poltphosi polutphseo OR Redemption Redeemed.

Wherein the Most Glorious Work of the REDEMPTION OF THE World by Jesus Christ,
is by Expressness of Scripture, clearness of Argument, countenance of the best
Authority, as well Ancient as Modern, Vindicated and Asserted in the Just
Latitude and Extent of it, according to the Counsel and most Gracious
Intentions of God, against the encroachments of later times made upon it,
whereby the unsearchable Riches and Glory of the Grace of GOD therein, have
been, and yet are, much obscured, and hid from the eyes of many.

Together with a sober, plain, and through Discussion of the great Questions
relating hereunto, as viz. concerning ELECTION and REPROBATION, THE
Sufficiency, and Efficacy of the Means vouchsafed unto Men by GOD, to Repent
and Believe; concerning the Perseverance of the Saints, and those who do
Believe; concerning the Nature of GOD, his manner of Acting, his Intentions,
Purposes, Decrees, etc. the Dependency of all Creatures or second Causes upon
Him, as well in their Operations, as simple Existencies, or Beings, etc.

The Decision of all these Questions founded upon the good Word of GOD,
interpreted according to the generally-received Doctrine, concerning the Nature
and Attributes of GOD, the manifest Exigency of the Words, Phrases,
coherencies, in the respective passages hereof relating to the said Questions,
as also (for the most part) according to the Judgment and Sense of the best
Expositors, as well Modern, as Ancient.

With three Tables annexed for the Readers accommodation.

By JOHN GOODWIN, A servant of God in the Gospel of his dear Son.

The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and
thy two Friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my
servant Job has. Job 42. 7. Aegrotat humanum genus, non morbis corporis, sed
peccatis. Jacet toto orb terrarum ab Orient usque ad Occidentem Grandis
aegrotus. Ad sanandum grandem aegrotum descendit Omnipotens Medicus, etc. Aug.
de verbis. Domini. Sermon. 59. (...). i. e. It becomes a man to sacrifice even
his own opinions and sayings upon the service of the Truth. Arist. LONDON,
Printed by John Macock, for Lodowick Lloyd and Henry Cripps, and are to be sold
at their shop in Popes head Alley, near Lumbard street. M. DC. LI.

TO THE Reverend Doctor Benjamin Whichcote Provost of KINGS College, and
Vicechancellor of the University of CAMBRIDG, together with the rest of the
Heads of Colleges, and Students in Divinity, in that famous UNIVERSITY.
REverend and Right worthy Gentlemen, Friends and Brethren in Christ; How
either your selves, or others, will interpret this Dedication, I am (I confess)
no such Seer, as to be able to foresee: and were the foresight hereof to be
bought, I should strain my self very little to make the Purchase. I have that
Witness within me, whose Prerogative it is to laugh all Jealousies and
Suggestions of Men to scorn, which rise up in opposition to his Testimony,
clearly assuring me, that the Oracles consulted by me about this Dedication,
were neither any undervaluing of you, nor over-valuing of my self, or of the
Piece here presented unto you, nor any desire of drawing respects from you,
either to my person, or any thing that is mine; much less any malignity of
desire to cause you to drink of my cup, or to bring you under the same cloud of
disparagement with me, which the World has spread round about me. Praise unto
his Grace, who has taught me some weak rudiments of his Heavenly Art of
drawing Light out of Darkness, for mine own use; I have not been for so many
years together trampled upon to so little purpose, as to remain yet, either
ignorant, or insensible, of mine own vileness, and what Element I am nearest
allied unto: or so tender and querulous, as either to complain of the weight of
those, who still go over me as the stones in the street, or to project the
sufferings of others, in order to my own solace and relief. My long deprivation
and want of respects from men, is now turned to an athletique habit, somewhat
after the manner of those, who by long fasting, lose their appetites, and
withal either contract, or find, an ability, or contentedness of Nature, to
live with little or no meat afterward. I can ((...) Philip. 4. 13 Non est
arrogantia, sed fides, praedicare ea quae accepisti. Aug.
) from the dunghill whereon I sit, with much contentment and sufficient
enjoyment of my self, behold my Brethren on Thrones round about me.

The Prize then that I run for in my Dedicatory Applications unto You, is, by
the opportunity and advantage hereof, to excite, provoke, and engage (and this,
if it may be, beyond, and above, all reasonableness of pretense to decline the
service) those whom I judged the most able, and not the least willing, among
their Brethren, to bless the World, laboring and turmoyling it self under its
own vanity and folly, by bringing forth the Glorious Creator, and ever-blessed
Redeemer of it, out of their Pavilions of Darkness, into a clear and perfect
Light, to be beheld, reverenced, and adored in all their glory, to be
possessed, enjoyed, delighted in, in all their beauty, sweetness, and
desirableness, by the Inhabitants of the Earth. I know you have no need to be
taught, but possibly you may have some need to consider, that your Gifts,
Parts, Learning, Knowledge, Wisdom, Books, Studies, Opportunities, pleasant
Mansions, will all suddenly make Company for that which is not, and never turn
to any account of true greatness unto you, nor of any Interest worthy the
lightest thoughts of truly prudent and considering men, unless they shall, by a
serious and solemn Act of Consecration, be consigned over unto, and interessed
in, that great Service of God and Men, whereby that blessed Union between them
shall be promoted and advanced, the Foundations whereof have been by so high an
Hand of Grace laid in the Blood of Jesus Christ. You know the Saying of the
great Prophet of the World: He that gathers not with me, scatters abroad
Mat. 12. 30
. Whatsoever shall not suffer, yea and offer, it self to be taken and carried
along, by, and with, Jesus Christ, in that grand and sublime Motion, wherein he
moves daily, according to the Counsel of his Father, in a straight course for
the saving of the World, will most certainly be dissipated and shattred all to
nothing, by the irresistible dint and force thereof: how much more that, which
shall stand in his way, obstruct, and oppose him in this his Motion? Especially
Gifts, Parts, Reason, Understanding in Men, improved and raised, or under means
and opportunities of being improved and raised, by Study, Learning, Knowledge,
if these do not make one shoulder with Jesus Christ, in lifting up the World
from the gates of Death; much more in case they shall disadvantage and
indispose the World to a receiving of those impressions from Christ, by which
it should, or might otherwise, be thus lifted up by him, will undoubtedly,
above the rate of all other things, abound to the Shame, Judgment, Confusion,
and Condemnation of Men. When Men of rich endowments, and worthy abilities of
Learning and Knowledge, shall give their strength in this kind to other
Studies, Contemplations, and Enquiries, suffering in the mean time the Minds
and Consciences of Men to corrupt, putrify, and perish in their sad Pollutions
through that Ignorance, or (which is worse) those disloyal and profane Notions
and Conceptions of God, and of Christ, which reign (or rather indeed rage) in
the midst of them, without taking any compassion on them, by searching out, and
discovering unto them those most excellent and worthy things of God, and
Christ, the knowledge whereof would be unto them as a Resurrection from Death
unto Life; they do but write their Names in the dust, and buy Vanity with that
worthy Price, which was put into their hand for a far more honorable Purchase.
And yet of the two, they are sons of the greater folly, and prevaricate far
more sadly with the dearest and deepest Interest, both of themselves, and other
men, who by suffering their Reasons and Judgments to be abused either by sloth
and supine oscitancy, or else by sinister and carnal respects otherwise (for
there is a far different consideration of those, who miscarry at this point,
through a mere Nescience, or humane infirmity) bring forth a strange God, and a
strange Christ unto the World, such as neither the Scriptures, no^ Reason
unbewitched, know, or own, and this under the Name of the true God indeed, and
of the true Christ: yea and most importunely and imperiously burden and charge
the Consciences of Men with the dread of Divine Displeasure, and the Vengeance
of Hell fire, if they refuse to fall down, and bow the knee of their Judgments
before those Images and Representations, which they set up, as if in all their
lineaments and parts, they exhibited the true God, and the true Christ,
according to the Truth.

The Apostle Paul relates a sad story of a great fire of Indignation kindled in
the Breast of God, and breaking out (in a very formidable manner) upon the
Heathen, who (as he says) knew God Romans 1, 21
[ i. e. had means sufficient to bring them to the knowledge of God Men under
means and opportunities of knowledge, are s^il estimated, and this justly, in
their Delinquencies, as having Knowledge, whether they be actually knowing, or
no. Compare Mat. 25, 44, 4^ with Luke 12 47, 48, etc.
] and withal professed themselves wise men Romans 1, 22
. Whether by such men he means the Philosophers in particular, and learned men
amongst them, (which is the more probable, and the more received sense of
Interprecers* or whether the generality of them, (as Calvin rather supposes)
varyeth not the story in any point of difference much material to my purpose.
The Misery which these men brought upon themselves through the just Displeasure
of God, is first (in general) drawn up by the Apostle in these words; that
Professing themselves wise, they became Fool, (...). Justa Dei ultione fuerunt
infatuati.
, [or rather were infatuated, or made Fools, as Calvin well expounds,] i. e.
whilst they assumed unto themselves the honor and repute of much wisdom and
understanding, God (as it were) insensibly, and by degrees withdrew that lively
presence of his Spirit from them, by which they had been formerly raised and
enlarged, as well to conceive and apprehend, as to act and do, like wise and
prudent men: but now the wonted presence of this Spirit of God failing them,
the savor and vigor of their wisdom and understandings proportionably abated
and declined, as Sampsons strength upon the cutting of his hair, sank and fell
to the line of the weakness of other men. Secondly, The Misery which these men
drew upon their own head, by breaking, as they did, with God, is termed by the
Apostle a delivering up [or, giving over] to a reprobate mind Romans 1, 28
: which seems to import somewhat more sad and deeply penal, then a simple
infatuation; or at least, the height and consummation hereof. A reprobate [or,
injudicious] mind, implies such a constitution, or condition, (...).
of that sovereign and supreme Faculty in Man, his Understanding, whose proper
office and work it is to order, umpire and command in chief all his motions,
and actions, as well internal, as outward, that light and darkness, things
comely, and things uncomely, action^ and ways pregnantly comporting with, and
actions and ways palpably destructive unto, the dear Interest of his eternal
Peace, shall, especially upon a practical account, be of one and the same
consideration to him; neither shall he be capable of any difference of
impression from things that differ in the highest. The delivering up of a man
by God to such a Reprobate Mind, as this, clearly supposes the frame and
constitution of the Mind and Understanding of Man to be naturally, Reprobate;
I mean, considered as the sin of Adam has defaced and distempered it, and as
it would have been in all men, in case the Great Advocate and Mediator of
Mankind had not interposed to procure the gracious conjunction of the
illuminating Spirit of God with it; yea and as it will be, whenever this
Spirit of God shall be so far offended and provoked by a man, as wholly to
depart, and desert it. So that this Judiciary Act of God, in giving men over to
a Reprobate Mind, imports nothing but the total withdrawing of all communion
and converse by his Spirit with them, hereby leaving them in the hand, and
under the inspection, of such a mind, or understanding, which is naturally,
properly, and entirely their own. In which case the mind and understanding of
a man suffers after some such manner, as a quantity of good, wholesome, and
spiritful wine would do, in case it should be bereft of all the subtle and
spirituous parts of it by a Chemical Extraction made by fire: that which should
remain after such a separation, would be but as water, without strength, or
taste.

Now the cause of this fire of displeasure kindled in the Breast of God against
the persons mentioned, burning so near to the bottom of Hell (as we heard) our
Apostle records, first in these words, Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful Romans 1. 21
. Afterward in these: And even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge Verse 28 (...), etc.
, etc. Or (as the Original, I humbly conceive, would rather bear) as they did
not make trial [i. e. put themselves to it, engage their abilities] to have God
in acknowledgment, [i. e. so to discover him to the World, that he might be
acknowledged in his sovereign Greatness, and transcendent Excellencies, by
men.] From which passages laid together, it clearly appears, 1. That for men
that know God, or have means and opportunities of knowing him, not to glorify
him like himself, and as God, is a sin of a very high provocation, and which
directly, and with a swift course, tends to an utter dissolution of all
communion and friendly converse between God and men. 2. That for men of
Knowledge, Parts, and Abilities, to neglect the manifestation, and making known
of God in, and to, the World, to the intent that he may be acknowledged,
reverenced, loved, delighted in, by his Creature, is a strain of the worst
resentment with God, of that unthankfulness, which he interprets, a
non-glorifying him, as God, or like himself.

Knowing the Terror of the Lord in the way of the Premises (Brethren honored,
and beloved in the Lord) according to the measure of the Light of the Knowledge
of himself, which he has been graciously pleased to shine in my Heart, (...),
I have in the ensuing Discourse lift up my Heart and Soul and all that is
within me to the discovery and manifestation of him in the World, in the truth
of his Nature, Attributes, Counsels, Decrees, Ways and Dispensations; and that
with a single eye, with clearness and simplicity of intention, to dis-encumber
the Minds, Judgments and Consciences of Men, of such thoughts and
apprehensions concerning him, which are evil Mediators between Him and his
Creature, feeding and fomenting that distance and enmity between them, which
have been occasioned by sinful and unworthy deportment on the Creatures side. I
confess that in some Particulars managed and asserted in the Discourse, I have
been led (I trust by the Spirit of Truth, and of God) out of the way more
generally occupied by those, who of later times have traveled the same Regions
of Enquiry with me. But deeply pondering what Augustine somewhere says, that as
nothing can be found out more beneficial unto the World, then somewhat Nihil
periculosius quaeritur, nihil fruct^osius invenitur.
further of God, then is at present known, so nothing is attempted or sought
after with more danger; I have steered my course in the subsequent Debates with
all tenderness and circumspection, arguing nothing, concluding nothing, but
either from the Grammatical Sense or best known signification of words and
phrases in the Scripture, and this (for the most part, if not constantly) in
conjunction both with the scope of places, the express consent and agreement of
Contexts, together with the Analogy of the Scriptures themselves in other
places; or else from the most unquestionable and universally received
Principles and Maxims, either in Religion, or sound Reason: and more
particularly from such Notions concerning the Nature of God, and his Attributes
and Perfections, which I find generally subscribed with the Names and Pens of
all that is called Orthodox amongst us, and have written of such things. Nor
have I any where receded from the more general sense of Interpreters in the
Explication of any Text or Passage of Scripture, but only, where either the
express signification of words, or the vergency (or rather indeed, urgency) of
the Context, or some repugnancy to the expressness of Scripture elsewhere, or
else some pregnant inconsistency with some clear Principle, either of Religion,
or sound Reason, necessitated me unto it. Yea I seldom upon any of these
accounts leave the common road of Interpreters, but I find that some or other,
one or more, of the most intelligent of them have trodden the same path before
me. And for the most part Chrysostom among the Ancient Expositors, and Calvin
himself among the Modern, are my Companions in the paths of my greatest
solitariness. Concerning the main Doctrine avouched in the Discourse, wherein
the Redemption of Mankind by Jesus Christ, no particular person, or member
hereof excepted, is held forth and asserted, I demonstrate by many Testimonies
from the best Records of Antiquity, to have been the Ecumenical sense of the
Christian World in her primitive and purest Times. Nor am I conscious to my
self (I speak as in the present of God) of any the least mistake, either in
word, or meaning, of any Author or Testimony cited by me throughout the whole
Discourse: nor yet of any omission in point of diligence or care, for the
prevention of all mistakes in either kind.

The Discourse, such as it is, with all Respects of Honor and Love I present
unto you; not requiring any thing from you by way of countenance or
approbation, otherwise then upon those equitable terms, on which Augustus
Sueton. in vita Augusti.
recommended his Children unto the care and favor of the Senate, Si meruerit.
Only as a Friend and Lover of the Truth, Name, and Glory of God and Jesus
Christ, and of the Peace, Joy, and Salvation of the World, with you, I shall
take leave to pour out my Heart and Soul in this Request unto you, that either
you will confirm, by setting to the royal signet of your Approbation and
Authority, the Great Doctrine here maintained, if you judge it to be a Truth; or
else vouchsafe to deliver me, and many others, from the snar^ thereof, by
taking away with an hand of Light and potency of Demonstration, those weapons,
whether Texts of Scriptures, or Grounds in Reason, wherein you will find by
the Discourse it self that we put our trust. Your Contestation upon these
terms, will be of a resentment with me more precious and accepted, then your
Attestation, in case of your comport in Judgment with me: though I shall
ingenuously confess, and profess, that for the Truths sake, even in this also I
shall greatly rejoice. Notwithstanding I judge it much more (of the two) richly
conducing to the dear Interest of my Peace and Safety, to be delivered from my
Errors, then to receive countenance and approbation from men in what I hold, or
teach, according to the Truth.

If nothing which is here pleaded, whether from the Scriptures, or otherwise,
shall be able to overruled your Judgments into an acknowledgment of Truth in
the main Doctrine contended for, in which case you will (I trust) though not
with respect to my Request in that behalf, yet for the Truths sake, and for
your own Interests sake, as well in the things of this World, as of that which
is to come, declare your selves in some worthy and satisfactory Answer to the
Particulars here propounded; I shall not need (I presume) to desire you, that
in your Answer you will not rise up in your might against the weaker, looser,
or less-considerate Passages or Expressions (of which kind you may very
possibly meet with many more then enough) but that you will rather bend the
strength of your Reply, against the strength of what you shall oppose (at least
if there be any thing herein worthy such a title.) You well know, that a Field
may be won, though many Soldiers of the conquering side should fall, or be
wounded, in the Battle: and that a Tree may flourish, and retain both its
beauty, and firmness of standing in the Earth, though many of the smaller
twigs, or lesser branches should prove dry and sere, and so be easily broken
off. So may a Mountain remain unmoved, yea and unmovable, though many handfuls
of the lighter and looser earth about the sides of it, should be taken up and
scattered into the air like dust. In like manner the main Body of a Discourse
may stand entire in its solidity, weight, and strength, though many particular
Expressions, Sayings, and Reasonings therein, that are more circumferential,
and remote from the center, should be detected either of inconsiderateness,
weakness, or untruth. Yea in some cases one Argument or Plea may be so
triumphantly pregnant and commanding, that though many others of the same
engagement should be defeated, yet the cause protected by it may upon a very
sober and justifiable account, laugh all opposition of contrary arguings to
scorn. I acknowledge there are some Expressions and Passages in the ensuing
Discourse (as in Cap. 1. Sect. 9. and elsewhere) which upon the review, I my
self apprehend obnoxious enough to exception: yea and which, had my second
thoughts been born in due time, should have been somewhat better secured. But I
trust that ancient Law of indulgence in such cases as mine (which very probably
may be some of your own also) is of Authority sufficient in your Commonwealth,
to relieve me:

-- O pere in longo fas est obrepere somnum: i. e. On him that sits long at
work, Sleep
Without disparagement may creep.
Neither need I suspect or fear any of that unmanlike Learning amongst you,
which teaches men to confute Opinions, by vulgar votes and exclamations. We
know that this Sect [or, Heresie] is every where spoken against Acts 28, 22
(...), etc.
, had no influence upon Paul to turn him out of the way of his Heresy. And for
those Mormolukes or Vizors of Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery, Pelagianism,
with the like, which serve to affright children in understanding out of the
love and liking of many most worthy and important Truths, I am not under any
jealousy concerning you, that you should suffer any such impressions from
them. You know that that great Enemy of the Peace and Salvation of men, who of
old taught the Enemies of God to put his Saints into Bears skins, and Wolves
skins, so preparing them to be torn in pieces and devoured by Dogs, has in
these latter times secretly insinuated and prevailed with many of the children
of God themselves, to put many of his Truths, such as they like not, or
comprehend not, into Names of Ignominy and Reproach, to draw others into the
same hatred and defamation of them with themselves. I have somewhere observed,
that this method of confuting and suppressing Opinions, against which men have
had no competent grounds of Eviction otherwise, was at first invented by the
subtle Sons of the Synagogue of Rome Divine Authority of the Scriptures, page
202, 203
: and elsewhere showed by several instances, that it is familiarly practiced by
them.

The truth is, that you have no such temptation upon you, as particular and
private men have, to flee to any such polluted Sanctuary, as that mentioned, to
save your Names and Reputations from the hand of any Opinion or Doctrine
whatsoever. For you so far (I presume) understand your Interest and
Prerogative, that for matters of Opinion and Doctrine, you are invested with an
autocratorical majesty, like that, which was sometimes given unto
Nebuchadnezzar over men: whom he would, he slew: and whom he would, he kept
alive: whom he would, he set up; and whom he would, he put down Dan. 5. 19
. By the joint suffrage of your Authority, your Interest of Esteem amongst men
being so predominant, you may slay, wh^t Doctrines, what Opinions you please;
and what you please, you may keep alive: of what Tenants you please, you may
make the faces to shine, and of what you please, you may lay the honor in the
dust. If you will justify, who are they that will not be afraid to condemn? if
you condemn, who will justify? Only Gods eldest Daughter, Truth, has One
mightier then you on her side, who will justify her in due time, though you
should condemn her: and will raise her up from the dead the third day, in case
you shall slay her. However, if the Doctrine commended in the Discourse now
presented unto you, shall commend it self in your eyes also, for a Truth, far
be it from you to hide your faces from it, because at present it labors and
suffers reproach in the World, considering that you may very suddenly take away
the reproach, and partake your selves of that Honor, which you shall cast upon
it. Should such an University as you fear the reproach of standing by a Truth?
Jesus Christ is not ashamed of the Bodies of his Saints, living, or dead,
though in both conditions vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, knowing
that he has power in his hand to cloth them with glory and immortality, when
he pleases, and that this glory, when vested in them, will be an high
augmentation of his own.

Brethren, unto you I may truly say (with Paul to his Philippians) that I have
you in my heart Philip. 1. 7
. I can look upon you with an eye of good hope, as a generation of men anointed
by God with a spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge, Zeal, and Faithfulness, to bring on
the New Heavens, and the New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell, and this
by repairing the breaches and decayed places in the Body of the Doctrine of
Christian Religion, which, since the first raising and completing of it by
Christ and his Apostles, partly through the ignorance and insufficiency, partly
through the oscitancy and remissness of those, to whom the guardianship and
custody thereof have been committed by God in their successive generations,
has been lamentably dismantled, mis-figured, and defaced, and this well-nigh
in all the integral and principal parts of it (more or less:) In so much that a
man who truly and clearly apprehends what this Doctrine was (and yet is in her
purity, and native frame) and shall compare it with the Systeme or Body of
Divinity, which under this Notion is commonly taught and held forth amongst us,
will hardly be able to say, this is the Doctrine of Christ. For whosoever shall
engage himself with that diligence, throughness, and unpartialness of Enquiry,
which become those, who run for so high a prize as an incorruptible Crown of
Glory, to consider what is ordinarily delivered, and more generally received,
amongst us, not only in, and about, those great Points of Election,
Reprobation, Redemption, the efficacy and extent of the Grace of God, and
Perseverance of the Saints; but also about many other Heads of Christian
Doctrine, as about Faith, Justification, the Sufferings of Christ, the
Intercession of Christ, Repentance, Good Works, Baptism, the state and
condition of the Dead until the Resurrection (with sundry more) and shall with
like diligence consider what the Scriptures teach concerning these Particulars
respectively, will clearly and distinctly see, that though Christ be not so ill
formed, amongst us, in some of these Doctrines, as he is in others, yet he is
represented very unlike, and much beneath himself, in them all. So that as
Joshua, though he performed the part of a valiant Captain, and made a worthy
progress in the Conquest of the Land of Canaan before his death, yet left a
very considerable proportion of the work to be achieved by others after him
Judges 1. ^, 9, etc.
: in like manner Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, with others, who labored with much
honor and success in the work of Reformation, and reduced the Body of Christian
Religion to a far better complexion and constitution, then that wherein they
found it; yet left it under so much craziness and unsoundness, that other
Physicians also, and those of best value, have large opportunities before them
for enriching the World, and themselves also, by perfecting the cure. I look
upon you as Men the likeliest I know to wear this Crown. As for those, who of
late attempted the building of a fence-wall of Discipline (under the Name of a
Reformation) about that Vineyard of Christ amongst us, of which I now speak,
and to this day seem to lie under much regret of spirit, both against God and
men, for hindering them in their Building; the truth is, in such an attempt,
the unreformedness and unsoundness of the Doctrine commonly received amongst
us, and taught by themselves, considered, they ran a like course of
inconsiderateness, which an Husbandman would do, that should go about to make a
strong and tight hedge about his field, whilst his Neighbors Cattle are feeding
and spoiling the Corn in the midst of it.

Brethren, my Pen has transgressed the line and law of my Intentions. These
confined me to a much narrower compass in my Epistle, and prohibited me the
troubling of you to any such degree, as now I have done. The truth is, my
affections to you interposed, and occasioned the Transgression. Love is
bountiful: and (I trust) will as naturally produce Pardon on your side, as it
has brought forth such a Transgression on mine. In all this address I have
desired nothing of you, little, or much, upon mine own account, save only so
far, as your ingenuous and worthy Deportment in the Particulars offered,
together with the unspeakable Benefit, and Blessing which you shall bring upon
the World thereby, will be matter of joy and high contentment unto me. Envy me
not my rejoicing with the Truth, though herein I should be found equal to the
greatest of you: it is the best of my portion in the world. I shall discharge
you from any further sufferings from my Pen at present, only with my Soul
poured out before the Great God, and Father of Lights, in Prayer for you, that
he will make his face to shine upon you, in quickening your Apprehensions,
enlarging your Understandings, balassing your Judgments, strengthening your
Memories, in giving you ableness of body, willingness of mind, to labor in
those rich Mines of Truth (the Scriptures) in breaking up before you the
Fountains of those great depths of Spiritual Light, and Heavenly Understanding,
in assisting you mightily by his Spirit in the course of your Studies, in
lifting you up in the spirit of your minds above the faces, fears, respects of
men, in drawing out your Hearts and Souls to relieve the spiritual necessities,
and extremities of the World round about you, in making you so many burning and
shining Lights in his House and Temple, the joy, glory, and delight of your
Nation, in vouchsafing unto you as much of all that is desirable in the Things
of this World, as your Spiritual Interest will bear, and the Reward of Prophets
respectively in the Glory and great Things of the World to come.

Your poor Brother in CHRIST, always ready in Love to serve the meanest of you:
John Goodwin.
From my Study in Colemanstreet, London, Feb. 22. 1650.
THE Preface to the Reader.
GOOD READER,
THE account of my application unto thee in this Epistle, is this. Not loving
(with Job) to eat my morsels alone, I desire thy company at my Table, in the
ensuing Discourse. If thy intellectual taste be the same with mine (which I
question not, if thou have not eaten somewhat already, which disordereth and
corrupts it) and thy spiritual constitution the same also, (from which, if
thou be healthful and sound, it cannot much differ) I doubt not, but in case
thou please to accept of the invitation, and eat of the bread here set before
thee, thou will find it both pleasant in thy mouth, and strengthening to thy
Soul. I confess that till some few years last past, I was my self accustomed to
another diet, and fed upon that bread, which was commonly prepared by my
Brethren in the Ministry for the People of the Land, and Children of God
amongst them. But the truth is, I found it ever and anon gravellish in my
mouth, and corroding and fretting in my bowels. Notwithstanding the reverent
and high Esteem I had of many of those, who prepared it, and fed upon it
themselves, in conjunction with those harder thoughts which I was occasioned by
some undue carriages in many of those, who lived upon bread of another molding,
to take up against them, together with a raw and ill-digested conceit I had,
that there was no better or less-offensive bread to be had from any hand
whatsoever, prevailed upon me to content my self therewith for a long time,
though not without some regret of coffeehouse also with it.

But to leave my Parable; that which first turned to a sharp engagement upon
me, to search more narrowly and thoroughly, then formerly I had done, into the
Controversies agitated in the subsequent Discours^, was a Pamphlet published by
a young man about five or six years since, under the title of A Vindication of
Free Grace, etc. which, though libellous enough, and full of broad untruths,
yet the face of it being fiercely set against me and my Doctrine, it was lifted
up (well-nigh) as near unto the Heavens, as Herod's Oration Acts 12 ^^
, by the applause of such persons in and about the City, whose ways in matter
of Discipline, and thoughts, in other more weighty Points of Christian
Religion, my Understanding would never serve me to make mine. Being for a time
under a conscientious resentment of a necessity lying upon me to publish some
Answer to the said Pamphlet, as well the Person, as the Doctrine therein
stigmatized, being innocent of all crimes there charged on them, I fell to work
accordingly; and drew up a competent Answer (as I supposed) thereunto, with the
perusal whereof I was willing, upon request, to gratify some private friends,
amongst whom it lay dormant for a time. In the Interim, perceiving that the
noise which the said Pamphlet had made was but like the crackling of ^horns
under a pot, and that the heat of the tumultuary rejoicing occasioned by it,
had exhaled and spent it self, I began to consider, that the Answer which I had
prepared, a good part of it being taken up in proving the Pamphleter tardy in
several reports made by him of matters of fact, the knowledge whereof would be
(I conceived) of slender Edification, and of no great Acceptance, unto
Readers, and the detection of ^^m in such unworthy practices might be offensive
to some of his Friends, whom I well respected, might in these respects rather
cumber, then benefit, the World, in case it were published. And considering
further, that the matters of real weight and consequence insisted upon in the
Answer, being here handled only according to the exigency of the Particulars
of my Charge (respectively) might more satisfactorily, and with more advantage
to the Peace and Comfort of Men, be discoursed in a just and entire Treatise, I
accordingly changed my Intentions of publishing the said Answer, into a
Resolution of declaring and asserting my Judgment about the Doctrinal
Imputations specified and managed therein, against me, more at large. This
Resolution continuing with me, seconded and strengthened with further Light
shining into my Heart daily from the Father of Lights, about those important
affairs, which lay upon mine hand to manage, not only in order to my own
Vindication in such passages of Doctrine, wherein I was publicly traduced by
the Pamphleter, as a Teacher of Errors, but to the christian Information and
Consolation of others also, has at last given the light of life to the ensuing
Treatise; the perusal whereof I desire to recommend upon such terms unto thee,
that thou may resent it as worthy thy labor, and the best exercise and
engagement of thy mind and thoughts.

This (I presume) I should do effectually, if I were able (in the first place)
to possess thee thoroughly with a true Notion of the danger of Error, and
mis-apprehension in the things of God: Secondly, with the deep and solemn
necessity which lies upon all persons of Mankind without exception, who are
endued with Reason and Understanding, to engage these worthy and noble
Faculties to their uttermost, about the things of God, and matters of
Salvation: and lastly, with the innocence and inoffensiveness of the Doctrines
maintained in the present Discourse, in respect of those vulgar Imputations,
which by way of prejudice, are laid to their charge. And these things I shall
endevor within the narrowest compass of words, wherein it is lightly possible
for matters of so great consequence to be transacted to any purpose, in the
remainder of this Epistle.

For the first: Truth, especially in things of a supernatural concernment, the
knowledge The danger of Error in matters of a Religious import.
whereof faceth Eternity, and without which (in some competent degree) no
person (capable of it) can, or will, be judged by God, meet to partake with the
Saints in the inheritance of light, being nothing else (interpretatively) but
God himself prepared, of, and by, himself, for a beatifical Union with the
Understanding, and from hence, with the heart and affections of men, Error in
things of this high and sacred import, can be nothing else but Satan, the Great
Enemy of the Peace and Blessedness of Men, contriving and distilling himself
into a Notion, or Impression, apt and likely to be entertained and admitted by
the Understanding, under the appearance, and in the name, of Truth, into union
with it self, and by means hereof, into union also with the Heart and Soul of
Men. Much in such a sense, as that wherein the Apostle affirms, meats to be
for the belly, and the belly again for meats 1 Cor. 6. 13
, is Truth for the Understanding, and the Understanding for Truth. And in such
a sense, as poisoned or unwholesom meats, are not, nor ever were intended by
God, for the belly, nor the belly for them; it may truly be said, that Error is
not, nor was ever intended by God, for the Understanding, nor the Understanding
for Error. Truth, or God issuing and streaming out his most excellent and
incomprehensible Nature and Being, his infinite Wisdom, knowledge, Power,
Goodness, Bounty, Mercy, Justice, etc. in certain Positions, Notions, and
apprehensions, is of the most natural, kindly, and sovereign accommodation for
the Understandings of men (and dependently hereupon, for their hearts and
affections also) that can be imagined. So that the belly is not, in the low way
of Nature appropriate unto it, better, or more naturally provided for and
satisfied, when filled with the best, and best nourishing meats; nor the body,
or rest of the members, in a more ready, natural, and certain way of well-doing
naturally, whilst the nourishment of these meats lasts, and is regularly
dispensed from the belly unto them, then the Understanding of a man is, when
invested, enriched, filled with supernatural and Divine Truth; and whilst the
knowledge and due consideration hereof there abides, as far as the influence
and sphere of the activeness of it extend, the Heart, Soul, and Affections of
Men also are hereby enriched and filled with their appropriate Treasures of
Righteousness, Holiness, Joy, and Peace. Whereas Error, and all Mis-notions of
God, his Nature, Attributes, Counsels, or Ways, though the Mind and
Understanding of a man may rejoice over them for a season, yet do they all this
while pollute, corrupt, and imbase them by their union and communion with them;
as a person of a noble house and blood stains his honor and reputation, by
coupling himself in marriage with a woman of base parentage, and conditions.
Yea all Error (of that kind whereof I now speak) being seated in the Judgment
and Understanding, secretly and by degrees infuseth a proportionable malignity
into the Will and affections, and occasioneth sinful distempers, unholy and
unworthy dispositions, to put forth here. The truth is that Error is the great
Troubler of the World: it is that fountain of Death that issues and sends
out all those bitter waters, and streams of sin and unrighteousness in every
kind, which overflow the Earth (almost) in every place and part of it, making
it so extremely barren of Comfort and Peace, as it is, yea and as the shadow of
Death to the Inhabitants of it. Why do men so universally walk, in ways of
Oppression, Extortion, Deceit, Covetousness, Unmercifulness, Dru^kenness,
Uncleanness, Envy, Hatred, Pride, Ambition, etc. but because they judge such
ways as these, all circumstances considered, more commodious and desirable unto
them, then ways and practices of a contrary, that is, of an holy and
truly-honorable import? And what is this but a most stupendous and horrid
Error and mistake, being the natural result of those numberless, erroneous and
lying apprehensions and conceits concerning God, wherewith men willingly suffer
their minds and consciences to be imbased, and corrupted, even to a spiritual
rottenness and putrefaction? For when God shall please to heal the World of all
the malignity, that yet boyls and works in the bowels of it, and breaks out
upon all occasions to the great annoyance and discontent of men, the receipt
which he will administer unto it in order hereunto, is only the knowledge of
himself, i. e. of the truth of his Nature, Attributes, and transcendent
excellency of Being. This is the Word of Promise, which came long since from
the mouth of God himself unto the World: They shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy Mountain: FOR the Earth shall be FULL OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE LORD, as
the waters cover the Sea Isai. 11. 9
: clearly implying, that when ignorance, and all misperswasions concerning God
in the world, shall be led captive by the light of the knowledge of the Truth,
and when there shall be a good understanding begotten between him, and his
Creature, the hearts of men will serve them no longer to rebel against him, or
to despise his Law. So that what is commonly said of Knowledge, may truly be
said of God; non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem; he has no Enemy, but only
those who know him not. The Devil had no door to open effectual enough* by
which to give sin an entrance into the World, but only the perverting of the
straight thoughts and apprehensions of God, which God himself had planted in
the Mind and Understanding of his Creature, Man. The Woman had a right and
sound persuasion of the just severity, and Truth of God in his threatenings,
until Satan prevailed with her to change it for a lie Genesis 3. 4, 5
: into the spirit of which lie Adam himself also was presently baptized by her
confidence under it. Neither could the Devil have touched either the one, or
the other of them, but by the mediation of some erroneous Notion or other,
concerning God. And as Satan brought sin into the World by the opportunity of a
misrepresentation of God unto his Creature: so when God shall please to Reform
the World, and make a perfect ejection of sin out of it, he will do it by
repairing the breaches which Satan has made upon the Judgments and
Understandings of men, with a clear light of the knowledge of himself. Well may
the Holy Ghost call sin and wickedness in every kind, the works of darkness,
because they are never practiced, but by the illegal warrant, and blind
direction, of some false persuasion or other in the minds of men. Upon this
account also it is, that the Apostle interprets the building of timber, hay,
and stubble [i. e. unsound Doctrines, and Opinions] upon the true Foundation,
Jesus Christ, to be a corrupting [or destroying] of the Temple of God (...). 1
Cor. 3. 17
[ i. e. of his Church and People, as he explaineth it.] For every Error, or
false apprehension in the things of God, and matters of Salvation, is not only
of a defiling, but of a corrupting nature also; and according to the tenor and
degree of malignity in it (for there is some degree of a spiritual malignity in
every Error) disposes the Soul which drinks it in, and converseth with it, to
a spiritual Death, being destructive to that communion with God, wherein
principally the life [ i. e. the strength, peace, joy, and happiness] of the
Soul consists. For God, in whatsoever he reveals, or speaks in his Word,
of any inconsistency with an Error (and Error there is none about spiritual
things, in opposition whereunto God speaks not more or less in his Word) must
needs be as a Barbarian, or one that speaks with an unknown tongue, to him
whose Mind and Understanding is distempered with it. When our Savior told his
Disciples (in words express, and plain enough) that the Son of man should be
delivered into the hands of men, (Luke 9. 44. and 18. 34.) it is said, that
they notwithstanding understood not the saying. The Reason plainly was, because
they were erroneously principled about the subject, of which Christ spoke,
which was his estate of Humiliation by suffering Death; they supposing and
taking it for granted, that he was to be a great Potentate and Monarch in the
World, without passing through the valley of an ignominious Death thereunto. In
like manner when he said to Joseph and the Virgin his Mother, Wist ye not that
I must be about my Fathers business Luke 2. 49
, the Text says, that they understood not the saying that he spoke unto them.
The reason of their non-understanding in this case, was because they were under
the command of such a supposition, which thwarted that principle, according to
the exigency whereof he so spoke. They supposed that he was under no
engagement, in no due capacity, at least at those years, which at this time he
had attained, to manage the great affairs of God and his Kingdom, in the World:
whereas his sense was, that he was under the one, and in the other; and spoke
accordingly unto them. So also the Reason why Festus supposed Paul to be
besides himself, and that much learning had made him, mad Acts 26. 24
, (implying, that he could make neither sap nor sense, of what he had said) was
because the tenor and substance of Paul's Discourse was diametrally opposite to
his Principles. After the same manner, when and whilst a man's Judgment is
perverted by any unsound Opinion, that has taken fast hold on it, he is
incapable of all that light of Truth, which God shines in the Scriptures in
opposition to that Error, and must of necessity, either relinquish this
Opinion, or else, either deprave and mis-understand the Mind of God in all
such passages, or else profess dissatisfaction touching the true sense and
meaning of them. In both cases he suffers a proportionable loss in his
communion with God. Can two walk together (says the Scripture) except they be
agreed? Civil Communion cannot be maintained or held, under a dissent in
Principles relating to such Communion, at least not in such things, unto which
such a dissent extends, or relat^th. Beasts are incapable of all friendly
converse and intercourse of affairs with men* and so men with Beasts. The
Reason is, because neither of them have any Principle symbolical with the
other: the thoughts of men are not the thoughts of beasts: neither are the
thoughts or impressions of beasts, the thoughts of men. And though men being
sound in some sovereign Principles of the Gospel, and such which are (as it
were) the lifeguard of the heart and vital parts of Religion, may possibly
live in communion with God upon terms consistent with Salvation; yet may they
very possibly also, in case they be entangled with Error otherwise, by means
hereof suffer loss to a very sad degree in the things of their present peace.
When the Sun is in the greatest Eclipse that is lightly incident to it, there
yet shines so much Light to the World, which is sufficient to make it day, and
whereby to perform ordinary works wont to be done in the day time:
notwithstanding during such an Eclipse as this, the World, through want of that
fullness of light, which that worthy Creature, the Sun, naturally affords,
suffers many degrees of the damp and sadness of the night. In like manner,
though the light of Gods countenance may shine in the face of the Soul to such
a degree, as to make a day of Grace and favorable acceptance with him,
notwithstanding the interposition of a dark cloud of many Errors; yet most
certain it is that according to the compass and proportion of such a cloud, and
during the interposition of it, the Soul will be apt to suffer now and then
many grudgings and sad impressions of a fear of being rejected by him. There is
no ray or beam which naturally shines from the face of God, but the
interception, deprivation, and want of it must needs prove both poena damni,
yea and poena sensus too, upon occasion, unto the Soul. Yea the Scripture it
self supposes men that are ignorant in any thing relating to their spiritual
affairs (and much more such as are confidently, i. e. erroneously (...).
Epiphan.
ignorant) to be in a deplorable and sad condition; and the proper Objects of
pity and compassion, in case their Ignorance, or Error, be not affectate, and
such, from the intanglement and pollution whereof they had competent means to
have delivered themselves. The Apostle makes it a worthy character of an High
Priest taken from amongst men, to be able to have COMPASSION ON THE IGNORANT,
and such as are out of the way Hebr. 5. 2
. There are but two things that can make the condition of a Creature miserable.
Sin, and Sufferings: and both these are the unquestionable fruits or
productions of Error. Lusts and sinful distempers can be no where engendered,
but only in the dark regions of the Soul: the shining of the light of the
Truth, is as the shadow of Death unto them. Nor can fear that has torment, nor
any afflicting or sad impression upon the spirits of men, climb up into the bed
of the Soul, to disturb the rest and sweet peace of it, but only in the night
of Ignorance, and by the opportunity of Error lodging there. The light of the
knowledge of the Truth as it is in Jesus, is unto fears, agonies, and all
perplexity of spirit, like unto Solomon's King sitting upon his Throne of
Judgment, in reference to wicked men, whom he scatters, or chaseth away, with
his eyes Prove. 20. 8
. The Truth (says Christ unto the Jews, meaning, when known by them) shall
make you free John 8. 32
. All bondage and servility, whether under sin, or under sorrow, is dissolved
by the clear shining of the light of the knowledge of God into the Heart and
Soul: Whereas the darkness of Error strengthens the hand of the Oppressors,
and binds fast the iron yoke of servitude upon the necks of those that are in
bondage.

The time would fail me to speak at large of all the sad retinue of Evils and
Mischiefs that attend upon Error. Take in brief the sum, as well of what I have
said, as what I would willingly say yet further, upon this account.

First: It has been said, that Error defiles and embaseth the person, who
coupleth his Judgment with it.

Secondly, That it obstructeth communion with God, as far as the malignity of
the influence of it extends.

Thirdly, That the proper and direct tendency of it, is unto death, to bring
everlasting destruction upon the Soul.

Fourthly, It has been showed, that Error is the proper Element for Jim and
Ojim, and doleful creatures, I mean, for fears, sad apprehensions, disconsolate
thoughts, on the one hand, and so for wild Satyrs, lusts, sensual, and sinful
distempers on the other hand, to be engendered and bred, as also to live and
subsist, to move, and act, and take their pastime in, the knowledge of the Truth
being mortal unto both: I now add;

Fifthly; That Error disposes the Soul to Apostasy from the Gospel, and to a
recidivation or falling back into the devouring sin of Unbelief. This it does
not only by giving opportunity and encouragement unto lusts, and inordinate
affections in the Soul, the motions and actings of which are to the life of
Faith, that which poison is to the natural life of a man; but also by
representing the Gospel unto the mind and conscience of a man, (at least in
some of the ways and passages of it) as weak, unworthy, dark, unpleasant,
uncouth* or whatsoever, Error, when the Soul by long acquaintance and converse
with it shall discover the true nature or genius of it, and so grow into a
dislike and contempt of it, shall now appear unto them, For this is much to be
considered, that a man, or woman, who have for many years professed the Gospel,
may in process of time come to discover vanity in some erroneous Principle or
Tenent* wherewith their Judgments had been leavened for some considerable space
formerly, and so grow into a disapprobation or contempt of it, and yet may very
possibly think and suppose, that the Gospel favors or countenanceth it, and
that otherwise they should never have owned or approved it. Now when a person
shall be brought into the snare of such a conceit or imagination as this, that
the Gospel in some of the veins or carriages of it teaches or asserteth things
that are vain, or of no good consistency with Reason or Truth* he is in a ready
posture to throw off from his Soul all credence of the Divine Authority of the
Gospel, and to esteem it no better then a Fable devised by men, Nor will all
that which he Judges serious, and sound, and good in the Doctrine of the
Gospel otherwise, relieve him in such a case. He that imagines that he smells
but so much as one dead Fly in the ointment of the Gospel, will, as he should
have sufficient cause to do, were his imagination in this case sufficiently
grounded, conclude, that certainly it came not from God, but from men. No man's
heart or conscience will serve him to reverence that, as coming from God,
wherein he savours the least weakness, error, or untruth.

Sixthly: Though an Error seems to be merely speculative, and in respect of the
frame and constitution of it, to have no affinity or intermedling at all with
the moral principles, or practices of men, as that of Ana-Baptism, (amongst
some others;) ye^ does it secretly, and in a collateral way, through the
weakness and vanity of the heart, infuse malignity even into these; occasioning
persons otherwise grave, sober, peaceable, meek, loving, etc. to break out many
times in strains of pride, self conceitedness, contention, contempt of others,
cavilling against pregnant and clear Truths, with the like, for the maintenance
and defense of it. For as he which has a child, though it be never so
hard-favored, or deformed, never so ill* behaviored, or conditioned, yet
^udgeth himself bound to provide maintenance and support for it: So He that
embraces an Opinion about the things of God, and of the Gospel, be it never so
erroneous, uncouth, irrational, and weak, yet supposes himself bound in
conscience to plead the cause of it, and protect it, upon all occasions. Now it
being unpossible that any man, of what gifts, parts, or learning soever, should
be able to maintain or make good the cause of a weak or erroneous Opinion,
especially against an adversary of equal abilities, and insight into the cause,
with himself, by solidity, pregnancy, or clearness of Argument, whether from
the Scripture, or otherwise; hence it frequently comes to pass, that when the
Patrons of such a Cause fall short in their Intellectuals, and sobriety of
Discourse, to keep the head of it above water, they supply that which is
wanting in their Judgments and Understandings, with that which abounds (upon
such a temptation) in their wills, and affections, I mean with passion, and
with unworthy and reproachful vilifications, either of the persons of their
adversaries. because being once entered within the doors of a man's Judgment, it
commonly bewitcheth the person with such an adulterous affection toward it
self, that his foot is very hardly recoverable out of the snare. There is no
Error but at one turn or other, either directly, or indirectly, gratisieth the
flesh, or that which remains of the old man in men. Now the flesh in all men is
very loath to part with any of her Benefactors; to be despoyled of any
principle, which speaks to her heart in any matter of ease, pleasure, honor,
profit, or the like. Upon this account it comes to pass* that Error is so
readily, and sometimes even greedily, entertained, and with so much difficulty,
and conflicting with the Judgments and Consciences of men, cast out. Nauseabit
ad antidotum, qui hiavit ad venenum.
None (says Solomon, speaking of the Harlot) that go unto her, return again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life Prove. 2. 19.
. They are not many, who having once turned aside into Error, return back again
into the way of Truth, when once they have forsaken it. Such persons commonly
prove (...) (as the Philosopher Arist. Ethic. l. 7. c. 9.

Mul^^ veritatem ita amant, ut velint esse vera, quaecunque amant; vid. de
quodam Judaeo, qui nol^it Deum ora^e, ut illuminaret cor ejus, quia hoc ess^t
dubitare de lege sua etc. apud Th. Bradward. l. 1 c. 1. Corol. part 32

Sic amatur veritas, ut quicunque aliud amant, hoc quod amatur, velint esse
veritatem: et quia falli nollent, nolunt convinci, quod fals^ sunt. Aug.
Confess. l. 10 c. 23


speaks) i. e. stout and stiff in their Opinions, and men that will stand fast
in their conceits. And (as another expresses their genius) they will have that
to be Truth, which they hold; but they will not hold that which is Truth. Yea a
great part of those, whose Judgments and Consciences are enthralled under
Error, and this of a very sad and dangerous import, are yet so superstitiously
fearful to make use of those means, which God has expressly prescribed and
enjoined for their deliverance; that they make it matter of Conscience to
refrain from hearing such Teachers, and so from reading such Books, and
admitting such Discourses, whereby their Judgments might be healed, and
themselves made sound in the Faith. Error in this case is so full of a
pestilential malignity to the Soul, that whereas God has commanded men to try
all things, that so they may be in a capacity to hold fast that which is good,
they on the contray resolve to hold fast at peradventure that which they have,
and to make no trial at all, whether it be good, or no.

The Premises concerning the fierce and bloody War, wherein Error fights
against the Soul, considered, it cannot seem strange unto us, that the great
Lover of the Peace and Prosperity of Souls, Jesus Christ Blessed for ever,
should pour out his Heart and Soul unto Men so abundantly a^ He has done in
the Gospel, in Cautions, Admonitions, Directions, Threatenings, Promises,
almost without end, that so by one means or other, they might be effectually
prevailed with to use all diligence to keep themselves unspotted of such
Errors, which he knew the great Enemy of their Peace would be industriously
diligent to spread and scatter up and down the World in all Ages. Believe not
every spirit; but try the spirits, whether they be of God: because many false
Prophets are gone out into the world 1 John 4. 1.
. So again: Try [or, prove] all things, [i. e. all Doctrines, and Sayings of
men,] hold fast that which is good 1 These. 5. 21
. Again: Ye therefore* Belov^d, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest
ye also being led away with THE ERROR of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness 2 Pet. 3. 17
, etc. Of like notion whereunto is that of another Apostle: Take heed,
Brethren, lest there be an evil heart of Unbelief, to depart from the living
God Heb. 3. 12
. An evil heart of Unbelief is never contracted, but by suffering erroneous
conc^its, and false persuasions concerning God to grow upon our Judgments, and
corrupt them. The same Apostle again: Be not carried about with diverse and
strange Doctrines Heb. 13. 9.
. Elsewhere: That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4. 14
. Again: Let no man deceive you with vain words Ephesians. 5. 6
: So; be not deceived 1 Cor. 6. 9
. Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit Colos. 2. 8
, etc. These things (says John) I have written unto you concerning those that
deceive you 1 John 2. 26.
, [or, seduce you,] i. e. that endeavor to seduce, or deceive you. The Lord
Christ Himself cautioneth his Disciples (and in them, others, ex abundanti,)
against false Christ's, and false Prophets, who (as he says) should show great
signs, and wonders, in so much that if it were possible, they should deceive
the very Elect Mat. 24. 24.
. This operous and abundant interposure of the Holy Ghost (for ten times more
of like consideration might be added) in all variety of Applications unto men,
which are any ways conducing to the preserving of men's Judgments free, and
their minds pure, from Error, does with a great pregnancy of conviction argue
and suppose, that Errors and false Conceptions in matters of Religion, are of a
most formidable and dangerous consequence to the precious Souls of men. Far be
it from any man to imagine, that the Holy Ghost should (according to the
Proverb) thus labor about the lifting of a Feather, or be solicitous at that
high rate, which has been expressed, to prevent the lighting of a Grasshopper
upon the Eorth, where it can do little, or no harm.

The second thing (Good Reader) wherewith I desire to possess and fill thee,
Judgment The great necessity which lies upon all men to engage to the
uttermost their Reasons and Understandings in matters of Religion.
and Conscience. Heart and Soul, and all that is within thee, to strengthen thy
hand to a diligent perusal of the Treatise ensuing, ^^, the high necessity that
lies upon thee (as it does upon all the world besides, respectively) to awake,
raise, and engage all those worthy faculties and endowments which God has
vested in thee, Reason, Judgment, Memory, Understanding, about the things of
thine eternal Peace. And because this Iron (I fear) has been of late much
blunted with the earthly Conceits and Suggestions of many, I am desirous to put
so much the more strength to it. But to me it is the firstborn of wonder and
astonishment, that amongst men professing the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Wisdom of God, yea amongst the Teachers themselves of this Wisdom, men
should be found, who think they do God and men very good service, in persuading
men wholly to lay aside their Reasons, Judgments, Understandings, in matters of
Religion, and not to make use of, or engage, any of these in their enquiries
after matters of a spiritual or supernatural concernment. Doubtless Satan is a
Debtor to those persons, who have seasoned the world with the unsavory Salt of
such a Principle as this, for all the religious respects, and high
entertainment, that have of late been given by many amongst us, to all those
wicked, senceless, sapless, hideous, and blasphemous Doctrines and Opinions,
which like the dead Frogs of Egypt Exodus 8. 14
, make the Land to stink. For if men may not interpose with their Reasons and
Judgments to distinguish between Spirit, and Spirit, Opinion, and Opinion, why
should not one Spirit be believed, as well as another, and one Opinion
received, as well as another? Or if the difference be not to be made, by the
interposure and exercise of Reason in a man, I demand, by what other principle,
or means, ought it to be made? If it be said, partly by the Word of God, and
partly by the Spirit of God; I answer;

1. Concerning the Word of God, it is acknowledged, that this is to be in
special manner interessed in all our dijudications between Doctrine, and
Doctrine, Opinion and Opinion, in matter of Religion, and that this is the fire
which must try every man's work, of what sort it is 1 Cor. 3* 13.
, and that must separate the vile from the precious. But as the Plummet and
Rule do not measure the work of the Architect, or discover whether it be true
and square, or otherwise, of, or by themselves, but as they are regularly
applied hereunto either by the workman himself, or some other capable of making
such an application; however true it may be, that a sufficient test or proof of
the work, cannot be made without the use of the Plummet and Rule about it: In
like manner, though the Word of God be of sovereign use and necessity for the
measuring of Opinions and Doctrines, and for the discovery of what is straight,
and what crooked, in them, yet he that desires to reap the spiritual benefit
and advantage of the usefulness of it in this kind, must, 1. rightly understand
the sense and mind of God in it: and 2. be dexterous and expert in making a due
application of it, being rightly understood, to the Doctrines, or Opinions, ^he
soundness, or unsoundness whereof he desires to understand by it. For 1. It is
not the letter, or form of words, as separated, or considered apart, from the
spirit, notion, or sense of them, that is the Touchstone, or Rule of Trial for
Doctrines. Yea the letter and words, are only servants to the sense and notion
which they contain and exhibit, and were principally, if not only, delivered by
the Holy Ghost unto men, for this end, that by them the Sense, Mind, and
Counsel of God in all the particularities of them which are held forth in the
Scriptures, might be communicated and conveyed to the Reasons and
Understandings of Men. So that in case a man had the sense and mind of God upon
the same terms of certainty and knowledge, without the letter, on which he has
it, or may have it, by means of the letter, he should be as richly, as
completely qualified hereby to discern between Doctrines, as he now can be by
the opportunity and advantage of the letter. Now if the Scriptures themselves
be upon no other terms, nor in any other case, serviceable or use full unto men
for the trial of Doctrines and Opinions, but only, as, and when, they are truly
understood by them, it clearly follows, that whatsoever is requisite and
necessary to bring men to a true understanding of the Scriptures, is of equal
necessity for the distinguishing of Doctrines, and to interpose, or be made use
of, in all affairs and concernments in Religion. If then the Reasons,
Judgments, and Understandings of men must of necessity interpose, act, argue,
debate, and consider, before the true sense and mind of God in any Scripture
can be duly apprehended, understood, and believed by men, it is a plain case
that these are to be used, and to be interessed in whatsoever is of any
Religious consequence or concernment to us. That the Mind of God in the
Scriptures cannot be duly apprehended, received, or believed by men, but by the
acting and working of their Reasons, Minds, and Understandings, in order
hereunto, i^ evident from hence: viz. because the Mind of God cannot be thus
apprehended, or believed, by men, but by means of an intellectual or rational
difference tasted or resented by them, between this mind of his, and all other
minds, meanings, or senses, whatsoever, that may be supposed to lie, or reside,
in the words. For example: if there be another sense to be given of such, or
such, a passage of Scripture, either contrary unto, or differing from, that,
which I conceive to be the Mind of God here, which has the same rational or
intellectual savor and taste with this, that is, which as well suits with the
words, agrees with the Context, falls in with the scope and subject matter in
hand, is as accordable with Scripture assertion elsewhere, comports as clearly
with the unquestionable Principles of Reason, and the like, how is it possible
for me in this case, to conceive or believe, especially with the certainty of
Faith, that my sense is the Mind of God, and consequently the true sense of
that place, rather then that other, which has all the same Characters,
Symptoms, and Arguments of being the Mind of God, which mine has? Therefore
it must needs be by the exercise and acting of my Reason and Understanding, and
by the report which they make of their Discoveries in their Enquiries, that I
come regularly to conclude, and to be satisfied, that this is the Mind of God
in such, or such a Scripture, and none other.

If it be here objected and demanded; But is it meet, or tolerable, that the
Reason of man should judge in the things of God? Or that the Understandings of
men should umpire and determine in his Affairs? I answer,

1. If God pleases to impart his Mind and Counsels in words and writing unto
men, with an Injunction and Charge that they receive and own them, as from him,
and that they take heed that they do not mistake him, or embrace either their
own conceits, or the minds of others, in stead of his, in this case for men to
put a difference by way of judging and discerning, between the Mind of God, and
that which is not his mind, is so far from being an act of Authority,
Presumption, or unseemly Usurpation in men, that it is a fruit of their deep
loyalty, submission, and obedience unto God. When Christ enjoined the Disciples
of the Pharisees, and the Herodians, to render unto Caesar, the things which are
Cesars, and unto God, the things that are Gods Mat. 22. 21
, He did not only give them a Warrant and Commission to judge and determine,
what, and which were the things of God, as well as which were the things of
Caesar, but laid a Charge upon them also to put this warrant in execution; and
this not only by judging actually which were the things of God, but by
practicing and acting also, upon, and according to, this Judgment.

2. To judge of God, and of the things of God, in the sense we now speak, is but
to acknowledge, own, and reverence God, and the things of God* in their
transcendent Excellency, Goodness, and Truth, and as differenced in their
perfections respectively from all other Beings and things. The poorest and
meanest Subject that is, may lawfully, and without any just offense, judge his
Prince, yea or him that is made a lawful Judge over him, to be wise, just,
bountiful, etc. at least when there is sufficient ground for it.

If it be yet further demanded; But is the Reason or Understanding of a man
competent to judge of the things of God, as (for example) to determine and
conclude what is the mind of God in such, or such a passage of Scripture, or in
such and such a case? Does not the Scripture, speaking of men in their natural
condition, call them, Darkness Ephesians. 5* 8
? affirming likewise, that the Light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not John 1. 5
? And elsewhere does it not inform us, that the natural man perceives [or,
receiveth] not the things of the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness
unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned 1
Cor. 2. 14
? And how many Heathen Philosophers, Heretics, and others, undertaking to judge
of the things of God in the Gospel, by the light and strength of their own
Reasons and Understandings, have miscarried to the everlasting perdition of
their own Souls, and, as is much to be fe^re^, of many others also? To all thi^
I answer by degrees.

1. It is a thing as unquestionable, as that the Sun is up at noon day, that
Reason and Understanding in men are competent to judge of the things of God, at
least of some, yea of many of them, or rather indeed of all that are contained
in the Scriptures, according to the degree of their discovery and manifestation
there. For does not God Himself own them in this capacity, when he appeals, and
refers himself unto them in several of his great and important Affairs,
authorizing them to judge in the case between him, and his adversaries? And now,
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, JUDGE, I pray you, betwixt me and
my Vineyard. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not
done in it Isai. 5. 3, 4
? So again: Hear now, O house of Israel, is not my way equal? are not your ways
unequal Ezekiel. 18. 25 29
? Yet again (in the same Chapter,) O house of Israel, are not my ways equal?
are not your ways unequal? In these and such like Appeals, he supposes the
persons appealed unto, to be as capable, or (however) as well capable, of the
Equity and Righteousness of his ways (and consequently to be in a regular
capacity of justifying him) as of the unworthiness and unrighteousness of their
ways, against whom he stands in the Contest. So our Savior to the chief
Priests and Elders, in his Parable: When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard
comes, what will he [or rather, what shall he] do unto those Husbandmen? They
say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his
Vineyard unto other Husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their season
Mat. 21. 40 41
. We see these Priests and Elders, though men of great unworthiness otherwise,
and far from believing in Christ, were yet able to award a righteous Judgment,
and such as our Savior himself approved, yea and put in execution not long
after, between him and his Husbandmen. So in another place to the hypocritical
Jews: Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, and of the Eatth? but
how is it that ye do not discern this time? Yea and why even of [or, from] your
selves judge ye not what is right Luke 12. 56 57
? In which passage (among other things) he clearly implies these two: 1. That
had they set their minds upon things that most concerned them, they were in a
sufficient capacity, by the direction and help of those characters and signs,
which their own Prophets had long before delivered, clearly to have discerned,
that the days and times in which they now lived, were indeed the days of their
Messiah. 2. That (...), from themselves, i. e. out of natural and inbred
Principles, whereby they were enabled to judge of things commodious and
expedient for them in like cases, they were in a capacity to have come to this
issue and conclusion; that it was now high time to comprimise that great and
weighty Controversy, which of a long time had been depending between God, and
them, by Repentance. The Apostle Paul, wills the Corinthians, in one place to
judge what he says 1 Cor. 10. 15
, in another, he directs that in their Churchmeetings the Prophets should
speak two or three, and that the rest should JUDGE 1 Cor. 14. 29
. In both which places he cl(...)ly supposes in them a competency of
Judicature, or discerning, about spiritual things. And when in his Defense
before Agrippa, he demands of him, and the rest that were present, Why should
it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead Acts
26. 8
, he clearly supposes, that the Resurrection it self of the dead, which yet is
one of the great and deep Mysteries of the Gospel, was nothing but what they,
consulting with the light of Reason and Understanding in themselves (for they
were not supernaturally enlightened) might judge probable enough, and no ways
unlike to be effected. When God commands, and calls upon all men every where to
repent Acts 17. 30
, (and so to believe 1 John 3. 23
) he must either suppose them in a capacity to distinguish and discern between
the things whereof he would have them repent, and the things of which he would
not have them repent, and so between what he would have them to believe, and
what not: or else speak unto them as no otherwise capable of such his Commands,
then the stones on the Earth, or beasts of the field. And how then is the
Commandment holy, and just, and good? Therefore certainly those noble faculties
and endowments of Reason and Understanding in Men, as they are sustained,
supported, and assisted, by the Spirit of God in the generality of Men, are in
a capacity of apprehending, discerning, understanding the things of God in the
Gospel. Yea and evident it is from the Scriptures, that men act beneath
themselves, are remiss and slothful in awakening those Principles of Light and
Understanding that are vested in their Natures, or else willingly choke,
suppress, and smother them, if they remain in the snare of Unbelief. Pray for
us (says Paul to the Thessalonians) that we may be delivered from unreasonable
and evil men: for all men have not Faith 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2
. By unreasonable [or, as the word signifies, absurd] and evil men, he plainly
means, not men who naturally, or in actu primo were unreasonable (such as
these were not like to end^nger him, or to obstruct the course of the Gospel)
but such as were unreasonable actu secundo, i. e. persons who acted contrary to
the light and principles of Reason, and hereby became (...), industriously
evil, or wicked. That there were such persons as these abroad in the World, he
gives this account, for All men have not Faith: which clearly implies, that
men who act, and quit themselves according to the true Principles of that
Reason, which God has planted in them, cannot but believe, and be partakers in
the precious Faith of the Gospel. To this purpose that passage in Chrysostom is
memorably worthy: As to believe [the Gospel] is the part of a raised and
nobly-ingenuous Soul: so [on the contrary] not to believe, is the property of a
[Soul] most unreasonable, and unworthy, and depressed [or, bowed down] to the
sottishness of brute beasts (...). Chrysostom. in Romans Hom. 8.
. Therefore,

Secondly, Whereas it was objected, that men in their natural estates, are by
the Scriptures termed, darkness, and in this respect presented as unable to
comprehend the light of the Gospel, I answer: There is in the Controversies
about the extent and efficacy of the Grace of God vouchsafed unto men, as great
an abuse of the word, natural, (and so of the word, supernatural, a term not
found in the Scriptures, either formally, or vertually) as there is of the
word, Orthodox, in this, and many others. The Scripture knows not the word,
natural, in any such sense or signification, wherein it should express or
distinguish the unregenerate estate of a man, from the regenerate. Our
Translators indeed render (...) (in the Scripture adjoining, of which a touch
presently) the natural man: but, quo jure, nondum liquet. And however, the
whole carriage of the Context round about, makes i^ as clear as the light (as
I have elsewhere argued and proved at large Novice Presbyter, page 86 87
) that it is not the unregenerate man, but the weak Christian, that is there
spoken of, and termed (...), as a little after (in the same contexture of
discourse) he is termed (...), carnal, and (...), a babe, or youngling, in
Christ. If therefore by the natural estate of men, the Objection means, the
unregenerate estate of men according to the whole compass and extent of it, and
under all the differences which it admits, I absolutely deny that the
Scripture any where terms, natural men, darkness. Those Ephesians, of whom
the Apostle says, they were sometime darkness, had been not only, or simply,
unregenerate, but had walked in sins and trespasses, according to the course of
this world, and after the Prince that rules in the air, the Spirit that
works effectually in the children of disobedience, by whom their
understandings had been darkened, and they possessed with many false, wicked,
and blasphemous conceits concerning God and the Gospel, etc. All which imply an
unregenerate estate most dangerously encumbered, and from whence it argued the
high and signal Grace and Favor of God that ever they should be delivered. The
Jews also (Joh. 1. 5.) are termed, darkness, upon a like account: viz. because
they were strongly and desperately prejudiced and prepossessed with erroneous
Notions and Conceits against Christ, and about the estate of their Messiah at
his first coming unto them; whom they expecting in the form of a great Monarch,
rejected and crucified in the form of ^ ^ervant. It was this darkness, which
they had through an oscitant, loose, and sensual converse with their own
Scriptures, voluntarily suffered to grow and spread it self upon the face of
their Minds and Understandings, that was a snare upon them, and occasioned the
sad Event here mentioned, viz. that when the light shone unto them (i. e. when
sufficient and pregnant means were vouchsafed unto them, to have brought them
to the acknowledgment of their Messiah) they comprehended it not, i. e. did not
by the means of it come to see and understand that, for the sight and knowledge
whereof it was given them. For that (by the way) is to be observed, that the
Evangelist does not say, that the darkness in which the light shined, could
not, or, was not able, to comprehend it, but only, that it did not comprehend
it. Now it is a known Principle in Reason, that a negatione actus, ad
negationem potentiae, non valet argumentum. There may be a defect in action, or
performance, where there is no defect of power for action. And the very
observation and report which the Evangelist makes of the non-comprehension of
the light by the darkness in which it shone, plainly enough imports, that the
defectiveness of this darkness in not comprehending the light, did not consist
in, or proceed from, any natural or invincible want of power to comprehend it,
but from a blindness voluntarily contracted, and willingly, if not wilfully,
persisted in. For how can it be reasonably supposed, that this Evangelist, who
flies an higher pitch then his fellows, in drawing up his Evangelical tidings
for the use and benefit of the World, should, in the very entrance of his
Gospel, and whilst he was thundering out on high (as one of the Fathers
speaks) the Divinity of Christ, insert the relation of a thing, that had
nothing strange, nothing more then of common and ordinary observation in it? Or
is it any thing more then ordinary, or what is most obvious, that men do not
fly in the air like birds, or that fishes do not speak on the Earth like men?
Or is it a thing of any whit a more savory consideration, then these, that men
void of all capacity, destitute of all power, to comprehend the light, should
not comprehend it? But that there should be a generation of men, whom it so
infinitely concerned to comprehend the light, to acknowledge and own their
Messiah being now come unto them, and who withal had a rich sufficiency of
means to have done the one and the other, should notwithstanding be so stupid
and unlike men, as not to comprehend this light, not to acknowledge or own this
their Messiah, is a matter of high admiration and astonishment, and the mention
of it very commodious and proper for that subject of discourse, which the Holy
Ghost had now in hand (as might be showed more at large, but that I fear the
Reader has already more then his burden, of an Epistle.)

Thirdly, Concerning that Scripture, (1 Cor. 2. 14.) But the natural man
perceives not etc. if, Reader, thou conceivest there is any thing in it spoken
with any intent to disable Reason or Understanding in a man, so far, as to
divest them of all capacity or power, for the apprehending, conceiving, or
believing any the things of God, yea or particularly of such of the things of
God, the discerning and believing whereof is of absolute necessity for
Salvation, thou may, if thou please, deliver thy Judgment from the mistake,
by the perusal of a few Pages in a Discourse formerly published Novice
Presbyter, p. 86, 87, 89, etc.
, where thou will find this passage of Scripture opened at large, and driven
home to its issue. Here I clearly demonstrate these three things: 1. That the
place speaks not of the natural, i. e. of the unregenerate man, but of the
weak Christian, the babe in Christ. 2. That the things of God here spoken of,
are not such things, the knowledge or discerning whereof is of absolute
necessity to Salvation, but the high, or deep things of God; of the true and
worthy discerning of which, only the spiritual man, i. e. the strong and
well-grown Christian, is de praesenti, and immediately, capable. 3. (And
lastly) That the incapacity of these things of God, which is here asserted to
be in the natural man, or weak Christian, is not an utter or absolute
incapacity, or such which by a diligent use of means he may not very possibly,
and according to the ordinary course of Providence, out-grow; but only a
present or actual incapacity, or indisposition, which is regularly, and (as it
were) of course, curable. These things I there evince from the express tenor
and carriage of the Context.

4. (And lastly, to the Objection) Concerning Heathen Philosophers, Heretics,
and others of great Parts, and natural endowments of Reason, Wit,
Understanding, etc. who either rejected the Gospel as a fable, as the
Philosophers, or else perverted and wrested the Truth thereof in many things,
to their own destruction, and (possibly) to the destruction of others, as
Heretics; I answer; When I affirm and teach, that Reason, or the Intellectual
part of a man, is competent to apprehend, discern, subscribe unto, the things
of God, and of the Gospel, my meaning is not to affirm withal, that therefore
men of these Endowments, though never so excellently enriched with them, must
of necessity apprehend, discern, or subscribe unto these things. Reason and
Understanding even of the greatest advance in men, will serve men for other
ends and purposes, besides the apprehension and discerning of the things of God
in the Gospel, and may accordingly be improved and employed by them. Yea they
may be employed against the Gospel, and made to war and fight against the Truth
of it. It is a saying of known Truth concerning all things that have not an
essential connection with a man's sovereign good:

Nil prodest, quod non laedere possit idem: i. e. Nothing there is so
profitable,
But to do mischief is as able.
Because some men suffer themselves to be bewitched with a corrupt desire of
drawing away Disciples after them, and for the fulfilling of such a lust, speak
perverse things Acts 20. 30
(as the Apostle speaks,) it does not follow from hence, that therefore they
were in no capacity, or in no possibility, of speaking the Truth, and
refraining from the teaching of perverse things. Aristotle speaking of riches,
says, that it is unpossible that he should have them, who takes no care to
have them (...). Arist. Ethic.
. So are we to conceive of the knowledge and true discerning of the things of
God in the Gospel: in what capacity soever men are, either for abilities, or
means otherwise, for obtaining them, it is unpossible that ever they should
actually attain them, unless they be careful, and shall bend the strength of
their Minds and Understandings in order to the attainment of them. Now the
Heathen Philosophers (more generally) became vain in their imaginations Romans 1
21
(as the Apostle speaks) i. e. they spent themselves, the strength of their
parts, time, and opportunities, upon matters of a low, or secondary
concernment, and which they apprehended to have a more ready and certain
connection with their own honor and esteem amongst men: and did not charge
themselves, their gifts, or parts with that worthy and blessed design, which
the Apostle calls, the Having of God in acknowledgment See the Epistle
Dedicatory.
. Upon this their unnatural unthankfulness toward God, uttering it self in
their addiction of themselves to studies, speculations, and enquiries of a
self-concernment, with the neglect of him, (...), their foolish heart was
darkened. Concerning Heretics, it is a common notion amongst us, that these
from time to time were turned aside from the way of Truth by some unclean
Spirit, or other, as of Pride, Ambition, Envy, Voluptuousness, or the like. If
these Spirits once enter into a man, they will soon call in, and take unto
themselves, other Spirits worse ^hen themselves, I mean, Spirits of Error and
Delusion, to advocate for them, and plead their cause. As for the mistakes and
miscarriages in Judgment of good men, upright (in the main) with God and the
Gospel, about some particular Points, they are to be resolved into several
Causes, of which we shall not now speak particularly. Only this I shall say;
whatsoever any man's Error or mistake in Judgment is about the things of the
Gospel, it is not to be imputed to any deficiency on Gods part in the
vouchsafement of means unto him competent and sufficient, as well for the
guiding into, as for the keeping of his Judgment in, the way of Truth: but into
some deficien^^, neglect, or incogitancy of his own, which he might very
possibly have prevented, or overcome. But,

Secondly, Concerning the Spirit of God, by which alone, and in opposition unto
Reason, many affirm and teach, that the things of God, and matters of Religion
are to be apprehended, discerned, and known, I answer; That such an Opinion as
this is a conceit as uncouth, as palpably weak, and ill-coherent with it self,
as lightly can be. For if only the Spirit of God within me apprehends the
things of God, and I my self apprehend them not, (and apprehend them I cannot,
but by my Reason, or Understanding, having no other faculty wherewith to
apprehend, or conceive,) such an apprehension of them relates not at all unto
me. Nor can I any whit more be said to apprehend them, because the Spirit of
God apprehends them in me, then I may, or might, in case the same Spirit should
apprehend them in another man. That which another man meditates, or indites in
my house, without imparting it unto me, no whit more concerns me, then in case
he should have meditated or indicted the same things in the house of another
man. Besides, the Spirit of God being but one and the same infinite indivisible
Spirit in all men, he cannot with any tolerable propriety of speech, nor with
truth, be said to apprehend, discern, or conceive that in one man, which he
does not after the same manner apprehend, discern, and conceive in another;
yea, in every man. Therefore if there be any thing more apprehended, or
discerned of the things of God, in one man, then in another, the difference
arises, not from the different apprehensions of the Spirit in these men, but
from the different apprehensions of these men themselves, and this by their own
reasons and understandings, they having (as has been said) no other faculties,
principles, or abilities, wherewith to apprehend, but these.

If it be demanded, But is any man able without the presence and assistance of
the Spirit of God, to discern the things of God, or to judge aright in matters
of Religion? I answer,

1. Plainly and directly to the Heart (I suppose) of those, who make this
demand, No: The Spirit of God has such a great Interest in, and glorious
Superintendency over, the Minds, and Spirits, Reasons and Understandings of
Men, that they cannot act, or move regularly, or perform any of those
operations or functions, that are most natural and proper to them, upon any
worthy or comely terms, especially in matters of a spiritual concernment, but
by the gracious and loving interposure and help of this Spirit. For
(questionless) the intellectual frame of the Heart and Soul of man, was, by the
sin and fall of Adam, wholly dissolved, shattered, brought to an absolute Chaos
and Confusion of Ignorance and Darkness, to a condition of as great an
impotency to do him the least service in order to his comfort or peace in any
kind, as can be imagined. So that if the Reasons and Understandings of men quit
themselves in their actings or workings, with honor, or in any due proportion
to their benefit, comfort, or peace, it must needs be by means of that Gracious
Conjunction of the Spirit of God with them; which is a vouchsafement unto the
children of men, procured by him, who raised up the Tabernacle of Adam, when it
was fallen, Jesus Christ Blessed for ever; In respect of which vouchsafement
purchased by him, and given unto men for his sake, He is said to enlighten
every man coming into the world John 1. 9.
. So that what light soever, of Truth, what clear and sound principle, or
impression of Reason, or Understanding soever, is, since the Fall, to be found
in any man, is an express fruit of the Grace, that is given unto the World upon
the account of Jesus Christ; and is re-invested in the Soul by the appropriate
interposure of the Spirit of God, the gift whereof upon this account, is so
frequently and highly magnified in the Scriptures. Yea not only the habitual
residency of all principles of Light and Truth in the Soul, is to be attributed
unto the Spirit of God as supporting and preserving them from defacement, but
also all the actings and movings of the rational powers of the Soul according
to the true exigency, ducture, and import of them, as in all right
apprehensions of things, in all legitimate and sound reasonings, and debates,
whether for the confirmation of any Truth, or the confutation of any Error, or
the like. But,

2. Though the Spirit of God contributes by his assistane after that high
manner which has been declared, toward the right apprehending, understanding,
discerning, the things of God by men, yet this no ways proves, but that they
are the Reasons and Understandings of men themselves, that must apprehend,
discern, and understand these things: and consequently must be provoked,
raised, engaged, employed, and improved by men, that they may thus apprehend,
and discern, notwithstanding all that assistance which is administered by the
Spirit: otherwise nothing will be apprehended, or discerned by them. Nor will
the assistance of the Spirit we speak of, turn to any account of benefit or
comfort, but of loss and condemnation unto men, in case their Reasons and
Understandings shall not advance, and quit themselves according to their
interest thereupon.

3. In case the Spirit of God shall at any time reveal [I mean, offer and
propose] any of the things of God, or any spiritual Truth, unto men, these must
be apprehended, discerned, judged of, yea and concluded to be the things of
God, by the Reasons and Understandings of men, before they can, or ought, to
receive or believe them to be the things of God, yea before such a Revelation
can any ways accommodate, benefit, and bless their Soul. When our Savior,
speaking of the Spirit to His Disciples, says, And he will show you things to
come: and again; He shall receive of mine, and shall show them unto you, (Joh.
16. 13, 14.) He supposes that they (viz. with their own Reasons and
Understandings) were to apprehend and judge of the things that should be thus
showed unto them, to have been showed unto them by the Spirit of God, and not
to have proceeded from any other Author. Yea in case men shall receive the
things of God themselves FOR the things of God, or of the Spirit of God, before
their Reason and Understanding have upon rational Grounds and Principles judged
them to be the things of God, yet can they not receive them upon these terms,
As the things of God; I mean, as the things of God ought in Duty, and by
Command from Himself, to be received by Men; or so, as to benefit or enrich the
Soul by their being received. For as God requires of men to be praised with
Understanding Psalm 47 7
, [ i. e. out of a rational apprehension, and due consideration of his infinite
worth and Excellency,] so does He require to be believed also. And they that
believe him otherwise, believe they know not what, nor whom: and so are
Brethren in vanity with those that worship they know not what John 4. 22
, and build Altars to an unknown God Acts 17. 23
. To trust, or believe in God upon such terms as these, is, being interpreted,
but as the Devotion of a man to an Idol: Yea the Apostle Himself arraigns the
Athenians of that high crime and misdemeanor of Idolatry, upon the account of
their sacrificing to an unknown God Acts 17. 29
.

4. (And lastly) The Interposure and actings of Reason and Understanding in
men, are of that sovereign and most transcendent use, yea necessity, in and
about matters of Religion, that all the Agency of the Spirit notwithstanding, a
man can perform nothing, no manner of service unto God with acceptance,
nothing in a way of true Edification to himself, without their engagement and
service. First, I stand charged by God, not to believe every spirit, but to try
the spirits, whether they be of God 1 John 4. 1
. I demand, by what Rule or Touchstone shall I try any spirit? When, or upon
what account, shall I reject one, as a spirit of Error, Falsehood and Delusion?
and do Homage with my Judgment and Conscience to another, as the Spirit of God?
If it be said, I ought to try the spirits by the Scriptures, or Word of God; I
demand again, but how shall I try my Touchstone, or be sure that that
principle, notion, or ground, which I call the Word of God, and by which I go
about to try the spirits, is indeed the Word of God? There is scarce any spirit
of Error that is abroad in the Christian World, but freely offers it self to be
tried by the Word of God, as well as the true Spirit of God Himself, i. e. by
such meanings, senses, or conclusions, as it self confidently asserts to be the
Word of God, i. e. the Mind of God in the Scriptures. So that I am in no
capacity to try such a spirit, which upon such an account as this pretends his
coming forth from God, unless I be able to prove, that those senses, meanings,
and conclusions, by which he offers to be tried, are not indeed the Word of
God. Now it is unpossible that I should prove this merely and only by the
Scriptures themselves: because unto what place, or places soever, I shall have
recourse for my proof or trial in this case, this spirit will reject my sense
and interpretation, in case it makes against him, and will substitute another
that shall not oppose him. Nor can I reasonably or regularly reject his sense
in this case, at least as an untruth, unless I apprehend some relish or taste
therein, which is irrational, or some notion, which jarreth with, or grateth
upon, some clear principle or other of reason within me. For as on the one
hand, what Doctrine or notion soever clearly accords, and is commensurable,
with any solid and undoubted principle or ground of Reason within me, is hereby
demonstrably evinced to be a Truth, and from God: so on the other hand, what
Doctrine or saying soever bears hard, or falls foul, upon any such principle,
must of necessity be an Error, and somewhat that proceeds from Satan, or from
men, and not from God. The Reason hereof is clearly asserted by the Apostle in
these words: For God is not the Author of Confusion, but of peace 1 Cor. 14. 33.
. From whence it appears, that God is not divided in himself, or contradictions
to himself, so as to write, or assert that in one book, as in that of the
Scriptures, which he denies, or opposes in another, as viz. in that of
Nature, or of the fleshly tables of the heart of man: but whatsoever he writes
or speaks in the one, he writes or speaks nothing Inclinavit Deus
Scripturas ad infantium and lactentium capacitatem. Aug. in Psalm. 8. * Tertul.
De testimonio Animae adversus Gentes. c. 1. Mirum, si a Deo data homini, novit
divinare? Sic mirum, si a Deo data, cadem canit, quae Deus suis dedit nosse.
Ibidem c. 5. Si de tuis literis dubitas, neque Deus, neque natura mentitur; ut
and Deo, and naturae credas, creed animae etc. Ib. cap. 6. Cur verba habet
Christianonorum, quos ne auditos vis^s* que vult? Ibid. O testimonium Animae
naturaliter Christianae! Tertul. Apologet. Ne ^ui praeclusus esset ad
felicitatem aditus, non solum hominum mentibus indidit illud quod diximus
Religionis semen etc. Calvin instit. l. 1. c. 5. Sect. 1.
in the other, but what is fairly and fully consistent with it. Upon this
account it is a grave and worthy advertisement of Mr Perkins in his Epistle
before his Treatise of Predestination. It is (says he) also requisite that
this Doctrine (he speaks of Predestination, Election, and Reprobation) agree
with the grounds of common Reason, and of that knowledge of God, which may be
obtained by the light of nature. In this saying of his he clearly supposes,
that whatsoever should be taught by any man in the mysterious and high points
of Predestination, otherwise then according to the Scriptures, and the Truth,
may be clearly disproved by this, viz. the disagreement of it with the grounds
of common Reason, and of that knowledge of God which the light of Nature shines
into the hearts of men. If himself had kept close to this principle of his own,
in drawing up his Judgment in the point of Predestination, the World had
received a far differing and better account from his pen of this subject, then
now it has. But if his sense were, that the heights and depths of Religion
(for so we may well call the Doctrines of Election and Reprobation, etc) have
nothing in them but what agrees with the grounds and principles of common
reason, and with the Dictates of Nature in men, and consequently may be
measured, discerned, and judged of by these, he did not conceive that matters
of a more facile and ordinary consideration, were above the capacity and
apprehension of Reason. It was the saying of Augustine, that God has bowed down
the Scriptures to the capacity even of Babes and Sucklings. Tertullian has
much upon this account to excellent purpose. In one place (speaking of the Soul
being yet simple, rude, and unfurnished with any acquired knowledge, either
from the Scripture, or other institution) he demands why it should be strange,
that being given by God, it should speak out (or sing) the same things, the
knowledge whereof God gives unto his children. Not long after he admonishes
the Gentiles, that neither God, nor Nature, lie: and thereupon, that they may
believe both God and nature, wills them to believe their own Souls. A little
after he says, that the Soul he speaks of, has the words (and therefore the
inwards senses and impressions) of Christians, whom notwithstanding it wishes
that it might never hear, or see. Elsewhere, having mentioned some expressions
of affinity with the Scriptures, as often coming out of the mouths of Heathen, he
triumphs (as it were) over them with this acclamation. O, the Testimony of a
Soul naturally Christian! Nor does Calvin himself say any whit less then all
this, when he says, that God has implanted [or inwardly put] the seed of
Religion in the mind of men. Doubtless the seed sympathizeth richly with that
body, which springs and grows from it. But these things by the way. All
impressions, all principles of light and truth, which are found written in the
hearts and consciences of men, are here written by the finger of God himself.
Therefore what spirit or Doctrine soever symbolizeth in notion, and import,
with these or any of them, must of necessity be of the same parentage and
descent with them, there being no original Parent or Father of light and truth,
but God only. And on the contrary, what Doctrine or spirit soever, puts any
of these Principles to sorrow, or shame, and does not lovingly comport with
them, hereby declare themselves to be of a spurious and ignoble race, as Christ
reasoned with the Jews: If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I
proceeded forth, and came from God John 8 42.
. But because they hated him, he concluded them to be the children of the Devil.

Concerning the mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation of God, or, the Son of
God, the conception of a Virgin, with some other points of like consideration,
commonly pretended to be against, or at least, above, and out of the reach and
apprehension of Reason, I clearly answer: 1. That they are every whit as much,
yea, upon the same terms, out of the reach of Faith, as of Reason. For how can
I believe (at least upon good grounds, and as it becomes a Christian to
believe, whatsoever he believes) that which I have no Reason, nor am capable
of apprehending any Reason, nay, for which there is no Reason, why I should
believe it? If it be said, I am bound to believe the Doctrines specified,
because they are revealed by God; I answer, that this is a rational ground,
whereof my Reason and Understanding are thoroughly capable, why I should believe
them. The light of Nature clearly informs me, that what God reveals, or
speaks, must needs be true, and consequently, worthy and meet to be believed.
If it be further said; but Reason is not able to apprehend, or conceive, how
three should be really and essentially one, and the same: how a Virgin should
conceive, and bring forth a Son, etc. I answer, that no Faith or Belief in such
things as these, is required of me, nor would be accepted with God, in case it
were in me, above what I am able by my Reason to apprehend, and understand. As
I am not able to apprehend by my Reason, the particular and distinct manner how
the three Persons subsist in one and the same Divine Nature and Essence, so
neither am I bound to believe it. That which I am bound to believe in this
Point, is only this, that there are three who do thus subsist (I mean, in the
same Divine Essence) and for this, my Reason is apprehensive enough why I
should believe it, viz. because God himself has revealed it (as has been
said*) If I should confidently believe any thing more, or further, concerning
the Trinity of Persons (commonly so called, and there is the same Reason of the
other Points mentioned) then what I know upon the clear account of my Reason
and Understanding, it would be presumption in me, and not Faith; and I should
contract the guilt of those, whom the Apostle charge with intruding [or,
advancing] themselves into the things, which they have not seen (...). Col. 2.
18 Vid. Sam. Petit. Var. Lect. l. 1. c. 9
, [ i. e. rationally apprehended, and understood.] But,

2. If it be yet demanded, but is it not contrary to the grounds of Nature, and
so to Principles of Reason, that a Virgin should conceive a Child? And if so,
how can such a Doctrine, according to what you have asserted, be received as
from God, or, as a Truth? I answer; it is no ways contrary to Reason, nor to
any Principle thereof that God should be able to make a Virgin to conceive, but
very consonant hereunto; as the Apostle Paul supposed it credible enough (as we
lately heard) even in the eye of Reason, that God should make the Earth bring
forth her dead, alive Acts 26, 8
. Indeed that a Virgin should conceive in a natural way, or according to the
course of ordinary Providence, is contrary unto Reason: but this Religion
requires not of any man to believe. Nor does it bear hard at all upon any
Principle of Reason, that God should be willing to do every whit as great and
strange a thing as that (I mean, as to cause a Virgin to conceive) for the
accomplishment of so great and glorious a design, as the saving of a lost
World. Nor is it contrary to Reason, or any Principle thereof, that God, or the
first Being, being infinite, should have a manner of subsisting, or Being, far
different from the manner of subsistence, which is appropriate to all created
and finite Beings; or that this manner of subsisting, which is proper unto him,
should be unto men incomprehensible. But most consonant it is to Principles of
Reason, when God himself has pleased so far to reveal that appropriate and
incomprehensible manner of his subsisting, as to declare and say, that he
subsisteth in three* that men should accordingly believe it so to be. So that
most certain it is that there is nothing in Christian Religion, which, so far
as it concerns men to know and believe, but what fairly and friendly comports
with that Reason and Understanding which God has given unto Man, and what by a
diligent and conscientious use of these noble faculties, he may come to know
and believe, at least so far as to salve his great Interest of Salvation.

2. Look with how many Precepts, Exhortations, Admonitions, I stand charged by
God to submit unto, and practice, I am under so many charges and engagements
from him likewise, to exercise my Reason and Understanding. 1. To apprend
aright the Mind of God in every of these respectively, lest when he injoyneth
me one thing, I, through mistake, should do another: 2. To consider how, when,
and in what cases I am commanded by him to do this, or that: 3. (and lastly, to
pass by other particulars) To gather together, and call up upon my Soul all
such Motives and Considerations, which I am able, whereby to provoke, stir up,
and strengthen my self to the execution and performance of all things
accordingly. When God commands me to strive to enter in at the strait gate,
to seek his Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof in the first place, to labor
for the meat which endures to everlasting life, to be a man in understanding,
(to omit other Precepts of like nature, without number) be commands me
consequentially, and with a direct, clear* and necessary implication, to rise
up in the might of my reason and understanding in order to the performaance of
these things: nor am I capable of performing the least of these great and most
important commands, in any due manner, but by interessing my reason, judgment,
understanding, and this thoroughly and effectually, in and about the
performance. The truth is, I stand bound in duty and conscience toward God,
and in faithfulness to mine own Soul, neither to believe any thing at all, as
coming from God, which I have not, or may have, a very substantial ground in
Reason to believe comes indeed from him: nor yet to do any thing at all, as
commanded by him, unless there be a like ground in reason to persuade me that
it is indeed his command.

I confess (good Reader) I have presumed at somewhat an unreasonable rate upon
thy patience, in detaining thee so long with the Argument yet in hand. But the
sense of that unconceivable mischief and misery, which I most certainly know
have been brought upon the Christian World (at least in our quarters of it) and
which lie sore upon it at this day, by means of the reigning of this notion or
Doctrine amongst us, that men ought not to use, but lay aside, their Reason, in
matters of Religion, lies so intolerably sad and heavy upon my Spirit, that I
could not relieve my self to any competent degree, with saying less then what
has been said, to relieve the World, by hewing in sunder such a snare of death
cast upon it. Most assuredly, all the ataxies* disorders, confusions,
seditions, Insurrections, all the Errors, blasphemous Opinions, apostasies from
the truth, and ways of Holiness, all trouble of mind, and sad workings of
conscience in me, all unrighteousness and injustice, all bribery and
oppression, all unmanlike self-seeking and prevaricating with public Interests
and Trusts, all covetousness and deceit, and whatsoever can be named in this
World, obstructive, destructive, to the present comfort, and peace, to the
future blessedness, and glory, of the sons and daughters of men, proceed and
spring from this one root of bitterness and of death; they neglect to advance
and engage home their Reasons, Judgment's, Understandings, in matters of
Religion, to employ and improve them according to their proper interests and
capacities in these most important affairs.

O Reader, my mouth is open unto thee, my heart is enlarged. Now for a
recompense in the same (I speak unto thee as a dear Brother in Christ) be thou
also enlarged. Say unto the World round about thee, Awake thou that sleep,
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Doubtless the World
would soon find it self in another manner of posture, then now it is, and see
the whole hemisphere of it filled with the glorious light of the knowledge of
God in the face of Jesus Christ, if the inhabitants thereof, every man from his
quarters, would be persuaded to rise up in the might of those abilities, those
heavenly endowments of reason, judgment, understanding, wherewith God, by Jesus
Christ, has re-invested them, to seek after him, by enquiring diligently into,
by weighing narrowly all those things, as works of creation, works of
providence, inscriptions upon the Soul, and especially the Sacred Word of
extraordinary revelation, wherein, and whereby God has drawn near unto men,
and (as it were) prepared, postured, and fitted himself on purpose to be found
and known, and this as well in the excellency of his Grace, as of his glory, by
all those who upon these terms seek after him. The time was, when the Spirit
was not given, because Christ was not glorified John 7. 39.
in Heaven: the time now is, wherein the Spirit is not given unto the World
according to the preparations of the royal bounty and magnificence of Heaven,
because he is not glorified on Earth by the worthy employment of the means,
abilities, opportunities vouchsafed unto men. The Word of God makes it one
argument of the wickedness, and sensual ways of men, that they have not the
Spirit Jude ver. 18. 19.
: yea the Apostle Paul by charging the Ephesians to be filled with the Spirit
Ephesians. 5. 18
, clearly supposes it to be a sinful strain of a voluntary unworthiness in
men, if they have not a very rich and plentiful anointing of the Spirit. He
that lives up to those principles of light, which God has vested in him, is
under the Beatifical influence of that most rich Promise of Christ: to him that
has, shall be given, and he shall have abundantly Mat. 25. 29
. By him that has, (in this promise) is meant (as clearly appears from the
tenor of the parable immediately preceding) such a person, who uses,
imployeth, improveth, that which he has, hereby declaring that he has what he
has. Nor is that which he is here said to have, any thing of a spiritual or
supernatural import. This likewise is evident from the said parable. For here
one of the three, who all had received talents, one or more, all which talents
must needs, by the course of the parable, ^e supposed to be of one and the same
kind, nor is the least intimation of any difference, especially of any
specifical difference, between them, is said to be an evil and slothful
servant, notwithstanding his talent; and because of his slothfulness, to have
been cast into utter darkness. These are no characters (especially in the
Judgment of those, with whom we are to conflict in the ensuing Discourse) of
persons that had received any thing saving or supernatural. But by that which
is here promised to be given, and that in abundance, to him that has, must of
necessity be meant somewhat that is of a spiritual and saving nature. This also
is evident from the carriage of the same Parable: where the servants, who had
received the Talents, and employed them faithfully (by whom are typified our
Saviors, (...), those that have, as was lately said) are graciously invited by
their Master into his joy: Enter thou into thy Masters joy: So to the other;
Enter thou into thy Masters joy. Now if either God, or Christ, be signified and
meant by the Master of these servants (as I suppose no man questions, but that
either the one, or the other, are typified hereby) by, entering into their joy,
cannot be meant a receiving of a greater measure of natural gifts or
endowments, nor of receiving any reward which belongs to persons qualified only
with such Endowments as these, but, Salvation, or Eternal Blessedness and
Glory. If so, it roundly follows, that by what Christ promises shall be given
to him that has (in the sense declared) is meant somewhat of a saving
consequence, as regenerating Grace, the sanctifying Spirit of God, Faith, and
the like. And promising, not only, or simply, that to him that has, shall be
given, but further, that he shall have abundantly, he clearly signifies, that
in case men will provoke, stir up, and lay out themselves accordingly in the
improvement of such abilities and gifts, which shall from time to time be
vouchsafed unto them, they may, by virtue of the bounty and gracious Decree of
God in that behalf, attain and receive from God what proportion or measure of
the Spirit of Grace, and of God, they can desire. Therefore they that teach men
to be merely passive in matters of Religion, and forbid them the use of their
Reasons and Understandings, as unlawful, or dangerous, in these affairs, how
prudently soever they may consult their own carnal ease, honor, or worldly
accommodations by such a Doctrine, yet herein they say unto men (in effect) Be
not excellent: let it never be said, that the God of Heaven has made you rich,
or Great.

Good Reader, I have no Apology for my Prolixity in the Argument in hand, but
only the high and sovereign importance of it, together with mine own abounding
in the sense of that most sad Calamity, under which the world groaneth by means
of the importune and tyrannical Regency of that Notion or Doctrine, unto the
deposal whereof I have lift up my Heart and Hand in all that I have said
herein. I shall only add this one word more (upon this account) at the present:
Whereas thou (I fear) art ready to complain of a long Harvest already, the
truth is, that all I have said in the business hitherto, is but a first-fruit
of that abundance, which yet remains in my spirit and Soul, ready to utter it
self upon any other like occasion, for the eradication and utter extirpation
(if it be possible) of that most pestilential and pernicious notion and conceit
out of the minds of men. In the mean time I shall make thee some part of amends
for thy patient bearing of my burden in this Point, by as much brevity as thou
can reasonably desire in the third and last particular yet remaining. The
tenor hereof was, to remove some stumbling stones, which it is like have been
thrown in thy way, to alienate thy mind from the perusal of the Discourse
ensuing. Objections against the reading of, the present Discourse, with others
of like Argument, answered.


For Satan and men have together devised and hammered out variety of Arguments,
or Pretenses, to alienate the minds of weak and inconsiderate persons, not only
from the D^^trines themselves here asserted, but even from acquainting
themselves with Books or Discourses, of like Argument and Plea with the
Discourse before thee.

One Vizor very hideous and affrighting, which they put upon the face of such
Discourses as this, to scare children in Understanding from them, is, that they
teach the uncomfortable, sad, and dismal Doctrine of the possibility of Saints
and true Believers falling away, and this both totally and finally. But how far
this Doctrine is from being either uncomfortable, sad, or dismal, I shall not
here stand to demonstrate: but refer thee to the nineth Chapter of the
Discourse it self (with several other passages afterward) where I evidently
prove, the two opposite Doctrines being duly and unpartially compared together,
that that which denies this possibility, is every whit as great, yea a far
greater Enemy to the peace and comfort of the Saints, then that which affirms
it.

Secondly, Some labor to work a distaste of such Discourses as we speak of in
the minds of men, by possessing them with a conceit, that they are derogatory
and injurious to the Grace, or freeness of the Grace, of God, in the Salvation
of Men: and that they exalt Nature, and the abilities hereof, as Free Will, and
the like, to the dishonor and prejudice of this Grace. To this I answer, 1.
That I am no ways responsible for all that may possibly sibly be taught or
said, in every Treatise, or Discourse, that builds up one or more of the
Doctrines here asserted* but only for such things, wherein their sense and mine
greet e^ch other. 2. I answer to the Charge (in reference to my self, and my
Doctrine and Judgment touching the Grace of God) that it is of a like
consideration and relation between my Accusers, and me, as the accusation of an
unchaste deportment brought against Joseph by his Mistress was between them.
For as the Accuser here, and not the Accused, was guilty of the crime objected
in the Accusation: so the truth is, that the Sense and Opinion of those, who
sentence my Doctrine as injurious to the Grace, or freeness of the Grace, of
God, are themselves deep in the condemnation, my Doctrine being as innocent, as
the manifest Truth it self is, from such a crime: Nor does it exalt Nature any
whit more, if not much less, then they. For, 1. Concerning the Grace of God,
and the freeness hereof, I hold and teach nothing but what fairly and fully
accords with these Positions. 1. That the Original or first-spring of the
Salvation of the World, and so of every particular person, that comes to be
saved, was in, and from, the Grace, the free Grace and good Pleasure of God. 2.
That the whole method, or systeme of Counsels, by which, and according unto
which, God effects and brings to pass the Salvation of all that are saved,
did proceed wholly and entirely from the same Grace and good pleasure. 3. (And
more particularly) That the gift of Jesus Christ for a Mediator and Savior
unto the World, and so the Grant or Promise of Justification, and Salvation
unto men, by, or upon believing, issued solely and wholly from the same Grace.
4. That men by Nature, and of themselves, i. e. considered in, and under such a
condition, as they were brought unto by Adam, and wherein they should have
subsisted (in case they had ever been born, and lived in the world) had not the
free Grace of God in Christ interposed to relieve them, and better their
condition, have no strength or power, not the least inclination or propension
of Will, to do any thing, little or much, acceptable unto God, or of a saving
import. 5. That notwithstanding this resta^ration or healing of the natural
condition of man by the free Grace of God, yet there is not one of a thousand,
possibly not one throughout the whole World, but so far corrupts himself with
the lusts of the flesh, and ways of the World, that without a second relief
from the free Grace of God, as viz. in his patience and long-suffering toward
him, ever comes to repent, or believe, or to persevere believing, and so to be
saved. 6. That it is from the free and undeserved Grace of God, that any person
of Mankind is so much as put into a capacity of believing, or has power and
means vouchsafed unto him, sufficient to enable him to believe. 7. That a man
is put into this capacity of believing by an irresistible acting or working of
the free Grace of God. 8. That when any man, by virtue of the power and means
vouchsafed unto him by the free Grace of God, comes actually to believe, the
exercise and acting of this power proceeds also from the free Grace and good
pleasure of God: so that no man ever believes, without a present and actual
assistance from the free Grace of God in order to this his believing, over and
above his ability or power to believe. 9. (And lastly) That the act of
believing, whenever it is performed by any man, is so inconsiderably, and at
so low a rate of efficiency from a man's self, that (to help apprehension a
lttle in the case) suppose the act of believing could be divided into a
thousand parts, or degrees, nine hundred ninety and nine of them are to be
ascribed unto the free Grace of God, and only the one remaining, unto man. Yea
this one degree of the action is no otherwise neither to be ascribed unto man,
then as graciously supported, strengthened, and assisted by the free Grace of
God. The Reader will find none of these Positions contradicted by any thing
affirmed or denied in the Discourse. I attribute as much as possibly can be
attributed to the free Grace of God, in, and about the Act of Believing,
salving the attributableness of the Action unto man himself, in the lowest and
most diminutive sense, that can well be conceived. For certain it is, that it
is the Creature, Man, not God, or the Spirit of God, that believes: and
therefore of necessity there must so much, or such a degree, of Efficiency
about it be left unto man, which may with truth give it the denomination of
being his. And they that go about to interess the free Grace of God, in, or
about the act of Believing, upon any other terms, or so, that the act it self
cannot truly be called the Act of the Creature, or of Man, are injurious in the
highest manner to the Grace of God at this main turn, rendering it altogether
unprofitable to the poor Creature, who by the verdict of such a Notion, should
be left in his sins, and never come to be justified. For the Law of
Justification is expressly this* He that believes, shall be justified.
Therefore if it be not man himself, who believes, it is unpossible that he
should be justified. He that shall ingenuously and unpartially compare the
Doctrine of our Adversaries touching the Grace of God, with that, the substance
whereof has been expressed in the nine Positions lately exhibited, will
clearly find, that this Grace is by many degrees more highly, and with another
manner of an Heavenly Magnificence, advanced by the tenor and import of this
Doctrine, then of the other; yea and that Nature is far more depressed and
abased, in the latter, then in the former. But,

3. Some pretend, that the Doctrines and Opinions maintained in such Discourses
as this, are only old rotten Errors, rejected and thrown out of the Church by
Orthodox men in all Ages: But they who hedge up the way of men with such thorns
as these, to keep them from reading such Books as we speak of, cannot but
scratch, yea rend and tear, their Consciences with them. Concerning the two
Doctrines more largely handled in the following Discourse, I prove upon a most
pregnant account in the fifteenth Chapter for the one, and in the nineteenth
for the other (besides many other places in the body of the Discourse) that
they were never rejected or cast out of the Church by any Council, or Synod,
reputed Orthodox (at least until the late Synod of Dort) but were constantly
taught by all Orthodox Antiquity, are at this day more generally taught by the
Lutheran Party of the Reformed Churches, yea and have many full and clear
Testimonies of their Truth from the Pen of Calvin himself, and many others that
are counted Pillars on his side.

4. Some are brought out of Love with such Discourses as this, by being
informed, that they are full of nice, subtle, and curious speculations: and
that the secrets of God are too narrowly and presumptuously pried into by the
Authors of them, To this I answer, 1. If any man, whether in the handling of
the Doctrines we now speak of, or of any other, advances himself into the
things which he has not seen, or above the proportion of his Faith, let him
suffer as a Transgressor of the Law of Sobriety: I shall not be his Advocate.
For the Discussions managed in the Treatise ensuing, I go no further, then I
feel the ground firm under me. Or if at any time I come to a place that is soft
and tender, I tread light, and charge no great matter of weight upon it. Yet,
2. Not to go up to the Mount, when God calls, and offers the kisses of his
mouth unto us there, under a pretense of danger in climbing, is to reject the
bounty of Heaven, and to betray our richest opportunities for the making of our
selves Excellent, and Great in the sight of God, and Angels, and Men. 3. Things
revealed in the Scriptures, as well those of the most spiritual and sublime
consideration (which our Savior calls, Heavenly John 3. 12
, and the Apostle Paul, sometimes, the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2. 10
, sometimes strong meat Heb. 5. 14
,) as well as things of a more obvious and facile import, belong unto us and
our children, i. e. are our spiritual Patrimony, which God our Father has
given us to maintain our selves honorably, as viz. in Faith and Holiness, in
the World. Every inch of such an Inheritance is worth the standing upon, and
contending for. 4. Aristotle in his Moral Discourses somewhere observes, that
persons who are vicious or tardy in either of the extremes, frequently censure
him that is truly virtuous, and steers a middle course between them, as if he
were an Offender in that extreme, which is opposite to the other extreme,
wherein themselves are Delinquent. So it is to be feared, that many who
complain of curiosity in speculation, and of prying into the secrets of God,
are themselves dull of hearing, of remiss and un-engaged spirits in the things
of God: and therefore call the most substantial and solid Discourses, if they
be of any considerable elevation, and worthy those, who are spiritual, and men
in Understanding, by the unworthy name of nice and curious speculations. 5.
(And lastly, for this) I confess that the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation,
and so of the extent of the efficacy of the Death of Christ, and of the
Interest of the Spirit of God in the Work of Conversion, might have been
managed and carried with far less appearance of curiosity, had not the
Controverters of the one side forsaken the solid Grounds and Principles of
Reason in their Expositions of the Scriptures, and obtruded upon the World such
notions and conceits under a pretense of Scripture Authority, because of an
appearance of some words and phrases comporting with them; the vanity and
unsoundness whereof could not be sufficiently detected, but by the light of
some such strains of Reason, which the minds and thoughts of men being not
accustomed unto, may at first very probably censure as more curious then safe,
more subtle then sound. But the saying of Basil is worthy consideration at this
Point: Truth (says he) is hard to be taken by hunting, and must be found out
by a narrow observing of her footsteps on every side (...).
. And more especially, the discovery of the Truth in the Controversies we speak
of, mainly depending upon the knowledge of the Nature of God, and of the manner
of his Actings, which are matters of a very spiritual and obstruse
contemplation, it cannot reasonably be expected, but that the Disputes
themselves should sometimes soar high, so that the ordinary apprehensions of
men may possibly lose the sight of them for a time.

5. Some plead a non-necessity of bestowing our time in looking into Books that
shall now, or hereafter, be written, about the Argument or Subject matter of
the present Discourse, upon a pretense, that nothing more can be said therein,
then has been said already* and that all Scriptures, and Arguments that can be
levied for the defense of the Doctrines maintained herein, have been already
answered. Such a pretense as this is proper for men, who hope to make a great
purchase with a little money; to produce the honor and reputation of much
knowledge and learning, by uttering a few assuming and daring words. For upon
what sober and rational account can such a saying proceed from any man? Or who
can say unto the Almighty, with due reverence to the unsearchable Riches,
either of his Wisdom, or of his Grace and Bounty; Hitherto indeed thou have
advanced thy self in giving Wisdom and Understanding unto men, but further thou
can not go, thy treasures are exhaust? It becomes not me to say, unless I
were invested with Paul's privilege, of speaking without offense like a fool 2
Cor. 11. 16 23
, that there are several Considerations and Grounds traversed in the present
Discourse, and these intimously relating to the Controversies there handled,
which I believe the Masters of the pretense last specified, have not observed
in all their Travels through those many regions of Books and Authors, which
they would be supposed to have read and studied for the Information of
themselves and others with the Truth in those great Controversies. And whereas
the Pretext in hand glories, that all that has been said in defense of the
Opinions avouched in our Discourse, has been already answered, unless he takes
Sanctuary at some very unproper signification of the word, Answer, his glorying
in this behalf will be found to his shame: yea such a Sanctuary as this will
not much relieve him. Indeed as Tacitus says of the ancient Britans of this
Nation in relation to the Romans, eos potius triumphatos, quam victos fuisse,
that the Romans rather triumphed over them, then overcame them; so have the
Adversaries of the Opinions and Doctrines we speak of, been at the charge of
erecting many Trophies one after another, as if they had by the Sword of the
Spirit, and dint of Argument, vanquished and subdued them, and trodden down
their strength; whereas upon a true and unpartial account, the main Grounds and
Pillars, upon which the said Doctrines stand, will be found to remain
undemolished and unshaken to this day; yea and to have too much evidence and
clearness of truth in them ever to be shaken.

Some pretend, that the Opinions contended for in this Discourse, have been
from time to time taken up and held (for the most part) by a looser and
less-Religious generation of men; and the contrary, by persons of a better Name
for Holiness, and Worthiness of Conversation. This notion is accessory to some
men's stumblings at the said Opinions, yea and at all those, whether men, or
Books, that give the right hand of fellowship unto them. But what near
communion this notion has with darkness and untruth, is abundantly proved, in
the nineth, fifteenth, and nineteenth Chapters of the Discourse, (besides other
places.) Although the truth is, that, were there truth in it, yet would there
be little weight in it to mediate a resolved Enmity between men's Judgments, and
these Opinions. The Devil held, that Jesus Christ was the Holy One of God Mark
1. 24
, and professed it, whilst Paul persecuted him, and thought verily that he was
bound to do many things against his Name Acts 26. 9
. But to this Point I speak more in the said 15 Chapter.

The noise of Arminianism, Pelagianism, Socinianism, is very terrible in the
ears of some, and make the said Opinion^ the dread and abhorring of their
Souls; and all Books, and men, that own them, as the shadow of death unto them.
To this I answer, 1. That it is a saying of Luther, that God sometimes puts on
the vizor of the Devil, and the Devil, the vizor of God. But God would be known
[by men] under the vizor of the Devil, and would have the Devil rejected under
the vizor of God Deus larvam Diaboli, Diab^lus Dei induit, et Deus sub larva
Diaboli cognosci, et Diabolum sub larva Dei reprobari vult. Luth. in Gal. 5
. Odious names, and imputations, are but the Devils vizors; which, though they
be by men put upon the face of Truth, will not excuse us in our rejections of
the Truth. But, 2. Concerning the Charge of Pelagianism, I demonstrate in
several passages in the Discourse, that the Opinions there pleaded, have an
express diametral antipathy against the Errors of Pelagius, and that the sense
of our Adversaries, in opposition to us, is truly Pelagian. 3. Concerning
Arminianism; I confess I do not well understand what men mean by it. I suppose
they mean, the owning of such Doctrines or Opinions, in opposition to the
Truth, (so voted, and called, by men) which were held and taught by Arminius.
If so, the formality or essence of Arminianism, does not stand, in holding any
thing simply in opposition to the Truth, but in opposition unto men, as
supposed by themselves and others to be Truth. The Jewish Doctors, who love to
be called, Rabbi, have a saying, that the Law is on Earth not in Heaven: the
import of which saying Musculus interprets to be this, that the Law [meaning of
God] is subject to their power Magistri Synagogae dicebant, Lex est in terra,
non est in coeli^; significantes illam suae potestati esse subjectam. Mus. 1.
Cor. 11
[or authority] If this be the sense of those that are Teachers amongst us,
that their Authority is competent to overruled the Scriptures, or to make Truth
and error of what they please, they who dissent from them must (for ought I
know) compose themselves as well as they can to bear the burden of their
imputations. If the opinions commended by me for Truth in the work in band, be
Arminian, certain I am that the ancient Fathers and Writers of the Christian
Church were generally Arminian: yea and that Calvin himself, had many sore fits
and pangs of Arminianism (at times) upon him; yea and that the Synod of Dort it
self was not free from the infection; nor scarce any writer of name and note in
these latter times. These things are brought into a clear and unquestionable
light, by the Discourse ensuing. Concerning Socinianism; if the opinions
themselves charged herewith know no more then I do, of the Truth of the charge,
they may justly take up David's complaint, and say; They lay to our charge
things that we know not Psalm. 35. 11
. But if such Doctrines or Tenants, which now suffer the ignominy and reproach
of Arminianism, Socinianism, Pelagianism, etc. shall be found to be the Truths
of the ever-living God, sorrow, and shame, and confusion of face will be a
portion (at least) of the portion of th^se, who have crowned them with the
honor of such Martyrdom. The day will declare it, because it shall be revealed
as by fire.

Some pretend, that all disputes in matters of Religion, wherein the received
Doctrines, or Tenants generally held in those places where such disputes are
commenced, are opposed, tend to the unsetling and disquieting the minds and
consciences of men: and minister occasion unto many to abandon all care and
thoughts of Religion, as containing little in it but matter of uncertainty, and
doubtfulness of disputation: and upon this account, very passable (as they
suppose) are professed enemies to such Disputes. But to this we briefly answer,
1. That it is much better that men's judgments and consciences should be for a
time disturbed, then that they should always remain settled upon the lees and
dregs of any rotten and unsound opinion. We lately showed how perilous Error is
to the precious Souls of men. God never dealt more graciously by the Earth,
then when he shook the Heavens, by sending the Messiah of the World to turn the
state of Religion (as it were) upside down in the midst of it. David
acknowledged unto God, that it was good for him that he had been afflicted;
that so he might learn his statutes Psalm. 119. 71
. And so many (I believe) have (and happy were it, had more the like) cause to
say it; It is good for us that we were sometimes shaken in our judgments and
consciences, that we might learn the Truth. 2. They who are offended, that
there should be arguings and disputes to and fro about the things of God, and
matters of Religion, seem to be, either discontented that the things and
counsels of God should be so spiritual, or remote from the common, or first
apprehensions of men, that all men should not at once understand them; or else
loath, that they who are in the gall of any bitterness, by being entangled with
error, should be delivered. We read that Paul frequented the Synagogue for the
space of three months together, disputing and persuading the things concerning
the Kingdom of God Acts 19 8
. And afterward, that for two years together he disputed daily [about matters
of the same nature and import] in the house of one Tyrannus Ver. 9. 10
. 3. (and lastly) Had it not been for disputes in matters of Religion, the
pillars of Antichrists Throne had not been shaken to this day. Upon occasion of
those frequent disputes in Germany a^out matters of Religion in Luthers days, a
Magistrate and Judge of the Popish party said: If it comes to matter of dispute,
our whole mystery will be confounded Si Disputetur, totum nostrum mysterium
destruetur. Sculpet. Annal. Decad. 2. p. 384
. And as Wisdom says, All they that hate me, love death Prove. 8. 36
: So may sober and through examinations and discussions of the mysteries of our
faith, say, All they that hate us, love darkness, love error, love danger, yea,
and death also.

As for the allegation of those, who pretend all controversies and disputes
about matters of Religion, to be malignant to the Civil Peace, and therefore
judge it an high point of Statepolicy to discharge their Coasts of them, as the
Gadarens did of Christ, it is not worthy an answer; in as much as it savours
more of Atheism, and profaneness, then of reason, or Christian policy. For it
is an express Order from Heaven directed unto all Christians, to contend, and
that earnestly, for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints Jude v. 3
. Now to restrain the members, or subjects of a State, from doing that, which
God, upon whom the peace, safety, and prosperity of all States so entirely
depend, has so expressly enjoined them to do, is without all peradventure, to
consult, not the joy, or peace, but the sorrow, trouble, ruin of this State.

Other pretenses of a lighter and looser notion it is like there are, by which
some are made such affectionate and effeminate Proselytes, to the opinions
rejected in this Treatise, that they cannot bear the gentlest or softest air
that breathes cool upon them. But I am already beyond the line of an Epistle:
and therefore shall not pursue the chas^ of such enemies any further. I crave
leave only to add a few words concerning the change of my judgment, in the
great controversy about the death of Christ (with the rest depending hereon)
by way of answer unto those, who labor to represent my present judgment in the
said points, as little valuable, or considerable, because it sometimes stood a
contrary way. Though I know nothing in the allegation subservient in the least
degree to the end and purpose therein mentioned, but ^ather much against it,
yet let me say; 1. That however sin and an evil conversation, are just matter
of shame and disparagement unto a man, yet Repentance and amendment of life,
are truly honorable. Nor do I know why it should be of any more disparaging an
interpretation against any man, to reform his Judgment, then his life, neither
of which can be done without a change in either. Nor 2. can I resent any such
conformity with my never-sufficiently-admired, adored Savior, which consists
in an increase of wisdom (for herein he is reported to have increased, in the
days of his flesh Luke 2. 52
) any matter of prejudice, or disparagement, either to my self, or any other
man* Though he indeed was never prevented with error, yet was He post* enriched
with the Truth in many things. A man can hardly (if possibly) grow in Grace,
and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord 2 Pet. 3. 18
, without out* growing himself in judgment and understanding from time to time,
without rectifying and making straight many things in his mind and thoughts,
which were crooked before. 3. That chosen vessel Paul, never quitted himself
like a man, never consulted peace and glory to himself, until he built up that
Faith, which sometimes he had destroyed. Nor was his Authority or esteem in the
Gospel, and in the things of Jesus Christ, ever a whit the lighter upon the
balance, because he had sometimes been a Pharisee. 4. I desire to ask the men,
that make the change of my judgment a spot of weakness, or vileness in it,
whether themselves were always in the same mind touching all things, with
themselves at present. If so, it plainly argues, that their thoughts and
apprehensions, now they are men, are but such, which are incident unto
children. And if, since their coming to riper years, they have always stood,
and are resolved always to stand, by their first thoughts and apprehensions in
all things, it is a sign that their judgments reside more in their wills, then
their wills in their judgments: and that they are much more like to judge
according to appearance, then to judge righteous judgment. But this whole Nation
knows (to its sorrow, and sad sufferings) that many of the Persons we speak
of, have shifted their judgments (and that in matters of a far more ready and
easy Cognizance, then the questions about Predestination) into a troublesome
corner. Yea, there are very few of those amongst them, who call themselves
Ministers of the Gospel, but many times, when they preach, within the compass
of an hour, either change their judgments, or deny them, their Doctrine being
frequently Samaritan, when their application is a Jew. 5. If to dig broken
Cisterns, with the forsaking of the Fountain of living Water, be the commiting
of a double evil Ier. 2. 13
; how shall not a recoursing to the Fountain of living Waters in conjunction
with a forsaking of broken Cisterns, be the practicing of a double duty? And if
so, shall it not be of so much the higher acceptance with God? And if it be
thus, ought it not to be of higher acceptance with men also? To forsake an
error, is one duty; and to embrace truth, is another: whereas to persist in one
and the same mind, suppose it be sound and good, is but a single duty. Our
Savior informs us, that there will be joy in Heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance
Luke 15. 7*
. That which is an occasion of a multiplied rejoicing in Heaven, why should it
be made matter of complaint, change, or imputation upon Earth? 6. He is in the
most likely and best capacity to give a right judgment between two countries,
or lands, as which is the more fruitful, the more healthful, the more pleasant
of situation, etc. who has been an inhabitant in both, and acquainted himself
with the respective conditions of both in such particulars. In like manner, it
is so far from being a reason, why a man's present judgment* should be rejected,
that he has been of a contrary judgment formerly, that it renders it the more
considerable, and competent to discern aright between those opinions, with
which it has been thoroughly, and upon a conscientious engagement, acquainted.
It is a true saying of the Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 3.
Heathen Philosopher: (...) i. e. Every man is able to judge well of those
things, which he knows. But when a man, having a long time known and
professed such an Opinion, by and under the profession whereof he enjoyed
peace, credit, wealth, love and respects from men of all sorts, and was in a
fair and probable way to have lift up his head yet higher in the world, by his
continuance in the profession of the same, shall notwithstanding relent in his
Judgment, and q^^t the Profession of this Opinion, and profess that, which is
opposite to it, wherein he could not but in all Reason judge and conclude
beforehand, that he should with Paul, (...), suffer loss of all things, lose
Credit, lose Friends, lose all hopes of preferment from the world; when a man
(I say) shall change his Judgment upon such terms as these, it is a strong
Argument that he well and thoroughly understands the spiritual danger and
inconvenience of the Opinion, which he forsakes, as likewise the worth, truth,
and goodness, of that which he imbraceth and professes in the place of it.
Therefore, 7. (and lastly) As David replied to Michal, when she upbraided him
with such a deportment, by which (as she apprehended) he had made himself
contemptible and vile, I (says He) will yet be more vile then thus 2 Samuel 6.
22*
: So, the Grace of God assisting me, if the changing of my Judgment upon such
terms, as God knows, and men also know (impart) I have done (in the
Controversies often mentioned) rendereth either me, or my Judgment, contemptible,
I am resolved, upon the like occasion, to make both it and my self more
contemptible yet, by* cutting off from my Soul Error after Error, as fast as
they shall be discovered unto me, and by changing my Judgment, as often as I
shall thoroughly understand that my spiritual Interest does require it* Yea it
shall be one of my chief exercises, quotidie de erroribus meis demere, to
diminish daily the number of my Errors, by making a diligent and frequent
survey of the state and condition of my Judgment, and by separating the vile
from the precious here, until no misprision at all of God, or of any of his
things, shall, if it be possible, be found with me.

Reader, I trust, though I have wearied thee with a long Epistle, and so have
made thee incapable of reading further at present: yet I have withal begotten
in thee a serious desire and resolution to possess thy Heart, Soul, Judgment,
Conscience, with the substance of the ensuing Discourse, and this with as much
expedition as thy opportunities of reading will permit. Let them that have
wives, be as if they had none: and they that weep, as though they wept not: and
they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as if they
possessed not 1 Cor. 7. 29 30
: but let him that runs for the great prize of a blessed Eternity, for an
incorruptible Crown of Glory, be as a man wholly taken up, and transported with
the glory of his Engagement, let him so run, as if he had nothing else to do,
but to run this race. Give me leave to mind thee of an admonition, recommended
unto men by an Heathen Philosopher. It becomes not him that is a man, to mind
the things of men [i. e. such things as men commonly mind,] nor him that is
mortal, mortal things. But as far as is possible, to immortalize it, and so to
quit himself in all things, as to live according to that which is most
excellent in him (...). Arist. Ethic. 10. c. 7.
, [meaning, his mind and understanding.] Now thy God, and my God, of his rich
Grace give thee a large heart to understand and consider the Great things of
thy peace; recompense the labor and travel of thy Soul in reading the
Discourse here presented unto thee, with the precious returns of light, and
life, and peace into thy bosom; that when thou shall have read, thou may say,
I have been in the Mount with God; and may return with thine heart rejoicing,
and with thy face shining, unto men. This (Good Reader) is the unfeigned
desire, and fervent prayer of,

Thy Brother in Christ, greatly devoted to the Peace of thy Soul, John Goodwin.
From my Study in Coleman-street, London, Febr. 12. 1650.
The Contents of the several Chapters in the ensuing Discourse.
Cap. I. THere is no created Being, or second Cause whatsoever, but depends
upon the first, which is God; and this as well in the second, as in the first
Act; i. e. as well in the Motions and Operations issuing from, or performed by,
every of them, as in their simple Existence, or Being, it self. Page 1. Cap. 2.
Though there be as absolute and essential a Dependence of second Causes upon
the first, in point of motion, action, operation, as of simple existence, or
being: yet are not the motions, actions, or operations, of second Causes (at
least ordinarily) so immediately or precisely determined by that Dependence,
which they have* upon the first Cause, as their respective Beings are. 7 Cap.
3. Concerning the Knowledge and Foreknowledg of God; and the Difference between
these, and his Desires, Purposes, Intentions and Decrees: and how these also
are distinguished one from another. 28 Cap. 4. Concerning the Perfection of God
in his Nature and Being. Some things clearly deducible from it: particularly,
his Simplicity, Actuality, and Goodness of Decrees. 40 Cap. 5. Four several
veins, or correspondencies of Scriptures propounded, holding forth the Death of
Christ for All Men, without exception of any. The first of these argued. 73
Cap. 6. Herein several texts of the second sort of Scriptures propounded in the
former Chapter as holding forth the Universality of Redemption by Christ, are
discussed. 97 Cap. 7. The third sort, or consort, of Scriptures, mentioned cap.
5. as clearly asserting the said Doctrine, argued and managed to the same
point. 113 Cap. 8. The Scriptures of the fourth and last Association
(propounded cap. 5.) as pregnant also with the same Great Truth of general
Redemption by Christ, impartially weighed and considered. 120 Cap. 9. Enters
upon a Digression about the commonly-received Doctrine of Perseverance
(occasioned by several passages in the preceding Chapter) avouching, and
clearly evicting, the benefit, peace, and comfort of that Doctrine, which
teaches a possibility of the Saints declining, and this unto death, above the
other contrary unto it. 154 Cap. 10. A Continuation of the former Digression,
wherein the texts of Scripture commonly alleged to prove the impossibility of
the Saints declining unto death, are taken into consideration, and discharged
from that service. 177 Cap* 11. A further Continuation of the former
Digression, wherein the Arguments and Grounds commonly insisted on in defense
of the received doctrine of Perseverance, are detected of insufficiency, proved
and declared, Null. 225 Cap. 12. The former Digression yet further prosecuted,
and a possibility of defection in the Saints, or true Believers, and this unto
death, clearly demonstrated from the Scriptures. 268 Cap. 13. Grounds of Reason
from the Scriptures, evincing a possibility of such a defection, even in true
Believers, which is accompanied with destruction in the end. 299 Cap. 14.
Exhibiting from the Scriptures some Instances of a total Declining, and falling
away, from the Grace and Favor of God, in true Believers. 344 Cap. 15.
Declaring the Sense and Judgment, as well of the Ancient Fathers of the
Christian Church, as of Modern Reformed Divines, touching the Point of
Perseverance: and so concluding the Digression concerning this Subject. 365
Cap. 16. Several other Texts of Scripture (besides those formerly produced in
ranks and companies) argued to the clear eviction of Truth in the same
Doctrine, viz. that the Redemption purchased by Christ in his Death, was
intended for all, and every man, without exceptiof any. 403 Cap. 17. Declaring
in what sense the former Passages of Scripture asserting the Universality of
Redemption by Christ, are (as to this point) to be understood: and consequently
in what sense the said Doctrine of Universal Redemption is maintained in the
present Discourse. 432 Cap. 18. Exhibiteth several Grounds and Reasons, whereby
the Universality of Redemption by Christ, or Christ's dying for all men, without
exception, is demonstratively evicted. 453 Cap. 19. Wherein the Sense of
Antiquity, together with the variableness of Judgment in Modern Writers, about
the Controversy under discussion, is truly and unpartially represented. 524
Cap. 20. The Conclusion; Exhibiting a General Proposal, or Survey, of Matters
intended for Consideration, Explication, and Debate, in the second Part of this
Work. 562
CHAP. I.
There is no created Being, or second Cause whatsoever, but depends upon the
first and supreme Cause, or Being, which is God: and this as well in the
second, as in the first Act; I mean, as well in the Motions and Operations
issuing from, or performed by, every of them, as in their simple Existence, or
Being it self.

WE shall not need (I presume) to levy a dispute, for the gathering. 1.
or geting in that tribute due to the Crown and Sovereignty of Being, from all
Beings besides, which consists in an acknowledgment of his free bounty, in
calling them out of the abyss of vanity and nothing by the Word of his Power,
hereby taking them into part and fellowship with himself in his Prerogative of
Being, according to what was resolved by the counsel of his Will, as meet to
be dispe^sed unto every of them (respectively) in this kind. Trees that are
thoroughly and deeply rooted in the Earth, will grow and flourish, though the
dew or rain from Heaven should seldom, or never, fall upon them: but grass,
and herbs, and tender plants, whose roots have but a slender and thin
protection of their Element against the scortching violence of the Sun, will
soon wither and die away, if the clouds of Heaven should not ever and anon drop
verdure upon them, and relieve them. In like manner, such notions and
impressions in the Soul, into which Nature is deeply baptized, and mightily
(...)ssest with their Truth, are like to live, and to maintain their interest
and aut^^rity in men, though not seconded or relieved by argument or dispute:
but those, which have only taken a fainter and looser hold of the judgments
and consciences of men, are in danger of miscarrying, and proving like the
Corn upon the house top, which (as David observes) withers before it be
grown up Psalm. 129. 6.
, unless they be timely, yea and frequently encouraged, backed, and strength
by discourse. That there is a Being, which looks upon this Universe, ^ith all
the host of it, as the workmanship of his own hands; and that every creature,
or finite Being, is lineally descended from him, as their Great, and first
Progenitor, are (I conceive) such principles of Light and Truth, written in so
fair and full a Character in the Tables of all men's hearts, that even whilst
they run, they may read them, yea and cannot lightly depose, or suffer the
loss of them, though they be not bound upon their judgments and consciences
with any other bands of argument or demonstration, then those of their own
evidence and conviction. Therefore what God has made manifest and clear in
men, we shall not cast any suspicion of darkness or obscurity upon, by making
it matter of disputation.

And though the dependence of things in actual and complete Being, upon. 2.
God, for sustentation and support, as well of their simple Existences and
Beings themselves, as of their Operations (respectively, which is the sense and
substance of the Thesis propounded) be not altogether of so pregnant an
inspiration, as dependence upon him for their Production, and first bringing
into Being* yet conceiving it not to be of any difficult or remote speculation,
nor finding it so much as controverted or questioned by any considering man,
(especially of latter times,) we shall in these respects content our selves
with a brief and light enquiry upon it.

The Holy Ghost indeed judged the Assertion of this Truth, and that by one. 3.
of his Greatest Instruments, worthy of him; yet not so much, I suppose, to
commend it simply as a Truth, or to secure the judgments and consciences of
men of the Veracity of it, as to enforce the practical consequences thereof
upon them; upon which ground (doubtless) it is, that we find so many common
and ordinary Truths, not only delivered, but some of them often repeated and
inculcated, in the Scriptures. Principles and Assertions, that are very obvious
and low for matter of Truth, and apprehension, may be transcendently weighty
and High, in those things, whether relating unto practice, or opinion, which
are infolded and contained in them, and deducible from them. Mary was but a
Carpenters wife, yet did she bring forth the Great Messiah and Savior of the
world. But this only occasionally. The Truth held forth in the Thesis, is the
clear Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, and that preached at Athens, amongst
Philosophers, for learning and knowledge, the Princes of the world. For in him
(says he, speaking of God) we live, and move, and are, or subsist Acts 17. 28.
(as the original, (...), imports) (...) In him, i. e. through him, or, by
means of him, (as the Praeposition, (...), frequently signifies.) We are not
said to live, move, and have our beings in God in a way of permission only, as,
viz. because he refrains the exercise of that power in him, by which he is as
able to take away all our beings, as he was at first to give them; or because
he forbears to annihilate us: in such a sense as this, we might as well be said
to live in every man, who having power and opportunity to kill us, yet
suffers us in the possession of our lives: but we are said to receive or have
these accommodations in, or through God, in a positive way, viz. by means of a
glorious supporting influence, which issuing from his power by the media^ion of
his goodness, or will, is to the great Body of the Creation, and to the
respective parts and members hereof, as the Soul is to the natural Body of a
man, with the members thereof, which remaining in union with it, preserves it
from dissolution and putrefaction; or as the presence of the Sun is to the
light in the air, which retains its Being, whilst the Sun shines upon it, but
vanishes presently, and becomes that which is not* as soon as the fountain of
light withdraws his shining. The Holy Ghost himself expresses the
dependence of creatures upon God in a borrowed resemblance of very near
affinity with this: Thou hidest thy face, (says David unto God,) they (i. e.
the creatures) are troubled; thou take away their breath, they dye, and
return to their dust Psalm. 104* 29
. That Great Act of God, in it self so wonderful, and inexpressibly glorious,
the Sustentation and upholding of the Universe, with all the parts thereof, in
Being, is ascribed only to the setting, or turning of his face toward it; to
show (I conceive) that it is an act of special dignation and favor in him to
preserve it, and yet withal an act of easy performance, and which costs him
not the least labor or toil: A gracious look from him will do it effectually,
as the contrary is enough to affright all things out of their Beings, and
(which is equivalent hereunto, and in some cases, more) out of all that is
desirable in their Beings.

The Lord Christ is said (...), Heb. 1. 3.
i. e. to sustain, or bear up all things by. 4.
the word of his power; which implies. 1. An utter impotency and weakness in
the creature to stand alone, or to keep it self by its own strength from a
recidivation, or relapse into its first vanity or nothing: For that which is
able to preserve it self from falling, needs no support, or bearing up by
another. 2. That Christ feels no weight, or burden, of the Universe, whilst he
supporteth it. The speaking of a word, especially within himself, and in his
mind only, engages no man's strength, nor puts him to the least pain. This
great Act of bearing up the Universe, is therefore, (I conceive) appropriated
unto Christ, (though common to the other persons with him) because in his
Mediatory Humiliation he laid a foundation of Equity and Reason, why God,
notwithstanding that great provocation given by the sin of man, to dissolve it,
should yet consent to the standing and supportation of it. Such executions
which depend upon his Mediation, and for which there had been no place
otherwise, are elsewhere in Scripture peculiarly asserted to him in respect
thereof: See John 5. 27. Though in respect of the Divine Nature, Power, and
Will, being one and the same in all the three Persons, there is a necessity of
their joint concurrence in all actings ad extra, (as the Schoolmen call them,)
yet such of these actings, for which way has been made by any personal
achievement or transaction of any of the Three, may, with a good savor of
Reason, be in a more special and remarkable manner attributed to that person,
who has more peculiarly interposed for the procurement of them.

When the Apostle affirms, that we live and move in God (in the sense. 5.
declared) as well as have our essence, or being, in him, his meaning seems to
be, that it is through God, and his voluntary closing with us, that we have,
and do enjoy, all manner of accommodations of Being, as well the greater and
lesser, as Essence or Being it self. To live, oft-times in Scripture, signifies
the enjoyment of an happy and contentfull condition, which signification is no
ways inconvenient for this place. Or if the Apostle be conceived to speak of
the life natural, (which is not improbable) he must be supposed to include all
those noble and desirable faculties and endowments, as of Reason, Memory,
Judgment, Understanding, Speech, etc. which are appropriate to the life of
man: So that when he says, We live in God, his meaning is, not only, or
simply, that that spring or fountain of vital actions or motions in men, which
in a district sense is termed life, is possessed, enjoyed, and held by means of
a gracious and loving comportment of God with them for such a purpose; but that
all that honorable retinue likewise of those excellent powers and faculties
named, which attend upon the Principle of life in man, is maintained in being
by the same compliance also.

Whereas he adds, That in him also, (...), we move, or are moved (as the. 6.
word rather imports) he implies, not only that all our vital actions and
motions are exercised and performed by the gracious concurrence and compliance
of God with us, as well as our lives themselves, and Principles of action
preserved; but further, that there is a further and appropriate concurrence of
God required (and by him accordingly exhibited) to enable men to act those very
Principles of action and motion that are in them, distinct from that by which
their lives, and Principles of action, in every kind, are preserved: Insomuch
that though men be never so well appointed or provided for action in one kind
or other, in respect of suitable, proper, and sufficiently-disposed Principles
thereunto, yet upon a suspension of that particular influence or concurrence by
God, which is appropriate and necessary, both for the leading forth unto, and
for the supporting of these Principles, in, and under, their proper actions,
there is none of them will go forth into action, nor is able to maintain or
support it self in acting. But whether such a concurrence of God supposed, and
actually granted, as is sufficient both for the leading forth unto, and for the
support of the Principles we speak of, in their proper actings, these
Principles notwithstanding (at least such of them, whose actions lie under the
command of the will) may not refuse or forbear to act, is another Question,
wherein more may be said hereafter.

In the mean time, that God may at any time separate between Principles,. 7.
and their actings, even those that are most proper and connaturall to them,
only by withholding that compliance of his with them, which is appropriate and
necessary for their conducting unto action, is evident from several passages
in the Scriptures. Doubtless, the heat of the fire in Nebuchadnezzars furnace,
being het seven times hotter then ordinary, was as proper, as likely, a means,
to have consumed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, being cast into the midst of
this furnace, as those, who were employed by the King only to cast them into
it. Nor can it reasonably be said, That God separated the heat, or burning
property, from the fire, or annihilated it, all the time that these three men
were in the furnace. For, 1. unless we shall suppose the subject it self, I
mean, the fire, to have been destroyed, or annihilated, we cannot suppose, that
heat, or a burning property, being ^ property inseparable from such a subject,
should be taken from it. 2. It appears by the story, that those, who cast the
three Servants of God mentioned into the furnace, were consumed by the fire of
it, whilst the Servants of God remained in the furnace. Therefore certainly
there was true fire, and true heat in the furnace, whilst the three men
continued in it. 3. And lastly, The story says, That the Princes, Governors,
and Captains, etc. being gathered together, saw these men upon whose bodies the
fire had no power Dan. 3. 27.
. So that there is not the least question, but that there was real fire, and
real heat, and that in abundance, in the furnace; which notwithstanding had no
power, no not so much as over the hair of their heads, or the garments they
wore. What now was the Reason why this fire, and this heat, prevailed not over
those that were cast into the midst of them, as they did over those, who cast
them in? Was it any other then this? The Lord of hoasts his withdrawing the
wonted conjunction of himself from the heat of the fire, and refusing to
comply with it in that expedition, or attempt, which it naturally inclined to
make upon these men, as well as upon any others, to destroy them; whereas he
kept his natural and accustomed union with this heat, in that attempt which it
made upon those other men, who cast these into the furnace; by means whereof it
suddenly prevailed upon them; and consumed them. There was the same Reason, why
the Bush, which Moses saw burning with fire, was not consumed by it. The Reason
likewise (in all likelihood) why the men of Sodom could not find the door of
Lots house, was, because God withdrew his usual concurrence from their visive
faculty in order to the discerning of that object: For that other things were
all this while visible enough to them, appears from their continued endeavors,
even unto weariness, in seeking this door. If they had bin wholly blind, so that
they could have seen nothing, at all, it is no ways credible but that they
would have desisted their enterprise at the very first. This withdrawing or
suspension of the wonted Presence of God with the Seeing faculty of men, is
called, the holding of their eyes: Luke Luke 24 16.
24. 16. But their eyes were holden, that they could not know him: (...), they
were mightily, or powerfully held: they could not act, or perform that, which
otherwise was most natural and proper for them to do* in receiving, and
representing to the Sensus Communis, or adjudging faculty of the Soul, the true
species and shape of a Person, standing visibly before them, and near to them,
through the want of that accustomed co-operative Presence of God with them in
order to this act, which until now (it is like) had never failed them upon the
like occasion. Other instances we have in Scripture of such like impotencies
and deficiences as these, in natural faculties, through the suspension of that
sovereign presence with them, upon which all their motions and actions depend.
See Ioh. 20. 14, 15. 2 Kings 6. 17, 18, etc.

When God threatened his People of old, That the wisdom of their wise men. 8.
Esa. 29. 14*
should perish, and the understanding of their prudent men he hid, (Isai. 29.
14.) he does not (I suppose) threaten an utter annihilation of those Principles
or habits of wisdom and understanding in these men, but only an intercision or
failing of such interposals and actings from, and by, these Principles, in
order to the safety and preservatio^ ^oth of themselves, and their state, which
might reasonably, and accordin^ to the common course of second Causes, be
expected from them; which wonder (as he calls it) was (I conceive) to be
effected, only by the hiding of his face from them, without the beholding
whereof, no second Cause whatsoever is able to move, no not in those ways of
acting, which are most appropriate to them. This manner of execution of the
judgment here threatened, seems to be employed in those latter words, And the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid; i. e. shall not be conspicuous
or discernable in any fruits, or effects, worthy of it; not that the Principle
it self should be absolutely destroyed, or divested of Being. This Liberty, or
great Interest of God, which we speak of, I mean, to suspend the proper and
most accustomed effects of second Causes, by refusing to join in action with
them, causes that time and chance (as the wise man calls them) which happen
now and then, in those occurrences of humane affairs, as, viz. when the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, etc. Eccles. 9. 11. Eccles. 9.
11.. 9.


If it be here demanded; In as much as second Causes and created Principles,
especially in men, act, notwithstanding such a substraction of the Divine
Presence from them, as has been declared, though not according to the
perfection of their natures, but in a troubled and miscarrying manner; the eyes
of the two Disciples we spoke of, though they were so held, that they knew not
Christ, (viz. to be the person, which he was,) yet they represented him unto
them as a man, etc. Whether do such actings as these proceed from their
Principles without any such presence of the first Cause with them, as that,
which we have asserted to be simply necessary for, and with, second Causes,
whenever they go forth into action; Or what manner of presence of this first
Cause, or how differing from that which is constant, and more agreeable to
their natures* shall we suppose they have with them, when they act irregularly
or deficiently?

To this I answer:

1. Whenever second Causes move into action, whether they act congruously to
their respective natures and kinds, or whether defectively, they still have,
and must have, a presence of the first Cause with them, (as has been already
argued.) But,

2. When they fail or faulter in their motions or actings, if their motions be
such which are not moral, or commanded by the will, (of which kind the mis*
representation of the person of Christ by the eyes, or visive faculty, of the
two Apostles, was) I conceive that the presence or concourse of the first cause
with them, is attempered and proportioned in order to the deficiency of the
action; I mean, as well to the degree, as kind, of this deficiency, and is not
the same with it self in the ordinary and proper actings of these faculties:
The reason hereof, is, because faculties merely natural, act determinately and
uniformly, after one and the same manner, unless they be troubled, and put out
of their way by a superior power. But in moral actions, and such, whose
deficiency proceeds from the wills of men, or other creatures endued with the
Whether, or how the concurrence of God with the wills of men in good actions,
dister from that, which is afforded unto them in evil actions, shall (God
willing) be taken into consideration, in the second part of this work.
same faculty, the presence and concourse of the first Cause with the
Principles producing them, is not (at least ordinarily) different from that,
which is natural and proper to them, and by virtue whereof at other times,
they act regularly, or at least may. The Reason hereof, is, because the nature,
and intrinsecall frame and constitution of the will, imports a liberty or
freedom of choosing its own motions, or acts: this being the essential and
characteristicall property of it, whereby it is distinguished from causes
merely natural. Now then if this faculty, when it moves or acts inordinately,
should be so influenced by the first Cause, as hereby to be determined, or
necessitated to the inordinacy of its actings: 1. That distinguishing property
we speak of, should be dissolved or destroyed, and the will it self hereby
reduced to the Order, and Laws, of Causes merely natural. 2. The
inordinatenesse or sinfulness of the motions and actings of it, could not be
resolved into it self, or its own corruption, but into that over* ruling and
necessitating influence of the first Cause upon it, which it was not able to
withstand, nor to act besides, or contrary unto, the determinating exigency
thereof. And thus God shall be made the Author of Sin; which is the first born
of abominations, even in the eye of Reason and Nature it self. But of these
things more hereafter.

Though all the motions, and actings of the creature, and created Principles.
10.
or faculties, are absolutely suspended upon the association of the first Cause
with them in their actings, yet do they very seldom suffer any detriment, or
actual suspension of their motions, or actings hereby; God never denying,
suspending, or withdrawing that concurrence or conjunction of himself with
them, without which they cannot act, but only upon some special design, as
(for example) now and then to be a Remembrancer unto the world* that Nature and
Second Causes are not autocratoricall, i. e. do not perform, what ordinarily
they do perform, independently, and of themselves; but that he is the sovereign
Lord of them, and has all the strength and operations of them in his hand. The
battle commonly is to the strong, and the race ordinarily to the swift, and
bread most frequently to men of understanding, etc. But more of this also in
the following Chapter.

The Apostle affirming, That in God we live, and move (in the sense declared).
11.
passes the sentence of condemnation against two opinions, which yet condemn
one the other also, being two extremes, leaving the Truth between them in the
middle. The former denies all cooperation of the first Cause with the second,
affirming, That God only communicates that operating virtue unto them, which
they respectively exert and put forth, and preserves it, but does not at all
cooperate with it. The latter affirms, That it is God only, who acts or
works at the presence of Second Causes, and that these do nothing, but stand
by; act not at all. The former of these opinions w^^ held by Durandus (the
Schoolman) and by some others, far more ancient then he; against whom Augustine
disputes, Lib. 5. d^ Ge^. ad lit. c. 20. The latte^, by Gabriel Biel, (a
School man also) and some others of that Learning. The Apostles assertion, That
we move in God, in the sense asserted* is visibly attended with these two
consequentiall Truths: 1. That God does associate himself, and communicate
with Second Causes, and all created Principles, in their respective motions and
operations; and consequently, contributes more toward their motions and
operations, then only by a collation* and conservation, of a sufficient
strength, or virtue, in their respective causes to produce them. 2. That the
ordinary effects, acts, and operations produced in these sublunary parts, are
not so, or upon any such terms attributable unto God, but that they have their
Second Causes also respectively producing them, whereunto they may as truly,
(and perhaps more properly) be ascribed, as unto God.

CHAP. II.
Though there be as absolute and essential a Dependence of Second Causes upon
the first, in point of motion, action, and operation, as of simple Existence,
or Being: yet are not the motions, actions or operations of Second Causes (at
least, ordinarily) so immediately or precisely determined, by that Dependence,
which they have upon the first Cause, as their respective Beings are.

THe simple Existences, or Beings, of things, may be said to be determined. 1.
by God, the first Cause, three ways: 1. In respect of their Natures, or
constituting Principles of their respective Beings. 2. In respect of their
production into Being. 3. And lastly, In respect of their permanency or
continuance, in, and with, these Natures, and Beings. In the first
consideration, they are absolutely, and in every respect, determined by God;
neither themselves, nor any other, contributing any thing at all toward their
Natures, or Beings (in that sense,) nor being in any capacity, to withstand, or
make any resistance against, that hand of Pleasure, and Power, which made them
so, or so, and imparted such and such a nature, or frame, determinately unto
them. But secondly, In respect of their respective actual productions into
Being, they are not (at least a great part of them are not) so determined by
God, as in the former consideration. Men may sow more or less grain or corn in
their fields as they please: and so likewise herbs in their gardens. Yea, the
ordinary course and assistance of Providence only supposed, they have power to
multiply individuals in some species of animal creatures; and however, to
restrain such a multiplication. Yea doubtless many Persons, both of men and
women, have been propagated and born into the World, whose Parents were not
determined, or necessitated, to their generation. In the third and last
consideration, though things cannot (at least, all things cannot) be said to be
absolutely, positively, or irresistibly determined by God, as in the first, yet
does his will and pleasure, for the most part, interpose effectually, though by
the mediation of Causes, either natural, or moral, or both, for a
determination in this kind also. The continuance of Herbs, Plants, and Trees,
in their vegetative lives, or Beings, in respect of their species, or kinds,
respectively, is determined by God, but by the intervention of their several
natures, temperatures, constitutions, or the like. So that those Herbs, Plants,
or Trees, more generally, and in respect of their kinds, are longer lived,
whose tempers and complexions are more healthful and strong, and so better
provided to resist, and defend themselves against such inconveniences, which
endanger, and are destructive unto, the lives and beings of such creatures, as
they. The continuance of individuals, or particulars in each kind of these
vegetative creatures, in their respective Natures or Beings, is not so
determined by God, but that they are obnoxious (at least many of them) to the
hand, and will of man, who may at pleasure serve himself of which, and of how
many, of them he pleases, being within the reach of his arm, and under his
power* A man may cut down, and suffer still to grow, which, and how many of the
Trees growing in his own ground, he pleases. Thus may he do also by the Herbs
in his garden* There is the same consideration in all respects of sensitive
creatures also. The lives of many of these are subjected to the wills and
pleasures of men.

Concerning the Natural Lives and Beings of men in the World, neither. 2.
is the continuance of these so absolutely, or peremptorily fixed, or
determined by God, but that either themselves, or others, may either abbreviate
and contract them, or else enlarge and protract them to a longer period, by
means proportionable unto either. By excess in sinning (and so by defect in
caution, and use of means for their preservation) men may draw the evil day of
death nearer to them; as by righteousness, and a prudent circumspection to
prevent dangers, and things destructive unto life, they may put it further from
them. But thou, O God (says David) shall bring them down into the pit of
destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days Psa.
55. 23.
; e. i. the half of those days, which according to the course of Nature, and
Providence, and Will of God otherwise, they might have done. To like purpose
Eliphaz in Job, speaking of a wicked man who stretches out his hand against
God, and strengthens himself againct the Almighty; i. e. who sins at more
then an ordinary rate of provocation; His branch, says he, shall not be green,
but shall be cut of before his day. God shall destroy him, as the vine his
sour grape, and shall cast him off, as the Olive does his flower Job 15. 32,
33.
. And again afterward: Have thou marked the old way, which wicked men have
trodden? who were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a
flood Job 22. 15, 16
. It is probable he here speaks of the old World, who because of that
redundancy of wickedness which was amongst them, were destroyed by a deluge of
waters, which otherwise they might have escaped: according to what our Savior
speaks to Capernaum concerning Sodom; If the mighty works which have been
done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day
Mat. 11. 23.
. And whereas God threateneth Ephraim (meaning, the ten Tribes) that within
threescore and five years Ephraim should be broken, that he be not a People
Isai. 7. 8.
, this judgment, according to Musculus his computation, was put in execution
within twenty years after this Prophecy, and that propter enormitatem maliciae,
as he faith, i. e. for the enormous heinousness of their wickedness. So then,
as God has by no decree determined that men shall be wicked, especially not
outragiously wicked, (which we shall further demonstrate afterward) so neither
has he determined that abbreviation of the lives of particular men, which
their voluntary excess in wickedness brings upon them. He has indeed
determined indefinitely, and in the general, That bloody and deceitful men
shall not live out half their days: but if we speak of any particular
persons, who being bloody and deceitful, came thereby to an untimely end,
neither their sin, nor their suffering by an untimely end, was determined by
God.

Again, That men by a prudentiall, and providentiall care in preventing. 3.
dangers, sicknesses, and such inconveniences, which are of a known malignity
to the life of man, may advance their days to a greater number, then under a
contrary neglect, especially as the neglect for degree might have been, they
would, or could in reason have amounted unto, is evident. God himself informed
David, That if he stayed in Keilah till Saul should come thither to demand him,
(which he was now ready to do) the Lords of this City would deliver him up unto
him Sam. 23. 12.
; in which case, he had been but a dead man. Therefore David by departing from
Keilah, before Saul's coming down to demand him, added many days unto his
life, above what their number would have been, had he neglected the Divine
Oracle, and by staying in Keilah fallen into the hand of Saul. The men that
were with Paul in the ship, by harkening unto his counsel for causing the
Mariners to abide in the Ship, got enlargement of quarter for their lives,
which upon their leaving of the ship had certainly been denied unto them: For
Paul said unto the Centurion, and the Soldiers, Except these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved Ac^ 27. 31.
: whereas upon their staying in the ship, it so came to pass, that they came
all safe to land V^s. 44.
. The Lord Christ himself, by the care and faithfulnefs of Joseph in conveying
him, being yet an Infant, into Egypt (according to the charge of the Angel
which appeared unto him) came to see many more days in the flesh, then he was
like to have done, in case he had bin found in Bethlehem, or near to it, when
Herod's bloody Inquisition came forth against him. For this is the reason, which
the Angel gave unto Joseph, why he was enjoined by God to remove the child
Jesus into a place of safety; Herod, says he, will seek the young child to
destroy him: which supposes, not only a possibility, but a probability at
least (if not a certainty) That if the child had remained in, or about,
Bethlehem, Herod both would have found him out, and also destroyed him. So
afterward, we read, Luke 4. and elsewhere, That Christ by declining the
present rage, and bloody intentions of the Jews from time to time, drew out
the days of his mortal Pilgrimage to that just period and ^our, wherein,
according to his ever-blessed good pleasure, he had appointed that happy
meeting between his own death, and the life and salvation of the World.

True it is, the days of humane subsistence and continuance on Earth, are. 4.
in the general, but finite, yea, and few: yet if we speak of particulars,
they are not properly, determinate, or set down as so many, and no more, by any
decree of God. It is, indeed, appointed [by God] unto men, once to dye Heb. 9
27.
: yea, as Job calculateth, within a short time; Man, says he, that is born of
a woman, is of few days Job 14. 1.
. But I do not find it said of particular persons, that it is appointed unto
them to dye precisely at such or such a time, day, or year, of their lives; or
that they shall neither dye sooner, nor live longer. I deny not, but that there
are some few examples in Scripture, of persons, the precise number of whose
days seems to have been fixed by God. His gracious Message to King Hezekiah,
being now sick unto death, was, That he would add unto his days fifteen years
King. 20. 6.
: Yet this expression does not necessarily imply, that they should be
adequately and precisely so many, and no more. Nor when Job in passion
reasons thus with God, (as our last Translation renders his words) Seeing
his days are determined, and the number of his months are with thee; thou have
appointed his bounds, that he cannot pass; turn from him, that he may rest
Job 14, 6, 7.
, etc. does he suppose, that the bounds and limits of all men's lives are so
rigidly or immoveably pitched by any decree of God, that they must of necessity
live home to them, and cannot possibly live beyond them; but only this, that if
God will at any time interpose by his power to cut off the life of any man, he
may determine* and put a period to it without being resisted, or hindered, by
any. According to the exigency of this sense, both Tremellius and Beza,
translate that clause, and the number of his months are with thee, out of the
Original, thus; Numerus mensium ejus pen^^ te est, i. e. the number of his
months is in thy power; meaning, that thou may make them fewer, or more, if,
and thou please. Doubtless if either David or Hezekiah had conceived the
date and period of their lives to have been irreversibly concluded by any
precedaneous decree of God, they would not have interceded with that
affectionate importunity, which is found in their Prayers, for a prorogation of
them. I said, says David, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days
Psalm. 102. 4
. And again; O spare me, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence,
and be no more Psalm. 39. ^:
. These expressions clearly imply, That David apprehended as well a liberty in
God, as an executive power, either presently to take away, or else to continue
his life and being in the world, for a longer time. For who will solicit a
man to do that for him, which he apprehends him in no capacity or possibility
to do? or for that, which he conceives him, whom he requesteth, absolutely
engaged and necessitated to do for him, whether he requesteth it, or no? Now
such a liberty in God as we speak of, and as David supposes, was wholly
inconsistent, with such a peremptory and irreversible decree concerning the
punctual extent and duration of his life, which some imagine. So when he
fasted and wept for the life of his child, being sick, he neither supposed God
bound by any unchangeable decree, either to continue, or presently to take away
the life of it, but at liberty to do either. In the Prayer of Hezekiah, though
there be no express Petition found for the enlargement of his life, yet there
are grounds laid down which are proper to enforce such a Petition upon; and by
the tender whereof unto God, it is evident, that he did solicit for a
reprieve; which is yet more apparent, from that gracious return which God made
unto him of this his Prayer, by the Prophet Isaiah* Go (says God unto him) and
say unto Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord God of David thy Father, I have heard
thy Prayer, and seen thy Tears; behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years
Isai, 38. 5.
. Therefore (doubtless) when Job says, (as we heard) That the days of man are
determined, (or, paecisi, i. e. cut short, as Junius and Tremellius render it,)
and that God has appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, he does not speak
of any determinate number of days or years, set out by any decree of his, unto
particular Persons for life, which by no interveniency of means, or occasions,
on either hand, can either be diminished, or protracted; but of that general
council, purpose, or decree of his, by which he has reduced, and contracted
the mortal Pilgrimage of man on Earth, to a very short and inconsiderable
space of time.

Nor does it follow from any the Premises, but that God does frequently. 5.
interpose, and that after a very special and remarkable manner, sometimes for
the preservation, other-while for the abbreviation and cutting off the lives of
Particular men. When God will undertake, and resolvedly engage to stand by the
life of man, (as now and then he does, at least for a time,) a thousand shall
fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand, and the danger not come
nigh him, i. e. he shall remain as safe, and as free from evil, as if all
danger of evil were far from him. He shall not be afraid [i. e. such a man
needs not to be afraid] for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flies by day: Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness; nor for the
destruction that wastes at non-day Psa. 91. 5, 6, 7
. But daily experience shows, That God does not engage himself upon such
terms as these, for the protection of the lives of all that are godly* many of
these falling by the hand of death, even whilst the lives of thousands, and ten
thousands round about them, are not touched there with. Nor have any Persons,
though never so godly, any sufficient ground from the passages mentioned, or
the like, to expect absolutely, and with confidence, protection of life, in the
midst of all such dangers, which are there specified* but only conditionally,
viz. if God will vouchsafe to undertake for their Preservation and Peace. Such
Scriptures hold forth the constant power, not the uniform Will, or Pleasure, of
God. On the other hand, when God takes no pleasure (as the Scripture phrase
is) in the life of a man, the little finger of death is enough to crush it; my
meaning is, a very slender and inconsiderable occasion will serve his
Providence for the dissolution of it. But neither of these dispensations
amounts to any demonstration of any such decree in God, wherein he has
punctually and indispensably assigned to all Persons whatsoever, a set number
of years, months, days, hours, and moments, for their allowance of life,
which neither himself, nor themselves, nor any other creature, has the least
liberty or power, either to augment, or diminish, upon any occasion, or by any
means whatsoever. It is indeed commonly reported to be a great Article in the
Turkish Creed, That the lives of all men, at least of all Turks, are so
absolutely disposed of in the counsel and decree of God, that it is a thing
simply impossible for men, either by running upon the mouths of Cannons, or by
casting themselves into the Sea, or by rushing naked into the midst of an Host
of armed enemies, or by adventuring upon any danger, upon any death whatsoever,
to anticipate the date of such a disposal; and so on the contrary, by any
Care, Prudence, or circumspectnesse whatsoever, to prevent the fatality
thereof. But such Notions and Decrees as these, are fitter to make Alcoran
Divinity, then Christian. I freely acknowledge all the Decrees of God to be
absolute, and unchangeable, upon any occasion, or by any means, whatsoever* and
none of them, in a true and proper sense, conditional: but I am far from
making the Decrees of God commensureable with his Prescience, or
foreknowledge. But of this hereafter.

In order to a full and thorough explication of the subject last in hand, if. 6.
this had been any material part of our present design, many Particularities,
besides those insisted upon, should have been added. But the consideration of
the dependence of the motions and actings of the creature upon God, in respect
of their determination, is more intimous to the heart and spirit of our Grand
Intendment, then of their simple existences, or beings. Therefore (to pass on
to the explication of this) we have laid down for the Argument of his Chapter,
this conclusion, (either in words, or substance,) that the motions, actions, or
operations of second Causes, though they do as absolutely depend upon the
first, as their existences, or beings, (as was argued in the former Chapter)
yet are they not by this dependence, at least, ordinarily, so immediately, or
precisely, determined, as their beings. Notwithstanding how their beings, in
respect of their natures, their Productions, their subsistings, or durations in
being, are determined, or not determined, by God, has been the inquiry, and
decision of the preceding part of this Chapter. We come now to inquire, how,
how far, and after what manner, the motions and actions of second Causes, are
determined, or necessitated, to be both when, and where, and what they are, by
that essential dependence, which they have upon God.

All second Causes whatsoever, are reducible to one of these three heads,. 7.
or kind^, They are, either, 1. Such, which act and move without any knowledge
or apprehension at all (as being capable of neither) either of the end, for the
obtaining whereof they act, or move, or of their motions or actings, in order
to this end. Or 2. Such, which are capable of some kind of knowledge or
apprehension, both of their ends, and of their actings and movings, toward
these ends; but very imperfect and weak, viz. such, which extend not to the
reason, or relation of these ends, nor to any deliberation about them, nor yet
to the proportion or aptness of those their actings and moveings for the
obtaining of their ends. Or 3. and lastly, they are such, which know and
apprehend (or at least are capable of both) not simply of those ends, in order
whereunto they act and move, but of the Nature, Reason, and further tendency of
these ends also, as likewise of the proportion of likelihood of their
engagements in any kind, for the obtaining of their ends. The first kind of
these causes, are called, Natural, or merely natural: the second, Animal, or
spontaneous: the third, Rational, Voluntary, or freeworking. Of the first
sort, are 1. all inanimate and life-lesse creatures, as Fire, Water, Air,
Earth, Stones, Minerals, and such like. 2. all Creatures, which are endued with
a Principle of vegetation, but not of sense. Of the second, are all animal, or
sensitive Creatures, not partakers of any Principle or indowment, above those
of outward sensation, and a certain estimative faculty, or fantasy, by which
they 1. apprehend what is naturally good, or evil, for them, (at least in some
Particulars) and 2. are acted and moved accordingly; as either to, or from,
them, but without any deliberation, or consideration had, either about the one,
or the other. Of this kind, are beasts of the Field, birds of the Air, fishes
of the Sea, and generally whatsoever has breath and life, excepting men. These
are said to act, or move Spontaneously, because they act out of some knowledge
of their end, without any compulsion or necessitation from without. Of the
third and last sort, are only men, and Angels, whether good, or bad, in either
kind; who are therefore called rational, voluntary, or free working causes,
because they are capable, not only of an apprehension or knowledge of such
ends, for, and toward the obtaining of which they act and move, but also of
the nature, quality, and import of them, and of deliberation likewise, or
consulation, about the means and ways of their Procurement.

Now though all these several causes, have such a dependence upon God,. 8.
that (as has been said) none of them can move into action without a surable
concurrence from him, yet are not their actions or motions thereby determined
(ordinarily) or necessitated unto, or upon, them. The reason why fire burns, or
heats, and does not moisten, cool, or the like, is not because God concurreth
with it, when it acts: for then Air or Water, should burn and heat
likewise, with a like concurrence. Therefore the particular and determinate
actions of the Fire, are not caused by, do not flow from that concurrence of
God with it, when it acts, but from that intrinsecall form, or those natural
Properties, which he has vested in it by the Law of Creation. There is the
same reason of other causes of this kind in their respective actions, or
effects. Nor are the motions or actings of the second kind of causes
mentioned, as of Birds, Beasts, etc. any whit more determined, then of the
former, by the Presence of God with them in their actions; but partly by their
natural abilities for action, or motion, partly by the natural proportions,
and disproportions, between their respective Estimatives, or Fantasies, and
such and such Creatures, or Objects, whose natures are either proportioned, or
disproportioned, unto them. As for example, the reason why a lamb runs to
the dam, and flees from the Wolf, is, partly the natural sympathy between
the fantasy of the lamb, and the dam, and the antipathy between the said
fantasy, and the Wolf; partly also that ability or nimblenesse of motion,
which God has given unto this creature, for the conveyance of it self this
way, or that, according as the fantasy of it is affected. The concurrence of
God with it when it runs to the dam, and when it flees from the Wolf, is
(doubtless) one and the same. So that the difference of these two motions in
this Creature, does not arise from any diversity therein, but from one of the
causes now mentioned.

In like manner, the actions and motions of the third and l^st kind of. 9.
causes; which we termed rational and voluntary, are not determined. i. e.
made rational and voluntary, (much less, are they necessitated) by the
conjunction or Presence of God with them, when they act or move, but by their
own proper and free election of what they act, or move unto. Whilst it
remained Acts 5. 4.
(says Peter to Ananias, speaking of his possession, whilst it was yet unsold,
and remained with him in specie) was it not thine own? i. e. Were thou not at
full liberry to have retained, and kept it for thine own private use, there
being no Law of God imposing it as a duty upon thee, to sell it? And when it
was sold, was it not in thy power? viz. whether thou would part with the
money, which thou receivedst for it, or no? The word (...) translated Power,
does not only signify a Power of right, but of liberty also, or a freedom of
will to dispose of it, as he pleased: otherwise, a Power of right had been of
no accommodation unto him, nor any competent matter of the aggravation of his
sin. Why have thou put this thing into thy heart? viz. to dissemble and lie,
pretending and professing to bring the whole money which thou receivedst for
the possession, when as thou bring a part of it only? God concurred with the
motion of Ananias will, when he resolved to bring his money to the Apostles for
public distribution; and so likewise, when he brought it: otherwise he could
not have resolved, or willed to do it. Yet this concurrence of God with him in
his act of willing, or resolving, did not make it necessary for him so to will,
or resolve, because he had a Power, this notwithstanding, to have willed or
resolved the contrary; I mean, either the keeping of the Possession to
himself, being yet unsold; or the not-bringing the money received for it, to
the Apostles. Otherwise both the act of selling it, and also of bringing the
money to the Apostles, must be looked upon, not as the acts of Ananias, but of
God himself. For whatsoever a man is necessitated to do, especially by a
Principle of force, or power out of himself, is the act of the necessi^ator,
not his. Yea the Apostle Paul, counts it no flattery either of himself, or
any* other man, to acquit both himself and them, of all such irregular acts,
whereunto they are necessitated, though by an inward and inherent Principle.
Now (says he) if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me Romans 7. 20.
. It is true, the act of Ananias his will, both for the selling of his
Possession, and bringing the money to the Apostles, in the very instant of the
Elicitation or Production of it, was necessary in this respect, viz. because
now it could not be unproduced, according to the common maxim; every thing
that is, when it is, must of necessity be Unumquodque quod est, quando est,
necesse est esse.
: but it was not the concurrency of God with his Will, that imposed any
necessity upon him to produce it, because then it had not been in his own
power; neither had it been properly his own act, when produced.

But it may be here objected, and said; that though the specificall actions,.
10.
or motions, of all the causes mentioned, be determined (as has been proved)
by the specificall natures, or properties of every of them respectively, and
not by any concurrence of God with them, yet their individual and particular
actions, and motions, are determined by some kind of concurrence, or
Providentiall interposall of God. As for example, that Fire (in the general)
burns that which is combustible being put to it, is from the nature of it,
not from any concurrence of God with it: but that it burns such, or such a
man's house, goods, or the like, this is not simply from the nature of it,
without some special disposal of Divine Providence. So again that wicked and
ungodly men, should (in the general) do wickedly, as (for instance) plot,
contrive, accomplish the death of such as are godly, proceeds from
themselves, and from the corruption of their wills, not from any concurrence of
God with them, nor from any special interposall of his, in such actings. But
that such and such wicked men, by name, should plot, and effect the deaths of
such and such godly men by name, and not the death of others, godly also;
proceeds not so much from the wickedness of such men, as from some special
decree of God, together with a suitable interposall of his Providence and
Power, for the effecting of it. That which Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the
Gentiles, and the Jews did, in, and about the crucifying of Christ, Peter
says, that the hand and counsel of God had determined before to be done Acts
4* 28.. 11.
. To this I answer;

1. That this particular and signal attribution of some special actions or
events, unto God, or to the determination of his hand and counsel (other
instances whereof are to be seen, 1 King. 12. 15. 2 Samuel 17. 14. Jos. 11. 20.
Deuteronomy. 2. 30. etc.) clearly argues, that ordinarily actions are performed by
men, and events come to pass upon other terms; I mean, without any such
particular, or extraordinary interposition by God, either by way of Decree, or
of Providentiall efficiency, or contribution toward them. Emphaticall and
remarkable appropriations are unsavory and impertinent, where all particulars
are of one and the same consideration.

2. It is no where said, that the hand or counsel of God determines before,.
12.
that such, or such evil actions, shall be done by such* or such particular
men, or that such or such men shall do these, and these evil actions; but only
that such, and such things shall be done. It is not said, that the hand or
counsel of God had determined before, that Herod, Pontius Pilate, such and
such of the Gentiles and of the Jews, should have their hand in the crucifying
of Christ; but only that these were gathered together, and levied their joint
endeavors to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had determined before
to be done, [or, come to pass.] Notwithstanding the determination of God
before hand concerning the crucifying of Christ, yet were Herod, Pontius
Pilate, and the rest, at as much liberty to have declined all manner of
compliance with the action, as they could have been, in case no such
pre-determination had passed in the counsel of God. For it is not here said,
that God gathered Herod, or Pilate, or any of the rest together, to act in this
business; but (as our former Translation read it) that they gathered
themselves together: Thus Calvin also translateth it: Convenerunt ^nim, etc. i.
e. They came, or met together, etc. Nor does the passive reading of the word,
were gathered together, imply any acting, much less any compulsive acting on
Gods part, in uniting, or drawing them together about such a work. For such
actions* which proceed from men themselves, or from their own wills, are
frequently in Scripture (and may with propriety of speech enough, be)
attributed unto them in terms of a Passive signification. But every man (says
James) is tempted, when he is DRAWN AWAY of his own lust, and ENTICED Jam. 1
14
. So also Paul: For of this sort are they, which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly Women, LADEN with sins, LED AWAY with diverse lusts 2 Timothy 3 6.
. And again: For some are already TVRNED ASIDE after Satan 1 Timothy 5. 15.
: (Besides many others). And if God, who has so severely prohibited the
shedding of blood, or the taking away of any man's life unjustly, should any
ways incline, or dispose, especially compel, men to the Perpetration of such
things; should he not be divided, in, or against, himself? and then (according
to the Process of our Saviors Argument) how should his Kingdom stand? Mat.
12. 26.. 13.
. Therefore,

3. Some Interpreters (as Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Prosper, and others) do not
refer the Decree spoken of Acts 4. 28. to the sin of those, who crucified
Christ, but to the effects and fruits of his suffering, in this kind. According
to this interpretation, the sense of the place will rise thus: Herod, Pontius
Pilate, the Gentiles, etc. met together to do whatsoever the hand and counsel
of God had determined before to be done. i. e. Whereas God had before
determined to redeem and save the World by the delivering up of his Son unto
death. i. e. By leaving of him to the wills and pleasures, and in the hands of
such men, whom he infallibly fore-knew would put him to death, Herod, Pontius
Pilate, etc. did now accordingly rise up, and though knowing nothing of the
determinate counsel of God concerning that which should follow upon their
wicked act, yet did that in crucifying Christ, which effected it.
Notwithstanding, to speak properly, the redemption and salvation of the world,
were not the effects of their act in crucifying Christ, but partly of the
determinate counsel of God in leaving him in their hands for such a special
Purpose; partly of the obedientiall humility, and voluntary subjection of
Christ himself to his Fathers Will and Pleasure in that kind. So that that
which the hand and counsel of God determined, was not the act of Herod,
Pontius Pilate, etc. in putting him to death; but his own Providential act, or
Premission, in leaving him in their hands for such a Purpose. God need not
determine that before to be done, which he knew would be done without any
determination of his in that behalf. See* v. 18. of the second, and v. 23. of
the third Chapter of the Acts. But,

4. (And lastly) for the true and genuine sense and Purport of the Passage in
hand, it is to be considered, 1. What the maine intent and scope of it is. 2.
How the Words and Phrases in the Passage may, and must be understood, in order
hereunto.

For the first, evident it is that the young converts or Christians, who are
said to have uttered these words with one accord, intended hereby the
magnifying of God (together with the strengthening of their own Faith) for his
most gracious and wonderful dispensation, in, and about the death and
sufferings of Christ; as viz. that in order to the Redemption and Salvation of
the World, he should so far dispense with the Counsels and Methods of his
ordinary Providence in Protecting the innocent, and righteous, as to expose or
leave his holy Child [or Son] Jesus, the most innocent and righteous Person o^
all others, to the rage, malice, and cruelty of wicked men, yea so far, as to
suffer death it self from them. There is no consideration able to reconcile the
Providence, or Permission of God in leaving a Person of such infinite Worth,
Holiness and Greatness, as the Lord Christ was, in the hands of wicked men,
with Principles of Reason, Equity, or Prudence (and so to render it worthy
Faith) but only some great and signal design to be accomplished and effected
by it. Hence it is, that in their mention of what Herod and Pilato, the
Gentiles and the Jews had done unto Christ in Crucifying of him, they cast and
fix their eye upon the hand and determinate counsel of God; i. e. Upon the
special Counsel and Decree of God not to interpose by any Power or Providence
of his, to prevent or divert the malice and rage, either of these, or of any
other wicked men, that should have attempted the same thing, from crucifying
the Lord of life, (though so innocent and holy a Person, as he was) Here is not
the least intimation of any counsel or determination by God, that any of the
Persons here mentioned, or any others, should have acted in, toward, or about
the death of Christ: but only that those things should be done (i. e. be
permitted, or suffered by God to be done, as we shall show further presently)
which these men met together to effect and Perpetrate. Nor was it any ways
necessary, that God, in order to the salvation of the World by Christ, should
determine or decree, that such and such men by Name, should crucify, or put
him to death; no nor yet that Christ should be actually crucified by any man,
or men whatsoever: for the effecting of this great and blessed design, it was
sufficient for God to determine and decree, that in case any man, or number of
men, should attempt his death, he would not restrain or hinder them from
effecting it.

If it be objected; But did not the Redemption and Salvation of the World
depend upon the actual death, or crucifying of Christ? and if so, should not
God have left this great and gracious design of his in suspense, and at
uncertainty, for matter of execution, in case he had not Absolutely and
Positively decreed the death of Christ, by one means or other, as either by
those who now did effect it, or by some other men? To this I Answer;

No: the Salvation of the World (doubtless) did not depend upon the actual or
literal dying, or crucifying of Christ, but partly upon the council and good
pleasure of God, to deliver him up unto death in order to this end. [ i. e. To
leave him freely unto men to crucify him, if they would] partly upon the
readiness and perfect submission of will in Christ to suffer death, in case
any man, or men, should be found, that would inflict it upon him. My grounds
and reasons for this Opinion are;

1. If the Salvation of the World depends wholly and entirely upon the merit
and satisfaction of Christ, in conjunction with the Will and good Pleasure of
God the Father to accept of this satisfaction in order thereunto, then did it,
does it, no ways depend upon any thing done by other men, especially wicked
men, least of all upon any thing done wickedly and provokingly in the sight of
God by them; and consequently the actual or literal Crucifiers of Christ
contributed nothing at all simply necessary toward the salvation of the World.
Sed verum prius: ergo et posterius.

2. If the merit of Christ received no addition, was no ways perfected, by the
actings of those who Crucified him, or by the things which he suffered from
them, then did not the salvation of the World depend upon his being actually
crucified, or upon his crucifying by men, but only upon that crucifying,
wherewith he had crucified himself before men came to lay hands upon him. Sed
verum prius: ergo et posterius. That the merit of Christ was no ways perfected
or augmented by the things which he suffered from men, is evident; because he
acted or did nothing herein, or under these sufferings, more then what he had
done before in the inward transactions of his Soul; yea and would have done
still, or again, whether men had Crucified him, or no.

3. If the acceptance of the sacrifice of Christ, depended only upon, 1. The
nature, quality, and legitimatenesse of the Sacrifice. 2. Upon the legitimacy
and dignity of the Priest offering. 3. (And lastly) upon the legitimatenesse of
the manner observed in the offering, then was not the act of those who
Crucified Christ, any ways contributing toward the acceptance of this
Sacrifice: and if so, the acceptance hereof with God had been the same (and
consequently, the salvation of the World, Purchased and Procured by it) whether
men had interposed to Crucify Christ, or no. Evident it is that they who
Crucified Christ, neither gave legitimatenesse to the Sacrifice: nor were any
legitimate Priests, upon whose actings about the Sacrifice, the acceptance of
the offering any ways depended; nor. 3. Did they, in what they did about the
Crucifying of Christ, observe any legitimatenesse of order or manner, which
should render the oblation acceptable with God. Therefore the acceptance of
that great Sacrifice we speak of, with God, depended wholly upon Christ
Himself, who 1. In respect of his Person, was a legitimate Sacrifice to make
that great atonement for the World, that was made by him. 2. In respect of his
office, was a legitimate High Priest, anointed by God to offer that great
Sacrifice of himself. 3. (And lastly) by virtue of his Holiness, Love, Zeal,
and all other heavenly endowments requisite for his Office of Priesthood,
performed the oblation with a perfect observation of all the requirements
appertaining to the Law or manner of such an offering. In none of all these had
he the least dependence upon those who put him to death: nor stood he in need
of their wickedness in Crucifying him, to make him either Sacrifice, Priest,
or oblation of highest acceptance with God.

4. The Apostle expressly affirms concerning men, that if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted [meaning with God] according to that a man has,
and not according to that he has not 2 Cor. 8. 12
. His meaning clearly is, that where there is a clear, perfect, and upright
desire of soul in any man, to perform any service pleasing unto God, but wants
opportunity or means for the actual or complete performance of it, and shall
go, in, or toward the Performance, as far as he has opportunity or means to
carry him, such a man finds the same acceptance with God under these
deficiencies, which he should find under an actual and complete Performance.
This is that which Divines commonly express in saying, that God accepts the
will for the deed. Now there is no reason to conceive or think, but that God
should deal in a way of as much equity and grace with Christ, as he does with
other men. Therefore supposing that there was a clear, perfect, and entire
willingness, or readiness of mind in Christ to lay down his life for the
World, but he had wanted an opportunity actually to have done it, (as suppose
no man should have appeared to take away his life from him) there is no
sufficient reason to think, but that he had been accepted with God upon the
same terms under, or in respect of such his willingness, or desire, on which he
is now accepted under his actual Death.

5. (And lastly) if it was the deep humility, and perfect subjection to the
Fathers Will and Pleasure, together with those other inward and gracious
deportments of soul in Christ, in, and under his sufferings, which gave the
whole and entire worth of merit and satisfaction unto them, then were his bare
external sufferings considered a part from these, no ways meritorious; and
consequently of no absolute necessity for, or toward, the Redemption of the
World. Sed verum prius: ergo et posterius. The former consequence in this
argument, is evident: because nothing, whether Action, or Passion, can be
meritorious, without something in it, or relating to it, which should give it
the weight or worth of merit. The latter consequence is no less evident
neither. For whatever, whether doings, or sufferings, are wholly void of merit,
though they may somewayes contribute toward the work of Redemption, yet can
they be no ways essential, or of absolute necessity thereunto. For the minor;
neither is this much questionable; the Scriptures themselves from place to
place, placing the value, merit, or expiatory worth of the death and sufferings
of Christ, over and besides the dignity of his Person, in his innocence,
meekness, humility, Perfect subjection to his Fathers Will, etc. Let these
Passages be considered. Heb. 9. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Heb. 7. 26, 27,
28. with many others of like import. Now certain it is, 1. That the excellency
and dignity of the Person of Christ, was and would have been the same. 2. That
the Innocence, Humility, Love, Patience, Obedience of Christ were, and would
have been the same also, whether he had actually and corporally suffered, or
no. Therefore whatsoever was Properly, Formally, or Essentially meritorious in
Christ, was in him before his sufferings of a natural death, and would have
been in him, whether he had suffered such a Death, or no: and consequently the
work of Redemption might have prospered in his hand, whether he had thus
suffered, or not.

If it be demanded; but does not this Doctrine suppose, or make, Christ to have
died in vain? yea, and contradict all those Scriptures, which ascribe the
Redemption, and Salvation of men, to his Blood, Death, Cross, and Suffering? I
answer; neither: it is most free from both these erroneous impieties. From the
former, because the death of Christ is soveraignly necessary upon several
other accounts; as 1. If he should not have actually yielded up himself unto
death, there being found those that would, and did, attempt it, it must needs
have been conceived and concluded by men, that he was not truly, inwardly, and
really willing and free to have laid down his life for the World: and
consequently there had been no ground, or footing for any man to believe,
either that he was the Son of God, or that he was meritoriously qualified for
the Redemption of the World. Secondly, had he always declined actual dying,
under those frequent attempts made by men to take away his life, it could not
have been known (and so not upon any sufficient ground believed) that God the
Father delivered him up to Death: and consequently his Will and good Pleasure
concerning the salvation of the World by his Son, could not upon any competent
terms have been believed. Thirdly, the Prophecies in the old Testament
concerning the actual sufferings of Christ could not have been fullfilled.
Fourthly, upon the said supposition as, viz. That he had an opportunity
thorough the blood thirsty malice of men, to lay down his life actually, if he
should not have done it, that great example of his Humility, Patience,
Self-denial, Love of the Brethren even unto blood, etc. had been wanting in
the Churches. Fifthly, (and lastly) upon the supposition mentioned, the actual
dying of Christ was altogether necessary in respect of the inward frame and
disposition of his Soul, which rendered him freely willing to lay down his Life,
in case it should be required of him, at, or after such a time, as his Father
judged it meet to permit the execution. Now such a frame and disposition of
Heart and Soul, as this, was (as was formerly argued) absolutely necessary to
be found in Christ, to qualify him for a Redeemer: and being found in him, it
could not possibly but produce his actual death, when men should attempt it,
and God no ways interpose to prevent it. Thus then you see clearly, how the
Doctrine, which denies an absolute necessity of Christ's actual and external
Death, in order to the salvation of the World, no ways renders, or supposes
this death of his to be in vain.

Nor does the Doctrine we now speak of contradict any of those Scriptures,
which attribute the Redemption and Salvation of the World to his Blood, Death,
Sufferings, etc. For when we are said to be healed by his stripes, 1. Pet. 2.
24. to be justified by his Blood, Romans 5. 9. to have Redemption thorough his
Blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. etc. It no ways supposes or implies, that the literal or
material shedding of his Blood by men was simply and absolutely necessary,
either to the justification, or redemption of men, but only that a shedding of
it, by himself, spiritually, in that great Act of Resignation of it to be shed
by men, which passed and was transacted inwardly in his Soul, whether it had
been externally shed by men, or no, was simply and absolutely necessary
thereunto. There is scarce any Phrase or Idiome of speech more frequent in
Scripture, then to mention and speak of an act simply, and indefinitely, as
performed and done, when the doing of it has been fully resolved, concluded,
or consented unto in the heart and soul, whether ever it be actually and
externally done, or no. Thus Abraham, in the same Verse is twice said to have
offered up his son Isaac Heb. 11. 17.
; only because he was inwardly, really, and fully willing to have offered him
up literally, which yet (we know) he did not. So a man is said to forsake all
he has Luke 14. 33.
, when he is inwardly and unfeignedly willing and resolved to forsake all
[literally, and actually] when he shall be called to it, whether he be ever so
called, or no. In this Phrase of speech God is said to have given the Land of
Canaan unto the Israelites, Ios. 1. 3. when as he had only purposed or resolved
to give it unto them, as appears Ver. 6. So to have saved us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. only
because of his full purpose to save us; upon our believing. So again to have
rejected Saul from being King, 1 Samuel 15. 23. only because he was fully
purposed to reject him, upon his impenitence in his rebellious course: for
evident it is, that Saul was permitted to enjoy his Kingdom, a considerable
space of time, after it was said that God had rejected him from being King. In
like manner he is said, Cap. 13. 13. To have established (for so Arias Montanus
translates out of the Original, viz. stabilierat* and our former English
Translators, had established) the Kingdom of Saul upon Israel for ever, only
because he was purposed to do it, and that conditionally too, viz. upon the
good behavior of himself, and his Posterity, in the Throne. It were easy to
multiply instances in this kind even unto weariness. In like construction of
speech, Christ may be said to have given his Flesh, laid down his Life, shed
his Blood for the Redemption of the World, justification of men, etc. (and
consequently, the World be said to be redeemed, and men justified by his Blood,
Death, Cross, etc.) only because he was freely willing, unfeignedly ready and
prepared to do all these actually, when the Providence of God, and the
wickedness of men should afford him an an opportunity to do them. Nor can it
be said, that (in such a sense) he should ever the less have given his Flesh,
laid down his Life, shed his Blood for the salvation of the World, then now he
has done, in case the Providence of God, and wickedness of men, should never
have conspired or agreed about the taking away his Life from him. It was his
Blood, as shed by himself, not by men; it was his Life, as laid down by
himself, not as taken from him by men; it was his Flesh, as given or offered by
himself, not as sacrificed by wicked men, which produced those glorious and
blessed effects, the Redemption, Justification, and Salvation of the World. Now
Christ, to shed his Blood, in such a sense as he shed it; to lay down his Life*
in such a manner, as he by any act or consent of his concurred and acted
toward the laying of it down; and so to give his Flesh, as he gave it, needed
not the malice, violence, or bloody injustice of men; but did all this,
performed all these acts within his own sphere; yea, and had performed them,
before the least drop of his Blood was spilt by men: and consequently the
Redemption and Salvation of the World were provided for by him in all things
essential, and simply necessary thereunto, before either Herod, or Filate the
Gentiles, or the Jews interposed with any of their counsels, or engagements,
for the Crucifying of him.

Thus then we see what the Christians mean, in saying, that Herod and Pilate,
with the Gentiles and People of Israel gathered together to do whatsoever the
hand and counsel of God had determined before to be done; viz. to act toward,
in, and about the Death and Crucifying of Christ, to the uttermost ((...),
quaecunque) of what God had before upon a special account and design,
determined or Decreed to Permit them to do, or rather, to Permit to be done,
notwithstanding his Hand or Power, to have prevented them. For (to touch the
second thing propounded) the word, (...), translated, to be done, does not
import any eventuall certainty, or indispensable necessity of the coming to
pass of those things, which Herod, Pilate, etc. gathered themselves together
to do, and accordingly did, about the Crucifying of Christ; but only, the
possibility, or (if we will) the probability of their coming to pass upon the
determined Permission of God in that behalf. (For that the Permissive Decree of
God, does not import the certainty, or necessity of event in things so Decreed,
is afterward proved in this Chapter Sect. 20.
). It is a form of speech frequent in the Scriptures, to speak of things
probable, or likely to come to pass, as if they should, or would, simply and
certainly come to pass: and so again to use the infinitive Mood in a
potentiall sense, or signification. An instance of the former, we have, Deuteronomy.
13. 11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more, any such
wickedness as this is, among you. The meaning is not, that it shall certainly
and infallibly thus come to pass, viz. That no Israelite, hearing of the
judgment executed upon the idolatrous Seducer, would ever commit the like
wickedness afterward; but that the hearing of such a severe course taken with
such an offender, should be a probable and likely means to preserve others from
the like wickedness. Another passage of like expression and import, you have,
Deuteronomy. 17. 13. and again Deuteronomy. 19. 20. See also, Genesis 21. 6. Number. 14. 13. 14.
Ioh. 11. 48. (to omit other the like without number) An See Franciscus Vigerus,
De praecipu^s Graecae dictionis Idiotismis, p. 99.
instance of the latter we have, Romans 1. 20. (...). i. e. That they might be,
or, that they may be (as our last translators render it in their margent) or
that they should be (as our former translators had it) without excuse, [viz. in
case they glorify not God as God.] See also Romans 4. 11. where the infinitive
Mood is twice used in such a potentiall sense as we speak of. So when Christ
says unto Simon and Andrew (Mar. 1. 17.) Follow me, (...), i. e. and I will
make, [or cause] you to be [or, to become] fishers of men, his meaning is not,
that upon condition they would follow him, he would compel or force them to be
fishers of men, (he might have done this as well without persuading them to
follow him) but that he would furnish them with such wisdom and knowledge,
with such an heavenly art and skill, that if their hearts would serve them for
the employment, they might, and should be excellently accomplished and fitted
by him, for the drawing of men out of the World unto God. See also Mar. 10. 44.
Luke 8. 35. 23. 24. And (to cite no more places upon this account, which
readily might be done to a far greater number) in the next Verse (save one) to
the words in hand the same speakers express themselves thus, -- (...). etc. i.
e. And that signs and wonders MAY BE DONE by the Name, etc. So that whereas in
the Scripture in debate, we have the Original, (...), translated, to be done,
as if the meaning were, that the hand and counsel of God had positively and
conclusively determined, that all those things should be done, which now were
done by Herod, Pilate, etc. about the Crucifying of Christ; it might, as
properly, with as much consonancy to the Scripture Dialect and Phrase
elsewhere, and (questionless) with far better agreement with the truth, be
rendered, MIGHT BE DONE. And then the Sense of the whole Passage imports no
more but this, that Herod, Pilate, etc. were gathered together to do the
uttermost of what God had long before, even from eternity, graciously and
sapientially determined to permit and suffer them to do, in, and about the
Death and Crucifying of Christ. So then here is nothing in this Scripture to
prove, that God peremptorily decreed or determined before hand the Crucifying
of Christ by Herod, Pilate, the Gentiles, or the Jews, or by any other
Persons; but only that in order to his great and blessed design of saving the
World, he thus Decreed, that either these, or any other (in case these had not
done it) should be at liberty to Perpetrate this great wickedness, and that he
would not by his hand or Power interpose to hinder them, in case they should
attempt it; which he from eternity foresaw, and certainly knew that they would.

This sense of the place is fully confirmed from all these and such like
expressions in Scripture: Who was DELIVERED up [meaning by God] for our
offenses Rom 4. 25.
. So again, He that spared not his own Son, DELIVERED HIM UP for us all, etc.
Romans 8. 32.
. And again: Him being DELIVERED [(...), given out, viz. out of the protecting
or rescuing Hand of God] by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have Crucified, etc. Acts 2. 23.
. Such passages as these evidently show, that God went no further in any of his
Determinations, or Decrees about the actual Crucifying of Christ, but only to
a delivering of him up. i. e. to a leaving of him un-guarded, unprotected, for
wicked men to do with him (thus far) even what they list; not to any
necessitating of any person, or persons whatsoever, to lay violent hands upon
him.

If it be objected, but how does it stand with the Wisdom of God to determine.
14.
events before hand, without determining means, or instruments, which shall
infallibly produce, or give being unto them? Or does he determine any thing,
the effecting whereof he leaves in the Liberty, and Power of men? So that they
may choose, whether it shall be effected, or no? I Answer,

1. (In the general) that God never determines any thing, but what he either
provideth means himself, or else knows himself sufficiently provided
otherwise, to bring to pass; viz. according to the tenor, manner, and form of
his Determination. But

2. Whatsoever God determines to do, or to be done, in case, or upon such or
such a supposition, though his determination it self be absolute, and
independent upon any condition whatsoever, yet the event, or the thing
determined, upon such terms, is suspended upon the condition included in the
determination. As for example, it cannot be denied, but that God had determined
to destroy Niniveh within forty days after warning given hereof Jona. 3 4.
by the Preaching of Jonah. For doubtless if he had not purposed or determined
the thing, he would not have engaged his Prophet to Preach, and assert it in
his Name. But because the tenor and form of this his determination was
conditional, importing only a purpose in him to inflict the judgment
determined, in case they humbled not themselves within so many days after the
denunciation of this judgment as determined by him, their humiliation and
repentance intervening within the time limited in the determination or Decree,
the judgment determined was not executed; nor did the tenor of the
determination import any other, then the non-execution of the judgment
determined in such a case. A like instance we have, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Wherefore the
Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed (i. e. I purposed, or determined) that
thy house, and the house of thy Father, should walk before me, (viz. in the
Office and Dignity of the Priestood) for ever. But now the Lord says, be it
far from me: for them that honor me, I will honor: and they that despise me,
shall be lighty esteemed. The purpose or determination of God for vesting the
Priest hood for ever (i. e. during the use and continuance of it in the World)
in Elie's house, was absolute, not alterable, or changeable, by any
intervention, one, or more, of what nature, or kind, soever. But what then was
the tenor or form, of this determination, or purpose? not categoricall, or
simply assertive, as, viz. That the Priesthood should remain in this house or
family, for ever, how much soever it should at any time degenerate from it self
in sin and wickedness, but Hypotheticall, and Provisionall, thus; the
Priesthood shall remain for ever in Elie's House, provided that this house
remains faithful, and observant of the Law of their God concerning this
dignity. This purpose or determination of God, I call absolute, and
unchangeable, because neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, by any interposition whatsoever, could, or should have
hindered, the said duration or continuance of the Priesthood in Elies house, in
case it had remained faithful. The Scriptures abound with instances of like
consideration with these. See 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Gal. 5. 21, etc.

. 15. 3. God may leave the execution or fullfiling of his determinations (such
as they may be) at the free liberty, and in the power of men, and yet have
assurance and certainty enough, that they will be executed and fullfilled. For
being infinite in wisdom, and so able to discern and comprehend the most
secret, subtle, and tickle Proportions and Connexions between causes and
effects Cognitio illa Dci Sapientialis omnino certa est, et infallibilis; sed
non infallibilitate scientiae quae sumitur ab obj^cta, sed ab intell^ctu
Divino, perf^ctissime and infallibiliter jud^cante etiam de fallibilibus and
contingentibus. Arrib. Op. Conciliat. lib. 1 ca. 9.

Effectus causa vum creatarum vide^ qu^dem Deus in ipsi^ causis, multo melius
quam nos. Aqu. Sum. part. 1. Qu. 14. Art. 7. Quccunque igitur pissunt per
creaturam fieri, vel cogitari. vel dici; and etiam quaecunqu^ ips^ fac^r^
po^^st, omnia cognoscit Deus, etiamst actu non sunt. Ibid. Art. 9. Divina
essentia est ratio cognoscendi intuitive quodcunque intelligibile, etiamsi
nullum existeret in se. Rada. Contr. 30. Art. 3.


, such as are altogether undiscernable both unto Men, and Angels, (as between
the will of a man attended with such and such Principles, and Notions of things
in the understanding, for her guide in her elections, and again, with such and
such objects, circumstances, and occasions about her, and between all possible
or imaginable elections, or actions, in such a case) God (I say) thorough the
infiniteness of his wisdom being able to penetrate, calculate, and compute,
all, and all manner of relations, and aspects, between all and all manner of
causes and effects whatsoever, is able infallibly, without all possibility of
error or mistake, to foresee, not only all men's actions and ways, what they
will be from the beginning of the World to the end thereof, being conscious to
his own Model, Platform, and intentions for the government of the World; but
likewise what they would have been, had himself been pleased to have carried
the government of the World (I mean, in circumstances and occasions relating
to it) otherwise. He did not only foresee, that Saul would come down to Keilah,
which he did; but also that the Lords of Keilah would have delivered David into
Saul's hand, in case he had stayed there till Saul's coming, and demanding of
him; which yet they did not, because they were prevented of the opportunity, by
David's departure from them before. 1 Samuel 23. 11, 12. So that in this sense God
may be said to determine, what will, or shall, be done in the World by men; not
by determining, or decreeing to bow, or bend their wills by any immediate or
physical influx, or acting of his Power upon them, much less by necessitating
or compelling them to their respective elections; but by determining or
decreeing, either to suffer them to remain so, and so, affected or inclined,
and under the Power and guidance of such, and such Principles, which he
certainly foreseeth that they will drink in; or else to put new Principles of
light into them, by the influence whereof he also clearly foreseeth that the
tenor and frame of their wills and affections will freely alter, and change;
and with all, to give being to such and such, circumstances, providence, and
occasions, which have such or such an aspect upon, or reference unto, them, in
such, or such, a Posture. Upon these terms, the hand and counsel of God might
and did absolutely determine, the giving up of his Son Jesus Christ to suffer
death upon the Cross, and yet not determine, either that Herod, Pontius
Pilate, or any other Person, or Persons, by Name, should have acted this his
determination, knowing certainly, 1. That these men would act it freely, and
without being any ways determined, yea or in the least degree excited, by him
hereunto: 2. That in case these had not acted it, there were enough in the
World besides that would. But

4. Concerning those actions of men, with their Consequences, Productions,. 16.
and Events, which are so emphatically and signally (as has been said)
attributed unto God; the reason of this attribution (I conceive) is, partly
because the conjunction of such Principles in men, and Providence about men,
between which the actions we speak of are begotten and produced, is somewhat
particular and rare; partly also (and chiefly) because the event and
consequence of such actions, are some special design and intendment of God,
as is clearly to be seen in the instances already pointed at, Deuteronomy. 2. 27.
compared with v. 30. Jos. 11. 20. 2 Samuel 17. 14. 1 King. 12. 15. and Act. 4.
28. compared with Romans 4. 25. and 8. 32. etc. Therefore,

5. Concerning the ordinary and constant, motions, and actions, of other. 17.
Creatures, in the World, though the least of them comes not to pass without
the knowledge, and foreknowledge of God (in such a sense, as foreknowledge is
attributable unto him) nor without his Prudentiall disposal of them to their
(or rather his) respective ends, yet can they not be said be to determined by
him in any other sense, or consideration, then this; viz. as he was the Author
of such and such determinate Natures, Properties, and Beings, in the Creation,
which by his ordinary concurrence with them for support and action, are apt to
move or to act after such, or such a manner, determinately. The regular and
respective motions, shinings, influences, of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the
flowing of Rivers from their Fountains together with the decurrency of their
Waters into the Sea, with a thousand things besides of like consideration, are
no otherwise determined by God, then as has been said.

6. Concerning the particular motions, actions, and exertions of such
Creatures,. 18.
or Causes, which though merely natural, do not move, act, or exert uniformly
or without variation, but with a latitude and disproportion in their motions
and effects, there is ground (I conceive) to judge, that God does (at least,
sometimes, though not so frequently, as is commonly presumed) Providentially
interpose, beyond his ordinary concurrence, to occasion or bring to pass such
a variation. As for example, that the same ground, with the same labor, cost,
and skill of the Husbandman bestowed on it, does not yield a like proportion of
increase one year, which it does another; so again, that the same
fruit-bearing Trees, are barren one year, and well-bearing another; that the
Seas are Pacifique and commodious for Passage at one time, in such parts and
places of them, as when such, and such Ships, with such and such Persons in
them, pass thorough them, where they are turbulent and dangerous at another
time, when such and such other Ships, and Persons in them, pass the same way,
(with many more particulars of like consideration) the reason (doubtless) of
the variety and diversity of occurrences, or effects, in this kind, is not
always to be resolved, either divisim, or conjunction, only into the native
Properties of the Causes, whether mediately, or immediately producing them, or
into the ordinary and standing concurrence of God, with these Causes, for, or
in producing them; but there is somewhat a more particular hand of the great
Ruler of the World, which forms and fashions them in such different shapes;
and that in order to such and such ends, which though sometimes apprehensible
enough, yet for the most part are very hard for men to call by their Names.
Only this remains true, that in such occurrences and events, as those now
specified, notwithstanding that great diversity found between them, yet
ordinarily all Particular Causes interessed in the Production of them, act in a
regular and due conformity to their respective Natures, and Properties, and are
not forced or turned out their way by any immediate Power or interposall of
God. And that which he does in order to a diversification, when the difference
is Preter-naturall, and signally from him, consists either in a multiplication
of, or a substraction from, the number of Causes, which according to the course
of nature, and ordinary Providence, would have joined in raising the effect, or
else in suspending, either in whole or in part, or in augmenting the operating
virtue, of one cause, or more present with those, which together raise and
produce the effect. Which suspension and augmentation, though in a sense they
may be called miraculous, yet are they not direct or perfect miracles, partly
because they are not so obvious to any of the outward senses, partly also,
because, though they be unusual and rare, compared with the co(...) of
ordinary Providence, yet are they frequent in such kinds of dispensations,
which are either signally penal, or munificent.

7. Concerning such occurrences and casual events, wherein, or whereby,. 19.
any creature suffers loss, either of being, or of well-being, in what kind,
or degree soever, neither are these determined by God, though he takes special
knowledge of them both before, and when they come to pass, and contrives them
accordingly to their most appropriate ends. When our Savior reaches his
Disciples, that a Sparrow shall not fall to the ground (i. e. be taken, killed,
or hurt,) without his Heavenly Father; his meaning is not to assert a
particular Decree or determination in God, concerning the death, or hurt, of
every Sparrow, that either dies, or receives harm; but to show, that God is
vigilant and careful in his Rule and Government of the World; and takes exact
notice how his Creatures suffer, or are diminished. It is more proper (of the
two) and nearer to the truth, to say and hold, that God determines the
preservation, or keeping alive of those Sparrowes, which fall not to the
ground, then that he determines the falling to the grounds of every one that
so falls. The reason is, because the object of Gods determinations or
Decrees, is only that which is good, whereas things indifferent, and things
that are evil, are the object of his knowledge, as well as that, which is
good. But of this more hereafter. So when any man's Person, House, or Goods, are
consumed, or hurt, by Fire, there is no competent ground to say or think, that
any of these were determined by God, or that they might not have been
prevented. For certain it is, that he Decreed not, either the negligence or
carelessness, nor yet the malice, of those, who thorough either the one, or the
other, were the Authors of such accidents.

If it be said, yea but the permission of such accidents as these, is good:. 20.
otherwise God would not permit them to be. And if so, then such a Permission
may be the object of Gods Determination and Decree. And if God Decrees the
Permission of a thing, does not this include, or suppose, a necessity that it
shall, will, or must come to pass? If so, it is as much determined or
necessitated by Gods, Permissive Decree, as if it had been directly and
peremptorily decreed by him; To this I answer,

It is indeed the judgment of some learned men, that the purpose or intent Dr.
Twisse.
of God to permit or suffer such, or such a thing to be done, or such or such
an accident to come to pass, supposes a necessity (at least a syllogisticall
or consequentiall necessity) of the coming of it to pass. But that the truth
lies on the other side of the way, appears by the light of this consideration.
If whatsoever God has Decreed, or intends, to permit to come to pass in any
case, upon any terms, or any supposition whatsoever, should by virtue of such
an intention or Decree, necessarily come to pass, then all things possible to
be, (or at least ten thousand things more then ever shall be) must be, yea and
this necessarily. For (doubtless) God has Decreed, and intends, to leave
natural Causes, generally, to their natural and proper Operations, and
Productions; yea and voluntary Causes also, under a Power, and at liberty, to
act ten thousand things more, then ever they will do, or shall do. For example;
God intends, and has Decreed, to permit, that fire shall burn, what
combustible matter soever it shall take hold of, or that shall be cast into it;
that one spark of it falling into a barrel of dried Gunpowder, should
suddenly fire it, etc. but it does not follow from hence, that therefore every
thing that is combustible in the World, shall be burnt with Fire; or that every
barrel of dry Gunpowder shall be blown up with sparks of Fire falling into
them. So (in the instance formerly mentioned) God had Decreed to permit the
Lords of Keilah to deliver up David into Saul's hand, in case he had stayed in
their City, till Saul's coming to demand him: this is evident from the Text 1 Samuel 23. 12.
. But it did not follow from this Permissive Decree of God, that therefore
these Lords must necessarily deliver up David into Saul's hand: for we know they
did it not. So likewise God has Decreed to permit any man to destroy the life
of another Vitae alienae Dominus est, quisquis contemptor est suae. Sen.
whom he meets with (I mean, in respect of a natural Power to do the
execution) but it follows not from hence, that therefore every man must
necessarily murder, or destroy the life of his Brother that comes in his
way. So that evident it is, that no Decree of God whatsoever, which is simply
and purely Permissive, does import any necessity at all of the perpetration, or
coming to pass, of the thing so Decreed. God permitted Adam to eat of every
Tree in the Garden of Eden (the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, only
excepted Genesis 2. 16. 17.
) and therefore certainly had Decreed, or Intended this Permission: yet was not
Adam any ways necessitated by any virtue or influence of this Decree upon him,
to eat of every of these Trees; nor is it in the least degree credible, that
ever he did eat of every of them, nor yet of any one of them, but only that,
which was prohibited unto him, his ejection out of this Garden following so
suddenly after this Patent, or Permission, granted unto him. The reason why no
Decree of God, that is purely and barely permissive, either induces or
supposes any necessity of the coming to pass, of what is only so Decreed, is
this. First, because no such Decree does any ways interesse God to any manner
of interposall, either by his wisdom, power, or providence in what kind
soever, toward the effecting or bringing to pass of what is so decreed. So
that such events, which are no otherwise Decreed by God, then thus, are in the
same posture of contingency, in the same possibility of being, or not being,
wherein they would have been, had there been no such Decree at all concerning
them. Secondly, neither does any such Decree in God suppose a futurity of such
a concurrence of Causes simply requisite and necessary for the bringing of
things, so Decreed, to pass, which will actually bring them to pass. Though
God has Decreed, that a spark, or coal of Fire, falling, i. e. in case it
shall fall, into a barrel of Gunpowder, shall fire it, yet it does not follow
from hence, that he has Decreed that any such spark, or coal, shall fall
into it; without which notwithstanding the effect Decreed, viz. the firing of
this powder, will not come to pass. Or if it be said, that God has Decreed
that such a spark, or coal, shall fall into the said barrel of powder, now is
not the Decree barely permissive, but operative and assertive, and such which
ingageth the Decreer to interpose effectually for the bringing of the thing
Decreed to pass. But such Decrees as this, in matters of that nature, we deny
to be in God.

If it be yet further objected; yea but all events, and whatsoever comes. 21.
to pass at any time, in any place, or with relation to any person whatsoever,
are foreseen, and fore-known by God. And if so, then is there an absolute and
unavoydable, necessity of their coming to pass: otherwise the foreknowledge
of God shall be but conjecturall, obnoxious to error and mistake, not certain,
or infallible. To this I answer;

1. By concession; viz. that the knowledge of God (for foreknowledge, if we
speak properly, is not competible to him Quia ca, quae nobis futura sunt,
videt, quae tamen ipsi semper praesto sunt, praescius dicitur, quanvis
nequaquam futurum praevideat, quod praesens videt. Greg. Mor. l. 2. c. 23.
) is all light, and there is no darkness in it at all: all possibility of
error or mistake are ten thousand times further from it, then the Heavens are
from the Earth. But,

2. I answer further (by way of exception) that notwithstanding the certainty
of the knowledge of God concerning things, that daily and hourly come to pass,
and that will come to pass hereafter, yet there is no more, no other necessity
of their coming to pass, in respect of such his knowledge, then there would,
or should, have been, in case no such knowledge were, or had been, in him. For
certain it is, that no knowledge, as such, has any influence at all upon the
object, or thing known, to cause it to be, or not to be Non ideo peccavit Adam,
quia Deus hoc suturum noverat; sed praescivit Deus, quasi Deus, quod ille erat
propria voluntate facturus. Hieronym. Dial. 3. contra Pelag. Deus praescientia
sua non cogit facienda, quae futura sunt. Aug. de llb. Arbit. l. 3. c. 4.
.

If it be replied; yea, but if God knows, that such and such things will come
to pass, is there not a necessity of their coming to pass: or otherwise, must
not the knowledge of God prove abortive, and be accompanied with error?

I answer, no: if the events supposed to be known by God before their. 22.
coming to pass, be contingent, or at least such, in the Production whereof
Futura contingentia, etiam ut subsunt divinae scientiae, non sunt simpliciter
necessaria. Rada. Contr. 30. Art: 5.

Scientia Dei non tollit contingentiam ab eo, quod est scitum. ibid.


the wills of men must some ways or other, interpose, if ever they be
produced, (of which kind of events only we now speak) the certainty of the
knowledge of God may be salved, and yet no absolute necessity of the coming to
pass of such events be supposed. The reason is, because at the same time, when
God sees, or knows, that they will come to pass, he sees and knows also,
that there is no necessity they should come to pass, but that they may well be
prevented. In which respect, in case they should not come to pass, the
knowledge of God should suffer no defeature, or disparagement.

If yet it be said; yea but when it is supposed, that God knows that such,.
23.
or such, an event will come to pass, if it should be supposed withal, that
he knows it may not come to pass, or that it may come to pass otherwise,
then according to this knowledge, does not this suppose or imply a
consciousnesse in God of the weakness or deficiency of his knowledge?

I answer, no; but rather the contrary; viz. a consciousnesse in him of the
strength and perfection of his knowledge. For he that knows not that
contingent and free-working Causes, which way soever they shall act in order to
any particular event, might yet act otherwise, or suspend their actings, is
certainly defective in knowledge. And if God did not as well know, that there
is a Possibility of the non-futurity, or of the not coming to pass of such
contingent events, which he knows will come to pass, as well as he certainly
knows that they will come to pass, he should be defective in his knowledge
concerning the Nature and Property of contingent and freeworking Causes: in as
much as this is their Nature and Property (as has been said) to be at liberty
in reference to particular actings, to act one way, as well as another, or else
to suspend their action. Indeed if it should be said, or thought, that any
event WILL not, or SHALL not, come to pass, which God knows before hand will
come to pass, this would import an obnoxiousness unto error in the knowledge,
or foreknowledge, of God. But to say, or think, that such an event, whose
future coming to pass God knows, MAY, notwithstanding this knowledge of
his, not come to pass, reflects no dishonor or disparagement at all upon his
knowledge Cum ista, Antichristus crit, stat haec, Antichristus potest non fore.
Rada. Contr. 30. Art. 6. Et paulo post; non pugnat igitur quod Deus sciat,
Petrum esse peccaturum, and tamen quod ipse possit non peccare, vel possit non
esse peccaturus.
; but rather gives an honorable and high testimony of excellency and perfection
unto it. For he that certainly knows what contingent and free-working Causes
will do, notwithstanding their freedom and liberty either to do, or not to do,
or to do otherwise, must needs be excellent in knowledge indeed, and one who
needs not count it robbery to be equal with God.

Concerning the acts of the wills of men, which are called (I know not how
Properly) supernatural, I mean such, which have an essential connection with
their eternal happiness and glory, how, or how far they are, determined by
God, and how, and how far, not, we shall be better fitted with an opportunity
to demonstrate in the Process of our Discourse.

In the mean time, the reason why the great Commander and Lord of. 24.
nature, leaves his whole Militia, ordinarily to move, and act, according to
their native Properties and inclinations respectively, without counter manding
them, or turning them out of their way, are these (with their fellows:) First,
Nature with all her train and retinue of particular Causes, together with all
their furniture of Principles for Motion, and Action, being the workmanship of
his own hand, if he should ordinarily, or frequently interpose to change her
Laws, or innovate her course, he should seem to pull down that, which himself
has built up; and to dislike that Portraicture and resemblance of himself,
which he has drawn with admirable and unimitable art and skill in the regular
and standing Progress of Nature, and second Causes. Secondly, being conscious
to himself, with what excellency of Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, the great Body
of Nature with all the Parts and Members of it, was at first raised, built,
framed, and tempered by himself, he knows there is no need for him either to
add to, or to take from, or to alter any thing (ordinarily) in her course. He
has sufficient security that his handmaid left unto her self (only with his
ordinary and regular concurrence, without which she can neither move, nor be)
will no ways mis-behave her self in order to his ends, and those concernments
of his glory, wherewith she is entrusted. So that for him to check, or
control her in her way, would be but a kind of condemning the innocent,
which is, when practiced amongst men, an abomination to him. Thirdly, (and
lastly) if he should customarily, and of course overruled Nature or second
Causes, in their regular Proceedings, he should overlay his own market for
miracles and works of wonder, and bring down the price of the glory and esteem
of them to a very low rate. In the days of Solomon, Silver was but as Stones,
nothing esteemed 1 Kings 10. 21. 27.
, by reason of the abundance and commonness of it. Miracles are the rarities of
Heaven; and the reserve of Nature, when her testimony concerning the Glory and
Power of her Lord and Master is despised by Men.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the foreknowledge and knowledge of God; and the difference between
these, and his Desires, Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees: and how these also
are distinguished the one from the other.

IT is not to be denied, but that the Scriptures do attibute (...), or. 1.
foreknowledge unto God in several places; as Acts 2. 23. Romans 8. 29. 11. 2.
1 Pet. 1. 2. etc. Though evident it is, that in some, if not in all, of these
places, the word rather imports a Pre-approbation, then a simple Prescience, or
foreknowledge; according to the known signification of the simple word, (...):
which, though properly it signifies knowledge, yet in Scripture language
(according to that idiome of speech, wherein the consequent is put for the
antecedent, not unusual in the Scriptures) frequently imports, approbation, As
Mat. 7. 23. Romans 11. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 19. But as many other things are often in
Scripture attributed unto God, which according to the proper and ordinary
signification of the words, are no ways comperible to him, as Hands, Eyes,
Ears, Grief, Repentance, etc. So is Pre-science or foreknowledge also.
Notwithstanding as there is a ground in Reason, one, or more, for all those
other metaphorical and improper attributions, which are in any kind made unto
God, so is there for this of Prescience also. Only care and caution must be
taken, that our Table proves not a snare unto us; my meaning is, least those
things which are metaphorically spoken of God for the accommodation of our
understandings, and to enrich us with such conceptions, apprehensions, and
knowledge of him, as we are well capable of, according to the truth of his
Nature, and Being, be not so interpreted or understood by us, as to occasion
any such fancies or imaginations in us, which are unworthy of him, and
inconsistent with the truth of his Being.

That Pre-science, or foreknowledge, are not Formally or Properly in. 2.
God, is the constant assertion, both of Ancient and Modern Divinity. The Quid
est proescientia, nisi scientia futurorum? Quid autem futurum est Deo, qui
omnia super graditur tempora? Si enim in scientia res ipsas habet, non sunt ei
futurae, sed praesentes; ac per hoc, non jam praescientia, sed tantum scientia
dici potest. Aug. l. 2. ad Simpl. vide plura. ib.

Nec zelus, nec ira, nec penitentia, nec proprie miscrecordia, nec praescientia
esse potest in Deo. Greg. Moral. l. 2. c. 23.


learned Assertors of the Protestant Cause are at perfect agreement with their
Adversaries the Schoolmen, and Papists, in this. Nor is it any wonder at all,
that there should be peace, and a concurrence of judgment about such a point
as this, even between those, who have many Irons of contention otherwise in the
fire, considering how obvious, and near at h^^d, the truth herein is. For 1.
if foreknowledge were Properly and formally in God, then might Predestination,
Election, Reprobation, and many other things be Properly and Formally in him
also; in as much as these are, in the Letter and Propriety of them, as
competible unto him, as foreknowledge. Nor can there be any reason given so^ a
difference. But unpossible it is, that there should be any Plurality of ^^ings
whatsoever, in their distinct and Proper natures, and formalities, in God, the
infinite, simplicity of his nature and being, with open mouth gainsaying it.
Secondly, if foreknowledge were Properly, or Formally in God, there should be
somewhat in him corruptible, or changeable. For that which is supposed to be
such a foreknowledge in him to day, by the morrow, suppose the thing, or event
foreknown, should in the interim actually come to pass, must needs cease, and
be changed; in as much as there can be no foreknowledge of things that are
present, the adequate and appropriate object of this knowledge, (in the
Propriety of it) being res futura* somewhat that is to come. Thirdly, (and
lastly) there is nothing in the Creature univocally and formally the same, Quid
est praescientia, nisi scientia futurorum? Aug. l. 2. ad Simpl. q. 2.
with any thing which is in God. The Reason is; because then, there must either
be somewhat finite in God, or somewhat infinite in the Creature: both which are
unpossible. But if Prescience or foreknowledge, being Properly and Formally in
the Creature, should be Properly and Formally also in God, there should be
somewhat in the Creature, univocally and formally the same, with somewhat,
which is in God. Therefore certainly there is no foreknowledge, properly so
called, in God.

If it be objected, that this argument lies as strong against the Propriety. 3.
of knowledge, as of foreknowledge, in God; in as much as knowledge, is every
whit as Properly and Formally in the Creature, as foreknowledge; I Answer,

True it is, there is no knowledge neither in God, according to the precise and
formal notion of knowledge, or in such a sense, wherein it is found in men.
And this the first and last of the three Reasons mentioned, do infallibly
demonstrate. Knowledge in the Creature is a Principle or habit, really and
essentially distinct from the subject, or soul, where it resideth: yea and is
capable of augmentation and diminution therein, and of separation from it.
Whereas that which is called knowledge in God, neither differs really, or
essentially from his nature, or from himself, but is really one and the same
thing with him (as will further appear in the following Chapter) nor is it
either capable of growth, or of decay, or of separation. Only in this respect,
knowledge, of the two, is more properly attributeable unto God, then
foreknowledge, viz. because foreknowledge, in the proper notion, or formal
conception of it, includes, or supposes a liablenesse to a change or
expiration ( viz. upon the coming to pass of the thing fore-knowne, which
must of necessity come to pass in time) whereas knowledge imports nothing, but
what may be Permanent and Perpetual, and so is (of the two) more appropriable
unto him, who changes not.

But though neither knowledge, nor foreknowledge, can in strictness and. 4.
formality of notion be ascribed unto God, yet since both the one and the other
are frequently in Scripture attributed unto him, necessary it is that we make
inquiry into the Grounds and Reasons of such attributions. For it is no ways
credible but that the Holy Ghost in all such expressions, did intend to inform
the World of somewhat, and that according to truth, concerning God. Now the
method and way (in general) whereby to discover, upon what grounds or Reasons
the Holy Ghost attributes such things unto God, which yet are not Formally or
Properly competible to him, and consequently what it is in God, of which, by
such expressions he desires to impart the knowledge unto us, is this; to
consider the Respective natures, the different manner of operation, the diverse
effects, or ordinary consequents, of those things, in the Creature, whet^^r
they be Actions, Passions, Habits, Parts, or whatsoever, which are upon such
terms attributed unto God. For still we shall find something or other
proceeding from God, or done by him, which holds proportion and correspondeth
with some, or other, one, or more, of the ordinary effects or consequents, of
those things in the Creature, which are so attributed unto him. And the intent
of the Holy Ghost in ascribing such things unto God, which are proper only to
the Creature, is, to make known to us, that the Divine Essence, or God himself,
has that eminently, after a transcendent and most perfect manner, in his
nature or being, which always inableth him, and (in respect of some
particulars,) upon occasion rendereth him actually willing, to express himself
in such kind of actions or effects, wherein the Creature is wont to express
it self upon occasion, out of, and by means of, such Principles, or
instruments of action (being in the Propriety, or Formality of their respective
natures, in them) which are ascribed unto God. As for example, to give the
World knowledge, that the Divine Nature can, and upon just occasion will, yea
and does many times, express it self after such a manner, and with such a
kind of effect, as men use to express themselves out of anger, as viz. by
Reproveing, Expostulating, Withdrawing themselves, Striking, Punishing, and the
like, the Holy Ghost often ascribes the Passion, or Impression of Anger, unto
God. There is the same consideration of all those other Creatureaffections, as
of Love, Zeal, Grief, Sorrow, Repentance, Delight, Mercy, Compassion, etc. And
so also of all those organicall parts or members of an humane body, as Eyes,
Ears, Hands, Heart, etc. which are so frequently in the Scriptures attributed
unto God. These respective attributions give the light of this knowledge of God
unto the World, that the Divine Nature, though most singly, simply, most
undividedly, and indivisibly One, is yet able out of the infinite perfection of
it, to act all that variety, and diversity of action and effect, which the
Creature is wont to act, out of such affections, and by means of such organs,
or members, respectively.

To come in to the particular in hand. The Scripture is wont to ascribe. 5.
knowledge unto God, to inform the World, that, what kind of contentment
soever men reap, or receive, by means of any knowledge of things, which they
have, and that what regular use, or advantage soever they make, or are capable
of making in any kind, of such Knowledge, God receives the like contentment
by, makes, when, and as he pleases, the same or the like use of the infinite
perfection of his nature or being. For example: men of knowledge, and of
understanding, so far as their knowledge extends, are free from errors,
mistakes, and other inconveniences, in reference to the things known, whereunto
men that are ignorant are exposed. Again, men that have knowledge of things,
are hereby according to the measure and extent of this knowledge, enabled to
manage and order their affairs to their best advantage, either in a way of
profit, or of Repute and Honor: yea and being otherwise furnished with
opportunity and means for such a purpose, to communicate and impart the same
light of knowledge unto others, which shines in, and to, themselves. In like
manner, knowledge, yea the knowledge of all things, 1 John 3. 20.
is in Scripture asserted unto God, not because he knows them after the same
specificall manner, or upon the same specificall terms, upon which men know or
understand, the things known by them (for as the Lord sees not as men sees 1 Samuel 16, 7
, so neither does he know, as man knows) but because, from, and by means of,
the infinite perfection of his Nature, 1. He injoyeth himself with a
scientificall contentment, (I mean, with such a kind of contentment, as
knowing men enjoy, or might enjoy, by means of their knowledge): and, 2.
Because by the same means, he is enabled to manage, order, and dispose of all
things, to the best advantage and improvement for his own glory, and for what
other end besides he pleases: and, 3. (and lastly) because he has an
opportunity also thereby, to impart the knowledge of what things soever he
pleases, unto his Creature.

By what has been said, it is no matter of difficulty, either to conceive,. 6.
or to declare, in what sense, or upon what ground, one, or more, the
Scriptures attribute prescience also, or foreknowledge, unto God. For look
what regular convenience, opportunity, or advantage in any kind, the
foreknowledge of things in men, affords unto them, the like does the infinite
perfection of the Divine Nature exhibit and afford unto him. Men who have the
certain foreknowledge that such and such things will come to pass at such,
or such a time, if they any ways relate unto them, or be capable of being
wrought to such a Relation, besides the inward contentment of such knowledge,
have an opportunity thereby, not only of making known before hand unto their
friends, or others, that at such a time such things will come to pass (for
this they may do, whether the things fore-knowne, do any ways concern them,
or no) and by this means gain the repute of being Prophetical, or otherwise
very understanding and discerning men; but also of contriving and ordering
other things in the mean time, so, and after such a manner, that the things
fore-knowne, when they come to pass, shall come to pass with more convenience
or advantage unto them, then otherwise they could have done. Upon such
considerations as these, the foreknowledge of things, yea of all things, that
are future, is by the Scriptures ascribed unto God; viz. Because thorough the
infinite perfection of his Essence and and Being; he, 1. Injoyes a delight or
contentment answerable to that, of fore-knowing men, by means of this their
knowledge. 2. He is able to impart before hand at what distance of time he
pleases, either to his Saints (his Friends) or others, such particularities,
of what is hid in the womb of time, as himself judges meet to be upon such
terms as these revealed. 3. (and lastly) he is able also providentially to
dispose of all such things to the best advantage, both for his own glory, and
the benefit of those, who shall be found worthy of this great interest in him.

From the Rule that has been given, and the explication made according. 7.
thereunto, for a right understanding, how, and in what sense, and upon what
grounds, both knowledge, and foreknowledge, are in Scripture transferred unto
God, a clear light shines, whereby to discover, how, and upon what gounds
also, Desires, Purposes, Intentions, or Decrees, in one kind or other, are by
the same authority vested in God: as likewise how they differ both from his
knowledge, and foreknowledge. That Desires, Intentions, Purposes, and Decrees,
as well as Knowledge, or foreknowledge, are only anthrope-pathetically
ascribed unto God, not formally, the former part of this Chapter (I presume)
has given the tantamont of many demonstrations. So that clearly and distinctly
to understand, how, and in what sense they are in Scripture, attributed unto
him, inquiry must be made, and consideration had, how they are wont to affect,
or engage men; after what manner, and upon what terms men are usually acted,
and drawn forth by them. Only before we come to the Explication hereof, this is
to be remembered, by way of caution, that though there always be (as has been
said) a Ground or Reason, one, or more, for that attribution of humane actions,
affections, members, etc. which the Scriptures so frequently make unto God,
which Reason is still founded in a certain Proportion or Similitude found
between the Nature of God, and the nature of man, in respect of the things so
attributed unto him; yet is it not necessary, that all things accompanying, or
relating unto those affections, or impressions in men, which are attributed
unto God, should be paralleled in him, or have something in his nature
corresponding to them. It is a sufficient ground or reason for the attribution,
if the humane affection, or impression attributed unto him, be, Similitudo non
currit quatuor Pedibus. Neque illa quae important intrinsecam perfectionem,
sunt tribuenda Deo proprie and formaliter, nec debemus consuetum modum loquendi
omnino cavere, cum de Divinis loquimur, si seclus^s imperfectionibus, and non
aliter, humana transferamus ad Deum. Arrib. Op. Council. l. 3. c. 9
in respct of any one particular appertaining to it in men, paralleled, or
analogized in the Nature of God; the Proverbiall maxim well admonishing, that
similitudes are not wont to run on all four; no, nor always on three, not yet
on two: they do service enough, if they stand well on one. To exemplify our
Caution in a particular or two: Anger, as it is incident unto, and sometimes as
it is inherent in, men, is obnoxious to be attended with unseemely behavior,
inconsiderate and unjust actions, etc. Yet it does not follow from hence, that
because God is said to be angry, therefore there is that in his nature, which
renders him obnoxious in either of these kinds. It is a sufficient ground of
the attribution of this Passion, or affection, unto him, that out of the
perfection of his simple Essence, or Nature, he does any thing upon occasion,
which is proper or frequent, for men, being angry, to do; as that he sharply
expostulates, or reproves, that he smites those who provoke him, with any
severe stroke of judgment, or the like, etc. So again* expectation in men is
always attended with an apprehension that the thing expected will indeed come
to pass; no man expecting that, which he knows certainly will never come to
pass; yet it does not follow from hence, that because expectation is ascribed
unto God, therefore he must not know but that the thing expected by him, will
come to pass. It is a sufficient ground of ascribing expectancy unto him, that
out of the perfection of his simple essence, or nature, he sometimes deporteth
himself, as men under expectation are wont to do, though it be but in some one
particular; as that he apprehends a probability or likelihood, in respect of
means, motives, and engagements, that the thing, which he is said to expect,
will come to pass; notwithstanding he certainly knows withal, that what he
is said in this kind to expect, will, all that probability or likelihood
notwithstanding, never come to pass. Instances hereof we have, Esa. 5. 2. 4.
7. Mat. 21. 37, 38, 39. etc. Take yet one example more for the better
understanding of the premised Caution. Purposes and intentions, where they are
in the letter, and in their Propriety* as in men, are always found in
conjunction with a supposall, that the things purposed or intended, shall, or
will, be effected; no man ever intending or purposing that, which he certainly
knows before hand never shall, or will, be effected. But it does not follow
from hence, that when Purposes or intentions are attributed unto God, they must
needs be thus attended; I mean, with a supposition, or expectance, that the
things said to be purposed or intended by him, shall, or will, come to pass.
Therefore that saying of Mr. Rutherford, Excercit. p. 224. Tenentur omnes
credere Deum omnipotentem sua intention excidere non posse (i. e. All men are
bound to believe, that God being Omnipotent, cannot fail of his intention) is
less considerate; yea, and defective in truth, without the help of some
further explication. If instead of intention, he had said, Decree, thus: All
men are bound to believe, that God, being Omnipotent, cannot fail, or fall
short in any Decree, so as not to be able to put it in execution, Reason and
Truth had greeted each other in such a saying. But God may be said (as we shall
see further anon) to purpose or intend things, in case he affords means that
are proper, and sufficient to bring them to pass, especially if he commands
them to be used accordingly; this being a dispensation of like consideration
and nature with the deportment of men, who are wont to provide a sufficiency of
means (at least so apprehended by them) for the effecting of what they purpose
or intend. So that to Reason thus: God intends not the salvation of all men,
because he certainly knows that all men will not be saved, no wise man ever
intending that, which he certainly knows beforehand shall never be effected,
is to reason weakly, and upon a false supposition; viz. that purposes and
intentions are attributed unto God in respect of all particulars, or under all
circumstances* wherewith they are accompanied in men: whereas such attributions
are sufficiently salved (as has been showed) in the Analogy and Similitude of
one Particular only.

Yet before we can conveniently come at our intended explication, how,. 8.
and in what respect, or sense, Desires, Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees, are
by Scripture assignment transferred upon God, necessary it is that the
difference between them in point of Signification and Propriety of import,
together with the signification of some other terms of near consideration with
them, be examined, and clearly stated. For that these words, Desire, Purpose,
Intention, and Decree, do not precisely signify one and the same thing, is
out of question: nor are they ascribed unto God in one, and the same
signification, or respect: though it is true, there is a word, frequently also
ascribed unto him (I mean, the word, will) which in the latitude of the
signification of it, comprehends them all; yea and some other too besides
these. For what God more properly may be said to Desire, he is in a more
general term, often said to, will: so again, what in more propriety and
strictness of expression, he might be said (and sometimes is said) to Purpose,
Intend, Decree, and to command or persuade unto, he is very frequently said to
WILL. So that this word, Will, when it is attributed unto God, must be
differenced in point of sense and signification, pro subjecta materia,
according to the different exigency of the context, and matter in hand, in such
places, where it is respectively used, (as we shall show presently.) But to the
four terms mentioned;

First, to desire, according to the Precise and strict import of the word, as.
9.
it is appropriable unto, and found in, men, signifies only an act of appetency
in the heart, or soul of a man, toward somewhat that is absent, whether in
respect of simple Being, or of Place only, and with all apprehended by the
Desirer, as connaturall and suitable unto him, either in respect of his own
Personal convenience and accommodation only, or the accommodation also of some
others, whom he wishes well unto. How it differs from the other three, will
plainly enough appear in the Progress. Secondly, to purpose, or intend (for
between these I conceive there is very little difference, if any at all, in
Point of signification) properly signifies such an act of the heart or soul,
by which they resolve or engage themselves to interpose and act toward the
effecting or bringing to pass, of the thing purposed or intended (being
always such a thing, which is apprehended good and convenient for them) so far
as they judge it meet, and agreeable to Principles of wisdom, and good
discretion. If there be any difference between them, it lies (I conceive)
rather in point of strength or degree, then in nature and kind; a purpose,
being an intention, in sieri (as the Schoolemens expression is) i. e. in the
making; and an intention, a purpose in facto esse, i. e. completely made. But
they are taken promiscuously the one for the other, and so may be, without any
inconvenience, as far as yet I apprehend. For the fourth and last of the four
words mentioned, Decree; this properly imports such an act of the heart or
soul, by which men resolve, determine, and conclude, to act to the uttermost
of their strength and might, for the bringing to pass, of the thing decreed,
which is still presumed to be somewhat, that is of grand concernment unto them
for good.

Now though the difference between, desires, purposes, intentions, and. 10.
decrees, be discernable enough, by their respective descriptions that have
been given, compared together; yet will it (I conceive) appear to more
satisfaction, by a dictinct assignement of their respective operations or
effects, which they produce in men. For, if the Tree be known by the fruit,
the difference of Trees, may be known by the difference of the fruits also.
First then, the simple desire of a thing, and as such, does not engage a man to
act at all toward the effecting or procurement of it: a purpose or intention,
ingageth unto action in this kind, but under Proviso's, and with limitation. A
Decree (strictly and properly so called) does not simply engage unto action,
for the bringing to pass of the thing decreed, but ingageth home, without any
Exception, Reservation, or Proviso, whatsoever, save only that of sufficiency
of Strength or Power, for matter of execution. A desire, if it be intense, and
raised to any height or strength, and the nature of the thing desired be such,
that the procurement of it lies, either in whole, or in part, within the Power
of the Desirer, and withal opposes not (in his apprehension) either the
Enjoyment, or Procurement, of somewhat more desirable unto him, always
advances into a purpose, or intention, of obtaining the thing so desired.
Otherwise, if it be either languishing, faint, and low, or the thing desired be
no ways, in no kind attainable by any thing the desirer can do; or if his
engagement for the obtainment of it, be conceived by him, as likely to
prejudice him in any other matter of greater moment; in all these cases the
desire subsists within it self, and advances not, neither into intention nor
action.

Secondly, desire, when it is boild up to a consistency, or fixed substance. 11.
of a Purpose, or Intention of obtaining the thing desired, by means of this
super-added act, or further impression upon the soul, being in conjunction with
it, it ingageth the Desirer, being now a Purposer and Intender likewise, to
act, and give out himself in the use of means for the obtaining of the thing
desired and intended, as far, as he judges it meet, and well-standing with the
rules of wisdom and discretion, for him to go. Only this is to be remembered,
that there is no man (at least no considering man) that so far desires any
thing, as to intend or purpose the obtaining of it, but that he so far ingageth
himself in the use of means for the procurement thereof, as he judges
reasonable and sufficient for such an attainment. If men do not advance such a
Proportion of means, which (in their own apprehensions at least) is sufficient
to compass what they purpose, or intend, it argues a vanity, or nullity
rather, in their intentions. But on the other hand, there is no ground or
reason to conclude from the non-assecution, or non-obtaining of a thing, yea
though a man has a sufficiency of Power in some kind to obtain it, that he
did not really and unfeignedly Purpose and intend the effecting of it. A man
takes a long journey to a person of quality, and in great place: the end and
intent of his journey, is to obtain a suite or courtesy at his hand. In his
addressement to him, he demeans himself with all respects of honor and
observance: uses many Reasons and Arguments of great weight to persuade and
overcome him. The Person sued unto stands off, and refuses to gratify the
Petitioner, unless he will submit to such and such terms, which are very
inconvenient and dishonorable to him. The Petitioner being a man of Conscience
and Honor, refuses the terms, and so returns ungratified in his motion. In
this case, though he might with making a breach upon his Conscience and Honor,
have obtained that, which he sued for, yet his non-obtaining it upon such
terms, does no ways argue, but that he really desired it, yea and purposed and
intended the obtaining of it, if it might have been procured upon meet and
honorable terms. Many Cases of like consideration might be put.

Thirdly and lastly, to Decree (in the strict and formal signification of. 12.
the Word; for otherwise, Purposes, and Decrees, sometimes interchange
significations) imports such an act of the mind and will of a man, whereby
he does not simply, or only Purpose or Intend the effecting of what he
desires, but this upon such terms, with such strength of intention an^
resolution, that it carries him against, and above, all possible intervention
of any disswasive circumstance whatsoever, one, or more, to the effecting
thereof. So that a Purpose or Intention, and a Decree, in strictness of notion
respectively, may be distinguished by their objects, thus: A Purpose, or
Intention, respects that which is desirable, yet not simply and absolutely
desirable, but upon such and such terms, under such and such circumstances: a
Decree respects that which is simply and absolutely desirable, and from the
Prosecution whereof a man ought not to be taken off by any consideration
whatsoever. We speak now of regular Purposes and Decrees, and such which are
conceived and taken up by men according to Principles of sound judgment and
understanding.

By the tenor and manuduction of these things, which are evident and. 13.
unquestionable, we may come readily, and steadily to conceive and understand,
how, and in what sense, Desires, Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees, are, and
may be, ascribed unto God. First it is considerable, that Desires, and Purposes
or Intentions, are never separated in God: he never desires any thing, but
what he purposes or intends to effect. The reason is, because whatsoever he
apprehends suitable to him, and of tendency to his glory, which is the
adequate object of his Desire, he always interesseth himself to effect.
Matters relating unto his glory, being the only object of his Desires,
unpossible it is that any of these should be so weak, or faint, as not to
advance and rise up into a purpose and intention, and consequently, into
action; especially considering, 1. That there is nothing which concerns his
glory, but which lies within the compass of his Power to effect, and 2. That
by reason of his infinite wisdom, being in conjunction with a Power every ways
commensureable to it, he is able so to manage all the concernments of his
glory, as not to prejudice himself in any, in, or by the Prosecution of others.
But,

Secondly, though desires, and purposes, or intentions, cannot be separated in
God, yet intentions or purposes, and decrees, may. God does not always decree
the effecting, of what he purposes, or intends to effect, though he always
purposes and intends to effect, what he decrees. The reason why he does not
always decree to effect, what he purposes or intends to effect, is; because
he judges it meet to act only to a certain degree of efficiency, for the
effecting and obtaining of some things; by which if he cannot effect or obtain
them, he judges it not meet to act any further, or higher, in order thereunto.
But because he never acts for, or toward, the effecting of any thing, but
with a due and full sufficiency of means (the whole course and compass of his
efficiency in this kind taken together) he may well and truly be said to
purpose and intend, whatsoever he ingageth himself to effect, though with the
lowest degree of efficiency, wherein at any time, and in reference to any end,
he appears.

If you ask me, but what are the things in Particular, or any of them,. 15.
which God may be said to Purpose or Intend, and yet not to Decree? I Answer,

1. In general; they are all such things, for the Procurement and effecting
whereof he vouchsafes means, and these sufficient (for he never starveth his
ends for want of means, as has been often, in effect, said) and yet the things
themselves many times are not obtaine^, nor ever come to pass: in which
respect he cannot be said to Decree them, because his Decree (according to the
Proper notion of the Word, formerly opened) carries all before it against, and
above, all opposition and contradiction whatsoever, and never fails to bring
forth.

2. (In Particular) the Faith, and Repentance of all men, the honest and
upright lives of all men, and consequently the Peace, Happiness, and salvation
of all men, are some of the Principal of the Particulars inquired after. For,
1. Evident it is, that God interposeth and vouchsafes means for the effecting
and procurement of all these, (of which more hereafter) in which respect
(according to the grounds laid) he must needs be said to purpose or intend
them. And yet 2. Every whit as evident it is, that these things are not
effected or obtained, nor ever will: in which respect they cannot be said to be
Decreed by God, according to the Proper notion of a Decree, often specified.

To draw up a full and clear account from the Particulars argued, (with. 16.
as much brevity as may be) how, in what sense, and upon what grounds, Desires,
Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees, are attributed in Scripture unto God; First
(in the negative) that none of them are attributed unto him up on any such
ground or supposition as this, viz. as being Properly or Formally in him, i. e.
after such a manner as they are in men; really distinct, and separable from his
Nature or Being, has been already asserted, and that (I suppose) with a nemine
contradicente. Therefore secondly, in direct pursuance of our Preparatory
instructions formerly also delivered in order to the business in hand, the
said four Particulars must be acknowledged, as attributed unto God upon this
ground; viz. Because the infinite Perfection of his Nature and Being, enableth,
yea and leads him to act, and give out himself after some such manner, and
with such a kind of efficiency (reasonable allowance being made for the great
disproportion between him, and the Creature) as the said Particulars ( Destres,
Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees) being found in men, are wont to engage them
unto. So that 1. God is said to desire, or will, such and such things, because
the goodness of his Nature leads him, to act and give out himself, and to
vouchsafe means, for the bringing of them to pass; it being an essential
Property of desire in men, 1. When it is cordial and strong (as all Gods
Desires are, as it was formerly Proved:) and 2. When men have opportunity to act
for the obtaining of the thing desired (which God always has:) 3. And lastly,
when their acting for the obtaining of the thing desired, is not like to hinder
them from obtaining another thing more desirable then that (a case never
incident unto God, in respect of any thing desired by him, as has also lately
been showed) it being (I say) in this case, and under these circumstances, an
essential Property of desire in men, to engage them unto action for the
obtaining of the thing desired. Because whenever men act, or endeavor
themselves in any kind to bring a thing to pass, they are always presumed to
desire the thing, or the coming of it to pass; therefore God also, according
to Scripture Dialect and Phrase, may be said to desire, whatsoever he any ways
interposeth himself, or gives means, to bring to pass.

Secondly, there is the same consideration and ground also, of Purposes. 17.
and Intentions attributed unto him. He is therefore said to Purpose and Intend
such and such things, because his Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, i. e. The
infinite Perfection of his Nature, which eminently contains all these;
enableth and induces him to act for, or toward, the attainement of them,
after such a kind of manner, and upon such terms, according to which, men (I
mean, sober and well advised men) are wont to act and engage themselves for
the assecution of such things, which they Purpose and Intend. How, and upon
what terms such men are wont to act in order to the obtaining of things
Properly Purposed and Intended by them, and not absolutely Decreed, was lately
declared; viz. so far, and to such a degree of engagement, as they judge
convenient and meet, consideration being had, of the value, worth, and
consequence, of the things Purposed and Intended by them, in case they be
obtained. Therefore to conclude Gods non-intendments from his non-attainments,
is a reasoning of no value; and supposes a non-difference between his Purposes
or Intentions, and Decrees; between which notwithstanding (as has been showed)
there is a very emphaticall and signal difference. The reason why God ingageth
not himself to the actual assecution of all things purposed and intended by
him, shall (God willing) be argued in due Time and Place.

Thirdly and lastly, God is also said to Decree such and such things, because.
18.
the infinite Perfection of his Nature and Being, inclines him to act and
engage himself for the effecting of them, after such a manner, and upon such
terms, as men are wont to engage themselves for the actual Performance and
bringing to pass, of what they decree. What this manner, and what these terms
are, we have already showed. What men properly determine, or decree, they
engage to the uttermost of their might to put in execution and perform, if no
lower rate of engagement will do the deed. In like manner, God, is, and well
may be, said to Decree such things, the execution and effecting whereof he
suspendeth upon no condition, or consideration whatsoever, one, or more: but
declares himself as one resolved to give being unto them in their respective
seasons, whatsoever Angels, Men, Devils, or any other Creature, shall either
do, or not do. In this sense, and upon this ground, he may be said to have
decreed, that all men once shall die; that all men shall be raised from the
dead; that men dying in the Lord, or in the Faith of Jesus Christ, shall be
everlastingly blessed; that men dying in their sins, or in unbelief, shall be
eternally accursed; to omit other Particulars without end of like
consideration. Only I desire to re-minde the Reader of this: that though we
have in our present discourse exactly differenced Purposes or Intentions, from
Decrees, according to the strict importance of the words, and precise Notion of
the things themselves, yet may not this difference be always so observed,
either by other Writers, or by the Scriptures themselves, but that the terms
may be sometimes put indifferently the one for the other: yea and the things
themselves be expressed and held forth by such Words and Phrases of speech,
which will equally admit of either signification; yet as to the Scriptures,
hardly (I presume) can any instance be found, where either the context, or the
subject matter in hand, will not clearly determine the case; I mean, whether
it be a Purpose, or a Decree, according to the regular Notion of either, (as
they have been distinguished) which the Holy Ghost there intends.

Before we pass from the subject in hand, it will not be amiss (I suppose).
19.
to take a more perfect knowledge, of what was intimated before; viz. That all
the four Particulars, Desires, Purposes, Intentions, and Decrees, yea and more
then these, in their respective attributions unto God, are frequently in
Scripture expressed by THE WILL of God. Joh. 5. 21. Christ is said to quicken
whom he will, i. e. whom he desires, or intends, to quicken. See also. Joh.
6. 38. 17. 24. Whereas it is said, Joh. 6. 39. And this is the Fathers WILL
that has sent me, etc. and again, ver. 40. And this is the WILL of him that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life; evident it is, that the Decree, or decreeing WILL of God is
meant. See also Ephesians. 1. 5. 9. 11. and elsewhere. The Apostle Paul, speaking
thus of God, who WILL have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. and Peter, that he is willing that all should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. speak plainly not of Gods decreeing WILL, but of his
purposing or desiring. WILL? But of these Scriptures more hereafter. Other
significations of this word, will, when attributed unto, or spoken of God,
which are diverse, besides those specified upon the present occasion, we shall
not now insist upon.

For a close to this Chapter, let us from the grounds Pre-asserted herein,. 20.
take into consideration, the difference between the knowledge, or
foreknowledge of God, and the Intentions, or Decrees of God. Therefore (not to
repeat, but to build upon, Premised Principles and Discussions) First, as the
knowledge, and foreknowledge of God are differenced by their objects, the
object of his knowledge being far more large and comprehensive, then the object
of his foreknowledge, the one extending to all things whatsoever, Past,
Present, and to Come, yea to all possibilities of things; the other, only to
things that are future, and yet to come; so likewise both the knowledge and
foreknowledge of God taken together, are plainly distinguished from his
Intentions and Decrees, by the greater latitude and extent (...) object; yea,
the object of the foreknowledge of God, which (as ha(...) said) is far
narrower, then the object of his Knowledge, is yet far larger and more
comprehensive, then the object either of his Intentions, or Decrees. The object
of his Decrees extends only to such things, which (as was formerly argued)
himself purposes to effect, or give being unto, without any Exceptions or
Proviso's concerning any possible interventions whatsoever. The object of his
Intentions or Purposes, extends to such things only, which he desires and
intends to give being also unto, but with condition and limitation* So that
the utmost border and extent of the respective objects of the Purposes, and
Decrees of God, reaches but unto such things only, about the Production and
Procurement whereof himself intends Operativenesse and Positivenesse of action,
or efficiency: whereas the limit of the object of his foreknowledge, extends
unto all things whatsoever, that are future, and takes in, as well such things
which his soul abhors, and therefore will not lift up his hand unto, I mean,
the sinful actions of the Creature, as those, which himself intends to call
and bring into being.

If you demand a reason, why I make this difference between the object of. 21.
the knowledge and foreknowledge of God on the one hand, and the object of his
Intentions and Decrees on the other, extending the one to all things future,
without exception; restraining the other, to such future things only, wherein
God himself means to be active; my Reason and Answer is this (according to
fore-laid grounds;) men generally do know, and commonly foreknow, many things,
for, or toward the Production or procurement whereof, they intend no
contribution of aid, strength, or means in any kind, viz. when they are such,
that their coming to pass, and their not coming to pass, are but of equal
and indifferent concernment to them, as knowing how to make the same benefit or
use, of the one, and of the other. Whereas some other things there are, the
effecting whereof, or at least the attempting and endeavoring whereof, is of
special concernment unto them. Now things of this latter consideration, are
the object of men's Desires, Intentions and Decrees, and they purpose to be
active about the bringing of them to pass, whereas matters of the former, are
the object of their knowledge, and foreknowledge, only; and (happily) of their
Providence, if as well their coming to pass, as their not coming to pass, be
contriveable by them into any matter of benefit, or advantage. In like manner,
the sins, and wicked ways and actions of men, may be called the object of the
Knowledge, and Foreknowledge, yea and of the Providence of God, as well as his
own most just and holy dispensations, because through the infinite Perfection
of his Nature and Being, he is enabled, 1. To declare, or Pre-declare as he
pleases; and 2. Both enabled and actually resolved, to dispose, and
Pre-dispose, of them to the best advantage for his own glory, as well as if he
formally knew, or fore-knew them: whereas notwithstanding he neither was, nor
is, nor ever intends to be, operative, in, or about the bringing of them to
pass, in as much as their non coming to pass would have been of the same
consequence unto him for the advancement of his glory, as their coming to
pass, is, or can be. For (doubtless) God is not so poorly or meanly
provided, in, and of himself, for the exaltation of his Name and Glory, as to
stand in need of the dunghill of sin to make a footstool for him whereby to
ascend into his Throne. If the goodness and righteousness of men be nothing
unto God, profit not him Psalm. 16. 2. Job. 35. 7. 3.
, much less can the sins of men claim part and fellowship in such a
business. So then the sins of men, being only known and fore-knowne by God,
and contriveable to his glory, but no ways requisite or necessary hereunto;
may well be looked upon as the object (I mean, the partial object) of the
knowledge, and foreknowledge, yea and of the Providence of God, but not of his
Desires, Intentions, or Decrees. Whereas his own dispensations, with their
Natural and Proper fruits and consequents being intrinsecally, and with a
direct tendency, of sovereigne and high concernment for his glory, may safely,
and with the best consistency of reason and truth, be looked upon, as the
object, not of his knowledge or foreknowledge only, but of his Desires,
Intentions and Decrees also.

CHAP. IIII.
Concerning the Perfection of God, in his Nature and Being, and some things
clearly deducible from it: Particularly, his Simplicity, Actuality, and
goodness in Decrees.

ANd this is life eternal, that they (or, that men) know thee the only true. 1.
God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, (says the Lord Christ,
himself in that most solemn supplicatory address unto his Father, recorded,
Joh. 17. yet not for his Fathers instruction, but his Childrens.) What
knowledge Verse. 3.
of himself it is, either for kind, quality, or degree, which Jesus Christ
here joyneth with the knowledge of God, as, together with it, constituting and
making up one entire cause or means of salvation, unto the Creature; or with
what kind of necessity he supposes the conjunction of that knowledge of
himself, which he intends, with the knowledge of God, to be necessary to that
great end and purpose, as whether with an absolute, or an expedientiall and
accumulative necessity only, we shall not for the present inquire, much less,
determine. This (I presume) will be granted upon demand only, without Proof;
that as the true knowledge of Christ does necessarily include, or presuppose,
the like knowledge of God; so does such a knowledge of God, as our Savior here
describes, the knowing of him to be the only True God, comprehend in it an
implicit, or vertuall knowledge of Christ also. This might be brought into a
clear light by the helping hand of the Scriptures, but that the contemplation
of it is a little eccentricall to our present design. However, let those who
doubt, consult these Oracles (with their fellows) Joh. 14. 1. Joh. 5. 23.
Psalm. 9. 10. Jer. 9. 23, 24. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. besides many
others.

But what is it to know God, or God the Father, (...). the. 2.
only True God? First, to know God, or the Father, the only True God, may admit
of a double construction, or meaning: either, 1. As if the truth of this
Proposition, God, or God the Father, is the only true God, were the terminus,
or intended object of the knowledge here spoken of: or 2. As if God the Father
his Being the only True God, were presupposed to this knowledge, and some
further Particulars concerning him, the object hereof. The former sense has
both most men, and (doubtless) most reason also, to plead for it. For when
God, is perfectly known to be the only true God, there is very little, or
nothing more left to be known concerning him. Therefore, 2. to know God, or God
the Father, the only, or the alone true God, is (I conceive) 1. To know [viz.
upon substantial and demonstrative grounds] that his Nature or Being every
ways answers the true and regular Notion of a God, i. e. That he is infinitely
Gracious, infinitely Wise, infinitely Just, infinitely Powerful, infinitely
Blessed, infinite in all manner of Excellency and Perfection; and all this in
the most absolute simplicity of Essence, without any Plurality, Multiplication,
or Composition in what kind, or of what things, soever: and on the other hand,
that there is nothing in him, in one kind or other, in one consideration, or
other, which reason duly informed, and judging like it self, can think unmeete
or unworthy to be found in a true God. This is to know God, or God the Father,
to be a True God. 2. To know him to be the only true God, implies further a
like knowledge that there is no other Nature or Being whatsoever, but his, or
that wherein he partakes, that in Excellency or Perfection in any kind is
equal unto His, or either Formally, or Vertually, the same with His.

That God is perfect, is one of the Philosophers (...), of those common. 3.
impressions of light, or inbred Principles of Reason, wherewith Nature (in
their language) or God himself (in the Dialect of Christians) upon the account
of Christ's Merit and Mediation (in which respect it is attributed unto him
also, Joh. 1. 9.) enlighteneth every man that comes [or, (...), as he
comes, or, comming] into the World. The united light of which Principles, or
Impressions, is said ver. 4. to be that life of men, i. e. The means of that
life of men, or the means whereby men were to attain that life, which is there
said to have been in Christ [viz. as in a fountain of merit, or as in a
designed purchaser] for them. For the meaning of the latter clause of this
Verse, (...), which our English rendereth, and the life was the light of men,
is (I conceive, with submission) this, or to this effect; viz. that that life
and salvation, which Christ, in reality of design, and with semblable
acceptance in the (...) of God, had from the beginning purchased by his Death
for men, did, or do^^ (as it were) in the first break, or dawning of it,
appear, and discover it self in those Principles of natural Light, Reason,
Judgment, Conscience, Understanding, etc. which are found in the generality of
men upon their coming into the World; these being granted and given unto them
by God for that great and blessed end and purpose, viz. that by them they might
be made capable of attaining that life and Salvation, which was procured and
purchased for them by Christ^ and intended to be really conferred upon them,
upon their believing, and continuance therein unto the end: though it is true,
that men generally as they grow up in the World, convert these Principles of
light and understanding to other uses, and not to those, for which they are
given them; as viz. to make provision for the flesh for the fulfilling of the
lusts thereof, and not to the obtaining of that life and happiness, which is
in Christ for them; as foolish Children, which fall to play, or quarrel
amongst themselves, by the opportunity of that Candle, which their Parents
allow them for their studies and books. Yea men generally do not only
mis-spend those Talents of light we speak of, about the impertinencies of this
present World, but partly through an un-manlike oscitancy and
inconsiderateness, partly out of an inordinate Propensity to comport with the
World without any fear or sense of danger hereby, suffer their judgments and
understandings to be corrupted, adulterated, imbased and abused by many false
and foolish Principles and Notions, which turn them quite aside from a regular
and due prosecution of that Life and Salvation, which is in Christ for them,
and might have been obtained by them; yea and subject them to a sad incapacity
of the things of their Peace, when they are proposed with the greatest Evidence
and Power unto them. Insomuch that though the Life, which was in Christ, is
said to be the light of men; yet it immediately follows, that the light
shines in darkness, [i. e. The Doctrine of Life and Salvation is clearly
Preached to an ignorant World] and the darkness comprehended it not. [i. e.
That ignorance, or incapacity rather, of the things of eternal life, which men
have voluntarily contracted and brought upon themselves, is fo exceeding great
and strange, that they understand little or nothing of this Doctrine so
Preached unto them.] But this occasionally only, and by the way. As to the
Work in hand; doubtless there was never any man touched with any competent
sense, or enlightened with any tolerable Notion of a Deity, that ever put it to
the question in himself, whether God was perfect, or no. All men (says
Aristotle in his Metaphysiques) without any demur or delay, ascribe that unto
God, which they conceive to be most perfect. And indeed, that very Sense and
Notion of God, which Nature prompteth her Children with (though many of them
are dull of hearing in this kind) does not admit of any thing looked upon as
defective, or imperfect, within the Verge of it.

Therefore having so firm, and so generally-approved a foundation to build
upon, as the perfection of God, let us see what it affords unto us by way of.
4.
evident deduction, toward the advancement of our great design, the magnifying
of God in his gracious intendments of salvation unto all men, without
exception, in, or by the Death of Christ.

First, if the Nature, Essence, and Being of God be most perfect, then must it
needs be most simple, most entirely, absolutely, and perfectly one, not
admitting any Plurality, or Composition whatsoever. The reason of this is
plain: because all Plurality and Composition, whether of Parts, or of Natures,
suppose imperfection. For if any one of these Parts, or Natures, were perfect,
absolutely or infinitely perfect, it were able to do whatsoever is necessary,
yea or possible to be done (for without this there is no simple or absolute
perfection) and then what need were there of any thing more to be added unto
it, or joined with it? That a man has Ears, as well as Eyes, and Eyes, as
well as Ears: and so, Hands, as well as Feet, and Feet, as well as Hands,
clearly proves, that no one of these members are simply and absolutely perfect,
i. e. can do or perform, and this with a like comeliness and convenience,
whatsoever is necessary to be done and performed by man: for then all the rest
should be superfluous. They may all be perfect in their kind, i. e. with a
determinate and limited perfection, and in order to such, or such, a particular
action and service, and yet one stand in need of another (as the Apostle
speaks:) but if any one of them were simply and absolutely perfect, i. e.
could do all things whatsoever, upon the same terms of convenience, which both
it self, and all the rest can do together, certainly all the rest were
needless. So if an Angel could understand by his mere Essence or Substance of
his Nature, without any endowment or gift of understanding distinct therefrom;
or could perform any other action, or do any execution immediately by his
Essence, without the intervening of those Natural endowments or qualities of
Strength, Power, Activenesse, etc. all these endowments and appendices to his
Nature and Essence, would be merely superfluous. The necessity which the Angels
have of Wisdom, Knowledge, Reason, Strength, etc. over and besides their mere
Essences and Beings, plainly declares and shows, these Essences and Beings
of theirs to be unperfect (I mean, in respect of a simple and absolute
perfection) and that they stand in need of such additionall Properties and
Endowments, as we speak of, to make them perfect even in their own kind. Nor is
it indeed possible for God to make any such Creature (or to speak somewhat more
properly, no such Creature can possibly be made) which shall be able to act or
work immediately by its Essence, or otherwise then by the mediation of some
Virtue, Property, or Quality, in one kind or other, inherent therein; it being
the glorious and incommunicable property and prerogative of the Divine Essence
or Being it self, so to work. So then this absolute and infinite simplicity of
the Nature of God supposed, as without which he cannot be absolutely and
infinitely perfect, it plainly follows,

First, that all those attributes of God (commonly so called) as Wisdom,. 5.
Knowledge, Justice, Mercy, Goodness, Power, etc. and so all those Passions
and Affections, as of Anger, Grief, Repentance, Love, Hatred, etc. Deo idem
est esse, and fortem esse, vel sapientem esse, vel justum esse, and si quid de
illa simplici multiplicitate, vel multiplici simplicitate dixeris, quo
substantia ejus signific^tur. Aug. de Trin. l. 6. c. 4.
And again, all those Parts, or Members, as Eyes, Ears, Hands, Feet, Mouth,
etc. which are so frequently attributed unto him in the Scriptures, are all one
and the same thing in God, though they be very different things in men: nor is
any one of them, nor all of them together, any other thing, but only his
single, simple, and pure Essence. But therefore all this variety and diversity,
both of Attributes, Affections, and Parts, is attributed unto him, because by
means of this one simple and single Essence, being infinitely perfect, he can,
when he pleases, and pleases, when he judges meet, give forth himself, and
act all that variety and diversity of action, which these different Principles
are wont to produce in men. As for example; a man that has wisdom, is able to
act, and does act when he pleases, in a regular proportion, or due order unto
his ends. So a man that has knowledge, whether of things past, present, or to
come, being wise withal, manageth and disposes his affairs according to the
exigency of such knowledge, and with the best advantage, that such knowledge
affords unto him. A man that is just, does things that are just and equal: and
so he that is angry, frowns, threatens, or strikes: he that loves, does good
unto, and kindly by those, who are loved of him: he that hates, acts to the
prejudice or hurt of the person hated, when he has opportunity; and so in the
rest. Now because God out of the infinite perfection of his Nature, though it
be (as has been said) most singly and simply one, is yet able to act, and does
act, when he pleases, all this variety of action, acts as wise men act, as men
that have knowledge of things act, as men that are angry, as men that love, as
men that hate, are wont to act, etc. Therefore all these Principles of action,
as Wisdom, Knowledge, Anger, Love, Hatred, etc. are by the Holy Ghost ascribed
unto him. Suppose there were in Physique such a simple, as (for example) an
Herb, Root, Drug, Mineral, or the like, which had such a precious or sovereign
virtue in it, that the use of it were a certain cure of all diseases, as Gout,
Stone, Fever, Apoplexy, etc. and further, that there were particular Medicines
or Receipts besides appropriated to every disease respectively, and were all of
them sufficient to cure their appropriated diseases; in this case, that simple
we speak of, might be said to have the several virtues of all those other
Medicines or Receipts, in it, because it is able to do alone, as much, and as
many things (in a medicinal way) as all those taken together: yet can it not
be said to have the virtue of any one of them in the specificall or formal
Nature of it, but only eminently, i. e. in respect of that sovereign Property,
which, though it be simply and formally but one, yet answers in value, worth,
and variety of operation, unto all the several virtues, and healing properties
in all those other Receipts. In like manner all that great variety of
Faculties, Powers, Properties, Virtues, Endowments, Excellencies, and all
Principles of action whatsoever, that are scattered in their proper and
distinct Natures amongst the Creatures, may be attributed unto God, though not
so much as any one of them be properly and formally in him; viz. because there
is that sovereign and super transcendent perfection in his Nature, being but
simply, and most singly one, which for Power and variety of action in every
kind, answers them all* yea and far exceeds them also.

Secondly, from the simplicity of the Nature of God, as it has been argued. 6.
and explained, it clearly follows, that love and hatred, and so mercy and
justice, or severity, in God, toward his Creature, do not argue any different
affection, or inclination in him toward it (the simplicity of his Nature not
admitting of any such difference) but only a different dispensation (answerable
to the different effects, or expressions, of such Principles in men.) So that
there is no inconvenience nor untruth in it at all, to affirm that God at one
and the same time, may both hate and love, and so again, love and hate, the
same Person; viz. in respect of several dispensations of a contrary Nature and
import. As for example; when he severely punishes a godly Person, for some
sin, or sins, committed, and yet withal continues such a measure of his Grace
or good Spirit unto him, whereby he is enabled still to believe in God, and to
love him, his fore affliction notwithstanding; in respect of this latter
dispensation, God may be said to love; and in respect of the former to hate him.

If it be demanded; but can God in any sense be said to hate a Person that is
godly? I answer, that hatred in God, importing, not matter of affection, but of
dispensation only agreeable to the effects of hatred in men; to deny that God
can in any sense be said to hate a godly Person, is to deny that he can punish
him for sin, or act to the prejudice of his Comfort and Peace in any kind,
howsoever he provokes him.

If it be yet said; but the Scripture will not justify or warrant any such
assertion as this, that God ha^eth a godly Person. I answer,

1. By concession, that the Scripture does not indeed (to my best remembrance)
justify or warrant such a saying, by way of example, or samenesse of
expression. But

2. (By way of exception) I answer, that the Scripture warranteth many things
by way of reason or ground, which it does not warrant, either by Example,
Precept, or otherwise then by ground, as is famously known in the case of
Infant Baptism, and of women's admission to the Lords Table. Now where ever,
either the Perfection or Simplicity of God is asserted in the Scriptures,
whether expressly, or by way of consequence (as both the one and the other
frequently are) there is a sufficient ground laid, to warrant, both truth, and
also aptness enough of expression in such a saying as this, that God may be
said both to Love, and to hate the same Person, yea, and both these at one and
the same time (as has been sufficiently explained.)

Thirdly and lastly, from the Simplicity of the Nature of God, the Truth 7.
of that common maxim in Divinity, Quicquid est in Deo, Deus est, i. e.
whatsoever is in God, is God, is fully demonstrable: and consequently that
neither from eternity was there any thing, neither for the present is there any
thing, nor ever shall be any thing in him to eternity, inferior to himself, any
thing which is not God. And if so, then both the justification of men from
eternity, and so the condemnation of men from eternity, are but idle fancies,
with which some men, partly through weakness, partly through
inconsiderateness, commit spiritual fornication. Yea, though I will not say
that any of the Persons, who hold either of these opinions, do blaspheme; yet
the opinions themselves narrowly examined, will not be found innocent from this
great offense: in as much as both the one and the other, do apparently give the
honor of the glorious God in his incommuicable attribute of eternity, a part
ante (as Divines call it) to weak and contemptible Creatures, men: they make
these co-eternall with God, and to subsist from Eternity. For that which is
not, can neither be justified, nor condemned.

If it be demanded (in favor of these opinions) but had not men some. 8.
kind of being, or subsistence, from eternity? were they not in the Mind of
God, and present with him, after some such manner, as the Idea, or model of an
house is in the mind of the Architect, before there be so much as a stone of it
laid?

To this I answer (according to the tenor of what has been lately argued and
proved concerning the simplicity of the Divine Essence) that if they had any
being from eternity, it could be none other then the Divine Being it self: for
there were no plurality of beings from eternity. All beings, without
beginnings, may be numbered by the figure of one, and this unmultiplied.
Therefore if God justified any from eternity, it must be himself: if he
condemned or reprobated any from eternity, it must be himself likewise. No^ can
men be said to have been in the mind of God from eternity, after any such
manner, as the Idea or Platform of an house is in the mind of the Artificer,
before he begins to build: because such an Idea is no part of the Artificer,
nor yet of his mind, but is clearly separable from both; whereas there was
nothing in God from eternity but his own Essence, and that which is altogether
inseparable from him. Or if it should be granted, that men were in God, or in
the mind of God, from eternity, after such a manner as is contended for; yet
could it not be said that men, men themselves, i. e. those Creatures, which
consist of bodies and souls, and have sinned on Earth, were either justified or
condemned from eternity, but only their Idea's or representations in the mind
of God. Yet how, or in what Sense, or Notion, these should be said, to be
either justified, or condemned, when as they never sinned, nor are capable of
sinning, is out of the reach of my understanding to conceive.

If it be yet further demanded, but were not men (and all things besides). 9.
in some consideration, or sense, in God, from eternity; and may it not be
said, that in this sense, whatever it be, they were some justified, and some
condemned? I answer,

1. (By concession) that men, and all things besides, were in God from eternity
tanquam in font, seu radice, vel causa productiva, i. e. as in the fountain,
root, or Productive cause of their respective beings. There is nothing capable
of receiving an existence, or actual being, but what had a Potentiall or
seminall Being in some Productive cause or other, one, or more, before.
Therefore if this Universe, with all the Parts and Members of it, had not been
in God, as in the Productive Cause, doubtless they had never been produced, or
received being. But

2. I answer further (by way of exception) that men, considered in that being,
which they had in God from eternity, were no ways capable, either of
justification, or of condemnation, or of any such difference or distinction
between them, as these two acts, or conditions, infer. For as God himself, the
common root, or producent cause of all men, was one, singly, simply, and most
undividedly one, from eternity, so were all men singly, and simply one in him;
all alike holy, all alike innocent, and free from sin: and consequently all
alike beloved of him, all being yet nothing but himself. It cannot be said of
the Roses, which in the winter time were vertually and seminally in one and the
same root, that some of them flourished and prospered, others, were blasted or
eaten up with Worms, whilst they were together in the root; though
afterward, when they come to receive actual Production, and to subsist extra
causas, respectively, this difference may very possibly befall them.

Yea, but were not some men justified, and others condemned, in the Counsel,.
10.
Purpose, and Decree of God, from eternity? I answer;

(If the meaning of the Question be only this, whether God from eternity did
not Purpose, or Decree, to justify some men, and condemn others) that God
from eternity did Purpose and Decree, to justify in time all those, who should
in time believe; and to condemn all those, who living to years of discretion,
should die in their unbelief: yet these Decrees, though in their respective
executions they make a great difference indeed between Persons, and Persons,
yet in their making or enacting by God, they made none at all. This Decree of
God, whosoever believes, shall be justified, does neither make, nor suppose,
any one man, any whit nearer, either to believing, or to justification, then
another: nor on the other hand does this Decree, He that believes not, shall be
condemned, either make, or suppose, one man nearer, either to unbelief, or
condemnation through unbelief, then another. A Law that is made for the
punishing of Murder, or Adultery, with death, relates no more, in the intention
of the Lawmakers, at the time of the making or enacting of it, to one man,
then to another. i. e. they intended no more the punishment, or death, of one
man, then of another, (personally considered;) much less did they intend to
make any man, or to permit any man to become, a Murderer, or Adulterer, by the
enacting of such a Law, but the contrary: yet this Law, when it comes to be put
in execution for the crimes made punishable by it, and voluntarily committed by
men, makes as great a difference between men, and men (and somewhat greater) as
is between the living, and the dead.

If the meaning of the Question last propounded be, whether God did not. 11.
from eternity Decree the justification of such and such particular men by
Name; and so the condemnation of others, after the same manner; I answer, that
(doubtless) he did from eternity Decree, equivalently, though not formally,
the justification of all those particular Persons by Name, who in time come to
be justified; and so again, the condemnation of all those by Name, who in time
come to be condemned. My meaning is, that no particular Person, whatsoever his
Name be, who comes to be justified, but his justification flows from that
Decree of God from eternity, wherein he decreed to justify all those by their
Names, who should believe. For had not God made such a Decree as this (and make
it he must from eternity, if he made it at all) certainly no man could ever be
justified upon such terms. In like manner God from eternity Decreed the
condemnation of all such particular Persons, whatever their Names be, who
living to maturity of years, should die in unbelief. In this sense and
consideration, and in this only (as far as yet I apprehend) God may be said to
have Decreed, both the justification, and the condemnation of particular men,
and women, from eternity. viz. because he made two such Decrees from eternity,
by the one of which, all particular Persons come to be justified, who ever are
justified; and by the other, all particular Persons to be condemned, who are
condemned. But we shall have opportunity to argue the unsoundnesse of both the
opinions, especially of the latter, upon other grounds: in reference whereunto
we supersede any further inquiry into them for the present.

Secondly, if God in his Nature, or Essence, be simply, absolutely, and. 12.
infinitely perfect, then must he needs be a most pure and simple act, without
any potentiality at all: i. e. he must needs be actually, Et de praesenti (as
they say) and so have been from eternity, whatsoever he is capable of being, or
whatsoever it is possible for him ever to be. The reason of this, is, because
all potentiality, or possibility of being any thing more, or any thing besides,
what a Person, or thing, is, for the present, argues imperfection: which is
clearly proved thus. Whatsoever it is possible for a Person (or thing) to be,
which at present he is not, must needs be something, which will either add unto
his being, and make it better: or else take away from his being, and so make it
worse: or else be a thing merely indifferent, and so of no concernment unto him
at all. So then, if a man be capable of being any thing, which yet he is not,
for the bettering of his condition, it is a clear case that his present
condition, or being, is unperfect: for he is as yet destitute of that, which
should add perfection unto him. If he be capable of any thing, or of being any
thing, which yet he is not, to the making of his present condition worse, here
the case is yet more clear, that such a man's condition is not perfect. For to
be obnoxious to the deprivation or losing of any good, which a man injoyeth for
the present, manifestly argues weakness and imperfection. Thirdly and lastly,
if a man be capable of being any thing, which yet he is not, suppose it be
without any relation at all to his condition, either for the better, or the
worse, yet this also plainly argues imperfection. For it supposes, that a
man has something, has a capacity, which is a mere superfluity to him, and
does him no good, yea which he knows not how to improve for his good; and
this as apparently as either of the former, argues imperfection. So that
certain it is, that if the Nature and Being of God be absolutely, and
infinitely perfect, he must needs be a pure and mere act, all in present and
actual Being, whatsoever it is possible for him ever to be.

This most entire and complete Actuality of the Divine Nature and Being,. 13.
is (I presume) generally subscribed by all Reformed Divines. God (says
Zanchie) is a most pure, and most simple act, and no ways capable, or in any
possibility, of being any thing, more or less, then what he is Cum igitur Deus
purissimus sit, and simplicissimus Actus, and nullo modo in potentia ad
aliquid, evincitur, Deum nullo modo mutabilem esse. Zanch. De Not. Dei. l. 2.
c. 4 qu. 1.

Praeterea cum tria sint eorum omnium, quae sunt, genera; supremum, est tantum
actus simplicissimus, sine ulla potentia passiva. Ibid. ca. 6. Et paulo post;
Adhae^, Deus Actus est purissimus, sine ulla potentia pass^va. Ergo nullum
habet, aut habere potest, suae perfectionis finem.


. And from this Actuality of God, he infers both his absolute immutability, and
infinity of his Perfection. It is affirmed (says Peter Martyr) as with one
mouth, of all that are godly, that God is not changed; in as much as this would
be a certain sign as well of imperfection, as inconstancy, in him Apiis
omnibus, uno propemodum ore, dicitur, Deum nequaquam mutari, quando quidem id
cum imperfectionis, tam etiam inconstantiae certum esset indicium. Pet. Mart.
loc. Class: 1. cap. 11. Sect. 23. Imo purus and simplex est actus, nec unquam
sistitur felicissima ejus actio. Ibid. Class. 2. c. 7. Sect. 1. Deus est purus
Actus, non habens aliquid de potentialitate. Aqu. Sum. part. 1. qu. 3. art. 2.
. The reason why God is not changed, nor capable of any change whatsoever, is
because he is a most Pure, Absolute, and Complete Act, i. e. He is for the
present whatsoever it is possible in any respect for Him to be: So that,
notwithstanding his omnipotency it self, He has no Power to make the least
alteration or change in Himself, either in Nature, Will, or Action. Upon the
account of this Authors credit, who interesseth all the godly in the Assertion
and Belief of Gods unchangeablenesse, (and consequently, of that perfect
actuality, which we assert) I judge it needelesse to make any further levy of
Testimonies in this behalf.

Only (I conceive) it may be worthy our pains to vindicate this Doctrine. 14.
of this Actuality of God, from the encumbrance of an Objection, or two. First,
if God be so Pure, Mere, and Perfect an Act, that no mutation in any kind is
incident unto Him, how can He be said to act, or do any thing to day, which He
did not yesterday, or before, yea from eternity? as for example, to give Faith
unto a Person, or make him a Believer to day, who was an Unbeliever yesterday?
Or does God work no more, no otherwise, in, or upon a man, when he is made an
actual Believer, then he did, whilst he was yet an Unbeliever? And if God
changes his action, or manner of action, or acts at all, where he acted not
before, is he not somewayes mutable, and consequently, no such Pure, or
Complete Act, as has been asserted.

I answer, 1. What Mutations, Changes, or Differences soever be at any time
found in Men, or in other Creatures, whether in their Natures, Qualities,
Motions, Actions, or in what respect soever, most certain it is that God is
uniformly and unchangeably the same in His, both Nature, [or Essence]
Properties, and Actings. God (says Peter Martyr) defers his assistances, as
seems good unto Him, and moves the hearts of Men at a certain time, whereas
He moved them not before: which notwithstanding we question not but He does
without any change of Himself Deus auxilia sua diffe^t, prout illi videtur: et
hominum co^da movet certo tempore, cum ^a antea non moverit. Quod tamen ab eo
absque sui mutatione fieri non dubitamus. P. Mart. Loc. Class. ^. c. 2. Sect. 8.
. The Essence or Being of God being altogether unchangeable, and His Operations
or Actings being really and formally the same with His Essence, unpossible it
is that the one should be more changeable, then the other. Therefore,

2. When a man believes to day, who believed not yesterday, or before,. 15.
though God now inclines and moves His heart to believe, which he did not
before, yet he does it not by any new act, or exertion of himself, but by that
first great eternal act of His, quo totum Ens, and omnes ejus differentias
profudit (as Aquinas speaks) i. e. by which he poured out (as it were) from
himself at once, the whole and entire body of entity or being, with all, and
all manner the differences of it. For we are not to conceive, that upon the
multiplication or new production of Entities or Beings, the acts of God are
multiplied, for, or in, their production; but that whatsoever is produced by
him, or receives being from him (as all things that have being, do) when, or at
what time soever they receive this being, they receive it by virtue of that one
creative act of his, by which at once ( in the beginning, as the Scripture
phrase is) he gave being to all things, Past, Present, and yet to Come. Nor are
we to conceive, that when Moses reports the History of the Creation, thus;
And God said let there be light Genesis 1. 3.
: and afterward ( viz. after a days space) that he said, Let there be a
Firmament Genesis 1. 6.
: and again, (after the same distance of time) Let the waters under the Heaven
he gathered together into one place, Genesis 1. 9.
etc. that he spoke these things at three several distinct times, or that he
waited the just space of a day between speech, and speech; but that Moses his
intent in this description, or relation, was, to declare, by what successive
spaces or distances of time, that one Creative Word of God which he spoke at
once, took place, and gave being to the several, and respective parts of the
Universe. So that (for example) when, by way of Preface to the second days
work, he writes thus: And God said, let there be a Firmament, etc. His
meaning only was to signify, what that one creative Word of God, once, and at
once, spoken, did produce, or give being unto, toward the completing of the
Universe, the second day after the Creation was begun; not that God rested, or
kept silence, for a days space, and then fell to work again.

This truth, I mean, that all temporary and successive effects in the World,.
16.
whether produced by the intervening and concourse of second Causes, or
without, are produced by the impression and vigor of that one great act of God
we speak of and not by any new act, exercised or exerted by him in order to
their several and particular Productions, is frequently insinuated in the
Scriptures themselves; yea, and is demonstrable by ground of reason; and
nothing but what has been the judgment of several learned men, and of
Augustine (by name). The context of Moses, Genesis 2. 4. tenoureth thus: These are
the generations of the Heavens, and of the Earth, when they were created; IN
THE DAY, that the Lord made the Earth and the Heavens, and every plant of the
field, BEFORE IT WAS IN THE EARTH, and every herb of the Field, BEFORE IT
GREVV. Here he plainly affirms, that God created the Earth and the Heavens in
the same day, and every Plant of the Field, BEFORE it was in the Earth, etc.
Clearly implying, that though the Earth, and the Heavens, received their
respective beings on two several days successively, yet that which God acted,
or did, toward their Productions, was done by him in one and the same day, i.
e. at once: and again, that although no Plant of the Field, was actually
produced, before it was in the Earth (for no Plant was made out of the Earth,
and afterward by God put into it) yet that on Gods part, and in respect of
what he contributed toward their actual Production, they were produced
before, viz. by that one Creative act we spoke of. Consonant to this deduction
from, as also to the exposition lately given unto, the context of Moses, is
this passage of Augustine. When thou hear that all things were then made,
when the day was made, conceive, if thou be able, that six or seven fold
repetition which is made, [or to be made] without any intervalls of delays or
spaces of time; or if thou be not able so to conceive of it, leave it for
those to conceive, who are able; and go thou forward with the Scripture, which
forsakes not thy infirmity, but walks a Mothers pace slowly with thee; and
which so speaks* that with her height she laughs at the proud, with her
depth, she amazeth the considerate; with her Truth, she feeds the strong or
well-grown; and with her affability, nourishes little ones Et cum audis tunc
facta omnia, cum factus est dies, illam senariam, vel septenariam repetitionem
sine intervallis mora^um spaciorumque temporalium factam, si possis,
apprehendas; si autem non possis, haec relinquas conspicienda valentibus; tu
autem, cum Scriptura non deserente infirmitatem tuam, and materno incessu tecum
tardius ambulante, proficias, quae sic loquitur, ut altitudine superbos
irrideat, profunditate attentos terreat, veritate magnos pascat, affabilitate,
parvos nutriat. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 5. c. 3.
. The same Author, elsewhere: For God (says he) made all time with all
corporal Creatures, together, or at once: which visible Creatures are
signified by the Name of Heaven and Earth Fecit enim Deus omne tempus simul cum
omnibus creaturis corporalibus, quae creaturae visibiles, nomine coeli and
terrae significantur. Aug. lib. 1. de Genesis contra Manich. c 3. Quod futurum
est, jam factum est. Idem. Soliq. cap. 26.
. This to have been his positive and clear judgment, many other passages in
his writings give plenary and pregnant testimony; and more particularly his
105th. Tractate upon John, and his Books upon Genesis. But to return to the
Scriptures. Those words, Psalm. 115. 3. He [God] has done whatsoever he
pleased, in the best sense and interpretation of them, and that which is
closest to the letter, are thus to be understood; viz. that whatsoever God
wills, or has willed, should at any time come to pass, he has already done
[viz. all that he means, or which is any ways necessary for him, to do,
toward the effecting of it.] In this sense also that of the Apostle ( Romans 8.
30. with many other places of Scripture of like Phrase and consideration) is to
be understood. Moreover, whom he has predestined, them also has he called:
and whom he has called, them has he also justified; and whom he has
justified, them has he also glorified. God is said to have [already] called,
justified, glorified, [all] those, whom he did foreknow (ver. 29.) i. e.
preapprove ( viz. as lovers of God, Verse. 28.) and so predestined to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, because he has already done, whatsoever
is requisite for him to do, for the procurement, and effecting of them in due
time.

By the way, lest the Table of this Doctrine should prove a snare of error. 17.
or mistake unto any, four things are diligently to be minded. First, that
that one great Act of God, by which he gave Being, in time, unto the World, and
unto all things, that either have been, or ever shall be produced, or done, in
it, was not exercised, or acted by him in time, but from, or in, eternity. The
reason hereof is, because being really and formally one, and the same thing
with his Essence and Being, (as learned men generally acknowledge) it could not
be of any later, or other, edition, then so. Secondly, that this act, though
acted or put forth by him from eternity, is not therefore to be conceived, as
an act that is past, or finished long since, but as permanent, and continued in
him, or by him (yet without any succession, or continuity of time) according to
that of our Savior, My Father WORKS HITHERTO, and I work Joh. 5. 17.
. There is nothing perishable, or changeable in God: what he works once, he
works always; though the Products or Effects of his working, alter and
change, rise and fall. The late learned Bishop Davenant asserteth these
Propositions as true, in the opinion of all Divines: 1. That God can Will
nothing in time: [if so, then that Will of His, by which the World was at first
Created, and by which all things are in continuance and succession of time
produced, must needs be from, or in, eternity.] 2. That God cannot but have
that Will which he has: [if so, then that will, by which he created the World,
and gave being unto all things that were to receive being in time, is
unchangeably permanent in him. ^ 3. And lastly, that God cannot have any will,
which for the present he has not Deus potest nihil velle ex tempore; Deus non
potest non habere volitionem, quam habet. Non potest habere volitionem quam non
habet. Davenant. Animadversions upon a Treatise, entitled, Gods love to
mankind. Page 484.
; [if so, then that Will of his, by which he operateth or works Faith in
Peter, in time, as, for instance, to day, was in him from eternity: and
consequently, God wrought as much toward the making of Peter a Believer,
before he did believe, as he did, when he was actually brought to believe.]

A third thing to be considered for a right understanding of the point in. 18.
hand, is; that that Act of God we speak of, though from eternity, and the
effects or productions of it in time, yet is it not to be conceived as
precedaneous in time, to these effects, or productions themselves. Though God
(for example) willed that will from eternity, which was efficacious to make
Peter a Believer in time, yet is not the act of this Will in God to be looked
upon, or conceived, as preceding in time that act of Peter's will, by which he
became, or was made, a Believer. The reason hereof, is, because there is no
succession, nothing sooner, nothing later, nothing before, nothing after other
in order of time, in eternity; nor yet in those things, which are measured by
eternity, as by their proper and adequate measure, as all the Acts of God are.
This is the constant and known Doctrine of the ablest and best Divines as well
modern as more ancient In Deo non est vicissitudo temporum. P. Mart. Loc.
Class. 3. c. 1. sect. 6. Aeternum est, quod principio et fine caret, ut Deus.
Vrsinus. Expl. Cat. qu. 58. [ Quod autem principio and fine caret, non potest
habere medium, nec prius, aut posterius] Aeternitas, neque habet, neque habere
possit prius aut posterius. Zanch. de. Not. Dei. l. 2. c. 3. Qu. 1. These. 1. Et
paulo post: Illa vere dicuntur aeterna, quae principio et fine carentia, eadem
semper sunt, ab omni successione libera. Vid. plura huc spectantia in seqq. In
ipsa aeternitate nulla spacia temporis cerno*; quia spacia temporis,
praeteritis and futuris rerum motibus, constant. Nihil autem praeterit in
aeterno, et nihil futurum est. Ita quod praeterit esse, desinit: et quod
futurum est, nondum esse coepit. Aeternitas autem tantum modo est: nec fuit,
quasi jam non sit: nec erit, quasi jam non sit. Aug. de vera. Rel. cap. 49.
Aeternitas ipsa Dei substantia est, quae nihil habet mutabile: ibi nihil est
praeteritum, quasi jam non sit: ibi nihil est futurum, quasi nondum sit: sed
non est ibi, nisi est: non est ibi fuit and erit, quia et quod fuit, jam non
est: et quod erit, nondum est: sed quicquid ibi est, non ^isi est. Idem. in
Psalm. 101. Praesens autem tempus, si semper esset praesens, nec in praeteritum
transiret, jam non esset Tempus, sed aeternitas. Idem. Confess. l. 11. c. 14.
Et si aliquid semper vivat, tamen si mutabilitatem patiatur, non proprie
aeternum appellatur, quia non semper ejusmodi est; quanvis immortale, quia
semper vivit, recte dici potest. Aug. lib. qu. 83. qu. 9. Carere initio, and
fine, and omni mutabilitate, dat aeternum esse. Rich. de S. victore. l. 2. de
Trin. c. 9. In illo [Deo] nec praeterita, nec futura reperiri queunt, sed
cuncta mutabilia immutabiliter durant: et quae in scipsis simul existere non
possunt, illi simul omnia adsistunt: nihilque in illo praeterit, quod transit:
quia in aeternitate ejus, modo quodam incomprehensibili, cuncta volumina
saeculorum transeuntia manent, currentia stant. Greg. Moral. l. 20. c. 23.
. That priority or precedence, which the Act of God has before the act of
Peter, by the mutual co-incidency, or joint concurrence whereof Peter is made
a Believer, is only a priority in Worth, Dignity, Excellency, Eminency, etc.
not in time. God does not will the conversion of Peter, before he is converted,
nor the glorification of Peter, before he be glorified; though he willed, or
rather, wills, both the one, and the other, from eternity. The reason of the
seeming strangeness of these things to our apprehensions, is our ignorance and
unacquaintednesse with the Nature of of eternity: which being nothing else but
God himself, considered as his own measure (in point of duration) and in this
respect exceeding difficult to be rightly and fully apprehended and conceived
by us, men in the mean time being generally averse from intense and deep
speculations, it is no great marvel, if it seems a kind of uncouth mystery
unto them. But that which we here affirm, viz. that that act, or operation of
God, by which Peter is made an actual Believer, though it were in God, and put
forth by him from eternity, yet was not, in order of time, before that act of
Peter himself, whereby he Believed, but only in a kind of transcendent
excellency, or dignity (proper to eternity) is nothing but the avouched
Doctrine of many learned and judicious men; yea and clearly follows from the
very Nature of eternity, as it is generally defined and described by our
Reformed Divines themselves, yea even those that are esteemed most Orthodox.
But if (says Austin, speaking unto God) there was no time before Heaven and
Earth, why do men ask, what did thou, THEN? [meaning, before Heaven and
Earth were made]: For th^re was no, THEN, where there was no time. Neither do
thou precede times, in time: for if so, thou could not precede [or be before]
all times. But thou precedest all times that are past, with the stateliness
[or transcendent height] of thine eternity, which is always present; and art
above all times that are future, because they are yet to come, and when they
are come, they will be past: but thou art the same, and thy years fail not Si
autem ante coelum and terram, nullum erat tempus, cur quaeritur, quid tunc
faciebas? Non enim erat Tunc, ubi non erat tempus; nec tu tempora tempore
praecedis; alioquin non omnia tempora praecederes. Sed praecedis omnia tempora
pr^terita, c^lsitudine semper praesentis aeternitatis: and superas omnia
futura, quia and illa futura sunt, and cum venerint, praeterita erunt: tu autem
idem ipse es, and anni tui non deficient. Aug. Confess. l. 11. c. 13.
. Consonant hereunto is the saying of Boethius, a Philosopher. Nor ought God
(says he) be conceived by us, as more ancient then his Creatures, in respect
of any quantity of time, but rather in respect of the propriety of his simple
Nature Neque Deus conditis rebus antiqu^or videri debet temporis quantitate,
sed simplicis potius proprietate naturae. Boet. de Consol. Philos. l. 5. pros.
6.
. Fr. Arriba a late Writer, and acute, thoroughly versed in the learning of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, has notably cleared this point, and fully answered all
Objections, which (as far as I am able to apprehend) can be brought against it.
I shall present the Reader with two or three passages from him* relating unto
it. When the Holy Scripture (says he) and our Schoole-Doctors with it, say and
teach, that things which are eternal, are before things made in time, they
speak truly, not of a priority FORMALLY so called, such as that is, which is
found in those things, unto which the consideration of what is before, and what
is after, does belong (which I have often said cannot agree to eternity) but
they speak of a kind of EMINENTIALL priority, in respect of which, those
things which never fail, but are always the same indefinently, are truly said
to be before things that are temporal [or in time] not indeed formally, but
eminently. For speaking properly of this eminentiall priority, or of an
eternal permanency, that which is indefinently, [i. e. without end, or
ceasing] is before that, which sometimes is, and sometimes is not Dum Scriptura
sacra, simulque Doctores Scholastici, dicunt, aeterna esse priora temporalibus,
vere loquuntur, non de prioritate formali, qualis est illa quae reperitur in
^is rebus, quibus convenit ratio prioris and posterioris (quod saepe diximus
aeternitati convenire non posse) sed loquuntur de prioritate, sub quadam
eminentiali ratione, quatenus illa quae nunquam deficiunt, and quae
indesinenter sunt, vere dicuntur priora temporalibus, non quidem formaliter,
sed eminenter. Proprie enim loquendo de ista prioritate eminentiali sive de
aeterna permanentia, illud quod indesinenter est, prius esse dicitur quam
illud, quod aliquando est, aliquando vero non est. Fran. de Arriba. Operis Con.
l. 3. c. 15. Sect. 7.
. In another place, he expresses himself thus: Our former Doctrine supposed,
it manifestly follows from thence, that those words of Christ, Joh. 8. Before
Abraham was, I am; and that of Paul, Ephesians. 1. He chose us in him before the
World was made, with many other like places of Scripture every where obvious,
are to be taken, according to the manner of our understandings, as meant of
this eminentiall priority, not of an antecedency in respect of time, not of any
priority, properly and formally so called Ex praesupposita Doctrina manifest
deducitur, illa verba Christi, Antequam Abraham fierit, ego sum, andillud Pauli
ad Ephesians. 1. Elegit nos in ipso ante mundi constitutione, andplurima alia
Scripturae Sacrae similia loca, qua passim occurrunt, accipienda esse, nostro
modo intelligendi, de ista eminentiali antecedentia ad tempus, non vero de
Antecedentia proprie and formaliter sumpta, etc. Ibid. Sect. 11.
. The same Author elsewhere has these words: In as much as the proper and
formal reason [or Nature] of mutability, wherein the ratio [or Nature] of time
consists, is intrinsecall [or essentiall] unto time, and to the differences
of it, as Past, Present and to Come, and consequently imperfection must needs
be intrinsecall to them also [mutability always including imperfection]
evident it is, that fuit, and erit, was, and will be, whereby that which is
past, and that which is to come are signified* cannot [with truth] formally, or
properly, be attributed unto God Cum Tempora, ejusque differentiis* quales sunt
praesens, praeteritum, and futurum, sit intrinseca formalis ratio
mutabilitatis, in qua consistit ratio temporis, and consequenter sit illis
intrinseca imperfectio, non debet tribui Deo formaliter, fuit, vel erit, quibus
praeteritum and futurum significantur. Ibid. c. 14. Sect. 7.
. This then is a third thing to be diligently considered and remembered, to
prevent all misprision about the point in hand: no act of God is before any act
of the Creature, in respect of time.

The fourth, and last thing of like necessity to be considered for the same. 19.
end, is this: No act of God, nor Cooperation of his with his Creature,
imposes any necessity upon any free-working cause (I mean, upon any cause,
which is free, in the nature or constitution of it to work, or not to work, and
to work variously) to act so, or so, determinately; nor yet supposes any
necessity, or infallibility of any act, or effect, producible by such causes,
before, or until they be actually produced. Nor is this any thing but the
received Doctrine of Orthodox and approved Divines. God (says Austine) so
administreth, or governs all things which he has Created, that he suffers
them to exercise and act their own proper motions Sic administrat omni^ quae
creavit, Deus, ut etiam ipsa prop^^os exercere and agere motus sinat. Aug. de
Civit. l. 7. c. 30.
. This saying of Austin is frequently cited and made use of by our best
Reformed Divines as P. Martyr Loc. Com. Class. 1. cap. 14. Sect. 2.
, Polanus Symph. Cathol. cap. 6. These. 5.
, and others, in their explications of the Providence of God, and the manner of
his concurrence with second Causes in their motions. Now if God,
notwithstanding any influence of his upon, or any Cooperation with, his
Creature in their motions or actings, yet so far comports with them, as to
leave them to their native Principles, Properties and Propensions, in their
actings, doubtless he does not necessitate, or determine with any strong or
irresistible hand, the wills of men in their respective actions, or elections;
it being the innate and most intrinsecall property of these to determine
themselves, or make their elections freely. There is every whit as much (if not
much more) in this passage of Anselm. And when (says he) we deny that there
[he means, in eternity] is any thing either past, or future, which has been,
or is to be hereafter, in time, we do not affirm that what has been, or is to
be hereafter, is in no sense, or consideration there: we only say, that these
things are not there, after the manner, or in the consideration of things,
either past, or to come, but indefinently and as present, with such a
presentiality which is proper to eternity. And in this there appears no
contrariety at all Et quando negamus fuisse, vel futurum ibi esse aliquid. quod
in tempore suit, aut erit, non asserimus id quod fuit, aut erit, nullo modo ibi
esse: sed tantum praeterito vel futuro modo dicimus non ibi esse, quod ibi
indesinenter est suo praesenti modo: in his vero nulla videtur adversari
contrariet^^s. Sic utique sine ulla repugnantia dicitur, aliquid esse multabile
in tempore, antequam sit, quod in aeternitate manet immutabiliter, non antequam
sit, vel post quam est, sed indesinenter, quia nihil est ibi secundum tempus.
Nam hoc ipsum est ibi aeternaliter, quia temporaliter aliquid est, and antequam
sit, potest non esse, sicut dixi. Anselm. Opusc. de Concord. c.*
. So then, THAT MAY, WITHOUT ANY REPVGNANCY OR CONTRADICTION, BE SAID TO BE
CHANGEABLE, OR ALTERABLE IN TIME, BEFORE IT IS, WHICH REMAINS UNCHANGEABLE AND
UNALTERABLE IN ETERNITY; not before it is, or after it is, but indesinently,
because here (viz. in eternity) there is nothing according unto time, [or any
the differences hereof.] The same Author, to the same purpose, and in the same
Tract, where the recited passage is extant, writes thus. For as, although in
eternity, there is nothing which was, and is now past; or that shall be
hereafter, but only that which is, and yet in time something has been, and
something shall be, without any repugnancy: so may it be proved without any
inconvenience, that what cannot be changed or altered in eternity, may yet in
time, before the being of it, be changed or altered, by the liberty of the
wills of men. Though there be nothing there [in eternity] but what is present,
yet presence there, is not a presence in time, like unto ours, but an eternal
presence [which neither admits any thing past, nor to come] in which all times
are contained. So that, as the present time comprehends every place, and what
soever is in any place; so is all time, and all things that are, or are done in
time, comprehended and shut up in the present [or, now] of eternity Sicut enim
quamvis in aeternitate non fuit, aut erit aliquid, sed tantum est, et tamen in
tempore fuit, et erit aliquid, sine repugnantia; ita quod in aeternitate mutari
nequit, in tempore aliqua^do per liberam voluntatem, antequam sit, esse
mutabile, probatur absque inconvenientia. Quanvis ibi nihil sit, nisi praesens,
non est tamen illud praesens temporale, sicut nostrum, sed aeternum, in quo
cuncta tempora continentur. Siquidem quemadmodum praesens tempus continet omnem
locum, and quae in quolibet loco sunt, ita aeterno praesenti simul clauditur
omne tempus, et quae sunt in quolibet tempore. Ibid.
. He that speaks such things as these, clearly supposes, that no act of God
whatsoever, how unchangeable, how potent soever, imposes any necessity upon
the wills of men, to act so or so, to will this, or that, determinately, before
they have acted, or willed: but that Judas (for example) notwithstanding any
act of Predestination in God concerning him, was at as much liberty at the
first, whether he would betrary his Lord and Master, or no, as any other of his
fellow-Apostles, or any other man; yea and that, at any time, before he did
betray him, he was, notwithstanding any act of God in suspending, or
withdrawing his grace from him, at liberty, whether he would have proceeded to
the actual betraying of him, or no? The Jews (says Gaudentius, an Author
much more ancient then the former) were willing to do the evil, which they
did. And certainly, had they been unwilling, they had not done it. Doubtless
it is no less then high sacrilege so much as once to think, that God, who is
not only Good and Just, but Goodness and Justice it self, should either
command, or constrain, that to be done, which himself condemns Voluerunt
Iudaei facere malum, quod fecerunt. Et utique si noluissent, non fecissent.
Certe ingentis sacrilegii est vel cogitare, quod Deus, qui non solum bonus and
justus, sed ipsa bonitas est, and ipsa justicia, vel jubeat aliquid, vel cogat
fieri, quod ipse damnat. Gaudentius Sermon. 3. ad Neophy^.
. So that (in this Authors sense also) the wills of men are left free by God,
either to will, or not to will, things that are sinful.

Nor is this contrary to the Doctrine of our later and best Reformed Divines,.
20.
when they speak like themselves, and drive out of the rut, or worn path, of
common Credulity and un-manlike preoccupation. For God (says Peter Martyr)
indeed draws all things [along with him] but yet he yields [or gives way]
after such a manner, that he troubles, or disturbes nothing [in its course.] So
things, though in respect of their natures, they incline indifferently to
either side, yet they are by God bowed [or, brought over] more [or, rather]
unto one Trahit enim Deus quidem res omnes, sed ita quodammodo cedit, ut nihil
turbet. Ita res quanvis natura sua aeque propendeant in utranque partem, tamen
a Deo inclinantur magis in alteram. P. Mart. Loc. Com. Class. 1. c. 13. Sect. 4.
. It is clear from the instance, which he immediately subjoynes, that he here
speaks of the wills of men: and consequently that the import of the passage
cited, is, that God acts no further, no otherwise toward the determination of
the wills of men, but only by swaying, or inclining them, more, or rather, to
the one side, then the other; and consequently leaves them free, not only from
all co-action, or force, but from all necessitation also, in their actions, or
elections. For he that is only swayed, or bowed, more, or rather, to one thing,
then to another, has, this notwithstanding, a liberty or power left him,
whether he will conclusively pitch upon that, whereunto, or toward which, he
is swayed and bowed, or no. The mind of the same Author, in the same discourse
is delivered in these words. God (says he) will alter, or change the will of a
man, being evil: he makes use of Admonitions, Sermons, Chastisements: for
these are the Organs and Instruments of the Providence of God, etc. Vult [Deus]
mutare malam hominis voluntate^: adhibet admonitiones, Sermones, castigatio^es.
Haec enim sunt organa and instrumenta Providentiae Dei, etc. Ib. Sect. 16.
. If Admonitions, Sermons, etc. be the Instruments and Means, which God uses
to change the evil hearts and wills of men, certainly he does not change them
by an irresistibleness of Power, nor in any way whereby the change is
necessitated; because then there could be left no place for any usefulness, or
serviceablenesse at all of his Instruments, in, or about the change. Nothing
can be isntrumental, in, or about the producing of an action, or effect, but
only in a way of, and according to, such an efficiency, which is proper to the
nature of it. Charms and Spells written in Paper, and hung about the neck, are
not isntrumental in the Cures which are wrought by Satan, there being no
Property, or Quality in them, which holds any proportion of causality with such
effects, as the Cures of Diseases are: nor can such Cures be truly said to be
wrought by them, though (happily) they would not be wrought without them. In like
manner the nature and property of Admonitions, Exhortations, Chastisements,
etc. being to persuade, or work the hearts of men to a change, contingently
only, and not in a way of necessitation, much less of compulsion, unpossible
it is that these should be isntrumental in the Hand of God, in changing the
hearts of men, unless it be supposed that this change is wrought by him
contingently, and with a possibility at any time, before it be effected, that
it should not be effected; and this not only in respect of his liberty, whether
he will go through with the work, and effect it, or no, but in respect of the
liberty of the will it self, whether it will be persuaded to a change, or no.
But concerning the uselessnesse of exhortations, etc. in case conversion be
wrought by an irresistible, or necessitating hand, we shall have occasion to
speak more at large hereafter. To the point in hand, Polanus, another Reformed
Divine, as Orthodox by repute, as Mr. Calvin himself, prefixes this title to
his fifth Thesis in the sixth Chapter of his Symphony. God so works by the
means of Nature, that he works nothing contrary to their Nature: and
therefore the Providence of God constrains not the will of the Creature Deus
sic agit per media naturae, ut nihil contra eorum naturam; ac proinde
Providentia Dei non coget voluntatem Creaturae.
. The Nature of the will is to work, I mean, to assent, and dissent, freely,
contingently, and without any necessitation, either from within, or from
without. Therefore if God works nothing contrary to the Nature of the will,
the will still consents unto him upon such terms, that she is at liberty to
dissent, any thing that he works to procure this consent notwithstanding.
Besides, if God works nothing contrary to the Nature of second Causes, then
he must needs (according to the common expression of Divines) as with necessary
Causes, work necessarily, so with contingent Causes, work contingently. Take
the acknowledgement of the same Truth from Ursine also another late Writer, no
less Orthodox then the two former. The will of man (says he) even moved of
God, is ABLE not only TO RESIST, but also to assent unto, and obey God in his
Motion, by her own, and proper Motion: which doing, she does not only suffer,
but acts also, and raises up, [or springs] her own actions; although she
has the POWER of assenting and obeying from the Holy Ghost Potest enim
volu^tas mota a Deo non tantum repugnare, sed etiam adsentiri and obsequi Deo
moventi, suo ac proprio motu: quodfaciens, non tantum patitur, sed etiam agit
and ciet ipsa suas actiones; et si vim assentiendi et obseque^di non ex se
habet, sed ex Gratia Spiritus sancti aceipiat. Vrsin. Catec. Part. 1. Qu. 8. Et
paulo post: voluntas humana regitur non tantu^, ab alio, sed etiam a se. Deus
enim sic movet homines. ut tam^n non vi rapiantur, sed et ipsi se moveant.
. A little after these words, he says: for God so moves men, that yet they
are not ravished by force or might, but they move themselves also. No man can
more clearly assert the perfect contingency, or non necessity of the actings of
the wills of men determinately, under the movings and actings of God, then this
Author has done in the words presented. He that says, the will moved by God,
is able not only to resist, but also to obey God in his Motion, doubtless
means, or supposes, that the will is able to resist him, in, or under those
very Motions, under which, and by means whereof, she is able also to consent
unto him, and obey him. Besides, saying that the will receives POWER of
assenting and obeying from the grace of the Holy Ghost, does he not plainly
imply, that she receives from hence no necessitating impressions unto these
actions? A man that is unavoidably carried, or acted, in, or toward an action,
can in no tolerable construction, be said to receive Power for the performance
of this action; in as much as the conferring of a Power to do that which a man
was not able to do before, does no ways infer the taking away of that Power
(such as it was) which this man had before, not to act. Notwithstanding my
sense and judgment in the point is, that the will receives from the grace of
the Holy Ghost, not only a Power of consenting, and obeying God in his gracious
movings, but ( Sensu sano) these actings themselves. But of this hereafter. It
is (I suppose) needless, (and would be more tedious, then difficult) to make
the Pile of Testimonies from our best and most approved Authors, for the
confirmation of the Truth last asserted, any whit greater. He that is afraid to
Believe the Truth, unless he has an arm of flesh to encourage him, may find
many more quotations from several Authors of best acceptance with himself, for
his encouragement in this kind, drawn togeby me in my late Answer to Mr.
Jenkyn, from p. 67. to p. 74. But for the Truth of this Assertion (hitherto
managed, and credited by the authority of men) that no Act of God, is either
destructive to the contingency of, or impositive of any necessity, or
infallibility in the event, upon the actions of the wills of men, it has been
in part already, and may in place more convenient in the progress of our
present discourse, be further evicted and confirmed, by dint of argument and
demonstration. In the mean time my request to him, that shall (happily)
undertake to answer these Discussions, is, that he will not needlessely trouble
either himself, his Reader, or me, with producing the Authors, lately either
named, or referenced, or any others, as asserting the contrary to what I have
argued and proved from them, in other places; For I can more willingly grant,
then question, that they have many inconsistences, (in other parts of their
Writings) with those things, which I have quoted from them. So that for any man
to quote them in oppositum, is to gain nothing to their cause, but what is
already granted to their hand; only it may prove the easing of the Truth from
the burthensomnesse of their Authority in other Points, in as much as the
speaking of contradictions, is a plain confession of our ignorance, or
doubtfulnesse (at least) of the Truth.

We have now done with those four Cautions, so necessary (as was said). 21.
for the keeping our apprehensions and understandings upright under the
reception of this great Truth (absolutely necessary to be believed, for the
vindicating and clearing the perfect actuality, and immutability of God) viz.
that, how, or after what manner soever God acts, or is interessed in the
successive and new Productions of Actions, or Beings in the World, that which
he does in this kind, he does it not by any new Influx, Operation, or Exertion
of himself, but by that one great Creative Act, wherein he gave out himself
from eternity. This Opinion, because it may seem strange unto many, yea and
nothing less, then a truth, though we have already sufficiently, (I trust,)
established it upon the foundations of the Scriptures, we will further show to
have been clearly held and asserted by very judicious and considering men: and
secondly add a Reason or two for the proof of it.

For the first; no man (I presume) will deny that great light of the Church,.
22.
and Agent for Christ, in his Days, Austin by name, to have been a judicious
considering, and learned man. How full of the Opinion (now asserted) he was,
his Writings in many passages declare, I shall insist only upon some few. So
then (says he) day was made, in what day God made Heaven and Earth, and every
green thing of the Field, before they were upon the Earth. Before, seven days
were reckoned: here, one day is spoken of, in which day God made Heaven and
Earth, and every green thing of the Field, and every Herb; by the name of
which day, all time may well be conceived to be signified. For God made all
time, with all Creatures that should be in time, together, or at once, Factus
ergo est dies, quo die fecit Deus coelum and terram, and omne viride agri,
antequam essent super terram, and omne pabulum agri. Superius septem dies
numerabantur, nunc unus dicitur dies, quo die fecit Deus coelum and terram, and
omne viride agri, and omne pabulum, cujus dici nomine, omne tempus significari
been intelligitur. Fecit enim Deus omne tempus simul cum omnibus creaturis
temporalibus, etc. Aug. De Genesis contra Manich. l. 2. c. 3.
etc. If God made all time, and all things that were to be in time, together,
he must needs make all things by one and the same Act. Elsewhere the same
Author demands; And how [or, after what manner] did God say, Let there be light
in time? or in the eternity of his Word? If in time, it must be mutably, [or,
with the change of himself]: and if so, he must speak it by the Creature:
because he himself is unchangeable. Not long after he inquires further about
the same Point, thus: Or whether does not this belong to the nature of that
Word of his, of which it is said: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. For when it is said of him, All things were
made by him, it is evident enough, that the Light also was made by him, when
God said, let there be Light, which if so, that which God said, Let there be
Light, is eternal [or, from eternity] because the Word of God, God with God,
the only Son of God, is co-eternall with the Father; although God speaking
in, [or, by] his eternal Word, the Creature was made in Time Et quomodo dixlt
Deus, Fiat lux: utrum temporaliter? an in verbi aeternitate? Et si
temporaliter, utique mutabiliter, etc. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 1. c. 2. Et
paulo post: Et utrum hoc ipsum ad naturam pertineat verbi ejus, de quo dicitur,
In principio erat verbum, and verbum erat apud, Deum, and Deus erat verbum. Cum
enim de illo dicitur, Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, satis ostenditur and lux per
ipsum facta, cum dixit Deus, fiat lux: Quod si ita est, aeternum est quod dixit
Deus, fiat lux: quia verbum Dei Deus apud Deu^, filius unicus Dei, Patri
co-aeternus est: quanvis Deo hoc in aeterno verbo dicente, creatura temporalis
factae est. Cum enim verba sint temporis, cum dicimus, quando and aliquando,
aeternum tamen est in verbo Dei, quando fieri debeat aliquid; tunc fit quando
fieri debuisse in illo verbo est, in quo non est quando, and aliquando, quoniam
illud totum verbum aeternum est.
. From this piece of discourse, these three things are evident. 1. That the
Authors judgment was, that God did not give being unto things, by any
multiplied, or distinct acts, or workings, but by one and the same most simple
word, the efficacy and force whereof extends it self to the production of all
particular Creatures or Beings, when, and at what time, or times, the Speaker
pleases. 2. That this Word was not spoken by him in time, but in, or from,
eternity. 3. (And lastly) that notwithstanding the Word was spoken from
eternity, yet the Effects or Productions of it, receive their respective Beings
in time. The same Author; in the progress of the same Tractate, relating (as
it seems) to the last-recited words, demands thus (upon occasion of Moses
his reducing the works of Creation to one Day, Genesis 2. 4. whereas in the former
Chapter he had digested them into six) Is not this that, which we endeavored to
show in a former book, that God MADE ALL THINGS TOGETHER, or, at once An forte
hoc illud est, quod in libro superiore moliebamur ostendere, simul Deum fecisse
omnia; quandoquidem narrationis illa contextio cu^ sex dierum ordine cuncta
creata and consummata memorasset, nunc ad unum diem omnia rediguntur? etc.
Idem. de Genesis ad. lit. l. 5. c. 3.
? And presently after, glancing by the way at those words, (as the Latin
translation reads them) Ecclesiasticus. 18. 1. He that lives for ever has
created all things together; he plainly affirms, that the reason of this
expression ( Genesis 2. 4.) In the day that the Lord Created Heaven and Earth,
etc. was, that we might understand, how that this day was seven times repeated
[or mentioned] before, that so seven days might be made up Ita jam non ex alio
Scripturae Sanctae libro profertur testimonium, quod omnia simul Deus
creaverit, sed vicina testificatio paginae consequentis, and ex hac re, nos
admonet dicens, cum factus est dies, fecit Deus coelum and terram, and omne
viride agri; ut istum diem septies intelligas repetitum, ut fierent septem
dies. Ibid.
. To save the labor of transcribing, the Reader may please to peruse from the
same Pen, another testimony, as full and pregnant to the point in hand, as any
of these, in the 16th. Sect. of this Chapter. So that Augustine was grounded,
and strongly built upon this foundation of Truth, that no multiplication of
effects, argues any Plurality or Multiplication of Acts, or Exertions in God,
in, or for, the Productions of them.

Let the judicious Reader consider, whether the same Truth lies not large. 23.
also in these words of Ambrose. There is not in God (says he) any Accident,
Motion, or NAVV WILL, or temporal counsel: nor is his thought varied
according to the inequality of mutable things Non est in Deo accidens, motus,
aut nova voluntas, aut temporale consilium: nec cogitatio ejus cum rerum
mutabilium inaequalitate variatur. Ambr. De vocat. Gent. cap. 10.
. If there be no motion, or new will, in God, he cannot be conceived to
advance, or put forth any action, or operation in, or from himself, for the
effecting of any thing in time, which he did not put forth from eternity. Nor
is this saying of Bernard less conscious of the same opinion, (be it Error, or
Truth;) God cannot deny himself, nor not do the things, which he has already
done, as it is written, Who has done the things, which are yet to come Non
potest seipsum negare Deus, neque non facere, quae jam fecit, ut Scriptum est,
Qui fecit, quae futura sunt. Bernard Sermon. 68. super Cant.
. In this citation from the Scripture, who has done the things yet to come, he
follows the Translation of the Septuagint (as the ancient Writers more
generally did) who make the Scripture so to speak, Esa. 45. 11. In saying that
God has done the things, that are yet to be done, (or, to come) he clearly
supposes, that God by one and the same simple act, which is really the same
with his Essence, or Being, gives Being to all things whatsoever, that either
have been, are, or shall be hereafter. D' Arriba, an Author formerly mentioned
as one that profited more then many of his fellows in the learning of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, is more clear and distinct in the business, then any
of the former; yea, and asserts the opinion, now contended for, as confessed
with one mouth by all Divines. Secondly, (says he) I suppose that, which all
Divines with one mouth confess and teach, (though many of them, conversing too
much with temporal things, very hardly comprehend [or, understand] what they
most truly herein affirm) viz. that although the things, which are properly
Created by God, be multiplied, and distinguished in themselves, [one from
another] not only in respect of their proper and respective [Natures, or]
Beings, but also in respect of the [severall] times and places, in which they
receive the beginnings [or first] of their Beings by a true Creation, yet the
act of the Divine will, or the command or decree, of God, by virtue whereof
things are Created, and begin to be, are not therefore multiplied, or
distinguished between themselves Secu^do suppono illud, quod universi Theologi
uno ore confitentur, and docent, licet multi eorum temporalibus assueti,
difficillime comprehendant sensu, quod verissime enu^ciant, hoc scilicet, quod
quanvis res, quae proprie creantur a Deo, multiplicentur and distinguantur
inter se, non solum penes proprias entitates, sed etiam penes tempora and loca,
in quibus per veram Creationem existere incipiant, non propterea Divinae
voluntatis actus, sive imperium and decretum Dei, cujus virtute res creantur,
and incipiunt esse, multiplicantur, and distinguuntur inter se, etc. Fr. de
Arrib. Op. Council. l. 3. c. 8. Sect. 6.
. This supposition of his, he further explaines, and argues, in that which
follows. It were easy to multiply testimonies from this Author, yea and not
hard to do the like from many others (of more credit, happily, then this) for the
confirmation and countenance of the matter in hand. But (for authorities) I
shall conclude, with that confident (though brief) assertion of an approved
Author of our own (formerly touched;) For in all Divines opinions, (says the
late Bishop Davenant) these Propositions are true; God can will nothing in
time; God cannot but have the will, which he has; He cannot have any will,
which he has not Deus potest nihil velle ex tempore; Deus non potest non
habere volitionem, quam habet: non potest habere volitionem, quam non habet.
Davenant. Answ. to Mr. Hoord. p. 484.
. If God can will nothing in time, nor have any will which he has not, then
must needs that act of His will, by which he gives Being unto all things, be
from eternity: nor does any thing, which is produced, or receives Being in
time, receive this Being, by virtue of any presentaneous, or new act of the
Divine interposall, or concurrence, other then that, which was exercised and
put forth by him from eternity.

Give me now leave to add a Reason, or two, (briefly) for the further. 24.
clearing and asserting of this Doctrine. First, it is a known maxim in Modus
operandi consequitur modum essendi. vid. Thom. 1. part. qu. 89. Art. 1. in cor.
Reason; that every thing must needs Act, in proportion, or according, to the
manner of the Being of it. Now the Being of God, being most absolutely perfect,
the manner of his Acting or Working, must needs be most perfect also. So then
all repetition, or multiplication of actings in the Creature, for the obtaining
of such ends, which it desires, arguing imperfection (a Principle upon which
the Apostle himself builds, Heb. 10. 1, 2. For the Law having a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of them, can never with those
Sacrifices, which they offered year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect. For then would they have ceased to be offered, etc.
) it must needs be agreeable both to Reason and Truth, to conceive, that God,
by reason of the infinite perfection of his Being, must needs reach and
compass all his ends (and consequently give Being to whatsoever he intended
should be at any time) by one and the same simple Act, or Dictate of his Will.

Secondly, the Being of God being an eternal Being, the formal consideration.
25.
whereof, (as all the diligent surveyours of Eternity unanimously agree)
stands in an incommutability, i. e. in an absolute and utter impossibility of
admitting the least alteration or change of Being, unpossible it is that he
should act any thing in time, other then what he acted, in, or from eternity;
because any new acting in time, supposes an alteration or change in that
Being, which so acts. To act that afterward, which a man acted not before,
infers a manifest alteration or change in his Being, as viz. from the Posture,
Habit, or Condition of a Man at rest, to the State or Posture of a person in
action. So that if it should be conceived; that God produces or gives Being
to those various and multiplied effects, which successively receive Being, and
are produced in the World, by a multiplicity or plurality of Acts, it must be
conceived withal, that all this multiplicity of acts was levied and raised by
him from eternity. But that God from eternity did not multiply productive acts
according to the number of things produced in time by him (for if he multiplied
them at all, it must in reason be according to this proportion, or number) is
evident from hence; because these supposed multiplied acts must be conceived to
have been exerted and put forth by him, either together, and (as it were) at
one and the same instant, or else successively, one after another. Successively
raised they could not be; because all succession, and divisibility, are wholly
inconsisten^* with eternity Ratio eternitatis ab aevo and tempore, distinctam
dicit rationem: aeternitas autem nec habet prius and posterius, nec ea
compatitur. Aqu. part. 1. qu. 10. art. 2. Deus totum suum esse simul habet, in
quo ratio aeternitatis consisti^. Idem. Contra Gent. l. 1. c. 15. Ibi [in
aeternitate] nihil est praeteritum, quasi jam non sit, nihil est futurum, quasi
nondum sit. Aug. super Psalm. 101.
, in which there is nothing before, or after other. Together, and at the same
instant they could not be raised, it being repugnant to a cause that is most
singly, simply and indivisibly one, without all manner of composition of parts,
or otherwise, as God, or the Divine Essence is, to exercise a Plurality of acts
together, especially really distinct, and differing one from another, as the
acts we speak of, in case they were supposeable in God, must needs be.

If any man shall yet demandingly object, But how can these things be?. 26.
How is it possible to conceive, that God by one and the same act, and this
acted from eternity, should give Being to all that infinite variety of
Creatures, Motions, and Actions, which are produced successively in the course
and current of time? I answer, 1. It is very possible to conceive, that an
infinite Power may do any thing, which imports Perfection. Now as it imports a
Degree of Perfection in men, as in point of Wisdom, Strength, Power, etc. by
one and the same action, or engagement of themselves, to bring several ends to
pass; so does it argue nothing but pure and mere perfection, that God by one
act, or word speaking, should bring forth a World of such and such a duration,
so furnished in all respects, in every part of this duration of it, as seemed
best to Himself, with Creatures, Motions, Actions, and Events of all kinds.

2. To aid and ease our imaginations a little, in conceiving the manner how
that great wonder we speak of, may be; Augustine (I remember) somewhere in his
Writings finds a kind of shadow, or resemblance of it, in the art (as he
calls it) or Principle, by virtue whereof, or out of which, a man Prays, or
Speaks, in respect of the several Syllables, Words, or Sentences, which in
Praying, or Speaking, he utters successively by means of such a Principle.
The art, or skill of Praying, is but one and the same Principle in a man; yet
by virtue of it, even whilst it remains fixed and unmoved in the mind, the
man produces words successively, as he pleases, such and such words in the
first place, such and such other, in the second, etc. In like manner, God by
one and the same eternal Act, eternally permanent in him, may express and
utter himself unto the World by the producing of such and such things in every
kind, according to all variety of times and seasons, as himself pleases.

This for answer to that great and difficult Objection against the perfect
actuality of God, raised from the successive Production of things by Him.

Another Objection seeming to war against the same Property, and Perfection. 27.
in God, is this. If God be a pure, and complete Act, admitting no kind of
Potentiality in his Nature, or Being, how then can he be a free Agent? much
less, the first of all others, as he is commonly affirmed to be? And if it be
unpossible for him to act otherwise, then as he acts, or to give Being to any
other things, then what are produced by virtue of that one act, which he put
forth from eternity, must he not needs ^e conceived to act out of the necessity
of his Nature, and not out of the liberty, or freedom of his Will?

To this I answer more briefly, 1. To act out of the necessity of Nature,
imports not only the ignorance, or nescience of what is so acted, but an utter
incapacity in him that acts, to reflect (with understanding) upon his action.
And therefore no intellectual nature, can be truly said to act out of the
necessity of their natures, but out of the liberty of their wills, because they
are capable (at least) of knowing what they act, and by denying, or withholding
the consent of their wills, may prevent, or forbear any action, that passes
from them. Nor does that of the Apostle, Romans 7. 19. The evil which I would
not, that I do, any ways imply the contrary. Because his meaning is not, that
when he did that which was evil, and which he hated, his will for the present
did not consent to the act: for had not his will now consented, unpossible it
is that such an act should have been done by him: but the evil which he would
not, or, which he hated, [viz. in the standing, and habitual frame of his
heart, and out of the case of surprizall] this he did [viz. through Tentation,
or Being prevented with humane infirmity.]

2. God is said (and truly) to be Agens liberrimum, the most free Agent of all
others, 1. In respect of the exercise of his Act, or execution of what he
wills: he is obnoxious to no disappointment in what he wills to effect, by
any Wisdom or Power whatsoever; whereas all other Agents, are liable, in what
they intend to put in execution, to suffer a check and failer, from him. 2. He
is the most Free Agent, in respect of the elicite Acts of his Will (such are
his Purposes, Decrees, Intentions, Desires, etc.) two ways, 1. As these are
not occasioned or raised in him by means of any necessity, or dependence which
he has upon any of their Objects, or the things Purposed, Decreed, Intended or
Desired by him, but proceed out of the mere goodness of his will; whereas
the elicite acts of created wills are (for the most part, if not always)
begotten by some necessity or other of the things wi^led, lying upon him that
wills, as not being complete in the enjoyment of himself, without the
willing, or obtaining such things. 2. As these acts of his will arise and flow
from their Principle or Fountain, with a greater enlargement thereof, and more
strength of exertion, then the like acts proceeding from the wills of any other
Agent, or Agents whatsoever.

3. (And lastly) the immutability of his Will, or the determination of it to
things actually and de facto willed by him, is no impeachment to the liberty or
freedom of his Will; but only supposes, or demonstrateth it to be another
kind of liberty or freedom, much more excellent and perfect, then that which
is found in the wills of Men or Angels. That liberty of will, which is
competent unto, and found in, these, includes a Peccability, or Potentiality
unto sin, which argues weakness, or non-perfection: whereas the unchangeable
rectitude of the Will of God, excluding all possibility of sinning, excludes
no degree at all of liberty or freedom from it, but only weakness,
imperfection, and defectibility, which are the indelible characters of created
wills Non habet liberam voluntatem is, qui consilium mutare non potest
impeditus a causa externa, and si mutare velit. Deus autem consilium suum non
mutat, nec mutare potest, non propter impedimentum causae externae* nec propter
naturae, aut facultatis defectum: sed quia non vult, nec velle potest, consilii
sui mutationem, propter immut^bilem rectitudinem voluntatis suae, in quam neque
error, neque ulla mutationis causa potest cadere. Vrsinus Expl. Catech. part.
1. qu. 8.
.

Having thus cleared this foundation of Truth, the perfect Actuality of. 28.
the Divine Essence or Being, let us consider what we may safely, and with
evidence of deduction, build upon it. If then God be a pure and mere act,
without all Potentiality, or Possibility of change, in one kind or other, then
those volitions, or acts of his Will, which (with the Scriptures) we call
Election, Reprobation, Predestination, etc. are not to be conceived as acts
that are past, Cavendum est, ne falsa quadam imaginatione, actum voluntatis
Divinae quasi praeteritum cogitemus. Scotus in. l. Distinc. 40.
or like to the Volitions, Purposes, or Intentions of men, which being once
fulfilled and put in execution, die, and cease to be in them; but are to be
looked upon, as being really and in Truth one and the same thing with his
Essence and Being (which is unchangeably permanent) only with relation to the
effecting of such things in time, which answer, and hold proportion with, the
actings of men, when they Elect, Reprobate, or Predestinate. So that (for
example) when God prevails by his Word and Spirit with men in time to believe,
and during this their believing, continues the same gracious means toward
their further establishment, and edification, he is said to have elected them;
not because he had formerly passed any act of Election concerning them, which
is now at an end, and cease; but because he does by them, or to them, as men
use to do by Trees, when they have chosen them out of the Forest, for
building, they fell, saw, hew, and every ways prepare and fit them for such
places in the building they intend, for which they are most proper and useful.
Again, when God, upon men's neglect, refusal, or abuse of the means of grace
vouchsafed unto them, shall withdraw these means to such a degree, that they
fall to open profaneness, looseness, etc. he is now said to have reprobated
them, not because he had at any time before passed an act of Reprobation
against them, which was now put in execution, and consequently, expired, and
over; but because he now acts, (or rather forbeares to act) in relation
toward them, as men are wont to act in reference to what they dis-allow,
refuse, or reject, whether things, or persons. Hence it is, that the Apostle
Paul professes his care of doing those things, which might exempt him, not
from under any decree of Reprobation, which had already passed against him, but
from falling under any such displeasure of God, which puts men into an
estate of Reprobation, i. e. Alienateth the heart, will, and care of God from
them* But I keep under my body (says he) and bring it into subjection; lest
that by any means, when I have Preached to others, I my self (...), should be
[or rather, become, or, be made] a cast away [or reprobate 1 Cor. 9. 27. (...)
] as the word in the Original properly signifies, and is elsewhere so
translated Romans 1. 28. 2 Cor. 13, 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Tit. 1. 16.
.

Nor does that expression of Paul, concerning Gods choosing men in Christ. 29.
before the foundation of the World (Ephesians. 1. 4.) import any Act in God, that is
past, and now cease to be in him, but only the standing counsel and good
pleasure, which is eternal in him, (being nothing else but himself, and his
Divine Essence) of giving life and salvation unto all those, who believe in
Jesus Christ, by the means which he graciously purposes also to vouchsafe unto
them, and accordingly vouchsafes, for this end. The Reason why the Scriptures
usually express the Acts of God, which are eternally permanent in him, by
Verbs of the Preter perfect tense, and in Phrases importing time past, is (as
Anselme long since well observed) because, there being no words used, or known
amongst men, which signify that kind of Permanency, or Presence, which is
proper to eternity, words signifying the time past, are taken up by the Holy
Ghost to express matters of that consideration and import, rather then others,
which signify either the time present, or to come* because that which is past,
being unchangeably past, and in no possibility of being any other, then past,
holds better agreement with, and is more like unto that, which is eternally,
[and so, unchangeably] present, then either that which is present in time, or
future; in as much as that which is present, is not unchangeably present, but
will shortly be past; and that which is future, is not unchangeably future, but
will in time be present, and after this, past Vnde cognosci potest eum
[Apostolum] propter indigentiam verbi significantis aeternam praesentiam, usum
esse verbis praeteritae significationis, quoniam quae tempore praeterita sunt,
ad similitudinem ^terni praesentis, omnino immutabilia sunt. In hoc siquidem
magis similia sunt ^terno praesenti temporaliter praeterita, quam praesentia:
quoniam quae ibi sunt, nunquam possunt non esse praesentia, sicut temporaliter
praeterita, non valent urquam praeterita non esse: praesentia vero temporis
omnia quae transeunt, fiunt non praesentia. Ansel. Opusc. de Concord. c. 1.
.

Secondly, if God be a Perfect, Pure, and complete Act, all in present. 30.
Being, and Doing, which is any ways possible for him either to be, or to do,
then must his Counsels and Decrees concerning men, and particularly those
lately mentioned, Election, Reprobation, Predestination, etc. of necessity
respect them, and relate unto them, not as individually or personally
considered, or as such, or such men, by Name* but in a specificall
consideration, or as Persons so, or so, qualified; or, of such, or such a
condition. So that (for example) God cannot be said to elect, or to have
elected, Peter, simply considered as Peter, or as a Person consisting of that
individual body and soul, of which Peter consists; but as an individuum, or
Person of such, or such a Species, Sort, or, kind of men. The reason why an
election of men in a mere personal consideration, must needs be inconsistent
with the perfect Actuality of God, is, because it evidently supposes a
mutability, or possibility Concerning the unchangeablenesse of God, See more
cap. 10. Sect. 40, etc. of this Discourse.
of change in him, as viz. in point of affection, as from hatred unto love;
which an election of them according to a specificall consideration does not.
For if God (for example) shall be supposed to have chosen Peter, simply and
merely as Peter, and not as a Believer, or as a godly or righteous Person; and
if it shall be supposed withal, that Peter before his conversion, was a wicked
and ungodly man (as the greatest part of men are before their conversion,
especially at some distance of time from it) it will follow, that God in time
comes to love that Person, which sometimes he hated; which evidently supposes
a mutability or changeableness of affection in God, according to a change made
in the Creature. The Scripture says expressly of God, that he hates all
workers of iniquity Psalm. 5. 5.
. Therefore whilst Peter was a worker of iniquity, most certain it is that
God hated him. But upon this Peter's conversion, it must be supposed that God
laid aside his affection of hatred toward him, and put on the affection of
love in stead thereof; which imports a Palpable and plain change in him.

If it be said, that such an Election as I Plead for, viz. of men under a
specificall consideration, supposes such a mutability in God, as this:
because. 31.
according to the notion and tenor of this Election, God must be supposed one
while to hate Peter, viz. during the time of his non-conversion, and whilst he
is a worker of iniquity, and another while to love him, viz. when he is
regenerate; I answer, no: the Election asserted infers no mutability or change
in God at all. The reason is, because it does not make the persons of men,
merely, and simply as such, the Precise and formal object of election; but
considered as the individua^ls of such a determinate Species, Sort, or Kind of
Men, or rather the species it self of such and such Men. Now as it is as truly,
as commonly, said in Logique, that though all the Individualls of a Species be
corruptible, may change or die, yet the Species it self remains incorruptible,
and cannot be changed: so in the case in hand, the Love of God in Election,
(and there is the same reason of his hatred in Reprobation) being Primarily and
directly pitched and set upon a certain Species of Men, and not upon the
Persons of Men, save by accident, and indirectly only, and in a consequentiall
way, hence it follows, that the Proper and formal Object of Gods Love, (and
so of his hatred) being unchangeable, his love it self cannot be said to be
changed, nor yet his hatred, though the persons of Men change never so often,
from good to evil, or from evil to good. Though all the righteous Persons on
the Earth should apostatize, and turn wicked, yet the Species or Kind of
righteous Men would be still the same, the same in Nature, Definition, Worth,
Loveliness, and in whatsoever is essential or proper unto the Species. And as
God loved this Generation, or Species of Men with this love of Election, before
the foundation of the World, (as the Apostles Phrase is) and consequently
whilst as yet no individual Person thereof was in actual Being, in like
manner, were all the righteous Persons in the World dead, or degenerated into
wicked men, the Love of God toward the Species would be still the same; yea
and toward all particular Persons of Men that should at any time rise up in
this Species. According to this notion of Election, it argues no mutability, or
change at all in God, either in respect of his love, or hatred, that one while
he loves, and another while hates, one and the same Person: because it
supposes no Person of Men, to be any otherwise, or in any other consideration,
the object of his Election, or of his elective Love, but only as righteous; nor
any Person of Man the object of his Reprobation, or reprobating hatred, but
only as wicked, or ungodly. As it argues no change or alteration in the
Heavens, or in the Climates thereof, that a Man removing himself by travel out
of a cold Climate, where he felt the inconvenience of cold, into an hot,
partakes here of the accommodation of warmth: it only argues, a change in the
Man in respect of his Residence and Place: so neither does it argue any change
at all in God, nor of any affection in him, in case a Man passing from sin,
where he lived under the hatred and displeasure of God, unto righteousness,
injoyes in this condition the Love and Favor of God. This only imports a
change in such a Man, but no change at all in God, or in any affection of his.
He now loves, but where, and what, he loved before, and hates still, as before
he hated. Nor does this Notion or Doctrine of Election, and Reprobation, any
ways suppose, either righteousness to be the cause of the former, or sin, of
the latter; as opportunity may be given in the Process of the Discourse more
fully to show.

Thirdly, if the Actuality of God, or the Divine Essence, be so absolute. 32.
and full, as Proof has been made, then can there be no such Act, or Decree in
him, as the Reprobation of Men, personally considered, from eternity: The
Reason is, because all men being in the loins of Adam, whilst he was yet
standing, just, and righteous, were partakers of the same condition of
righteousness with him; and consequently of all Privileges, amongst which the
Love and Favor of God are predominant, equitably belonging to this condition.
So that all Men, whilst they were found in this condition or estate of
righteousness, were the objects of Gods Love, who is frequently in Scripture
said to love the righteous Psalm. 146. 8.
, to bless the righteous Psalm. 5. 12.
, with his favor to compass the righteous, as with a Shield, Ibid.
etc. Therefore all this while, I mean during their innocence and integrity in
Adam, there was none of them, that could possibly be the Objects of Gods
hatred, or (consequently) of his Reprobation. So that if any of them be
reprobated, it must be afterward, and in time: for upon the said supposition,
which is manifestly true, viz. that they were all the Objects of his Love,
whilst they were righteous and innocent, it could not be from eternity. And
besides; if God loved them, personally considered, it is impossible, that
without a change in his affection, which is absolutely inconsistent with the
Perfect actuality of his Nature and Being, he should ever hate them, or
reprobate them, under the same consideration, or under any other, then as
changed personally from righteousness unto sin, from innocence, unto
transgression. In which case God may be said to hate them, though he loved them
formerly, without the least shadow of a change, either in himself, or in his
affection, as was lately proved.

Fourthly, and lastly, from that complete Actuality of the Divine Essence,. 33.
which has been argued and asserted, it plainly follows, that all Gods
Counsels, Purposes, and Decrees, are absolute, unchangeable, irreversible,
upon any terms, suppositions, or conditions whatsoever. Any change, or
possibility of change, in any of these, supposes a change, or possibility of a
change in him; either of which are diametrally inconsistent with a complete
Actuality, which excludes all Potentiality, and capacity of change in what
kind soever. It is true many of the Purposes and Decrees of God have
conditions essentially included in them, and which are parts of them; but
taking the whole body or systeme of the Decree, they are all absolute,
irrevocable, indispensable. It is one of the great Purposes and Decrees of God,
that if Men believe, they shall be saved. Here is a condition, viz. believing,
essentially included in the Decree. But this condition does not make the Decree
conditional, in reference to execution; nor any whit less absolute, then
those Decrees are, which have no condition at all framed into them. For let the
World stand, or fall, let Men, Angels, and Devils, interpose, and oppose their
utmost, this Decree of God shall stand, and be put toties quoties in execution;
if men believe, they shall be saved. There is the same reason of all others,
which are of like tenor and frame. And thus from the Perfection of the Divine
Nature, we have evinced, 1. The Simplicity thereof: 2. The most Pure and
absolute Actuality thereof; and from both these, in a way of lawful, clear and
evident deduction, inferred several considerations and conclusions for the
support and strengthening of our maine building in this Discourse: We have only
one thing further to argue from the Infinite Perfection of the Nature of God.
Therefore

Thirdly, (and lastly) if God in his Nature and Essence be absolutely. 34.
and infinitely Perfect, then can He act nothing, Order, Decree nothing, to the
Prejudice, or hurt of any Creature whatsoever, but only in a way of
righteousness and equity, i. e. upon the consideration of some demerit, or sin
Preceding. For not only to act, but to be able to act, unrighteously, or to
intend evil, to, or against the innocent, argues imperfection, and that in a
very high degree. Because as Job reasons and demands on the one hand, who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? and concludes, not one Job. 14 4.
; so may we on the other, who can bring an unclean thing, out of that which is
Perfectly clean? Surely not one. If the Nature of God be infinitely Perfect,
there can be nothing in it, there can nothing proceed from it, or be done by
it, that is unjust, nothing unequal, nothing hard, nothing that any ways
bends, or inclines to the hurt or damage of the Creature, being yet
innocent. And if so, then can there be no such purpose, no such Decree in him,
as men commonly call, Reprobation, or an irreversible Decreeing, or Ordaining
of men (much less far the greatest part of Men) to eternal destruction, from
eternity; no nor yet any such Preterition of men, whether we conceive it under
the Notion of an act, or of a mere Negation, which, even Lenitate verbi
tristiciam rei mitigante. Cic. Offic.
in the sense of those Men, who think to qualify the harshnesse of the matter,
with the softness of such a term, tends every whit as infallibly, as
unavoydably to the everlasting ruin and misery of the Creature, as a Positive
Reprobation could do. And indeed the exchange of the word, Reprobation, for a
Preterition, no more eases God, or vindicates the honor of his Grace,
Goodness, Love, Bounty, toward the Creature, then it would the justice or
clemency of a Judge, to plead on his behalf, that though he sentenceth
guiltless men unto death, yet he takes special care that execution shall not
be done upon them with hempen, but with silken Halters. For as not to feed a
man's enemy, when he is an hungry; or when he is thirsty, not to give him to
drink, is interpreted by God, to be an avenging of a man's self (Romans 12. verse.
19. compared with verse. 20.) in like manner for God to leave Men in such a
condition, or upon such terms, in, and under which it is simply unpossible for
them to escape the vengeance of eternal fire, is constructively, and (as we
use to say) neither better, nor worse, then, to Ordain, or Decree him in a
Positive way to the suffering of this vengeance.

But here it is commonly pleaded on Gods behalf, and said; yea but it is no. 35.
unrighteous thing, no unequal or hard thing in God, to Reprobate, or
Predestinate to destruction, and that from eternity, which, or how many of his
Creatures he pleases, without any consideration of sin at all. This is his
lawful and just Prerogative, as he is the absolute Lord of his Creatures: and
if he uses it in reference to such, or such of them, who can say unto him, why
do thou so? Or however, if he be conceived to have looked upon Men, as lapsed
in Adam, and so, sinful, when he Passed by so many of them, and left them in
the hand of eternal ruin, without all possibility of an escape, is there so
much as any appearance of unrighteousness, or hardness, in this? I Answer,

1. As some men importunely officious unto Kings and Princes, and desirous to
make their faces to shine above their native luster, in the World, have
attempted to vest such Prerogatives (as they call Prerogative) in them, as a
lawfulness of Power to impose what taxes they please upon their Subjects, to
take away any man's estate they have a mind unto, to exempt such Malefactors
from death, which by the Law of God ought to die, with many the like, which
have proved snares of dishonor, and of danger unto them otherwise; in like
manner some men desirous to commend themselves unto God, as men zealous for his
glory more then others, study and invent Notions and Senses of some Scripture
expressions, to bestow upon him in the name of Prerogatives, which they presume
are much for his honor and glory in the World: which yet upon due
consideration are found most unworthy of him, and of a broad inconsistency with
his glory indeed. For what relish or savor of honor or glory unto God can
there be, in bringing him upon the great Theater of the World: speaking thus; I
will cast out of my favor, and devote to everlasting burnings, to torments
Endless, Easlesse, Intolerable, Insupportable, thousand thousands, and ten
thousand times ten thousands, of my most excellent Creatures, Men, Women and
Children, though they never offended me, otherwise then Children may offend
many thousands of years before they are born: yea, though I thus in the secret
of my Counsel intend to leave them irrecoverably to the most exquisite
torments that can be endured, and these to be suffered by them to the days of
eternity, without all possibility of escaping, though they shall do the
uttermost they are able to please Me, and to reconcile themselves unto Me; yet
will I in words speak to their hearts, Proclaim and Profess my Self unto
them, to be a God merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in
Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin Exodus 34. 6, 7.
; I will entreat them with bowels and great compassions, and Profess my Self
aggreived in Soul because of their impenitency; I will allure them to
Repentance with all my great and Precious Promises of Pardon of sin, of life,
and glory, and all the Great things of the World to come; yea I will most
seriously and solemnly Protest and Swear unto them by the greatest Oath that
is, even by my own Life and Being, that I desire not their Death Ezekiel. 33. 11
. Can Men endued with reason and understanding, or that know in the least what
belongs to matters of honor and glory, resent or savor any thing in such
Proceedings as these, that is like to make a Prerogative, worthy the Name,
Glory, and Super-Transcendent Holiness and Excellency of God? Most certain it
is, that there is nothing in God, nothing that proceeds from him, but what is,
both Divisim and Conjunctim, and that according to the Principles of Reason,
and that light of understanding which Himself shines in the hearts and
consciences and inward Parts of Men, just matter of Praise, Honor, and Glory
unto Him: (of which more ere long.) But,

2. That Prerogative, or Prerogative-Will (as some call it) which. 36.
God stands upon in the Scriptures, and claims to Himself, as a Royalty
annexed to the Crown of Heaven and Earth, either in the ninth to the Romans, or
elsewhere, in reference to the condemnation and eternal destruction of his
Creature, stands not in any Liberty or Power claimed by him to leave what
Persons he pleases to inevitable ruin, only upon consideration of Adams sin;
(much less before or without any such consideration) but to make the Laws,
Terms, and Conditions, as of life, so of death, as of Salvation, so of
Condemnation, and these indifferently, and equally, respecting all Men, not
such as Men are apt to think meet and fitting for him to do, but what Himself
Pleases, i. e. Such as the Counsel of his own Will advises and leads Him
unto. For He is said, not to act, or Work, all things, or any one thing,
simply according to his own Will, but to work all things according to the
Counsel of his own Will Ephesians. 1. 11.
. So that in whatsoever God acts, or wills, we are to look, not only for
Will, but Counsel, i. e. Wisdom, and Tendency unto ends worthy of him; and
these discernable enough (as was lately said) by Men* to be such, if they were
diligent and impartial in the consideration of them. As for example; the Jews
thought it most equal, reasonable, and best becoming God, that he should
constitute and ordain the observation of Moses his Law, to be the Law of
Justification, Life and Salvation unto Men: and the neglect, or non-observation
of this Law, to be the Law of condemnation, and of death. God here interposeth
with his Prerogative, and declares to them, that his Will and Pleasure is
otherwise; and that he Constitutes and Ordaines Faith in his Son Jesus Christ,
to be the Law of Justification and Life, whether joined with the observation of
Moses Law, or without it; and on the other hand, unbelief, to be the Law of
condemnation and of death, though in conjunction with the strictest observation
of Moses Law. This Prerogative indeed God Himself pleads, and asserts to
Himself, with a majestique and God-like authority, speaking thus to Moses: I
will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion, an whom
I will have compassion Romans 9. 15.
: as if he should say, Men shall not prescribe unto Me Laws or Terms of
showing Mercy: I will not be advised or obliged by them, whom, i. e. what
manner of persons, or how qualified, I shall justify and save: I mean to
follow, and to keep close to the Counsel of mine own Will, in these great and
most important affairs, which concern the Life and Death, the Salvation and
Destruction of my Creature. The same prerogative The Apostle also vindicateth
unto him afterward in the same Chapter, in the similitude of a Potter. Has
not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor Romans 9. 21.
? meaning that God had a like equitable Power, or Prerogative over the great
mass of Mankind in Adam, to make what Laws of Life and Death unto them he
pleased, and to appoint who, or what manner of persons, should be saved, and
what manner of persons should be condemned, which the Potter has over the lump
of Clay which is before him, to make what Vessels he pleases for honor, and
what again he pleases for dishonor. But of this passage, as also of that,
verse. 18. we shall speak more at large toward the close of the Discourse,
where we intend an entire Explication of the 9th to the Romans from the
beginning of verse. 6. to the end of the 23. In the mean time let this be taken
along by way of caution, about what has been delivered in this Section; viz.
that though the Jews thought it most equitable, and most beseeming God, to
justify Men by the works of the Law, rather then by Faith in Jesus Christ,
which notwithstanding was the Counsel and good pleasure of God about
Justification; yet this Counsel and good pleasure of God, especially being
from time to time so signified unto them by God Himself, as it was, might very
well, had they not been negligent, or willingly blind, have been apprehended
and submitted unto by them, as a way and means of Justification, far more
rational, more full of Wisdom and Equity, and every ways more honorable
unto, and better becoming God, then that way and Method of their imagination. I
mean, by the observation of Moses Law.

3. Though it be not to be denied, but that God has an absolute Sovereignty.
37.
and Lordship over his Creature, i. e. a lawful power to dispose of it, as he
pleases, yet it is an horrible indignity and affront put upon him, and no
less then a constructive denial of his Infinite Grace, Goodness, Mercy,
Bounty, Love, etc. to affirm, that he exercises, or administreth this
Sovereignty and Power upon the hardest terms, and most grievous unto his
Creature, that can ligh^^y be imagined, yea and no ways conducing unto his own
glory: which notwithstanding they affirm (in effect) who maintain, that from
eternity He left, or purposed to leave, the far greatest part of his most
excellent Creatur^^, Men, to everlasting Misery and Ruin, without any
possibility of making an escape therefrom. Suppose that God should grant an
absolute Power unto Parents over their Children, as that if they pleased, they
might slay them, or dispose of them to be stain, (which some learned Men are
not far from supposing that God did grant unto Parents under the Law Vi. Ludov.
Cappell. de voto Jepthae. Diatrib.
) or else to expose them to the wide World as soon as they are borne, to suffer
all the extremities that are incident to flesh and blood; can it be imagined,
that persons of loving, kind, and ^ender dispos^tions by Nature, would ever
marry out of a desire to have Children, that they might show their Prerogative
or absolute Power over them, either in disposing of them unto death, or
exposing them unto misery, as soon as they should be borne? Or are such
Intentions or Desires as these, any ways consistent with sweetness,
goodness, and tenderness of disposition? How prodigiously then, and
portentuously inconsistent must it needs be with the Grace, Goodness, Mercy,
Bounty, Love, of God, which are all Infinite, to create, millions of
Men-creatures with a desire or intention to declare his Prerogative over them,
in leaving them irrecoverably, irrevocably, unavoydably to the ^aslesse,
endless, torments of Hell?

4. Suppose such a Preterition or Dereliction of the Creature as this,. 38.
could be reconciled, or argued into some tolerable consistency, with the
Grace, Goodness, Sweetness, Love, Bounty, and Mercy of God, yet the Wisdom of
God will not bear them, as being most disadvantagious unto him in point of
glory; or at least, compara^ively disadvantagious, I mean, in respect of that
other most wise, just, and equal disposition of them, wherein, and according
unto which, he is asserted to have predestined, or purposed so many of them,
be they fewer, or be they more, as should truly believe, unto life and glory;
and the residue, be they fewer, or be they more, viz. all those who should not
believe, being capable through years, of believing, and otherwise competently
rational, unto destruction. Such a Predestination of men from eternity as
this, the Scriptures clearly and frequently hold forth; yea those that are
contrary minded in the present controversies, subscribe hereunto: and without
controversy, such a Predestination as this, is fairly and fully consistent
with the glory of his Wisdom, and highly commends and magnifies, either all, or
the greatest part, of his Attributes, without the least disparagement or
obscuration unto any. Whereas that doom-full preterition, that blood, which
many wring out of the Scriptures in stead of Milk, has no rational or
intelligible comport at all with any of them; but casts a kind of spirit of
obscurity and contristation upon them all. Nor did any of those (I verily
believe) who have been the rigidest and most confident assertors of it, ever so
much as undertake to show, how, or wherein, it gratifieth, or complieth with
any of them; no, nor have they all been able with any tolerable satisfaction to
Men of unpartiall and free judgments, to discharge it of those imputations of
Malignancy against the glory of the Divine Attributes, which the Dis-assertors
of it have charged upon it.

5. (And lastly,) the Scriptures are so far from countenancing or asserting. 39.
any such exercise of prerogative in God over his Creature, which consists in a
most severe and dreadful dereliction of them from eternity, to unavoydable and
endless misery, that they still present Him as a Creator of far another
Spirit, yea of a Spirit directly contrary to that, which such a dereliction
notoriously imports. These frequently commend Him as a Creator very Gracious,
Loving, Merciful, and Bountiful toward all the works of his hands, and
toward Men above all; in so much that our Savior himself recommends him unto
his Saints, in his deportments even toward the worst and most unworthy of Men,
as an absolute pattern for them to imitate in doing good, and showing mercy
even to their enemies. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the children of your Father which
is in Heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust Mat. 5. 44. 45.
. If it shall be supposed, that God from eternity has irreversibly doomed to
eternal destruction those evil and unjust ones, on whom he makes his Sun to
rise, and sends Rain, it must be supposed withal, that he intends the
greatest evil unto them that can be imagined, even whilst he does these good
things unto them. If so, then must they who imitate him in such ways, be the
most accursed Hypocrites and Dissemblers under Heaven; making show of Love and
Kindness in their outward deportments, whilst, War and Blood are in their
hearts, toward men; yea and doing good unto them, with a purpose and desire of
bringing so much the greater evil and destruction upon them thereby. But the
Scripture every where abounds in giving testimony to the Love and Goodness of
God toward all his Creatures. The Apostle Peter styleth him (...), a Faithful
Creator, ^ Pet. 4. ult.
and wills Christians to commit their Souls unto him in well doing, upon
that account, viz. as one, or as a God, that would faithfully perform and
discharge the Relation of a Creator unto them. In calling him, a Faithful
Creator, he clearly intimates, that there is a kind of natural tie or
engagement upon every Author of Being, whether unto persons, or things, which
promises unto those who receive Being from them in any kind, a regular and
due care in them for their preservation and good. The relation of a Parent,
Father, or Mother, promises unto the Child, a regular care, desire, and
endeavor in the Parent, for the comfort and well being of it. By virtue of this
Promise it is, that (as the Apostle inform us) Parents stand bound to provide,
and lay up for their Children 2 Cor. 12. 14.
. And Parents, who do carefully perform such engagements as these unto their
Children, may well and properly be called, Faithful Parents. So the Relation
of a Mother promises unto the Infant born of her, and that with much
asseveration, and natural solemnity of protest, all care and tenderness for
the well being of it. In respect of this solemn promise it is, that God himself
demands; Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her Womb Esa. 49. 15.
? implying that such Women are very unnatural and unfaithful that can. Yea,
God himself speaking thus of the Ostrich, she is hardened against her young
ones, as if they were not hers, (Job. 39. 16.) clearly implies, that this
Creature only excepted, there is an universal tenderness and care in all
others, toward their young ones. In like manner every Creature has a very
great and rich assurance from that very relation wherein it stands unto God, as
a Creator, that upon a regular deportment of it self, toward him, and such as
any ways becomes a Creature, toward the Creator or Maker of it, it shall
receive protection, preservation, and every good thing from him. Yea the
Scripture plainly implies, that there must be a very great breach on the
Creatures part in point of degeneration and unworthiness, before God looks
upon himself as discharged from that care for the preservation and well being
of it, which he promised (as it were) unto it, in his being the Author of Being
unto it. Consider that passage in the Prophet Esaias: For it is a People of no
understanding: therefore he that MADE them, will not have mercy on them; and HE
THAT FORMED THEM, will show THEM NO FAVOR Esa. 27. 11.
. Does not this clearly imply, that had not this People been very enormously
and intolerably corrupted, and degenerated (as it were) into the spirit and
actions of brute beasts, suffering the glory of the Work of God in their
Creation utterly to sink within them, had they but quitted themselves like a
People of any competent reason or understanding, the relation of a Creator in
God toward them, would have wrought so effectually in him on their behalf,
that he would have showed them mercy and favor in delivering them. The
Creature must depart and go astray very far from the Creator, and grow (in a
manner) quite out of kind, before the Creator will, or can, cease to know,
love, and respect it, as his Creature. Hence it is that we find God himself so
frequently mentioning, and insisting upon his Relation of a Creator unto his
People, when he seeks to satisfy and comfort them, as touching his love
toward them, and care over them. Thus says the Lord that MADE thee, and that
FORMED thee from the womb, which will help thee, Fear not, O Jacob, my
Servant, Esa. 44. 2.
etc. So again: Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the
house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from
the womb; And even to your old Age I am He, and even to hoare hairs will I
carry you: I have MADE, and I will bear, even I will carry and will deliver
you Esa. 46. 3, 4.
. Thus says the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and HIS MAKER, Esa. 45. 11.
etc. Once more, (to pass by many other places of like import) But now, O
Lord, thou art our Father* we are the Clay, and thou our Potter, and we are all
the work of thy Hand Esa. 64. 8.
. As in the former passages, God strengthened the Faith of this People by
remembering them that he was their Creator, and Maker, and consequently bare the
affection and love of a Creator toward them; So in this last, they themselves
declare how effectually that consideration, viz. of the Relation of a Creator
in God toward them, had wrought upon them to the strengthening of their Faith
in his Love toward them, and care over them; and accordingly plead the same in
their requests to him.

Nor is it prejudicial in the least to that demonstration, which we intend. 40.
to make from the said passages (with their fellows) viz. of the love and care
of God, as a Creator, to all the Works of his Hands, to pretend, that in these
places and the like, God speaks only to his Church, and his Elect ones. For, 1.
The Relation of a Creator in God is uniform, one and the same, toward the
Elect (Believers) and toward Reprobates, or Unbelievers; the one being the
workmanship of his hands, as well as the other: and therefore as promising to
the one, as to the other, (if they understood, or considered, the voice of this
promise.) 2. If God, notwithstanding the Relation of a Creator in him, were
likely to have reprobated his Creatures from eternity, especially had this
people believed that he had de facto, so reprobated millions of them, it had
been a very slender support and encouragement to their Faith, that he should
remember them of his relation unto them, as their Creator. For might not they,
upon such a supposition as this, have replied unto him; Lord, why do thou so
much inculcate into us the consideration of thy Being our Maker, and Creator,
as if there were any thing in this to comfort us, or to relieve our Faith
concerning thy love to us, or care for us? Do we not know that thou art a
Creator to many thousand thousands in the World, whom notwithstanding thou
hate, and casted'st out of thy Love without any cause given on their parts,
from eternity? Therefore what assurance of grace and favor with thee can we
receive upon any such account as this, that thou art our Maker and Creator? So
that evident it is, that God himself does acknowledge a gracious tie and
engagement upon him, as a Creator, to love, respect, and take care for his
Creatures, until they voluntarily renounce and disclaim their relation unto
him, as his Creatures, by walking rebelliously against him, or suffering the
God of this World, to deface the glory of his workmanship in them. And whereas
he compares himself in tenderness and care over his Creature, unto an Hen,
which gathers her Chickens under her wings, they who make him like unto the
Ostrich, which leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and forgets that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild Beasts may break them, and is hardened against
her young Job 39. 14, 15.
ones, as if they were not hers, (which astorgy God himself imputes to want of
wisdom and understanding in her) have the greater sin, representing him
altogether unlike unto himself.

Other Scriptures there are exceeding many, which testify aloud, the grace. 41.
and love and goodness of God, as a Creator, toward his Creatures. The Lord
(says David) is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works
Psalm. 145 9.
, erga omnia opera ejus (as Piscator) i. e. are extended and shown unto all
his Creatures. But had he intended from eternity to abandon the far greatest
part of the best of his works, Men, to the vengeance of eternal Fire, could
his tender mercies (in any tolerable sense) be said to be over these?
Especially can those men justify David in such a saying as this, who conceive
and teach, that whatsoever God does in a providentiall way for such Men, so
abandoned, as in causing his Sun to rise, or his Rain to fall, upon them, in
filling their hearts with food and gladness, in giving them Health, Wealth,
Liberty, Peace, etc. he does all with an intent to harden them, and so to bring
that heavy destruction upon them with the more severity and terror in the end,
whereunto they were predestined and appointed from the beginning? Will Men
call Health, Peace, Liberty, Meats, Drinks, etc. given with an intent to become
snares unto Men, and to bring inevitable damnation upon them, the tender
Mercies of God? The holy Man Job, being conscious to himself of no signal
departure from God by unrighteousness in any kind, looked upon that
dispensation of God in so severely afflicting him, as very strange, and that
only upon this account, that he was his Creator. Thy hands have made me, and
fashioned me together round about [meaning, that he was the sole Author of
Being unto him] yet thou do destroy me. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou
have MADE me as the Clay: and will thou bring me into the dust again Job 10.
8. 9.
? If Job thought it strange, that God being the Author of Life and Being unto
him, should without any grand offense or provocation given him, handle him with
so much severity (as he conceived) in the outer Man, how incredible would the
Doctrine of those Men have been unto him, who teach, that God from eternity
has irreversibly consigned over to the merciless torments of Hell fire,
millions of millions of Men, who never offended, or provoked him in the least?
The same Author does elsewhere also notably assert the universal Love, Care,
and Respects of God as a Creator toward men, alleging the consideration of
these, as a grand engagement upon him, to deal justly and equally with his
Servants. If I did despise the cause of my man servant, or of my maid servant,
when they contended with me, what then shall I do, when God rises up? and
when he visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb,
make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb Job 31. 13, 14, 15.
? Clearly intimating a tender care and regard in God toward Men, even the
poorest and least considerable of them. After the same manner, Elihu also
advances the poor into equal respects with Princes, before God: viz. because
they, as well as these, are the works of his hands. How much less to him, who
accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor: FOR THEY ARE ALL THE WORK OF HIS HANDS Job 34. 19.
, clearly implying, that that relation, wherein every Man stands toward God,
as his Creature, is a pledge of security unto him, that God tenderly Loves and
Respects him; (excepting only the case before excepted.)

From the Scriptures lately produced, (unto which double their number,
confederate in the same Truth with them, might be added) it manifestly
appears, that such an hatred or rejection of the Creature by God from
eternity, as is commonly taught, and received amongst us, is broadly and wholly
inconsistent with that Love, Tenderness, and Respect, which the Relation of a
Creator to a Creature every where imports: and consequently, is not to be
looked upon as any Prerogative worthy of him.

CHAP. V.
Four several Veins, or Correspondencies of Scriptures Propounded, holding
forth the Death of CHRIST for all Men, without exception of any. The first of
these Argued.

THe Premises considered, me thinks it is one of the strangest and most. 1.
importune sayings, that (to my remembrance) I ever met with from the Pen of a
learned and considerate Man, which I find in the Writings of a late Opposer of
Universal Atonement: I know (says he) no Article of the M. S. R.
Gospel, which this new and wicked Religion of Universal atonement does not
contradict. That which he calls a new and wicked Religion, the Doctrine of
Universal Atonement, I shall, God assisting, and granting life and health for
the finishing of this Present Discourse, evince both from the maine and clear
current of the Scriptures themselves, as likewise by many impregnable and
undeniable Demonstrations and Grounds of Reason, to be a most ancient and
Divine truth: yea to be none other, but the Heart and Soul, the Spirit and
Life, the strength and substance and brief sum of the glorious Gospel it self.
Yea, I shall make it appear from ancient Records of best credit, and from the
confessions of modern Divines themselves, of best account adversaries in the
point) that Universal Atonement by Christ, was a Doctrine generally taught
and held in the Churches of Christ for three hundred years together, next
after the Apostles. And if I conceived it worth the undertaking, or were minded
to turn the stream of my Discourse that way, I question not but I could make
it as clear as the Sun shining in his might, that there is no Article of the
Gospel (as this Man's dialect is) I mean, no great or weighty point of the
Christian Faith, can stand with a rational consistency, unless the Doctrine
of Universal Atonement, be admitted for a Truth. Yea, upon a diligent and
strict iniquiry it will be found, that, if any Man holds such a limited
R^demption, as is commonly taught, and believed amongst us, and yet withal
^^^es holily and like a Christian, he acts in full contradiction to such a
Principle, and happily denies that in practice, which erroneously he holds in
judgment. God in such cases as these, makes Grapes to grow on Thorns, and
Figgs on Thistles: nor does there want any thing, but Sense and Visibility of
the disproportion between the cause and the effect, to make the lives and ways
of such persons, miraculous. Neither does any thing, nor all things, that I
could ever yet meet with, either from the Tongues, or Pens of the greatest
Patrons of particular Redemption, deliver me from under much admiration, that
conscientious and learned Men, professing subjection of judgment to the
Scriptures, should either deny universal, or assert particular, Redemption;
considering that the Scriptures, in particularity, plainness, and expresness
of words and phrase, do more then ten times over deliver the former, whereas
the latter is no where asserted by them, but only stands upon certain
venturous consequences and deductions, which the weak judgments of Men, so
much accustomed to error and mistake, presume to levy from them; together with
such arguments and grounds, which upon examination, will be found, either to
have no consistency with the sound Principles, either of Reason, or Religion;
or else no legitimate coherence with the cause, which they pretend unto. Let us
first hearken unto the Scriptures lifting up their voices together for the
Redemption of all Men by Christ, without exception: we shall afterward in due
process of Discourse, give a fair consideration to those inferences and
consequences of Men, wherein the strength of their Scripture Proofs stands
for the support of the contrary Opinion.

And first it is considerable, that the Scriptures do not only speak to the. 2.
heart of the Doctrine asserted, in great variety of Texts, and Places, but
also in great Veyns and Correspondencies, or Consorts of Texts, each Consort
consisting of several particulars of like Notion and Phrase. I shall recommend
only four of these companies unto the Reader: which when we shall have
pondered, in some, or all, the particulars, respectively relating unto them, we
shall add, to make full measure, the contributions of some single Texts besides.

The first Division or Squadron of Scriptures, which speak aloud the
universality. 3.
of Redemption by Christ, are such, which present the gift and Sacrifice of
Christ, as relating indifferently unto the World. The name of this kind of
Scriptures, for the number of them, may be, Legion; for they are many. Some of
the principal and best known of them, are these. So God loved THE WORLD, that
he gave his only begotten, etc. Joh. 3. 16. That THE WORLD through him should
be saved, verse. 17. This is the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of THE
WORLD. Joh. 1. 29. My flesh, which I will give for the life of the World. Joh.
6. 51. And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. 1 John 22. And we have seen and do
testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the WORLD. 1 John
4. 14. For I came not to judge the WORLD, but to save the WORLD. Joh. 12. 48.
For God was in Christ reconciling the WORLD unto Himself, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 19. To
omit many others.

The second post of Scriptures, standing up to maintain the same Doctrine. 4.
with uniformity of expressions amongst themselves, are such, which insure the
Ransom of Christ, and the Will, or Desire of God for matters of salvation,
unto ALL MEN, and EVERY MAN. Some of these are: who gave Himself a Ransom for
ALL. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Because we thus judge, that if one died for ALL, then were
all dead: and that he died FOR ALL, that they who live, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
-- that he by the Grace of God, should taste of Death FOR EVERY MAN. Heb. 2. 9.
who will have AL^ MEN to be saved, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 4. -- not willing that ANY
should perish, but that ALL should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Therefore
as by the offense of one the judgment came upon all Men to condemnation: even
so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men to the
justification of life. Romans 5. 18. with some others.

A third sort or party of Scriptures, confederate with the former (for
substance. 5.
of import, and between themselves, for matter of expression) are such, which
hold forth and promise salvation indifferently, to Him, and to whosoever, will,
or shall believe. Of this sort are these (with their fellows.) -- and HIM that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37. -- HE that believes
in me, shall never thirst, verse. 35. HE that believes, and is Baptized, shall
be saved. Mar. 16. 16. -- That WHOSOEVER believes in Him, should not perish,
etc. Joh. 3. 16. -- That through his Name, WHOSOEVER believes in Him, shall
receive remission of sins. Acts 10. 43. Even the Righteousness of God, which
is by Faith of Jesus Christ UNTO ALL, and upon all, that believe -- For all
have sinned. Romans 3. 22, 23. It were easy to make this pile also much greater.

A fourth association of Scriptures, all pregnant with the Doctrine we. 6.
assert, consists of such places, where Christ is said to have died for those,
who yet may perish, yea and actually do perish: and again, where such Men are
said to have been bought by him, and to have been sanctified by his blood, who
yet through their own negligence and wilfulness in sinning, bring destruction
upon themselves, and perish everlastingly. Places of this kind are famously
known. Destroy not Him with thy meat, FOR WHOM CHRIST DIED. Romans 14. 15. And
through thy knowledge shall the weak BROTHER PERISH, FOR WHOM CHRIST DIED. 1
Cor. 8. 11. -- even denying the Lord that BOVGHT them, and bring upon
themselves swift DESTRVCTION. 2 Pet 2. 1. For if after they have escaped the
pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them, then the beginning. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall He be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son
of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace?
Heb. 10. 29. Then his Lord after he had called him, said unto him, O thou
wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me. Should
not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servant? And his Lord was wroth
and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due to
him. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you; if ye from your
Heart forgive not every one his Brother their trespasses, Mat. 18. 32. 33, etc.

Let us begin with the Texts of the first of the four Orders mentioned,. 7.
where the Death of Christ is presented as relating unto the World. From the
tenor and import of all the Scriptures of this Denomination and Tribe, it will
be made evident, that Christ died for all Men, without exception of any; the
word, World, in these places, being necessarily to be understood in the proper
and comprehensive signification of it (I mean, for all Men and Women in the
World, in, and according to, their successive generations) and not for any
lesser or smaller number, as for some of all sorts, for the Elect, for those
that shall believe, or the like. We shall (for brevity sake) argue only some of
these places, and leave the light of their interpretations, for a discovery of
the sense and meaning of the rest.

The first proposed (of these) was that place of Renown, Joh. 3. 16. So. 8.
God loved the World, that He gave, etc. Evident it is, from hence, that Christ
was given (viz. unto Death) for them, or for their sakes, whoever they be, that
are here meant by, the World. There are but three significations of the Word,
that (to my Remembrance) I ever heard of, as competitors in this place. First,
some by the World, here understand, the elect, dispersed up and down the World.
By the Elect, they mean, all those, and those only who shall in time actually
be saved; whom they call, the Elect, because they judge them to have been
chosen by God from eternity out of the generality of Mankind, with an intent
to be by him in time, with a strong hand, and power irresistible, 1. Brought to
believe; 2. Caused, or made to persevere believing, unto the end; and 3.
Hereupon eternally saved; the residue of Men being absolutely rejected, and
left to that unavoydable and heavy doom, of perishing everlastingly. But that
this is not the sense of the word, World, in the Scripture in hand, will
appear by the light of these considerations.

1. The word, (...), here translated, World, was never known to have any. 9.
such sense or signification in the Greek Tongue; nor was it, nor is it to be
found in any Author, who wrote in this language, before, or about the time,
when John wrote his Gospel, in such a signification, nor yet in any near to
it. Now the Gospel, as is generally acknowledged, and that upon sufficient
grounds, being written in the Greek Tongue chiefly for the Gentiles sake,
(amongst whom this Language was known and understood far and near) that they
might be brought to believe, and so be saved by it, it is no ways likely, that
the Evangelist should use words, especially in such Masterveyns, and maine
passages of it, as this is, in an uncouth, unknown, and unheard signification.

2. Nor can it be proved, that it is to be taken in the sense now opposed,. 10.
in any other place of the Scriptures themselves; but in very many places it
signifies the Universal Systeme, Body, or generality of Men in the World (we
shall not need to instance for the proof of this; places being so frequent and
obvious) as also for that part of the generality of Men, which is opposite, and
contradistinguished to the Saints; i. e. to the Elect (in their sense of the
word, Elect, who yet would have these signified by, the World.) This latter
signification of the word, World, is evident in these Scriptures. We know that
we are borne of God, and that the whole WORLD lies in wickedness 1 John 5 19.
. Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive Joh. 14. 17.
, etc. If ye were of the WORLD, the WORLD would love her own: but because ye
are not of the WORLD, but I have chosen you out of the WORLD, therefore the
WORLD hates you Joh. 15. 19.. 11.
. (to omit many others.)

3. If by the World (in the Scripture in hand) be meant the Elect (in the sense
of the assertors of this signification) then it will follow, that God out of
his great love gave Christ unto those, or for those, who stood in no need of
Him; at least, either to preserve them from perishing, or to invest them with a
Right or Title to eternal life; which yet are here laid down as the two only,
or at least as two maine ends of that great gift. For if exemption from
perishing, or salvation, be absolutely, and without all consideration, awarded
or decreed by God unto Men before, or from eternity, they have a full Right and
Title unto them* or unto the possession and enjoyment of them, by virtue of
this award or decree, without the intervening of any thing else whatsoever. For
what better Right or Title can there be to the enjoyment of any thing, then a
decree of Heaven? or the award of him, who has an unquestionable Right and
Power to dispose of all enjoyments whatsoever, as, and to whom, he pleases?
But more of this consequence hereafter.

4. The structure it self of the sentence, and tenor of the words, rises up.
12.
against this sense of the word in question. For 1. If by the word, World, we
understand, the Elect, we destroy the very Grammar of the place, and make it an
uncouth and harsh sentence, such (doubtless) as cannot be paralleled, in any
Author, nor yet in the Scriptures themselves. Read we then the place thus, So
God loved His Elect, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever* -- I
demand how, or in what regular sense that Universal distributive particle,
whosoever, or (...), every one that, shall be understood? It is a thing
generally known to those that understand any thing in the Rules of Grammar, yea
the vulgar dialect of those that speak Reason or common Sense, confirms it,
that partitive or distributive Particles of Speech, always suppose a
difference (at least in possibility) between the things parted, or distributed,
and this in reference to what occasioneth the distribution. As for example;
Suppose a great King having many Sons, should express himself thus: I so love
my Children, that which soever of them shall be dutiful unto me, I will bestow
Principalities, Dukedomes, or other great matters upon them* should he not
plainly imply a possibility (at least) that some of them might not prove
dutiful unto him? In like manner, if the word, World, in the Scripture in
hand, should signify, the Elect; the distributive, whosoever, must needs
im^ly, that some of these [ Elect] might possibly not believe, and so perish;
because believing, and not perishing thereupon, occasion the distribution here
made.

2. Though our Savior, in this Period of Scripture, mentions only the. 13.
benefit intended by God in the gift of his Son, to those that shall believe,
viz. non-perishing, and the obtaining of everlasting life; yet he plainly
implies, and supposes withal, the misery and loss, which they should
certainly suffer, who shall not believe. Except this he supposed, we shall
altogether misfigure our Saviors Mind and Scope in the place, and make him
speak, more like a Man void of understanding, then himself. For then the taste
and savor of his words, would be this: God so loved the World, that He gave
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believes, or not believes, in Him,
should not perish, but, etc. Therefore certain it is, that he in the place in
hand, as well insinuates the condemnation, or perishing of those, who shall not
believe, as asserts the salvation or non* perishing of those, who shall
believe. And besides, it is contrary to Reason, especially in seriousness of
discourse, in a positive and strict manner to suspend that upon the performance
of such or such a condition, which may be had without any such performance.
This then being granted, that our Savior here supposes the certain perishing
of those, who shall not believe, the place, according to their sense, who by,
the World, will needs understand, the Elect, must run thus: So God loved the
Elect, that whosoever of them believed, should not perish: but on the contrary,
that whosoever of them should not believe, should perish. Which (according to
their Principles, against whom we now argue,) is, as if a man should say, which
soever of my sheep, is no sheep, but a goat, shall have no pasture with his
fellows.

3. They who by the World, here understand, the Elect, must, if they will. 14.
not baulk with their Principles, suppose that Christ speaks at no better Rate
of Wisdom, or Sense, in this Scripture, then thus: So God loved the World, that
He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever did that, which was not
possible for them to decline, or not to do, should not perish, but, etc. Who
ever, being serious and in his wits, required that in the nature of a condition
from any Man, especially in order to the obtaining of some great and important
thing, which he, of whom it was required upon such terms, was necessitated, or
had no Liberty or Power, but to perform? what Father ever promised his Son his
Estate, either in whole, or in part, upon condition, that whilst he rode upon
an Horse, he should not go on foot? or upon condition, that he would do that,
which a force greater he was able to resist, should necessitate him to do? So
that the whole tenor and carriage of the verse, renders the interpretation of
the word, World, hitherto encountered; a mere nullity in Sense, Reason, and
Truth.

5. The Context and words immediately preceding, will at no hand endure. 15.
that sense of the word, World, against which we have declared hitherto. This
little word, for, FOR God so loved, etc. being causall, imports, not only a
connection of these words, with what went before, but such a connection or
Relation, as that which intercedes between the cause and the effect. So that
the words in hand must be looked upon as assigning or exhibiting the Cause, or
Reason of that effect, which was immediately before mentioned. This being
granted (as without breach of conscience it can hardly be denied) it will
appear as clear as the light of the Sun, that by the word, World, (in the place
under Contest) cannot be meant the Elect only. The tenor of the two next
foregoing Verses (for together they make but one entire sentence) is this: And
as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of
Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in Him, or, every one believing in
Him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. So that the effect here
mentioned and expressed, is the Salvation and everlasting happiness of what
Person, or Persons soever of Men, or of Mankind, that shall believe in
Christ. The Reason or Cause hereof our Savior discovers, and asserts, in the
words in hand: For God so loved the World, that He gave, etc. If now by, the
World, we shall understand, only the Elect, the Reason or Cause here assigned
of the pre-mentioned effect, will be found, inadequate to it, and insufficient
to produce it. For Gods Love to the Elect, and his giving his Son for their
Salvation only, is no sufficient cause to procure, or produce the Salvation of
WHOSOEVER shall, or should, believe on him. For certain it is, that there is
Salvation in Christ for no more, then for whom God intended there should be
Salvation in him. If there be Salvation in him, for none, but for the Elect
only, then is it not true, that whosoever believes in him shall be saved. For
certain it is, that no Man's believing puts any Salvation into Christ for him:
therefore if it were not there for him, before he believed, yea or whether he
believed, or not, neither would it be there for him, though, or in case, he
should believe.

6. (And lastly) that by the word, World, in the Scripture in hand, is not
meant, the Elect, nor any thing equivalent hereunto, is evident also from the
Context, in the Verse and words immediately following, where our Savior goes
forward in his Doctrine, Thus. For God sent not His Son into the World, to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved Ioh. 3. 17.
. This Particle, for, being (as we lately noted) Causall, or Raciocinative,
plainly shows, that he uses the word, World, or speaks of the World in this
Verse, where he speaks of the condemnation of it, in the same sense, wherein he
spoke of it in the former, and the means of the Salvation of it: otherwise he
should not argue ad idem, i. e. to the point in hand. Now then to make him here
to say, that God sent not his Son into the World, [i. e. to take the nature,
or to live in the condition, of the Elest,] to condemn the Elect, but that the
Elect, etc. is to make him speak, as never man (I suppose) spoke, but not for
excellency of Wisdom, or gracefulness of expression, but for weakness in
both. To say, that God sent not his Son into the World, to condemn his
Elect, were but to beat the Air, or to fight against a shadow; I mean,
solemnly to deny that, which no man was ever likely to imagine, or affirm. For
^ow, or by what way of apprehension, should it ever enter into any man's
thoughts, that God should send his Son into the World, to condemn those,
whom out of his infinite love he had from eternity decreed to save with a
strong Hand, outstretched Arm, and Power omnipotent and invincible? Or are
not these the Elect, in their notion of Election, with whom we have now to do?
Therefore certainly, the World, in the Scripture before us, does not signify,
the Elect.

A second interpretation of this word asserted by some, is, that by the. 16.
World, is meant genus humanum, or Mankind, indefinitely considered, i. e. (if
I rightly understand the mind of those, who thus interpret) as neither
importing all, nor any of the individiuums, or persons contained in, or under,
this species, or kind, but only the specificall nature of Man, common to them
all: as when the Jews said of the Centurion, that he loved their nation Luke
7. 5.
, their meaning was not, either that he loved all that were Jews, without
exception of any; nor yet that he loved any particular person of them, more
then another; but only that he was lovingly disposed toward them, as they were
such a particular Nation, as viz. Jews. But that this Interpretation, either
falls in (in substance) with the former, and so is already condemned with the
condemnation thereof; or else, with the third and last, which (as we shall hear
presently) finds in this Scripture a Love in God toward all the individual
Persons of Mankind, without exception of any; or else, that it vanishes into
nothing, and has no substance at all in it, may be thus demonstrated. If by
Mankind, indefinitely considered, be neither meant a special or determinate
number of the persons of Men (which the former interpretation asserteth) nor
yet the universality, or entire body of Men, consisting of all the particular
Persons of men, which either have been, now are, and shall be hereafter, (which
the third Interpretation avoucheth) then is it only the nature of Man
abstractively considened, which we may (with the Schoolmen) call, Humanitas,
Humanity, or the specificall nature of Man, not the persons of Men, some, or
all, which God precisely loved with that love, out of which He gave His only
begotten Son. If so, then it undeniably follows, that Christ was given out
of as much Love to one person of Mankind, as to another, or (which is the
same) not out of any love to any at all. For certain it is, that Humanitas, or
the specificall nature of Man, is not the person of any Man. And so, according
to this Interpretation, God should love the Reprobates, as much as the Elect,
and consequently give His only begotten Son [to Death] as well for the one,
as the other. Besides, if it were the humane Nature indefinitely considered (in
the sense pre-declared) which God is here said to have loved, with that love,
out of which He gave His only begotten Son, from hence also it must needs
follow, in as much as the Reprobate (so called) partakes every whit as much in
this nature, as the Elect, that Christ was given as much for the one, as for
the other. Again, if by, the World, be meant the humane Nature (in the sense
distinguished) the distributive Particle, whosoever, with the following words,
will be found incongruous, and no ways answering the former part of the Verse,
either in sense, or regularnesse of construction. For the humane Nature, is but
simply one and the same nature, or thing, nor does it contain any Plurality,
of Species, or Individual humane Natures under it; whereas a distribution
cannot be, but of some general, which contains many particulars under it.
And upon the supposall of such a sense of the word, World, to make the
construction Regular in the latter part of the Verse, the tenor of the whole
must run thus: So God loved the humane Nature, that He gave His only begotten
Son, that what humane Nature soever believed in him, should not perish, etc.
If this construction be ridiculous, so must that interpretation needs be, which
produces it. Lastly, (to answer the illustration of this interpretation, from
Luke 7.) the Jews, who said the Centurion loved their Nation, did not suppose,
that he loved only a handful or small number of their Nation, and hated all
the rest with an irreconcilable hatred; nor did they say, that he so loved
their Nation, that whosoever of this Nation should trust him, he would be a
signal Benefactor unto them, or the like: nor did they by, their Nation,
understand the Jewish Race, Lineage, or Descent, abstractively considered, and
without reference to any Person, or Persons, whatsoever, of this Nation (for,
their Nation, in this sense, was wholly incapable of any fruit or expression of
his love, or of having a Synagogue built to it, or for it). So that this
instance no ways parallel's or fits the interpretation of the word, World, for
the illustration, or confirmation whereof it is brought. But the plain meaning
of the Jews, saying, that the Centurion loved their Nation, was this, that he
was ready and willing to do any office or service of love to any Person, or
Persons of their Nation, because of their National Relation, rather then to
any other (upon such a consideration) when he had opportunity. The two
pretenders being nonsuited, a sufficient way (I presume) is made for the
admission of the right heir. Therefore,

The third (and last) interpretation of, the World, (in the Scripture under. 17.
debate) is, that by it is signified Universum genus humanum, the whole
compass of Mankind, or all and every individual person subsisting at any
time in the humane Nature, without exception of any. This exposition stands
with the ordinary and best-known signification of the words, and withal gives
Smoothness, and Regularity of construction, unto the period or sentence, which
both the former (as upon examination has been found) take from it: is of
perfect accord with the Context: and besides, magnifies the Love of God in the
freeness, fullness, and extent of it incomparably above, and beyond, either of
them. For,

1. The word, World, (...), very frequently and familiarly both in the. 18.
Scriptures themselves, and in other Authors, signifies the generality of
Mankind, or of Men: in the Scriptures especially, when it relates unto
persons, it seldom or never signifies any thing else, but either the
generality of Men simply and absolutely, or else that generality of Men, which
comparatively comprehends all Men, I mean, the whole number of wicked and
unregenerate Men, who in respect of their vast multitudes, and inconsiderable
number of the godly (in comparison of them) are by John termed, the whole
World; And we know that we are of God, and THE WHOLE WORLD lies in wickedness
1 John 5. 19.
. Or lastly, the promiscuous generality of persons, good and bad together, be
they fewer, or more, where a Man converseth, or has opportunity to come
amongst, or speak unto. Several instances were lately given of the second
signification of the word, from the Scriptures. Instances of the first
signification also there are many. Ye are the light of the World Mat. 5. 14.
. And the World knew Him not Joh. 1 10.
. And I speak to the World those things which I have heard of Him Joh 8. 26.
. But I have chosen you out of the World Joh. 15. 19.
. Whom thou have given me out of the World Joh. 17. 6.
. God forbid: for then how shall God judge the World Romans 3. 6
? As by one Man sin entered into the World Romans 5. 12.
. But God has chosen the foolish things of the World -- and the weak things
of the World 1 Cor. 1. 27.
. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the World 1 Cor. 14. 10
. The word being never used in the Scripture for the Elect or godly party in
the World, considered by themselves, or apart from others, but either for the
wicked of the World alone, or apart by themselves, or else for both godly and
wicked taken together; and as mixed, one with another, it were very strange
that our Savior should use it in that by-sence, (and unheard of elsewhere) in
so eminent a place and passage of the Gospel, as that in hand, and nor in the
familiar and best known signification of it.

2. This interpretation of the word, accommodates the whole Verse, or. 19.
Sentence, with cleernesse of sense, and regularnesse of construction, as is
evident unto those, who understand what the one, and what the other of these
mean. For by it the Genuine and Proper use and import of the distributive
Particle, whosoever, is fully salved, (which is destroyed by either of the
former,) and such a distribution of a general made by it, which supposes a
possibility of a difference between the Particulars contained under it, and
into which the said general is distributed, according to the exigency of those
things, in Reference whereunto the distribution is made. As for example: here
is a distribution made of this general, the World [i. e. of all Mankinde] by
this distributive Pronoune, whosoever: the occasion of this distribution is to
show, who, or what particulars contained under this general, i. e. what
particular Persons of Mankind, shall not perish, but have everlasting life;
and withal, by a tacit antithesis, or in a consequentiall way (as has been
already noted) to show, what other particulars contained under the same
general, shall perish, and not have everlasting life. The former, are said to
be such, as shall believe on the only begotten Son of God: the latter are
clearly implied to be such, who shall not so believe. Now if it should be
supposed, that there was, or is, no possibility that any such difference should
be found between the Particulars, into which the general is here distributed,
as believing, and not believing, the distribution would be altogether
needless, and vain; yea and would dis-sence the whole sentence. These things
are plain and sensible to every understanding, that knows what belongs to
common sense, or regularity of Syntaxis.

3. This exposition of the word, World, makes a clean joint, a rational. 20.
and pleasant coherence, between this Verse, and that which follows; as also
between this, and the two Verses immediately precedent. The words of the two
preceding Verses, are these: And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever
believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life. Now certain it
is, that Moses did not lift up the Serpent, with an intent of healing to be
conferred by it upon such, or such, a definite or determinate number of
persons; nor with an intent, either on his part, or on Gods Part, that none
should look upon it, but only such a parcel, or determinate number of Men;
but with an intent, not only that whosoever in the event did look upon it, and
could not but look upon it, might look upon it; but that whosoever would,
might look up unto it, and that whosoever, being stung with the fiery Serpents,
did look up unto it, should be healed thereby. This is evident from the story.
Make thee (says God to Moses) a fiery Serpent, and set it upon a Pole: and it
shall come to pass, that EVERY ONE THAT IS BITTEN, when He looks upon it,
shall live Numb 21. 8
. Now then, all Men without exception being stung with that fiery Serpent, sin,
unless Christ should be lift up [upon the Crosse] with an intent on Gods Part,
and in Himself, 1. That every Man, without exception, might believe in Him, and
2. That every Man that should believe in Him, should be saved by Him, He could
not be said to be lifted up, as [i. e. upon the same terms of an Universal
accommodation, on which] Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness.
Therefore our Savior, to give the World a satisfying account how it comes to
pass, that the Son of Man [meaning, himself] should be lifted up upon such
terms [ viz. for the Universal benefit of Salvation unto all Man-kind] he
assigns the Love of God to the World, as the reason or productive cause of it.
For God so loved the World, that, etc. Therefore by, the World, he must needs
mean all Mankind, or the generality of Men, that were bitten, or stung with
sin; unless we will say, that God gave His Son for the Salvation of those,
whom He loved not.

The tenor of the following Verse is this. For God sent not His Son into ^.
21.
the World, to condemn the World, but etc. In these words, our Savior confirms
his former Assertion, touching the love of God to the World, in giving His
Son for the Salvation of it, by rejecting that Reason or Motive, of his
sending Him into the World, which Men might imagine did occasion this His
sending by God, and besides which, there could none other well be imagined, but
only that which he had asserted; viz. an Intent or Purpose in Him [in God] of
condemning the World by Him. Now to make Christ to say, that God sent not His
Son into the World, to condemn Mankind, or the generality of Men, as having
sinned against Him, is to make Him say that which is savoury, and comfortable,
and that which opposes, or is apt to prevent, such a sad imagination* as was
very incident to the minds of Men through a consciousnesse of the guilt of sin,
viz. That if God ever did, or should, send His Son amongst them, it would be to
judge, or condemn them. But to make Him say, that God sent not His Son into
the World to condemn the Elect, i. e. those few whom He infinitely loved, and
to whom He had peremptorily, and without all possibility of reverse, decreed
non-condemnation, before this sending of Him, is to make Him speak at an
extreme low rate of Sense or Reason, and to labor (as the Proverb is) in
lifting a feather; in as much as no such thought or imagination as this was
ever like to bear upon, or trouble any man's spirit. In as much then as no
other interpretation of, the World, in the former Verse, but only that, which
hereby understands the generality of Men-sinners, will accommodate this
Verse, in respect of the connection between them, with any tolerable sense,
evident it is, that that must needs be the true interpretation thereof.

By the way, when Christ says, For judgment I am come into this World,. 22.
etc. Ioh. 9. 39.
. He no ways opposes what he here says. viz. that God sent him not into the
World to cond^mn^ the World. For in the former place, he speaks, not of the
intent, but of the event; in this, not of the event, but of the intent of his
sending, or coming, into the World. Christ was not sent into the world with
any intent on Gods part, nor came with any intention of his own, to make those
which see, to become blind; meaning, either to augment, or to discover to their
shame, the spiritual blindness and ignorance in such Men, who being ignorant
presume of their knowledge, by one means or other; but with an intent to heal
the blindness of all, to their Comfort, Peace, and Glory. Therefore if any man
through a foolish and proud conceit of his own knowledge, and wisdom, shall
stumble at, or reject the Gospel and Doctrine of Christ as foolishness, and
so discover himself to be blind, ignorant, and foolish, in the end; this is
merely adventitious and accidental, in respect of the Antecedent, Primary, and
direct intention of God, in sending Christ into the World, as Calvin himself
affirms Quod autem alibi docet Christus, se in judicium venisse, quod vocatur
Petra scandali, quod dicitur positus in multorum ruinam, id accidentale est,
vel (ut ita loquar) adventitium. Calv. in Joh. 3. 17.
.

If it be demanded, but did not God intend, that whosoever should stumble at,
or reject Christ, should (in such a sense) be made blind? I answer, yes
doubtless: God did intend to punish all manner of sins with judgments
suiteable to them. But his intention of making those blind (in the sense
declared) who should reject Christ or his Doctrine, was not that intent or
purpose, out of which he sent Christ into the World (which was the genuine and
natural product of his love) but such an intent, which his perfect hatred of
sin, especially of sin committed against the Law of Grace, formed in him.

4. The interpretation of the word, World, now under assertion, magnifies. 23.
that Divine Attribute, the love of God, incomparably more, and above either of
the former. They who by the World, understand the Elect only (which is the
substance also of the second interpretation, unless it chooses rather to
resolve it self into this third, as was lately proved Sect. 16. of this Chap.
) allow a very small, narrow, and inconsiderable sphere, for so noble, active,
and diffusive a Principle, as the love of God is, in comparison of those, who
extend it to the whole circumference of Mankind. The whole element, and vast
body of the Air, in all the dimensions of it, Height, Depth, Length and
Breadth, make but a proportionable sphere for the Sun, wherein to display the
fullness of the glory, and to express the activity of his abundant light: nor
will the whole Universe of Creatures, take the whole number and entire host of
them, a prima ad ultimam, and ab ultima ad primam, make a Theater any whit too
large, capacious, or extensive, for the abundant riches and fullness of the
love of God to act like themselves upon. They who present the love of God in
the gift of his Son Jesus Christ, as contracted to the narrow compass of the
Elect, i. e. of those only, who shall in the end be saved, and Preach this for
the Gospel, unto the World; do by Men, in respect of their spiritual
accommodation, as God should do by the World in their temporal, in case he
should keep his Sun in a continual eclipse, suffer ten parts of the light of
it to be perpetually obscured.

5. This interpretation we now plead, is of fair and full consistency. 24.
with those things, which the Scriptures so frequently and constantly teach and
affirm, concerning the Nature of God, his Mercy, Sweetness, Love, Goodness
toward all his Creatures, his equal and unpartiall administration of rewards
and punishments in the World, his non-acception of Persons, his ardent,
serious, and compassionate desires, that none should perish, but that even the
vilest and wickedest of Men should return from the evil of their ways, and
be saved, his not* delighting in the death of those, who do perish, with much
more of like consideration and import. There is an obvious and manifest
agreement between the exposition we contend for, and all such veins of
Scripture expression, as these: whereas the other interpetations are at an
absolute, and manifest defiance with them.

6. (And lastly) the sense now argued for is attested by Calvin himself. 25.
upon the place, (with several other Protestant Divines.) Both (says he) are
here distinctly delivered unto us; namely that Faith in Christ is of a saving
nature UNTO ALL: and that Christ therefore brought life, because his Heavenly
Father would not have MANKIND to perish, WHICH HE LOVES. And more plainly
afterward: He uses a note of Universality, both that he may invite all to the
participation of life, and that he may cut off matter of excuse from
unbelievers. The word, World ( which he used before likewise) imports as
much. For though there will be nothing found in the World worthy the favor of
GOD, yet he shows Himself PROPITIOVS [or favourable] UNTO THE WHOLE WORLD,
in that He calls all men without exception to believe in Christ* which is
nothing else but an entrance into life Vtrumque hic distinct nobistraditur:
quod scilicet fides in Christum omnibus sit vivifica: and quod ideo vitam
attulerit Christus, quia coelestis Pater, genus humanum, quod amat, perire
nolit.

Et postea: Vniversalem notam apposuit, tum ut promiscue omnes ad vitae
participationem invitet, tum ut praecidat excusationem incredulis. Eodem etiam
pertinet nomen mundi, quo prius usus est. Tametsi enim in mundo nihil
reperietur Dei favore dignum, se tamen toti mundo propitium ostendit, cum sine
exceptione omnes ad Christi fidem vocat, quae nihil aliud est quam ingressus in
vitam, Calv. in Joh. 3. 15, 16.


. In the former of these passages the interpretation we stand for, is largely
enough asserted: but in the latter, we have it with measure heaped up, pressed
down, and running over. For here, he does not only say, that GOD shows
Himself propitious, or favorable unto the WHOLE WORLD, but further that he
calls all Men to Faith in Christ, and invites all Men to participation of life.
Therefore (doubtless) his judgment was (at least whilst he had this
Scripture before him for his steerage) that there was life and Salvation in
Christ for all Men, and that upon such terms, that all might partake of it, as
well one, as another: and consequently, that he died for all Men; in as much as
there can be no life in him, for those to partake, for whom he died not, no
more then there is for the Devils. Gualter another Protestant Author of
approved learning and worth, avoucheth the same sense. And this (says he) he
more clearly expresses, when being to name those, who GOD so loved, he does
not mention Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, Moses, David, the Prophets, the Virgin
Mary, the Apostles, or holy Martyrs, but the World, which our Evangelist in his
Epistle affirms to lie whol^y in wickedness, and of which Christ himself
more then once affirms the Devil to be the Prince Et hoc quidem clarius
exprimit, quando eos nominaturus quos ita dilexerit Deus, non Abrahami, aut
Isaaci, aut Jacobi, Mosis, Davidis, Prophetarum, Mariae Virginis, Apostolorum
denique and Sanctorum martyrum meminit, sed mundi, quem totum in malo jacere
Evangelista noster testatur, and cujus Principem esse Diabolum ipse Christus
non uno loco affirmat. Gualter. Homil. 20. in Johan.
. So that this Writer, by the World, does not understand, the Elect only, or
the World of the Elect, whereof the Devil is no where affirmed by Christ to be
the Prince, nor which is any where affirmed by John to lie wholly in
wickedness; but, the World at large, and which comprehends Reprobates, as
well as the Elect. But of all our Reformed Divines, there is none speaks more
expressly and professedly to the mind of the interpretation held forth, then
learned Musculus. By the World (says he, speaking of the Scripture in hand) he
understands the Universe of Mankind: so that here his love of the World, and
his love of Men, is the same. And elsewhere thus: After the same manner it is
in this Redemption of Mankind, whereof we speak. That Reprobates, and
desperately wicked Men partake not of it, IS NOT THROVGH ANY DEFECT OF THE
GRACE OF GOD: nor is it meet, that, for the Sons of Perdition sake, it should
lose the glory and title of an UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION, since IT IS PREPARED [or
procured] FOR ALL, and all are called to it Sic Deus dilexit mundum, etc. Per
mundu^ enim intelligit Vniversum genus humanum; ut hic (...) idem sit quod
(...). Musc. Loc. De philanthropia Dei.

Ad eum modum habet and Redemptio ista generis humani, de qua loquimur, quod
illam homines reprobi, ac deplorate impii non accipiant, neque defectu fit
gratiae Dei, neque justum est ut illa propter filios perditionis, gloriam ac
titulum Vniversalis Redemptionis amittat, cu^ sit parata cunctis, and omnes ad
illam vocentur. Idem Loc. De Redempt. Genesis humani.


. Nor were there Men wanting in the Synod of Dort it self, who though
Ante-Remonstrants by profession, yet frequently by expression did plainly
close with that Doctrine, which they would be thought to oppose concerning the
particular in hand. Our English Divines lay down this Thesis: GOD out of
compassion to Mankind being fallen, sent His Son, who gave himself a price
of Redemption, for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. In the explication of this
Thesis, they say; That price which was paid for all, and which shall certainly
benefit all that believe, yet shall not benefit all Men, etc. And presently
after: So then Christ died for all Men, that all and EVERY ONE, by the
mediation of Faith, may through the virtue of this ransom, obtain remission
of sins, and eternal life Deus lapsi generis humani miseratus, misit filium
suum, qui seipsum dedit pretium Redemptionis, pro peccati^ totius Mundi. Et
postea: Illud precium, quod solutum est pro omnibus, and quod omnibus
credentibus certo proficiet ad vita^ aeternam, non proficit tamen omnibus* etc.
Paulo post: Sic ergo Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, ut omnes and singuli,
mediante fide, possint virtute (...) hujus remissionem peccatorum, and vitam
aeternam consequi. Syn. Dord. Sentent. Theol. Mag. Brit. de Artic. 2. These. 3.
. Evident it is, that these Men, by Gods love to the world, understand his love
of compassion to all Man kind in as much as nor a part, or some, but the
whole, and all particulars of Mankind, were fallen. Besides, saying that all,
and every one, may through the mediation of Faith, obtain forgiveness of
sins and eternal life, through the virtue of Christ's ransom, they clearly
imply, that Remission of sins and Salvation are purchased by Christ for all,
and every Man, upon the same terms, after the same manner, and with the same
intention, on Gods Part, in as much as he intends the donation of remission of
sins unto no Man, notwithstanding the virtue of the ransom of Christ, but
through the mediation of Faith; and through this mediation, he intends, yea and
promises it unto all Men, without exception; yea so (say our Countrymen) that
all, and every one, may through the said mediation, obtain it. Nor were these
Men altogether without company in that Synod, in such expressions. Immediately
after the Suffrage and Sentence of the Ministers of Geneva upon the second
Article, I find one (I suppose of those who were sent from Geneva) delivering
himself thus: There is a certain common love of GOD toward all Men, wherewith
he loved all Mankind being fallen, and seriously wills, or desires the
Salvation of all. Afterward (speaking of the condemnation of unbelievers) Such
an event as this (says he) is not of it self intended by GOD, but accidentally
follows through the default of Men. Yet again: if this Redemption be not
supposed as a common benefit, bestowed upon all Men, that indifferent and
promiscuous preaching of the Gospel, which was committed to the Apostles to be
performed in all Nations, will have no true foundation Est communis quaedam Dei
(...), qua dilexit totu^ genus humanu^ lapsu^, and serio omniu^ salut^m voluit.
Et paulo post (loquens de damnatione increduloru^,) Hic aute^ eventus per se
non intenditur a Deo: sed per accidens hominis culpa sequitur. Et postea: Si
haec redemptio tanqua^ commune beneficiu^, omnibus hominibus impensu^, non
supponatur, indifferens and promiscua praedicatio Evangelii Apostolis commissa,
apud omnes gentes obcunda, nullu^ veru^ fundamentum habebit.
. Doubtless that which is bestowed upon all Men by God, was by him intended
for all Men in the purchase, or procurement of it; and this out of love to all
those, on whom it is bestowed, and for whom it was purchased. It were easy to
multiply quotations of like import with these, from many convened in that
Synod, who are supposed to have condemned that Doctrine, which holds forth
Universal Redemption by Christ, for an error. But the certain truth is, that
if this was their intention, or attempt, the truth was at many turns too hard
for them, and prevented them, and gained many a testimony from her Adversaries.

For the Fathers, they who shall please to peruse and ponder the Commentaries.
26.
or Exposition of Austin (the chief of the Latin Fathers) and of Chrysostom
(the chief of the Greek) upon the place, will easily perceive that their sense
of the word, World, was the same with that, which has been avouched. Is not
Christ, life (says the former) and yet Christ died: but death died in the
death of Christ, because life being dead, flew death: the fullness of life
devoured death: death was swallowed up in the Body of Christ Nonne vita
Christus? and tamen mortuus est Christus: sed in morte Christi, mors mortua
est, quia vita mortua occidit mortem: plenitudo vitae deglutivit mortem:
absorpta est mors in Christi corpore.
. In all these Passages evident it is, that the Father speaks of that Death,
which had equally seized upon all Men, or whereunto all Men without exception
of any, where alike obnoxious. Therefore affirming this death to be dead by the
Death of Christ, to be devoured by the fullness of Life, etc. He supposes it
equally dead, devoured, removed, or taken away, in respect of all Men. A while
after, having rehearsed these words; For GOD sent not His Son to judge the
World, but that the World should be saved by Him, he infers thus: Therefore
as much as lies in the Physician, He came to save, or heal the sick. He
slays Himself, who will not observe the Precepts of the Physician. He came a
Savior unto the World. Why is He called the Savior of the World, but that He
should save the World Ergo quantum in medico est, sanare venit aegrotum. Ipse
se interimit, qui praecepta Medici observare non vult. Venit Salvator ad
Mundum. Q^are Salvator dictus est Mundi, nisi ut salvet Mundum? etc. Aug. in
Joha^. tractat. 12.
? Doubtless he that speaks these things, had not yet dreamed of any other
signification of, the World, in the Scripture in hand, but only that, which we
have asserted: nor did he imagine that Christ was given, or sent into the World
upon any other terms, then those, which equally and indifferently respected the
healing of all that were sick, or the saving of all that were lost: otherwise
why should he insert this Provisionall Clause, as much as in the Physician
lies (meaning Christ.) This plainly imports, that he came to heal such sick
ones, who notwithstanding slew themselves by neglecting His Precepts: yea and
that he could do no more, then he did, in, or by his Death, to save those from
perishing, who do perish; and consequently, that he died as much for these, as
for those who are saved.

Nor doubtless had the other (I mean Chrysostom) any other Notion of. 27.
the World, in the said Scripture, then the former. For describing those, whom
God is here said to have loved, he gives no other description of them, then
which agrees as well to the Reprobate, as Elect, affirming them to be such,
who come from the Earth and Ashes, who are full of an infinite number of
sins, who injured, or offended Him without ceasing, very wicked [or deserving
no Pardon.] And afterward: but we neglect [or, despise] Him, being naked, and
a stranger, who died for us. And who then shall deliver us from the punishment
[or, judgement] which is to come (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 27. in Johan. (...); Ibid.
? Clearly implying, that those for whom Christ died, may notwithstanding suffer
and undergo the wrath or punishment, which is to come. It were easy to levy
many more quotations, both from the Authors already mentioned, and from many
others, as well ancient as Modern, of a full and clear concurrence with the
interpretation given. But I take no pleasure in quotations from Men: nor do I
know any great use of them, unless it be to heal the offense, which truth is
always apt to give to prepossessed and prejudicate minds. The use which more
commonly is made of them, is a grand abuse; being nothing else, but the
interposing or thrusting of the credits and authorities of Men, between the
judgments of Men, and the truth, that so the one should not easily come at the
other. However, we have (I trust) made it fully evident by many demonstrations,
in full conjunction with the judgments of learned Men, that the Scripture in
hand casts the light of that love of God, out of which he gave his only
begotten Son to Death, with an equal brightness upon all Mankind; and
consequently, that this Death of his faceth the whole Posterity of Adam, with
the same sweetness and graciousnesse of aspect.

The Scripture last opened, speaking so plainly and fully (as we have. 28.
heard) the point in hand, might well be accepted as a sufficient security,
that all its fellows mentioned with it, as (in effect) they speak, so likewise
they intend and mean, the same thing. Yet because prejudice is froward, and
hard of satisfaction, let us unpartially examine one or two more of the
company; we shall find Universal Atonement, as well at the bottom, as at
the top, as well in the heart, as in the face, of them. The former of the two,
shall be that of the Apostle Paul; To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling
the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, and has
committed unto us the word of Reconciliation 2 Cor. 5. 19.
. That by the World, which God is here said to have been in Christ Reconciling
unto Himself, cannot be meant the Elect only, but the universality of Men, is
clear upon this account. First, it is not here said, that God in Christ did
actually, or in facto esse, Reconcile the World unto Himself, but, that he was
Reconciling the World, etc. i. e. God was, and is, and ever will be (for the
unchangeable Perpetuation of the Acts of God, are usually expressed in the
Scriptures by Verbs signifying the time past, for the reason specified in the
last Chapter) in, i. e. by, or through Christ, following and prosecuting his
great and Gracious design of Reconciling the World unto Himself. Participles
of the present tense active, import the currency, or carrying on, not the
consummation, or ending of an action, or endeavor. Secondly, by the Reconciling
the World unto Himself, in, or through Christ, which is here ascribed unto God,
must of necessity be meant, either such an act or endeavor in him, by which he
gains, or rather seeks and attempts to gain, the love and friendship of the
World, which was, and is, full of hatred and enmity against him; or else, such
an act, by which he went about to Reconcile Himself, i. e. to render and make
Himself Propitious, and Benevolous unto the World. Now take either of these
Senses, it is unpossible that by the word World, should be signified, only the
Elect, or indeed any thing, but the generality of Men.

If we take the Act of God, here termed the Reconciling the World unto
Himself,. 29.
in the former sense (which doubtless is the true sense of it, as clearly
appears from the next Verse, and subsequent Clause in this), by the World,
cannot be meant, only the Elect, because God does not by Christ, or in Christ,
held forth and Preached in the Ministry of the Gospel, seek to bring over
these only unto him in love, or to make only these his friends: neither does he
send the word of Reconciliation (as the Apostle calls it) i. e. the gracious
message of the Gospel, by which this Reconciliation is to be actually made,
only unto them; but, Promiscuously to the generality, or universality of Men,
without exception of any. G^e and Preach the Gospel to every Creature under
Heaven Mar. 16. 15.
. And therefore Paul did but keep to his Commission, when (as he says) he
Preached Christ, warning EVERY Man, and teaching EVERY Man in all wisdom, that
he might present EVERY Man perfect in Christ Jesus Colos. 1. 28.
. And 2. Evident it is, that in the Ministry and Preaching of this word, God
does as well, and as much, and after the same manner, persuade the obstinate,
and many of those who never come to believe, as he does those who are overcome,
and Persuaded hereunto. It is said concerning the ancient Jews, that the Lord
God of their Fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and
sending, because he had compassion on his People, and on his dwelling place.
And yet it follows: But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and mis-used his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his People, till there was no remedy 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16.
. So that God is every whit as serious, as urgent and pressing in the Ministry
of his Word and Gospel, upon those who remain obdurate and impenitent to the
last, as he is upon those, who in time come to repent, and to believe on him.
And Paul, Acts 17. Preached the same Sermon, used the same addressement and
application of the word, to those who mocked, which he did to those who
believed Acts 17. 32. 34.
. Evident therefore it is, that God as well seeks and attempts the Reconciling
of such unto Himself, by Christ, who in fine Perish, as well as he does those,
who are saved. And that he does vouchsafe as well the same inward, as outward
means, at least remotely, unto both, shall be Proved in due place.

Again, 2. If we shall take the latter sense of the Phrase, wherein God is. 30.
said to be Reconciling the world unto Himself, and understand hereby such an
act, whereby He renders or seeks to render Himself Loving, Gracious, and
Propitious unto the World, neither yet can the word, World, signify any
thing, but the generality or universality of Men; or howsoever, not the Elect
in Particular. The reason is, because God cannot, in any tolerable sense or
construction of words, be said to reconcile Himself unto those, with whom is
not angry, or offended; or to render Himself Loving and Propitious unto those,
to whom his love is so great already, that by reason of it he Peremptorily
resolves to give unto them absolutely the greatest and most desirable of all
good things, even no less then eternal life it self, which includes in it
the richest and fullest enjoyment of God Himself, whereof the Creature is
capable. Now we know this is the Posture, or Relation, wherein the Elect stand
before, and unto, God (at least as is generally held and maintained by those,
that are contrary minded in the present Controversy) viz. as Persons, with
whom God is so far from being angry or displeased, that He is pleased by
absolute Purpose or Decree to confer eternal life upon them. Therefore
certainly God cannot be said by any Act whatsoever to Reconcile Himself, or
render Himself Propitious unto these. But now, by the World, understand the
great bulk or body of Men in the World, with whom God is, and may truly and
properly enough be said to be displeased for their sins, so he may be said to
Reconcile Himself unto them; at least if by a Reconcileing, we mean such an
act, by which He takes a course, or uses means, to bring Himself into a
complacency, or love of friendship with them, as when a Father uses means to
recover his son of the Frenzy, or Plague. It is true, a Father loves his son
with a benevolous affection, or with a love of pity (as we commonly call it)
even whilst he is under a Frenzy, and has the Plague upon him: but he takes
no pleasure in his company, does not delight to converse with him, as with a
friend; bestows nothing upon him at the present, but only in order to his
recovery; and in case by all that he does for him in this kind, he cannot
recover him, he never proceeds to settle his inheritance upon him. But when,
and whilst, he does that, which is proper to recover him out of such
distempers, he may be said (in this sense) to do an act whereby to Reconcile
Himself to his Son; viz. to make way for Himself to take pleasure in his
company, and to converse with him, and to deal furthe^ by him, as a Friend. In
like manner it is as true, that God cannot properly, or according to the usual
sense or signification of the word, be said to do any act, whereby to
Reconcile Himself to the World in general (much less to his Elect, in
Particular) because he always bares a benevolous affection to it (as appears,
Joh. 3. 16. the Scripture lately opened; So again, Tit. 3. 4. and elsewhere) he
was never so far angry or offended with it, but that he seriously and
affectionately sought the good of it; yet in such a sense, or consideration,
wherein, notwithstanding his affection of benevolence or commiseration toward
it, he is said to be angry with Men for their sins, and to hate them for their
wickedness, and to resolve to destroy them everlastingly, if they repent not,
he may be said to do such an act, whereby to reconcile Himself unto it, as
viz. when he does that, by which he is like to take Men off from their sins,
and to bring them to Repentance: and consequently to cause his own anger and
hatred toward them for their sins, to cease. But however, this is not the
Primary or direct sense of the Phrase in the Scripture in hand (as was formerly
intimated) but only that which follows upon it. For God by seeking to
Reconcile the World unto Himself in the former sense, takes a course likewise
to Reconcile Himself unto it, in the latter. But take either the one
interpretation, or the other, there is no Color or Pretense, by the World, to
understand the Elect only.

If it be objected and said; yea but God is here said to be in Christ
Reconciling. 31.
the World unto Himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. Does not this
imply that God Reconciles none unto Himself, but those only; to whom he does
not impute their Trespasses, or sins? Now it is certain that God does impute
their sins unto all Men, his Elect only excepted: Therefore he Reconciles none
unto Himself in Christ, but these only. To this I answer,

1. By concession; It is true, God does actually, and in the event Reconcile
none unto Himself, by Christ, i. e. He brings no Man to Faith and Repentance,
but withal he forgives him his sins; or (which is the same) he imputes not his
Trespasses unto him. But

2. By way of exception, I answer further, that it was no part of the Apostles
intent in this place to speak of any spiritual or inward Act of God, by which
Particular Men are actually, and de facto converted, or Reconciled unto Him,
and consequently obtain forgiveness, or a non-imputation of their sins; but
only concerning that great and gracious dispensation, or act of Grace, together
with his Counsel or Project therein, in which, or whereby He did (as it were)
posture Himself, and take a standing with the best advantage, to save the
World. For this end and purpose, I mean, for the saving of the World, or of
Men, upon such terms as he was willing, and as only became Him, to save them,
it was necessary, 1. That He should Reconcile them unto Himself. It was no
ways convenient for God, as neither consisting with His Wisdom, or Holiness,
to take those into part and fellowship with Himself in His own Blessedness and
Glory, who should hate Him, and be full of enmity and hard thoughts against
Him, and would not admit of terms of a Reconciliation with Him. 2. To effect
this Reconciliation, and to bring Men over unto Him in love, who generally
through a consciousnesse of guilt, contracted by their evil works, and
because of that contrariety between His holy Laws, and their lusts and vile
dispositions, hated Him, it was necessary that He should take a course, and
have a means suiteable and proper, and which every ways became a God of
infinite Wisdom. Now this course, or means, the Apostle here expresses to be,
the non-imputation of their sins unto them: i. e. The tender, Offer, or Promise
of the forgiveness of all their sins, upon their Reconcilement. God by the
Proposal and tender of such an incomparable Grace, Favor, and Blessing as
this unto Men, upon such sweet and gracious terms, makes account to Reconcile
the World unto Himself, to bring off His Creature, Man, from their hatred and
hard thoughts, to a love and honorable esteem of Him. 3. (And lastly) to put
Himself into a way, or capacity, of making so rich and glorious a Proposal, as
this of forgiveness of sins, unto the World, He put Himself (as it were) into
His Christ; or (as our Apostles expression is) he was in Christ; meaning, that
that which God did, or intended to do by His being in Christ, as Mediator,
was, immediately, and in reference unto a further end, that by means of His
Death, he might offer free Pardon and Forgiveness of sins unto the World;
mediately, and as more Principally intended, that He might, by means of this
offer, Reconcile the World unto Himself: i. e. Prevail with Men to repent of
their sins, and turn in faith and love unto Him. Evident it is from the very
letter of the Context, that the Apostles intent in this Scripture, was only to
express and declare the tenor or Purport of the Gospel, or (as He calls it)
of that Word of Reconciliation, the Ministry whereof He says (in the end of
the Verse) was committed unto Him* Do but read in the former Verse to this,
and you will clearly see it: And all things are of GOD, who has Reconciled us
to Himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the Ministry of the
Reconciliation; To wit, that GOD was in Christ Reconciling, etc. As if He
should say, He has given unto us the Ministry of that Reconciliation, the
tenor, substance, or purport whereof is this, viz. or to wit, that GOD was in
Christ Reconciling, etc. So that here is nothing at all affirmed, or intended
to be spoken concerning men actually or effectually Reconciled, or brought home
unto God, or what their Privileges are, in one kind or other; but only to
show, how, or by what means God has projected or contrived the Reconciling of
Men to Himself, which is expressed to ^e (as has been said) by the message, or
Doctrine of forgiveness of sins, sent and Preached unto them by Christ.

Nor are the best and most confessedly-Orthodox of our Reformed Divines,. 32.
Dissenters from the interpretation given of the Scripture in hand, especially
as concerning the sense and import of the word, World. GOD (says M^s^ulus upon
the place) inhabit^ng his Son Christ, and directing him in all things,
Reconciled unto Himself, not us only, but even THE WORLD, i. e. ALL MANKIND,
which was, is, or shall be, from the beginning of THE WORLD to the end thereof,
by giving his Son unto Death for all Men. And soon after: It is most true
which the Apostle says; that GOD Reconciled the World unto Himself in Christ,
not imputing their sins unto them, as concerning the work it self of
Reconciliation, being PREPARED, or made ready FOR ALL MANKIND, and sufficient
for them Deus Christum filium suum inhabitans, and in omnibus dirig^ns, non nos
modo, sed and mundu^, i. e. omne genus humanum, quod inde ab initio ad finem
usque mundi fuit, and est, and erit, sibi Reconciliavit, dum filium in mortem
pro omnibus dedit.

Verum est omnino, quod dicit Apostolus: Mundum sibi in Christo Deus
Reconciliavit, non imputans eis peccata ipsorum, quantum attinet ipsum
Reconciliationis opus, toti generi humano Reconciliando paratum ac sufficiens.


. Calvin also, though not altogether so expressly as the former, yet with
cleernesse enough secondeth the same interpretation, writing on the place,
thus: But the fuller and richer sense ^s, that GOD was in Christ, and then,
that he Reconciled the World unto Himself. And a little after. To what purpose
then did GOD appear in Christ unto Men? for Reconciliation, that they who were
strangers, might be adopted for Sons Sed plenior, est sensus et uberior, quod
Deus in Christo erat: deinde, quod ejus intercessione Reconciliabat sibi mundum.

Quorsum ergo apparuit Deus hominibus in Christo? in Reconciliationem, ut
sublatis inimicitiis, qui alieni erant adoptentur in filios.


. If this were the end of that Reconciliation, for which God appeared in Christ
unto Men, that they who were strangers, might he adopted for Sons; it must
needs follow; that the end which God Propounded unto Himself in this
Reconciliation, was the adoption of all Men without exception, in as much as
all Men were strangers unto Him. Among the ancients, Chrysostom expounds the
word, (...), World, (in the Text in hand) by the word, (...) (...).
, which properly signifies, the inhabited parts of the World, or the persons of
Men wheresoever inhabiting in all the World: in which sense it is used, Acts
17. 31. and in very many places besides in the Scriptures.

A third Text of that squadron of Scriptures yet in hand, and the last. 33.
(of this Character) that we shall insist upon, is that mentioned from, 1 John
2. 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole World. Some, to keep the light of that Truth,
which we have now under assertion, from shining out of this Scripture, in their
eyes, and in the eyes of others, have essayed (amongst them) a threefold
depravation of the sense and import of these words, the whole World. By the
whole World (say some) John means, the Elect living in all parts of the World:
Others, Men of all sorts and conditions; others, Jews and Gentiles. Some, to
avoid the like danger, (I mean, of being convinced of the Truth) and
suspecting (as they have cause enough) the security of those interpretations,
take sanctuary under the wing of this distinction, Christ (say they) is a
propitiation for the sins of the whole World, i. e. of all Men in the World,
in point of sufficiency, but not by way of intention, on Gods Part. Yet let us
afford the honor of a trial to the three Interpretations mentioned.

For the first, which, by the whole World, understands, only the Elect, this.
34.
has been resolved into smoke already, Sect. 9. 10, 11. etc. of this Chapter:
where, if the Reader please to look back, he may see it smoking still. The
other two being confederate with it, (for both the one, and the other are the
same, in substance of matter, with it, and differ only in terms of explication)
must needs fall with it. For both they, who by the whole World (in the
Scripture in hand) understand, Men of all sorts and conditions, by these Men
(of all sorts and conditions) understand the Elect only: and they also, who
interpret, Jews and Gentiles, understand no other, either Jews, or Gentiles,
but the Elect only. So that all the three interpretations, are
interpretatively, but one and the same. And therefore, as in case Abraham's Son
by Sarah had been sacrificed, Isaac could not have escaped; no more can any one
of the three Interpretations mentioned stand, if any one of them fall, there
being but one and the same faint spirit of life in them all.

That which their Respective Assertors plead for their legitimacy, is of no. 35.
value at all. For their Plea is, that the word, World, and the whole World, do
in several other places, signify, sometimes, the Elect only; sometimes* Men
of all sorts, ranks, and conditions; sometimes likewise, Jews and Gentiles;
and hereupon they conclude, that they may admit of the same sense and
signification, both in the Scripture in hand, and in all the other Scriptures
usually brought upon the Theater of Discourse, for the same end and purpose
with it. But the mouth of this Plea is easily stopped. For

1. The determinate signification of a word in one place, is no argument of the
same sense or signification of it in another place. Elohim, Genesis 1. 1.
signifies him, who is by nature (...) (Joh. 17. 3.) a true God, subsisting in
three Persons; but this is a weak Proof, that it is to be taken, or that it
may be taken, in the same sense, Psalm. 82. 6. where the Prophet introduces God
speaking thus, to, and concerning the Rulers of the Earth: I have said, ye are
Elohim, or Gods. That the word (...), signifies, 1 Pet. 3. 3. (as it is
translated) adorning, is no argument at all, that it so signifies, Joh. 3. 16.
or in twenty places besides, where it is used. Nay in one and the same period
or sentence, where the same word is twice used, it does not follow, that
because it is used, and must necessarily be taken in such, or such a sense
(determinately) in one of the places, therefore it must be taken in the same
sense likewise in the other. As for example, where Christ says to the Scribe,
Let the dead bury their dead (Mat. 8. 22.) because in the first place, by dead,
are meant persons, spiritually dead, or dead in sins and trespasses, it no
ways follows from hence, that therefore it signifies such as are spiritually
dead, in the latter place. So likewise in that passage of our Savior;
whosoever drinks of this water, shall thirst again; but whosoever drinks
of the water, that I shall give him, shall never thirst, Ioh. 4. 13, 14
etc. by [ Water] in the first place, he clearly means, that common and
material element commonly known by the Name of Water; but in the latter, Water
analogically only, and spiritually so called, viz. the gift of the spirit, as
himself interprets ( Joh. 7. 39. and Joh. 4. 14. compared.) Therefore to
heap up a multitude of quotations from the Scriptures, wherein the word,
World, or the whole World, does, or may signify, either a certain species, or
determinate kind of persons living up and down the World, or, Men of all sorts
and conditions, or Jews and Gentiles; and from, either an Evidence, or
Possibility, of any, or all of these significations in these places, to infer
either a Necessity, or Possibility, of a like signification of the words,
either in the Scripture in hand, or in those other places argued in this
Chapter, is but to beat the Air, or build upon the Sand.

2. If the said words, either may be taken, or necessarily must be taken,. 36.
(in the places so multiplied) in any of the said significations, it is a
sign, that there is a sufficient ground of reason in the Contexts,
respectively, to enforce either the Necessity, or Possibility of such
significations. Now then to infer, or suppose, either a like Necessity, or
Possibility of the same signification, where there is no sufficient ground in
the Context to enforce either (which is the case in hand) but many sufficient
grounds to overthrow such significations (as has been in part already, and
shall, God assisting, be out of hand further manifested, as concerning the
Texts insisted upon, in this, and the following Chapter) is as if I should
prove that such or such a Man must needs be a Prisoner at London, because he is
a Prisoner in York; or that he has the liberty of the Tower of London,
because he may walk where he pleases within the Liberties of York Castle.
The signification of words in one place, is not to be adjudged by their
signification in another, unless both the Contexts stand uniformly, and
impartially affected toward this signification.

3. That neither of the two Texts already opened, will at any hand endure. 37.
any of the three significations of the word, World, lately mentioned, as
pretended unto, has been argued into the cleerest evidence. That the Text in
hand no whit better comports with any of them, then they, appears thus:

1. If any of the said three significations of the whole World, should be here
admitted, the Apostle (or rather the Holy Ghost by the Apostle) must be
supposed to speak after no better rate of reason, then this; Christ is the
propitiation not for our sins only, but also for the sins of some few
particular Men besides, whom you know not; or, of some few Persons, as well of
the Gentiles, as of the Jews. For none of the three interpretations amounts to
any thing more then this, as is evident. They who interpret, that Christ is the
propitiation for the sins of Jews and Gentiles, by Jews and Gentiles do
not mean the two great divisions of Men in the World commonly distinguished by
these Names, in all the Particulars of either division, (for this is the fence
and interpretation which we contend for) but that small, and (comparatively)
inconsiderable remnant of both, who in conclusion come to be actually saved.
There is the same consideration of the two other interpretations. Now what
weight, or worth of Notion, or savor of sense there should be, in informing
the Christians here written unto, that Christ was the propitiation for some few
Men's sins besides theirs, or as well as theirs, I yet understand not.

2. The natural and plain inclination of the Context, leads to the
interpretation. 38.
and sense of, the whole World, contended for. For the Apostle does not simply
say, that Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole World, but he
says it by way of an emphaticall antithesis, or addition, to this saying, that
He was the propitiation for their sins. And he is the propitiation for our
sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World. This
last Clause, but also for the sins of the whole World, is clearly added by
way of augmentation or further strengthening to the ground of their Faith, and
comfort. Now evident it is, that there will be little or nothing found in it
tending to any such end, as the further enlargement of their comfort, or
strengthening to their Faith, above what the former Clause presented, but
rather, that which will be prejudicial and insnaring unto both, unless these
words, of the whole World, be taken in their comprehensive signification; I
mean for all Men in the World (without exception.) For to say thus unto a
Believer, or to a Professor of the Faith of Christ, who is doubtful about the
grounds of his Faith, and but weak in the comfort of i^ (which was apparently
the condition of those, to whom John Writes this Epistle, and in consideration
whereof, that very Clause we now speak of, was added to the former) Christ is
the propitiation for the sins of the Elect, or of some few particular Men,
must needs rather add to their doubtings, then their Faith, and augment their
fears, rather then their comforts; yea and would take from, rather then add
to, that ground of consolation, which He had administered in the former Clause;
And He is the Propitiation for our sins. For when I am in suspense, and
doubtful in my spirit, whether Christ died for me, or be a propitiation for my
sins, or no, how should it any ways tend or conduce to my establishment, for
me to know, or consider, that Christ died for his Elect, or for some particular
Men, both of Jews and Gentiles, and for some only? Has not such a Doctrine,
or consideration as this, fuel in it to increase the burnings of my fears
within me, instead of water to quench, or allay them? Or can I be ever a whit
the more strengthened to believe that Christ died for me, by believing, that He
died for some Particular Men? or must not my fears in this kind, I mean,
whether Christ died for me, or no, needs be the more provoked and enraged
within me, by considering, that Christ died for some few Particular Men only?
Or does such an assertion as this, that Christ died for some Particular Men,
though never so substantially proved, though never so effectually believed, any
ways enable, or dispose me to believe, that I am one of those Particular Men,
for whom he died? Nay rather must not a rumination or feeding upon such a
Notion, or conception as that, falling in conjunction with the weakness and
doubtfulnesse of my Faith, together with the sense and conscience of my many
corruptions and infirmities otherwise, of necessity involve and perplex me with
so much the more grievous and inextricable fears, that I am none of those
Particular Men, none of those few, for whom alone Christ died? Therefore any of
those restrained interpretations of, the whole World, which we have opposed,
do most manifestly oppose the plain scope and drift of the Holy Ghost, which
was (as has been proved) the strengthening or encouragement of their Faith,
upon rich and excellent terms: whereas the true interpretation of the words,
and that which we plead, has the fairest and fullest consistance with such an
intent, which can lightly be imagined. For the consideration, that Christ by
his death became a propitiation, or made a full atonement for the sins of
all Men, without exception, as it tends to magnify the unsearchable riches of
the Grace of Christ, on the one hand, and so is proper to strengthen the hand
of every Man's Faith; so on the other hand, it throws down every Mountain, and
fills every Valley, removes all obstructions, takes away all impediments,
cleers all scruples, and so prepares a plain and smooth way for every Man to
come unto Christ by believing; yea and cuts off all occasion^ of relapses, or
faintings in Faith afterward.

How it comes to pass, and how it may well stand with the justice of God,
that, notwithstanding the Death of Christ for the sins of all Men, yet all Men
are not saved, shall be taken into consideration in due Time, and Place.

Concerning the distinction mentioned, of Christ's dying sufficiently for all.
39.
Men, but not efficaciously, or intentionally, (on Gods Part) as it was first
hammered out by workmen of no great credit with us for spiritual building (the
Schoolmen I mean) so is it built upon a false foundation or supposition, as
viz. that intentions are attributable unto God upon the same terms See also
Cap. 7. Sect. 5. And cap. 8. 33.
in every respect, wherein they are competible unto Men; the contrary whereof
has been undeniably proved, Cap. 3. Sect. 7, 8. etc. where likewise it was
particularly argued and made good, that God is, and very properly may be, said
to intend, whatsoever He vouchsafes proper and sufficient means to effect,
especially with a command to improve or use them accordingly, whether the thing
be effected, or no. So that to affirm and grant, that Christ died sufficiently
for all Men, and yet deny, that he died intentionally for all Men, is to speak
contradictions, and to pull down with the left hand, what a Man has built up
with his right. Certainly he that levieth and imployeth a proportion of means
sufficient and proper for the bringing of any thing to pass, must needs, in
one sense or other, in one degree or other, be supposed to intend the bringing
to pass of such a thing. Nor is it any dishonor at all unto God, nor in the
least unworthy of him, that he does not always attain his ends, or things
intended by him; no more then it is, that sin should be committed in the World,
notwithstanding his opposing it by his Authority, Law and Threatenings; though
in strictness and propriety of speech, it is most true, that God never fails
of his intentions or ends, if by intentions and ends we mean only such things,
which are absolutely and positively intended by him. But in this sense the
actual salvation of Particular Men, under any other consideration then as
believers, is none of his intentions. So God loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son [not simply or absolutely, that the World, i. e. every Man,
no nor yet, that any Man] should be saved, or have everlasting life; but that
whosoever believes should have it. So that the absolute and positive
intentions of God concerning the salvation of Men, are no^ concerning the
salvation simply of Men, or of any Man, as such, but of Believers: and of such
intentions as these he never fails, or suffers disappointment. But of this,
we spoke liberally in the third Chapter.

Besides, if Christ died sufficiently for all Men, either God intended this. 40.
sufficiency of his Death, for, or unto, all Men, or not. If not, then was the
glory, or sovereigne worth of this death of his, besides the intentions of God;
God did not intend any such compleatnesse of merit or satisfaction in his
death, as were in it. But this (I presume) tempts no Man's thoughts, or
belief. If then God did intend the sufficiency of his Death, for, or unto, all
Men, why may it not be said, that he intended his Death it self accordingly?
and so, that Christ died intentionally (on Gods Part) for all Men? The word,
sufficiently, is no terminus diminuens, no term of diminution. Therefore the
argument follows roundly: if God intended the sufficiency of Christ's Death for
all Men, then he intended his Death it self for all Men; and consequently
Christ Died, not sufficiently only, but intentionally also, for all Men. And so
the distinction vanishes.

Thirdly, how can he, who pays nothing at all for a Man, nor intends to. 41.
pay any thing, be notwithstanding said to pay that, which is sufficient for
him? Suppose a Man be in debt, and in danger of imprisonment for it, can a
sufficient payment be said to be made for him, whether any thing at all be
paid for him, or in order to the keeping of him from imprisonment, or no? when
nothing at all is paid for a Man, that is a great Debtor, but that he remains
as much a Debtor, and in as great danger, as before, can that which is
sufficient or enough for him, or for his discharge, be said to be paid for
him; unless (happily) it be in a sense very delusory and deriding, in which
sense (doubtless) Christ did not pay any Ransom for any man? Suppose a man
should pay a great sum of money only for the redeeming of John, and Peter,
being Captives; by which money, he might, if he had pleased, have ransomed me
also, and a thousand more, being in the same condition of captivity with them,
can this man by reason of the payment of such a sum as this upon the terms
specified, be said to have paid that which is sufficient to Ransom me? Or is
that sufficient to Ransom me, which was only paid for the Ransom of another?

Fourthly, if there were a sufficiency in the Death of Christ for all Men, or.
42.
for the Salvation of all Men, and God not intend it for all Men, but for a
few, a number inconsiderable only, then will the Death of Christ be found
rather matter of dishonor or disparagement, unto him, than of honor. Suppose
a Man were possessed of a very great estate in Gold, Silver, and other the good
things of this life, whereby he is able to relieve the necessities of all his
Neighbors round about him, who are generally poor, and that to such an
extremity, that without relief from him, they must inevitably perish; in case
this Man should resolve to relieve only two or three of these indigent Persons,
with this his abundance, and rather throw the rest of it into the midst of the
Sea, then minister unto any more of them, though they be many thousands, and
these every whit as necessitous and as well-deserving as the other; would not
this great estate, in such a case, and upon such terms as these, be a blot
rather, and reproach, then an honor or matter of repute, to this Man, and
declare him to be of a very unnatural, ignoble, and inhumane spirit? In like
manner if God shall have satisfaction, merit, and atonement before him
abundantly sufficient to save the whole World from perishing everlastingly, and
shall purpose rather to let it be like water spilt upon the ground, which
cannot be gathered up, then dispose of it toward the Salvation of any more,
then only a small handful of Men (comparatively) leaving innumerable souls to
perish irrecoverably, and without mercy; would not this abundance of merit and
satisfaction upon such an account as this, be, in the eyes of all considering
men, an obscuring vail over the Mercy, Love, Goodness, and Bounty of God, and
occasion the Creature to judge of him, as a God rather envying, then desiring,
the Peace and Welfare of men? And if God so deeply abhorred the fact of Onan,
in spilling the seed upon the ground, lest he should give seed unto his
[deceased] Brother, that he slew him for it Genesis 38 9. 10
, how dare men present Him so near unto communion in such a fact, as the
spilling, interverting, or non-consigning of the far greater part of the merit
of the Death of Christ unto men, lest they should be saved, would render Him?

Fifthly, if Christ died sufficiently for all men, and not intentionally, as
viz.. 43.
not for Reprobates (so called) then he died as much for the Devils themselves,
as He did for far the greatest part of men. Because His death, in respect of
the intrinsecall value and worth of it, was sufficient to have redeemed the
Devils, as well as men. Yea if the sufficiency of the Price paid by Christ, be
a sufficient ground to bear such a saying as this, that He died sufficiently
for all men, He may be said to have died, not only for Reprobates, as
Reprobates; and so for Unbelievers, as Unbelievers [ viz. sufficiently] but for
the Devils also, quatenus Devils: in as much as there is no defect imaginable
in the price we speak of, in respect of the absolute and inherent dignity,
value, or worth of it, but that all these, even under the considerations
mentioned, might have been redeemed by it, as well as the Elect. But that
Christ died for Reprobates, as Reprobates, and for Devils, as Devils, in one
sense or other, were never yet (I conceive) the sayings, or thoughts of any
Man; nor (I suppose) ever will be; certain I am, cannot reasonably be.

Sixthly, (and lastly) as yet there has no sufficient ground been showed,. 4. 4
either from the Scriptures, or from Principles of Reason for the distinction
under Contest; nor (I believe) ever will be, or can be. Therefore they who
distinguish between Christ's dying for all men, sufficiently, and intentionally,
opposing the one to the other, affirming the former, and denying the latter, do
not only go about to set Lambs together by the ears, which will not fight, but
also speak things most unworthy of God, and which render him a far greater
deluder or derider of his poor Creature, Man, then a Benefactor or well-willer
to him, in all his Declarations and Professions of love unto him, in the gift
of His Son Jesus Christ to make his atonement, and procure Redemption for him.

Upon consultation had with the Premises, with other considerations (happily) of
like import, some of the greatest and most learned opposers of Universal
Redemption, Piscator, and Beza by Name, have stigmatized the aforesaid
distinction (at least that member of it, wherein Christ is said to have died
sufficiently for all Men) as harsh, Barbarous, Homonymous; yea the former of
the two, as absolutely false. That expression (says Beza) Christ died for the
sins of all Men, sufficiently, but not efficaciously, though in a rectified
sense it be true, yet is it extremely harsh, and no less ambiguous then
Barbarous. For the particle, FOR, imports either the Counsel of the Father,
according to which Christ suffered, or else the effect it self of his
sufferings, or rather both; whereas neither of them belong to any, but the
Elect Illud, Christus mortuus est pro omnium hominu^ peccatis sufficienter, sed
non efficaciter, etsi recto sensis verum est, dure tamen admodum and ambigue
non minus quam Barbare, dicitur. Illud enim, Pro, vel consiliu^ Patris, ex quo
passus est Christus, vel ipsius passionis effectum, vel potius utrunque
designat, quorum neutrum ad alios, quam ad Electos spectat. Beza. ad Acta
Coloq. Monpelg. part. 2. p. 217. vid: eundem in Thesibus cum, D. Fayo in Schola
Genevensi disputatis de efficacia Sacrificii Jesu Christi. c Exprimitur
enunciatum falsum: nempe Christum pro singulis (pro singulis ais) mortuum
sufficienter. Nam Christus pro solis Electis mortuus est sufficientissime,
pretio Redemptionis persoluto, nempe pretioso sanguine suo, sanguine nimirum
illo filii Dei. At pro Reprobis nullo modo mortuus est Christus, sive
sufficienter dicas, five efficaciter. Pisc. Contra Schaffman. p. 123.
. Piscator to his Antagonist thus: The proposition laid down, is false, viz.
that Christ died sufficiently for every Particular or single Man (this is thy
Assertion;) For Christ died most sufficiently for the Elect, paying the price
of their Redemption, I mean, His precious Blood, that blood of the Son of
GOD. But for Reprobates Christ died neither in one kind, nor other, NEITHER
SVFFICIENTLY, nor efficaciously b.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein several Texts of the second sort of Scriptures propounded, Cap. 5.
Sect. 4. as holding forth the Universality of Redemption by CHRIST, are
discussed.

THE first of these Scriptures there mentioned, was this: Who gave Himself. 1.
a Ransom for all [or, for all Men] to be testified in due time 1 Timothy 2. 6.
. Let the Context adjoining to this Scripture be narrowly sifted, and then, if
we shall but grant that the Apostle speaks either Sap, Sense, Savor, or any
thing congruous to the judgments or understandings of Men, we shall not be
able to deny but that it carries the Doctrine asserted, with an high hand of
evidence in it. Evident it is, that the Apostle in this Verse goes on with the
confirmation, or further Proof of that Reason of his, laid down Verse. 4. for
the making good what he had said, Verse. 3. That which he had said in this third
Verse is this: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of GOD our Savior.
This is good, meaning, the Performance of that duty, whereunto he had exhorted
Verse 1. and 2. viz. that Supplications, Prayers, Intercession, giving of
Thanks, should be made for ALL Men; For Kings, and for ALL that are in
Authority, etc. Now then most evident it is, that by, ALL MEN, (in this first
Verse) for whom Prayers, etc. are to be made unto God, is not meant, some of
ALL sorts of Men, nor yet ALL the Elect, or the like, but ALL of ALL sorts of
Men whatsoever (except happily those who have barred up the way of our Prayers
for them, by that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, as John intimates 1 John 5. 16.
,) For that which follows Verse 2. clearly evinceth it; For Kings, and for
ALL in Authority. Certainly if this be good and acceptable in the Sight of GOD,
that we should Pray for ALL of one sort or degree of Men in the World,
especially for ALL in Authority (in which sort or rank of Men there are many
as unworthy and incapable of our Prayers, as in any other) it is good and
acceptable in his sight likewise, that we should Pray for ALL in ALL other
ranks or sorts of Men whatsoever. For there is nothing imaginable to cause a
difference in this Point. So then, to prove that it is good and acceptable in
the Sight of GOD to pray for ALL Men without exception, the Apostle lays down
this ground Verse 4. That God will have ALL Men to be saved. If now by ALL Men
in this Reason, we shall understand only some of ALL sorts of Men, or, ALL the
Elect only, we shall shorten the arm of the Apostles Argument so far, that it
will not reach half way toward that conclusion, for the proof whereof it is
brought, and so shall make him reason very weakly, and (indeed) ridiculously,
as viz. after this manner: It is good and acceptable in the Sight of GOD that
we should Pray universally for ALL Men without exception of any, because God
will have all his Elect to be saved, or some out of every sort of Men. There is
little savor of an Argument in this: whereas the rationality and strength of
the Apostles arguing, rightly understood, is pregnant and full of conviction.
It is good and acceptable in the Sight of GOD that we should Pray for ALL Men
without exception, because his Will is to have ALL Men, without exception,
saved. The strength of this Argument lies in this ground, or clear Principle
in Reason; viz. that a conformity unto his own Will, in the will and endeavors
of men, is, and must needs be, good and acceptable in the Sight of GOD* Now
then to prove that Gods Will, is, that ALL Men without exception should be
saved, the Apostle brings this reason (in the words in hand) viz. that Christ
Jesus gave Himself a ransom for ALL Men. So that (...), ALL Men here, in this
reason, must of necessity be of the same extent, with the same word in the
Doctrine or Conclusion, which was to be proved: otherwise we shall make the
Apostle stumble at that stone in arguing, at which only Novices, or
Liers-in-waite to deceive, are wont to stumble, as viz. when there is more put
into the Conclusion, then into the Premises. That which here lay upon the
Apostles hand to prove, was (as has been undeniably evicted) that Gods Will is
to have ALL Men, without exception, saved. Now to prove this by such an
argument or assertion as this, that Christ gave Himself a ransom, either for
ALL his Elect, or for some of ALL sorts of men, as for some as well Gentiles,
as Jews, and for no others, is as if I should undertake to prove the
bountifulness of a Prince toward all his Subjects, being many, by such an
argument as this, that he sent by a special servant of his very great rewards
to two or three of them, but resolved to do nothing at all for any more of
them. Therefore universality of Redemption by Christ is the most unquestionable
Doctrine of the Apostle in this Scripture.

The next specified in the said Catalogue or Inventory, was; Because we thus. 2.
judge, that if one died for ALL, then were ALL dead: and that he died for ALL,
that they who live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him,
who died for them, and rose again 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15.
. We see the Apostles judgment here is very clear, that Christ died for ALL:
he once clearly supposes it; if one died for ALL. i. e. since one died for ALL
(the Particle, if, being racionantis, not dubitantis, as in twenty places
besides) meaning, Christ: and once plainly asserteth it, and that he died for
ALL; i. e. We also judge that he died for ALL. That which is commonly given in
by way of answer, to this, and other Scriptures, both of the former, and latter
import, by those who look another way in the controversy in hand, is not much
considerable. But that which it is, is this: they pretend that both the word,
World, and such terms of universality, as these, All, All Men, every Man, etc.
are in many places of Scripture used, and accordingly are to be taken and
understood, in a restrained signification; as sometimes for many, or greater
numbers, of Men; sometimes for some of all sorts; sometimes for Jews and
Gentiles, or the like. From whence they would infer, that therefore such Terms
and Expressions as these, are in the Scripture in hand, and in the others
formerly cited for our purpose, to be taken in some of these limited
significations; and not in the rigor or extent of what they properly signify,
as viz. for an absolute and unlimited universality of men. For to this we
answer,

1. (By way of Concession) most true it is, that these Notes or Terms of
universality, All, All Men, every Man, etc. are in many places of Scripture
necessarily to be taken in some such limited and restrained signification, as
is affirmed. But then,

2. I answer further (by way of exception) four things. First, that neither. 3.
the terms we speak of, nor any other words or expressions in Scripture, are,
in any other case, or upon any other pretense whatsoever, to be taken out of
their proper and best known significations, but only when the tenor of the
Context, or some circumstance of the place does necessitate and enforce such a
construction of them. Now evident it is by what has been formerly argued upon
the Scriptures alleged, that there is no necessity at all in respect of any
the respective Contexts, nor of any circumstance in any of them, to understand
the said terms of Universality any otherwise, then in their most proper [ i. e.
in their most extensive and comprehensive] significations.

2. (That which is more then this) we have evidently proved that the very tenor
of the several Contexts, wherein the aforesaid places are found, does
absolutely enforce and necessitate us unto such a proper and comprehensive
signification of the said terms of universality, as has been contended for: so
that there can be no Reasonable, Regular, or Grammatical sense or construction
made of those Places, unless such a sense of these terms be admitted.

3. To reason thus; these, or these Words, or Terms, are to be taken in. 4.
this, or in that sense, in such, and such places of Scripture; Therefore they
must, or they may, be taken in the same sense in such and such other places of
Scripture, is to reason our selves into a thousand errors and absurdities. As
for example; evident it is that in that Scripture, Joh. 18. 16. where it is
said, that Peter stood at the door, by the word, door, is meant a door of
wood, or some such material. But would it not be ridiculously erroneous to
infer from hence, that therefore it is to be taken, or may be taken, in the
same sense, Joh. 10. 9. where Christ says, I am the Door. So again: when Paul
says, that Christ sent him to the Gentiles to open their eyes, Acts 26. 18.
evident it is, that by the word, eyes, he means their inward eyes, their Minds,
Judgments, and Understandings: but from hence to conclude, that therefore when
David says, that the Idols which Men make, have eyes, (Psalm. 116. 5.) the
word, eyes, is to be understood, or may be understood, here also in the same
sense, is to conclude that which common sense it self abhors. So that the
weakness of all such arguings or pleadings as this; the words, All, All Men,
every Man, are in these and these places of Scripture, to be taken in a limited
sense, for some of All sorts of Men, for Jews and Gentiles, or the like;
therefore they are to be taken in the same sense in all others, where they are
found, is notorious, and most unworthy considering men. Though whilst a man is
a Prisoner, he cannot go whither he desires, but must be content with the
narrow bounds of his Prison; it does not follow from hence, that therefore when
he is discharged, and set at liberty, he must needs continue in his Prison
still, especially when his necessary occasions call him to another place,
whither also he has a desire otherwise to go See more upon this account in
the preceding Chapter. Sect. 35. 36. and likewise Sect. 19 of this.
.

We have, as concerning the former Scripture, evidently proved, that the. 5.
terms, ALL Men, must of necessity be taken in their most proper, free, and
unlimited significations: and shall (God assisting) demonstrate the same in
those yet remaining. Let us (at present) because the place in hand is pregnant
and full to our purpose, evince above all contradiction, that the word, ALL, or
ALL Men, in it, cannot with the honor of St. Paul's intellectualls, be
understood otherwise. Because we thus judge (says he) that if one died for
ALL, then were ALL dead: and that he died for ALL, that they who live, etc.
Observe that clause of distribution, that they who live: we judge that Christ
died for ALL, that they who live, i. e. That all they (without exception) who
recover, and are, or shall be, delivered from this death by Christ, for them,
should not live, etc. So then, if by the word, ALL, or ALL Men, for whom the
Apostle here judges or concludes, that Christ died, we shall understand the
universality of the Elect only; for ALL Men, i. e. for All the Elect, and for
these only, we shall grievously misfigure the fair face of a worthy sentence,
and render it incongruous and inconsistent with all Rules and Principles of
Discourse. For then the tenor of it must rise, and run thus: we judge that
Christ died for all the Elect, that all the Elect, who shall live, and be
recovered from death by Christ, should not live, etc. Does not the ear of
every man's reason, yea of common sense it self, taste an uncouthnesse and
unsavourinesse of sound, in such a Texture of words, as this? Yea does not such
a carriage of the place, clearly imply, that there are, or may be, some of the
Elect themselves, who shall not live, or be restored from death by Christ, and
consequently shall not be bound, upon any such engagement, to live unto him?
Doubtless, if by the word, ALL, the Apostle had meant ALL the Elect, and these
only, he would not have added, that they who live; but rather, that they, or
these, might live. For these words, that they who live, clearly import a
possibility at least, yea a futurity also, i. e. That it would so come to
pass, that some of those ALL, for whom Christ died, would not live; and
consequently would be in no capacity of living from themselves to live unto
him. The uncouthnesse and sencelessnesse of such interpretations as these, was
somewhat more at large argued in the next preceding Chapter, Sect. 12. 13, etc.
But now let us take the word; (...), ALL, in the proper and due signification
of it, viz. for the generality or universality of men, the sense will run
clear, and have a savoury and sweet relish with it. Because we thus judge, [i.
e. upon clear Grounds and Principles of reason, argue, and conclude] that if
one died for All Men, then were All Men dead, [i. e. Obnoxious unto death, dead
in Law, as good as dead; otherwise they should not have had any need, that
another should die for their preservation] and that he died for All Men [i. e.
we further also judge, and conclude, that he died for All Men, with this
intent, or for this end, amongst others] that they who live [i. e. That
whosoever of those, for whom he thus died, shall be saved by this death of his
for them] should [in consideration of, and by way of signal thankfulness for
such a Salvation] not live unto themselves [i. e. only or chiefly mind
themselves, whilst they live in the World, in their carnal and Worldly
interests] but unto him, who died for them, and rose again [*i. e. Promote his
interest and affairs in the World, who so notably engaged them hereunto by
dying for them, and by resuming his Life and Being after his Death, is become
capable of their love and service to him in this kind.] In such a carriage of
the place as this, there is spirit and life, evidence of Reason,
Commodiousnesse of Sense, Regularnesse of Construction, no forcing or straining
of Words, or Phrases, or the like: whereas in any such exposition, which
contracts the signification of the word, (...), ALL Men, either to the Elect,
or to any lesser number of Men, then ALL, there will be found an universal
disturbance in the sentence, nothing orderly, smooth, or clear.

By the way, the Apostle in saying that Christ died for All Men, that they. 6.
who live, should not live unto themselves, etc. does not intend to confine the
duty of thankfulness for Christ's Death, only unto the Saints, or those that
are put into an estate of Salvation by it, as if wicked Men and Unbelievers
ought him no service at all upon that account; but only shows, that Christ
expects or looks for no such denial of themselves for his sake at the hands
of any, but of theirs only, who come actually to taste and partake of the great
benefit and blessing of his death. Thus then we see, that the word ALL, or ALL
Men, though in some place, or places, it may, yea of necessity, must, signify
only some men, or some parts of all men, yet in others (and particularly in
those two lately insisted upon) it must with the like necessity, signify ALL
Men, without exception.

4. (And lastly) for the word, World, which was the term of contention in the
former head of Scriptures, though I deny not, but that in some places it
signifies only some part of men in the World, and not the entire universality
of Men, as Luke 2. 1. Acts 19. 27. and frequently elsewhere; yet that it any
where signifies precisely that part of the World, which the Scripture calls the
Elect, I absolutely deny: neither has it yet been, nor (I believe) ever will
be proved; and the rather, because the Holy Ghost delights still (as some
instances have been given Cap. 5. Sect. 10.
, and more might be added without number) to express that part, or party of
men in the World, which is contrary unto the Saints, and which are strangers
and enemies unto God, by the, World. This by way of answer to that exception or
pretense against the exposition given of the Scriptures alleged; viz. that the
word World, and those general terms, ALL, and every Man, are sometimes used in
a restrained signification.

Concerning the exposition given of the Scripture last argued, were it not. 7.
clear and pregnant enough by the light wherein it has been presented, further
countenance might be given unto it, by showing what friends it has amongst our
best and most approved Authors. Among the Ancients, Chrysostom is generally
esteemed (and that worthily) the best Interpreter of the Scriptures. His sense
of the place under debate, is plainly enough the same with ours. For (says he,
writing upon the place) He (meaning, Christ) had not died [or, would not have
died] for All, had not All died [or, been dead.] In which words he clearly
supposes, that Christ died for as many, as were dead: and consequently for
ALL, without exception, in as much as ALL without exception, or difference,
were dead. A little after, thus: For it argues an excess of much love, both
to die for SO GREAT A WORLD, and to die for it being so affected [or disposed]
as it was (...).
. Amongst our later Divines, Musculus is not the least, if not equal to the
greatest. Yet he also gives the right hand of fellowship to the interpretation
given, upon the place. But Christ (says he) died, not only for his friends,
but for his enemies also; NOT FOR SOME MEN ONLY, BUT FOR ALL without
exception. This is the unmeasurable [or vast] extent of the love of God
Christus vero non pro amicis tantum, sed and inimici^; non pro quibusdam
tantum, sed pro omnibus Mortuus est. Haec est immensa Divinae dilectionis
amplitudo.
. But the cause we plead needs no such Advocates, as these, being potent enough
with its own evidence and equity, and therefore we shall retain no more of
them.

A third Text of Scripture presented upon the same account with the former,. 8.
was; -- that he by the Grace of God should taste death, (...), for every Man
Heb. 2. 9.
. This clause imports that universality of atonement made by the Death of
Christ, which we maintain, more significantly (if more may be) and with less
liablenesse to any evasion, or shift, then any of the former places engaged in
the warfare. To show that the Lord Christ, though clothed with a body of
flesh, wherein he was capable of dying, as well as other men, yet did not
suffer death simply through the malice or power of his enemies, but upon an
account far superior unto these, the Apostle attributes his death to the Grace
of God, [i. e. The love, and gracious affections of God] not toward some, or a
few, no nor yet toward all men [ collectively taken, or in the lump] but
toward all men distributively taken, i. e. toward every particular and
inviduall man. (...) (says the Holy Ghost) for every man* i. e. to procure
eternal Redemption and Salvation for every man, without the exclusion of any.
I cannot apprehend what can reasonably be said to alienate the mind or import
of this Scripture from our present cause. Evident it is (and you shall find
our best interpreters of the place affirming the same) that the Apostle in
these words, that through the Grace of God he might taste death, etc. assigns
a Reason, (or two rather) of what he had said a little before, concerning the
Incarnation and Humiliation of Jesus Christ (whom he had in the former Chapter
asserted to be the Son of God) to prevent, or heal any scandal or offense,
that either had already, or might afterward arise in the minds of these
Hebrews, through the unlikelyhood, strangeness, ot incrediblenesse of such a
thing. It is a saying among Philosophers, (and all men have experience, in
part, of truth in it) that a knowledge of the Reasons or Causes of things,
causes admiration, and so all troublesomenesse of thoughts about them, to
cease. So then, the Apostles drift and intent in the words mentioned, being to
satisfy the Hebrews concerning such a strange, wonderful, and unheard of a
thing, as 1. That the Son of God should be made Man; and 2. That being made
Man, he should suffer death; it is no ways credible, but that he should, 1.
Assign such a cause, as would carry the greatest weight of satisfaction in it;
and 2. express himself in such Perspicuity and Plainness of words, that they
might not lightly mistake his meaning, lest, if by occasion of his words, they
should first apprehend the Reason or Cause assigned by him, to be more weighty
or considerable then he intended it, and afterward should come to understand
that it was far lighter and less considerable, their scandal and offense, in
stead of being healed, or prevented, would be more strengthened and increased;
as usually it comes to pass in such cases. Now evident it is, 1. That the
Apostles words in this place, that he through the Grace of God should taste
death for every Man, in the plainest, the most obvious and direct sense and
signification of them, hold forth the Doctrine which we maintain for Truth,
here being no restraint at all, nor the least whispering of any limitation to
be put upon that term of universality, (...), every Man; and 2. As evident it
is, that the Death of Christ for all Men, without the exception of any (which
is the Doctrine we assert) and the Grace of God so intending it, amount to a
far more weighty consideration, and satisfaction, touching those great
dispensations spoken of, (the Incarnation and Humiliation of the Son of God)
then his dying only for a few, or for a select number of men, and the Grace of
God commensureable hereunto. Therefore there is not the least question to be
made, but that the large, and not the limited sense, was the Apostles sense in
the words now under debate. And when the Holy Ghost expresses himself (as we
have heard) that he through the Grace of God should taste death FOR EVERY MAN;
for any man to come and interpret thus, for every Man, i. e. for some men, or
for a few Men (which, if not for form, yet for matter and substance, must be
their interpretation, who oppose the exposition given) is not to interpret, but
to correct, and to exercise a magisteriall authority over the Scriptures.

Nor had Pareus himself the heart to decline the interpretation asserted,. 9.
though he seems somewhat desirous by some expressions, to hide this his
ingenuity from his fellows, to avoid their offense, Whereas (says he) the
Apostle says, for every Man, it respects the amplification [or extent] of the
Death of Christ. HE DIED NOT FOR SOME FAVV: the efficacy [or vertue] of it
appertains unto ALL. Therefore there is life prepared [or made ready] in the
Death of Christ for ALL afflicted consciences, Quod dicit, (...), ad fructum
mortis Christi amplificandum pertinet. Non pro paucis aliquibus mortuns est:
sed ad omnes efficacia ejus pertinet. Omnibus igitur afflictis conscientiis in
morte Christi vita parata est, etc.
etc. The truth is, that there can be no solid ground of Peace or Comfort to
any afflicted conscience whatsoever, without the supposall of Christ's Death for
every Man (without exception; as has been argued in part, Sect. 38. of the
former Chapter; and might be further evicted above all contradiction.) Amongst
the Orthodox Fathers, Chrysostom, who (as we heard) avouched the exposition
given of the former Scripture, stands by his own judgment and mine, in his
explication of this. That he through the Grace of God should taste Death for
every man; not only (says he) for the faithful [or those that believe] but
for ALL THE WORLD. He indeed died for ALL Men. For what if all Men do not
believe? yet He has done His part (...).
[or, fully performed that which was proper for Him to do.]

The Scripture next advancing in the forementioned troop, was, Who will. 10.
have ALL MEN to be saved (speaking of God) and to come unto the knowledge of
the Truth 1 Timothy 2. 4.
. Whereunto (for conformity in import) we shall join the last there specified,
which is this: The Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some Men count
slacknesse) but is long suffering to usward, NOT WILLING THAT ANY should
perish, but that ALL should come to Repentance 2 Pet. 3. 9.
. Concerning the former of these places, we clearly evinced (in the first
Section of this Chapter) from the unquestionable tenor and carriage of the
whole Context, that by, ALL Men, cannot possibly be understood, either some of
all sorts of Men, or Jews and Gentiles, or all the Elect, or the like; but of
necessity, All of All sorts of Men, simply and universally, without the
exemption of any, whether Jews, or Gentiles. Any other interpretation or sense
of the words, (...), All Men, but this, renders the Apostle palpably
impertinent and weak (that I say not ridiculous) in his arguing in this place.
This I plainly demonstrate in the said Section: I now add, that if it may be
said, that God will have All Me^ to be saved, because he will have some of All
sorts of Men to be saved; it may more properly and truly be said of him, that
he will have all Men to be destroyed, (at least in their sense, who hold an
irreversible reprobation of Persons Personally considered, from eternity)
because not simply some, but a very great part of All sorts of Men now extant
in the World, will in time perish, and that according to the Decree or Will of
God* the tenor whereof is, that all Persons dying in impenitency and unbelief,
shall perish. Yet the Scriptures do no where say upon any such account as this,
either in terminis, or in substance, that God will have All Men to perish, and
not to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Which is somewhat more then a
^opique argument, that God is not therefore said to will that all Men should be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, only because he will have some,
some few of all sorts of Men to be saved, and come to this knowledge: but
simply because his will is to have all Men without exception [ viz. as they are
Men, and whilst they are yet capable of Repentance] to be saved, and in order
thereunto to come to the knowledge of the saving Truth, i. e. the Gospel. Nor
does it follow, that the Will of God is changeable, in case he should Will the
same Man, as this day to be saved; and as on the morrow to perish, but only
that such a Man is changeable (as we shall further show, God willing, in due
time.) Now then if it be the Will of God to have All Men, without exception,
saved, etc. most certain it is that Christ died, and that intentionally on
Gods Part, for ALL Men, without exception: because it is not imaginable that
God should be willing to have those saved, for whom he was unwilling that
Salvation should be procured.

The latter of the two Scriptures lately brought upon the Theater of our. 11.
present Discourse, acts the same part with the former. There it is said of the
Lord (Christ) that he is not willing that ANY should perish, but that ALL
should come to Repentance. If so, then certainly there neither was, nor is, nor
ever shall be any, for whom Christ was not willing, did not intend, to die, and
to purchase Repentance. So that his Death was intentionally for All Men, as
well in respect of himself, as of God the Father. Besides those slimme evasions
and shifts of making bondmen of Christ's Freemen, I mean, of an arbitrary and
importune confining the expressions importing a simple and absolute
universality (in such Scriptures as these) to petty universalities, as of the
Elect, of Species, Sorts, or kinds of Men, etc. (the nakedness whereof has
been detected over and over Cap. 5. Sect. 9. 10, 11, etc. Sect. 34. 35. etc And
again, in this Chapter, Sect. 3. 4.
) our adversaries in the cause in hand are wont to take Sanctuary from such
Scriptures, as the two now in debate, under the wing of this Distinction. It is
true, say they, God Wills that all Men should be saved, and so that all should
come to Repentance, voluntate signi, with his Signified or Revealed Will; but
this does not prove, but that voluntate beneplaciti, with the will of his
Pleasure, or Purpose, he may be willing that many, even far the greatest part
of men, should perish. But to show the vanity, or at least the impertinency of
this Distinction to the business in hand;

1. I would demand of those, who lean upon the broken Reed of this. 12.
distinction, in opposition to the clear and direct sense given of the two
Scriptures last mentioned, what they mean by their voluntas signi, the
signified or revealed Will of God; and wherein the opposition or difference
lies between this, and that other Will of God, which they term the Will of
his good Pleasure or Purpose. If by his signified or revealed Will, they mean
only the Precepts or Commandments of God concerning such and such duties,
which God would have practiced and done by Men, (which is all the account that
some of the greatest Opposers in the Point in hand, give of it) I do not
understand, how, or in what respect God can be said to will the Salvation of
all Men, or that none should perish. For, 1. Salvation actively taken, is an
act of God himself, not of men: and consequently cannot be said to be a duty
enjoined by him unto men, and therefore not to be willed neither by him, by way
of Precept or Command. 2. Salvation, Passively taken, is not an act, but a
state or condition; and consequently is no matter of duty; and so cannot be
said to be willed by God, in such a sense.

If by the signified or revealed Will of God (in the distinction now under. 13.
canvasse) be meant the Declaration which he has made in his Word concerning
the final or eventuall Salvation and Condemnation of men, evident it is that
neither in this sense can he be said to will the Salvation of all Men: because
he has declared and signified unto the World, that few (comparatively) will,
or shall, in fine be saved.

If it be pleaded, that in this sense God may be said to will the Salvation of
all Men with his signified or revealed Will, because he injoynes Faith and
Repentance unto all Men, which are the means of Salvation; and he that injoynes
the means, may (in a consequentiall way) be said to enjoin the end, in the same
injunction; I answer;

1. If God injoynes Faith and Repentance unto all men, it argues that he
Preaches the Gospel unto All men: and consequently that they who have not the
letter of the Gospel Preached unto them by Books, or Men, (as many Heathen
Nations have not at this day) yet have the spirit, substance, and effect of the
Gospel Preached to them otherwise, as viz. by the Creation* and gracious
Government of the World, which is (as I have showed elsewhere Divine Authority
of the Scriptures etc. p. 184. 185 etc. Again p. 332. 333, etc.
) purely Evangelicall, and corresponding with the Scriptures. But how this will
stand with our adversaries judgment in the cause depending, I understand not.

2. It is the sense of one of the greatest Patrons of the adverse cause, that.
14.
the precept or injunction of God, is not properly the Will of God Mandatum Dei
non est v^luntas Dei proprie dicta; quia illo non tam significet quid ipse vult
fieri, quam qu. d nostri officii sit sacere. D. Twiss^. Vindiciae Gra* tiae,
etc. p. 171.
; because (says he) he does not hereby so much signify what himself wills
to be done, as what is our duty to do. I confess that no signification
whatsoever, whether of what a man wills, or decrees to be done, or of what
is the duty of another to do, can properly be said to be the will of the
signifier: but yet that will, wherewith, or out of which, God wills or
Commands us to do* that which is our duty to do, is as properly his Will, as
that whereby he wills, or decrees things to be done. My Will, or desire,
that my Child should obey me, or, that he should prosper in the World, is as
properly my Will, as that, whereby I Will, or purpose* to show the respects of
a Father unto him in providing for him; being as proper, natural, and direct
an act of that Principle or Faculty of willing within me, whereby I Will the
latter, as that act it self of this Faculty, wherein I will the latter, is. For
the Principle or Faculty within me of willing, how numerous or different soever
the acts of willing, which I exert by virtue of this faculty, may be, is but
one and the same. And this faculty being natural, there can be no such
difference between the acts proceeding from it, which should make some to be
more proper, and others, less; though some may be better, and others worse.
But this difference can have no place in the acts of the Will of God. Therefore
if the precept, or preceptive Will of God, be not properly his Will; neither
can any other Will of his, or any other act of his Will, be properly such. If
so, then that Will of God, or act of Will in God, whereby he Wills or
injoyneth Faith and Repentance, and consequently, Salvation, unto All men, is
as properly his Will, as that whereby he wills the Salvation of any Man.
Therefore if there be any secret or unrevealed Will in God, whereby he wills
the destruction of any man, at the same time when he wills the Salvation of
All men (be it with what kind of Will soever) these two wills must needs
enter-feere, and contradict the one the other. Nor will that distinction of the
late mentioned Author, salve a consistency between them, wherein he
distinguishes, between the Decree of God, and the thing Decreed by him;
affirming, that the thing which God Decrees, may be repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the thing which he commands; though the Decree it self
cannot be repugnant to the Command R^m a Deo decretam cum re a Deo mandata,
pugnare posse dicimus; decretum vero Dei cum mandato pugnare posse non dicimus.
Twissus. ubi supra.
. The vanity of this distinction clearly appears upon this common ground;
viz. that Acts are differenced, and distinguished by their Objects. Therefore
if the Object of Gods decreeing Will, or the thing Decreed by him, be contrary
to the thing preceptively willed, or commanded by him, unpossible it is, but
that the two acts of his Will, by the one of which he is supposed to will the
one, and by the other, the other, should digladiate, and one fight against the
other. Therefore certainly there is no such pair, or combination of wills in
God, as the distinction of voluntas signi, and beneplaciti, (as applied in the
question in hand) does suppose. It is unpossible that I should inwardly and
seriously will, or desire, the Death of my child; and yet at the same time
seriously also will and enjoin the Physician to do his best to recover him.

Again, if God enjoin Faith and Repentance unto All men, with a declaration. 15.
that he injoyneth them in order to their Salvation, or with a promise, that
upon their obedience to this injunction of His, they shall be actually saved*
then can he not at the same time will, with a secret will, the condemnation of
any. But most evident it is, that unto whomsoever he injoyneth Faith, or
Repentance, he injoyneth them in order to their Salvation, and with promise of
actual Salvation, upon their obedience to this injunction. Mar. 16. 16. Acts
3. 19. Joh. 20. 31. etc. Therefore unpossible it is, that he should secretly
intend, will, or purpose the destruction of any, to whom he injoyns Faith and
Repentance. The consequence in this argument is so rich in evidence, that it
needs no Proof. If a Prince should inwardly and resolvedly determine to put
such or such a Malefactor to death, and yet by Proclamation, or otherwise,
promise him his Life, or a Pardon, upon condition he would reform his course,
would this be a strain of Divine Perfection, or like unto one of the Ways of
God?

There is a sense (I confess) wherein the distinction now in consideration,.
16.
may be admitted. If by the signified or revealed Will of God be meant nothing
else, but such Declarations or Manifestations made by God, which when made by
men, are signs of a Will, Purpose, or Desire in them, suitable to their
respective tenors and imports, (which is clearly their sense of this member of
the distinction, who were the first coyners of it, I mean, the Schoolmen Aqu.
Sum. Part. 1. Qu. 19 Art. 12. in Cor.
) there is no inconvenience in granting a revealed will in God, distinguished
from, or opposed unto, a will of good Pleasure or of Purpose, in him. This
sense makes no opposition of Wills in God, nor yet between things willed or
purposed by him: but only shows, or supposes, that the will and good
Pleasure in God, extends not to the actual Procurement of obedience from men
unto all those Laws or Commands, which he judges meet to impose upon them; or
(which is the same) that God has not positively decreed that all Men shall, or
shall be necessitated by him, to live in subjection to all those Laws, which
he has appointed unto them. This sense is orthodox, and unblameable: but holds
no intelligence with that opinion, which supposes one will in God, according
unto which he wills all Men to be saved; and another, according unto which he
wills the far greatest part of men to be damned, and both antecedent. For
otherwise, two such wills as these, are fairly and clearly enough consistent
in him. God, according to the distinction of the Will of God into Antecedent,
and Cons^quent, (first set on foot by some of the Fathers, Chrysostom, and
Damascen by name, and since made use of by the Schoolmen) may with the former,
be said to will the Salvation of all Men; and yet with the latter be said also
(in a sense) to will the condemnation of far the greatest part of them. His
Antecedent Will (the distinction being admitted as it ought to be, having so
clear a foundation in Scripture) respects men simply as men; his Consequent
Will relates to them as considerable under the two opposite qualifications, or
immediate capacity, of life, and death; or of Salvation, and Condemnation; the
one of these being Faith persevered in unto Death, the other, final
impenitency or unbelief* According to the former of these wills, God is said to
will the Salvation of all Men, partly because he vouchsafes a sufficiency of
means unto all Men* whereby to be saved; partly also, because he has passed no
Decree against any man, which either formally, or consequentially, or in any
consideration whatsoever, excludes any man personally considered, from
Salvation, before he voluntarily excludes himself by such sinful miscarriages
and deportments, which according to the revealed Will of God, render him
utterly incapable thereof. According to the latter of these wills, as he
peremptorily wills the Salvation of all those, who are faithful unto Death;
so does he as peremptorily will the condemnation of all those, who shall not be
found in the Faith of Jes^s Christ, at their end. These latter, through their
own deplorable and voluntary carelessenesse and negligence, proving to be in
number far the greater part of men, God, upon this supposition, and in a
consequentiall way, may be said to will the condemnation of the greatest part
of Men, and the Salvation only of a few (comparatively). But of these things
more hereafter.

In the mean time evident it is from the Scriptures argued, that Christ
d(...). 17.
intentionally for All men, (without exception) considered as men; an^ that
there was nothing more procured, nor intended to be procured, thereby, for one
man, then another, personally considered, or simply as men. Only this was
intended in this Death of Christ (in the general) that whosoever, whether few,
or whether many, should with a true and persevering Faith believe in Him,
should actually partake of the benefit and blessing of this his Death in the
great reward of Salvation: and on the other hand, that whosoever, whether few,
or whether many, should not believe in him with such a Faith, should (upon this
account) be excluded from all Participation in the great blessing of Salvation
purchased by his Death, notwithstanding the purchase was as much made, and
intended to be made for them, as for those, who come actually to inherit; even
as the marriage feast in the Parable, was as much provided, prepared, and
intended for those, who upon their invitation came not, as it was for those,
who came, and actually partooke of it; unless we shall say that the King, who
made this Feast, intended it not for those, whom notwithstanding he solemnly
invited to it, and with whom he was highly displeased for their refusal to
come, being invited. Mat 22. 3, 4 etc.
And that the Death of Christ, and the gracious intentions of God therein, did,
and do, equally and uniformly respect All men, is abundantly manifest from
that Declaration made by the Lord Christ Himself on this behalf, (formerly
opened;) So God loved the World, that he ga^e his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but have everlasting life Joh.
3. 16.
. Those words, that whosoever believes on Him, should not perish, etc.
evidently import un-differenced and impartial intentions on Gods Part toward
men in the gift of His Son.

The last Scripture of the Division yet in hand, was this: Therefore as by. 18.
the offense of one, the judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon ALL MEN unto the
justification of Life. Romans 5. 18. Evident it is, that the Apostle in this
Passage compares the extent of the condemnation, which came by the sin of
Adam, with the extent of the Grace of justification, which came by Christ, in
respect of the numbers of Persons, unto whom they extended respectively; and
finds them in this point commensurable, the one unto the other. The Persons
upon whom the gift of justification comes by Christ, are made equal in number
unto those, upon whom the judgment of condemnation came by Adam. For as the
offense of Adam is here said to have come upon ALL MEN unto condemnation: so
also is the gift of justification of Life, [i. e. of such a justification, upon
which, and by means whereof, men are saved] which comes by Jes^^ Christ, said
to come UPON ALL MEN likewise. Now to say, that ALL MEN, in the former clause,
is to be taken properly and signifies ALL MEN, indeed, without exception of any
(which all Expositors grant without exception of any) but in the latter,
unproperly and with limitation, yea with such a limitation, which
comparatively, and a few only excepted, excludes ALL MEN, there being not the
least ground or reason in the Context to vary the signification of the words,
or to make them to signify more in the one clause, and fewer in the other, is
to exercise an arbitrary dominion over the expressions of the Holy Ghost, and
to invent and set up significations and sense^ of words at pleasure.

Nor does it at all ease the matter, to say or prove* that in other places of.
19.
Scripture, this word, (...), All men, signifies not all without exception, but
only a great number, or all of one particular sort or kind of Persons; because,

1. If it can be proved that in other places of Scripture it so signifies (I
mean, not All without exception, but only some greater number, or numbers of
men) it seems then there is a reason why it should, or must, so signify in
these places: otherwise it could not be proved that there it so signifies See
more of thi^ Sect. 3. and 4. of this Cap. as also, cap. 5. sect 35. 36.
. But here is no reason at all to be given why it should be taken out of the
proper and native signification, or signify any lesser number, then All Men
simply. Now to refuse the proper signification of aword, where there is no
other reason why it should be refused, but only because it is to be refused
where there is a reason (and so a necessity) to refuse it, is as if one should
persuade a man that is an hungry, to forbear Meat whilst he may have it,
because he must forbear it, when he cannot get it. When the Context or Subject
matter does require a by, less proper, or limited signification of a word or
Phrase, this signification is put upon them by God. But when there is no
occasion or necessity, either in respect of the one, or of the other, why such
a signification should be put upon them, now if it be done, the doing of it is
arbitrary, and from the lawless presumption of men. How much more when men
shall do it, not only without any sufficient ground or reason, but against
reason? which is the case of those, who by [ All men] in the latter clause of
the verse in hand, will needs understand only some men, and these but very few,
comparatively. For,

2. Though one and the same word, or Phrase, is sometimes to be taken. 20.
in a different signification in one and the same Period or sentence (as
elsewhere is observed) yet this is no where to be done, but where there is a
manifest and pregnant reason for the doing of it, as in these and the like
places, Let the DEAD bury their DEAD; Mat. 8. 22. So again: Whosoever drinks
of this WATER, shall thirst again: but whosoever shall drink of the WATER
that I shall give him, shall never thirst more; Joh. 4. 13, 14. There is a
plain reason, why by the dead, in the end of the former of these places, should
be meant such as were naturally, or corporally dead; viz. because such only are
to be buried, with that kind of burial, whereof our Savior had occasion to
speak, as appears from the former verse. Again, why by the dead in the
beginning of the said passage, should be meant those that are spiritually dead,
and not those that are corporally dead, there is this reason (every whit as
plain, as the former) viz. because those that are naturally or corporally dead,
are not capable of burying those that are dead, either with one kind of
burial, or other. So why the word, WATER, (in the latter of the passages
mentioned) should in the first place signify material or elementary water; in
the latter, spiritual water, or the Holy Ghost; reasons are obvious and near
at hand: we shall not need to name them. But why the words, (...), all men (in
the place of the Apostle under debate) being twice used, should be conceived so
far to vary in their significations, as in the former clause, to signify, All
men without exception; in the latter, very few men; no like reason (nor indeed
any competent) can be given.

3. Though, All men, does in some places signify only a greater number. 21.
of Men, not All men simply or universally; yet it never signifies a small
number of Men, either in opposition to, or in comparison with, a greater; least
of all with the greatest number that is; as they must make it signify in the
Scripture in hand, who will have no more signified by it (in the latter of the
two clauses, where it is used) then only those, who come in time to be actually
saved by Christ. For these are a very small number ( few there be, says
Christ, that find it; speaking of the strait gate, which leads unto Life)
in comparison of those, upon whom condemnation came by Adam.

4. If condemnation should come upon all Men simply, by the offense. 22.
of Adam, and righteousness only upon some Men, and these but a few neither,
comparatively, by the obedience and gift of Christ, then where sin abounded,
Grace should not superabound (as the Apostle says it did;) nay, sin should
superabound, and Grace be confined to a narrow compass (comparatively.) To
say, that the superabounding of Grace above sin, here spoken of, is to be
considered in the intensivenesse of it, [ i. e. in its prevalency over sin,
where it is vouchsafed,] not in the extensivenesse of it, as if it extended to
more Persons, is thus far acknowledged for a saying of truth; Grace does not
extend to more Persons, then sin (at least, not to more Persons of Men) because
sin extends unto all, and Grace cannot extend to more then all. But if we
shall straiten and limit Grace, in respect of the extent of it, to a small
number of Persons, as viz. unto those only who are, or shall be actually saved,
the glory of the superabounding of Grace above sin, in respect of the
Prevalency of it, where it is (in such a sense) given, will be fully matched,
or rather overcome and swallowed up, by the prevailing extensiveness of sin
above Grace.

5. The Apostle, both before, and after (as viz. Verse 15. and Verse 19.). 23.
computeth the condemned ones of Adam, and the justified ones of Christ, by one
and the same numericall expression. He tells us in both places of many dead by
Adam, and of no fewer then many justified and redeemed by Christ. Now what the
Holy Ghost makes equal, for Men to dis-equalize, especially to such a
Proportion or Degree, that the one number shall be inconsiderable, and as
nothing, in comparison of the other; is to lift up themselves above their line,
and so take hold of vanity in stead of Truth. The Apostles expression Verse 15.
is somewhat more emphaticall. For if through the offense of one, many be dead,
much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is by one Man Jesus
Christ, has abounded unto many. If it shall be supposed that many more
millions of Men are dead through the offense of Adam, then are justified or
made alive by the Grace of God in Christ, Paul's glorying over the Grace of God
in Christ, as much more abounding to the justification of many, must fall to
the ground. For if by the offense of Adam, all became dead; and a few only be
made alive by the gift of the Grace of God in Christ, who will not judge, but
that the offense of one much more abounded to the death of many, then the Grace
of GOD to the Justification or Life of many?

6. (And lastly) the Apostle having said, Verse, 20. That where sin abounded,
Grace superabounded, he adds (Verse. 21.) that as sin has reigned unto Death,
so did Grace reign through righteousness unto eternal Life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Now evident it is from Verse 14. and Verse 12. that sin
reigned over all Men without exception, unto Death: therefore Grace must have a
proportionable reign unto life [i. e. must by a strong and overruling hand
put all Men into a capacity or estate of life and salvation:] If so, it
undeniably follows that Christ Died for all Men without exception of any:
because otherwise, all Men could not be put into an estate of Grace or
Salvation by Him.

Nor was this interpretation counted either heretical, or erroneous, by the.
24.
most Orthodox Expositors of old; Chr^sostome himself commenting upon the
place, makes the Apostle to speak thus: If all Men were punished through the
offense [or, his offense, meaning Adams] they [i. e. these all Men] may
doubtless be justified from hence (...).
, [ i. e. by that over-abundance of grace and righteousness, as he there
speaks, which is given in Christ.] The former part of his commentary is more
full and Pregnant to this purpose: but because the transcription would be
somewhat long, I leave it to be read in the author himself. Nor are there
wanting amongst our late Reformed Divines, surnamed Orthodox, Men of eminent
Learning, Piety and Worth, who subscribe the said Interpretation. That our
Reparation, [Restauration] (says Mr. Bucer upon the place) is made by Christ,
and that it is more efficacious then the sin of Adam, and that it is of
LARGER EXTENT, is that which the Apostle argues in this, and the following
Section Reparationem nostri factam per Christum, and esse Adae noxa ^ffica
ciore^, and pa tere latius, est id quod Apostolus hac, and sequenti Sectione --
pertractat. Intelligit gratiam Christi bominum generi profuisse amplius, quam
nocuerit lapsus Adae.
. Again, upon those words; Sed non ut (...), and thus: The Apostle here
means, that the Grace of Christ did more profit MANKIND, then the sin of
Adam damnified it. Doubtless if all Men without exception were brought into a
condition of misery by the sin of Adam, and but an handful only (in
comparison) made happy by the Grace of Christ; the Grace of Christ cannot be
said to have profited Mankind, more then the sin of Adam damnified it. Yet
again upon Verse 16: For whereas the World was lost [or, undone] by the one
sin of Adam, the Grace of Christ did not only abolish this sin, and that
death which it brought [upon the World] but likewise took away an infinite
number of other sins, which we the rest of Men added to that first sin Cum
enim ex uno Adae peccato orbis perditus sit, gratia Christi non hoc solu^
peccatum, and mortem qua^ intulit, abolevit, sed simul infinita illa sustulit
peccata, quae reliqui homines primo illi peccato adjecimus.
. The commensurablenesse of the Grace of Christ with the sin of Adam, in
respect of the number of Persons, gratified by the one, and damnified by the
other, cannot lightly be asserted in terms more significant. Nor do the words
following import any thing contrary hereunto, wherein the Author adds, that
the said Grace of Christ brings all that are of Christ into a full or Plenary
justification. For by a full or Plenary justification, it is evident that he
means an actual justification, yea (as he explaines himself a little after)
that justification, which shall be awarded unto the Saints at the great day of
the Resurrection; to the obtaining of which, it is acknowledged, that Men must
receive a new being from Christ by Faith. In what sense Christ abolished the --
inque plenam justificationem, quotquot ex Christo sunt, adduxit.
sin of Adam, together with that Death, which it brought into the World; and so
in what sense he is said to have brought Righteousness, Justification, and
Salvation unto all Men, remains to be unfolded in due Place. Upon the 17 Verse
the aforesaid Author yet more clearly attests the substance of our
Interpretation, where he gives an account, how the Grace of Christ may be said
to be of larger extent, then the sin of Adam, notwithstanding it be true, that
this grace took away nothing, but what (in a sense) was the fruit and effect of
his sin. If we consider, says he, that every particular Man by his
transgressions increases the misery of Mankind, and that whosoever sins,
does no less hurt his Posterity, then Adam did all Men; it is a plain case,
that the Grace of Christ has removed more evils from Men, then the sin of
Adam brought upon them. For though there be no sin committed in all the
World, which has not its original from that first sin of Adam, yet all
particular Men who sin, as they sin voluntarily and freely, so do they make
an addition of their own proper guilt, and misery. ALL WHICH EVILS, since the
alone BENEFIT OF CHRIST HAS TAKEN AWAY, it must needs be that it has taken
away the sins of many, and not of one only. Manifest therefore it is that
more evils have been removed by Christ, then were brought in by Adam Verum si
consideramus singulos mortalium, suis quoque transgressionibus malu^ generis
huma^i auxisse, and non minus, quicunque peccant, suis posteris nocere, atque
nocuit omnibus Adam; in aperto est, gratiam Christi plura depulisse ab
hominibus mala, quam Ad^ noxa intulerit. Nam licet nihil in orb peccatu^ sit,
quod ex illo primo Adae lapsu non trahat originem; tamen singuli qui peccant,
ut sua quoque l^bera voluntate peccant, ita suum quoque adjiciunt reatum, suam
adferunt perniciem. Quae omnia mala, cum beneficium Christi solum sustulit,
certe jam multorum peccata sustulit, non unius Adae. Manifestum est igitur
plura per Christum mala submota esse, quam Adam obtulerat.
. And yet more plainly and expressly to the Point in hand (if more may be) upon
Verse 18. The sense whereof he gives thus: As by the fall of one, sin
prevailed over all, so as to make all liable unto condemnation: so likewise the
righteousness of one so far took place on the behalf of all Men, that all M^n
may obtain the justification of life thereby Infert hic Apostolus, repetit,
and summat, quae tribus praemissis collationibus disseruit: haec scilicet.
Sicut ex unius lapsu peccatum in omnes invaluit, ut reddiderit omnes
condemnationi obnoxios: sic etiam unius justiciam in omnes homines obtinuisse,
ut just ficatio vitae omnibus contingat.
. By this time I suppose Bucer has said enough, both to assert the
Interpretation of the Scripture in hand, that has been given, as also the
universality of Redemption by Christ.

The said Scripture calls for the sense and exposition asserted, with such a.
25.
loud and distinct voice, that Gualter also (another Divine of the same rank
and quality with the former) could not but hearken to it. As by the offense of
one (says he* completing the Apostles sentence, and rendering his sense
therein) condemnation was propagated unto all Men; So also by the
righteousness of one, Justification of life was propagated [or imparted] unto
ALL MEN. Again thus: As by the offense of one Adam, the judgment or guilt
came upon all Men to condemnation; so also by the righteousness of one Jesus
Christ the Gift or Benefit of God, abounded unto ALL MEN to Justification of
life Itaque qu^madmodum per unius offensam in omnes homines pro pagataest
co^demnatio: sic etiam per unius justiciam in omnes homines propagata est
Justificatio vitae. Sicuti per unius Adami offensam judicium sive reatus venit
in omnes homines ad condemnationem: sic etiam per unius Jesus Christi
justiciam, donum sive beneficium Dei redundavit in omnes homines ad
justificationem vitae.
.

Any Man that shall read with a single eye what Calvin himself has written
upon the said Contexture of Scriptures, cannot judge him an adversary to the
Premised Exposition. Paul (says he, upon Verse 15.) simply teaches that the
amplitude [or compasse] of the Grace purchased by Christ, is greater, then of
the condemnation contracted by the first Man Sed simpliciter majorem gratiae
per Christum acquisitae amplitudinem esse docet, quam contractae per primum
hominem damnationis.
. Not long after: The sum of all comes to this, that Christ overcomes Adam: the
righteousness of Christ, vanquisheth Adams sin: Adams malediction [or curse]
is overwhelmed with Christ's Grace: the Death which proceeded from Adam, is
swallowed up by that Life which comes from Christ Huc autem summa tendit; quia
Christus Adamum superat. Hujus peccatum, illius vincit justicia: hujus
maledictio, illius obruitur gratia: ab hoc mors profect^, illius vita
absorbetur.
. Doubtless if the curse brought upon Men by Adam, prevails and remains
still untaken off, upon far the greatest part of Men, it is not overwhelmed
with the Grace of Christ: nor is the Death, which proceeded from him swallowed
up by the Life of Christ, if still it reigns and magnifies it self over, and
against, far greater numbers of Men, then the Life it self of Christ preserves,
or delivers from it. Upon Verse 18. he Presents his thoughts in these words:
He [Paul] makes Grace COMMON UNTO ALL MEN, because it is exposed unto [or laid
within the reach of] All Men: not because it is in the reality of it extended
unto all Men, [i. e. not because it is accepted or received by all Men; as the
words following plainly show.] For (says he) though CHRIST SVFFERED FOR THE
SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD, and through the Goodness, or Bounty of GOD be
offered unto all Men, yet all Men do not take, or lay hold, on Him Communem
omnium gratiam facit, quia omnibus exposita est, non quod ad omnes extendatur
reipsa. Nam etsi passus est Christus pro peccatis totius mundi, atque omnibus
indifferenter Dei benignitate offertur, non tamen omnes apprehendunt.
. So that if Calvin would but quit himself like a Man, and stand his own
ground, he would Remonstrate as stoutly as Corvine, or Arminius himself.

CHAP. VII.
The third sort, or consort, of Scriptures, mentioned Cap. 5. Sect. 5. as
clearly asserting the Doctrine hitherto Maintained, Argued, and Managed to the
same Point.

WE shall not need (I conceive) to insist upon a Particular examination. 1.
of these Scriptures, one by one (the Method observed by us in handling the two
former Partees) because they are more apparently uniform and consenting in
their respective importances, then they. In which respect, a clear and thorough
Discussion of any one of them, or a diligent Poyseing of the common tendency
and import of them all, will be sufficient to evince their respective
compliances with the cause in hand. The Prospect of these Texts, is this. --
And him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6. 37. -- HE
that believes in me, shall never thirst, Verse 35. HE that believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved, Mar. 16. 16. -- that WHOSOEVER believes in him,
should not perish, etc. Joh. 3. 16. -- that through his Name, WHOSOEVER
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10, 43. Even the
righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, UNTO ALL, and UPON
ALL, who believe; for ALL have sinned, etc. Romans 3. 22, 23. (to omit very many
others of like tenor and import.)

In all these Scriptures, with their fellows, evident it is that Salvation is.
2.
held forth and Promised by God, unto all, without exception, that shall
believe; yea that it is Offered and Promised unto all Men upon the condition of
believing, whether they believe, or no. So that upon such Declarations of the
gracious and good Pleasure of God toward the universality of Men, as these,
the Ministers of the Gospel, or any other Men, may with truth (and ought of
duty, upon occasion) say to every Particular Soul of Man under Heaven, If thou
believe, thou shall be saved, even as Paul says that he preached Christ,
admonishing EVERY MAN, and teaching EVERY MAN in all wisdom, that he might
present EVERY MAN perfect in Christ Jesus Colos. 1. 28.
. Yea, this Apostle, speaking of God Himself, says, that he admonishes all
Men every where to repent Acts 17. 30.
. Now if the Gospel, or God in the Gospel, offers Salvation unto all Men,
without exception, and insureth it accordingly upon their believing, certainly
he has it to bestow upon them, in case they do See more of this Cap. 8. Sect.
31.
believe: otherwise he should offer or Promise that unto them, which he has
not for them, nor is able to confer upon them, though they should believe. If
he has Salvation for them, or to bestow upon them, upon their believing, he
must have it in Christ: because he has no other treasury or storehouse of
Salvation, but only Christ. Neither is there Salvation in any other, etc. Acts
4. 12. If God has Salvation in Christ for all Men, Christ must needs have
Bought and Purchased it for them with his Blood, in as much as there is no
Salvation, no not in Christ Himself, without, or otherwise then by, Remission
of sins; nor any Remission of sins, in or by Him, without shedding of blood.
Therefore all those Scriptures, wherein God Promises and ascertaineth
Salvation unto all Men (without exception) upon their believing, are Pregnant
with this truth, that Christ laid down his Life for the Salvation of all, and
every Man.

If it be here replied and said; but though God in the Gospel offers
Salvation. 3.
unto all Men, and Promises Salvation unto all Men upon condition of their
believing, respectively, yet knowing certainly before hand that none will
believe, but only such and such by Name, as viz. those, for whom there is
Salvation Purchased by Christ, he may upon a sufficient ground, and with
security enough, Promise Salvation unto all men upon condition they will
believe; I answer,

Though God by means of the certainty of such his knowledge, may, without
danger of failing in Point of Promise-keeping, or of being taken at his word to
his dishonor, Promise Salvation unto all Men (without exception) upon the
terms specified, though it should be supposed that Christ has not Purchased
Salvation for all Men; yet upon such a supposition as this, he cannot, either
with honor otherwise, or with truth, make any such Offer, or Promise. Not with
honor; because for a Man, that is generally and certainly known to be worth
but only one thousand Pounds in estate, to offer or Promise an hundred
thousand Pounds to any Man that shall be willing to serve him, or to do such
or such a courtesy for him, though he knew certainly that no Man would accept
his offer in either of these kinds, yet would such an Offer or Promise be
matter of disparagement to him in the sight of wise and understanding Men, yea
render them little other then ridiculous. In like manner, it being supposed by
our Antagonists in the cause now under Plea, that God has declared it unto all
the World in his Gospel, that Christ has died but for a few Men (in
comparison) and consequently that himself has Salvation only for a few; in
case he should Promise Salvation unto all Men without exception, upon what
account, service, or condition soever, must needs turn to dishonor in the
highest unto him, and represent him unto his Creature extremely unlike to
himself. Suppose the Devil had certainly known (as very possibly he might)
that the Lord Christ would not have fallen down and worshipped him, upon any
terms or conditions whatsoever, would this have excused him from vanity, in
Promising him all the Kingdoms of the World upon such a condition, when as all
the world knew that not one of these Kingdoms were at his disposal.

Again, 2. neither can God, nor any Minister of the Gospel, say, with. 4.
truth, to every Particular Man, if thou believe, thou shall be saved,
unless it be supposed that there is Salvation Purchased, or in being, for them
all. Because the truth of such an assertion cannot be salved by this, that all
Men, or every Particular Man, will not believe. The truth of a Connex or
Hypotheticall Proposition, of which kind this is, If thou Peter, or thou John
believe, thou shall be saved, does not depend upon any thing that is
contingent, no nor yet upon any thing that is extra-essentiall to the terms of
the Proposition it self (such as is, as well the non-believing, as the
believing of Particular Men) but upon the essential and necessary Connection
between the two Parts of the Proposition, the Antecedent, and consequent. If
this Connection be contingent, loose, or false, the Proposition it self is
false, though in every other respect it should be accommodated to the best. As
for example: in this Proposition, If Isaac were Abraham's Son, then was he truly
godly; both the Parts, considered apart, are true: for true it is, 1. That
Isaac was Abraham's Son: and 2. That he was truly godly; yet the Proposition is
absolutely false; because there is no necessary or essential Connection
between, being Abraham's Son, and true godliness: therefore the one cannot be
truly inferred, or concluded from the other. In like manner, when I shall say
thus unto a Man, If thou believe, thou shall be saved, it is neither his
non-believing, nor the certainty of my knowledge that he will not believe, that
either makes, or evinceth such a Proposition to be true: because neither of
these relates to the Connection of the parts thereof, nor contain the least
reason or ground, why the latter should follow upon the former. The Man's not*
believing, is no reason at all, why upon his believing he should certainly be
saved; no more is my knowledge, how certain soever it be, that he will not
believe. But to verify such a Proposition or Saying, there must be a certain
and indissolveable Connection between such a Man's Salvation, and Believing, in
case he should believe. Such a Connection as this there cannot be, unless there
were Salvation for him, which he might have and enjoy in case he should
believe. Now certain it is, that if Christ Died not for him, there is no more
Salvation for him, in case he should believe, then there would be, in case he
should not believe; there being no Salvation for any Man, upon any terms or
condition whatsoever, unless Christ has Purchased it for him by his Death.
Nor does Christ's Purchasing Salvation for any Man, depend upon such a Man's
believing: no more does his non-Purchasing Salvation for him, upon his
not-believing. So that unless it be supposed, that Christ has Purchased
Salvation for a Man, whilst He remains yet an unbeliever, and though He
should always remain an unbeliever, it cannot be supposed that He Purchased
Salvation for him, though He should believe: and consequently there can be no
truth in this Proposition, or Assertion, spoken to a Man who shall not believe,
If thou believe, thou shall be saved; it being certain (upon the aforesaid
supposition of Christ's non-dying for him) that he should not, could not, be
saved, no not though He should believe.

If it be replied; yea but the truth of this saying, to any Man whatsoever,. 5.
If thou believe, thou shall be saved, is sufficiently salved upon this
account, that Christ Died sufficiently for all Men, though not intentionally:
so that in case any Man whatsoever shall, or should, believe, there is
Salvation ready for Him in Christ.

I answer, that the vanity, or mere nullity rather (in respect of the
coincidence of the Members) of this distinction, wherein Christ is affirmed to
have Died sufficiently for all Men, but denied to have Died intentionally for
all Men, has been demonstratively, and at large evinced formerly Cap. 5. Sect.
39, 40, etc.
. I here only add, that if there be Salvation ready in Christ for all and every
Man, in case they should believe, then must this Salvation be found in him,
either naturally, and in respect of his mere Person, or by way of Purchase and
Procurement, i. e. by means of his Death. No Man (I presume) will affirm the
former, as viz. that there is Salvation in Christ for any Man, in respect of
his mere Nature, or Person: or howsoever, Himself plainly denies it; verily,
verily, I say unto you, except a corn of Wheat fall into the ground, and die,
it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much Fruit Joh. 12. 24.
. If there be no Salvation in Him for Men, but by Purchase, and this with his
Blood, then has He no more Salvation in Him, then what He thus Purchased: no
Man has any thing more by Purchase, then what he has Bought, or Purchased.
Therefore if Christ has Salvation in Him for all Men without exception, He
must have Purchased, or Bought it for them, with His Blood. If so, He must
either Purchase more, then He intended; or else intend to Purchase Salvation
for all and every Man. And what is this, without any Parable, but to die
intentionally for all Men? Therefore the distinction of Christ's dying
sufficiently for all men, but not intentionally, is ridiculous, and unworthy
from first to last of any intelligent or considering Man.

Nor is that distinction (because it relates to the subject matter of our
present. 6.
Chapter) so emphatically insisted upon by Mr. Rutherford, of much better
import. That eternal life (says he) should be offered unto all, and every
individual Man, upon condition of Faith; and that life should be offered unto
all and every individual Man, out of an intent on Gods part to give life unto
them, in case they believe, are two sayings widely different Long disserunt
ista, vitam aete^nam omnibus ^ff^r^i and singulis, sub condition si l^i; and
omnibus and singulis off^r^i vitam ex Dei intention dandi illis vitam, si
credider^nt. Sam. Rhe^orfortis. Exercit. Apolog. p. 3^9.
. For doubtless the latter has every whit as much truth in it, yea every whit
as much clear and pregnant Truth in it, as the former; yea has (in effect)
one and the same Truth. For when God offers eternal Life unto all and every
individual man, upon condition of Faith, is it not His intention that they
should have eternal Life upon their Faith, or in case they should believe? If
not, then in such an offer, he should offer, and promise that, which He intends
not to give, or perform, no not according to the tenor of His Promise. If it be
said, (in favor of the distinction,) but though God intends to give eternal
Life to all and every individual man, upon condition they believe (this being
the express tenor of His Offer or Promise) yet it follows not, that such an
intention in Him should be His reason or ground of tendering such an offer, or
Promise, unto them; unto this I answer, that if this were the intent of the
Author, I mean to difference the latter proposition from the former in point
of error or falsehood, upon this account, because the latter supposes such an
intention as that mentioned, in God, to be the adequate reason or motive, why
He tenders such an Offer or Promise unto them, I should not much gainesay:
because I suppose that God has indeed other reasons, and these of greater
weight, why He makes a tender of Salvation unto all men upon condition of
Faith, then His intention of giving Salvation unto them, in case they shall
believe. Yea, I do not conceive, that either God or men, do any thing which
they intend, simply out of their intentions thereof, or because they intend it;
but out of a desire to effect, or to procure the effecting of it, or because
they desire it.

But that the Authors meaning in impleading the said latter proposition. 7.
of error, was far differing from this, appears sufficiently by the account
which Himself gives hereof in the sequel of his Discourse. From this account
it clearly appears, that in framing the said latter proposition, he uses those
words, ex Dei intention, for, cum Dei intention; and places the error of the
proposition in this, viz. that it supposes an intention to be in God of giving
life unto all men upon their Faith, when He makes the offer mentioned unto
them. To prove this to be an error, he argues to this effect, from Joh. 17. 2.
(for his other arguments are plainly (...)) God the Father gave power unto the
Son to give eternal life to those ONLY, who were given unto him by the
Father. But reprobates (says he) are not given unto the Son by the Father:
therefore the Father gave no power unto the Son to give eternal life unto
Reprobates: and consequently the Son cannot, either according to his own, or
to his Fathers Intention, offer remission of sins or eternal life unto
Reprobates. To this I answer, that the whole proceed of the argument arises
from a mistaken ground, or a plain misunderstanding of the Scripture, upon
which it is built. For by a power given unto the Son to give eternal life,
etc. is not meant a power of dying for men, one or other, but a power of an
actual and real investing men with eternal life, or a power to confer
eternal life actually upon men, as appears from the former clause of the
Verse: As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life, etc. From whence it is evident, that the Power here spoken of as
given unto the Son, to give eternal life, etc. is a consequent, branch, or
effect, of that Power or Sovereignty, which the Father has given him over all
mankind, as viz. to dispose of them, especially in respect of their eternal
estates and conditions, according to such Rules of righteousness and equity,
as the Father, with the Son, have judged meet, and accordingly agreed upon, for
the regulating of such high and important dispensations. Now a power of
conferring eternal life upon men, may very well be conceived to be a branch or
part of that sovereignty, or larger power, which the Father has given unto the
Son over all flesh. But an injunction or command, or a free leave or liberty
(Notion it how you please) given unto Him to die for a few men, cannot
reasonably be looked upon as any Part or Branch, especially as any such
considerable or high-importing branch, as this here expressed must needs be
conceived to be, of that most transcendent, and majestique power* Or,

2. By eternal life, may very well be meant, not eternal life properly and. 8.
formally so called, as viz. the blessedness and glory of the World to come;
but such a discovery or manifestation of God, and His Counsels, which is an
effectual means to bring men in time to the Possession and Enjoyment of this
life. It is a frequent Dialect of Scripture, to call the means, and cause, yea
and sometimes an opportunity only, which are proper and effectual for the
compassing, effecting, or obtaining a thing, by the name of the thing it self,
which is to be, or may be, procured, or effected by them. Thus Numb. 22. 7. the
wages or rewards, by which the Elders of Moab sent from Balaak the King to
Balaam the Wizard, expected to procure Divinations, or some imprecatory and
divellish Practices against the People of God, from Him, are termed,
Divinations. And the Elders of Moab (says the Text) and the Elders of Midian
went, and Divinations in their hand, etc. Thus, good tidings, is put for the
reward, which good tidings usually procure unto them, who bring them, 2 Samuel 4.
10. In this Phrase of Speech, the Scriptures, or the saving Knowledge of God
therein revealed, are (according to the general sense of our best
Interpreters) termed, Salvation, Joh. 4. 22. So again, Heb. 2. 2. Thus wisdom,
is called a man's life [keepe her, for she is thy life, Pro. 4. 13.] because
she is the means of life, i. e. of Peace and Wellbeing unto men. In this
sense also (to forbear further instances, which are in great numbers at hand)
the Gospel (and sometimes the Preaching or Ministry of it) is frequently
termed, the Kingdom of Heaven. According to this manner of speaking (so
familiar in the Scriptures) by eternal life, which the Son had Power given Him
over all flesh, that He might give to as many as the Father had given him, may
well be meant the words of eternal life, (as Peter calls them Joh. 6. 68.) or
that Manifestation of the Name of God (as Himself speaks, soon after, Joh.
17. 6.) by which they might be effectually brought to the fruition and
enjoyment of eternal life. And that this indeed is the very meaning of our
Savior, is abundantly evident by the sequel of the Context all along, for
several Verses together. For having said, that the Father had given him Power
ove^ all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as he had given
him, Verse 2. He immediately declares, Verse 3. what He means by eternal
life. And this is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and him
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. This Notion He still carries on, saying,
Verse 6. I have manifested thy Name unto the Men, which thou gave Me out of
the World: thine they were, and thou gave them Me, etc. So again (directly
still to the same point, Verse 8.) For I have given them the words, which thou
gave me, etc. yet again (upon the same account, Verse 14.) I have given them
thy Word, etc. That which Verse 2. He had called, eternal Life, here He calls,
His Fathers Word: as before, the Declaration, or Manifestation of His Name (as
we heard.)

From the carriage of the Context, that further is abundantly evident, that. 9.
by those words, Verse 2. as many as thou have given Him, are not meant the
Elect, or the entire number of the Elect, or of those, for whom Christ Died (in
Mr. Rutherfords sense,) but precisely and particularly, His Apostles: of whom
alone He speaks, and for whom alone, and apart from the rest of the Elect, He
Prays, all along the Chapter, until Verse 20. where He enlarges His Prayer
thus: Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in
Me through their word. For this passage it is as clear as the Sun at noone day,
that from the beginning of the Chapter until now, He ^ad managed His Prayer,
and Heavenly Conference with the Father, with particular reference to His
Apostles; and had not mentioned any thing about the residue of the Elect. That
He speaks of the Apostles only Verse 2. under those words, as many as thou have
given Me, is most apparent from Verse 6. I have manifested thy Name unto the
Men which thou gave Me out of the World: thine they were, and thou gave
them Me, and they HAVE KEPT thy Word. First, Christ had not yet manifested His
Fathers Name to all the Elect, no not to all the Elect, at this time in being
in the World. 2. Neither could He say to His Father concerning all the Elect,
that they had kept His Word, many of them having not as yet received it. Again
(to pass by several things by the way making out the same truth) Verse 12.
Thus: whilst I was with them in the World (meaning, those, of whom He had
spoken ^^om the beginning of the Chapter) I kept them in thy Name, [i. e. I
preserved them from the exorbitances of the World, by the knowledge of thy
Name, which still I have been communicating unto them,] those that thou gave
Me, I have kept; and none of them is lost, but the Son of perdition, etc.
Evident it is, that this Son of Perdition, was one of that number of Men,
which the Father had given Him out of the World, and which He had kept
entirely, without the miscarriage of any one (this Son of Perdition only
excepted.) I presume that neither Mr. Rutherford, nor any of his judgment,
will say that this Son of perdition was one of the number of the Elect, but
certain it is, that he was one of that number of men, which the Father had
given unto Christ out of the World. The words are too too express to bear a
denial of this: those that thou gave Me, I have kept: and none OF THEM is
lost, but the Son of perdition, etc. Therefore by, as many as the Father had
given unto Him, with an intent that He should give eternal life unto them,
Verse 2. are meant the Apostles, and these only. These may be said to have been
given unto Christ by the Father, not because they were the Fathers by Election
from eternity (for doubtless the Son of perdition, as ^ath been said, was none
of His in such a Relation) nor simply because they were by any peremptory
designation appointed and set out by him from amongst other men, to make
Apostles for His Son, as if Christ had been necessitated to take these, and had
no liberty, or right of power to have taken any others into that Relation; (for
how could then Christ say unto them, that he had chosen them, viz. to the
office and dignity of Apostles, Joh. 6. 70. Joh. 13. 18. Joh. 15. 16. 19.) but
because God the Father by a work appropriable unto him (of which I conceive we
shall have occasion to speak more at large hereafter) had qualified, fitted,
and prepared them for Christ's Hand and Nurture, and so to make Apostles of in
time: in respect of which Work of God the Father, in and upon, them, Christ,
out of that wisdom wherein ^e excelled, and that knowledge which he had of the
several frames and tempers of the Hearts of men, made a prudent and deliberate
choice of them from amongst other men, for that service. Thine they were, and
thou gave them unto Me.] They are said to have been the Fathers, i. e. (as it
were) the Fathers Disciples, or persons taught by the Father, Joh. 6. 45. and
so (after a sort) appropriable unto the Father, (as those that believe, and are
taught of Christ, are said to be Christ's, or to belong to Christ) before they
became Christ's Apostles, or were chosen by Him upon this account: and are said
to have been given unto Him out of the World by the Father, because they were
peculiarly qualified, and (at it were) characterized and marked out by the
Father, as fit matter to be formed into Apostles by His Son. The word, give, is
frequently found in such a signification as this, in the Scriptures, and to
import the preparing, furnishing, or fitting, whether of things, or persons,
for such and such ends and purposes, in reference to the accommodations of Men.
In this sense Christ is said to have given some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pas^ors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, etc. i. e. to have every ways prepared,
qualified, endowed, fitted, furnished persons for all these Offices and
Services in His Church, for the benefit of the Saints, etc. Thus Acts 13. 20.
He gave them Judges, etc. i. e. He qualified and furnished men amongst them
from time to time, with public spirits, and with gifts fit for government,
etc. So Neh. 9. 27. thou GAVE them Saviors; i. e. thou furnishedst Men with
Hearts, and Courage, and Wisdom, etc. to save them. See Ephesians. 1. 22. HE GAVE Him
to be head over all things to His Church; i. e. He furnished Him with
Sovereignty of Power, Wisdom* Majesty, and with all manner of indowments
otherwise, requisite for such an Head. Thus Psalm. 44. 11. Thou have GIVEN us
like sheep for meat, etc. i. e. by withdrawing thy presence, help, and
protection from us, thou have prepared and sitted us to become a prey and
spoil to our enemies. In this sense also God says to Jeremy, taht he had
GIVEN him (for so it is in the original) a Prophet unto the Nations, i. e.
that he had furnished him, and meant to furnish him yet further, with
prophetical gifts and indowments for the benefit of Nations, if they would
hearken to Him, Jer. 1. 5. So Psalm. 21. 6. Thou have given him to be blessings
(so it is in the original, and is your marginall translation) i. e. thou have
so furnished, qualified, and disposed of him (meaning Christ) that whosoever
will apply themselves unto Him, may be made happy and blessed by Him. See Ezekiel.
3. 8, 9. Esa. 43. 16. (in the original) with other like. Our Savior Himself
uses the word in the sense now instanced from the Scriptures, when He
expresses Himself thus; All that the Father gives Me, shall [or rather will]
come unto Me, etc. Joh. 6. 37. Of which place more in due time.

Nor ought it to seem any hard, uncouth, or unpleasant expression unto. 10.
us, wherein that which is prepared, or any ways made fit for us, and withal,
so disposed of, or set in our way, that we may readily and lawfully serve our
selves with it, is said to be GIVEN unto us, by Him, or them, who thus prepare,
and dispose of it. He that shall prepare wholesome and savoury Meat, such as a
man loves, and shall set it before Him, and give Him free leave to take it, or
eat of it, may in sufficient propriety of speech be said to GIVE this Meat
unto him yea whether he takes, or eats of it upon such terms, or no. So God the
Father, having wrought and fitted the men, whom Christ chose for Apostles, to
serve and honor Him in this capacity, and withal disposed of them in their
Times, Residences, and Conditions in the World, so that Christ might both
readily and lawfully call them to His Service, He may very well, in these
respects, be said to have given them unto Him.

Thus by a diligent and narrow inquiry into Mr. Rutherfords Scripture, it
evidently appears that there is nec vola, nec vestigium, not the least mutter
or peep of any such Notion in it, as he imagines, viz. that if Christ should
Offer, eternal life unto any more, then only unto the Elect (so called by Him)
He must needs do it besides His own, and His Fathers Intention. Here is not
the least word, syllable, letter, apex, or (...) concerning, either the
Fathers, or the Sons intentions, about the offer of Salvation unto Men.

By the brief Discussions of this Chapter, it fully appears, that all those.
11.
Texts of Scripture, which offer, either forgiveness of Sins, or Salvation,
unto all men without exception, and which promise either, or both these unto
all men, upon, or upon condition of, their believing (which are very frequent
and numerous) do with the clearest light and evidence of Truth, hold forth the
universality of Redemption by Christ. From whence it follows, in regular and
due process of reason and discourse, that all they make God a liar in such
Scriptures, who restrain the Salvation, or Redemption purchased by Christ, to
any lesser number of men, then All.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein the Scriptures of the fourth and last Association (Propounded Cap. 5.
Sect. 6.) as pregnant also with that Great Truth hitherto Maintained, are
impartially Weighed and Considered.

WE shall (God assisting) examine every of these Scriptures particularly:. 1.
and so shall have occasion to exhibit the purport and tenor of them
respectively, as they shall be produced to act their several parts in Order.
In which respect we shall not here transcribe them (especially considering the
Reader may with a very little pains see them in their Muster, Cap. 5. Sect.
6.) but shall only point at their several Dwellings or Scituations in the
Book of God, which are these, Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Pet.
2. 20. Heb. 10. 29. Mat. 18. 32, 33. etc. We make these Scriptures of one and
the same Combination, and Associate them by themselves, because their import is
(in effect) one and the same, they all supposing that Christ has Died for
those, who may perish notwithstanding, yea for those, who will perish. And
certainly if He Died for those, who, notwithstanding His Dying for them, may
perish, yea and for those who will actually perish* as well as for those who
shall be saved, He Died for all Men without exception. For as for that opinion
of the Valentine Council in France, mentioned by Estius In 2 Pet. 2. 1. vi,
and Jo. Ball. Covenant of Grace. p. 238.
, and adopted by him (as it seems) for his own, which supposes some Reprobates
(as he calls them) to have been redeemed by Christ, but not all; this
opinion, I say, is not like (as far as I conceive) to make many Proselytes, nor
to attract the judgments of considering Men. For if the Dying of Christ for
Men, be to be esteemed matter of Love to them (as without all controversy and
question it ought) what reason can there be imagined why he should die for
Apostate Reprobates (who yet are that kind of Reprobate, for which only Christ
Died, according to that opinion) rather then for those, who though living and
dying in unbelief, yet never contracted the guilt, of so desperate and
provoking a sin? But this by the way.

The tenor of the Scripture first in view, amongst those lately appearing, is.
2.
this: destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ Died Romans 14. 15.
.

First, that the destruction here spoken of, whereunto the strong Christian is
so earnestly admonished and dehorted by the Apostle from exposing the weak, is
not any temporal destruction, but that which is of body and soul for ever, is
more clear, then to require Proof. It is not easily imaginable, how, or that,
a strong Christian, or any other Man, by eating meat sacrificed unto Idols,
should expose a weak Christian unto the danger of any other destruction, but
of that only, which is Decreed by God, against those, who shall depart from the
Faith, or finally apostatize from the Profession of Christ. Besides, it is
every man's Notion, that this is that Destruction, that first*borne of things
formidable and dreadful unto the precious souls of men, with which this great
Apostle had so much to do, and from which the great Prize that he runs for
with all his might in all his Epistles, was to deliver them.

2. Whereas he charge Men, not to destroy those, for whom Christ Died,. 3.
though he does not indeed suppose, that all those shall be actually destroyed,
or perish, whom another may be said to destroy, i. e. to do things tending to
their destruction (which is the sense of the word in this place) yet this he
clearly supposes, that such men, for whom Christ Died, are obnoxious to
destruction, may be destroyed, and perish everlastingly. Otherwise we shall
quench the spirit of his zealous tenderness over the Precious souls of weak
Christians, expressed in this serious Item or charge unto others, not to
destroy them; yea, and make him speak very weakly, and (indeed) ridiculously.
To admonish men in a serious and solemn manner, to take heed of destroying
those, who are out of all possibility of being destroyed, especially this being
known to the Men, that are thus admonished, is as if a Man should seriously and
affectionately entreat an Archer with his Bow and Arrows about him, to take
heed of shooting too high, for fear of hurting the Sun, and cause him to fall
down out of the firmament of Heaven.

If it be said; yea but though it be supposed, that the Persons admonished. 4.
in this case, do know in in the general, that they, for whom Christ Died, are
not under a possibility of Perishing, yet they may be ignorant in Particular,
whether those Men, whose destruction they are like to Procure, or Promote, by
the abuse of their Christian liberty, be of the number of those Men, for whom
Christ Died, or no: and consequently the Apostle may upon a good account
admonish them to take heed of destroying such;

I Answer, it can at no hand be supposed, that the Persons here admonished,
should be ignorant, whether the Men, about whose destruction, they are so
deeply cautioned by the Apostle, be of the number of those, for whom Christ
Died, because the Apostle himself so plainly and positively asserteth it: for
whom (says he) Christ Died. Besides, the maine strength and stresse of the
argument or motive, by which he inforceth the dehortation, stands in this,
that those Persons, whosoever they be, whose Salvation they shall endanger by
eating things sacrificed to Idols, are of those for whom Christ Died. Now to
press an exhortation, or dehortation, upon the consciences of Men by such a
motive, wherein these Men shall be supposed ignorant whether there be any
Truth, or no, is to fight with a wooden Sword; especially when it shall be yet
further supposed, that such Men are under an absolute incapacity of ever
knowing, whether there be any Truth, or no, in this motive; which must needs be
the case here, if we shall suppose there be any number of Men, for whom Christ
Died not. For unpossible it is (and so generally confessed to be) for one man
certainly to know the Truth of Grace, or Faith, in another; and much more to
know the certainty of his Preseverance unto the end: and consequently
(according to the Principles of Anti-universalisme) for any Man to know,
whether Christ Died for any Man in Particular, and by Name, but Himself.

Therefore most certain it is, that there is a possibility for those to
perish, and be destroyed, for whom Christ Died, or notwithstanding Christ's
Dying for them. And if so, then Christ's dying for Men does not suppose a
necessity of their Salvation: and if so, then Christ Died as well for those,
who may not be saved, and shall not be saved, as for those, who may, and shall;
and consequently, for all Men: for they who may, and shall be saved, and they
who may not, neither shall be saved, together comprehend all Men whatsoever.

The Exposition of the Scripture in hand, as importing the Death of Christ. 5.
for those, who yet may be destroyed and perish, is so pregnant with evidence
and truth, that it has subdued the judgments of all Expositors I meet with,
unto it. And Christ verily (says Chrysostom upon the place) refused not,
neither to be made a servant, nor to die for him: and wilt not thou so much as
neglect thy belly to save him? For although Christ was not like to [win, or]
gain all Men, yet did He die for all Men, so fulfilling that which appertained
to Him (...).
, [in order to the procuring of their Salvation.] Our late Protestant
Expositors follow in the same path. Another consideration (says Calvin)
wherein the offense of the Brethren renders the use of things in themselves
good, vicious [or faulty] is, that in wounding a weak conscience, the price of
the Blood of Christ, is dissipated [or dissolved:] for even the most
contemptible Brother [or member of a Christian society] is Redeemed by the
Blood of Christ: therefore a [very] unworthy thing it is, that he should be
destroyed, for the satisfaction of any Man's belly Altera ratio est, quod dum
vulneratur infirma conscientia, dissipatur pretium sanguinis Christi: nam
contemptissimus frater Christi sanguine est Redemptus: indignum est ergo ut
perdatur, quo ventri satisfiat.
. I trust that from henceforth, no Man that shall read these passages from his
Pen, will say, but that Calvin clearly held a possibility of the destruction of
such Men, for whom Christ Died, and consequently, that Christ Died for more,
then shall be saved: and if so, for all, (as we formerly argued.)

He (says Peter Martyr, meaning, Christ) has REDEEMED Him: wilt. 6.
thou DESTROY him (speaking of the Apostles weak Brother.) He has shed his
Life, Soul, and Blood for thy Brother: can not thou for his sake abstain
from a poor piece of Meat? Therefore the clear sense of this Orthodox man is,
that the Redeemed of Christ may perish and be destroyed.

If the Salvation of our Brethren (says M. Bucer on the place) be to be
procured by us by the laying down of our life's, and nothing be to be respected
in comparison thereof; how impious and accursed a thing is it, that any Man
should destroy a Brother for Meat? He had said immediately before: If we
follow Christ, He for the rescuing [or saving] our Brethren, suffered Death:
therefore we also ought to lay down our lives for the Salvation of the
Brethren, and to abhor the destroying of a Brother, more then Death Jam si
salus fratrum etiam nobis morte nostra paranda est, nec quicquam illi non post
habendum, quam impium and execrandum sit, si quis perdat fratrem cibo, etc. Si
Christum sequimur, ille pro adserendis fratribus nostris oppetiit mortem: and
nobis igitur pro salute fratrum, ponenda anima est, morteque magis aversandum,
fratrem perdere.
. Therefore he also plainly supposes, that even such a Brother may be
destroyed, and that for meat, for whom Christ Died.

Musculus speaks by the same spirit with the former. To this grieving of the
Brethren, the Apostle aptly subjoynes the destruction of those, who are
offended at the unadvised liberty of those that are strong. For the mind being
thus grieved, as being weak, easily falls to this point, viz. to begin by
little and little, being shaken through a sinister suspicion, to fall away from
Christianity, and FROM TRVE FAITH Commode subiicit huic contristationi,
perditionem eorum, qui temeraria fortium liberate offenduntur. Animus enim ad
hunc modum contristatus, tanquam infirmus, facile eo labitur, ut incipiat
sensim per sinistram suspicionem labe factatus, deficere a Christianismo, and a
vera fide.
. In which words, the Author clearly avoucheth the opinion of those, not only
who hold that those may be destroyed, for whom Christ Died, but theirs also,
whose judgment stands for a possibility of falling away (and that to
destruction) from true Faith. But as to the former point, he speaks more
significantly, a little after the former words. It is all one as if the Apostle
should say; Christ would have him saved, and sought it by his Death; but thou
do not only despise thy Brother, but opposest Christ also, and makes void
[or of none effect] through thy rashness, and that for the sake of Meat, that
DEATH of His, which He under*went FOR HIS SAKE, and by which thou thy self also
art saved Idem est hoc, ac si dicat, Christus voluit hunc salvum, idque sua
morte quaesivit: tu vero non solum fratrem contemnis, sed and Christo repugnas,
and mortem ipsius, quam illius gratia subijt, qua and tu servatus es, tua
temeritate, i^que cibi gratia, inanem reddis.
.

Nor does B. Aretius break rank, but marches in close order with his
fellows. The Apostles argument (says he) is from the effects: Thou destroyest
him with the use of things indifferent, whom Christ redeemed by His Death. What
madness is that? And soon after. Meat (happily) preserves thy life: but Christ
died for him, whom thou slayest, not by dying, but by living: what cruelty is
this Ab effectis argumentum est: usum rerum mediarum perdis, quem Christus
redemit sua morte: quae illa est insania? -- Cibus tibi vitam conservat forte:
sed Christus pro illo mortuus est, quem tu occidis, non moriendo, sed vivendo:
magna est illa crudelitas.
?

Let R. Gualter bring up the reere, for saying; the Apostle in this teaches. 8.
that Christ Himself is sinned against, yea and that the Merit of His Death is
overthrown, when we destroy Him, whom He by His Death and Blood has vindicated
[or restored] unto life Ita vero in ipsum Christum peccari docet, adeoque
meritum mortis ejus everti, quando eum nos perdimus, quem ille per mortem and
sanguinem suum in vitam asseruit.
.

Here are many witnesses (though many more might readily be summoned in with
the same evidence) and those of the firstborn qualification for Authority and
credit in such cases (I mean, men orthodox and sound in the judgment of
those, who assume the same honor unto themselves, and who are the high
opposers of the Doctrine under Protection in the present discourse) speaking
the same things plainly, expressly, and without Parable, with the Assertors of
this Doctrine. Neither (indeed) could they, or any other Man, having such
Scriptures before them, as that last insisted upon, with the former, to order
their judgments and thoughts, conceive or speak otherwise, with any tolerable
ingenuity, or without some such winking with the eyes, which is unworthy men
pretending friendship to the Truth. But let us, hear what the Spirit of God
says further in the Point.

The next Scripture lately directed unto, was, 1 Cor. 8. 11. And through thy. 9.
knowledge (or through thy Meat, as Chrysostom reads the place) shall the
weak Brother perish, for whom Christ Died. Some copies read the words with an
interrogation (and thus, either our English Translators, or Printers, or both,
deliver them unto us:) others, assertively. This difference in the pointing,
makes none in the matter, or substance of the Doctrine contained in the words.
Only the interrogative is more piercing, and provoking to the consideration of
the Truth imported. The tenor of the place is the same (in effect) with that
last opened: and clearly supposes (upon the account given in the traverse of
that Scripture) that such a Person may miscarry in the great business of
Salvation, notwithstanding Christ's laying down His Life for him. The Reader is
desired to revise our debate upon the former Place for His satisfaction herein;
unless, happily, the consent of the best Interpreters in that behalf will
balance that accommodation.

Thy Lord, and Master (says Chrysostom on the place) refused not to die for
him: but thou make no reckoning of him, no not so much as to abstraine from a
polluted table for his sake: but suffer him to PERISH AFTER SALVATION
PROCVRED FOR HIM upon such terms. And soon after: So that here are four
accusations [or matters of charge] and these exceeding high; 1. That He is a
Brother. 2. That He is weak. 3. That He is one, WHOM CHRIST SO HIGHLY PRIZED
AS EVEN TO DIE FOR HIM. 4. That after all this HE PERISHES for Meat (...).
.

The expressnesse of the words overruled even Calvin's Pen also to an
Assertion. 10.
of the same Truth. He is indeed weak, whom thou despisest, but yet a Brother:
for God has adopted him. Therefore cruel art thou, who have no care of thy
Brother. But that which follows is yet more pressing; viz. that even those
that are rude or weak, are redeemed by the Blood of Christ. For there is
nothing of greater unworthiness, then that Christ should not scruple to die,
that the weak might not perish; and we in the mean time lightly esteem the
Salvation of those, who have been Redeemed at so great a price. A memorable
saying, whereby we are taught, how highly we ought to value the Salvation of
our Brethren; and of these, not only, as considered in the lump, or in the
general, but of every one of them in particular, in as much as CHRIST'S BLOOD
WAS SHED FOR EVERY ONE OF THEM Est quidem infirmus, que^ tu cont^mnis, sed
tamen frater: nam cum adoptavit Deus. Crudelis e^ igitur, qui fratris cura^ non
habes. Sed vehementius etia^ number quod sequitur* rudes quoque aut infirmos
Christi sanguine redemptos esse. Nihil enim indignius quam Christu^ non
dubitasse mori ne infirmi perirent: nos floccipendere eoru^ salutem, qui tanto
pretio redempti sunt. Dictu^ memorabile, q^o doceneur, quanti nobis esse debeat
fratru^ salus: nec omniu^ modo, sed singuloru^, quando pro unoquoque est ^usus
Christi sanguis.
. Nor can it reasonably be pretended, that by the Brethren, for every of which
he says the Blood of Christ was shed, he means only the Elect. For evident it
is, that he speaks of the generality of Professors, who were joined in
external communion with the Churches of Christ; many of whom he could not but
know were not Elect (at least in the sense of such pretenders.)

Aretius works the place thus: Here is another fruit [or, effect] of that
licentious liberty, greater then the former, For the former only was, that by
means of such an example Men were strengthened in an evil error: but here he
shows, that he that is weak, is even destroyed. And presently after: In
conclusion, this practice mightily differs from the example of Christ: for He
died for the weak sinner, etc Alter fructus est licentiae illius superiori
aliquanto gravior. Nam prior fructus saltem erat, quod in malo errore
confirmarentur hujus exemplo. Hic autem quod etiam perdatur indicat; nec
simpliciter, sed qui infirmus est -- Denique factum hoc vehementer discrepat ab
ex^mplo Christi: is mortuus est pro peccatore infirmo.
. So that this Expositor also clearly supposes, that men may destroy him, for
whom Christ Died.

Nor does learned Musculus vary an hairs breadth from the import of these
things, upon the place demanding thus: How, I pray, can he be excused, who for
meats sake destroys him, whom Christ redeemed with his Blood? And not long
after: what greater sin can be committed against Christ, then to slay [or,
destroy] Him, for whom He Himself Died Quomodo quaeso excusari potest, qui cibi
gratia eum perdit, quem Christus sanguine suo redemit? -- Quid enim gravius
peccatum in Christum committi poterit, quam eum occidere, pro quo ipse est
Mortuus.
.

I finish this account with Mr. I. Deodates gloss upon the words. Perish] i.
e. (says he) shall be in danger of wounding his Conscience mortally: and
whereas before through tenderness of conscience he abhorred any thing that
drew near to Idolatry, he may peradventure use himself to it to the Ship-wracke
of Salvation.

These Expositors do not mince the words, as Piscator, and some few others. 11.
do, who (destroying hereby the best of the nourishment in them) gloss them
thus: Thy weak Brother shall perish] viz. as to thee, or as much as lies in
thee Peribit] nempe per te quidem, seu quantum per testat See also the
Annotations of the English Ministers, upon 1 Cor. 8. 11.
. I confess such a bridle as this does well in the lips of some other
Scripture expressions, which will not be ruled by the Truth without it: but it
incumbers the Scripture in hand, and abridgeth the serviceablenesse of it. For
if it shall be supposed, that that kind of offender against the weak
Christian, of whom the Apostle here speaks, knows certainly before hand,
that his act in eating meat sacrificed unto Idols, can have no such sad
effect, or sequel upon it, as the destruction of a weak Brother, must he not
needs be tempted hereby, to despise the Apostles charge on that behalf, being
grounded mainely upon such an Assertion or Supposall? and so be comforted, or
encouraged in his sinful Practice? To put restrictions upon Scripture Phrases
or Assertions, without necessity, and this demonstrable, either from other
Scriptures, or unquestionable grounds of Reason, is not to interpret the
Scriptures now in being, but (upon the matter) to make new.

If it be replied in favor of the said limitation or explication of Piscator;.
12.
that there will be great weight, and force enough to command the Consciences
of Men, in the Apostles argument, and to take them off from abuse of their
liberty, though it should be supposed that there is only a tendency in such a
Practice toward the destruction of weak Believers, whether it be supposed that
such Persons may actually Perish and be destroyed, or not:

I answer; there can be no tendency supposed, in any action, or means toward
an impossibility. For that which is simply impossible, or (which is the same,
in effect) impossible upon a condition, that is immutable and cannot fail, is
never the more possible, nor any whit nearer unto being, upon any other
account, or for any thing whatsoever that can be done. Therefore there is
nothing can be done with any tendency toward the effecting of such a thing.
Besides, were it granted, that there is a tendency in such a Practice, the
forbearance whereof the Apostle urges, toward the destruction of a weak
Brother, yea and further, that this Practice in respect of such a tendency in
it, were sinful; yet would there be very little in either, or both of these,
to deter men from such a Practice, unless it be withal supposed, that that
sad effect, whereunto the said tendency is acknowledged to relate, may possibly
be Effected or Produced by it. For the more secure a sinner may be, that his
sinful Practice will not be so sadly consequenced, as, the Nature and Property
of it only considered, it might very possibly be, the greater tentation lies
upon him to adventure upon it. The confidence which Judas had, that his act in
betraying his Master, would not have been accompanied with His Death, but that
he would now, as several times before he had done, find some way or other to
make an escape from those, into whose hands He was betrayed, was one maine
thing which betrayed Him into the deadly snare of that most abominable fact.
For it is said, that when Judas saw that he was condemned (which implies, that
this was more then He feared, or expected, notwithstanding his act in betraying
Him) he repented himself, etc. and cast down the pieces of silver in the
Temple, and departed, and went and hanged Himself Mat. 27. 3 5
.

Thirdly, (and lastly) the mention and tender of an impossible effect by way of
motive, to overruled the Consciences of men against a Practice in one kind or
other, whereunto they are inclined, is little less then ridiculous: especially
when the said impossibility is presumed to be known before hand to him, the
over ruling of whose Conscience is attempted thereby. Suppose I be full of this
Persuasion, 1. That I am a true Believer. 2. That being such, I am under an
impossibility ever to fall away so as to Perish, and under this double
Persuasion, were very much addicted to such, or such a sinful course; the
consideration of my falling away and perishing, were the most improper and
impertinent argument, that lightly could be Pressed upon me, to persuade me out
of the Way and Practice of my sin.

But some as willing to break loose from the Scripture in hand, as the former,.
13.
yet being not satisfied with their Projection for an escape, try the same
conclusion another way, and by another device. The Apostle, (say they) calls a
weak Professor of the Gospel, by the name of a Brother, not as if it could be
demonstratively known that he is a Brother indeed, but because others stand
bound by the Law of Charity to judge him such: after the same manner he says,
that Christ died for him; not as if he would have men to believe this according
to the judgment, or with the certainty, of Faith, but only with the judgment
of Charity. Upon this supposall, they draw up the Apostles argument for him,
thus: -- thy Brother shall perish, for whom, etc. i. e. by the abuse of thy
knowledge, thou may be the destruction of him, whom thou art bound in Charity
to look upon as thy Brother in Christ, and one of those, for whom Christ died.
But,

1. Why stand we not bound to believe, only with the judgment of Charity, and
not with the certainty of Faith, that Christ is the Son of God, or Savior of
the World, etc. as well as to believe only after this manner, that he may
perish, for whom Christ died; this latter being as positively, as clearly, as
roundly and fully asserted by the Holy Ghost, as either of the former? Or what
is such a liberty of Interpreting Scriptures, as this (being interpreted) but
an effectual door opened for the reducing of all things whatsoever in matters
of Religion, yea the Truth and Authority of the Scriptures themselves, to the
judgment of Charity, and consequently to the casting the judgment of Faith
out of doors? But,

2. To enjoin me a belief only according to the judgment of Charity,. 14.
where a belief according the judgment of Faith, would be ten times more
beneficial and serviceable unto me for the preserving of me from sin,
especially when the groundwork of Divine Revelation before me will better, and
with less descant upon the words, admit the latter belief, then the former,
(which is the case in the Scripture in hand) is very contrary to the Rule of
Charity, which restrains me from doing my Neighbor any prejudice, or harm,
as well in his spiritual, as outward, estate: yea, and much more in the
former, then in the latter.

3. If I stand bound to believe with the judgment of Faith, that it is
unpossible. 15.
for any man to perish, for whom Christ Died, what will such a consideration as
this (whether believed, according to the one judgment or the other) viz. that
Christ Died for such, or such a man, advantage me, by way of preserving me from
such a practice, which is apt to destroy him? For if it be a truth, that Christ
did die for him, I need not (according to the supposition mentioned) be at all
tender about doing any thing, or forbearing any thing, out of any apprehension
of danger, lest by the one, or the other, I should occasion his destruction. If
it be a truth that Christ did not die for him, upon what account should the
Apostle suggest unto me that he did die for him, or that it may be that he did
die for him, by way of argument, to deter me from doing that, which may tend to
his destruction? Suppose one part of the men in the World were impenetrable and
invulnerable, the other part, as now they are, exposed unto the danger of death
upon wounds received; were it a congruous motive or gound of persuasion,
whereby to caution me from wounding or smiting such, or such a man, with a
Sword, Dagger, or the like, to inform me, that this man is, or may be,
invulnerable? or that I ought to presume, or judge this man, to be
invulnerable? Would not such an argument as this rather strengthen my hand to a
smiting of him, then any ways occasion me to forbear? They clearly make the
Holy Ghost Himself to reason at no better rate of understanding, then this, in
the Scripture in hand, who make it only a matter of Charity to believe that
Christ Died for a weak Brother; and that in case he did die for him, he is
upon this account undestroyable.

4. (And lastly) most evident it is, that the scope of the Apostle, in that,.
16.
1 Cor. 8. (and there is the same consideration of, Romans 14.) is to deter
Christians from an unseasonable and undue use of their liberty and knowledge:
and this by an argument or motive drawn, not so much from what is unseemely,
uncomely, or dangerous, in respect of themselves, but from the consideration of
what danger or damage may very possibly accrue thereby unto others. The whole
tenor and carriage of both Contexts Proclaim this aloud: so that there needs
no more proof of it, then only the perusal of the Chapters themselves. Now the
danger, or damage, which a Christian by such an abuse of his liberty, as is
here expressed, may very possibly create, or occasion to another, the Apostle
affirms to be the destroying of his Brother for whom Christ Died, i. e. the
depriving of him of that great Salvation and blessedness, which Christ by His
Death purchased for him. Now if this strong Christian stands bound to believe,
according to the judgment of Charity, that this Person is a true Brother, and
one for whom Christ Died, he stands bound to believe, according to the same
judgment at least, if not according to the judgment of Faith it self, that he
may perish through the abuse of his liberty. Otherwise the Apostles argument
for the dissuading of him from such an abuse, cannot be supposed to take any
place in him, nor work at all upon him in order to such an end. For no
consideration or saying whatsoever, unless believed with one kind of Faith,
or other, can have any influence or operation upon men, either to persuade them
to, or from, any practice. If then the strong Christian stands bound to
believe, be it only according to the judgment of Charity, that the weak
Professor is a Brother indeed, and one for whom Christ Died, he stands bound
also to believe, according to the one judgment or the other, that he may
perish through his Unchristian misdemeanor in the use of his liberty. If so,
then he (and consequently, every other Christian) stands bound in Conscience to
believe, that such a man may perish, for whom he stands bound in Conscience
likewise to believe that Christ Died. For a belief according to the judgment
of Charity, where it is required, is matter of duty and of Conscience, as well
as a belief according to the judgment of Faith, in cases appropriate hereunto.

Neither is it true, according to the Principles of that opinion, which we now
implead, that a Christian stands bound in Conscience to believe, no not
according to the judgment of Charity, that all that Profess the Faith of
Christ, are true Brethren, or Persons for whom Christ Died. For the Patrons of
this opinion generally hold, 1. That many who make such a Profession, are
Hypocrites, and not true Brethren. 2. That many of this number, will perish at
last in their Hypocrisy and Unbelief. And thus far they hold nothing but
truth. But, 3. (and lastly) they hold yet further (which they should do better
to let go) that Christ Died for none of those Professors, who perish in the
end. These things they hold and believe, not with a belief according to the
judgment of Charity, but dogmatically, and according to the judgment or
certainty of Faith. Now certain it is, that no man stands bound in Conscience
to believe that according to the judgment of Charity, which is contrary to
what he believes, or what he truly judges Himself bound in Conscience to
believe, according to the judgment of Faith: because no Law or Rule of Charity
binds me to believe, with any kind of belief whatsoever, that God is a Liar,
or Untrue in his Word, which is the Foundation and Rule of what I stand bound
to believe according to the judgment of Faith. Such men therefore, who believe
according to the judgment of Faith, that all Professors of Christianity shall
not at last be saved, cannot, with the safety of their own Principles, say they
stand bound in Conscience to believe, with the belief of Charity, that Christ
Died for them all: because in their Notion, and according to their grounds,
these two Propositions are inconsistent in Truth, viz. that Christ should die
for all, and yet some, perish. But thus it still happens to those, who are
engaged in the defense of an error; I mean, to entangle themselves, and to
non-sensifie such Passages of Scripture, which manifestly oppose their error,
by such evasions, such unnatural and forced Interpretations, which for the
keeping alive of such a Tenet, which were better dead, they are necessitated
unto.

Nor will it avail them here to reply, that they do not judge themselves. 17.
bound in Conscience to believe in a way of Charity, that all and every
Professor of the Christian Faith, are true Brethren, or Persons for whom Christ
Died, but only that there is no Particular or single Person in this heap,
concerning whom they stand not bound by the Law of charity thus to believe, at
least until they have ministered grounds of suspicion that indeed they are
Hypocrites; For to this I answer,

1. In such an Explication of themselves as this, they clearly grant, that for
a time, viz. until Professors administer grounds of jealousy that their Faith
is not sound, they stand bound to conceive of them all, one or other, without
exception, (I mean, according to the judgment of Charity) that Christ Died
for them. But such a belief as this is contrary to what they believe
dogmatically (as has been said) and according to the judgment of Faith.
Therefore still they enterfeere. For to believe that Christ Died for every
individual Professor, and to believe that He Died for all Professors without
exception, is but one and the same belief, nor can any difference be showed
between them.

2. Neither is a Symptom of Hypocrisy, seen or observed in a Professor,. 18.
any sufficient ground for the reversall of such a judgment of Charity
concerning Him, according unto which we judged Him a Person for whom Christ
Died. Because, 1. There may be many Symptoms or Signs of Hypocrisy, which
are not demonstrative, or of any essential eviction. And 2. If a man were an
evicted Hypocrite, yet may he recover from under this condemnation. Therefore
Hypocrisy, though certainly known by a man, is no sufficient or reasonable
ground, no not according to the grounds of the Doctrine now oppugned, why I may
not, or ought not, in a way of Charity, to judge that Christ Died for him
notwithstanding. Thus then we see at last, that no Color, Plea or Pretense; no
turning, shifting, or winding about, this way, or that, will salve the
impertinency, that I say not, importune absurdity, of any interpretation
whatsoever of the Scripture in hand, which does not (in a clear comportance
with the words, and scope and drift of the Apostle therein) suppose a
possibility of their Perishing, for whom Christ Died, and that in order to
their non-Perishing; (as we shall have occasion to show further before the end
of this Chapter, in asserting another Passage of Scripture to the same Point.)

The next (in the order propounded) is 2 Peter 2. 1. But there were false. 19.
prophets among the People, even as there shall be false Teachers among you,
who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. Here it is clearly supposed,
and as good as in plain terms affirmed* that men bought by the Lord (viz.
Christ, as all Interpreters expound) may, yea and that some will, bring upon
themselves destruction. If so, then evident it is, that the Lord Christ bought
with the Price of His Blood, as well those who perish, and are destroyed by
their own wickedness, as those that are saved; and consequently, all men,
without exception.

That which is excepted against this Interpretation, and Inference from. 20.
the place, is very faint and weak; if you desire it, as it is, I shall impart
it. First (say some) the Lord Christ is not here said to buy those here spoken
of, and who are said to bring destruction upon themselves, after the same
manner, or upon the like terms, on which he is, or may be said to buy those,
that are saved: these He buys for one end, or with one intent, as viz. to
adopt for sons: those, with another, as, viz. for slaves and vassalls only. I
suppose the World never heard of such a purchase as this, made by Jesus Christ,
till these latter days; I mean, of men, only to make slaves and vassalls of
them. Certain I am, that the Scripture makes Christ's freemen, and Christ's
servants, or bondmen, all one. For he that is called in the Lord (says the
Apostle) being a servant, is the Lords freeman: likewise also he that is
called, being free, is Christ's servant, or bondsman 1 Cor. 7. 22.
. And indeed, it is the blessed liberty and freedom which we obtain by
Christ, that makes us His servants or bondmen, i. e. which ingageth us to be
such unto him. But if Christ buys Men with the Price of His Blood only for
slaves and vassalls, I would know whether they come to the actual enjoyment of
this Privilege (for such it must needs be supposed, as by the Context it self
will appear presently) by Faith, or without Faith. It cannot be said that they
come to the Possession of it by Faith; for by Faith men are put into the
blessed relation of sons: Ye are all the children of God (says the Apostle)
by Faith in Jesus Christ Gal. 3. 26.
. If they should come to it without Faith, then Christ should show more favor
(at least in this respect) to his vassalls, then to His Sons. His Sons come not
to the actual enjoyment of their Privilege, but by Faith: but His slaves (it
seems) may attain the actual enjoyment of theirs, without the performance of
this, or any other condition whatsoever.

Again, if Christ bought wicked Men and such as perish, for slaves and. 21.
vassalls, I would know whether they act the parts of slaves and vassalls, and
so serve Him in that capacity, which He aimed at in His purchase of them; or
whether they act contrary to the Nature and Laws of slavery or vassallage. If
they act as slaves and vassalls, then they answer and fulfill their Lords
intentions and desires in His Purchase, and so are not to be blamed, but
commended rather. If it be said that they act otherwise (I mean, then as
becomes slaves and vassalls) this must be either by acting righteously, or
unrighteously. If it be by acting righteously that they transgress the Law of
slavery, then it follows, that men may prove better, and live more holily,
then Christ ever intended, or desired they should. If it be by acting
unrighteously, then Christ did not intend, that those whom He bought for
slaves, should live unrighteously, but holily. If so, then were His intentions
toward those, whom He bought for slaves, altogether as gracious, as toward
those, whom He purchased for sons; His intentions toward and concerning these
(in His purchase of them) being clearly this, that they should serve him in
righteousness Luke 1. 74. 75.
.

Again, if Christ should buy some Men for slaves and vassalls, then in. 22.
case any of these, bought for such an end, or with such an intention, as this,
should repent and believe, Christ should be, not only disappointed in His
bargain, but this by the righteousness of the persons bought, or bargained
for by Him. To allege here, that it is unpossible that any person, who is
bought for a slave, should repent, or believe; 1. Is absolutely untrue, there
being no man but only he, who has sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, who
is not in a capacity or possibility of Repentance. 2. Though it were true, yet
it hinders not at all the truth, or the force of the consequence in the
proposition mentioned; viz. that in case any of those should repent, whom
Christ has bought for slaves, then he should be disappointed in his bargain,
and that by the righteousness of those bought by Him. Reason teaches us, that
a Connex proposition may be demonstratively true and pregnant, though both the
parts of it be never so false. As for example; if Ismael had been the natural
son of Lot, he could not have been the natural son of Abraham: this is a
proposition of a manifest and clear truth, yet both parts of it are false. For,
1. Ismael was not the natural son of Lot: 2. He was the natural son of
Abraham. Yet,

Again; if Christ bought some for slaves, then has he some base, servile,. 23.
hard, or drudgery work to do, such as is not meet for sons to put their hand
unto. For they have no need of slaves, that have no servile, or slavish work to
do. But Christ has no work to do, but that which is Honorable, and worthy
the most ingenuous of all His sons to do. All the Commandments of God (David
says) are righteousness Psalm. 119. 172.
. And a little before: All thy Commandments are truth Verse 151.
. Now Christ has no more Work to be done by Men, in the World, then God has:
neither has God any more, then what is expressed and set forth in His
Commandments: and all these (as we heard from David) are righteousness, [i.
e. require nothing but what is righteous and just for Men to do,] and
consequently meet for sons, yea chiefly for sons, or righteous ones to do.
Yea, God has no need of any Man's lie, or of any Man's sin whatsoever.
Therefore neither did Christ buy any for slaves.

Once more: if the Persons here said to be bought by Christ, were bought by. 24.
Him for slaves, then must the Apostle be conceived to extenuate their sin in
denying Him, by saying, that He bought them: whereas by the emphaticall
carriage of the Context it is evident, that His intent was, by this
consideration to aggravate that their sin, and set forth the heinousness, the
high demerit and provocation of it. He that buys Men, being slaves, to make
them free Men, and set them at liberty, may well expect thanks and free service
from them: and if they should not own such a Person as their Great Benefactor,
they deserve, not only to be divested of that liberty, which this Benefactor of
theirs has purchased for them, but to be subjected to a Bondage seven times
more grievous then that, from which they were delivered. But if a Man shall buy
those that were slaves before, only to put them into a condition of worse
slavery, then that wherein they were, they are not to be blamed, if they deny
Him to be any Great Benefactor to them. In like manner, if Christ shall be here
said to buy the Men spoken of, for slaves only, He should buy them out of a
more easy slavery, from under a lighter condemnation, only to put them into an
harder Bondage, and subject them to a greater condemnation: and consequently,
their not owning Him, or their denying Him as any Benefactor unto them, were no
just matter of provocation to Him, nor of displeasure from God. What is that
estate of Bondage, or Misery, in any kind, out of which Christ may be said to
buy those, whom He is supposed to buy for slaves? And what is that estate of
slavery, unto which He subjectth them, or into which He puts them, by this
purchase, or buying of them; that so we may compare them together? Doubtless
that Bondage and Misery, out of which these Men can be supposed to be bought by
Christ, is, in the utmost Line and Pitch of it, but an obnoxiousnesse, or
liablenesse to have been cast into Hell fire for their sin, committed in, or
contracted from Adam, as soon as they were conceived, or borne, or the like:
but that estate of slavery, whereinto (according to that interpretation of the
place, which we now oppose) they are bought, by being bought by Christ, is
seven times more grievous then so. For, 1. Under this they are as liable to be
thrown into Hell fire, as in the other. Nay, 2. They are sure to be cast into
Hell fire with much more guilt of sin upon them, then in their former condition
they were capable of; and consequently to be so much the more grievously
tormented for ever. Therefore their sin of denying Christ, is so far from being
aggravated by their being bought by Him for slaves, that indeed it is
extenuated, and brought to nothing by it: and consequently such an
interpretation is diametrally opposite to the Apostles intent in the place.

Lastly, (for this) if Christ bought the false Teachers here spoken of, with.
25.
other wicked Men* who in fine perish, for slaves, in what respect, or with
what intentions, may He be supposed to have bought such Infants, who dying in
their infancy, and before the committing of actual sin, are supposed, through
the want of the Privilege of Election, to Perish? Must we not have another
Device, or Notion, whereby to form the Intentions of Christ in His Purchase of
these? For it can at no hand of reason be said, or thought, that He bought
these for slaves, in as much as He never intended that these should live so
much as to a capacity of doing any work at all, in one kind, or other, for
Him. If the Assertors of the Interpretation now ready to fall, shall think to
relieve themselves at this Point, by saying, that it is not necessary that
Christ should at all mind such Children in His Purchase, so as to buy them in
one kind or other, but may well be conceived only to leave them, as He found
them; I would demand of them only this; how then, or upon what account, such
Children should enjoy the benefit of life, though but for a short season, as
for a Month, two, etc. together with the comforts of life appropriate to their
Age, as nourishment, nursing, looking to, etc. If no consideration at all was
had of such in the Death and Purchase of Christ, I would gladly understand what
other Friend they had to Mediate with God for such things on their behalf: or
whether God be so far well pleased with them without all mediation, as to
indulge such mercies and comforts unto them?

Nor can it with any Color of Reason be said, that Christ bought the. 26.
Persons here spoken of for slaves, or servants unto the Saints: because, 1. As
the sphere of the affairs of this World moves, the Saints are rather servants
unto the wicked, then these to them. Thy seed (says God to Abraham) shall be a
stranger in a Land that is not theirs: and they shall serve them, and they
shall afflict them four hundred years Genesis 15. 13.
. And, 2. Though there be a sense, wherein all things are said to be theirs
(the Saints,) All things are yours 1 Cor. 3. 22
, etc. yet wicked Men are in no other sense here said to be theirs, then that,
wherein Paul, Apollos, and Cephas are said to be theirs. Therefore as it does
no ways argue, that Paul, Apollos, and Cephas were bought by Christ for
slaves, because they are here said to be, the Saints, i. e. for their service
and benefit: so neither does it prove that wicked or impenitent Men were bought
for slaves by Him, because they are here said to be theirs also, or because (in
some sense) they are or may be serviceable to them.

Some seem to grant, upon the account of the Scripture in hand, that. 27.
Christ did buy some Reprobates [viz. such as are spoken of herein, and
afterward See Mr. I. Ball Covenant of Grace, p. 238. 239.
more fully described in the Chapter;] but (say they) this concludes not the
question in Hand, unless it can be showed, that there is the same reason of
all Reprobates. For (they say on) the thing to be proved, is, that Christ Died
equally for all and every Man: And it is one thing to die for the Reprobate in
some sense, and to die for them with an intention and purpose to save them: and
if Christ Died for some, and but some, that perish in a manner not common to
all and every Man, it is manifest He died not equally for all Men. How unlike
Himself is the Author in these Passages? or what Pen ever dropped such Divinity
as this, with that which follows in the same Contexture of Discourse, besides?
For, 1. is it reasonable to demand a Proof, that there is the same reason of
all Reprobates [viz. in all circumstances, or in every respect] to evince this,
that Christ Died equally for them all? Suppose some of them be greater sinners,
and some lesser, and sufficient proof can be made, that Christ Died for the
greater sinners amongst them (which the Author of the said passages plainly
grants) is it a reasonable ground of denial that He died for the rest, that
they are lesser sinners then they? Or suppose there can be ten thousand
differences showed between Reprobates, and Reprobates, yet if there be none of
them competent to evince a difference in the intentions of Christ, in, or about
His dying for them, they are all of them put together of no consideration at
all, to prove that Christ Died not equally for them; nor yet to infringe their
Assertion, who affirm He did. As suppose some of them be Tailors, others
Carpenters, a third part Mariners, or the like, such differences as these,
though never so many, are no ground, whereon to conclude, that Christ Died not
equally for them all.

Secondly, whereas He makes this the state of the Question between Him,. 28.
and His Antagonists, whether Christ Died equally for all* and every Man, or
no, confident I am that this is a very palpable mistake* especially if by,
equally, He means (as mean He must, if He means to speak congruously to the
interest of his own Discourse) intentions of procuring them by His Death the
actual enjoyment of equal conveniences, equal opportunities, equal
accommodations, in every kind, for their respective Salvations. For certainly
no Remonstrant was ever dis-sensed to such a degree, as to hold, that Christ
intended, in, or by His Death, to purchase any such uniformity of Divine
dispensations in the Government of the World at the Hand of God, that all and
every Man (for example) should enjoy a Ministry of the same Efficacy and Power,
for Conversion, Edification, Establishment, etc. or that all and every Man
should be disposed of unto callings equally free from, and equally subject
unto, Temptations, Occasions, Opportunities of sinning, etc. (with twenty and
ten Particulars more of like consideration which might readily be instanced;)
nor was ever any contra-Remonstrant engaged, or occasioned by any Adversary, to
remonstrate against any such Opinion, as this. But the Question between them
touching the intentions of God, and of Christ in His Death, was, whether God
did not as truly, as really, as cordially, intend the Salvation of one Man, as
another, considered as Men, in, or by Christ's Death. That God in His
Providentiall dispensations puts a difference between one Man's spiritual
opportunities, and another, does at no hand argue any different intentions in
Him toward the one, and the other, in Christ's Death, but may flow from
several other Principles, or Causes, as either from a different use and
improvement in Men of their original stocks of Grace, or from different
applications that have been made unto God by others, as in Prayer,
Intercession, etc. in the behalf of some, in respect of others; or from
different respects borne by God to the Parents or Forefathers of some, in
regard of their signal Piety and Serviceablenesse to His great Name in their
Generations, above others; or lastly from the Wisdom of God in conjunction
with His Goodness, in, and about the government of the World, according unto
which He judges it most expedient, as well for His own Glory, as for the
comfort and equitable consideration of His Saints, and such as walk before Him
with upright and perfect hearts, to make, or to permit all that variety and
disparity which is now seen in the World, in the spiritual conveniences or
accommodations of Men, some Men's Proportion and allowance in this kind being
but the Omer, and other Men's, the Ephah, which the Scripture makes ten times
larger, then the other Exodus 16. 36
. From some, or all of these considerations, and possibly from some others,
besides these, that inequality mentioned between Men and Men, in the enjoyment
of the means of Grace, may very probably arise: so that there is not the least
color of a necessity to resolve it into any difference of intentions in God,
in the Death of Christ. And if difference of means vouchsafed unto Men, would
argue different intentions in God touching their respective Salvation, in the
atonement made by Christ's Death; it will be found every whit as true, that
Christ Died not equally for the Elect themselves, as that He died not equally
for all Reprobates. Nay if an estimate be made of the Intentions of God in the
Death of Christ concerning the Salvations of Men, by this Rule, it will be
found that He bare more gracious intentions in the Death of Christ toward many
Reprobates, and their Salvation, then toward many of the Elect, or of those
who in the end come to be saved. For nothing is more evident, then that many
Perish under greater and more excellent means of Salvation, then are
vouchsafed unto many others, who yet are saved thereby Mat. 8: 10. and Mat. 15.
28 compared with C. 11. 10. 21, etc.
. So that it is a reasoning of no value, which concludes that Christ Died not
equally for all and every Man, because all and every Man have not the same
^eanes of Salvation granted unto them. Yet in what sense it is (at least) very
probable, that all and every Man have the same means of Salvation vouchsafed
unto them, shall be taken into consideration in due place.

Thirdly, whereas the same Author says, that it is one thing to die for. 29.
the Reproba^^ in some sense, and [another, I suppose he meanes] to die for
them with an intention and purpose to save them; I verily believe that neither
he, nor any of his persuasion in the present controversy, are able to credit
such a distinction, (unless captiously, and altogether irrelatively to the
business in hand, understood) either by the Scriptures, or any solid Reason.
For I confess I am yet to learn, where, in the Scriptures, Christ is said to
die for any, for whose Salvation he Died not. It is true, Christ Died not so
Precisely or Adequately for the Salvation of any Man, as not to die for the
obtaining of many other good things also for them, which are not comprehended
in Salvation, formally taken: and in this sense the distinction may be
admitted, in as much as upon this account, it amounts to no more, but this: It
is one thing to say, that Christ Died for the Reprobate in some sense, [i. e.
for the obtaining of lesser mercies for them,] and another, to say, that He
died for their Salvation. I confess, that these two Assertions, are not
formally, and every ways the same, as lesser things, and greater things,
compared only between themselves, are not the same. But such a sense as this no
ways accommodates the Authors Discourse. Therefore His meaning (to make him
speak like a Man) must be, that to say, that Christ Died for the obtaining of
some good things for Reprobates, may according to Scripture Principles and
Grounds, stand, and be justified: but to say, that He Died for the Salvation of
such Men, cannot by these Principles and Grounds, be evinced. But in this
sense, the said distinction has not yet been, nor (I believe) ever will be, in
the latter member of it, made Orthodox or sound, upon such terms.

The said Author in Process of the same Discourse, to save his Bottle of. 30.
Hay or Stubble, from being burnt in the fire of the Scripture in hand,
advances another distinction, every whit as helpless that way, as the former.
We confess (says he, speaking of the false Teachers in the Text before us,
who bring swift destruction upon themselves) that they were bought by the Blood
of Christ, because all these were fruits of Christ's Death, whereof they were
made partakers. But a few lines after, he retracts (upon the matter) the
substance of this his confession, by mincing it thus: To these Men their sins
were remitted IN A SORT in this World, and IN A SORT they were bo^ght with the
Blood of Christ, but INCHOATELY only, and as they tasted the Word of Life Mr.
I. Ball Covenant of Grace, p. 240.
. Such shifting, intricate, and winding expressions as these, falling from the
Pens of Grave and Learned Men, are the constant symptoms of a judgment
distempered with some error, laboring and toyling in the service of it. But,
1. who ever heard of sins remitted in a sort? or who is able to notion such
an expression? what is that remission, which is in a sort? If by Remission of
sins in a sort, he means Remission of sins to a degree, or with some
imperfection; this contradicts the generally received opinion of Protestant
Divines, who admit no degrees, no magis and minus, in Justification; still
assigning this for one difference between Justification and sanctification. If
by Remission in a sort, he means a conditional Remission (which seems to be
his meaning by an expression used a few lines before) I know no other sense can
be made of the expression, but only this, or of this import, viz. that God
forgiveth some Men their sins, upon such terms, as to reserve a liberty unto
himself, of Reversing or Recalling that grant, in case of such or such an
unworthiness in them afterward. This I judge to be most Orthodox and true;
though not in relation to some Men only, but with Reference unto all without
exception, to whom God at any time grants Remission of sins in this World:
(of which more before the close of this Chapter:) yet this sense (I presume) no
ways Befriends the Authors judgment in the controversy depending: so that
the truth is, I know not what sense to make, of his Remission of sins upon
condition, and in a sort.

Secondly, every whit as mysterious and uncout^ to me, as the former, is. 31.
that expression also, of these Men being bought with the Blood of Christ in a
sort. I wish that either some of the publishers of the Discourse, or some other
Friend, either of the Person, or Cause, or both, would explain it. For as for
his own explication (so intended, I suppose) in the words following, but
inchoately only, and as they tasted the Word of Life, it is to me rather a
further Obscuration, then Explication. Were they bought with the Blood of
Christ inchoately only? and not perfectly? How then can this Author say (in the
passage next following) that by promise he [God] assured them of Salvation, if
they did believe? and again, that if they had unfeignedly believed in him,
without question they should have been saved? Would their believing have
altered the Intentions of God concerning them in the Death of Christ? or cause
them to have been bought by the Blood of Christ, though they were not bought
before? Or did God assure them of such a Salvation, which never was* nor ever
so much as intended to be purchased or procured for them? Doubtless, if so be
they should without question have been saved, in case they had unfeignedly
believed, they were bought as perfectly and completely with the Blood of
Christ, as any the Elect themselves, their unbelief notwithstanding: because
their Believing could not have procured, or Brought any other Salvation to
them, but only that which was fully and completely purchased and bought for
them with the Blood of Christ, without any dependence at all upon their Faith.
Therefore unless we suppose, that Salvation was completely purchased for them
by Christ in His Death, we cannot say or suppose with truth, that in case they
had believed, they should without question have been saved See more of this
cap. 7. Sect. 2. 3. etc.
.

That which is behind, and as they tasted of the Word of Life, is yet more
inaccessible. 32.
to my understanding, then any thing that went before. For how, in what sense,
or with what congruity to a rational apprehension, can Men be said to have
been bought with the Blood of Christ, as they tasted of the Word of Life?
Surely the meaning is not, that when or whilst they tasted of the Word of
Life, they were so bought (I mean, with the Blood of Christ;) nor that this
their tasting of the Word of Life, was the formal or precise consideration
under which Christ bought them (though the Particle, as, frequently imports
this consideration:) As well the one, as the other, of these senses, are the
abhorrings of common sense it self; and besides, they are at enmity with the
Principles of the Author relating to the business in hand. Nor am I conscious
of any thing at all intended in the Clause, unless (happily) this may be it;
viz. that in as much as they tasted of the Word of Life, it is an argument that
they were bought with Christ's Blood; i. e. that they were Partakers in the
Fruit and Benefit of Christ's Death, or that the intentions of God in the Death
of Christ extended thus far, or in this consideration, unto them. But can it
enter into any reasonable Man's thoughts to imagine, that if this had been all,
which the Holy Ghost intended to say, viz. That God intended by the virtue or
means of Christ's Death, to cause these Men to taste of the Word of Life
(especially with exclusion of all intentions in Him to save them) that He would
have expressed it by saying, that Christ bought them? Suppose a Man should buy
or procure such a quantity of Meat and Drink for a poor captive, as were
sufficient to nourish him well and with good satisfaction, two or three days,
but should intend no such thing as to purchase his Liberty, or Redemption from
captivity, will any Man call this a buying, or Redeeming of the Person of this
Man? It is a very strange thing to observe, with what importune, bold, and
broad faced absurdities, error (sometimes) though in company and conjunction
with modesty and soberness of judgment, will attempt an escape out of an
exigency or strait. But further (to the Point in hand) evident it is (as has
been already observed) that the Apostle, in these words, who bought them,
intends an emphaticall aggravation of the sin of such Teachers, who should deny
their Lord. Now if there were nothing more intended in the said words, but only
this, that their Lord procured this for them, that they should taste of the
Word of Life, but intended nothing further, or better then this to them; this
would be so far from aggravating the sin mentioned, that it would rather ease
and qualify it. For if there was nothing purchased for them by the Lord
Christ, but only this tasting of the Word of Life, unpossible it was for them
to have obtained any thing more; weak and sinful Man being in no capacity of
obtaining more good in any kind, then what a way has been opened for him, in,
and by, the Death of Christ, to compass. Now for a Man to taste only of the
Word of Life, and to be in no capacity of making any further progress in the
way of Salvation, nay, to be in no capacity of doing that, by which he might be
actually saved, no whit bettereth or sweeteneth any Man's condition, but makes
it much worse, and much more grievous, then otherwise it would have been.
Better it had been (says our Apostle afterward in the same Chapter) for them
not to have known the way of righteousness [i. e. to taste of the Word of
Life] then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto them; which yet they must of necessity do, if they were in no
capacity, under no possibility, of going forward, or of being saved. Now for a
servant to deny, or disclaim his Lord, in case he never intended to make his
condition any whit better, but in many respects, worse, is a far lesser, and
lighter sin (if any at all) then it would be to deny Him, upon a supposition
that he had never done any thing at all in relation to Him, neither good, nor
bad. Therefore this Author is inextricably entangled with his exposition of the
place in hand, and makes no earnings of it at all. He gives no tolerable
account, how those Teachers, who brought swift destruction upon themselves,
should be bought by Christ inchoately only, and in a sort, and not simply and
absolutely, after the same manner, and upon the same terms, that all other
Men, yea, the Elect themselves, are bought by Him.

Our English Annotators, taking no notice of the former Exposition of the. 33.
place, as being (it seems) to them inconsiderable, give us, in stead thereof,
our choice of two others; but both of them calculated likewise to serve the
turn, not the truth. The Lord that bought them] i. e. (say they) that gave a
price sufficient for them. Or, by whom they professed that they were Redeemed:
and therefore they should not have denied Him. But (for the former) we have
once and again razed to the ground the polluted Sanctuary of that Distinction,
which asserteth Christ's Dying sufficiently for Men, and yet denies His Dying
intentionally for them Cap 5. Sect. 39, 40. etc. Again Cap. 7. Sect. 5.
. Besides, here to interpret, that Christ Died sufficiently for the persons
spoken of, without supposing, that He died intentionally also for them, is
clearly to overthrow the Apostles intention in the words, and to turn his
aggravation of the sin he speaks of, rather into an extenuation, then
otherwise. For he that shall pay that for the ease and benefit only of another,
which was sufficient to have pleasured and eased me also, as well as him, and
yet shall neglect me in such a payment, and leave me in misery, when as he
might, without the least trouble or charge to himself, above what he underwent
upon another account, have relieved me, has no cause to expect service, or
thanks from me, for such a payment: but I am the more excuseable if I neglect
him, or refuse to own him as a friend, because he neglected me in my greatest
extremity, and that when he had such a fair opportunity, of a miserable, to
have made me an happy Man, and might have done it without the least
inconvenience to himself, more then what he voluntarily put himself upon for
the sake of others, to whom he was no whit more beholding, or engaged, then
unto me. It is a palpably-importune and senseless conceit, to think that men
are engaged in any bands of thankfulness, or service, unto Christ for dying
sufficiently for them, unless He died intentionally also.

The latter Exposition of the last named Author^ (...), that the Lord Christ.
34.
is said to have bought these false Teachers, beca(...) they professed
themselves to have been bought by him. But, 1. why do they ^ot put such a
gloss as this upon other places, where there is every whit as much reason to
do it, as here? As when Paul says, For God has not appointed us unto wrath,
but to obtain Salvation 1 Thessalonians 5 9
, etc. why do they not interpret here, For God has not appointed us, etc. i.
e. WE PROFESS that God has not appointed us, etc. So when the same Apostle
says, that God has purchased the Church with his own blood Acts 20. 28
, why do they not gloss here; God has purchased the Church with, etc. i. e.
the Church PROFESSES her self thus purchased, etc. Partiality in
Interpretation of Scripture is every whit as bad, and Unchristian, as in civil
Judicatures.

Secondly, the great sin, by which these false Teachers are said to bring. 35.
swift damnation upon themselves, is said to be, their denying the Lord that
bought* them. If then they denied this Lord that bought them, how can these
Expositors say, that they professed themselves bought by Him? If it be replied,
they might formerly profess themselves bought by Him, though afterward they
denied Him; and the Apostle may charge them with sin in their present denial
of him, upon the account of their former profession; I answer: that if formerly
they professed themselves bought by him, but were not indeed so bought, and
afterward coming to understand or apprehend the truth, viz. that they were not
so bought, they are not at all to be blamed for denying themselves to have been
bought by him, or for denying that he bought them. To deny that to be so, which
is not so, especially when a Man verily believes and apprehends it not to be,
is no Man's sin. Or if it be further pleaded (in favor of the said gloss) that
these false Teachers might at the same time, when they professed themselves
bought by Christ, deny him, viz. in a consequentiall way, as either by teaching
such heretical Doctrines, which overthrew his Godhead, Manhood, etc. or else
by an impious conversation; I answer, 1. That if they professed themselves
bought by him, they could not lightly teach or hold forth any Doctrine, wherein
they should deny, either his Godhead, Manhood, Satisfaction, or any other
thing relating to him, without which he could not, in a rational way, have
made such a purchase of them. Or, 2. If they did teach any such Doctrine, it
must be supposed that they did it unwittingly, and because they apprehended
nothing in it of any inconsistency with their profession of being bought by
Christ. For it is not to be thought that Men will willingly and knowingly teach
contradictions, or teach any opinion, which they apprehend contradictory to
what they daily profess to believe. Now for a Man unwittingly, and contrary to
his intention and desire, to teach such a Doctrine, which consequently
involves, or leads unto an opinion that is dangerous and damnable, is nothing
but what is incident to the best and most approved Teachers (as I could readily
demonstrate by many instances) and therefore not like to be a sin of such high
provocation, as to bring swift damnation upon them. But, 3. (and lastly) that
the Apostle does not speak of any such denial of the Lord Christ by these
false Teachers, which is by works, or by wickedness of life and conversation,
but of Doctrine, is evident enough by the express tenor and carriage of the
words themselves. But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying, etc. which clearly shows, that the denial of the
Lord here charged upon false Teachers, stood not in works, but in words, in
false, Heretical, and damnable Teachings. Therefore they are not, they cannot
be here said to have been bought by Christ, because they professed themselves
to have been redeemed by him.

Some to evade that mortal stroke, which the Scripture in hand reaches. 36.
to that opinion, which denies a possibility of perishing in those, who are
truly bought and Redeemed by Christ, not being satisfied with any of the former
come-offs, have devised this. The Lord (say they) is said to have bought these
false Teachers, not because he really, indeed and in truth bought them, but
because in the opinion and judgment of Men he had bought them: they were
looked upon as persons Redeemed and bought by Him. And to credit this
Interpretation, they allege several Texts, where things, or persons are said
to be so, or so, such or such, not because they were really that, which they
are said to be, but only because they were this in appearance, or according to
the common estimate of Men. As Mat. 9. 13. Joh. 9. 39. Mat. 13. 12. com(...)ed
with Luke 8. 18. But this color is as faint, as any of the former, and as
easily washed off. And,

1. It is very questionable, whether in any of these places, either things or
persons receive any denomination merely from appearance, or opinion of Men.
Many things might be argued, and that with much probability, in oppositum. But
concerning the first of the places, most certain it is that there is no such
notion to be found there. For that by the righteous, whom Christ says that he
came not to call to Repentance, should be meant, righteous only in show, or in
the opinion of Men, whether themselves, or others, and not righteous truly and
properly so called, contradicts the manifest and declared intentions of Christ's
coming into the World, which are frequently avouched and found to be, the
calling of sinners of all sorts, kinds, and degrees, unto Repentance; and
therefore of Hypocrites also, as well as others, and of persons conceited in
the highest of their own Righteousness. See Mat. 3. 7, 8. etc. 1 Timothy 1. 12,
13, 14, 15. compared with Philip. 3. 6, 7, etc. (to omit many other places of
like import.) Besides, the occasion, and tendency of our Saviors Words, are of
pregnant eviction, that by, righteous, he means persons truly such, and not in
conceit, or opinion only. He was charged as with matter of undue deportment, in
eating with Publicans and Sinners. For his justification he pleads, that the
whole have no need of a Physician, but the sick; meaning that as the calling of
the Physician, is no ways necessary, in respect of those that are strong,
healthful, and sound, but only of the sick; so neither had His coming into
the World been of any such necessity, as now it was, but for sinners; and that
had Men been righteous and spiritually sound, there had been no need of His
coming unto them. And therefore as a Physician is not to be blamed for
conversing with the sick, in as much as the nature and end of his calling
requires his presence with them, and not with those that are sound: so neither
was he to be blamed for being in the company of sinners, seeing the great end
and intent of his calling to the Office of a Savior, was not to save, or to be
helpful unto, such as were righteous, who upon such an account stood in no
need of him, but to administer comfort and help unto sinners, who without help
from him must needs perish. Now certain it is, that the righteous, whom Christ
compares unto the whole, who in that respect need no Physician, are not men
righteous in show, or in opinion only, for these stand in as much, or more,
need of the Physician, then others; but those that are truly and sincerely
righteous. Therefore this Scripture holds no intelligence with that
interpretation of the other, which is now under censure. But,

2. Be it granted for truth, that things and persons sometimes receive
appellations. 37.
only from an appearance of what they are called, or from the opinion of Men
judging them such; yet such a line of interpretation as this, is not to be
stretched over what Scriptures we please; nor indeed over any, but where the
manifest exigency of the Context calls for it. Otherwise we shall entitle Men
to a liberty, of substituting shadows and appearances only, instead of
realities and substances of Truth, where, and when they please: and so to turn
the Mind and Counsels of God in the Scriptures upside down. The Contest of
old between Hierome and Austine about Paul's reproving Peter (Gal. 2.) is of
notable consideration to the business in hand. Hierome pleaded, that when Paul
reproved Peter at Antioch, he did it not seriously, or in good earnest: but
affirmed, that these two Apostles out of a kind of prudent Charity agreed to
make a show of a Contest between them, when as indeed there was none. But how
gravely, and copiously does Austin declare against, and argue down, such a
licentiousness of interpreting? The Scripture (says he) plainly says, that
Peter was worthy reproof, or to be condemned. If then we shall take this
liberty, (or boldness) to say, that indeed and in truth he did not amiss, but
only dissembled for the sake of those that were weak, then the Apostle Paul
lies, in saying, that he was worthy blame, or reproof. Admit this (says this
learned Father) and down falls all the Authority and certainty of the
Scriptures Mihi enim videtur exitiosissime credi aliquod in libris Sanctis esse
mendacium, etc Aug. Epist. 8. vid. and Epist. 9. and 14. and praecipue, Epist.
19.
. For if they speak that which is false in one place, who can make it good
that they speak Truth in another? This is the brief of that famous
dissertation between those two Worthies in the Christian Church. From whence it
may appear, of what dangerous consequence it is, to expound that, which the
Scripture simply and plainly delivers as a Truth, as spoken by way of
appearance, or humane opinion only, when there is no apparent necessity
enforcing such an Exposition. And if there be some places, which will bear, or
which call for such a figurative and Catacresticall Interpretation as this,
they are but few: and those which are, must be discerned and distinguished from
others, by the manifest exigency of their respective scopes and imports; the
least jot or title of which character is not to be found in the place in hand.
For,

3. (And lastly) most evident it is (as has been formerly also observed,. 38.
and as many Expositors, more then enough addicted to the contra-Remonstrant
opinion, themselves acknowledge) that the Apostles intent here is, to set forth
the most heinous and horrid indignity of the sin of these false Teachers in
denying their Lord, by this aggravating consideration, that they deny such a
Lord who bought them. Now if it be supposed that this Lord, really, and of love
and good will to them, and out of a desire to free them from misery, bought, or
redeemed them, the consideration is of great pregnancy and force to demonstrate
horrible ingratitude and impiety in them, to deny Him. But if on the contrary
it be supposed, that he did not indeed buy them with any intent to free them
from their misery, but only make a show of such a thing, or only do that, which
might occasion Men to think, or to believe that he did so, this manifestly
eases and qualifies the guilt of their sin in denying him; and so is
manifestly repugnant to the Apostles scope. For, to make a show of love only,
or to do that, by which other Men may be invited to think, that a real
kindness is done for such, or such a Man, when as indeed there is nothing done
of any such consideration, nor ever intended to be done, does no ways oblige
this Man in thankfulness unto him, who accommodates him upon no better terms,
but is rather a just ground of an harder and worse opinion of him.

If it be replied; yea but these false Teachers knew nothing but that they. 39.
were truly and really bought by Christ, and that out of a desire of saving
them: nor had they any sufficient reason to judge otherwise. Therefore their
sin in denying him is no ways eased upon this account, that he did not indeed
buy them with any such intent, or desire, because, 1. Men are bound to judge,
as they have reason to judge: and, 2. are bound to act or practice according to
their judgments; I answer;

There can be no sufficient ground for any Man to believe that which is false,
nor ought such a thing to be believed; at least with confidence of belief, or
with any such belief, upon which he shall stand bound to engage in any material
and weighty Action, or Practice. Therefore if Christ did not really buy these
false Teachers, they could have no sufficient ground to believe that he did; at
least to believe at any such rate of confidence, as rather to suffer the loss
of any considerable good, then deny it. If it be again replied; A Man may
stand bound to adventure much upon probabilities, in many cases, though there
be no certainty, or truth in that, which upon such probabilities he does
believe; I answer, possibly a Man may indeed stand bound, in point of wisdom,
or prudence, in some cases to adventure much (in a simple consideration) upon
probabilities only; but not in point of Conscience. As for example; a Merchant,
or other Man, may stand bound in point of wisdom to adventure some considerable
part of his state in a way of Trade beyond the Seas, upon probabilities only of
a gainful return; though even in this case, upon a more exact consideration
it will appear, that such a Man does not make, this adventure upon any mere
probability, one, or more, but upon that which is certain. For the probability
of a good return in this case, is a certainty to him: he knows certainly, and
beyond all doubt or question, that it is a thing probable or likely, that he
shall receive such a return, though he knows not certainly, but only
probably, that he shall indeed receive it. Now the true ground upon which the
Merchant adventures, is not the knowledge that he shall, or will gain by his
adventure: for it is unpossible for him to know this: but the knowledge and
consideration of the likelihood of his gaining, which (as has been said) he
may, and does know, and that certainly.

You will upon this say (it is like) The false Teachers (in the Scripture. 40.
in hand) had, or might have had, such a certainty as this, that the Lord
Christ did really buy them: for it was very probable that he had so bought
them, in regard of that illumination, external sanctification, and other
gifts, whereof they were partakers; and consequently their sin in denying him
was never the less upon any such account as this, that he had not indeed
bought them: in as much as they were bound to believe that he had so bought
them, and to behave themselves toward him accordingly. I answer: 1. Upon this
supposition, that Christ did not indeed buy, or had not bought them, they could
have no probability, no not upon their illumination, or outward gifts
whatsoever, that he had, or should have, so bought them; especially taking in
the opinion of those, against whom we manage our present Discourse, viz. that
Christ truly bought no more, then come to be actually saved. For, 1. if those
truly bought by Christ be but very few in number, comparatively, with those,
who were passed by, and not so bought by him, then no particular Man, thus far,
(I mean, as he is a member of Mankind, or one of the generality of Men) can
have so much as a probable ground, that he is one of those so bought by him. As
when there are twenty, or forty blanks in a Lottery, and only one prize, it is
not probable or likely that he that draws but once, shall draw the prize. For
it is twenty or forty to one that he shall not draw it. 2. Neither does the
receiving of illumination, or any other common gift, upon the former
supposalls, make it probable unto any Man, that Christ truly bought him,
because very many receive illumination (at least in the sense of our opposers)
etc. who live wickedly; and many also, who fall away from that external
sanctity, wherein they walked for a season. And our Savior himself says, that
many are called, but few are chosen Mat. 20. 16
; and again, that upon the abounding of iniquity, [viz. in fierce and bloody
Persecutors] the love of many shall wax cold Mat. 24 12
: and yet again, that many that are first, shall be last Mat. 19. 30
, (to omit many other passages of like import.) Therefore no external, or
common gifts whatsoever make it so much as probable unto any Man, that he was
truly bought by Christ, there being very many thus gifted, who will not in the
end be saved. But,

2. Suppose our false Teachers had probable grounds, from their illumination,.
41.
etc. to believe, that Christ had truly bought them, yet this probability, upon
the Premises last argued, could be but very faint, and mingled with much
jealousy and fear of the contrary: and consequently nothing so binding upon
them to own and honor him in the World, as a certain knowledge, (free from
the pain and torment of fear of the contrary) that he had so bought them,
would have been. So that though it should be yielded (which yet there is no
sufficient reason to do) that the Interpretation which we now oppose, does not
turn up by the very roots the drift and scope of the Apostle in the Place and
Words, yet it shakes them terribly, and leaves little spirit, strength, or
force in them. If the Merchant judged it forty, twenty, yea or but ten Vix
enim dicimus quisque eorum, qui Christo nomen ded^runt, fidei puritatem ad
extremum usque retinet: omnes fere ad corruptelas degenerant, atque amagistris
licentiae delust, prosancs^unt. Calvin. in 2 Pet. 2 2.
to one odds, that in case he should venture, he should never have any return
of what he ventures, he would have but flender encouragement, and so little
list, to follow his Sea-Trade with his whole estate upon such terms. Whereas
certainty of returns with considerable gain, would the Providence of God, and
condition of humane affairs bear it, would multiply Merchants without end; and
withal render those very weak, and unlike Men, who having means and
opportunity to follow such an employment, should either be slothful and sit
still, or else dispose of their estates in any other way, wherein little or no
improvement could be expected. In like manner a certainty of knowledge, that
Christ truly and really bought a Man with His Blood, is an high and sacred
engagement upon this Man to acknowledge, own, and honor Him as His Great and
Blessed Lord and Benefactor, in the sight of the World; and consequently
renders Him the reproach and abomination of Men, in case he shall be ashamed of
Him, or deny Him: whereas a faint apprehension only of such a thing done for
Him, entangled and encumbered with a thousand Questions, Fears, and Doubtings,
hardly extricable, whether it was indeed done, or no, makes the denial or dis
owning of Him, if not pardonable, yet much more excuseable, and of far lighter
provocation and demerit, then in the other case it would be.

Thus then at last we see, that no Interpretation will sit with any tolerable.
42.
closeness or congruity, to the words and scope of the Scripture in hand, but
only that, which acknowledges the false Teachers mentioned therein, truly,
really, absolutely and completely Redeemed or bought by Christ, I mean, after
the same manner, and upon the same terms of love on Gods Part, after, and upon
which, those were Redeemed and bought by Him, who in the issue and event come
to be saved. As for that objection, which lies in many Men's thoughts against
such an Interpretation as this, as viz. that if Christ truly Redeemed or bought
any Man, He must of necessity at last be saved; we shall (God assisting) give a
fair, clear and satisfactory Answer unto it, when we come to Answer the
Arguments insisted upon, for the Proof of the contrary Doctrine to that* which
is maintained in the present Discourse. But for that which some plead against
the Interpretation asserted, from Revel. 14. 4. where those that are said to be
Redeemed or bought (...), from Men, are termed the first fruits unto God, and
to the Lamb, and are said to follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes, which
implies their actual Salvation; the answer unto it is easy. For evident it
is from the description of the persons here spoken of, that they are such, not
simply who were Redeemed and bought by Christ, but who also truly believed in
Him, and persevered in Faith and Love unto the end; and consequently such, in
whom the work of Redemption performed by Christ, obtained its ultimate and
plenary efficiency, and end. In which respect they are said, in a kind of
emphaticall manner, to be (...), to have been Redeemed [or, bought] from Men
[or, from amongst Men,] i. e. Persons in whom the common Redemption vouchsafed
by Christ took Place, and wrought, to that great and signal differencing and
distinguishing of them from other Men, that whereas the grace of this
Redemption was Buried under other Men's wickedness and unbelief, and at last,
in their destruction, it prevailed and magnified it self in the constant Faith
and Holiness of these, and at last triumphed gloriously in their Salvation.
Whereby it came to pass, that these only seemed to have been Redeemed, amongst
Men, all others miscarrying, as if they had not been Redeemed. So that there is
nothing at all, scarce so much as an appearance of any thing, in this
Scripture, against that Interpretation of the other, for the establishing of
which, way has been made through the fall of many others.

And doubtless he that shall attentively, and with consideration Read. 43.
what Calvin himself has commented upon the place, must needs judge him very
compliant with the said Interpretation. Although (says he) Christ may be
denied several ways, yet (in my judgment) Peter means that, which is
expressed in Jude, viz. when the Grace of God is turned into wantonness. For
Christ has Redeemed us, that He might have a People separated from all the
defilements of the World, addicting it self unto holiness and innocence.
Wherefore THEY, WHO SHAKING OFF THE BRIDLE, CAST THEMSELVES FORVVARD INTO ALL
MANNER OF LICENTIOVSNESSE, ARE NOT WITHOUT CAUSE SAID TO DENY CHRIST, BY WHOM
THEY WERE REDEEMED. So then, that the Doctrine of the Gospel may abide with us
safe and sound, let this be always fixed in our minds, that we are Redeemed by
Christ, that He may be the Lord both of our Lives, and Deaths Tametsi variis
modis abn^gatur Christus, eum tamen ^ic (meo judicio) attingit Petrus, qui
exprimitur apud Judam, nempe cum gratia Dei in laesciviam convertitur. Redemit
enim nos Christus, ut populum habere segregatu^ ab omnibus mundi inquinamentis,
addictum Sanctitati and innocentiae. Qui igitur excusso fraeno in omnem
licentiam se proiiciunt, non immerito dicuntur Christum abnegare, a quo
Redempti sunt. Proinde ut salva and integra Evangelij Doctrina apud nos maneat,
hoc animis nostrie infixum sit, Redemptos esse nos a Christo, ut vitae simul
and mortis nostrae sit Dominus, etc.
. In this piece of Commentary, there are several passages, which plainly
declare the Authors judgment to have been (at least when He wrote these
things) that those are, and may be said to be redeemed by Christ (and that
after the same manner that the Saints themselves are redeemed) who yet may in
the end perish. For, 1. in saying, Christ has redeemed us, questionless he
includes Himself, and all the godly (at least) that heard Him, or shall read
these things. Now if He should mean that either Himself, or other godly ones,
were Redeemed with any other kind of Redemption, then that spoken of in the
Text before Him, viz. wherewith the false Teachers (there mentioned) were
Redeemed, his Commentaries should be quite besides the Text.

2. He says Expressly, that they, who shaking off the Bridle, cast themselves
forward [or head long] into all manner of licentiousness, are not without
cause said to deny Christ, by whom they were Redeemed. Now who are they that
bring swift destruction upon themselves, but such as he here describes, and
whom he supposes to have been Redeemed by Christ, and that with the same
Redemption, whereof He had spoken immediately before, viz. wherewith Himself,
and other godly ones, had been Redeemed? For to make him speak of two several
kinds of Redemption specifically distinct, in one and the same Passage, without
giving the least notice of any distinction or difference at all between them,
is to suppose Him to equivocate, and to make Him a Transgressor of the known
Principles and Rules of Writing.

3. (And lastly) when He exhorts, let this always be fixed in our minds, that
we are Redeemed by Christ, that He may be the Lord of, etc. He cannot be
supposed to address or speak only to those, that were, or are, truly godly,
but to all those (at least) who judge themselves such: yea, clear it is, that
He speaks to all Persons professing Christianity, without exception. Nor can he
be supposed to invite or persuade any Man to fix that in his mind, which is
every whit as likely, if not much more likely, to be false, then true, but only
that which is most certainly and unquestionably true. Therefore he clearly
supposes, that all Persons, who upon any terms or grounds whatsoever judge
themselves godly, yea, that all Professors of Christianity, without exception,
are Redeemed by Christ: and consequently, that as well those who Perish, as
those that are saved, are Redeemed by Him; there being nothing more certain,
then that many who profess Christianity, yea and who call themselves godly,
will Perish.

From henceforth then let no Man put the Doctrine maintained in this
Discourse,. 44.
to any such rebuke, as this, that it was never held or countenanced by any
Divine of the Order surnamed, Orthodox: we find the Principal of this Order (
Calvin himself I mean) besides many others of Name and Note amongst them, once
and again, yea seven times over, very freely giving the right hand of
fellowship unto it. We have been somewhat long in our vindication of the
Scripture last argued: but the restless and endless importunity of Men in
persuading the Scriptures to entreat their Darling error kindly, together with
the difficulty of the Scriptures to be so persuaded, has compelled us. But it
is very incident to Men, to do by the Scriptures as they do by themselves. God
(says Solomon) has made Man upright: but they have sought out many inventions
Eccles. 7. 29
. So may it be truly said; that God has made many Scriptures upright, plain,
clear, obvious for sense and meaning: but Men are wont to seek out many
inventions to perplex or misfigure this meaning, that it may not be known to
oppose their fond Conceits and Imaginations.

The next Scripture of the Consort designed for this Chapter, was, 2 Pet.. 45.
2. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollution of the World through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are entangled therein, and
overcome, the latter end is worse with them, then the beginning. For it had
been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after
they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them.
Here likewise it is most irrefragably and clearly supposed, that Men who have
been truly sanctified and regenerated, and consequently Redeemed by Christ, may
yet decline so as to Perish in the end. For to deny, that that expression of
escaping the pollution of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, does import true Sanctification, or Regeneration, is to
deny that the Sun is up at Noonday. For if the Persons here said to have
escaped the pollutions of the World, through, etc. shall not be supposed truly
and inwardly Sanctified, etc. but only superficially and externally, they must
be supposed withal, 1. To have been all this while in the midst of that
greatest pollution of the World, and which pollutes all other things unto Men
Tit. 1. 15.
, unbelief. 2. To have been in the inward bent and frame of their minds and
wills as much addicted to all other the pollutions hereof, as at any time
formerly. 3. (And lastly) to have been all this while most damnable Hypocrites
and Dissemblers. Now that the Holy Ghost should say, that Unbelievers, Persons
inwardly full of all wickedness and filthiness, most vile Hypocrites and
Dissemblers, have escaped the pollutions of the World, especially through the
knowledge [or rather, acknowledgement, (...)] of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, is to me (and I thin^ to all other impartially considering Men) the
first borne of incredibilities. Can a Man be said to have escaped his enemies,
when he still remains under their power, and is in greater danger of suffering
mischief from them, then ever before? Or is not he, who being enlightened,
Retains the truth in unrighteousness, remains inwardly full of malice and
wickedness, only garbing himself with an Hypocritical outside, or mere
Profession of Holiness, as much or more under the Power and Command of sin, as
likely to Perish everlastingly for sin, as ever he was, or could be before his
illumination? For that, during that condition of escape, of which the Holy
Ghost here speaks, from first to last, the Men spoken of were inwardly full of
all filthiness and wickedness, and consequently, vile Hypocrites and
Dissemblers, our Adversaries themselves confess in their managing this
Scripture, though (as they suppose) to their advantage. Evident it is (say
they) that all the while they were free from the pollutions of the World, they
were still Dogs and Swine [and if so, as inwardly vile and wicked as ever]
because it is said of them, Verse. 10. But it is happened to them according to
the true Proverb; the Dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that
was washed to her wallowing in the mire. But of this more anon.

2. That which is here expressed to be the cause, or means, of their escape.
46.
or deliverance from the pollutions of the World, their knowledge, [or
acknowledgement rather, which is somewhat more] of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, plainly evinceth it to have been such an escape, which is inward,
cordial, and real, in conjunction with true Sanctification, and not
external, formal, or in Show and Pretense only. There is scarce any thing
more frequent or familiar in the Scriptures, then the ascribing of
Justification, Sanctification, yea and Salvation it self to the knowledge,
sometimes of God, sometimes of Christ, sometimes of both. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant (says Isaiah, speaking of Christ) justify many
Esa. 53. 11.
. By his KNOWLEDGE; i. e. (as Interpreters generally) by his being known. He
calls that (says Musculus) the knowledge of Christ, not wherewith he himself
knows, but whereby he is known by us Scientiam Christi vocat, non qua ipse
scit, sed qua scitur and cognoscitur a nobis.
. The Apostle Paul speaks of the KNOWLEDGE of the Son of God, as one of the
Principal ends of that Evangelicall Ministry, which was by special ^race
given unto, and is continued in, His Church, and joins it with the perfection
of the Saints. Ephesians. 4. 12. 13. and afterward (in the same Chapter, Verse. 20.
22. etc.) ascribes the putting off the old man, and the renewing in the spirit
of our minds, unto it. The Apostle John makes no scruple to pronounce him a
liar, who shall say that he KNOVVETH CHRIST, and yet keeps not his
Commandments 1 Ioh. 2. 4.
. And again; that whosoever sins [i. e. lives wickedly] has not seen Him,
neither KNOWN Him 1 Ioh. 3. 6.
. That of our Savior Himself to this purpose is well known: This is life
eternal, that they KNOW thee the only true God, and Him whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ Ioh. 17. 3.
. It were easy to multiply places of like import. Therefore certainly that
obedience, that Sanctification, that Conformity in life and conversation to the
Word and Will of God, which is begotten and raised in Men, by the knowledge,
much more by the acknowledgement, or thorough* knowledge (which the Word (...)
seems to import) of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is cordial obedience,
true and real Sanctification, and conformity to the Will of God.

3. And lastly, if the escape and deliverance from the pollutions of the World.
47.
here spoken of, was not inward, real, and accompained with true
Sanctification, etc. how could the Persons be in danger of an after-
intanglement therewith, (especially of an inward intanglement, and wherewith
the Heart should be ensnared, which yet the Holy Ghost evidently implies they
were, Verse. 14. in ascribing unto them an heart exercised with covetousness,)
or of being overcome? at least how should their conditions be rendered so much
more grievous and dreadful by any such entanglement, then they were under the
escape, as the Holy Ghost here clearly supposes? If the escape here mentioned,
imports not true and real Sanctification, the Persons escapeing must of
necessity be supposed, all the time of this their escape, to have been in the
gall of bitterness, and bands of iniquity; and particularly, to have been both
Hypocrites, and Unbelievers. Now our Savior Himself supposes Hypocrites and
Unbelievers to be the first borne children of Hell, and of the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone for ever, in those two sayings of His,
compared, viz. Mat. 24. 51. with Luke 12. 46. The tenor of the former is this:
The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him
his portion with HYPOCRITES: there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Of
the latter, this: The Lord of that servant -- will cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with UNBELIEVERS. If Hypocrites and Unbelievers be of the first
and Primary designation for Hell, and eternal destruction (which the said
Passages clearly import) they cannot lightly through any apostasy whatsoever
contract any worse, or more grievous condition, then their present condition
is. The truth is, that I know no Apostasy, of which an Hypocrite or Unbeliever
is properly capable, but only that, which is from Belial unto Christ, or from
Satan, unto God.

All that the Adversaries of the Interpretation given, and who will not
acknowledge the escape here mentioned to imply any thing more then a mere. 48.
formal and outside Sanctification, are able to plead from the words, or
Context for themselves, is only that (which has been already touched) Verse
22. The Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow, etc. From hence
they conclude, that as a Dog, is a Dog, retains the same nature, whilst his
vomit, and he are parted, which he had before: and so a Sow, or a Swine, is the
self* same Creature inwardly, washed, and unwashed: so were the Persons
resembled to these Creatures, the same men in the inward frame and constitution
of their Hearts, even whilst they had made the escape here spoken of from the
pollutions of the World, which they were before; therefore not truly
Sanctified, or Regenerate.

But how weak this allegation is, sufficiently appears by the foundation, on
which it is built, which is this, that Parables or Similitudes run upon all
four; or that all things whatsoever found in the things resembling, are
appliable also to the things resembled. God in hearing the importunate and
restless cries of his Saints, is compared to an unrighteous Judge, who though
neither fearing God, nor regarding Man, was notwithstanding overcome with the
Widows importunity, to do her Justice. Now to infer from hence, that because
this unjust Judge remained still unjust, even whilst he did Justice to the
Poor Widow; therefore God also, being compared to him, was unjust, whilst he
heard the Prayers of his Saints, would be an inference blasphemously
ridiculous. Of no whit better calculation is that collection mentioned;
wherein, because Men, sometimes clean, and afterward polluted, are compared,
in respect of such a change, to a Dog returning to his vomit, and a washed Sow,
to her wallowing in the mire; it is argued, that therefore during their
cleanness, they must needs be inwardly, and in disposition, like unto these
Creatures. Besides, supposing the Persons here spoken of, to have been Dogs and
Swine, I mean, inwardly unclean and impure, before the alteration here
ascribed to them, the Proverb of the Dog returning to his vomit, etc. may, in
sufficient Propriety of Speech, be applied unto them, without any supposall,
that under that alteration they should be Dogs also. Suppose a Dog should by
casting up his gorge, or vomit, be turned into a Sheep, and afterward should
by a contrary means, viz. by resuming it, become a Dog again, might it not
Truly and Properly enough be said, that this Dog, though lately a Sheep, is now
become a Dog again? But the impertinency of the Plea now impleaded, may be any
Man's Vision, that will but narrowly and impartially look upon it. Yea,

Calvin himself (it seems) was so far unsatisfied with it, that he could. 49.
not own the Interpretation attempted by it, but crosses over the way to the
other Interpretation. This (says he upon Verse. 22.) is that in brief that
Peter would say; that the Gospel is Physique which purges us with an
wholesome vomit, but withal that there are many Dogs, who to their
destruction, resorb [or resume] what they have vomited up. And again, that the
Gospel is a Laver, which washes away all our uncleanness: but there are
many Swine, who soon after their washing tumble themselves in the mire. In the
mean^ time the godly are admonished to take heed of both, unless they mean
to be reckoned amongst Dogs and Swine Hoc autem summatim vult Petrus,
Evangelium esse medicinam qu^ nos salubri vomitu purgat: Sed multos esse canes,
qui in suam perniciem resorbent, quod vomuerant. Item Evangelium esse lavacrum,
quod immunditias omnes nostras abstergit: sed multos esse porcos qui statim a
lotione in coenum se provolvant. Interea monentur pij ut sibi ab utroque
caveant, nisi velint in canum and porcorum ordine censeri.
. If Men like Dogs, may resume that to their destruction, which they have
vomited, or cast up, certainly, when they had thus vomited, and till such a
resorbition, they were sound, and in a condition of Salvation. A Man cannot
reasonably be said to take any thing to his destruction, who had that in Him
before, which was a greater and more certain means to destroy Him. Nor need
godly Men be admonished of any thing, as like, or Possible, to bring them into
the account of Dogs or Swine, if such a transition be supposed to be unpossible
to them. Therefore (doubtless) Calvin resents much better that Exposition of
the Place in hand, which supposes the escape specified therein to include an
inward and real Sanctification, then that which resolves it into smoke and
wind, I mean, an External, Formal, Hypocritical Sanctification.

Another Scripture ranged in the same Division with the former, is of much. 50.
the same consideration with them. Of how much sorer punishment (says the
Apostle) shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace Heb. 10. 29
? To say, that this Scripture (with the former) does not speak of a true and
real Sanctification, but of that only, which is outsidely, seemingly, and
hypocritically such, is to claim a mere Arbitrary Power for Interpreting the
Scriptures.

For, 1. The word here translated, Sanctification, is the same, with that which
our Savior uses, Joh. 17. 17. where, in the behalf of His Disciples, He
Prays thus unto His Father: Sanctify them through thy Truth: thy Word is the
Truth. If neither Reason, nor Religion suffers us here to interpret, that
Christ Prayed unto the Father to Sanctify His Disciples, outwardly, formally,
seemingly only, but really and in truth, I would gladly know which of the two,
or whether both, lead us to understand any other Sanctification, in the Place
in Hand.

2. No one instance (I verily believe) can be brought throughout all the
Scripture, where Men are said to be Sanctified by Christ, by the Blood of
Christ, by the knowledge of Christ, or the like; but that the Place is to be
understood, of a true, sound, and saving Sanctification. But Places of this
Interpretation are many, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Heb. 13.
12. etc.

3. There is this reason evincing with an high Hand that the Scripture before
us speaks of an inward, real, and soul Sanctification, viz. that the sin of
the Person here said to have been Sanctified, in counting the Blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing [i. e. in Despising or Profaning it] is aggravated by
this consideration, that He was Sanctified by it. The carriage of the Verse,
clearly, and above all contradiction, evinceth this. Now then if we shall
suppose that this Person had received no more good, no greater benefit by this
Blood of the Covenant, but only to be made an Hypocrite, or a Dissembler by it
(which must be affirmed, if the Sanctification here attributed unto Him, be
only a feigned, or formal Sanctification;) this is so far from aggravating
that sin of His in despising it, that it does very much, if not altogether,
extenuate and excuse it.

Nor can it be here pretended (with reason) that it was not the fault,. 51.
nor any defect in the blood of the Covenant, that he was not truly and really
sanctified, but his own negligence and falsenesse of Heart. For though it be
true, that the Reason why any Man, especially enjoying the Gospel, Proves an
Hypocrite, is not any deficiency in the Blood there Presented unto Him by way
of antidote, and for his cleansing, but his own negligence, and unfaithfulness
to his own Soul; yet the Sanctification spoken of in the Scripture in Hand, is
not attributed to the Looseness or Hollow-heartednesse of the Person, in whom
it was found, but to the Blood of the Covenant it self. Now that which is the
Proper and genuine effect of this blood, cannot be any Hypocritical, or mere
outside thing. And however, were this Sanctification an Hypocritical, or
meere-outside thing, and so an occasional effect only of the blood of the
Covenant; yet would the consideration hereof be no just or fitting matter,
whereby to aggravate the sin of him that should despise this Blood. Though I
may be guilty, and an offender in an high degree, to remain an Hypocrite, or a
false-hearted Man, under means so efficacious and Proper to make me sound and
upright Hearted, as the Gospel, and the Blood of the Covenant held forth
therein, are; yet the consideration of my remaining an Hypocrite in this case,
is no ground why I should be judged, either by my self, or others, the greater
sinner, for despising these means. It is rather an extenuation (as has been
said) of my sin in this kind, then otherwise, to consider, that though this
Blood of the Covenant be a very Efficacious and Proper means to make me
sound-Hearted and sincere, yet it is not so Efficacious and Powerful in this
kind, as actually to subdue and overcome the Hypocrisy and Wickedness of my
Soul, without mine own endeavors in concurrence with it. Therefore certainly
the Apostle would never instance in a counterfeit, unsound, or imperfect
Sanctification, wrought, or occasioned by the blood of the Covenant, to
aggravate the sin of such a Person, who should despise it, by Apostatizing from
the Profession of it. But,

4. (And lastly) suppose the Scripture in Hand should be conceived to speak of
an outward formal Sanctification, which consists in a civil or moral
Reformation of the outer Man (which yet the scope of the Place, will at no
hand, as has been argued, admit) yet it sufficiently reaches in Point of
Proof, that which is intended from it, viz. that Christ Died for those that
Perish. For this Sanctification, of what kind soever it be, be it shadow, or
be it substance, is ascribed to the Blood of the Covenant (i. e. the Blood of
Christ, wherein God covenanteth Life and Salvation unto the World upon their
believing) as the efficient cause or means of it. Therefore this Blood
howsoever was shed for those that may, and do Perish.

If it be said; it is true, it was shed for such Men, with such an intent on. 52.
Gods Part as this, that they should be externally cleansed by it, and
outwardly sanctified, but not that they should be really and internally
Sanctified, or in fine saved by it; I answer, 1. That the strength of this
Objection has been already trodden down in this Chapter Sect. 29* 30, etc.
. 2. I here add, that if God intended an external Sanctification only by the
Death of Christ, for the Persons mentioned in the Objection, then were His
intentions in Christ's Death, in reference to these Men, rather grievous, then
gracious; bent upon the aggravation and increase of their condemnation, not
upon the advance of their Salvation: and Christ Himself should come unto them,
not that they might have life more abundantly, but that they might have Hell
and Death more abundantly; whereas most certain it is, that God sent not His
Son into the World to condemn the World, much less to increase the
condemnation of the World, but that the World, that is (as we formerly made
good the interpretation Cap. 5. Sect. 10. 15, etc.
) the generality of Men, might be saved. 3. (and lastly) If Christ Died for
these Men to invest them with an external Sanctification, to make them
outwardly holy, I would know, whether, together with this outward
Sanctification, He did intend to Procure for them by His Death an inward
Principle answerable to it, out of which it should flow. If so, if He did
intend to Procure by His Death an inward suitable Principle for these Men, out
of which that outward Sanctification should flow, then certainly He did intend
to Procure them a true and real Sanctification. For what can we imagine a true
and real Sanctification should be more, then a righteous, blameless, innocent
and Christian Conversation issuing from an inward Principle suitable to it? If
it be said, no; Christ did not intend by His Death to Procure for these Men any
such inward Principle, as you speak of, but only that outward conformity to
the Ways and Laws of Christian Religion, then it will follow that Christ Died
with an intention to make Men Hypocrites, or to Procure Hypocrisy for Men.
Because a fair show in outward Practices and Religious deportments, without an
inward Principle and frame of Heart answerable to them, and which arises out
of an hollow and unsanctified Heatt, is Hypocrisy, and that in the Plainest
and most obvious signification of the Word. Therefore certainly Christ did not
shed His Blood to Purchase any such Sanctification for Men, which some conceive
to be meant in the Scripture in hand. Christ in Dying for Men intended nothing
for Men, but that which is true, real, and saving, in the Nature and Proper
tendency of it. Intentions of making Men hypocrites, or Christians by halves,
in one kind or other, are more fitting for Satan, then for Christ. How little
danger there is, or rather what Precious advantage there is for the comfort,
Peace, and Edification of true Christian Souls, in that Interpretation of this
Place, which by Sanctification, understands a true and real Sanctification,
above any thing that is in the contrary, we shall (God willing) demonstrate in
the next Chapter.

In the mean time I desire the Reader will please to understand this, that. 53.
the interpretation asserted, and which understands the Scripture in hand of a
true and real Sanctification, is no slip of Remonstrantisme, but attested by
very Orthodox Men (as the word now rules:) Calvin himself writes nothing
upon the Place, but of good accord with it. By a comparison of the benefits
(says he, speaking of what Men received by Moses under the Law, and what
Christians now under the Gospel receive by Christ) he aggravates the
ingratitude of Men. It is a very unworthy thing to profane the Blood of Christ,
which is the matter [he means, the Principal, or most material cause] of OUR
SANCTIFICATION. Yet this they do, who apostatize from Faith. A little after.
But he [the Apostle] takes notice of the manner how the Covenant is confirmed
unto us, when he says, we are sanctified: because the Blood shed would profit
us nothing, unless we were watered [or sprinkled] therewith by the Holy Ghost.
From hence comes Expiation and Holiness Comparatione beneficiorum
ingratitudinem auget. Valde indignum est sanguine^ Christi, qui
Sanctificationis nostrae materia est, profanare. Hoc vero faciun^ qui
desciscunt a fide. -- Sed modum confirmationis notat, quum dicit nos
Sanctificatos: quia nihil prodesset fusus sanguis, nisi nos per Spiritum
Sanctum eo irrigaremur. Vnde and expiatio, and Sanctitas.
: (with much more to like Purpose in this Commentary.) Whereby evident it is,
that this Author, by the Sanctification mentioned in the Text, understands no
other, then that which was in himself, and which is wrought by the Spirit of
God in the Saints, by Watering or Sprinkling them with the Blood of Christ.

By which he was Sanctified] i. e. (say our English Divines in their
Annotations upon the Place) by which their sins were pardoned, in regard of
that meritorious sufficient satisfaction purchased by it; sending us back to
their Note on Verse. 10. of this Chapter, where they interpret the word,
Sanctified, as signifying, our being freed from the guilt of our sin, and
consecrated to Gods Service. So that there is little question but that these
also understand the Place to speak of a true Sanctification indeed* and which
either is, or flows from, justification it self. And long before them both
Chrysostom interpreted the Place, as speaking of such a Sanctification, which
appertains to a Son, or Child of God. God (says he) has made thee a Son: and
will thou be willing to be made a Servant (...);
?

The last of the Scriptures Produced, to Prove, that Christ Died even. 54.
for those also who Perish, as well as others, was Mat. 18. 32. 34. The tenor
and carriage of this is of like consideration with the three last opened;
excepting only, that whereas those speak of Sanctification, this speaks of
Justification. The passages now to be insisted upon lie in the Body of a
Parable, which is somewhat large: the Reader may please to peruse the whole in
the Evangelist. The Particulars in it for our Purpose, are contained in these
words. Then His Lord, after He had called Him, said unto Him; O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou desiredst Me: Should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on
thee? And His Lord was wroth, and delivered Him to the Tormentors, till He
should pay all that was due to Him. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do
also unto you, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one His Brother their
Trespasses. In these words we hear of a Servant to whim his Lord and Master
had freely forgiven all that debt, which he owed unto Him, which (as we find
in the former part of the Parable) was a vast sum of ten thousand Talents (fit
to typifie or represent that great debt of eternal sufferings, which every Man
owes for Sins and Trespasses, unto God:) And yet we hear also that this same
Servant, by provoking this gracious Lord and Master of His, by unmercifulness
and cruelty to one of his fellow servants, forfeited his former Grace and
Mercy, which he had received from Him in the forgiveness of his great debt,
and that this forfeiture was taken by His Lord, and he delivered by Him to the
Tormentors, or Prison-keepers, until He should pay the whole debt, i. e. for
ever, in as much as He had not, nor was ever able to procure, wherewith to make
such a payment. What was intended and signified by all this, is clearly
expressed by our Savior in those last words, which contain the application,
and are the close of the Parable: So likewise shall my Heavenly Father, etc.
From which words the clear and direct scope and intent of the Parable shows
it self to be this, viz. to give the World to know and understand, that if Men,
who have obtained forgiveness of sins by the means and Grace of Jesus Christ,
shall so far sin against the excellency and richness of this Grace, as to
deal cruelly and unmercifully by Men, this act of Grace toward them shall be
cancelled and revoked, and the debt of their sins shall return and recoyle
again upon them. Yea, he plainly tells his Disciples themselves (for this
Parable was in special manner directed unto them, as appears from the
beginning of the Chapter) that they themselves must not look to be exempted
from this Law of the righteousness and equity of God. So likewise shall my
Heavenly Father do also unto you, or, even unto you (notwithstanding any
Privilege you may seem to have above other Men, by being My Disciples;) he
will neither deal better nor worse with you, but just as this Lord did by that
wretched and most unthankful Servant of his, if you Provoke him after the same
manner, i. e. if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one His Brother their
Trespasses. That great Grace of forgiveness of sins, under which you now
stand, will be reversed and called in again, by him that has given it you, if
you shall so far tread and trample the glory of it under your feet, as not in
consideration and acknowledgement of the greatness of it, to be open and
free-hearted in forgiving one another such Injuries and Trespasses, as are done
to you. This is the righteous and royal way of that God with the World, who
(as Peter says) without respect of Persons judges according to every Man's
work.

I shall not need (I suppose) to caution that which has been delivered. 55.
upon this account, with any such Item or Explication, as this; that it was far
from our Saviors intent to threaten, either his Apostles, or any other Man,
that they should incur the sore judgment mentioned, the loss of the
forgiveness of sins, or be cast into the Prison of hell, by every passionate
or sudden heat conceived against a Man upon a Provocation, or Offense given. If
this were so, the whole World of Saints (in a manner) might cry out, as the
Apostles, upon occasion of another Doctrine taught by Christ, sometimes did,
Who then can be saved? But his meaning clearly was, and is, that if they should
harbor or nourish thoughts or desires of revenge against any Man, that should
at any time offend or injure them, and remain implacable, not admitting of a
clear and cordial reconciliation with him, and should live and die in this
hateful and revengefull Posture, that then God would deal no better with
them, then the Lord in the Parable did by that Servant, to whom he had forgiven
a great debt, upon his unmercifull dealing by his fellow servant, when He
delivered Him to the Tormentors to be cast into Prison, until He should pay
the whole debt.

Nor does any thing that has been asserted concerning the return of the. 56.
debt of sin upon any Man, after forgiveness, upon occasion of cruel,
unmercifull, and revengefull dealings by their Brethren, bear at all upon that
of the Apostle: the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance Romans 11. 29.
. For the meaning hereof is not, that what God once gives, he never takes away:
we know there are instances in the Scripture without number to the contrary. He
took away that integrity and rectitude of nature from Adam upon his fall,
which he had given him in his Creation. So in the Parable, he commands the
Talent to be taken away from the unprofitable servant Mat. 25. 28
, which before he had given him: yea and threatens universally, that from every
one that has not [viz. by way of improvement or increase] shall be taken away
even Verse. 29.
that which he has [viz. by way of stock, or original donation.] So that the
gifts and calling of God are not in this Sense without Repentance. Therefore,

2. When the Apostle affirms the gifts and calling of God to be without. 57.
Repentance, his meaning may be, 1. That he never gives any thing to any
Person, or People whatsoever, but that he knows and considers beforehand, all
the inconveniences and dis-accommodations that will follow upon it, either in
Reference to his own glory, or to his Creature, one or other, in any kind. In
so much that what ever be the event or consequence of any of his gifts, if they
were to give again, he would give them. Nor does that expression concerning
him, and it repented the Lord that He Had made Man upon Earth, and that it
grieved Him at His Heart Genesis 6 6.
, any way imply, but that if Man had been now to make, he would have made him;
or that when he did make him, he did not foresee the inconvenience which now
followed upon his making of him. The Phrase only imports a purpose of heart in
God shortly to destroy him from off the face of the Earth for his wickedness,
as he says (immediately after) that he would do. For which kind of
expression, when attributed unto God, we have accounted at large in the third
Chapter of this Discourse.

2. The gifts and calling of God, are, or may be said to be, without
Repentance,. 58.
because, let Men continue the same Persons (I mean, Geometrically, or
Proportionably the same) which they were, when the donation, or collation of
any gift was first made by God unto them, he never changes, or alters his
dispensation toward them, unless it be for the better, or in order to their
further good: in which case he cannot be said to repent of what he had given.
But in case Men shall change and alter from what they were, when God first
dealt graciously and bountifully by them, especially if they shall notoriously
degenerate, or cast away that principle, or through negligence, or otherwise,
divest and despoile themselves of that very qualification, on which, God (as it
were) graffed his benefit or gift vouchsafed to them; in this case, though he
recalls and takes away his gift, he cannot be said to repent of the giving it,
because the terms upon which he gave it, please him still; only the persons to
whom he gave it, and who pleased him when he gave it unto them, have now
rendered themselves by their unworthiness, displeasing unto him, and
incapable, by the Laws and Rule, of his righteous dispensations, of any
further enjoyment thereof. This is the case between God, and such Men, who
having once obtained remission of sins from him by such a Faith, which wrought,
or was apt and ready to work, by love, afterward upon the loss or
degeneration of this Faith, together with the operativenesse of contrary and
vile principles, are divested by him of that great and glorious privilege, and
fall back into their former estate of condemnation.

Therefore from those quarters of the Parable in Matthew which we have. 59.
lately surveyed, perfect intelligence comes, that persons, who have by means
of a sound Faith received remission of sins upon the account of Christ's Death,
may through negligence in not preserving this Faith, or the sweetness and
soundness of it, so far provoke their glorious Benefactor, as to cause him to
repeal that His Act of Grace toward them, and to suffer their former guilt to
return, like the unclean spirit with seven worse then himself, upon them.
From whence it undeniably follows, that Christ has purchased Remission of
sins by His Death for those, who notwithstanding may through their own folly
and wickedness perish. Chrysostom interprets the place in full consonancy
with this inference or supposition. Although (says he) the graces and gifts
of God are without Repentance, yet malice [or, wickednesse] prevailed so far,
as to dissolve this Law. What then is there of more grievous consequence, then
to remember injuries, which appears to be a subverter [or, destroyer] of such,
and so great a gift of God (...);
? Amongst our later Expositors Musculus, as Orthodox as Men can make a Man,
advances the same interpretation; making it his third observation upon the
place, that those sins, which are through the Grace of God pardoned [at
present] shall not be remitted [in the future] unless we will forgive our
Brother. For it is an unjust thing, (says he) that he should enjoy the free
remitment [or, forgivenesse] of a debt of ten thousand Talents, who refuses to
forgive his Brother a debt of an hundred pence Tertia observatio est, etiam
eadelicta, quae jam condonata sunt per gratiam Dei, non fore remissa, si nos
nolimus remittere fratri. Est enim injustum gaudere de re missis sibi Talentis
mill, qui nolit centum denarios fratri remittere.
. Mr. John Ball himself nibbleth also at this exposition, even whilst for the
sake of those that sit at table with Him, he opposes it. As in the Parable
(says he) the Lord is said to remit to his servant a thousand Talents, when he
desired him, viz. inchoately or upon condition, which was not confirmed,
because he did not forgive his f^llow servant: so the false Prophets are bought
by the Blood of Christ, viz. in a sort, as they believed in Christ, but not
sincerely and unfeignedly Covenant of Grace. p 240.
. A little after: to these Men their sins were remitted in a sort in this
World, etc. If he would have brought forth his darkness of, inchoately, upon
condition, in a sort, into a clear and perfect light, his meaning must have
been, that that Remission of sins which God gives unto Men in this World, he
neither confirms unto them in the hour of Death, nor in the Day of judgment
(the Authors own words a little after the former) in case they live and die
under an implacablenesse or unmercifulness of spirit, toward those who injure
them. Such a sense as this is truly Orthodox, whether Men vote it such, or no.
Our English Annotators, though they neither buy, nor sell, this interpretation
in expressnesse of terms, yet interpretatively they buy or confirm it. This
Parable (say they upon Verse 35.) informs us that they shall find God severe
and implacable, that do not forgive their Brethren, although they have been
diversely and grievously injured by them. In these words they clearly suspend
the Gracious Act of God in Remission of Sins, in respect of the ultimate and
complete exercise of it, upon the Christian deportment and behavior of Men in
forgiving one another their Trespasses.

How perfectly it stands with the immutability of God, the unchangeablenesse of
his love, the unalterablenesse of his counsels, and generally with all his
Attributes, to Reverse Acts or Grants of favor, to re-demand debts once
forgiven, etc. shall be cleared in the process of the Digression following,
occasioned by the contents of this Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Containing a Digression about the commonly received Doctrine of Perseverance
(occasioned by several passages in the preceding Chapter) wherein the benefit
and comfort of that Doctrine, which teaches a possibility of the Saints
declining even to destruction, is avouched and clearly evicted, above the other.

NOtwithstanding the frequently experienced Truth of the common saying,. 1.
pessimus Consiliarius Timor, Fear is a very bad counselor, yet is it very
incident to the natures of Men never to think themselves wiser, then in their
fears, nor to be more importunely wedded to any apprehensions, then those,
which they conceive to be sovereigne for the prevention of evil. With what
height of confidence, and unrelentingnesse of judgment did the Jews please
themselves in their opinion of justification by works, through an apprehension
that they must needs disclaim or reject Moses, and the authority of his Law,
or Writings, in case they admitted the Doctrine of Paul concerning
Justification by Faith! Whereas this Apostle expressly poves and demonstrates
unto them, that this Doctine of his was so far from reflecting prejudice in the
least upon Moses his Law, that indeed it did establish it [i. e. avouch the
Truth and authority of it Romans 3. 31. and cap. 4. thoroughout.
.] yea I verily believe that a very considerable part of those Doctrines and
Tenants, which are at this day held by Professors of Christian Religion, are
not maintained or held by them, so much upon any evidence, or confidence they
have of their Truth upon those positive grounds, whether from Scripture, or
Reason, which they commonly plead for them, as out of apprehensions and conceits
that the contrary Doctrines are of evil consequence, and will in one kind or
other do them harm; in case they should give intertainment to them.
Lactantius reports that one principal thing which entangled the Heathen with
Idolatry, or worse shiping of Idols, was, a certain fear or conceit that
possessed them, that all their Religion or devotions would be in vain, in case
they saw not with their eyes something that they might worship Verentur ge^tes,
ne Religio vana sit, si nihil videant, quod adorent.
: Tertullian (as Austin reports) who held the Soul to be corporeal, or a body,
held it upon the account of this fear, least if he made not a body of it, he
should make nothing at all of it ^enique Tertullian^, qui cor p^^ esse un^am
cred^ dit, non obaliud nisi quod eam incorpore^m cogita re non potuit: and ^d^o
timuit ne nihil esset, si corpus non esset. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 25.
. The ancient Jews (Mr. Brightman affirms it) held it not meet for young Men
to read the Book of the Canticles, out of a fear they would receive harm by it
In Cantic. p. 5.
. Mercer likewise relates, that the Ancient wise Men of this Nation, judged it
best to restrain the common People from reading the Book of Ecclesiastes, out
of a conceit that it both contradicted it self, and other parts of Scripture
likewise Nec vulgo legendum tradere, quod repugnantia contineret, and aliis
libris contraria. Mercer in Pro. 8. 9.
. Luther (it is sufficiently known) rejected the Epistle of James, out of a
conceit that it contradicted the Doctrine of Paul concerning Justification by
Faith only. And several others, both learned and good Men, some, the second
Epistle of Peter, some, other pieces, only, or chiefly, upon the like account
of fear.

Concerning the Doctrine, which maintains a possibility of defection in. 2.
the Saints themselves, or true Believers, unto destruction, though I am not
ignorant, but that many, both Texts of Scripture, and arguments otherwise, have
been levied, and are wont to be brought into the field, against it; yet I
verily believe that that which makes Professors generally so impatiently
zealous in their opposition to it, is not so much any satisfaction they find
either in these Scriptures, or arguments, for the Proof of that, which is
contrary unto it, as their inconsiderate and tumultuary fears, least this
Doctrine should bereave them of those inward accommodations of Peace and
Comfort, which they conceive themselves to be befriended with by the other. In
this respect, being little less then necessitated for the securing of some
passages (in the former Chapter) very material for the carrying on the maine
design of this Discourse, to engage a little about the Doctrine of
Perseverance, I conceive it best, in my entrance hereupon, to remove this
stumbling stone out of the way, and to demonstrate, not only that this Doctrine
has every whit as fair and full a consistency with the Peace and Comfort of
the Saints, as that contrary to it, but that of the two it is of a far better
and more healthful complexion to make a Nurse for them. When we have cleared
the innocence and inoffensivenesse of it in respect of the Peace and Comfort of
Men, and so shall have reconciled it unto their affections, it will be no great
mastery (I conceive) to gain in their judgments unto it afterward. And,

1. I must crave leave (the truth, and dear interest of the precious Souls. 3.
of Men so commanding me) to say and to affirm, that the Doctrine of
preseverance so much magnified amongst us, as it is commonly taught, and
received, is, in the nature and proper tendency of it, very obstructive, yea
and destructive, unto the true peace, and sound comfort of Souls. For if we
shall diligently inquire after the common and ordinary causes of those doubts
and fears so incident to Professors of Religion, as also of those extreme
burnings and ragings of Conscience, wherewith both such persons, and others,
are sometimes most grievously handled and tormented, we shall find them, if
not universally, yet generally and with very few cases of exception, to be
these (with their fellows, negligence and slothfullnesse in watching over
their hearts and ways, omission of known duties, formality in services,
unprofitablenesse in their course and callings, non-proficiency in Grace; and
especially the frequent prevailings and breakings out of base corruptions, vile
affections, noisome lusts, etc. Therefore what Doctrine soever, is, in the
Native Frame and Constitution of it, apt to lead men into such snares of Death,
to fill their consciences with the guilt of such Unchristian misdemeanors, as
these, must needs carry a strong antipathy in it, and be full of enmity against
the inward Peace and Comforts of their deer souls. And what Doctrine lightly
can there be of a more apparent and notorious tendency this way, then that
which promises unto Men, and that with height of assurance, under what
looseness, or vile practices soever, exemption and freedom from that
punishment, the fear and dread whereof is the strongest and sharpest bridle,
which God Himself has to put into the lips of the unruly flesh in Men, to
restrain it from sin; yea and which, the strength and sharpness of it
notwithstanding, the flesh many times despises and laughs to scorn, and
disdains to be reclaimed or held in by it? And is not that Doctrine of
perseverance, commonly taught and believed amongst us, of this very calculation,
tendency, and import?

If it be said, yea but they who teach the Doctrine of perseverance, teach. 4.
withal, yea urge and press the necessity of the use of such means, which
God has appointed to enable Men to persevere; I answer, It is in vain to
persuade or press Men unto the use of such means in any kind, which are in
themselves distasteful and unpleasing unto them, when they are ascertained and
secured before hand, that they shall not fail of the end howsoever, whether
they use such means, or no.

If it be replied; that the Teachers I speak of, do not promise perseverance in
Faith unto the end, but only unto those, who shall use the means appointed by
God for the obtaining of it; I answer, if this indeed be the tenor of their
Doctrine, mine, and theirs, are no more two, but one and the same. I am as
willing and free, as the most zealous of them in their way, to give that great
Pledge of Heaven, the Word of the living God, unto the Saints, to secure them
of their standing unto the end, upon the use of the means which God has
prescribed in order thereunto. But I fear this is not the clear and simple
tenor of their Doctrine we now speak of: they blind it with some such
additionall ingredient as this, that as God requires the use of the means of
perseverance at the hand of the Saints, and will give it unto none but those,
who shall use them; yet he has certainly, universally, and irreversibly
decreed, that they shall all use them accordingly, and that he himself will
interpose by the power of his spirit, that not a Man of them shall miscarry at
this point. I have but a word to say to this: let them produce such a decree as
this, and it shall be an end of all strief between me and them (as to this
point) immediately. But how little there is to evince any such decree, in all
that they are wont to allege and argue to that purpose, will sufficiently
appear upon the examination, whereunto we shall bring it in due time.

2. As that Doctrine of perseverance, whereof Professors make such a. 5.
treasure, is deeply accessory to the greatest part of those fears, those
wringings and gripings of conscience, wherewith their peace is interrupted, and
their comforts appal'd and shaken, so is it exceedingly to be feared that it
has a potent and pernicious influence of causality into those frequent, daily
and most sad apostasies and declinings from ways of holiness, unto looseness
and profaneness, which are found amongst them. For when the flesh, or that
which is corrupt, carnal, and sensual in a Man (a Principle not only in
being, but even vigorous more then enough in the greatest and best Believers)
shall be intoxicated with such a luscious and fulsome conceit as this, that it
has goods laid up for the days of eternity, has it not the temptation of
that foolish man (as he is called) upon it, who upon a conceit that he had
goods laid up for many years, encouraged his Soul unto vanity; Soul, take
thine ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry Luke 12. 19
. When a man that stands, is in any capacity of falling, is it not the only way
to educe that power or capacity into act, and to cause him to fall indeed, to
persuade him that he is in no possibility of falling? Agag being full of this
conceit, Surely the bitterness of Death is past 1 Samuel 15. 32.
, came (as the Text says) unto Samuel, delicately. When the flesh shall be
taught to say, Surely the bitterness of eternal death is past, I am out of
all danger, all possibility of suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, is it
not a secret and bewitching encouragement unto it to wax wanton against Christ,
and to feed foul upon the sinful delicacies of this present World? Not only
the distinct sound, but any confused blast of such a trumpet as this, is
sufficient to prepare the flesh to the battle of sense, and sensuality. Nor
do they seem to be much acquainted with, at least not much to consider; the
genius of that Principle in men we now speak of (I mean, the flesh) who think
there is any other means so proper, or probable to hamper it, to break the
heart and strength of it, as the Iron yoke of the fear and dread of the Worm
that never dies.

If it be said; yea but it cannot be proved, that any of those, who decline. 6.
from Religious courses, unto looseness, how many soever they be that thus
miscarry, ever were true believers; or if such, that they continued in their
declinings, without an holy recollection of themselves before the end; To this
I answer,

1. Be it supposed (which yet will never be proved) that all they who fall away
from a Profession of Faith and Holiness, without rising again, or returning,
were never true Believers, yet it cannot be denied (and it is commonly granted
by men of contrary judgment) but that many of them were, or might be, in a
very fair, probable, and hopeful way of obtaining true Faith, of being made
sound Believers. Now that Doctrine, whose native and proper tendency is to take
men off from the means, or to turn them aside out of the ways of Life and
Peace, or (which is the same) of sound Believing, is every whit as much, (if
not more) Anti-evangelicall, as that which directly occasioneth such
miscariages in those, who do truly believe. So that there is nothing gotten by
that pretense howsoever. But,

2. If there be any Persons under Heaven, who may upon sufficient grounds,. 7.
and justifiable by the Word of God, he judged true Believers, many of those
Apostates we speak of, were to be judged such. All the visible lineaments of a
true Faith, were in their faces. As far as the eye of man is able to pierce,
they lived godlily, righteously, and soberly in this present World. Does any
true Believer act zealously for his God? So did they. Is any true Believer
fruitful in good works? So were they: yea, there were found in those we now
speak of, not only such things, upon the sight and knowledge whereof in men, we
ought to judge them true Believers, but even such things further, which we
ought to reverence and honor, as the lovely and majestique characters of Faith
and Holiness in their exaltation. Therefore it is but an importune pretense in
men to deny them to have been true Believers. To say, that whilst they stood,
men were indeed bound in charity to judge them true Believers; but by their
declining, they discovered themselves not to have been the men; is but to beg
the question, and that upon very ill terms to obtain it.

3. If our Saviors Rule be authentic, By their fruits we shall know them
Mat. 7. 20.
,. 7.
we did not only stand bound by the Law of charity, but by the Law of a
righteous or district judgment it self, to judge the persons we speak of,
true Believers, whilst they adorned the Gospel with such fruits of
righteousness, as were mentioned. For our Savior does not say, by their
fruits you shall have ground to conceive, or to conjecture them such, or such,
or to judge them in charity such, or such; but you shall know them. Now what a
man knows, he is not bound to conjecture, or to judge it in a way of charity to
be that, which he knows it to be; but positively to judge and conclude of it
acordingly. If then it be possible (as has been said) for men by any Signs,
Fruits, Works, Expressions in one kind or other, to know true Believers (which
our Savior in the said Rule, and elseqhere, seems to suppose to be very
possible) the persons we speak of may be known to have been such.

4. (And lastly) if that Doctrine of Perseverance, in the comfort whereof. 8.
men so much rejoice, intangles them with such a necessity, for the defense of
it, as this, I mean, to judge all those to have been Hypocrites, or unsound in
the Faith, who afterward apostatize and decline to prophannesse, it will be
found upon a true account, to be a Doctrine of no such good accord with their
peace, or comfort, as is pretended, or as they (in considerately) imagine. For
what will it avail me to my Peace or Comfort, though I be never so fully
resolved, or persuaded, that in case I be a true Believer, I shall never fall
away to Perdition, if in the mean time I be so entangled in my judgment, that
I can hardly, if at all, have any sufficient or clear ground to judge, when,
or that, I am a true Believer? or be otherwise occasioned strongly to suspect
and doubt of the truth of my Faith? Now if I must of necessity conclude all
those to have been Hypocrites, or pretenders only unto true Faith, who
afterward fall, and rise no more, I must needs hereby minister an occasion of
a thousand fears and jealousies to my self, and my own conscience, touching
the truth and soundness of mine own Faith, lest this should be of no better
kind or constitution, then theirs. And being compassed about with such fears
and jealousies as these, what great peace or comfort am I capable of, touching
my Salvation? Or what is it to me whether true Believers may fall away, or no,
when as I lie under the heavy pressure of so many doubts and debates with my
self, whether I be a true Believer, or no?

If it be replied; yea but I may have security and assurance enough for the. 9.
truth and soundness of mine own Faith, because I am perfectly conscious to
the uprightness and simplicity of mine own heart, which I could not be of
theirs: and therefore though I might very possibly be mistaken touching the
truth of their Faith, having nothing to found my judgment in this kind upon,
but only their outward deportments, yet having the testimony of mine own heart
and conscience, together with my outward conversation, I may here be confident,
though I miscarried there: To this also I answer,

1. Far be it from me to deny, but that a man may very possibly attain unto a
very strong and potent assurance, and that upon grounds every ways sufficient,
warantable, and good, that his Faith is sound and saving; yea and such, wherein
persevering unto the end, he shall undoubtedly be actually saved. I shall not
need to argue this, because it is nothing but what is owned on both sides. But,

2. I verily believe withal, that there is not one true Believer of an
hundred,. 10.
(I might say of many thousands,) who has any such assurance as this of the
truth and soundness of their Faith, (such an assurance I mean, which is built
upon solid and pregnant foundations, and which are proper to bear it) my
reasons are two. 1. Because though the testimony of a man's Heart and Conscience
touching his uprightness toward God, or the soundness of any thing that is
saving in Him, be comfortable and cheering, yet seldom are these Properties,
(this comfortablenesse and cheeringnesse of it) built upon such foundations,
which are sufficient to warrant them, at least upon such, whose sufficiency in
this kind men duly apprehend. For the testimony of the Conscience of a Man,
touching any thing which is spiritually and excellently good, is of no such
value, unless first it be excellently enlightened with the knowledge of the
Nature, Properties, and Condition of that, of which it testifies; and, 2. Be
in the actual Contemplation, Consideration, or Remembrance of what it knows
in this kind, when it renders such testimony. Now there are (I question not)
many thousands both of Men and Women in the World, who truly believe, and whose
Hearts are upright with God, who yet are not to any such degree enlightened
about the Natures and Properties, either of a true Faith, or uprightness of
Heart, but that the testimony which their Consciences give concerning these, is
liable to many Disputes and Questions about the certainty and truth of it, in
the Consciences themselves, which give it. This is the constant and known
experience of (in a manner) the whole believing World; there being not one
amongst many of the inhabitants hereof, the testimony of whose Consciences
touching the soundness of his Faith, is upon any such terms, or to any such
Degree, either Comforting or Cheering, but that He conflicts with many fears,
and scruples, and doubtful apprehensions notwithstanding.

2. The comfortablenesse, and cheeringnesse of the testimony, which any. 11.
Man's Conscience gives touching the soundness of his Faith, and the
uprightness of his Heart toward God, depending mainly and Principally upon
the uniforme, regulate, and constant tenor of his life and conversation in
ways of Holiness; and there being so few, even among the Saints themselves,
who are to any competent or considerable degree, careful to walk without
stumblings, and slippings, and many strains of unworthiness, hence it must
needs follow that that testimony of Conscience we speak of, will faulter, and
be divided in it self: and though that which is comforting and cheering in it
may be predominant, yet the consciousness and sense of irregularities in Men's
ways, must needs detract proportionably from the same. The credit and
authority of that testimony, which any Man's Conscience gives in unto him
touching the truth and soundness of his Faith, must needs in a very great
measure depend upon the equable flowings or issuings forth hereof in ways and
works of Righteousness, because when there is any considerable interruption in
these, that testimony will be suspended and put to silence for the time, unless
the Conscience it self be under the power of some delusion. This is evident
from the Scriptures themselves in many places. Little Children (says John) let
no Man deceive you: he that does Righteousness, is righteous 1 John 3. 7
. This caveat, let no Man deceive you, plainly intimates, that the
Consciences, even of Christians, and true Believers themselves (for such John's
little Children here, are on all hands presumed to be) may very possibly be
deceived in their estimate of a righteous Man, or (which is the same) of a
sound Believer, and judge him to be either the one, or the other, who is
neither. This is chiefly spoken (and is accordingly to be understood)
concerning a Man's judging of himself. Whereas he adds, he that does
righteousness, is righteous; it is to be understood emphatically and
exclusively, so that he, and he only, who does righteousness, is to be judged
a righteous Man, the Scripture frequently expressing it self after the same
manner See Esa. 66 2 Gal. 3. 12. Joh 3. 16.
. Now by doing righteousness, he does not mean the doing of some righteous
acts now and then, but a constant and uniforme practice of righteousness
(humane frailties only excepted, which come not in to this account.) For in the
Writings of this Apostle, as (...) 1 Ioh. 3. 8* 9
, usually (if not constantly) signifies (as it were) to follow a Trade or
Course of sinning, to sin with the like frequency and dexterity that a
Tradesman works upon his ordinary calling, or occupation; so does (...) 1 Ioh.
2. 29. 7. 10.
, and so (...) 1 Ioh. 1. 6 Ioh 3. 21.
, and (...) Ioh. 7. 17* 9. 31, etc.
, signify a proportionable acting of righteousness, and of the truth, and of
the Will of God. Now if no Man can, or ought, upon Scripture grounds, to be
judged a righteous Man, or sound Believer, but only he who does, or works
righteousness upon such terms as these, evident it is, that in what degree Men
fall short of these terms in working righteousness, the testimony of their
Consciences, touching the soundness of their Faith, and uprightness of their
Hearts toward God, must needs f^ulter, and be encumbered with doubts and fears,
proportionably, unless th^^ Consciences themselves be mis-inform'd, or hardened.
Therefore what Doctrine soever occasioneth Men to question the sufficiency of
their obedience or righteous walkings, for rendering the testimony of their
Consciences touching the soundness of their Faith, valid and worthy belief,
can be of no such lovely or desirable Consequence for their Comfort and Peace:
and consequently, the Doctrine of Perseverance, cannot, in a righteous
judgment, be adjudged such. Because (as has been already argued) it still
necessitateth Men to give sentence against a better, and more uniforme
Righteousness, then their own, (I mean, the practical Righteousness of
many, who (...)erwards apostatized without returning) as being invalid and
insufficient to evince those to have been true Believers, in whom it was found.
And if I stand bound in Conscience to judge those to have been Hypocrites, or
Pretenders only to a true Faith, and not true Believers indeed, whose
Righteousness and Fruitfulness of conversation by many degrees exceeded mine;
am I not strongly hereby occasioned, yea engaged, to question the truth and
soundness of mine own Faith? especially considering (as has been said) that
the evidence of the truth and reality of every Man's Faith, depends so much upon
the fruitfulness and operativenesse of it in ways and works of Righteousness.

The Premises duly considered, that Doctrine of Perseverance, over which. 12.
the generality of Professors so impotently rejoice, as being of so desirable
and rich a compliance with their spiritual Comfort and Peace, must needs
appear to be a Doctrine of no such import or accommodation to them, but rather
a Doctrine, very apt and likely to entice them into a boldness and
venturousnesse in sining; and consequently must needs dispose them to apostasy
and declining, yea and fill their Consciences many times with dread and horror,
and very frequently with great jealousies, inextricable Questions and Disputes
about the truth and soundness of their Faith.

Yea but, will the friends of the said Doctrine, (it is like,) still say; we.
13.
find it very sweet and comfortable to us: whereas the contrary Doctrine,
which tells us of a possibility of our final apostasy and falling away, is
very sad, and full of discouragement, etc. To these things, and all that can be
pretended in this kind; we answer,

1. Suppose the Doctrine we speak of were never so comfortable* yet this would
be no Argument of the truth or goodness of it, unless the comfortablenesse of
it be found in due consistence with the Wisdom and Righteousness of God. It
were easy to invent twenty Doctrines every whit as comfortable (nay much more
comfortable) as this, in respect of the Natures and Imports of them; which yet
will be found notoriously defective in point of Truth, because they hold not
any regular Proportion with those Attributes of God. As for example, such
Doctrines as these, All Men without exception; shall be saved, whether they
believe, or not; no Man shall be punished for any sin^^ whatsoever, neither in
this World, nor in that which is to come; Men are as much app^^ed of by God in
the committing of the greatest sin, as in the performance of the greatest
duty; such Doctrines (I say) as these, are much more sweet and comfortable in
respect of their frame, constitution, and import, then that, which affirms a
necessity of the Saints preseverance. But as those Doctrines with their
fellows, are not to be commended, nor entertained for their sweetness, or
comfortablenesse sake, having no approbation or countenance from God in His
Word; so neither is the common Doctrine of Perserverance at all to be regarded
for any thing of like accommodation; I mean for any thing sweet or comfortable
in it, unless the stamp of Divine Authority could be showed upon it, which by
no light yet extant is to be seen.

2. Though Doctrines and other means of spiritual comfort, are very. 14*
desirable, and earnestly to be pursued and contended for, when they are
regular, and lawful; yet as we must be content to be at the allowance of our
Heavenly Father, for the accommodations and comforts of this present Life, and
not be our own Carvers of all that comes within our reach, for such a purpose,
so ought we no less to rest satisfied with such grounds and means for our
spiritual consolation, which God has judged meet for us, and has Himself
administered unto us in His Word, and not strain our fantasies or
apprehensions to mould such Notions and Doctrines, as we our selves conceit to
be commodious and serviceable to us in such a way. And as it is an high
reproach unto the gracious and bountiful Providence of God for Men to have
recourse unto the Devil, or any of his unclean Arts or Methods, for their
temporal supplies in any kind; so is it no less (if not rather much more)
dishonorable to Him, when Men shall make themselves beholding to a spirit of
error for the supports or supplies of their inner Man. But,

3. No such Notion or Doctrine, which is only comfortable, and betiding. 15.
peace to the flesh, i. e. the corrupt, base, and sensual part of a Man, ought
to be esteemed, especially by the Saints, so much as comfortable, simply, and
indeed, or any means of peace (truly so called) but should rather be looked
upon as prejudicial unto, and of an evil influence upon their whole interest
in this kind. For that which is proper to strengthen the hand of the flesh,
can very hardly (if at all) be serviceable unto the Spirit, in the things of
the Peace and Comfort thereof. Now that the Doctrine so often named, is a grand
Benefactresse to the flesh, a full fountain of joy and gladness unto it, has
been sufficiently proved in this Chapter already. I here only add this brief
demonstration further: It must needs be a Doctrine speaking to the heart of the
flesh, because it administreth a certain hope unto it, that it shall however
escape the wrath and vengeance which is to come, yea though it dispo^teth it
self in all manner of looseness, and licentiousness in the mean time. For
this i^ the spirit that speaks in that Doctrine.

That it is no ways comforting or strengthening to the spirit, or spiritual.
16.
and regenerate part of a Man, but rather fulsome and importune, is evident
from hence, because a man, so far as he is regenerate and spiritual, desires
not, wishes not Heaven, or Salvation it self, but only in ways of Holiness
and of Honor: nor would he purchase a dispensation, though it were offered unto
him, with the least hair on his head, to take his fill in the pleasures of
sin, without danger. Nay if an Angel from Heaven should come and offer such a
dispensation as this unto him upon the terms specified, it would be as an
unclean and accursed offer unto him. The Holy Angels, because they have no
flesh, no corruption in them, though they be mutable, (as all Creatures
whatsoever by the unavoideable Law of their Creation, are) value not their
happiness, or their security in their standings, at the least mite the less,
because they have no liberty of sinning without danger: nor would they account
such a liberty any privilege or comfort at all to them, if they had it. But
that they are capable or in a possibility of sinning, as well as Men
regenerate, though not in so near a capacity, we shall (I conceive) have
opportunity to demonstrate in the sequel of the Discourse. Now a Man
regenerate, take him so far as he is spiritual, and borne of God, valueth
opportunities of sinning no more than an Angel: nor desires continuance in
the love and favor of God, upon any other terms or conditions, then such, on
which the Lord Christ Himself (as it seems) enjoyed it. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my Love: even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his Love Ioh. 15. 10
. So then evident it is that the new Man takes no pleasure, rejoices not in
any such Doctrine, which insures either perseverance in Faith, or continuance
in the Favor and Love of God, to it, upon any other terms, then of walking
holily and humbly with him. And upon these terms the Doctrine which teaches a
Possibility of the Saints declining, insureth both the said glorious
accommodations, with as high an hand of security, as it.

Yea the Truth is, that the received Doctrine of Perseverance, is so far. 17.
from gratifying the spiritual part of a Man, that it is to it what Peter was
to Christ, when he counseled him to pity himself Mat. 16. 22
, I mean, an offense: o^ what those Christians were unto Paul, of whom He
complained that they brake his heart with weeping Acts 21* 13
. For it secretly whispers, and suggests, unto it such things, the Nature and
Proper tendency whereof is to scatter, what the spirit has gathered, to
dissolve and break the strength of those holy Purposes and Resolutions,
wherewith the Regenerate part has harnassed and armed it self against
temptations unto evil. When the new Man in a Servant of God, shall (with Paul)
have reasoned and resolved thus: I will keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection, lest that by any means when I have Preached unto others, I my self
should be a castaway 1 Cor. 6. 27
* he that shall come and insinuate thus into him, whether thou keep under
thy Body, or no, whether thou bring it into subjection, or whether thou
suffer it to wax wanton, thou shall be in no danger, in no possibility of
being a castaway, shall he not loosen the very foundation and groundwork of
such a resolution, which was the sense and apprehension of the great danger of
being a castaway, in case his body was not kept under? Or suppose a Man should
argue, and conclude thus within himself, I will labor with my hands, that I
may have whereof both to subsist honestly, and to do good unto others, would
not such a suggestion as this to him, that he shall have that which will be
abundantly sufficient for both purposes, whether he labors with his hands,
or no, be a temptation and snare upon him to retract his Conclusion in that
kind?

If it be here said* yea but a certain knowledge, and full assurance that. 18.
God will never cease to love me, will bestow Salvation and blessedness upon
me, whatsoever my failings shall be, is an effectual motive unto my heart and
soul, to cleave unto him in all love and faithfulness; and consequently is
nourishing, cheering, and strengthening even to the inner man; To this I Answer;

1. That the inner, or new Man in the Saints, takes no pleasure at all in any
such Notion or Persuasion as this, that it may, or shall enjoy the Love of God,
or Salvation it self, under the practice of all manner of sin and wickedness
whatsoever. The very sound of these last words is harsh and uncouth unto it.
Nor can it easily be persuaded, that any such Persuasion is from GOD.

2. Should it be granted, that a full and Perfect assurance of the continuance
of the Love of God upon all, upon any, terms whatsoever, even of the greatest
sin and wickedness, would be an effectual motive upon the Heart and Conscience
of a regeneate Man, to cleave in Love unto God, yet would it not be a motive in
this kind of any such strength or efficacy, as such an assurance as this, that
he shall continue in the Love and Favor of God for ever, in a way of
Righteousness and well doing, but with all shall be in danger of loosing this
love, in case he shall decline unto wickedness. The reason why this latter
compounded motive, must needs be of more efficacy to the purpose mentioned,
then the former, is, because the latter supposes a necessity of this cleaving
in Love to God for the obtaining of this great good [ the continuance for ever
of the Love of God toward him.] which the former does not. Now this is a
general rule, that that motive is still of greater force to persuade to an
action, which renders the action persuaded unto, as of absolute necessity for
the obtaining of some desirable end; especially when the said end is insured
withal, upon the performance of the action, then that which renders this end
attaineable without the Performance of this action. He that shall persuade me
to love such or such a man, by telling me, that whether I love him, or no, yet
he will deal lovingly and friendly by me, should not persuade me to love him
by an argument or motive of so much strength, as he that should move me to the
same Point, thus: if you love him, he will deal very lovely and friendly with
you; but if you shall neglect, or voluntarily injure him, you will find him a
sore enemy. There is no action how lovely or desirable soever in it self, but
becomes so much the more desirable, by how much the greater good shall appear
to depend upon it, and must needs be produced by it; especially if it shall yet
further appear, that this good cannot be produced or obtained by any other
means whatsoever, without it. Now then as he who deprives a man of a greater
benefit to interess him in a lesser, does him as real an injury or wrong, as he
that should take away a part of his substance from him without any
consideration at all: in like manner that Doctrine, which shall bereave the
spiritual part of a man, or a Believer, of a greater and more effectual
motive to the performance of a duty, only to present him with a weaker, and of
less Power, must in reason be judged an enemy unto the one and the other, yea
as great an enemy, as such a Doctrine would be, which deny them a lesser motive
in that kind, without any recompense at all.

3. If such a knowledge or assurance, as the Objection speaks of, were. 19.
an effectual motive to persuade the heart of a man to cleave in love unto
God, what reason can be given why God should not administer it, in order to
such a Purpose, as well to his enemies and carnal men, as unto his Saints or
Friends? For, 1. certain it is, that all men whatsoever are commanded by God
to love Him, or to cleave in this affection unto Him. 2. As certain it is,
that God is not defective in the subministration of motives unto them on this
behalf, no not of those that are most Proper and efficacious to persuade them
thereunto. 3. As certain it is, as either of the former, that an assurance of
the love of God toward them against all sin and wickedness whatsoever that
they are capable of committing, is a motive every whit as taking with, as
suitable and pleasing to Natural and Carnal Men, (if yet a motive it be) as
to spiritual and holy Men, to persuade them to the love of God. Therefore if
God has not thought meet to afford such a motive as this is, unto Natural or
Carnal Men, it is no ways likely that he has afforded it unto Saints; with
whose hearts, as such, (I mean, as they are Saints) it has no agreement or
takingnesse at all (as was showed formerly) Sect. 16, 17. of this Chapter.
.

4. And lastly, the very truth is (all things duly considered) that the
consideration. 20.
we now speak of, and which is specified in the Objection, has nothing at all
in it of the true Nature or Property of a motive, to persuade any Man to cleave
in love unto God. For whatsoever represents God to the Heart, Soul, or
Conscience of a Man, as a God, in whose sight he is good, that does evil Mal.
2* 17
, and consequently as no God of judgment; as a God Promising His Love, Favor
and Acceptance, as well unto Dogs returning unto their vomits, and to Swine
wallowing, after their washing, in the mire, as well as unto Lambs and Sheep,
is no consideration which commends him unto his Creature, Man, or
consequently which has any thing in it, to engage him to cleave in love to
him. Suppose a man were thus Principled, that having once had a good opinion of
any man, he would never alter his opinion of him, how desperately soever the
Man should degenerate from himself, as though he should become the first borne
amongst all the Sons of Belial, turn the most bloody murderer, the most
cruel oppressor, the most brutish incestuary under Heaven; but under the guilt
and daily Practice of these and such like abominations, should love this Man
with as much truth, reality, and sincereness of affection, only upon the
account of his sometime* goodness, as he does the most virtuous and worthy
Person under Heaven, would such a Temper or Principle as this, commend him as a
Person so much the more worthy love and respects, in the eyes of any
considering Man? or would they not rather draw disparagement and contempt upon
him, yea and this from those very Persons, whom he shall affect and love upon
such terms? Therefore in case it were possible for me certainly to know, that
how loosely, how Profanely, how debauchedly soever I should behave my self,
yet God will love me as entirely, as fervently, as he does the holiest and most
righteous man under Heaven, it would be a very slender motive unto me to cleave
i^ love unto him. So then it does not yet appear by any thing that has been
mentioned or argued to the Point, that the Doctrine of Perseverance, as it
passes up and down amongst us, is any contributor to the Peace or Comfort of
that, which is of God, but only to that which is of Satan, in men, and which
deserves mortification and Crucifying instead of Comfort and Peace.

If it be yet further Objected; But is not the Doctrine of falling away a. 21.
very uncomfortable Doctrine, apt to beget a servile spirit in the Saints, a a
spirit of bondage and fear? Or must not they* who apprehend themselves to be
in continual danger of falling away, and Perishing, needs eat their bread in
darkness, dwell with Sorrows and Perplexities of soul all their days? To
these, and all other reasonings and demands of like import with them, I Answer,

1. To be in danger of falling away, and to be under a Possibility of falling
away, are two very different things; at least if we take the word, danger, in
the common (which yet is the Proper,) Notion and signification of it, viz. as
it imports a Probability or likelihood of evil to befall those, that are said
to be in danger. A man that is in danger (Properly so called) of suffering
evil, if the evil be great, cannot well enjoy himself with much Comfort or
Peace, whilst the danger continues. But he that is only in a possibility of
suffering evil, especially being sufficiently Provided of means whereby to
prevent the coming* of the evil upon him, if he please, is fully capable of
enjoying himself upon the richest and best terms of security, that are
competiable to a Creature. Nor are men wont to be troubled with the lightest
grudgings of fear in respect of such an evil, though very grievous in the
Kind and Nature of it, which may very possibly befall them, in case they may
with ordinary care keep themselves from it. Men may very possibly fall into the
fire, and be burnt: into the water, and be drowned* from the tops of Houses, or
Steeples, and be dashed in pieces: yet no man lives ever a whit the more
uncomfortably, or under any kind of fear, because they live under a
Possibility of suffering these great evils. The reason of their security in
this kind, is, because they know that God has given them reason and
understanding sufficient to preserve themselves from them. In like manner* God
having vouchsafed unto the Saints means abundantly sufficient to preserve
themselves from Apostasy, and consequently from Perishing, so that they need
not, either Apostatize, or Perish, except themselves please, there is no
occasion at all (much less any necessity) why they should live any whit the
more uncomfortably, or abate so much as the least hair of their Head in
confidence of being saved, only because they are under a Possibility of
Declining, and so of Perishing. The Apostle Paul acknowledges himself to have
been under a Possibility of being made a Reprobate, or castaway (lest, says
he, having Preached unto others, I my self should prove, or become, a castaway
1 Cor. 9. 27*
) yet at what an excellent rate and height of comfort, yea of joy unspeakeable
and glorious, did he live? I am persuaded (says he) that neither Death, nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to
separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord Romans 8. 38,
39.
. That which ministered unto him the groundwork of this most raised, and
blessed confidence, notwithstanding the Possibility he was under of being made
a castaway, was partly that clear and certain knowledge which he had of the
unchangeable Purpose of God to give Salvation unto all those, who should
Persevere in Faith and Holiness unto the end; par^ly also the like knowledge*
of the bounty of God toward all His Saints, in vouchsafing unto them so rich
and full a Proportion of means, as he does, whereby to Persevere* accordingly.
Thus then we see, that the Doctrine of falling away, teaching only a
Possibility hereof, and so of Perishing, is no Doctrine of uncomfortableness,
nor necessarily occasioneth the least fear in men of falling away, or of
Perishing.

2. Suppose (for Argument sake) the Doctrine of Perseverance should. 22.
be subscribed unto, and that absolute assurance of Salvation granted unto
Believers, which this Doctrine pretends to give unto them; yet will not that
conditional assurance, which the other Dostrine affords unto them, fall much
short of it (yea in most respects, some whereof have been already touched, it
will be found, in order to their Comfort and Peace, greater then it.) Put case
I were a man, who very much desired to live long in the World, and God should
please to grant me a Lease or Assurance of my life for a thousand years, only
upon condition that I should not wilfully destroy myself, as either by
thrusting a Sword through my own bowels, or by casting my self headlong from
some high Tower, or by taking Poison known to me for such before hand, with the
like; would I not upon the matter be as well satisfied with such a conditional
Lease or Grant as this, as with one that should be absolute, and wherein my
life should be assured unto me against all possible attempts to be made by my
self to destroy it? Doubtless if it were simply long life, which I desired, the
former grant would be as satisfactory unto me, as the latter. Indeed if besides
the security of my life, and of the continuance of it for such a term, I
should wantonly or vain gloriously desire to show desperate tricks, without
fear or danger, as to take Lions by the beards, or Bears by the paws, to
tread upon Cockatrices, to wash in cauldrons of boiling Lead, or the like,
then the latter grant would accommodate me better then the former. In like
manner, if it be simply and singly the Salvation of my soul, which I desire,
and the certainty or assurance hereof, such a conditional Promise made unto me
by God as this, that saved I shall certainly be, if I will but quit my self
like a Man, abstain from foolish lusts, and not, with the Dog, return again
to my vomit, or with the Swine that has been washed, to my wallowing in the
mire, such a Promise (I say) as this is security in abundance unto me in that
behalf. But if my desire be, over and above the saving of my soul, to live
loosely and prophanly, to disport my self in all manner of sin and wickedness,
to affront the Heavens, and bid defiance to the Almighty, and laugh Jesus
Christ and His Gospel in the face to scorn, or the like, without running the
hazard of losing my soul, then I confess only such a Grant or Promise of
Salvation from God, as the Doctrine of absolute Perseverance demands, would
satisfy and content me, and furnish me with that assurance which I desire. So
that the most express and evident truth is, that there is nothing more in that
assurance of Salvation, which the Doctrine of absolute Perseverance pretends
unto, then in that, which the Doctrine of falling away, or of conditional
Perseverance, indulgeth unto the Saints, but only a liberty or fearlesseness of
sinning, And whether men may not be of a free, ingenuous, and Son-like spirit,
without a liberty, or boldness of sinning; yea whether such a liberty as this,
will consist with that spirit, I freely refer to the Determination of any man,
who has been never so little baptized into the spirit, whereby the Saints cry,
Abba, Father.

3. That Doctrine which is efficacious and proper to cut off, and prevent. 23.
all those occasions and miscarriages, from which troubles of Conscience,
doubtings of Salvation, fears of Perishing, etc. do most frequently (if not
always) arise, must needs be a Doctrine of a far better comportance with the
Peace and Comfort of men; than that, which is apt to multiply, or to give being
to such occasions. Now, 1. that the unclean issues of lust and corruption in
the lives and ways of Men, are the Springs and Fountains that commonly send
forth the bittter waters of inward troubles, fears, and perplexities of soul,
has been already argued in this Chapter; and besides, is nothing, but what the
daily experience of too many fealeth unto for truth, 2. It has been likewise
brought forth into a clear light, that the Doctrine of absolute Peseverance is
of as pregnant and dangerous a calculation, as a Doctrine lightly can be, to
cause the lives and ways of men to abound with those unclean issues we speak
of. Therefore, 3. (and lastly) I here add; that the contrary Doctrine, (I
mean, of conditional Perseverance) is of a kindly temper, of a most absolute,
choice, and proper constitution, to prevent the breakings out of such issues,
to amate the courage, and to break the heart of those corruptions in men, which
otherwise would be very unruly, and hardly bear restraint: and consequently,
is a faithful and severe guardian to and over the Peace and Comforts of Men.
For teaching on the one hand, certainty of Perseverance, and of Salvation
thereupon, upon a conscientious use of those means, which God has prescribed
in order thereunto, (I mean, for the inabling of men to persevere) it mightily
cheereth, fortifieth, and strengthens the spirit in men, who desires (as
has been proved) neither Perseverance, nor Salvation it self, upon any other
terms, then these, and rejoices above measure, that upon these, they may, and
shall, most assuredly be had; and on the other hand, by teaching, that by
looseness, profaneness, negligence in the use of means, etc. there may be an
apostatizing to Perdition, it sorely rebukes the flesh, or corruption in a Man,
and puts a sharp bit and bridle into their lips. A* Bridle (says Solomon) for
the Ass, and a rod for the Fools back Pov. 26. 3
. The terrible rod of Hell fire, is for the back of that great Fool, the
flesh, or that which is irrational and unruly in Men, without the shaking and
sound whereof it will hardly learn subjection.

If it be objected; yea but experience shows, that the contrary Doctrine,. 24.
that which maintains un-conditioned Perseverance, is more effectual to
subdue corruption in men, then the other, in as much as many, who maintain the
Doctrine of falling away, are known to be loose, and of sinful addiction in
several kinds, to be no friends to the power of Religion, etc. whereas men of
greatest holiness, and strictest conversation, are known to be of the contrary
judgment; to this also I answer;

1. The experience asserted in the Objection, is not so unquestionable in Point
of truth, but that if the Assertors were put home upon the Proof, they would (I
fear) account more in presumption, then in reasonableness of Argument. For if
persons of the one judgment, and of the other, were duly compared together, I
verily believe there would be found every whit as full a proportion of men
truly Conscientious and Religious amongst those, whose judgments stand, and
have stood, for a possibility of falling away in the Saints, as on the other
side. But through a foolish and unsavory kind of partiality, we are apt on
all hands, (according to the Proverb) to count all our own Geese, for Swans,
and other men's Swans, Geese. Certain I am, that if the Writings of men of the
one judgment, and of the other, be compared together, and an estimate made
from hence of the Religious worth and holiness of the Authors respectively,
those who oppose the common Doctrine of Perseverance, need count it no robbery
to make themselves every ways equal in this honor with their opposers. The
truth is (if it be lawful for me to utter, what I really apprehend and judge
in the case) I do not find the spirit of holiness to breath with that
Authority, heat, or excelency of power in the writings of the latter, which I
am very sensible of in the writings of the former. These call for
Righteousness, Holiness, and all manner of Christian conversation with every
whit as high an hand, as the other, and add nothing to check, obstruct, or
enfeeble the authority of their demands in this kind: whereas the other,
though they be sore many times in their exhortations and conjurements unto
holiness, yet otherwhile render both these, and themselves in them,
contemptible, by avouching such Principles, which cut the very sinews and
strength of such their exhortations, and fully balance all the weight of those
motives, by which they seek to bind them upon the consciences of men. And for
numbers of men truly holy, and conscientious, doubtless the Primitive
Christians, for three hundred years together, and upwards, next after the times
of the Apostles, will fully balance (with an abundant surplussage) both for
numbers, and truth of godliness, all those in the reformed Churches, who since
Calvin's days have adhered to the common Doctrine of Perseverance. And that the
Churches of Christ more generally, during the said space of 300 years and more,
next after the Apostles, held a possibility of a total and final defection,
even in true and sound Believers, is so clear from the records, yet extant of
those times, that men who shall please to acquaint themselves with them, cannot
without much opposition from their Consciences, deny it. We shall (God willing)
give some light of proof to this Assertion in the 15 Chapter of this Discourse.

2. Concerning the Persons signally (I suppose) aimed at for the confirmation.
25.
of the said experiment on the right hand, as Calvin, Musculus, P. Martyr,
Bucer, with other Protestant Divines of like Note and Name with them; together
with such of our English Ministers, and other Professors amongst us, who stood
up with the greatest zeal in opposing Ceremony and Superstition, Episcopal
tyranny, and Popish innovations, being generally reputed men very exemplary,
and particular in their ways and conversations, my answer is, 1. That it is a
mere mistake to conclude or think, that these, especially the former, were so
through or settled in their judgment for the Doctrine of absolute Perseverance,
as to have no thoughts within them, coming and going, the contrary way. He
that shall narrowly and unpartially peruse their Writings, will (I verily
believe) find in them every whit as much said for conditional, as for
absolute Perseverance. I shall (God willing) give a very competent account of
this my Faith, before the end of this Discourse: and shall fully prove by
several express testimonies from some of the leading men, and greatest
masters amongst them, that they had a very good mind, at least at times, to be
of that opinion, which affirms a possibility of defection in the Saints even
to the loosing of the Soul. And for the latter (I mean, the English
Ministers, and those mentioned with them) there is the like consideration of
these also. The works of such of them, as have written, bewray them to have had
both the Nations we speak of in their womb; in which works or writings of
theirs, if they speak one word for a necessity of Perseverance in the Saints,
it is ten to one but they speak another for a possibility of such a defection,
which is never accompanied with Repentance. For those godly Ministers now upon
the Stage, who are looked upon as rigid Patrons and Assertors of the received
Doctrine of Perseverance, the truth is, that whatsoever they are in the letter
of their Conclusion, they are in the Spirit of their Principles and Premises,
builders up of that Faith, which destroys the Faith of that Doctrine: most of
their Sermons, which any ways relate unto that subject, having ( Janus-like)
two Faces, with the one of which they countenance this Doctrine, and with the
other, that which is contrary unto it. So that the experience pretended in the
objection of so many pious men embracing the Doctrine of Perseverance, is but a
mere presumption: the men generally are divided in their own judgments about
the Point. True it is, our English Ministers and Professors, more generally
profess themselves for the Doctrine of Perseverance, and cry out upon the
Doctrine of falling away, as Arminian: but as it fell to Esaus lot, through
Divine dispensation, to be firstborn, and so to have the precedence of Jacob
in worldly honors, in respect of time, though at last his Mountain and his
Heritage was laid wast Mal. 1 3, 4.
, for ever; so it seemed good to the Providence of God, that, of the Doctrinall
twins we speak of, striving together in the wombs of the minds and judgments
of those men now under consideration, that of Perseverance should first lift up
its head in the World, and be applauded; making no question withal, but that
the time is a coming, yea and is even at the door, when this Doctrine must
decrease, and the contrary to it, increase, and be exalted in the judgments,
and tongues, and writings of Men. The maine Providentiall occasion (I conceive)
which has caused the Doctrine of Perseverance to flourish hitherto like a
green bay Tree in this Land, as it has done, was the Permission of Mr.
Perkins his judgment to be overruled on this hand, by those Texts of
Scripture, (some, or all of them) together with those reasons, which are
commonly at this day insisted upon for the Proof of this Doctrine. The great
worth of the Man otherwise, commended his Opinion unto many far above the worth
thereof. And it being so incident unto men, malle credere quam judicare, rather
to believe, then Omnes malumus credere, quam judica^e. Sen.
judge; and again, to believe persons reputed singularly Pious and learned,
rather then others; it may very well be conceived, how by the authority and
repute of this worthy Instrument of God in His Generation, this land should
come to be so generally levened as it is, not so much indeed with the opinion
it self of which we speak, as with the Profession of it. Before his days, this
Doctrine found no such general applause or intertainment amongst conscientious
Persons in this Land, and many of the learned Martyrs in Queen Mary's days
leaned another way; who likewise dessented from him in several other Tenants
about the Arminian controversies. And when I consider what grudgings there are
of the contrary Opinion (I mean of that which avoucheth a Possibility of
falling away) in the judgments of the most conscientious Ministers amongst us,
though the stream of their Professions runs in opposition hereunto, and
withal what Principles they clearly and frequently hold forth, especially in
the applicatory Parts of their Sermons; I am easily induced to believe, that as
by the authority of one Man, or some few, the Profession of such a judgment
came in upon them, and surprised them, so likewise they want nothing in order
to the Profession of a change of their judgments in the Point, but only the
authority and countenance of some one, or some few Men of like Popular
acceptance, to go before them, 2. Suppose it should be granted, that the godly
Persons minded in the Objection as holding the Doctrine of Perseverance, were
perfectly whole and entire, and not divided (as has been said) in their
judgments thereupon, yet would it n^ ways follow from hence, that therefore
this Doctrine was any ways accessory to that godliness, whereof they gave so
good an account in their lives and conversations. These men (I presume) held
many Principles of Christian Religion, which taught them to live god^ily,
righteously and soberly in this present World. So that if they did live
according to all these worthy and commendable strains of Christianity, yet is
there no necessity of entituling the Doctrine of Perseverance held by them,
either in whole or in part, thereunto.

3. Concerning the Persons chiefly intended in the Objection for the
confirmation. 26.
of the experience therein averred, on the left hand, who (I suppose) were the
worst of our late Bishops, such as Romanized, and Tyrannized most amongst them,
together with their Clergy* creatures and favorites, who were generally
inclined to the Doctrine of falling away, and with all took more liberty in
their lives, then men truly Religious ought to have done; my Answer is, 1. That
as was said concerning the godliness of the other, that it did not necessarily
flow from the Doctrine of Perseverance, either as held, or professed by them,
so neither did that looseness or unworthiness in any kind, which was found
in these, necessarily (no, nor so much as probably) arise from that Opinion
concerning the possibility of a total and final defection in the Saints,
professed by them. They held other Principles more then enough, sufficient to
teach them all that irregularnesse and unrighteousness of conversation, which
can with truth be charged on them. So that neither the good, nor the bad,
neither the godly, nor the ungodly, deportments of persons professing such, or
such particular Doctrines, principles, or opinions, are any demonstrative, no
nor yet so much as any Dialecticall or probable arguments, either of truth, or
error in them. The Scribes and Pharisees were full of all Hypocrisy and
unrighteousness, yet did they hold and teach many Doctrines that were sound,
in so much that the Lord Christ himself commanded his own Disciples to observe
and do, whatsoever they taught as necessary to be observed Mat. 23. 3.
. And if the soundness or rottenesse of Opinions should be estimated by the
goodness, or badnesse of the lives of any parcel, or number of persons
professing them, as well the Opinion of Atheism, which denies the being of any
God, as the Opinion of Polytheisme, which affirms a plurality of Gods, must be
esteemed better and more sound, then that which maintains the being of one
God, and of one only. For certain it is, that there have been many Heathens,
professors, some of the one, and some of the other of those Opinions, who have
quitted themselves upon far better terms of honor and approbation in their
lives, then many Christians, professors of the last Opinion, have done. It is
the observation of a great learned man of this Nation, Atheism did never
perturb Sir. Fr. Bacon. Essay 12. of Superstition.
States: for it makes Men wary of themselves, as looking no further: and we see
the times inclined to Atheism, as the time of Augustus Caesar, and our own
times in some Countries, were, and are, civil times. 2. There is (I suppose) a
plain reason to be given, why that Generation of men now under discourse, (the
popish gang of Bishops, with the Clergy adoring them for perferment-sake)
should, in order to the promoting of their secular interest, take up the
Doctrine, which opposes the common received Doctrine of perseverance; together
with those other Doctrines, commonly, but I know not how properly, or
deservedly, called, Arminian. It is sufficiently known, that the men we speak
of, were professed enemies to the most Religiously-zealous party of the
Ministers in the Land, with their adherents, then commonly Puritans, whom they
both hated and feared, as a generation of men, by whom, rather than any other,
they apprehended themselves in danger of being dethroned. Nec eos fefellit
opinio. Upon this account they judged it a very material point of their
interest, to suppress and keep under this faction (as they termed them) in
order hereunto, they studied and cast about, how to weaken their interest and
repute with the generality of the People, or at least with all those that were
intelligent, and in that respect, considerable. To this end, wisely considering
that nothing was like to prejudice them more in their esteem with such men,
than to detect them of error and unsoundnesse in their Doctrine; and perceiving
withal (as with half an eye they might, being so fully disengaged, as they
were, from all high thoughts of those who held them) that they were not in any
Doctines besides, which they were generally known to hold and teach, more
obnoxious to such a detection, then in those, which they held and taught in
opposition to the Remonstrants; hereupon they politiquely fell to profess and
teach Remonstrantisme, that so they might have the more frequent occasion and
opportunity, to lay open the nakedness of the Puritan Doctrine before the
People, and to show the inconsistency of it with the Scriptures, as also with
many the most manifest Principles, as well of Reason, as Religion, besides.
Therefore should it be granted, that (in the general) there is much in the
unworthiness of men, who profess such or such a Doctrine, or Opinion, to
render the one or the other suspected, yet in the particular case before us,
there is nothing at all: because the persons we speak of did not embrace or
take up the Opinion or Doctrine mentioned, out of any natural compliance they
resented in it with their lusts, or any their undue practices (for such it had
none) but out of a politic only: and as Austine sometimes said, it is no
disparagement to the Sheep, that the Wolf sometimes puts on and wears her
clothing.

3. (And lastly) it is generally known, that the Cathedral Generation of Men
throughout Christendom, were generally great admirers of the old learning (as
some call it) I mean, the Writings, and Tenants of the Fathers, and of Austine
more especially: and that they frequently made shield and buckler of their
authority, to defend themselves against the Pens and Opinions of later Writers,
whom their manner was, according to the exigency of their interest (at lest, as
they conceived) to slight and vilify, in comparison of the other. Now the
judgments of the Fathers more generally, and of Austine more particularly (as
we shall show in the procedure of our present Discourse) stood for the
possibility of the Saints defection, both total, and final; wherein (it
seems) the greater part of our modern Reformed Divines have departed from them.

Whereas some to prejudice the minds and affections of men against the. 27.
Doctrine of a possible defection in the Saints, (with the rest commonly found
in the same retinue) cast out such sayings as these, that they never knew any,
who fell in with these Opinions, but they declined in Religion, and in the end
came to nothing, they do but spread a snare in the way of the simple: any
considering man will laugh such pretenses to scorn. Such an allegation as this
much sembleth the superstitious advise of those, who dissuade the Marriages of
Cozen Germans upon the account of this Observation of theirs, that such have
never prospered. It is very possible that they may have observed and known some
miscariage, disaster, or lesse-desirable success in one or two of these
conjunctions, amongst some of their acquaintance and friends: but what is there
in this to create prejudice in the least in the judgment of any well ballassed
and considering Man, against the whole species of such Marriages, more then
there is in the frequent miscarriages that are found in all kinds of Marriages
whatsoever, to disaffect the minds of Men against all these also? If a man
should inquire a little after matters of this Nature in the World, he shall
soon find or hear of many instances, of poor persons Marrying, who
prospered not, of rich persons Marrying, who prospered as little; of Nobles
Marrying, whose married condition was little blessed from Heaven; of Princes
Marrying, to the great affliction, or ruin of themselves, etc. Is it now
reasonable to infer from such observations, or instances as these, that
therefore neither poor Men, nor ric^ Men, nor Nobles, nor Princes, shall do
well, or wisely, to marry? The alledgement in the Objection in hand, is of no
whit a better genius, then such a collection as this. For what though many, who
have clozed in their judgments, (or rather made profession of such a clozure)
with the Opinions there mentioned, have lost their savor, withered in their
zeal, and put away a good Conscience from them; ought, or can, this in the
judgments of reasonable Men, reflect any whit more prejudice upon the said
Doctrines, then the frequent and daily apostasies and declinings, that are made
under, and from, the contrary, yea under, and from the Protestant Religion it
self; yea (that which is yet somewhat more) under, and from Christianity it
self, ought in reason to disparage all these? We have a common proverb, that
one Swallow makes not a Summer: and to say, that one Woodcock makes not a
Winter, would in time make a proverb of as much Truth.

But though enough has been said to evince and maintain the innocence. 28.
of the Doctrine under Protection, in respect of any violation of, or
intrenchment upon, the inward peace and comfort of the Saints, yea and more (I
am certain) then can with good Reason be gainsaid, yet prejudice (I know) is
restless, and thoughts of any long standing in the minds of Men, hardly
removed. Therefore it is like, notwithstanding all that has been argued
hitherto, some will still object and say, we cannot yet be satisfied, but that
your Doctrine of falling away must needs be very uncomfortable, and of sad
importance to the Saints: because though there be but a possibility only of
their falling away, yet considering their manifold and great weaknesses, and
aptness to sin, they must needs be in continual fears, lest this possibility
should be reduced into Act. And therefore there is nothing that can bless them
with any security or peace in this kind, but the knowledge and belief of some
such fixed and unchangeable Decree of God as this, that however, they shall
never fall away, to perdition. Nor is there the same consideration of a Saints
refraining from sin, and of a Man's forbearing to destroy his Natural Life, by
wilful precipitation, poisoning himself, or the like: because the inclination
which is in Men to preserve their Natural Lives and beings, and so to refrain
all things manifestly destructive to them, is Potent, Vigorous, and Active;
whereas the inclination to abstain from sin, which is in the Saints, is
comparatively weak, much encumbered and broken by the flesh, the frequent
Motions and Temptations thereof, etc. To these things, and whatsoever may be
further pretended in the same kind, I answer;

1. Though that disposition which is in the Saints to forbear sin, be neither.
29.
so free, nor so full of Energy and Power, as the Natural inclination in Men
to preserve their Natural Beings; yet, 1. Even this inclination it self is not
so entire, or free, or so strong, but that it is liable to temptation also, and
subject to be incountered, yea and sometimes is overcome; as in those, who
under great Pangs and Agonies of discontent, lay violent hands upon themselves.
Therefore there is no such great disproportion between the one inclination, and
the other, as the Objection supposes. But,

2. Be it granted, that the Propension in the Saints to abstain from sin,. 30.
simply, and in the general, is nothing so energeticall or powerful, as the
Natural desire in Men to preserve their Natural lives; yet possibly it may
be, yea probably it is, every whit as potent and operative, in Reference to
some sins; and particularly to those, which are likely to occasion or produce
final Apostasy. For though there be in every sin whatsoever, a Natural
tendency, according to the kind and degree of it, toward Apostasy, even that
which is final, as there is in every light prick with a Pin in a Man's finger,
toward the dissolution of the Natural Life; yet as no man is disturbed in his
Peace and Comfort touching the continuance of his health and life, by a drop o^
two of Blood dramn from his finger by the scratch of a Pin; so neither is there
any reasonable ground, or occasion, why upon the commission o^ ^^ry sin, a
Saint should be struck into a Passion of fear of falling away, u^lesse he has
an assurance from Heaven that he shall not fall away. They are not sins of
infirmity, or sins quotidiani incursus (as Austine somewhere calls them) i. e.
sins of a daily incursion, but only such sins quaevastant conscientiam (as the
Schoole-m^^s ^hrase is.) i. e. that lay wast the Conscience, which have any
dangerous (...)ity with falling away. Now I suppose that in respect of such
sins as these, the inclination of the Saints may well be as strong and free
tow^^ds ^ Non-commission, or Refrainement, as the Natural Inclination in Men
is toward a self-preservation.

3. Whether that inclination or disposition in the Saints, which we now. 31.
speak of, be actually, and in the generality of them according to their
present conditions, commensurable in Strength, Power, and every other
desirable Property, with the inclination in Men to preserve their Natural
Beings by the forbearance of all acts whatsoever apparently destructive to
them, or no; most certain it is, that God has vouchsafed unto them a
sufficiency of means, yea means in abundance, to make them every ways
commensurable hereunto, yea to raise them to an higher Pitch or Degree of
Strength and Power, then so: yea and further has made them (the Saints
themselves I mean) every ways capable, (all their infirmities and weaknesses
considered, and allowed for) of the use of these means even to the actual
producing of such a glorious and blessed effect, as that. So that if the said
inclination in them be not every ways as serviceable unto them, in securing
them against all fears of acting in any way apparently destructive to their
great spiritual interest, the saving of their Souls, as the other inclination
in Men is unto them, to secure them from fears of doing any thing knowingly, to
the unavoideable loss of their lives, the fault is merely and absolutely in
themselves; and this not through any infirmity or weakness, which is Natural
to them, and so inseparable, but through a Gross, Rank, and Stupid
carelessenesse and sloth. If thus, then is not the Doctrine of falling away
any ways prejudicial to the Peace and Comfort of the Saints, in respect of it
self, but merely accidentally and occasionally, viz. as the Saints will
voluntarily, and without any necessity either from within, or from without,
compeling them, break out into such extravagancies of sin, which, that Doctrine
being true, may justly fill them with fears of falling away, and perishing. But
let me say this too (which here is not to be omitted) that even the Assertors
themselves of the common Doctrine of Perseverance, do affirm and teach, that
their Doctrine it self notwithstanding, the Saints under such extravagancies of
sin, as we speak of, can have no Comfort, Peace, or Assurance of Salvation, and
consequently no assurannce of Persevering in Faith unto the end. Therefore by
their own confessions and tenor of discourse, there is no such great difference
between the two Doctrines, in Reference to the Peace or Comfort of the Saints,
the one (I mean that of Perseverance) leaving them obnoxious unto fears and
doubtings, as well as the other, yea if sentence were given between them
according to truth, that of Perseverance must be adjudged, not only to leave
the Saints under a possibility or capacity of discomfiture and fear (which
indeed the other does) but under a sore temptation also (as we have formerly
proved) of tormenting themselves with such fears, which the other does not.

If it be demanded; But what are the means, which God has given (as. 32.
I say) so abundantly unto the Saints, to make themselves as free, as strong in
inclination to avoid things apparently destructive to their spiritual Peace,
and Salvation of their Souls, as Naturally Men are to forbear all such
actions, which are apparently destructive to their Natural Lives; so that they
need not be any whit more afraid of losing their Souls through their own
actings, then men are, or need to be, of destroying their Natural Lives, upon
the same terms? I answer;

1. There is nothing which indangereth the Salvation of the Soul, but sin: yea
there is nothing that causes this danger to any much considerable or
formidable degree but only such sins, which are notoriously manifest unto the
Saints, if not by the light of Nature, yet by the light of Grace, and of the
Scriptures; manifest I mean, not only, or simply, as, or that, they are sins,
but manifest also according to that Relation, wherein we now speak of them, i.
e. as, and that, they are sins threatening (as it were) with a loud voice
destruction to the Soul. So that (in the first place) God has vouchsafed unto
the Saints means fully sufficient to inform them of whatsoever is imminently
or apparently destructive to their Souls.

2. He has given them Eyes wherewith, and light whereby, clearly and. 33.
evidently to see and know, that it is not more Rational, or Man-like, for Men
to refrain all such actions, which they know they cannot perform but to the
present and unavoideable destruction of their Natural Lives, then it is to
forbear all sinful acts whatsoever; and especially all such, which are
apparently destructive to their Souls.

3. God has not only given them the Eyes, and the light we speak of,. 34.
wherewith, and whereby clearly to see and understand the things mentioned, but
has further endued them with a faculty of consideration, wherewith to reflect
upon, and review, to weigh and ponder, as often as they please, what they see,
understand, and know in this kind. Now whatsoever a Man is capable, 1. Of
Seeing and Knowing; 2. of Pondering and Considering, he is capable of raising
or working an inclination in Himself toward it, answerable in Strength, Vigor,
and Power, to any degree of goodness or desireablenesse, which he is able to
apprehend therein. For what is an inclination toward any thing, as suppose
toward an act, or course and frequency of actions, but a propension and
leaning (as it were) of the Heart and Soul toward it? And how comes the Heart
or Soul of a Man to propend or lean toward any thing, but by apprehending
and considering somewhat, that is seemingly at least, if not really also, good
for him therein? And the greater the good is that is apprehended herein, and
the cleerer, the more raised and multiplied the apprehension is, the greater
proportionably, the fuller of Strength, Vigor, and Power, must the Propension,
and inclination of the Heart and Soul needs be thereunto. So that if, 1. There
be worth and goodness sufficient in any object whatsoever to bear it: and, 2.
If a Man be in a capacity of discovering and apprehending this good clearly;
and, 3. Be in a like capacity of revising or considering this his vision, as
often as he pleases, certainly he is in a capacity and at liberty to work
himself to what strength or degree of desire and inclination toward it he
pleases. Now evident and certain it is to every Man, or else easily may be,
1. That there is more good in abstaining from things, either eminently
dangerous, or apparently destructive to his Soul, then in forbearing things
apparently destructive to his Natural Being. 2. As evident it is, that every
Man is capable of attaining, or coming to the certain knowledge of, and of
clearly apprehending this excess of good to him in the former, above the
latter; 3. Neither is it a thing less evident, then either of the former, that
every Man is as capable of Ruminating or Re-apprehending the said excess of
good, as much, and as often, as he pleases, as he is simply of apprehending it.
All which supposed as undeniably true, it follows with an high hand, and above
all contradiction, that the Saints may, and have means and opportunities fair
and full for the purpose, Plant an inclination or disposition in themselves, to
refrain all manner of sins apparently dangerous and destructive to the safety
of their Souls, fuller of Energy, Vigor, Life, Strength, Power, then that
Natural inclination in them, which teaches them to refrain all actions, which
they know must needs be accompanied with the destruction of their Natural
Beings. Therefore if they be more (yea or so much) afraid of destroying their
Lives voluntarily and knowingly, as by casting themselves into the Fire, or the
Water, or the like, then they are of falling away through sin, the Fault or
Reason hereof, is not at all in that Doctrine, which affirm's, and inform's
them, that there is a Possibility that they may fall away, but in themselves,
and in their own voluntary negligence: they have means and opportunities (as
we have Proved) in abundance, to render themselves every whit as secure, (yea
and more secure) touching the latter, as they are, or reasonably can be,
concerning the former. The Possibility they live under of destroying their
Natural Lives with their own hands, does not occasion the least trouble or
fear of death in them, in such a way. Nor needs the Possibility they lie under
of falling away, being grounded only upon a Possibility of their own voluntary
actings, occasion the least disturbance, uncomfortableness, or fear in their
spirits, that they shall fall away. Therefore,

2. (To the maine objection in hand) I answer further; concerning the. 35.
manifold weaknesses of the Saints, their aptness to sin, etc. these indeed
are sufficient and Proper to cause them to fear, but nor the fear of falling
away from God, or from his Grace, but that fear, which the Scripture is wont to
oppose to high mindedness. Be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20
This fear is nothing else but an humble reflection upon a Man's own weakness,
and insufficiency to stand by his own strength, which necessarily draws along
with it an humble dependence upon God for strength whereby to stand, together
with an acknowledgement of strength received from him, when, and whilst, he
does stand. This is evident from that of the Apostle: work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling* [i. e. with humility, with a sense and
acknowledgement of no sufficiency, as from your selves, for so important a
work] for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of His good
Pleasure Phili, 2. 12. 13.
. i. e. you are debtors unto him both for every disposition you find in your
selves to act, and likewise for every action, wherein you do act, in order to
your Salvation. But of this Passage of Scripture more hereafter, God willing.
In the mean time certain it is, that the infirmities and weaknesses of the
Saints, through which they are apt to sin, do not require any such Decree in
God, which ^ncludeth in it an impossibility of their falling away, to render
them secure from, or against such falling. For as the lighter crosses and
discontents, which men daily meet with in their household affairs, conversings
with Men, and dealings in the World, bring them into no danger or fear of
making away themselves, or destroying their own lives, though there be no
absolute Decree of God to secure them in this behalf, the Natural desire of
self-preservation which God has planted in them, easily over ruling, by the
Power and Strength of it, all motions ^or dispositions toward self-destroying,
which are wont to arise from such occasions: in like manner the strength of
that inclination or desire, which is, or ought to be, and very possibly (as
has been Proved) might be in the Saints, to save their Souls, and
consequently to preserve themselves from apostasy, is sufficient, without any
such Decree in God as was mentioned, to secure them both from all danger, and
from all fear of apostatizing to destruction, notwithstanding all weaknesses
or infirmities that they are subject unto. The truth is, that the infirmities
and weaknesses of the Saints, as such, are so far from being any necessary or
just ground of fear unto them that they shall fall away; that the sense and
acknowledgement of them are most clear, pregnant and effectual Antidotes and
Preservatives against falling away. For he that is inwardly and truly sensible
of his own weakness and inability to stand, will, especially being a Saint, or
Believer, most certainly depend upon him for strength, who is both able, and
willing to supply and furnish him, upon such terms.

3. (And lastly,) upon the former account, and for a close of this Chapter,. 36.
I answer; that if the Doctrine of falling away be so uncomfortable unto the
Saints, as the objection pretends, the truth is (as we have in the Premises of
this Chapter made it to appear) they are not much relieved at this Point by the
Received Doctrine of Perseverance. For this Doctrine (as has been showed)
scarce suffers any man to believe, upon any Rational, competent, or
sufficient grounds, that he is a true Saint, or Believer, yea and does little
less then tempt him to such things, which are exceeding apt and likely to fill
him with fears and questionings touching the truth of his Faith. And what
great comfort can it then be unto him to hear, or believe, that true Believers
cannot fall away, or perish? whereas the other Doctrine leaves them a good
latitude of competent ground, whereon to judge themselves true Saints, and true
Believers: nor does it deprive them of sufficient ground, on which to secure
themselves both against the danger, and against all fear of the danger* of
Apostatizing or falling away, to Perdition. This Doctrine therefore, of the
two, is (questionless) of the more benevolous aspect and influence upon the
Peace and Comforts of the Saints.

CHAP. X.
A Continuation of the former Digression: wherein the Texts of Scripture
commonly alleged to prove the impossibility of Saints declining unto Death,
are taken into consideration, and discharged from that Service.

BEing occasioned, and (after a sort) necessitated, for the securing of. 1.
some passages of interpretation Cap. 8. being of main concernment to the
Principal cause undertaken in this Discourse, to engage home in the Question
about Preseverance, I should, according to ordinary Method, and that hitherto
observed in the traverse of the maine Doctrine, first have argued my Sense and
Judgment in the Question (...), assertively; and then (...), i. e. by
answering such Objections, whether from Scripture, or otherwise, which are wont
to be levied by Men of contrary judgment, in opposition thereunto. But finding
by experience that weaker men, through too much fullness, and abundance in
their own sense in matters of Controversy, and this chiefly by means of some
Texts of Scripture running still, and working in their heads, which in sound of
words, and surface of Letter, seem to stand by them in their Sense and Notion,
are under a very great disadvantage, either for minding, or understanding such
things, which are spoken unto them for their information in the Truth; I
thought it best, for their relief in this case, to invert that Method in the
present Dispute; and first to endeavor to take from them those weapons,
whether of Scripture, or argument, wherein they trust; and afterward present
them with such other Scriptures, and grounds, which are Able, Pregnant, and
Proper, to build them up, and establish them in the Truth.

We shall not tie our selves to any Rule, or Prescript of Order, in bringing. 2.
those Scriptures upon the theater of our Discourse, which men of differing
judgment in the cause in hand, are wont to plead in defense thereof,
themselves (as far as I have observed) observing none; but shall produce them
one by one as God shall please to bring them to mind, unless (happily) two, or
more of them, by reason of affinity or likeness in Phrase, or import, may
commodiously enough be handled together. Most of the places compelled to serve
in this warfare, I find situate in the New Testament. The first that comes
to hand, is that of our Savior unto Peter -- and upon this Rock will I build
my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it Mat. 16. 18
. From hence it is argued, that those that are once built by Faith upon the
Rock, Christ, or upon the truth of the Gospel, are not in danger, or in a
possibility of being prevailed against [ viz. to destruction] by all the Powers
of darkness whatsoever. I answer,

1. That this promissory assertion of Christ, the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail,. 3.
etc. does not necessarily respect every individual and single Person, who de
praesenti is a Member of his Church, so as to secure him of his Salvation,
against all possible sins, or ways of sinning, whereunto he may, or can be
drawn by Satan; but may well be understood of the Church in general, i. e.
considered as a body of men, separate and distinguished from the world. Now the
Church (in this sense) may be said to stand, and be secured against all the
Power and Attempts of the Devil, though not only some, but even all the
Particular Saints, of which this body consists at present, should be prevailed
against by Satan to destruction. Because the ratio formalis or essence of the
Church, in this sense, does not consist in the Persons of those, who do at
present believe, and so are members of it (for then it would follow, that in
case these should die, or when they shall die, Christ should have no Church at
all upon the Earth, in as much as nothing can be without the essence of it) but
in the successive Generation of those, who in their respective times believe,
whether they be fewer, or whether they be more, whether they be such and such
Persons, or whether others. As suppose there be not now one drop of that Water
in the channel of the River of Thames (as it is like there is not) which was in
it seven years since, yet is it one and the same River, which it was then: and
so put the case there be not one Person now alive in any of the Companies in
London, of which they respectively consisted 40. years since, yet are they the
self same Companies, which they were then. So then the saying of Christ, that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against His Church, may stand clear and
firm, though many particular members thereof should be overcome. Therefore
there is nothing in this Scripture to evince that universal Perseverance of
all Saints which is commonly taught and received amongst us.

2. When our Savior promises that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. 4.
against His Church, his meaning (questionless) is this, that death, or the
Grave (which may very properly be called the Gates of Hell, because they that
go, or are sent to Hell, enter by them thereinto) or else that Hell it self
shall not prevail, i. e. shall not have a full or final conquest over those,
that shall die, built upon the Rock he speaks of, by Faith, as, by Reason of
their most formidable strength, they are like to have over all other Men.
According to this interpretation his meaning only is, that those that shall
continue firmly built upon him by Faith, shall in time be rescued and delivered
out of the hand of all adverse Powers, yea from death and the grave themselves,
the most formidable of all others.

This Exposition fully accords with what Chrysostom has upon the place.. 5.
If (says he, Paraphrasing the words of Christ) they shall not prevail
against it [my Church] much more shall they not prevail against me. Therefore
he not troubled when thou shall hear that I shall be Betrayed, and Crucified
(...).
. These words clearly imply, that by the prevailing of the Gates of Hell, the
Author understands, the final prevailing of Death, or the Grave; and not the
prevailing of Satan by subtilty or temptations in one kind or other.

Amongst our late Protestant Divines, Cameron, who commonly strikes as. 6.
happy a stroke in opening the Scriptures which he undertakes, as any man,
does not only deliver, but with an high hand asserts, argues, and evinceth this
Interpretation. This then (says he) seems to have been the mind of Christ in
this place: Let those who believe, lie for a time, dead, let death have
dominion over them, let death exercise his right [or execute his Law] upon
them, hold them fast shut up in the Grave (as in a Prison) bound with bands [or
fetters] yet shall he not always have his will over them; he may, or shall do
much against them, but shall never have a full conquest over them Haec ergo
Christi hoc in loco men's fuisse videtur: Jaceant fideles ad tepus demortui,
mors in illos dominetur, exerceat jus suum, in Sepulchro (veluti in carcere)
eos teneat conclusos and vinculis quasi constrict^s, haud tamen usque and usque
obtinebit: valebit quidem certe, at non prevalebit, (...).
. This Exposition he confirms, 1. by instancing several other places of
Scripture, as Job. ^8. 17. Psalm. 9. 13. Psalm. 107. 18. in all which, by the
Gates of Hell, or of Death, is clearly meant, the Grave. To which he add's.
Psalm. 18. 16. and Psalm. 116. 3. as places of affinity with these. 2. By
showing, that the word (...), here translated Hell, is never in Scripture
(except once) used to signify, Hell, (properly so called, i, e. the place, or
state, of the damned) but constantly, either the Grave, or the state and
condition of those that are dead. 3. By minding us, that (...) and (...), the
Grave and Death, are elsewhere termed the enemies of the Church, yea the last
enemies, as 1 Cor. 15. 26. to which he adds the consideration of their being
cast into the Lake of Fire. Revel. 20. 14. 4. (and lastly) by particular
arguments against every other interpretation offered by Expositors.

Musculus, though by the Gates of Hell he understands as well the Policy,. 6.
as Power and strength of the Devil, yet by the Relative Particle, (...), it,
a Mihi videtur certius ut ad Petram, ^d est, Ecclesiae fundamentum referamus:
non quod d^bitem de Eccl^siae soli ditate, sed qu^d ea si. ex p^tra, super quam
aedifica^a est* quae tam est robusta* etc.
he does not understand the Church, but the Rock, or Foundation of Doctrine, on
which the Church is built. So that his sense of the place seems to be, this:
that that Doctrine, on which the Church is built, is so firm and strong, that
all the Policy and Power of Satan, though joining together, shall never be able
to prevail against it, so as either to evict it of falsehood, or otherwise to
destroy and cast it out of the World. None of all their interpretations suppose
any such thing deducible from the place, as this, that those who are once
Believers, or Members of the Church of Christ, shall never be seduced by Satan
to destruction. The place speaks nothing of Satan, much less of his Subtilty,
Policy, or Power to seduce the Church; but supposing the exceeding great and
formidable strength of Death and the Grave, asserteth the glorious and final
conquest of his Church over them notwithstanding. So that this passage of
Scripture perfectly sembleth with these, and the like. He that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever lives and believes in
Me, shall never die Ioh. 11. 25, 26.
. And again: And this is the Fathers Will, that has sent Me, that of all
which He has given Me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day Ioh* 6. 39.
. See also Joh. 5. 25. 28, 29, etc.

That which is pleaded by some for such a sense of the place, which carries. 7.
the Doctrine of Perseverance in it, is weak and value less. Whatsoever (say
these) opposes the building of the Church upon the Rock, or the constant
adhering of it unto Christ, is meant by the Gates of Hell prevailing. For, in
these words, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Christ must
needs be supposed to remove whatsoever is contrary, to that, which he had
asserted in those, And upon this Rock will I build my Church. But the politic
and subtle tentation of Satan to seduce Believers, are opposite to the
building of the Church upon the Rock, and to the constant adhering of it unto
Christ. Therefore by the Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church, must
needs be meant the defeature, or non-prevailing of the strategems or counsels
of Satan against Believers; and consequently, their persevering unto the end.
For to this I answer;

1. By denying the Major Proposition in the Argument. For that which Christ
takes away in this clause, And the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,
is not whatsoever opposes the building of His Church upon the Rock, but
whatsoever opposes the happiness of it being so built, and adhering constantly
and perseveringly unto him. For the Pronounce Relative (...), it, does not
Relate to the Verb, (...), I will build, but to the Substantive, (...), Church.

2. Whereas (in the said Proposition) Christ's building of His Church, is
expounded by, the constant adhering of this Church unto him, that which is the
Principal thing in question, is taken for granted: which is very
in-argumentative. For the matter in question is, whether the Church of Christ,
in all the members of it once built upon the Rock, must, or does, necessarily
so adhere to him.

3. (And lastly) the said exposition renders a sense very preposterous and
importune. For upon this account, Christ should speak at no better Rate of of
Reason, then thus: The Gates of Hell shall not prevail, i. e. the Subtilty,
Policy, and Machinations of Satan shall not be able to seduce those that are
built upon the Rock, i. e. that constantly adhere unto Christ. Which amounts to
no more, then if he should have said: the Devil shall not be able to make
those inconstant, who shall be, and remain constant, or to cause those, who
shall firmly adhere unto Christ, not to adhere firmly to him. Which strain of
discourse, whether it becomes him, who spoke as never man spoke, I leave unto
sober men to judge.

Another Argument urged by some, against the interpretation given, is. 8.
this. If by the prevailing of the Gates of Hell, be meant nothing else, but
the eternal condemnation of, or perpetual prevailing of Death against, the
Church, then Christ here promises nothing, but only in the behalf of those
that are Dead: and consequently nothing, but what may stand, with a total
defection of his Church on Earth* But this seems to be contrary to his
intention in the place, Ergo. I answer:

1. It is no inconvenience to suppose or grant, that Christ in this place, and
in the Promise here mentioned, does not insure the perpetual continuance, or
Residence of a Church on Earth, no more then he does in many other Promises,
which yet are of very high and blessed importance, in their Respective kinds.
In that great Evangelicall Promise, whosoever believes, shall be saved, there
is nothing but what may possibly stand with an universal defection of a Church
on earth; yet is the Promise great and Precious. It were easy to instance many
others of like nature. But,

2. As in the Promise last mentioned, though there be nothing which necessarily
includes an un-interrupted succession of Believers in the World, yet is there
that, which exceeding much conduces toward the propagation and raising of
such a succession, as viz. a promissory proposal of the greatest reward that
is, unto whosoever shall believe, even no less then that of eternal life; so
may it be said concerning this Promise of Christ, And the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it. Here is enough said, if Men would but consider and
quit themselves like Men, to replenish the Earth with a Generation of Believers
like unto the Waters of a River, which fail not. Therefore,

3. (And lastly) It is not truly said, that this Promise, And the Gates of Hell
shall not, etc. (in the sense asserted) relates only to those that are dead.
The truth is, that if we speak properly, neither this, nor any other promise
whatsoever relates only, if at all, unto the dead, or is made only on the
behalf of the Dead: the Dead (in propriety of Speech) are utterly incapable of
Promises, though not of performances of Promises. But clearly this, and all
other Promises are made to the living, and for their accommodation and comfort,
though for the letter and reality of the performance of them, they are not to
be partakers hereof, until they have undergone the state and condition of
Death. It is just matter of joy unspeakeable and glorious to him that is yet
living, to know and consider, that though he dies, yet death shall not have
any such dominion over him, but what he shall shake off, and that with a
blessed advantage and conquest, in due time. But this exception against the
exposition asserted, is but like a moat in the Sun, which darkeneth not at all
the Rays or light thereof, but only gains, by being here, a discovery of it
felf to be a thing inconsiderable, and next to nothing.

Another passage of Scripture compelled to bear the Cross of the same service.
9.
with the former, is that, Mat. 24. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's,
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that (if
it were possible) they shall (or should) deceive the very elect. From hence it
is inferred, that the deceiving, or seducement of those who truly believe, is a
thing impossible. But whether the drawing of such conclusions as this, from
such Scriptures, as that, be not a drawing of darkness out of light, the
considerations ensuing will be competent enough to determine.

1. In their Notion, who try to fetch the Water of Perseverance out of the
Flint of the Scripture mentioned, the word, Elect, does not signify, Saints,
or true Believers, but such as they suppose to have been, in a personal
consideration, chosen by God from eternity out of the great body of mankind,
with an intent to save them against all possible interveniencies, or
oppositions whatsoever. Now that such as these, at least before their calling,
are as liable to be deceived, or seduced, as other Men, is their own confession
without fear. And the Apostle Paul, to whom (questionless) they will not deny
the grace of their Election, acknowledges himself with Titus, to have
sometimes been, foolish, disobedient, and DECEIVED Tit 3. 3.
. Yea,

2. It is frequently confessed by the same party, that such Elect as they
mean, and we lately described, may even after they are called and have
believed, by the Just and Wise sufferance of God, fall into Heresy, and this
in fundamental Points, yea and into that fearful sin of an abnegation and
abjuration of Christ, and Christian Religion. If so, then certainly there is no
impossibility of their seduction. Yea, the great Patrons of the Doctrine of
Perseverance, which managed the Conference* at the Hague about these Questions,
Anno. 1611. acknowledged, that even true Believers may fall so far, as that the
Church, according to the command of Christ, shall be compelled to testify
[against them] that they cannot [beare, or] tolerate them in their outward
communion, and that they shall have no part in the Kingdom of Christ, except
they repent [or be converted D^inde respondemus ad minorem, fieri posse ut vere
fideles eo prolabantur, ut Ecclesia ex mandato Christi cogatur pronunciare se
in externa sua communione tolerare non posse, neque cos partem in regno Christi
habituros, nist resipiscant. Collat. Hag. p. 399.
]. Doubtless they, who, having once truly believed, become afterward
incapable of having part in the Kingdom of Christ, without conversion, or
Repentance, give a loud Testimony, that there is no impossibility for true
Saints, or true Believers, to be deceived, and that to the highest and most
dangerous pitch of all.

If it be here said; yea but the Scripture in hand is to be understood. 10.
of a final deceiving, or of a being deceived unto destruction: and thus (it
is there supposed, that) the Elect cannot possibly be deceived, I Answer,

1. This is to presume, not to argue, or believe. For there is not the least
ground, or so much as the smallest sand in either the words, or context, where
on to build such an interpretation, as this.

2. The abettors of this interpretation, are wont to prove from the words, not
only an impossibility that the Saints should finally be deceived, but also that
they should be deceived totally, i. e. so as to be at any time wholly destitute
or bereft of that Faith, which is justifying and saving.

3. (And lastly) the same men suppose, that if the Saints may fall away totally
at any time, they may fall away finally also. If it be said, that they cannot
fall away totally; I answer; if so, then one of these three things must needs
follow; either, 1. That true, saving, and justifying Faith may stand, not only
with Heresy, and this in fundamental Articles of Christian Religion, but even
with an express abnegation and abjuration of Christ himself with his Religion;
or else, 2. That their Opinion is false, who affirm, that true Believers may
possibly fall, both into such Heresy, and such abnegation, or, 3. (And lastly)
that they, who do fall both into the one, or the other, are not seduced, or
deceived. This last is manifestly false: the second, is the* sense and
confession of our adversaries themselves, viz. that true Believers may fall
into such Heresy and abnegation. For the first, if saving Faith may stand with
such Heresy and abnegation of Christ as is there spoken of, how will that of
Christ Himself stand, whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
before my Father which is in Heaven Mat. 10. 32
? To reply here and say, that it is to be understood of a final denial, will
not at all salve the soar. For there is the same consideration of a denial of
Christ, as to the ejecting of a Man out of his favor, whether it be final,
and in the end of a Man's days, or whether it be in the middle of them. Nor
has Christ any whit more reason to be offended with him, that denies him at
one time, then with him who denies him at an other, if there be nothing but
merely time to make the difference. It is true, he that denies Christ in the
middle of his days, and so casts himself out of His favor, may possibly
recover His favor again by Repentance, and a renewed confession of him before
men, which he that denies Him at the instant of death, cannot. But as for the
Nature and demerit of the sin, and consequently in order to the just judgment
of Christ upon it, it is the same in both cases. But,

3. Further to demonstrate the nullity of the aforesaid deduction from the. 11*
place in hand, it is to be known and considered, that this Phrase or
Expression, (...), if it be possible, does not always, (if at any time) import
the impossiblity of a thing, but only the difficulty of a thing on the one
hand, and the exquisite diligence and endeavors of those on the other hand, in
respect of such difficulty, who attempt it. Thus the Evangelist Luke, speaking
of Paul, says, that he hasted, (...), IF IT WERE POSSIBLE for him to be at
Jerusalem the day of Pentecost Acts 20. 16
. The light of the Sun at Noon day is not more clear, then that, if it be
possible, does not here signify, or imply, an impossibility. For then the
meaning must be, that Paul made all the haste he could to do that, which was
impossible for him to do. To say, that Paul might be ignorant, whether his
being at Jerusalem by Pentecost, was possible, or no, and that he only resolved
to make trial of the truth herein, to the uttermost, is to asperse this great
Apostle with a ridiculous imputation of ignorance; yea of such ignorance, which
is not lightly incident to Men of the shallowest capacities. For who (almost)
can be so ignorant, as not to know whether it be a thing simply impossible to
make such or such a port, by such, or such a time or no? It is true, wise men
may be ignorant whither they shall, with their best diligence and dispatch, be
able to make it within the time they desire, and thus far I can grant that Paul
might be ignorant. But that he should be ignorant of so broad and vast a
difference, as lies between a possibility, and impossibility of the thing, I
m^st borrow some other Man's fancy to conceive. However, let the Apostle suffer
the disparagement of such an ignorance as this, yet neither will this evince an
impossibility of his being at Jerusalem by Pentecost, to be here implied by
this phrase, (...), if it be possible; but only some doubtfulnesse or
difficulty in the thing, together with his utmost endeavor to compass it
notwithstanding. In the like sense the same clause is used, Romans 12. 18. (...),
if it be possible, as much as in you lies, have peace with all Men, If we
shall suppose, that, if it be possible, here supposes an impossibility, the
sense of the sentence must rise thus: As much as in you lies, do that which
you cannot do, or which is unpossible for you to do: which is a sound that
Paul's trumpet was never like to make. Excepting the parallel place in Mark,
The Phrase is but twice more (to my present remembrance) used in the New
Testament, viz. Mat. 26. 39. and Gal. 4. 15. in neither of which places can it
reasonably be supposed to import an impossibility. But,. 12.


4. Touching the place in hand, that here it only imports a difficulty (as has
been said) of deceiving the Elect, [i. e. Believers] together with the most
raised and vehement intentions or desires in the false Prophets to effect it
notwithstanding, appears yet more plainly from the Evangelist Mark, who
records the same passage thus: For false Christ's, and false Prophets shall
arise, and shall show signs and wonders, (...), TO SEDVCE, if it were
possible, the very Elect Mar. 13. 22
, i. e. with an intent, raised out of great and strong desires, to draw off
Believers themselves, from adhering unto the true Christ and Messiah, borne of
the Virgin, and to follow and embrace them in his stead. Yea, it is no ways
like, but that they had a far greater desire to practice their seducing Arts
upon these, and to draw these after them, then any other sort of Men: because
these had set up and upheld such a competitor (...).
with them in the World, who was like to carry away the World from them,
unless they could prevail with his followers to dis-own and disclaim Him. The
great difficulty which was in the Primitive times, and whilst these false
Christ's rose up one after another in the World, to work off Believers from a
Stquidem edicens multos venturos signa facturos, and virtues magnas edituros,
aversionem etiam Electorum, nec ideo tamen admittendos, temerariam signorum and
virtutum fidem ostendit, ut apud Pseudo Christos facillimam. Test. adversus
Marcionem. l. 3. c. 3.
the true Christ, appears (in part) by that proverbiall saying in Galen: A Man
may sooner unteach men Christianity; or, teach men away from Christ. And
Austine somewhat reports, that a Man repairing to Apollo's Oracle, to inquire
what course he should take to draw off his Wife from Christianity, received
this answer, that he might more easily either write letters in a swift stream,
or fly in the Air. But, notwithstanding the difficulty of the thing, that yet
sometimes it was done, appears from that passage of Tertullian. For, saying
(says he, speaking of Christ) that many should come, and show signs, and do
great wonders, YEA AND TVRNE AWAY THE ELECT themselves, and that all this
notwithstanding they were not to be received, he plainly shows, that a Faith
built upon signs and wonders is rash and inconsiderate, and such as is easy
for false-Christs [to attempt, or procure.]

5. If the Phrase, (...), if it be possible, shall here be conceived to import.
13.
an absolute impossibility, the necessity, Efficacy, and Power of the Lord
Christ's Prediction, and caution, will fall to the ground. For he, who would
have those, to whom he speaks, certainly to believe that they are Elect, and
again, to believe also, that it is a thing unpossible for the Elect to be
seduced by any means whatsoever, certainly has no necessity, scarce the
lightest occasion or pretense that can be imagined, to caution these Men
against seducers. And what can be more ridiculous, then in a most grave,
serious, and solemn manner, to admonish a man to take heed of that, which yet
withal we do assure him is unpossible should befall him? Yea,

6. According to the known Principles of those, with whom we have now to do,
whether the Apostles to whom Christ speaks in the words in hand, knew
themselves to be Elect, or no, yea or whether they were Elect, or no, there
could be no great necessity or occasion why Christ should thus solemnly arm
them against seducers. If they were Elect, the sense of these men is, that
whether they had been thus armed, or no, they could not have fallen in the day
of battle: as on the other hand, in case they were not Elected, that neither
this, nor any other armor, or cautionary provision whatsoever, could be able
to make them stand, or keep them alive.. 14.


That which is commonly pleaded at such turnings, as this, is very light and
impertinent, God (say our Antagonists) as He wills the end, so also He wills,
and injoyneth the means for the accomplishment of the end. So in the Particular
in Hand: Christ, as He wills the non-seduction of the Elect, so He wills
also that they should beware of seducers, as a means tending to that end. For
to this we answer;

1. Though it be very true, that God who wills the end, wills and
prescribes the means also [ viz. when He declares the end not to be otherwise
attaineable, then in and by the use of such means, as He prescribes in order
hereunto] yet when He has irreversibly decreed that the end shall certainly be
obtained, or that He will interpose by an high and irresistible Hand for the
effecting of it, and withal has declared either the one, or the other, or
both of these His decrees unto the World, it is now no ways consistent with
His Wisdom to enjoin men the use of any means for the obtaining of this end,
especially under the penalty or threatening of a non-obtaining it. Nor can any
instance be produced from the Scripture, where any means have been directed or
enjoined by Him upon such terms. As for that, which some allege from Acts 27.
Ver. 22. compared with 31. it no ways reaches the business. For evident it
is from that 31. Verse, where Paul says to the Centurion and Soldiers, Except
these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved, that that promissory
encouragement which He delivers unto them, ver. 22. upon what was said unto Him
in vision by God, ver. 24. viz. that there should be no loss of any man's life
amongst them, was but conditional, and not absolute; and consequently, that
the saving of their lives did depend upon their continuing in the Ship, and
that so, that had they not continued here, they had perished, the Promise of
God made unto Paul concerning their safety notwithstanding. Which clearly
proves this Promise of God to have been conditional, and the meaning of it
only this: there shall be ^o loss of any man's life amongst you, viz. if you
will follow the Counsel of God for your preservation, and not destroy your
lives your selves by rejecting it. There is nothing more frequent in Scripture,
then Hypotheticall Promises in categoricall forms; I mean, then conditional
Promises delivered in positive or absolute terms. But hereof we shall have
frequent occasion to take knowledge in the present discourse.

2. Though God, who wills the end, wills and appoints means. 15.
for the obtaining the end (upon the terms expressed) yet we cannot suppose
that He exhorts and presses men to use means in order to the obtaining of
such, or such an end, which Himself gives assurance unto them that they shall
obtain, whether they use the means, or no. For it being the Hope and desire of
obtaining the end, which render the means, otherwise unpleasant and
un-acceptable, desirable unto men, evident it is, that He, who gives
assureance unto them of obtaining the end howsoever, [ i. e. whether they use
the means, or no] destroys the energy and force of any such exhortation,
wherein the use of the means shall be recommended unto them* or they persuaded
thereunto. He that shall insure me, that whether I run, or no, I shall be
crowned, and shall afterward exhort me to run, that I may be crowned, shall
(doubtless) pull down that with his Promise, which He seeks to build up by His
exhortation.

If it be replied and said; but God assures no man that He shall not be
deceived. 16.
or seduced, but only in, and by the use of means, that He may not be seduced;
I answer; if so, then God has made no peremptory Decree concerning the
non-seducement of the Elect, nor other, then with which the seducement of them
may very possibly stand. For that which depends upon any deliberate or elective
Act of the will of man, cannot be said to be positively, peremptorily, or
absolutely Decreed by God: nor is it any other, in the Nature and Condition of
it, then what may very possibly not be. Now certain it is, that the use of
means to prevent seduction in the Elect, is such an Act, or series of Actions,
which depends upon the deliberate Act of their will; at least so far, that it
can never take place, or be, without a deliberate concurrency hereof.

If it be yet further said; Though the use of means to prevent seduction in. 17.
the Elect, depends upon the deliberate motions and actings of their wills,
thus far, that it cannot take place, or be performed without them; yet may it
have such a relation unto, or dependence upon, the absolute will or decree of
God, which shall give certainty and infallibility of being unto it
notwithstanding. For God is able so to interpose by His excellency of Power in
all the deliberations of Men, as to carry and fix the issues, and
determinations of them, which way, and upon what He pleases; To this I answer;
that the Question is not, what God is able by the excellency of His Power to
do in this kind, but what He is pleased to do, or what He has decreed to
do out of the Counsel and Liberty of His Will. And that which we affirm and
plead in the cause depending, is not, that God is not able to determine the
wills of the Elect to the use of means proper and sufficient to prevent their
being deceived, but that He has no where declared Himself willing o^ resolved
to do it; and consequently, that it is an (...), a conceit above what is
written, to think that He does it. Therefore until it be proved, either from
the Scriptures, or by the light of some solid demonstration otherwise, that God
has absolutely Decreed the non-seduction of the Elect (we still speak of a
seduction to destruction) or (which is the same, upon our Adversaries Grant and
Plea, lately mentioned) the determination of their wills to the use of means
necessary to secure them against seduction, we judge our selves free in
Conscience to deny the pretended impossibility of the Saints deception, or
seduction.

Another Scripture much discoursed in the behalf of the common Doctrine. 18.
of Perseverance, is, 1 Pet. 1. 5. -- who are kept by the Power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. From hence it is frequently concluded, that they who once
truly believe, and are regenerate, ( Verse 3.) are kept by the engagement of
the Mighty Power of God, from falling away to destruction. I Answer,

1. That it is not here said, that regenerate Men are kept simply and
absolutely by the Power of God unto Salvation, but that they are kept by the
Power of God THROVGH FAITH, unto Salvation. Which plainly implies, that the
Power of God here spoken of, ingageth for no Man's preservation, or safeguarding
unto Salvation, but by the mediation of Faith, or any whit longer then their
Faith shall continue. Now here being nothing said, or implied, touching the
certainty of the continuance of the Faith of the Saints unto the end, nor
concerning any engagement of the Power of God, for the Perpetuation thereof,
evident it is, that nothing can be concluded from hence for the establishment
of the said Doctrine of Perseverance, But, 2. For the clear sense and
importance of the place, it is this; that Men once begotten by God to a lively
hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, Have, or may Have, the
greatest security, which the infinite Power of God can afford, that persevering
in that Faith, from whence this hope issues, unto the end, they shall be
saved. The place, according to this interpretation, runs parallel in sense and
import, with these, and their fellows; But he that shall endure to the end,
shall be saved Mat. 24. 13
; ( viz. against all opposition, nnd contradiction, of impediments whatsoever.)
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life Revel. 2. 10
. So with that lately opened: -- upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it Mat. 16. 18
; to which you may add Joh. 10. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1. 19. with many others.

This exposition perfectly accords with Bullingers Commentary upon the place.
In the mean time (says He) let this suffice us, that eternal happiness is
in safety for us [or, to us] which no, either Man, or Devil, can intercept
[or, deprive us of] unless Faith fails us, wherewith, neglecting the things
which mortal Men so much seek after, let us wholly depend upon Heaven Nobis
interim sit satis quod aeterna fae^icitas nobis est in tuto, quam nullus
hominum aut daemonum possit intercipere, modo ne eos [nos] deficiat fides, qua,
neglectis rebus mortalium, totipendeamus a coelo.
. In the clause, modo ne nos deficiat fides, so that Faith fail ^^ not, He
clearly supposes, 1. A possibility that our present Faith may fail us: 2.
That in case it shall fail us, we may perish, notwithstanding any thing here
delivered by the Apostle, concerning our being kept by the Power of God unto
Salvation.

If against this Interpretation it shall be objected, that it greatly
depresseth,. 19.
and (in a manner) quenches the spirit of the consolation, clearly intended by
the Holy Ghost to be administered unto the Saints in the words; and that it
makes very little for their comfort, to hear of their being kept unto Salvation
by God, or by His Power, in case this keeping depends upon their continuance in
Faith, especially if this also be uncertain, and depending upon themselves,
their diligence and care to procure it; I answer;

1. That the Heart of this Objection was broken in the former Chapter Sect. 21.
22.
, where we showed, that in matters of greatest consequence and most desirable
in things appertaining to this life, yea as to life it self, the most timorous
and cautious Men, neither wish, nor desire any greater security, then to have
what they desire assured unto them upon their own willingness and care, either
for the procurement, or the continued enjoyment, of it. The most impotent lover
of life under Heaven, and He that lives in the greatest bondage in the World
through fear of Death, would (both of them) be highly satisfied, if God would
but vouchsafe such a promise as this unto them, that so long as they should
desire the continuance of their lives, and take heed of destroying them
themselves by unnatural or desperate courses, as by casting themselves into
the Fire, into the Water, down from high Towers, etc. He would secure them
against all other interveniences, or means of dissolution whatsoever. In like
manner, it is, and ought to be so esteemed by the Saints, a consolation rich
and glorious, that God has undertaken and engaged Himself, by the greatness
of His Power to preserve them against all enemies, and threatening obstacles and
oppositions whatsoever, for His Heavenly Kingdom, only upon condition that
they shall not willingly, wilfully, desperately destroy themselves, or render
themselves incapable of such His preservation, by apostatizing from that Faith,
in His Son Jesus Christ, which He by His especial Grace has Planted in them,
and by which they stand at present in favor and acceptance with Him.

2. Though God has not simply and absolutely undertaken for their
preseverance,. 20.
or continuation of their Faith unto the end, nor upon any such terms, but that
if they will be brutishly and desperately careless of so high a concernment to
themselves as a blessed Eternity is, they may make defection from it, and turn
Proselites to Hell; yet has He laid a rich foundation for their Perseverance,
in those many precious Promises and encouragements, which He has given unto
those, who shall persevere, as also in those most severe and dreadful
threatenings, bent against the faces of all Apostates and backsliders, together
with those frequent Promises or Declarations, which He has made, to continue,
yea and to enlarge, upon occasion, the inward contributions of His Spirit, the
motions, excitements, and directions thereof, in order to the plentiful
inabling of His Saints to persevere, until they shall willingly and wilfully
turn their backs upon them, and reject them. Upon the account of all these
gracious Promises and Declarations made by God unto His Saints, for, or
toward, the effectual accomplishment of their Perseverance, the Apostle Paul
frequently incourageth them to the hope and expectation of it. But the Lord is
faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3
. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 1. 8
. God, according to the common Dialect and Notion of Scripture language, is
said to establish, confirm, and keep men from evil, when He does that, which
is of a proper tendency, and sufficient thereunto, whither the effects or ends
themselves of establishments, confirmation, etc. be actually obtained, or no,
For there is nothing more frequent or familiar in Scripture, then to ascribe
the effects themselves, sometimes unto God, sometimes unto Men, only upon their
respective actings or doings of such things, which are of a Natural, Proper,
and Direct tendency to produce them, whether they be actually and de facto
produced, or no. Thus our Savior charge Him, who shall put away his Wife for
any other cause, then Fornication, with causing her to commit Fornication Mat.
5. 32
; whether the Woman thus put away, commits Fornication, or no; viz. because
in that act of putting her away upon such terms; He does that, which has a
proper and direct tendency to cause Her to commit this sin. For it is not
necessary to suppose that every Woman thus divourced or put away, commits,
or will commit Fornication. But whether she does, or no, the sin of Him that
put Her away, is one and the same: He (in our Saviors Dialect) caused Her to
commit Fornication. Thus also, He who eats to the offense of a weak Brother,
is charged by the Apostle with destroying him with his Meat, for whom Christ
Died Romans 14 15 20.
. i. e. with doing that, which is apt and proper to occasion His destruction,
whether He be actually destroyed, or no. In this idiome likewise of speaking,
God expressly says that He had purged Jerusalem; and yet in the same place
says also, that Jerusalem notwithstanding was not purged. In thy filthiness,
is lewdness [i. e. notorious and desperate obstinacy] because I HAVE PVRGED
THEE, AND THOU WAST NOT PVRGED, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee Ezekiel. 24 13
. God is said to have purged Jerusalem, because He vouchsafed proper and
sufficient means unto Her for Her purging, as the Ministry of His Word and
Spirit, frequent Admonitions, Exhortations, Expostulations, Promises,
Threatenings, etc. by His Prophets, however Jerusalem by Her rebellious
obstinacy, hindered and obstructed the through and kindly working of these
means, by reason whereof the desirable effect of Her purging was not obtained.
In such a Sense and Phrase as this, the goodness of God is said to lead such
Men to Repentance, who yet are so far from Repenting, that after their
hardness, and impenitent heart, they threasure up wrath unto themselves
against the day of wrath, etc. Romans 2. 4, 5
. meaning, that the goodness of God in His Patience and Long-sufferance
toward wicked and ungodly Men, ministers many occasions and opportunities
unto them, by the advantage whereof they might easily be drawn to repent, did
they not willingly indulge themselves in that hardness of Heart, which in the
fruits of it tends to nothing but to the treasuring up of wrath to themselves,
etc. In the same construction, Christ is styled the Lamb of God which takes
away the sin of the World Ioh. 1. 29.
; and so to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole World 1 Ioh. 2. 2
; not as if, or because, the sin of the World is actually or completely taken
away by Him, or so, that this whole sin either is, or at any time must needs
be, pardoned, or actually taken away in all the fruits, consequents, or effects
of it, because He is said to have taken it away; but because He has done and
suffered that, which has a glorious efficacy and tendency in it, to, or
toward such a taking of it away; so that if it be not actually and completely
taken away, the cause of it is somewhere else to be sought, and found, as viz.
in the sinners, or men themselves, and not in Him. In this sense likewise He is
said to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole World, not because the
sins of the whole World are actually, completely, or with succesfulnesse in
the event propitiated or attoned by Him, but because that Sacrifice of Himself,
which He has offered in order to a propitiating or attoning the sins of the
whole World, is so pregnant and full of a propitiatory efficacy and virtue, and
withal is so propounded and held forth by God unto the whole World, that if
any man's sin remains actually unpropitiated, or un-pardoned, it is through his
own voluntary neglect of this Sacrifice, and not from any intention on Gods
Part, that his sin should not be attoned or propitiated by this Sacrifice, as
well as any other Man's. It were easy to multiply examples of that propriety of
expression now under observation, from the Scriptures. And I desire the rather
that it may be carefully minded and remembered, because I verily believe that
the non-advertency of it by Men of learning and worth, with some few others of
like consideration (whereof we may give notice in time) has mainly occasioned
the dividing of their thoughts and judgments from the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption. We shall be invited (I suppose) before the conclusion of this
discourse, to recruite the Readers memory with a re-mention of this notion of
Scripture Dialect. In the mean time we clearly see by the light of it, how God
may be said to establish, to confirm unto the end, to keep Men from evil,
though Men neither be actually, or in the event, established, confirmed, or
kept from evil; and this without any prejudice, or disparagement in the least,
either unto the grace or goodness of God, or to His Power, or Effectualnesse
of Working, in this behalf.

The next Scripture, which we shall undertake to right, against those,. 21.
who have done it the injury of fathering the common Doctrine of Perseverance
upon it, is this. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out,
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us 1 Ioh. 2. 19
. From hence this inference is drawn up; that they who are of the Saints, i. e.
of the number of those, who are real and true Saints, will always continue in
this number, and never apostatize. But for answer;

1. This inference presumes many things, for which neither it, nor any the
Authors of it, will ever be able to give any good security of Proof; as viz. 1.
That this Phrase, they were not of us, imports, that they never were true
Believers. This certainly can never be proved, because there is another sense,
and this every whit as proper to the words, and more commodious for the Context
and scope of the Place, which may be given of them, as we shall see anon. 2.
That this expression, they were of us, signifies, that they were true
Believers; of the uncertainty of this supposition, we shall give the like
account. 3. That these words, they went out from us, signify their final
desertion or abdication of the Apostles Communion, or their total and final
renunciation of Christ, His Church, and Gospel. This supposition has no
bottom at all, or color for it. 4. That this clause, they would no doubt have
continued with us, signifies, they would have continued in the same Faith,
wherein we persevere and continue. Nor is there any competent reason to enforce
this sense of these words, because neither does the Grammatical tenor of them
require it, and much less the scope of the passage (of which in due time.) 5.
The said inference supposes, that John certainly knew, that all those, who for
the present remained in his Communion, were true Believers. For if they were
not true Believers, they that were gone out from them, (in the sense contended
for) might be said to be of them, i. e. Persons in the same condition with
them. But how improbable this is (I mean, that John should infallibly know,
that all those, who as yet continued with them, were true Believers) I refer to
consideration. 6, The inference under contest yet further supposes, that John
certainly knew, that they, who were now gone out from them, neither were now,
nor ever before, true Believers; yea and that he certainly knew this, by their
departure, or going out from them. 7. (And lastly) it presumes yet further,
that all true Believers, do always abide in the external Communion of the
Church; and that when Men do not so abide, they plainly declare hereby, that
they never were true Believers. Which is not only a manifest untruth, but
expressly contrary to the Doctrine it self of those Men, who assert the
inference. For they teach (as we heard before) that even true Believers may
fall so foul, and so far, that the Church according to the command of Christ
may be constrained to testify, that she cannot tolerate them in her external
Communion, nor that ever they shall have any part or Portion in the Kingdom of
Christ, unless they repent. Doubtless to be cast out of the Church, according
to the Institution and command of Christ, who commands no such thing, but upon
very heinous and highly-un- Christian misdemeanors, is of every whit as sad an
importance, as a voluntary desertion of the Churches Communion can be,
especially for a season. But,

2. Suppose these two suppositions be granted to the Inference-Makers,. 22.
1. That this Phrase, to go out from us, signifies voluntarily to forsake the
Society or Communion of Christians; and 2. That this expression, to be of us,
signifies true and inward Communion with those, from whom they went out, yet
will not these contributions suffice for the firm building of the said
Inference. The reason is, because the Apostle expressly says, that they would
have continued WITH Us, not, that they would have continued such as they were,
in respect of the truth or essence of their Faith. And if the Apostles scope in
this place were, to prove, or affirm, that they who are once true Christians,
or Believers, always continue such, then when He says, they would have
continued with us, He must of necessity mean, either that they would have
continued faithful, as we continue faithful: or else, that they would have
continued always in our Society, or in the Profession of Christianity. But
that neither of these senses are of any tolerable consistency, is evident by
the light of this consideration; viz. that the Apostle then must have known,
that the persons He speaks of, and who went out from them, neither were, nor
ever had been, true Christians or Believers, when they thus went from them. Now
if He had this knowledge of them, it must be supposed, either that He had it by
extraordinary Revelation: but this is very unprobable, and howsoever, can never
be proved; or else that He gained or obtained it by their departure, or going
out from them. But that this could be no sufficient Argument or Ground to beget
any such knowledge in the Apostle concerning them, is evident from hence,
because it may very easily, and does very frequently, come to pass, that they
who are true Christians, do not always continue in that Christian Society,
unto which they have once joined themselves, and adhered; no nor yet in the
external Profession of Christianity it self. Yea, our Opposers themselves
frequently and without scruple teach, and affirm, that even true Believers
themselves, may, either through fear, or shame, or extremity of sufferings, or
the like, be brought to deny Christ, and without any danger of making shipwreck
of their Faith, forbear a Profession-making of the Name of Christ afterward.
But,

3. (For the true meaning of the Place) it is to be considered, that the. 23.
Apostles intent in the words, was to prevent, or heal an offense, that weak
Christians might take, at that Doctrine, which was taught and spread abroad, by
those Antichrists, or Antichristian Teachers, (spoken of in the former Verse,
and there said to have been, many) and that especially because they had
sometimes lived and conversed with the Apostles themselves in Christian
Churches; and had professed the same Faith and Doctrine with them. By reason
hereof some Christians, not so considerate or judicious, as others, might
possibly think, or conceive, that surely all things were not well with the
Apostles, and those Christian Societies, with which they consorted; there was
something not as it ought to have been, either in Doctrine, or Manners, or
both, which ministered an occasion unto these Men to break Communion with them,
and to leave them. To this the Apostle answers partly by Concession: partly by
Exception. First by Concession, in these words, They went out from us. Which
words do not so much import their utter declining or forsaking the Apostles
Communion (though there be an expression following which probably does) as the
advantage or opportunity which they had to gain credit and respects both to
their Doctrine, and Persons, amongst Professors of Christianity in the World,
in as much as they came forth from the Apostles themselves, as Men taught, and
Commissioned by them to Teach. The same Phrase is used in this sense, and with
the same import, Acts 15. 24. where the Apostles write thus to the Brethren of
the Gentiles: For as much as we have heard, that certain which WENT OVT FROM
Us, have troubled you with words, subverting your Souls, saying, ye must be
Circumcised, and keep the Law, to whom we gave no such [Commission, or]
Commanaement. So that in this clause, they went out from us, the Apostle
grants, 1. That those Antichristian Teachers had indeed for a time held
Communion with them: and 2. That hereby they had the greater opportunity of
doing harm in the World by their false Doctrine. But 2. He answers further, by
way of exception: But they were not of us, i. e. Whilst yet they conversed
with us, they were not Men of the same Spirit or Principles with us; we walked
in the Profession of the Gospel with single and upright Hearts, not aiming at
any secular greatness, or worldly accommodations in one kind or other: these
Men loved this present World; and when they found that the simplicity of the
Gospel would not accommodate them to their minds, they brake with us, and with
the truth of the Gospel it self, at once. By the way, when He says, But they
were not of us, He does not necessarily imply, or suppose, that they never had
been of them, i. e. sincere and single-hearted in the Profession of the
Gospel, as they were: but only that about, and at, the time of their going out
from them, or perhaps somewhile after, they were thus tainted and corrupted.
The cares of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches, and those lusts of
other things, which choked the seed in the Thorny gr^und, are said to have
entered in, ( viz. some while after the seed was sown, and sprung up) Mar. 4. 19
. Nor is it said to have fallen among Thorns, because there were Thorns on the
ground, when it was sown, but because it fell on such a ground, where it Proved
to be amongst Thorns afterward. Nor is it like* that Demas Himself loved this
present World, when first he embraced Paul's company, with that affection,
either for kind, or degree, which he did afterward. So that it cannot be
Proved from this clause, that the Persons spoken of, had never been sincere
Christians, but only that they were not such, when John spoke these things
concerning them. It follows: For if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us. In these words, the Apostle gives a reason of his
exception; telling them to whom he writs, that this was a sign, or argument,
that those Antichristian Teachers were not of them (in the sense declared)
viz. that they did not continue with them, i. e. they quitted their former
intimacy and converse with the Apostles, refused to steer the same course to
walk by the same Principles any longer with them; which (says he)
questionless they would not have done, had they been as sincerly affected
toward Jesus Christ, and the Gospel as we. In which Assertion, John plainly
vindicateth himself, and the Christian Churches of his Communion, from giving
any just occasion of offense unto those men, whereby they should be any ways
induced to forsake them; and resolves their unworthy departure in this kind
into their own carnal and corrupt hearts, which lusted after such fleshly
accommodations and contentments, that were not to be obtained, or enjoyed, in a
sincere Profession of the Gospel, with the Apostles, and those who were
Perfect in heart with them.

It follows (...), i. e. but that they. 24.
might be made manifest that they are not at all of us, meaning, that God
suffered them thus unworthily to break fellowship with us, that hereby they
might all of them, one or other of those, who thus causlesly deserted us, be
discovered to be Men of degenerous and ignoble spirits, and not Principled like
unto us, the true Apostles of Christ, or those that walk in uprightness of
heart with us. It appertains to the just and righteous Judgment of God, and
withal is a dispensation of a gracious tendency and import for the Honor,
Peace, and Safety of Christian Churches, and sincere Christians, that Men of
corrupt minds amongst them, should be timely discovered.

This being the clear and undoubted Scope, and Sense of the Place, evident it
is, that no inference or conclusion can be drawn from it for the countenance or
establishment of the received Doctrine of Perseverance. All that can be made of
it toward such an account as this, is, that Men sincerely affected toward the
Gospel, and free from that adulterous and inordinate love of this present
World, which turns such multitudes aside from the way of Truth, whilst they
abide in this Posture and Frame, are seldom or never found to desert the
Society of faithful Teachers, or sound Christians. But concerning any absolute
necessity of their continuing free, who either have been free, or are free at
Present, from the inordinate love of the World, here is not the least overture
or intimation. Yea, the non-continuance of those false-Teachers with John, and
the good Christians with Him here spoken of, though it argues and imports a
worldly and dangerous distemper in their Hearts and Spirits, yet does it not
necessarily or demonstratively imply a nullity of their Faith.

Another Text of Scripture, from whence the Doctrine of Perseverance. 25.
claims countenance and credit, is that which speaks thus: whosoever is
borne of God, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is borne of God ^ Joh. 3. 9.
. From hence such an Argument as this is levied in defense of the said Doctrine.

He that sins not, neither can sin, cannot fall away from His Faith:
Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, neither can sin. Therefore whosoever is
borne of God, cannot fall away from His Faith. To this I answer by
distinguishing those terms, sins not, neither can sin, made use of in both
Propositions. First, by sins not, may be meant, commits no act of sin,
sins not at all. In this sense of the Phrase, the Minor is absolutely
untrue. For he that is borne of God, certainly sins (in a sense) i. e.
commits acts, yea many acts, of sin. In many things (says James) we offend
all James 3. 2.
; meaning, even the holiest and most regenerate of all. Secondly, by sins
not, may be meant, (say some) does not perpetrate, or commit sin with delight.
But this sense (I am confident) cannot be justified, either from the Scripture,
nor yet upon any competent ground of ^eason. Not to sin, does no where in
Scripture signify, not to sin with delight. I acknowledge, that Words and
Phrases are sometimes in Scripture used emphatically; in which cases, over and
besides their Proper significations, they consignifie some Peculiarity of
manner, or some special circumstance relating to the thing or action
expressed. But what they signify in this kind (I mean, over and besides their
strict and Proper significations) is not arbitrary, or left for Men to make
what they please; but is to be estimated by the scope of the place, and Nature
of the matter in hand. I easily grant, that the words under debate, sins
not, or does not commit sin, are emphaticall in the Scripture before us. But
that the emphasis lies in any such modification, which should give them this
sense, sins not with delight, has no good accord with reason, or with
truth. For there are many borne of God, who do Commit sin with delight: yea the
delight or pleasure which they take in many sins committed by them, is the
chief, if not the only reason why they commit them. Yea, it is a question,
whether any man commits any sin whatsoever without delight, in one kind or
other.

Thirdly, by, sins not, is meant (say others) sins not deliberately,. 26.
or without inward reluctation, in the act of sinning. But neither has this
sense any better bottom, then conjecture, (and this obnoxious enough to him
that will chew, and not swallow:) For, 1. What necessity is there, that when
John says, he that is borne of God, does not commit sin, he should mean,
commits it not with deliberation, or premeditation, or without reluctance?
why may not his meaning as well be, does* not commit sin unto Death? or,
customarily, as other Men do, or the like? 2. Certain it is, that he that is
borne of God, does, (at least sometimes) commit Sin with deliberation, yea and
(in the Apostles expression) makes provision for the flesh Romans 13. 14
, i. e. Plots and Projects Means and Opportunities for the committing of it,
and digests it, (as it were) into method before hand, that he may commit it the
more artificially, as well as wicked men: witness David in the matter of
Bathsheba and Uriah 2 Samuel 11.
; witness the two Patriarchs, Simeon, and Levi, in the matter of the
Sichemites Genesis 34.
; besides examples in this kind, which every day (almost) brings forth. 3.
Neither is it true, that every one that is borne of God, Sins always, when
he does Sin, with inward reluctance. Doubtless David was not divided in
himself, suffered no inward conflict about the committing of those sins lately
intimated, considering that (according to the general opinion of our best
Protestant Expositors and Divines) he remained for about the space of an whole
year after the committing of these sins, without any sense of, or remorse for,
them. And if the Lord had not sent his Prophet Nathan unto him, to awaken him,
who knows but that he might have slept in his guilt even unto Death? Besides,
as concerning sins quotidiani incursus, or sins of infirmity (as they are
commonly called) which are incident to those that are borne of God, as well as
unto others, the case is yet more evident; viz. that these, at least many of
them, are committed by them without any such inward reluctance, as the
Exposition now opposed suggesteth; and particularly those, of which they have
no knowledge, or sense, when they commit them. 4. (And lastly, to this) suppose
it were granted, that Men borne of God do not Sin but with inward reluctance,
yet that this is not the sense wherein the Apostle ascribes a non-Sinning unto
them, is evident from hence; viz. because certain it is, that the non-Sinning
here intended by him to be ascribed unto them, is such, which is appropriate to
them, and not communicable to wicked or unregenerate Men. But that Men
unregenerate, sin, and that frequently, with inward reluctance, is the frequent
acknowledgement of these Men themselves; and besides is of easy Deduction and
Observation from Romans 1. 32. Romans 2. 1. 5. etc. Nor is it, nor can it
reasonably, be denied by our Adversaries themselves.

4. When the Apostle says, that he that is borne of God does not commit. 27.
Sin, some understand it of committing Sin unto death, or with final
impenitency. This Exposition indeed, if it could be made to stand upright,
would bear the weight of the controversy depending alone. But it argues much
weakness for a Man, in an Exposition of Scripture to determine for his own
sense in a controversy or question, without giving a very substantial reason
of such his Exposition. Now I can meet with no reason at all from the Assertors
of this Exposition, for the confirmation of it. But reasons against it there
are these three at hand, and many more in comeing. 1. The Grammar or Letter of
the Phrase breaths not the least air of such a sense. 2. The Phrase of
committing Sin is no where in Scripture found in such a sense; I mean, to sin
with final impenitency, or unto death. The Authors of the Exposition have not
yet showed it, nor (I believe) ever will. 3. Nor does the Context, or Scope of
the place any ways invite, much less enforce, such an Exposition. The intent
and drift of the Apostle from ver. 3. even to the end of the Chapter, (as he
that does but run the Context over, may read) is not to show, or argue, whether
the Sons of God may possibly in time so degenerate, as to live sinfully, and
die impenitently; but to evince this, that those who claim the great Honor
and Privilege of being the children of God, cannot justify or make good this
claim, neither unto others, nor to themselves, but by an holy and Christian
life and conversation. Now it is one thing to argue or prove, who are the Sons
of God at present: another, whether, they, who are such at present, must of
necessity always so continue. The former, is the Apostles Theme in the
Context: the latter he is wholly silent unto. So then if by not Sinning, the
Argument which we have now upon answer, understands the non-committing of any
of these four kinds of sin, or a non-Sinning upon any of the terms explained,
the minor proposition is denied, which says, that whosoever is borne of God,
sins not: nor does the Apostle John affirm it (as has been clearly showed)
in any such sense.

If by Sins not, the Argument means, walks not ordinarily, or. 28.
customarily in any known way, or course, of sin; makes not (as it were) a
Trade or Occupation of sinning (which we have formerly proved to be the sense
of the Phrase, (...), in the Scriptures, and more particularly in the writings
of this Apostle Cap. 9. Sect. 11.
) the said minor proposition is granted, as to this clause: whosoever is borne
of God, Sins not. For that further clause in it, neither can Sin; this also,
as to the Scripture use of the words, can, and cannot, is very ambiguous, and
of doubtful signification. For, 1. a Man may be said to can, or to be able to
do a thing, when the thing is meet, or comely for him to do: and in
opposition hereunto, when a thing is uncomely or unmeet to be done by him, it
may be said of him (in Scripture Phrase) that he cannot do it. How then (says
Joseph to his mistrisse) CAN I do this great wickedness, and Sin against God
Genesis 39. 9
? which is as if he had plainly said, I cannot do it. So again: Can the
children of the bride-chamber mourn, (says Christ) as long as the Bridegroom
is with them Mat. 9. 15
? meaning, that it was an irrational or uncomely thing for them so to do; and
in this respect (says he) they cannot do it. Thus Exodus 8. 26. where our
English Translators read, It is not meet so to do, Ierom Translated it, Non
potest ita fieri, i. e. it cannot so be done. Thus also the Apostle Paul (to
spare other places) For we CAN do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8
etc. meaning, that it was a most unworthy, and unseemly thing for him to act
in any kind against the truth, or to the prejudice of the Gospel: and in this
respect he says that he could not do it See also, 1 Cor. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 21,
12 21 Gal. 4. 15. Luke 6. 42. Genesis 24. 50. 29, 8, etc.
. Secondly, a person may be said to can, or to be able to do such or such a
thing, when being otherwise provided of strength sufficient, He is under a
present disposition or inclination of mind and will to do it. In this sense
the Lord Christ is said to can, or to be able to have compassion on the
ignorant, Heb. 5. 2. and in opposition hereunto, when a Man wants such a
disposition, especially when a contrary disposition rules in him, it may (in
Scripture language) be said of him, that he cannot do it. Thus it is said of
the Lord Christ himself, that being in his own Country, He COVLD there do no
mighty work Mark 6. 5
; meaning that he had no disposition of mind or will hereunto (and this because
of the general unbelief of the People here, as one of the Evangelists
accounts) for otherwise his natural, or executive, power of doing mighty
works, was the same here, which it was in other places. So he demands of the
Pharisees, How CAN ye, being evil, speak good things Mat. 12. 34
. implying, that having a disposition in them contrary unto that, by which Men
are inclined to speak good things, they were as Men unable, and wanting Power,
to speak such things. Again, speaking to the same Generation of Men, he
demands, Why do ye not understand my speech? and answers his own question
thus: even because ye CANNOT hear my Word Ioh. 8. 43
; meaning, that they (...) a mervellous averse disposition as to the hearing or
minding of it; which he plainly signifies in the words immediately following:
ye are of your Father the Devil, etc. i. e. you are of a devilish
disposition, enemies unto God, and goodness: and this renders you unable to
hear, i. e. duly to mind and consider my words. This signification of the
word, cannot, is most frequent in Scripture. See further upon this account,
Genesis 37. 4. Rev. 2. 2. Mat. 20. 22. Mar. 9. 39. Luke 11. 7. 14. 20. etc.
Thirdly, the word, cannot, sometimes notes only the difficulty of a thing to be
performed. In this sense our Savior, approving that saying of his Disciples,
It is good not to marry, says thus* All Men CANNOT receive this saying, Mat.
19. 11
. etc. meaning that it was very difficult for some Men to acknowledge the
goodness of that saying in reference to themselves, or to refrain marrying.
For that it was not, or is not, simply impossible for any Man in this sense to
receive the said saying. or to judge the forbearance of marriage good for him,
and to forbear accordingly, is in self evident; and besides, may be inferred
from these words of our Savior following: and there be Eunuchs, which have
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake. He that is able to
receive it, (i. e. whose heart serves him to encounter, and engage against the
difficulty, and shall overcome it) let him receive it: i. e. Let him forbear
to marry. For concerning those. of whom he says, that they have made
themselves Eunuchs for, etc. evident it is, that he means not by them,
either such, who by nature are indisposed to marriage, nor such, upon whom an
incapacity in this kind has been forced (for of these he had spoken plainly
in the former part of the Verse;) but of such, who had overruled and
vanquished their inclinations and desires that way, by the weight and great
import of spiritual considerations, proper to obtain a conquest of that
nature. In this sense also Amaziah the Priest of Bethel says concerning the
Prophet Amos, that the Land is not able to [or, cannot] bear all his words
Amos 7. 10
: i. e. can hardly bear them, without falling soul up on him because of them.
So when our Savior says: A City that is set on an Hill, CANNOT be hid Mat. 5.
14
, he does not import an absolute impossibility of the hiding of it (for
doubtless there may be means found out to hide a City so situate, as well as
another standing in a valley,) but only a difficulty thereof See also Genesis 32.
12 Genesis 45. 1. Exodus 7. 21. 24.
. Fourthly, the Word or Phrase we speak of, cannot, sometimes imports only a
present incapacity in a Person, for the doing of a thing, when there is a
remote Principle or Power in him notwithstanding to do it. Thus God Himself
says to his Prophet Ezekiel, Thou art not sent to a People of a strange
speech, or of an hard language, whose words thou CAN NOT understand, Ezekiel. 3.
6
: implying that there were some People, whose words he could not understand,
viz. de praesenti, for the present: not but that there was a Principle of
reason and understanding in him, by the improvement whereof accordingly, he
might come in time to be very able to understand them. Thus it is said of the
Egyptian Magitians, that they COVLD NOT STAND before Moses [viz. at present]
because of the Boyles Exodus 9. 11
: but these notwithstanding, they were in a capacity of standing before him
another time as, viz. when they should be healed of their Boyles. Thus, it is
said that the Children of Israel COVLD NOT stand before their enemies 1 Judge 7.
12
, viz. whilst Achans sin was unpunished amongst them: yet were they remotely
capable, not only of standing before their enemies, but of vanquishing, yea and
making their enemies, fly before them. Fifthly, (and lastly) the Phrase,
cannot frequently imports an absolute impotency, or incapacity in Persons in
reference to the doing of such, or such a thing. Thus our Savior (speaking of
His sheep.) No Man [or, none] CAN take them out of my hand Ioh. 10. 29
: i. e. either has, or ever shall have any such Power, whereby to take them
out of my hand. And so Gamaliel to his fellows: But if this Counsel or Work
be of God, ye CANNOT overthrow it Acts 5. 39
, etc. i. e. you are in no capacity at all, either present, or remore, to
overthrow it. It were easy to multiply instances of this Signification.

Now if the clause, cannot sin, in the Argument propounded, be understood. 29.
according to any of the four first signification mentioned of the word,
cannot, both the Propositions are false: if according to the fifth and last,
the major is true, but the minor false. The major Proposition was this: He that
sins not, NEITHER CAN SIN, cannot fall away from his Faith. 1. If by the
denial of a Power to sin, in this Proposition (which that clause, neither can
sin, imports) be meant nothing else, but an unmeetnesse, or uncomlinesse for
a Man to Sin, it is a clear case that He that cannot sin, may, notwithstanding
such a want of Power to sin, very possibly fall away from his Faith. For
thousands may do, yea and do, things very unmeet and uncomely to be done by
them. 2. If by a denial of the said Power in the Proposition, be meant a
present indisposition or incapacity in a Man to Sin by reason of the contrary
disposition of holiness prevailing in Him, in this sense also He that cannot
Sin, may very possibly fall away from His Faith. For He, in whom a disposition
of holiness is predominant at present, may very possibly by degrees, and
through a frequency and custom of contrary actions (if not by an impetuous and
sudden turn also of Heart within Him,) divest Himself of that honorable
habit, and put on the vile garments of Looseness and Profaneness in the stead.
3. If by, cannot Sin, the Argument means can hardly Sin, or cannot Sin
without difficulty (which was the third signification of the word, cannot)
neither will this sense give any color of truth to the said Proposition. For
He that can hardly Sin, or not Sin without difficulty, may yet possibly Sin:
and consequently, such an inability to Sin notwithstanding, fall away from his
Faith. 4. If by cannot Sin, the Argument imports, only a present incapacity of
sinning in the Person, not excluding a remote capacity in Him hereunto, and
such as may in time, by means suitable, be reduced into act, evident it is,
that the Person, this inability to Sin notwithstanding, may possibly fall away
from his Faith.

Again, 2. according to all these Significations and Importances of the. 30.
clause, cannot Sin, in the said Syllogism, the other Proposition also is
false, which says, that whosoever is borne of God sins not, neither CAN
SIN. For, 1. He that is borne of God, may very possibly do that, which is
uncomely and unmeet for Him to do. 2. May be able to do that by the
superveening, or contracting of another habit upon Him, which by reason of a
contrary habit prevailing upon Him for a time, He cannot do. 3. He may
possibly do that, which only is hard or difficult for Him to do. 4. (And
lastly) He may have a remote capacity in Him of doing that in the future, and
in time, (and consequently, may do it) which at present He is under an
inability to do. Therefore it is a clear case, that there are four several
Significations of the Word, cannot, (and these frequent in Scripture) wherein
both the Propositions, in the argument now under canvass, is false.

If the said argument understands the Phrase, cannot Sin, according to the. 31.
fifth and last import mentioned of the Word, cannot, wherein it sounds an
utter and absolute incapacity, or impossibility; though in this sense the major
Proposition be granted, viz. that he that does not Sin, nor can Sin, cannot
fall away from his Faith, yet the minor is tardy, which says (as we lately
heard) whosoever is borne of God Sins not, neither can Sin. For He that is
borne of God, is in no such incapacity of Sinning (of Sinning I mean, in the
sense formerly asserted to the Scripture in hand) which amounts to an absolute
impossibility for Him so to Sin. But because this seems to be the sense
intended in the argument, and the minor Proposition (in this sense) to be built
upon the Scripture in hand, let us consider, whether the reason, which this
Scripture assigns for the said assertion, Whosoever is borne of God, cannot
sin, does necessarily enforce such a sense thereof. The tenor of the whole
Verse is this: Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin: for his seed
remains in him: and he cann^^ sin, because he is borne of God. Here are two
Propositions or Assertions laid down; and a reason given of either of them
respectively. The former Proposition is this; Whosoever is borne of God, does
not commit sin: The reason hereof, is: for his seed remains in him: The
latter Proposition, this; Whosoever is borne of God, cannot sin: The reason
hereof is: because he is borne of God. The sense, and difference, of the two
Propositions (according to what we have argued about the place hitherto, and
what we judge) is this: (...), etc. every one that has been borne of God,
stnneth not, i. e. whosoever has by the Word and Spirit of God been made
partaker of the Divine Nature, so as to resemble God in the frame and
constitution of his Heart and Soul, does not under such a frame or change of
Heart as this, make a Trade or Practice of sinning, or walk in any course of
inordinatenesse in the World: yea (says He, in the latter Proposition) every
such Person, does not only, or simply, refrain sinning (in such a sense) but
He cannot sin, i. e. He has a strong and potent disposition in him, which
carries Him another way; or He has a strong antipathy or averseness of Heart
and Soul, against all sin, especially against all such kind of sinning. Now
the reason (says the Apostle) why such a Person commits not Sin (in the
sense explained,) is, because his seed, [the seed of God, by, or of, which He
was borne of Him] (...). remains in Him, i. e. (according to the frequent
signification of the Word (...), to abide, or remain, in the Writings of this
Apostle) is, or has an actual and present being, or residence in Him. And
that in this place it does not signify any perpetual remaining or abiding, no
nor any abiding with relation to the future, is evident; because the abiding of
the seed here spoken of, is given as the reason, why He that is borne of God,
does not commit sin: i. e. does not at present walk in any course of known
sin. Now nothing, in respect of any future Permanency, or continuance of being,
can be looked upon as a cause of any present effect, but only in respect of the
present being or residence of it. The reason why the Soul moves* and acts the
Body to day, is not because it will move or act it to morrow, or because it is
in the Body to day upon such terms, that it will be in it to morrow also; much
less because it is an immortal substance, or the like, but simply because it
is now, or this day, in the Body. So the reason why the Angels at this day do
the Will of God, is not because they have such a Principle of Holiness, or
Obedience vested in them, which they cannot put off, or lose to Eternity, but
because they have such a Principle, as we speak of, (of Holiness, and
Obedience) residing in them at the present. Therefore when John assigns, the
remaining of the seed of God in Him, that is borne of him, for the reason, why
He does not commit sin, certain it is, that by this remaining of the seed, He
means nothing else but the present residence, or abode thereof in this Person.
And if his intent had been, either to assert, or imply, a perpetual residence
of this seed in Him that is borne of God, it had been much more proper for Him
to have reserved it, for a reason of the latter Proposition, viz. why He that
is borne of God, cannot sin (especially according to their sense, who by,
cannot sin, understand, can never sin) then to subjoyne it as a reason of the
former. For though the future continuance of a thing in being, can be no reason
(as has been said) of a present effect, yet may it well be a Ground or Reason
of the continuance of a present effect.

Now that the word (...), to remain, or abide, frequently signifies
(especially in the Writings of this Apostle) only a present residence, or
being,. 32.
whether of a Person, or Thing, without any reference unto, or implication of,
a future, appears by many instances. But ye know him (says our Savior to
his Disciples, speaking of the Spirit) (...), i* e. because he remains, [or
abideth] with you, and shall be in you. Here the latter clause, and shall be in
you, will be found a mere tautology, if the other Phrase abiding with them,
imports a perpetual residence, or inbeing. In the same Chapter, Verse 25.
where the original has it, (...), i. e. remaining [or abiding] with you, our
English Translation renders it, being yet PRESENT with you. So where this
Apostle says, that he that loves not his Brother, (...), abides in death 1
Ioh. 3* 14
, the meaning is, that such a Man is in an estate of Death or condemnation; not
that he will, much less of necessity must, abide for any space of time after,
least of all, for ever, in that estate. For then it would follow, that whoever
at any time did not truly love his Brother, never after became a Child of God.
Which saying how insupportable it is to the greatest part of those, who say
they believe, yea and do believe indeed, any man's first thoughts may
sufficiently determine. It is familiar with John (says a late Writer, from
Cameron, and Hugo Grotius) to use the Word (...), which properly signifies to
remain, for the Verb Substantive, to be Familiare Johanni (...) ponere
simpliciter pro, esse; ut Ioh. 5. 38, and 15. 11. and 1 Ep. 2. 6. 10. and cap.
3. 15. and 2. Ep. 2. Et alibi. Edward Leigh. Critic. Sacra. p. 259. in verbo,
(...).
.

Besides, that in the place in hand, it must needs signify, only a present
abode, or being, not a future, or perpetual, is evident from hence; because
such a signification of it, would render a sense altogether inconsistent with
the plain scope of the Apostle in the Context, which is, to exhort Christians
unto Righteousness and love of the Brethren. Now it is contrary to all reason,
yea to common sense it self, to signify unto those, whom we admonish, exhort,
and persuade to any duty, any such thing, which imports an ablolute certainty,
or necessity of their doing it, whether they take care, or use any means for
the doing it. or no. And a clear case it is, that the certainty of a
perpetual remaining of the seed of God in those, that are borne of him,
imports a like certainty of their perpetual performance of the duties,
whereunto they exhorted.

If it be here objected and said; yea* but the seed, of which those that are.
33.
borne of God, are begotten, is said to be an immortal, or incorruptible seed
1 Pet. 1. 23
: and therefore cannot perish or decay in those, who are begotten of it, or in
whom it ever takes place. I answer;

1. That seed, which the Holy Ghost affirms to be, not corruptible, but
incorruptible, is expressly said to be, the Word of God Ibidem.
. Now certain it is, that the Word of God is not therefore said to be
immortal or incorruptible, because it cannot be lost by those, who once
receive it, or in whose Heart it has been once sown; but partly because it is
in the Nature and Essence of it incorruptible, in respect whereof, though all
the World, who are now partakers of it, should reject and cast it out of their
Hearts, so that it were no where to be found under Heaven, yet it would be in
the Nature and Essence of it, every ways the same, and suffer no alteration or
change hereby at all; partly also, because it is endued with such an excellent
virtue or property, that it is able to derive and confer immortality and
incorruption upon those, who are begotten of it, yea and will actually derive
and confer these glorious Privileges upon them, if they suffer not the spirit
of this Heavenly Birth to be extinguished and quenched in them, before the
season of the actual collation thereof comes. For as that seed, which is
corruptible, is not therefore termed corruptible, because it may be transferred
or removed from the subject or soil, wherein it remains at present, but
because, according to the Nature and Elementary constitution of it, it may be
corrupted, and suffer a change of being; as also because it is naturally apt to
produce and yield such bodies or things, which according to the course of
Nature are corruptible likewise: in like manner the seed of the Word of God is
not therefore said to be an incorruptible seed, because it cannot be taken
from, or forsaken by, those, in whom it has a residence for the present; but
because, whether it be taken, or not taken from, whether it be forsaken, or not
forsaken by, these, it retains its proper Nature, which is to be
incorruptible. For it is merely extrinsecall and accidental to the Word of
God, to be either embraced, or refused* to be either retained, or let go or
lost, by Men: nor do any of these things make the least alteration in the
nature of it, no more then the taking up, or removing a corn of Wheat, or of
any other corruptible grain, from the Ground or Field, wherein at present it
rests, or the letting of it there alone; alters the Nature or Essential
Properties thereof. But,

2. It may be some question, whether by the seed of God in the Scripture. 34.
in hand, said to remain in him that is borne of him, be meant precisely the
Word of God, and not rather that which the Scripture elsewhere calls, the
Divine Nature, which is the proper effect of the Word of God, according to that
of Peter; Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises, that
by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature 2 Pet. 1. 4
, etc. together with that of the Apostle James: Of his own will begat he us
with the word of truth James 1* 18
, etc. If you ask me, what this Divine Nature is; I answer, it is a certain
Heavenly impression made by the Gospel, in, or upon the Heart or Soul of a Man;
or a Divine Principle, Quality or Disposition wrought in him by the Word of
God, by which he resembles God Himself, and is effectually inclined to walk
and act according to those Principles of Righteousness and Holiness, in all
things appertaining unto him to do, by which God Himself walks and ^acteth
in the World. If you ask me further; but why do I conceive that by the seed
of God (in the Scripture in hand) the Apostle should mean such an impression,
or disposition as this; I answer; because some such thing must of necessity be
meant by it, which is very spiritfull, vigorous, and active in turning the
Heart and Soul of a Man against sin. First, the metaphorical expression of
seed, imports as much; I mean, somewhat that is very spirituous, full of
Vigor, Power, and Efficacy, (in the kind of it.) Natural Philosophy and
experience jointly teach, that it is the nature of Seed to be full of spirits,
and thereby exceedingly vigorous and operative. Secondly, the effect here
ascribed to it, the keeping or preserving of the Man, in whom it remains, from
sinning, which requires a Principle of very great Strength and Power to effect,
implies the same. Now such a Principle, genius, or quality in a Man, as the
Holy Ghost calls, the Divine Nature, may well be conceived to be very
spiritfull and vigorously operative according to the kind and tendency of it,
in which respect it is frequently termed, Spirit; and consequently, to be
sufficiently active and powerful to preserve its subject from sinning. Yea,
our Apostle, in assigning the reason of his latter Assertion in this place,
which is, that he that is borne of God, cannot Sin, the reason whereof he
alleges to be this, because he is borne of God, supposes the seed here
spoken of (whatsoever is meant by it) to be so actuous and powerful, that it
does, not only actually and de facto preserve him, in whom it remains, from
Sinning, but also renders him impotent or unable to sin. For this reason,
because he is borne of God, is the same in effect, and for substance, with that
of the former assertion; for his seed abides in him: only it does somewhat
more emphatically import, that the reason why the Seed of God remaining in a
Man, is so potently exclusive of sin in the same subject, with it, is the
absolute Holiness, or most perfect hatred of sin, which is in God Himself, of
whom the Person is begotten again, by such his seed. As the reason why a Lion
has courage, strength, and other like leonine Properties, is, because he came
of a Lion, a Creature naturally endued with the same Properties. But whatsoever
is here meant by the Seed of God, whether the Word of God, or the Divine Nature
(so notioned as has been described) evident it is, by what has been argued,
that no inseparablenesse of it from the present subject, (nor consequently any
impossibility of falling away from Faith,) can be inferred from any thing
spoken of it, as attributed to it, in this Place.

There is only one objection more (as far as I am able to apprehend) that. 35.
lies with any seemingnesse of strength against the Premises. The tenor
hereof is this. If the Seed of God (whatever it be) remaining in a Man
regenerate, works in him the greatest and strongest antipathy against, or
alienation and abhorrency of mind and affection from, sin, that can lightly be
imagined (which has been granted all along in the traverse of the Scripture in
hand) how is it possible that such a man should fall away, especially totally
and finally, from his Faith? It is no ways reasonable to suppose, that it is
possible for a Man so to fall away from his Faith, without sinning, no nor yet
without sinning very grievously: nor is it much more reasonable (if not as
unreasonable altogether) to suppose, that a Man may sin, and that grievously,
who has the greatest and strongest antipathy against sin, the deepest
alienation and abhorrency of mind and will from sin, that lightly can be
conceived. Therefore how is it possible for him that cannot sin (even in this
sense) to fall away totally or finally? I answer,

He that has the greatest and strongest antipathy against sin, that flesh and
blood is capable of, yet retains that essential character, or property of a
creature, mutability, which supposes a possibility (at least) of Sinning; if
not in sensu composito, i. e. whilst such an antipathy remains in its full
vigor and strength; yet in sensu Diviso, i. e. in case, or when, this antipathy
shall abate and decline. As though Water made hot to the highest degree of heat
whereof the nature of it is capable, cannot possible cool any thing, whilst
it remains under such a degree of heat, yet this hinders not but that it may
in time, its present heat notwithstanding, return to its natural coldness,
and then cool other things: in like manner, a Man may by the Spirit of Grace
and Regeneration, be carried up to a very effectual and potent antipathy of
mind and will against Sin, by means whereof, he is in no Capacity or
Possibility of sinning, (in the sense formerly declared) whilst it continues
thus effectual and potent: but the present effectualnesse or Potency of it, in
a subject that is mutable, and successively capable of both contraries, is no
sufficient Argument to Prove, that therefore it must needs always continue
Effectual, or Potent, in the same degree. And if it may abate or fall one
degree, why not another? and if two, why not all; considering that all and
every Degree hereof is but of one and the same Nature?

If it be here said, yea but such a strong antipathy against Sin, as you
suppose. 36.
and grant in Regenerate Men, is inconsistent with any such abatement, or
declining, cannot reasonably be looked upon as capable of any Falling; Sinking,
or Losing so much as one Degree of its strength, in as much as such a Falling
or Losing as this, cannot be without Sin: and till there be such a declining as
this in that Holy Principle we speak of, the Person is supposed to be full of
the hatred and abomination of Sin. Therefore unless he shall be supposed
capable of Sinning even in sensu composito, i. e. whilst He is yet under the
greatest and most perfect hatred and abhorrency of Sin, (which seems to be
dura suppositio, and to need good Proof) he must be supposed incapable of any
declining at all in such his Principle, and consequently much more incapable of
falling away, either totally, or finally. To this I answer,

1. That according to the known Sense and Principles of our adversaries
themselves in the cause depending, Faith in Men Regenerate, or the Grace of
Regeneration it self, to what Degree or Perfection soever raised or advanced in
the subject, may notwithstanding very possibly decay or decline, though not
totally, or in all the Parts or Degrees of it, yet in some, yea in many; yea so
far, that in appearance it may seem utterly and totally lost. If so, then
every Particular Grace in such a Person, may possibly abate in the strength,
and fall from the height of it: and consequently that antipathy or hatred
against Sin, which is in him, how perfect soever it be, may lose ground also,
and abate of its perfection. Therefore,

2. When we suppose, or grant, a strong antipathy against Sin in those that are
borne of God, we do not suppose withal, either this antipathy to be
un-impaireable, or any such Principle, which cannot decline in the strength and
Power of it; or that it can be impaired or decline, without Sin in him, who
suffers an impairement of it to be made in him. When we suppose the greatest
antipathy against Sin in a Man, that flesh and blood is lightly capable of, we
do not hereby suppose him without the reach of temptation, or a Man not
subject to incogitancies, forgetfulness, and other humane frailties. We may
very well (and ought to) suppose Solomon to have been the wisest of Men; and
yet suppose him withal, even in the height and excellency of his wisdom, to
have been a man capable, or under a possibility, of doing weakly, or foolishly.
Nemo omnibus horis sapit. There is no acquired habit, or created Principle
whatsoever, seated in the heart or soul of a Man, that does at any time act
him, or cause him to act congruously to it, without the actual intention of
the mind upon, and the like concurrence of the will with, the action. Again,
2. most certain it is, that the mind of a Man, being a finite faculty, cannot
intend plurality of objects, actions, or occasions, at once, or at one and the
same time. 3. As certain it is, as either of the former, that neither the
mind, nor will of a Man, are compelled or necessitated by any habit,
inclination, or disposition whatsoever, always, or, (indeed) at any time, to
intend them, or their motions and actings, or to concur with them herein* but
are in some degree (at least) of liberty and power, to tu^ne aside from them,
to several other objects and occasions, as they please. It is true, habits and
inclinations, especially when they are much grown and rooted in the Soul by
frequent and long-continued actions, have a great Power over Men to entice and
draw them into a frequent repetition of the same kind of action, by which they
were first introduced, and whereunto they have so long prevailed with such Men
to accustom themselves. And in respect of this Power it is, that the Scripture
so frequently ascribes a kind of moral impotency unto Men to act contrary to
the tenor of such actions, whereunto they have much accustomed themselves, yea
or to suspend or forbear them upon opportunities: and (upon the same account)
represents Persons as servants, as in subjection and bondage to those
respective kinds of actions, or courses, whereunto they have voluntarily inured
themselves for any considerable time. Of this notion are such passages and
sayings as these. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever commits Sin
(i. e. frequently and customarily, as we formerly interpreted the import of the
Phrase in the Writings of the Apostle John Cap. 9 Sect. 11.
) is the SERVANT of Sin Io^. 8. 34.
. So again, Know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants
to obey, his SERVANTS ye are, whom ye obey, whether it be, Rom 6. 16.
etc. So also CAN the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil Jer. 13. 23.
. Of like consideration is that also of our Savior: A good Tree CANNOT bring
forth evil fruits: neither CAN a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit Mat. 7.
18.
. (To omit many others.) But, 4. (And lastly) when the Scripture supposes, or
asserts a moral impotency in Men (as in the passages now cited, with their
fellows) either wholly to cease from their long-accustomed actions, or to act
contrary to them* it neither supposes, nor asserts, a natural, simple, or
absolute impotency in respect of either. For it is the Nature, Property, and
Condition of all habits or created Principles in Men whatsoever, by
discontinuance or long suspension of their appropriate actions, to languish,
and abate of their wonted strength and vigor, and in time, wholly to expire. So
then, it remaining still in the Power of the mind and will of a Man, even
under the greatest captivity or subjection unto any Habit, Disposition, or
Principle whatsoever, whether sinful, or holy, to suspend and discontinue (as
has been proved) their proper actings respectively, by denying or withholding
their concurrence with them in order toward such actions, evident it is, that
they have Power, and may shake and weaken every such Habit, disposition, or
Principle in themselves to what degree they desire, yea and in time, wholly
enervate, dissipate, and expel them. Therefore it is no dura a suppositio, no
hard supposition, to suppose, that a Person invested with the strongest
antipathy against sin, whereof he is capable, (especially in the State and
Condition of mortality) may notwithstanding, even in sensu composito, i. e.
This antipathy standing, either do that which is sinful, but especially omit,
or neglect the doing of that, which is his duty, yea and of great concernment
likewise unto him, to do.

Thus we have at last, fully and clearly (we suppose) acquitted that Scripture,
1 John 3. 9. more vehemently suspected and charged, then all his fellows, with
confederacy against that Doctrine, which affirms a Possibility of a total and
final defection in the Saints.

Another Scripture has the same imputation cast upon it for speaking. 37.
only thus: My Father, which gave them me, is greater then all: and no Man is
able to take them out of my Fathers Hand Ioh. 10. 29
. From hence it is argued and conceived, that God ingageth himself with his
Omnipotency to preserve the Saints or Sheep of Christ, from either total, or
final, apostasy; and consequently, that it is unpossible but that they should
be preserved. But to this place of Scripture a sufficient answer has been
given already in this Chapter Sect. 18. 19, 20, etc.
: where we showed, that the engagement of the mighty Power of God for the
Protection and safeguarding of the Saints, as such, or remaining such, against
all adverse Power whatsoever, is frequently asserted in Scripture, but no where
for the compelling, or necessitating, of them to Persevere or continue such.
Nor is there the least intimation of any such thing in the Text before us. And
yet here I shall further add (in reference unto it.)

That by the tenor and carriage of the Context it appears, 1. That that
security, for which our Savior ingageth the greatness of His Fathers Power
unto his Sheep, is promised or ascertained unto them, not in order to the
effecting or procuring their final perseverance, but rather by way of toward
to it. 2. That this promise of eternal safety made by Christ unto His Sheep,
does not relate to their estate or condition in this present World, but to that
of the World to come. My Sheep (says he, verse 27. hea^ my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me. In which expressions of hearing his voice, and
following him, he intimates, or includes their perseverance Intellige autem
loqui Christum de ovi^us, qu^ tales sunt ac ma^ent* Hag. Grot* in locum.
, as appears by the words immediately following. Verse 28. And I give unto
them etenall life. This gift of his presupposes the final perseverance of
those to whom it is given. It follows: and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand. In these words he seems further to
explain, how, and in what sense he calls that, life eternal, which he
promises to confer upon them; as viz. that by the eternalnesse of it, he does
not only mean, such a constitution or condition of it, which secureth it from
perishing or dissolving, in respect, or by means, of any intrinsecall cause,
(upon which account the lives they live in the flesh, are perishable) but which
secureth it likewise against all external means, or power, that may seem to
threaten or endanger it. And for a further confirmation, that the life which he
promises unto his Sheep, hearing his voice and following him [viz. as was
said, perseveringly] is eternal (in the best, largest, most comprehensive,
most desirable sense of the word) he subjoynes the words in hand, Verse 29. My
Father which gave them me, is greater, viz. in power, then all: and none is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand; as if he should have said, God
Himself, by whose grace they became my Sheep and followed me, and whose power
is abundantly sufficient for the work, would maintain and make good unto them
to the uttermost, that life, which I shall give unto them, against all dangers,
all enemies, all adversary powers whatsoever. This being the natural and clear
disposition of the Context, it is a plain case that here is not the least air
or breathing of any engagement of the great power of God, to bring about the
perseverance of the Saints upon those terms of infallibility, or necessity,
which are so much contended for.

Another Scripture much entreated in the behalf of the Doctrine of
perseverance,. 38.
is that of the Evangelist John concerning our Savior: having loved his own,
which were in the World, he loved them unto the end Ioh. 13. 1.
. Out of this light some draw this darkness: Therefore whom Christ once loves,
He loves always, or unto the end. Which inference (they suppose) is further
strengthened by that of the Prophet: For I am the Lord: I change not Mal. 3. 6.
. I Answer;

1. From the passage in John, there can nothing more be concluded (in Reference
to the Question in hand) then (by way of immediate deduction) the greatness
and constancy of Christ's love toward such of His Disciples, who continued in
their obedience and faithfulness unto him (for the Evangelist, I suppose, did
not intend Judas amongst those, whom Christ loved unto the end) and, 2. (By way
of Proportion, or Rational consequence from this deduction) that the love of
Christ is great and constant toward all those, who persevere in love and
faithfulness unto him. This is the constant Doctrine of the Scriptures; but no
ways concerns the present Dispute. Yet for the pass^ge it self, if it has any
aspect at all upon it, it is rather by way of favor and countenance to that
side, against which, then to that, for which, it is commonly alleged. For if
the love of Christ toward His Disciples, unto the end, necess^rily supposes,
or requires, the concurrent continuance of the same affection in them toward
him, it plainly follows* that if men shall draw back from Him, His Soul will
have no further pleasure or delight in them. And this indeed was the express
Doctrine of that Man of God, who was sent to meet King Asa, and the People with
him, upon the late Presence of God with them against their enemies. O Asa, and
all Juda, and Benjamin; hear ye me: The Lord is with you, while ye be with
Him: and if ye seek Him, He will PE FOUND of yo^, but IF YE FORSAKE HIM, He
will forsake you 2 Chronicles. 15. 2
. Which clearly supposes, 1. A possibility of their forsaking God, who for a
time are truly and really with Him: 2. A certainty of Gods forsaking those, who
forsake Him.

2. It is not here said, that Christ having loved His own, loved them unto the.
39.
end, of their lives, or days; but, to the end, viz. of his life and abode in
the World; the emphaticall and clear meaning of the place, being thus, that to
declare the exceeding greatness and mervellous constancy of his affection
toward His Disciples, and that whilst they were yet in the World, [and so
subject to many weaknesses and infirmities, which might seem to render them
less lovely unto Him, then those that were made perfect Heb. 12. 23.
, as the Apostle speaks, thorough death] He did not cease to manifest His Care
and Love toward them, no not at such a time or season, wherein the most
affectionate and tender Parents, are wont to forget, and lay aside the care and
thoughts of their dearest children, as viz. when he knew, and was very sensible
of a most hideous and grievous storm and tempest of death hanging over his
Head, and even now ready to fall upon him. At such a time as this he expressed
His Love to them, and Care over them, as appears partly by that
condescentious action of his in washing their feet, (which immediately
follows in this Chapter) partly by that large and serious Discourse which he
had with them, and made unto them, in the three following Chapters; partly also
by that most affectionate and Heavenly Prayer for them, wherein he recommended
them unto his Fathers Love and Care. Cap. 17. But that by the end, unto which
he is said to have loved his Disciples, is not meant the end of their lives,
but of his own, is the common sense of Expositors. He loved them even to the
Death, which He suffered for them (say our English Divines in their Annotations
upon the place) and so uncessantly. Calvin likewise (not to mention any more)
plainly enough intimates the same sense. Nor is it doubtful (says he upon the
place) but that even now He bears the same affection, which He retained in the
very instant of Death Neque ^nim dubium est, quin cundem nunc quoque affectum
gerat, quem in ipso mortis articulo retinuit.
. So that in this passage of Scripture there is neither color, nor shadow, of
any thing for the final Perseverance of the Saints, but only for the
perseverance of Christ's Love toward them whilst they persevere, which indeed
may be substantially proved from hence, if it were any part of the Question.

3. For the words of Malachi: I am the Lord: I change not; from which it. 40.
Read more of this subject. Cap. 4. Sect. 30 31* etc. of this Discourse.
is wont to be argued, that when God once loves a person, he never cease to
love him, because this must needs argue a changeableness in him, in respect of
his affection; and consequently, that the Saints cannot fall away finally from
his Grace; I answer,

1. By the tenor of this arguing, it would as well follow, that in case God
should at any time withdraw his love or favor from a Nation, or body of
People, which he sometimes favored or loved, he should be changed. But that no
such change of dispensation as this toward one and the same people, or Nation,
argues any change at all in God, at least any such change which he disclaimeth
as incompetent to him, is evident from those instances (without number)
recorded in Scripture, of such a different dispensation of his, toward sundry
Nations, and more especially toward the Jews, to whom sometimes he gave
peace, sometimes he consumed them with wars, stirring up enemies against them;
sometimes he gave them plenty, other-while he exercised them with famine, and
scarcity of all things: sometimes he made them the head, and sometimes again
the tail, of the Nations round about them. Therefore neither the
changeableness, nor unchangeablenesse of God, are to be estimated or measured,
either by any variety, or uniformity, of ^ispensation toward one and the same
object; and consequently, for him to express himself, as this day, toward a
person, Man or Woman, as if he intended to save them, or that he really intends
to save them, and should on the morrow (as the alteration in the interim may
be, or however, may be supposed, in these persons) express himself to the
contrary, as that he verily intends to destroy them, would not argue or imply
the least change or alteration in him. Yea, when as in one hour he conferred
upon the lapsed Angels the greatest happiness they were capable of, and in
the next hour (perhaps sooner) there sin interveening, he cast them out of his
sight into the greatest misery, this argued no change, or shadow of change, or
turning, in God. Therefore,

2. That unchangeablenesse, which the Scriptures, or God Himself in. 41.
the Scriptures asserts unto Himself, is to be considered only in respect of
his Essence, Attributes, and Decrees, and not in respect of any constancy, or
samenesse of tenor in his dispensations toward the same Creatures, whether
they be changed, or no. First God is unchangeable in his Essence, or simple
Being: in respect of this, nothing can be added to him, nothing can be taken
from him, nothing can be altered, or made otherwise, with Him, in Him, or about
Him, then now it is, or was, from eternity. This unchangeablenesse in him the
Prophet David contemplated, in this his address to him: Of old thou have laid
the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy Hand. They
shall perish, but thou shall endure: yea all of them shall wax old like a
Garment, as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end Psalm. 102. 25, etc.
. Secondly, God is unchangeable likewise in respect of his attributes (which
are all founded in His Nature, Essence, or simple Being) so that (for example)
he is not more wise at one time, and less wise at an other, not stronger at
one time, and weaker at another, nor better at one time, and worse at another;
though it is true* he may show more wisdom (or, to speak more properly, he may
show his Wisdom more, i. e. more plainly and perspicuously, as unto Men) in one
contriveance, or Providentiall Dispensation, then in another, and in this
sense, he may show more Power, and so more goodness, at one time, then at
another. Yet this different expression of himself according to the different
natures and imports of his Attributes respectively, does not argue any
changeableness at all in these Attributes. As a Man may be as strong, when he
acts little or nothing, with his strength, as when in any action he exerts or
puts forth the uttermost of it: and so may be of as loving and sweet a
disposition, when according to the exigency of his calling, and conscience, he
most severely punishes the same Persons, for their misdemeanors, whom he
sometimes honored and loved, whilst he judged them virtuous, as he was,
whilst he yet honored and loved them. When a Judge, who is of a sweet nature,
and loving disposition toward all Men, considered as Men, especially as good
Men, shall, according to the Laws, whereunto he is sworn, and the equity of
the Case, award a Sentence of Death against one, or more of them, this no ways
argues, or supposes, any alteration or change in his goodness, or sweetness
of disposition; he may be, nay it is like he is, the same Man, in respect of
these lovely qualifications or indowments, even when* and whilst, he executes
such a Judiciary Act of severity, which he was before; yea and may still love
the Persons of these Men, whom he has condemned to die, considered as Men, as
much as he did before their delinquency. In like manner, in case God shall
destroy with eternal death such Men or Women, whom he sometimes truly loved
and respected deerly, this does not necessarily argue the least change or
alteration in any attribute of his whatsoever, as either Love, Goodness,
Mercy, etc. viz. in case these Persons, having been formerly faithful and
obedient unto him, have since apostatized, and died impenitently. Nay if God
should not destroy such persons in such cases, or upon such a supposition, it
would argue a manifest change in some of his Attributes, as Severity, hatred of
sin, truth, etc. yea (happily) if the matter be narrowly considered, even in his
Love, or Goodness it self. For if we judge it any part or property of the
Love, or goodness, of God toward goodness, and good Men, to put so great and
gracious a difference between them, and between wickedness and wicked Men, as
to reward the former with eternal glory, the latter, with eternal shame, and
misery, and that he has at any time expressed his love and goodness in this
kind; evident it is, that in case he should at any time not punish persevering
Apostates (which are the wickedest of Men) with eternal Death, it would argue
an alteration or change in those Attributes of his we speak of. Therefore to
reason thus: if God should love a Man to day, and hate him to morrow, it would
argue a strange inconstancy or mutability in God, or in His Love, is a very
inconsiderate and weak reasoning. For the constancy or unchangeablenesse of the
Love of God, does not stand in His constant loving the same Person, or Ob(...)
materially considered, but only as considered formally, i. e. as rem(...) the
same morally, or in loveliness, which it was, when he first loved it. Julian
the Professor, and Julian the Apostate, are the same Person, or Object,
materially considered; but in a formal consideration they are two, and these
very different. In like manner the Angels, in the integrity of their Creation,
and in the guilt of their transgression, are one and the same Object,
materially considered; but formally they differ as much as light and darkness.
And to argue, that unless God should always love the same Persons, materially
considered, whom He once, or at any time, loved, he should be mutable in his
love, necessarily supposes, either that God hated the lapsed Angels, whilst
they were yet Holy, and in the glory and beauty of their Creation, or else that
he now loves them in their apostasy. The truth is, that should God always love
the same Person, or Persons, though morally distinguished from themselves, and
of righteous become wicked and abominable, this would clearly argue a
mutability in his affection, as it would in the affection of such a Man, who
should love good Men as good Men, or good Men only, to day, and wicked Men to
morrow. So that Men, who were sometimes loved by God, may now be hated of Him,
without any the least change or alteration in Him, or in His affection, only by
means of a change and alteration in themselves. The third and last Particular,
wherein the unchangeableness of God, is to be considered* are His Decrees.
These, truly stated and understood, are all absolute and unchangable, shall,
and will take place and be fulfilled, against all contradictions, and
oppositions whatsoever. But of this formerly Cap 3. Sect. 18. 20, etc.
. And that unchangeableness assumed by God Himself unto Himself, in the words
in hand, I am the Lord: I change not, is (I conceive) that which is found in
him in respect of His Decrees. The reason is, because it is assigned by him as
the reason, why they were not utterly destroyed. I am the Lord: I change not:
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. In the beginning of the Chapter,
he had declared unto him his Purpose and Decree of sending His only begotten
Son, whom he there calls the Messenger of the Covenant, unto them. He
predicteth* ( Verse 3. 4.) the happy fruits or consequences of that his
sending, in Reference to their Nation and Posterity. To the unchangeableness of
this His Decree, He assigns that patience, which he had for a long time
exercised toward them, under their great and continued Provocations: whereby
he implies, that if he could have been turned out of the way of His Decree
concerning the sending of His Son unto them in their Posterity, they would have
done it by the greatness of their Sins. But in as much as this His Decree (or
Himself, in this His Decree) was unchangeable, and yet must have been changed,
in case they had been all destroyed (for the Decree was for the sending him to
their Nation and Posterity) hence (says he) it comes to pass, that though
your sins otherwise abundantly have deserved it, yet I have spared you from a
total ruin. Therefore in these two Scriptures last argued, there is every
whit as much, or rather more, against, then for* the common Doctrine of
Perseverance.

Another parcel of Scripture sought out for the service of this Doctrine,. 42.
is that which rises in these words. And we know that all things work together
for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to His
Purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to
the Image of His Son, that He might be the first borne amongst many Brethren.
Moreover* whom He did predestinate, them He also called, and whom He called,
them He also justified: and whom He justified, them He also glorified Romans 8*
28, 29, 30.
. From this Contexture of Scripture it is frequently argued to this effect,
that when Men once love God, and are effectually called, i. e. are Regenerate
and do Believe, they are fastened to one end (as it were) of a certain
Chain, consisting of several Decrees of God like so many Links,
indissolveably fastened one unto another, and hereby are infallibly and
irresistibly drawn unto glory; and consequently, cannot fall away, or perish
finally. To all this I answer,

1. That in as much as this passage of Scripture, is impressed also for the
service of the Doctrine of absolute Personal Election, we shall reserve the
further consideration of it, till our Method has carried us on to that
subject, and for the present examine it only in relation to the Point in hand.
Therefore,

2. Whereas it is argued from this place, that persons once Regenerate are
infallibly drawn, and carried on to glory by a Series or Chain of Divine acts
or Decrees, un-interruptedly suceeding, or taking hold of, one another, I
answer,

That no such conclusion as this can reasonably be drawn out of these words.
For the Scope of the Apostle in the sequel of this passage is clearly this (as
that ratiocinative Particle, for, in the beginning of Verse 29. plainly
shows) to prove and make good that assertion of his, Verse 28. viz. That all
things work together for good to those that love God. To prove this, he shows,
by what Method, steps, and (as it were) degrees of dispensation, or
transaction, God will bring it so pass. Whom He fore-knows (says he) i. e.
pre-approves (the word, knowledge, frequently in Scripture importing,
approbation) as he must needs do those that love him, these he Predestinates
to be conformed to the Image of His Son: and therefore, as all things, even his
deepest sufferings, wrought together for good, unto him, so must they needs do
unto those, who are Predestined, or pre-ordinated by God, to a conformity
with him. To give you yet (says our Apostle) a further and more particular
account, how God in the secret of his Counsels has belayed things, in order
to the bringing of those unto an actual conformity with the Image of His Son,
(viz. in glory, as appears Verse 30.) whom He has Predestined thereunto
(who are such as love Him, and thereupon are approved by him) you are to
understand, that whom He has so Predestined, He has also called, [i. e.
has Purposed, or Decreed to call Scriptura solet dicere, multaj^ esse facta,
quia postea certo erant facienda. i. e. The Scripture is wont to speak of many
things, as already done, because they were to be certainly done afterward.
Aug. de Genesis contra Manich. c. 7. And God in Scripture is often said to have done
a thing, or given a thing, when he intends, or has Decreed, to do it, or give
it. Thus Ios. 1. 3. He says unto Joshua; every place that the sole of your
foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you. 1. Do fully intend or
purpose to give unto you: for as yet he had not actually given it. So also, 2 Timothy 1. 9. He is said to have given us grace in Christ Jesus before the World
began. i. e. to have purposed or decreed to give us it. See also, 1 Samuel 15.
23* 26. And c. 16. 1. Ephesians. 1. 4. And 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. (with many others.)
,] viz. to the knowledge of his Son, or of his gospel, i. e. to afford a more
plain and effectual discovery of him, unto them, then unto others, whom he
has not so Predestined. By the way, this call, does not necessarily suppose
a saving answer given unto it by the called; no whit more, then that calling,
mentioned, Mat. 20. 16* and Mat. 22. 14. only it supposes a real purpose and
intent on Gods Part, to make it very sufficient to procure such an answer to it
from those that are called. The Apostle advances toward his proposed end, and
adds thus: Whom he called, them he also justified: i. e. (according to our
late explication of the Word, called) He has Purposed, or Decreed to justify,
viz. in case the called obstruct Him not in His way, or by their unbelief
render not themselves incapable of justification by Him. The Clause following
(the last in the Period) is likewise to be understood with a like Proviso, or
clause of exception, as viz. thus: and whom He has justified, them has He
also glorified, i. e. has Purposed or Decreed to save, or glorify them, in
case they retain the grace of justification conferred upon them, unto the end,
and do not make shipwreck of that Faith, upon which it was conferred.

That these Decrees or Purposed Acts of God here specified, are to be
understood. 43.
in their successive dependencies, with such a Condition or Proviso
respectively, as those mentioned, and not absolutely, peremptorily, or without
condition appears.

1. By the like Phrase or Manner of expression frequent in the Scripture
elsewhere; I mean, where such purposes or Decrees of God, the respective
executions whereof are suspended upon such and such conditions, are
notwithstanding simply and positively, and without any mention of condition,
expressed and asserted. Wherefore (says the Man of God sent unto Eli) the Lord
God of Israel says, I SAID indeed that thy House, and the House of thy Father
shall walk before me [meaning, in the Office and Dignity of the Priesthood] for
ever: but now the Lord says, be it far from me: for, 1 Samuel 2. 30
etc. I said indeed, i. e. I verily Purposed, or Decreed, or, I Promised
according to my real Purpose or Decree. Understand it, either of Purpose, or
Promise, it comes much to one, a Promise always including, or presupposing a
purpose See also Sect. ^1. and 54. of this Chapter. And Sect. 1. and 9 of the
Chap. next following.
answerable to it. When God made the Promise, and so declared His Purpose
accordingly, That Eli and his Fathers house should walk before him for ever,
he expressed no condition, as required to the execution or performance of it:
yet here it plainly appears that there was a condition understood, viz. the
regular and worthy walking of Eli, and his Fathers house in that Office. In the
same kind of Dialect Samuel speaks to Saul: Thou have done foolishly, thou
have not kept the Commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee:
for now the Lord, stabiliverat,, had established thy Kingdom upon Israel for
ever. But now thy Kingdom shall not continue, 1 Samuel 13 13.
etc. The Lord had established, i. e. had verily Purposed or Decreed to have
established it for ever [viz. in case thou and thy Posterity had walked
obediently with him.] Not that his purpose it self, considered as an act, or
conception of the Mind God depended upon this, or upon any other condition
whatsoever: all Gods purposes and Decrees without exception, are (in such a
respect) absolute and independent (as has been said formerly) but that the
actual establishment of His Kingdom according to such a purpose, depended
hereupon. Thus Gods purpose of preserving the lives of all that were with Paul
in the Ship, is expressed unto him in positive, and absolute terms: and lo, God
has given thee all them that sail with thee Acts 27. 24.
: yet evident it is afterward, that there was a condition tacitly included in
this purpose, or Decree, viz. the continuance or stay of the Mariners in the
Ship, until the rest had opportunity to shift for themselves; as well as they.
Except these abide in the Ship (says Paul, to the Centurion and Soldiers) ye
cannot be saved Verse 31.
. In like manner Gods purpose or Decree concerning the destruction of Niniveh
within forty days, was signified unto Jonah in a positive and assertive tenor
of words: yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed a: yet it ^. 3. 4.
is well known that God purposed not the execution of this his purpose; but
only in case of the obduration and impenitency of the inhabitants thereof. And
most frequently the Purpose and Decree of God concerning the punishment of
wicked and ungodly Men, is expressed by the Holy Ghost absolutely and
assertively, without the least mention of any condition of relaxation or
reversall (see the Text cited in the Margent Mat. 3. 10. 5 19 Man. 26. 16. 1
Co^. 6. 9. 10. ^oh. 3. 36, etc. See also 51. Sect. of this Chapter.
) yet from other passages of Scripture it is fully evident that this Decree of
His is conditional in such a sense, which imports a non-execution of the
punishment herein Decreed, upon the Repentance of the persons, against whom the
Decree is bent. In like manner though the purpose and Decree of God for the
justification of those, who are called, (and so for the glorifying of those,
that shall be justified) be (in the Scripture in hand) delivered in an absolute
and un-conditioned form of words, yet is it no ways necessary to suppose,
(the most familiar, frequent, and accustomed expression of Scripture in such
cases, exempting us from any such necessity,) that therefore these Decrees must
needs bring forth against all possible interveniencies whatsoever, so that (for
example) he that is called by the word and spirit of God, must needs be
justified, whether he truly believes, or no; and he that is justified, must
needs be glorified, whether he persevereth, or no.

If it be objected and said, yea but he that is called, (in the sense here. 44.
meant) must needs believe, and consequently be justified; and so he that is
justified, must needs persevere, and so be glorified; I answer, that whether
either the one, or the other, of these assertion, be so, or no, it must be
judged of by other Scriptures: certain it is, by what has been argued
concerning the frequent usage of the Scripture in point of expression, that it
cannot be concluded, or determined by the Scripture in hand.

If it be yet further objected, concerning all the places mentioned, wherein
the conditional Decrees of God (commonly so called) are positively, and
without condition, expressed, that the conditions respectively included in
them, and le^t to be understood in such expressions, are plainly enough
mentioned in Scripture elsewhere; whereas no such conditions, as I would
obtrude upon the Decrees of God, so positively and peremptorily expressed (as
we have heard) in the Scripture in hand, can be proved from any other
Scripture, to relate or appertain unto them; to this also I answer; 1. That by
the tenor of this objection it is granted, that the peremptoriness and
absoluteness of the said Decrees cannot be inferred from the Scripture now
under debate, but that recourse must be had to other places for the proof
hereof. Therefore no perseverance of Saints concludable from this Scripture. 2.
For other Scriptures, we have already in part, and shall ( God so pleasing)
further show in due time, that none of those, which are counted Pillars of such
a Doctrine, have any communion at all with it. Nay, 3. (And lastly) we shall (I
doubt not) be able to show, that there are other Scriptures, from which the
conditions specified as relating to the said Decrees, may be undeniably evinced
to relate unto them accordingly. In the mean time, that the Decrees, or
purposed acts of God expressed in the Scripture in hand, as viz. his justifying
those that are called, and so his gloris^ing those that are justified, have no
such peremptory or essential connection between them, but that the former, in
reference to particular persons, may be put in execution, and take place,
without the latter, I demonstrate. 2. By this reason. If the Apostle should
frame this series or chain of Divine Acts, with an intent to show or teach the
uninterruptiblenesse of it in what case, or cases, soever, he should fight
against his general and maine scope, or design, in that part of this Chapter,
which lies from about Verse 17. to the end; which clearly is this; to exhort,
strengthen, and encourage them, to constancy and Perseverance in suffering
afflictions. For to suggest any such thing unto them, as that being called and
justified, nothing could possibly interpose to hinder them from being
glorified, was to furnish them with a plain motive, or ground, on which to
neglect his exhortation in that kind. For who will be persuaded to suffer
tribulation, or things grievous to be endured, for the obtaining of that, which
they have sufficient assurance given that they shall obtain, whether they
suffer such things, or no? Therefore certainly the Apostle did not intend here
to teach, or imply, the certainty of Perseverance in those, which are once
justified, unto Salvation, against all carriages, and miscarriages, of these
Persons whatsoever.

3. (And lastly) I demonstrate the same thing yet further, by this
consideration. If God should justify all without exception, whom He calls,
and that against all bars of wickedness and unbelief, possible to be laid in
His way by those, who are called, then might ungodly and unbelieving Persons
inherit the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, But the Scripture speaks aloud the
impossibility, or (how-ever) the non-futurity, hereof. Ergo. The reason of the
connection in the Major Pro^osition, is evident; it being a known truth, that
Person^ justified are in a condition, or present capacity, of inheriting the
Kingdom of God.

If it be objected, that the said Connection is tardy in this, that it
supposes. 45.
that, which ought not to be supposed, viz. that persons called by God (in the
sense of the word, calling, here meant) may lay such bars of wickedness or
unbelief in the way, which shall hinder God from justifying them; I answer*
Judas, Demas, Simon Magus and others, were called, and yet they laid such bars
as we speak of, in the way, and by which their Justification (at least their
final justification) was obstructed and prevented. If it be replied, but these
were not called by God, in the sense of the Apostles, called, in the place
under question; I answer; 1. It has not yet been proved by any Man, nor (I
believe) ever will be, that the calling here spoken of imports any such act, or
work, of God, whereby the called are irresistibly necessitated savingly to
believe (...). Chry^ost. in locum.
. If it imports no such thing as this, what hinders, but that the persons
mentioned, might have been called, with, or by that very kind of calling,
which is here spoken of? 2. Suppose it should be granted that the calling here
spoken of, is that kind of calling, which is always accompanied with a saving
answer of Faith, yet neither does this prove, but that even such called ones
may obstruct and prevent, by wickedness and unbelief, their final
justification, and consequently their glorification. If so, then the chain of
Divine Acts or Decrees, here framed by the Apostle, is not indissolveable in
any such sense, which imports an infallible and universal exertion or
execution of the latter, wheresoever the former has taken place. That Judas
was called with such a calling as this, is Chrysostomes collection from, Mat.
19. 28. from whom Peter Martyr knows not well how to dissent in the point Vid.
Pet. Martyr. Loc. Class. 3. cap. 13. Sect. 4.
: and how probable (at least) it is that the other two mentioned, Simon Magus,
and especially Demas, were partakers of the like calling with him, may be
considered in due time. But that they all three with Wickedness and Unbelief
barred up the way against their final Justification, is (I suppose) every Man's
Hypothesis and grant, or conjecture (at least.)

But some (it may be) will yet further object against the interpretation. 46.
given, and plead, 1. That the Connection between these two links of this
chain, predestination to a conformity with Chrst, and calling, is simply and
absolutely indissolveable, so that (for example) whosoever is thus
predestined by God, never fails of being called by him. 2. That it is
altogether unlikely, that in one and the same series, or concatenation, of
Divine Actions, there should not be the same fixedness, or certainty of
coherence between all the Particulars, so that (for example) there should be as
much certainty that he that is called, shall be justified; and again that he
that is justified, shall be glorified, as there is, that he that is
predestined, shall be called. To this I answer,

1. By a demurrer upon the former of these Pleas, which was, that the connection
between the Predestination of God mentioned, and his calling, is
uninterruptible by any interveniency whatsoever. Somewhat doubtful to me it
is, whether a Person, who by means of the Love of God, which is in him at
present, falls under his Decree of Predestination, and consequently by virtue
of this Decree, is Predestined to be conformed to the Image of Christ, may
not possibly before the time appointed by God for his calling, be changed in
that his affection, and consequently pass from under that Decree of
Predestination, and fall under another Decree of God opposite thereunto, and so
never come to be called. But,

2. To the latter of the said Pleas, I answer, by denying the unlikelyhood
therein asserted. For in one and the same concatenation of Divine acts, the
aspect, and manner, or kind of dependence, between act and act, may vary,
according to their different natures, or the different tenor of Gods Decrees
concerning them. As for example. God may Decree to Create, or give Being unto a
Man: again, He may Decree, to give unto this Man a sufficiency of Means and
Power, whereby to maintain himself in this Being given unto him: Again yet
further, he may Decree to give unto this Man, not only a sufficiency of Means
and Power, to make good his Possession of that Being thus given him, but
further, to improve his present Being first given unto him, into a better, and
more desirable Being. Fourthly, he may yet further Decree to promote and
advance the condition of this his Creature, Man, above the line of his first
Being. In this subordinate concatenation of Divine Acts, all Decreed by him,
there is not the same aspect or relation, (I mean in Point of necessity, and
contingency) between every former act, and that which follows. As for
instance: the second act of the four now mentioned, may, partly by reason of
the tenor of the Decree, by which it was Decreed by God, partly by reason of
the nature of it, (I mean in reference to some Divine Projection, or end) have
an absolute and un-interruptible dependence upon, or connection with, the first:
so that in case God creates a Man, he is absolutely and against all
interveniences whatsoever resolved to confer upon him, that sufficiency of
Power which was mentioned. Neither Man himself, Angel, or Devil, could
prevent or hinder God from conferring such an endowment upon Man, being created
by him. But it does not follow from hence, that there must needs be the like
aspect of necessity, between this second act, and the third; or between the
third, and the fourth. For though God as well Decreed the third act, as the
second, viz. to bestow upon his Creature, Man, a sufficiency of Power and Means
whereby to improve his first Being into a better, yet he did not Decree it, i.
e. the doing of it, simply and absolutely, but only provisionally, and upon the
supposall of such an interveniency, one or more, which very possibly might not
have interveened, as viz. either the fall of this Creature, Man, by sin, and
the gift of Jesus Christ upon it to die for his Redemption; or else the
continuance of Man for a time in the honor of his Creation, and entireness of
his obedience unto God. First, that the fall of Man was contingent, there being
no cause either within him, or without him, necessitating him hereunto, is
unquestionable; (that the foreknowledge of it by God, did no ways prejudice
or hinder the contingency of it, has been formerly showed,) 2. That the gift
of Jesus Christ to die for the Redemption of Man, depended in this sense upon
his fall, viz. so as that he should not have been given in such a way, or upon
such terms, (I mean to die) had not Man fallen, is (I suppose) the sense and
apprehension of every Man. 3. And lastly, that that Act of God in giving unto
Man, Power, Means, and Opportunity, to better Himself in Point of condition,
above the line of his Creation, or first Being, depends (his fall supposed,
which was contingent also, as was lately said) upon the gift of Jesus Christ,
so as never to have taken place, in case He had not been so given, is
sufficiently evident without Proof. So that evident it is, that this Act of
God, has only an accidental or contingent dependence upon, or coherence with,
the former; whereas this former has an essential and necessary connection with
the first, as has been showed. There is the same consideration of the relation
between the third, and fourth (or last) of these Acts. For God, upon His Decree
to grant unto His Creature, Man, a sufficiency of means and opportunity, to
Promote (in his way, viz. by higher services, and greater acts of obedience)
his happiness above the condition of his Creation or first being, might, and
did, Decree also, Himself to promote (in his way, viz. by the engagement of His
Power,) his Creatures happiness accordingly. But this latter act of His though
Decreed by Him, does not import an absolute necessity of Performance by Him,
but only a conditional and contingent, the tenor of that Decree of His,
wherein this act is Decreed, being this; in case My Creature, Man, shall quit
himself in any measure worthy that grace, which I shall give unto him, in and
through My Son Christ, I will make Him greater in happiness, then He was in the
state of His Creation. So that it is as clear as the light at Noonday, that in
one and the same series or subordination of Divine acts, there may be a
different habitude in point of dependence between act and act, so that one of
these acts may infallibly, necessarily, and universally follow and be exerted
upon another, Precedent to it in the subordination; and yet another of these
act^, follow the next Predecessor to it in the series, but contingently, and
consequently admit of many suspensions and interruptions. Therefore there is
nothing in the last Objection against that exposition of the Scripture in hand,
which has been asserted, both the feet upon which it stands, being weak and
lame.

There is yet another Objection, colorable (I suppose) in some Men's. 47.
eyes, against the said interpretation. The substance of it, this. If the links
of that chain of Divine acts described in this passage of Scripture, may be
severed, or broken, by the miscarriages, or unworthiness, of the Saints in any
kind, then had the Apostle no sufficient reason to build the Saints so high
upon it, in Confidence, Exultations, and Triumphs, as He does in the Verses
immediately following. What shall we say to these things? If God be on our
side, who can be against us? And the reason is, because the Saints are children
of many infirmities, and of much unworthiness: apt to sin against God every
moment. Therefore if their Peace, and Salvation depend upon their own regular
and worthy walkings with God, they are in a condition of no good security to be
saved: and what ground then have they to rejoice and triumph at any such rate,
as the Apostle seems here to invite and encourage them unto? To this I answer,
that the Heart of this Objection was broken in the last preceding Chapter,
where we showed, upon several considerations and grounds, that the Saints have
cause in abundance to rejoice, yea and to triumph, under the hope and
expectation of Salvation, notwithstanding any possibility they are subject unto
of declining, or perishing. The Reader (I presume) will be satisfied in this
Point, upon a serious perusal of what is there Written, from Section 21. to
the end of the Chapter. I here add,

1. That the friends and favorers themselves of the common interpretation. 48.
of the place in hand, and which contradicts the exposition given, generally
grant, and teach, that the Saints themselves cannot have any Peace or Comfort
in their Faith, or assurance of Salvation, whilst they walk profanely,
loosely, or unfaithfully with God. So that these Men themselves do suspend the
Peace and Comfort, (and much more, the Joy and Triumph) of the Faith of the
Saints upon their Christian behavior, and Regular walkings with God. Therefore
judging the Exposition given, upon such an account as this, they condemn
themselves, and their own Doctrines.

2. The assureance of the continuance of Gods Love to them, and of His care
over them, whilst they in any measure walk worthy of it, is a Regular and due
foundation unto the Saints of every whit as great a confidence, Exultation and
Triumph, as the Apostle, in the words mentioned intitles them unto. Yea,

3. The very particular and express ground, upon which He builds up Himself
and the Saints with Him, in such a Triumphant Confidence, as we heard, is this;
the sense or assureance of Gods Love toward them [meaning, whilst they walk
with Him, as becomes Saints; because being out of this posture, they can
neither have sense, nor assureance of His Love, as our adversaries themselves
acknowledge and teach, as we lately heard] not any assureance of the
continuance of His Love to them, how profane, wicked, or abominable soever they
can, or shall, be. What shall we say then to these things? if God BE with us,
who can be against us? Therefore,

4. (And lastly) such a supposition or Doctrine as this, that they that are at
present justified, may possibly sin themselves out of the Grace of
Justification, and so never come to be glorified, is upon due consideration, no
bridle at all to check the holy and humble confidence, or boastings of the
Saints in God, or in the Lord Jesus Christ: they may in the face and presence
of such a Doctrine, though acknowledged and admitted for truth, lift up
themselves upon the wings of a blessed security unto Heaven, and rejoice that
joy, which is unspeakeable and glorious. But of these things we spoke liberally
in the last Chapter.

Some may yet possibly imagine, that they discover a ground of confutation. 49.
of all that has been said upon the Context of Scripture yet in hand, Verse
29. in those words; That he might be the firstborn amongst many Brethren. For
from hence they may reason thus. If this be Gods End or Design in
Predestinating those, whom he knew before [or, pre-approved] to be conformed to
the Image of His Son [in glory] that He might be the first borne amongst many
Brethren, [i. e. might have the honor of bringing many into part and
fellowship with Himself in His own blessedness and glory] then must all they,
who are thus Predestined, of necessity attain, or come to enjoy such a
conformity with Him; otherwise God shall be frustrated in His Design, and
Jesus Christ be defeated and disappointed of that excellent honor, which His
Father projected for Him. For if one, or some, thus predestined, may
miscarry, and never come to enjoy an actual conformity unto Him in His glory,
why may not others of them miscarry likewise, and consequently, all: and so the
Great Counsel or Project of God for the honor of His Son Jesus Christ, be laid
in the dust. To this I answer;

1. Suppose that Jesus Christ should have no Brethren conformable unto Him in
glory, yet would it not follow from hence, that the Counsel or Design of God
to make Him the first borne among many Brethren, should be made void, or
miscarry. For the Counsel or Design of God in this behalf, stood Mainely and
Principally in this; viz. in casting this honor upon Jesus Christ, that He
should be a Person every ways fitted and accomplished, should act, and do, or
be ready and willing to act, and do, every such thing, whereby many of his
Brethren, [i. e. of the children of Men] if they were not most shamefully and
grossly neglective of themselves, and their own greatest concernments, might
come to partake with him in His great Blessedness and glory. And in case Men
should prove thus neglective of themselves, and so as voluntarily to deprive
themselves of that great Salvation, which Jesus Christ out of His great Love,
and with the sore travel of his Soul, has prepared and made ready for them,
yea and invited, and called, yea and pressed upon them, to accept at his hand,
yet the honor and glory of a signal Benefactor and great Savior, shall
remain entire unto Him; nor is there the least color or pretense, why He
should suffer the least disparagement or prejudice in the thoughts, either of
Men, or Angels, because of the wilful folly and madness of Men to forsake
their own mercies, and destroy themselves. Himself owned, and built upon, this
consideration, when He spoke thus by the mouth of one of His greatest Prophets:
Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and my God shall be my strength Esa. 49 5.
. In the former Verse, He speaks thus in his Representor: Then I said, I have
labored in vain, I have spent my Strength for naught, and in vain: yet
surely my judgment is with the Lord; and my work with my God. And immediately
before the said words, thus: And now says the Lord that formed me from the
Womb to be his servant, TO BRING JACOB AGAIN TO HIM, Though Israel be not
gathered, yet, etc. Clearly implying, that though Gods Intent and Counsel was
to form Christ from the Womb for this end and purpose, viz. to bring Jacob
again to him [and so to save, and make Him blessed] yet would it be no
disparagement unto Christ, nor any miscarriage or defeature of the Counsel of
God herein, though Jacob should not upon this account, be brought again to
him, or be made blessed by Christ. The reason is, because when it is said, that
God formed Christ from the Womb to bring Jacob again to him, the meaning is
not, that He formed Him with any such intent, out of any such end or design,
to bring Jacob again to Him by head and shoulders (as we use to say) or by a
strong and irresistible hand; but to bring Jacob again, etc. i. e. that he
might be represented, and Preached, unto Jacob, as such a Person, who had
attoned their sins, made their Peace with God by His Blood, and had purchased
grace and favor and every good thing for them at his hand, in case they would
repent and turn again to him: and further, that he might by his Spirit,
especially in the Ministry of his Prophets, administer unto them inward
strength, and frequent excitements, abundantly sufficient to have brought them
to a due consideration and imbracement of these great things of their Peace. In
this sense (and in no other) Christ was formed by God from the Womb, to bring
Jacob again to him: and thus it appears also, how, and in what respect God was
not disappointed of his end, purpose, or intention in his forming of Christ,
nor Christ Himself any ways disparaged, notwithstanding Jacob was not actually
converted, or brought again to him. The Apostle Paul likewise upon the same
consideration, says of Himself and other the Apostles and faithful Ministers
of the Gospel, thus: For we are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ in them that
are saved, and in them that perish 2 Cor. 2. 15
. Whereby it appears, that howsoever Gods real Intent and Design in sending
Christ, into the World, was (according to the frequent testimony of Scripture)
the Salvation, and not the perishing or condemnation, of Men, yet he was no
more defeated or disappointed of his design herein, by the perishing, then by
the Salvation, of Men. Otherwise Christ in the faithful Ministry of the
Gospel, would not be a sweet Savor [i. e. matter of high contentment and
satisfaction] unto him, as well in those who perish, through unbelief, as in
those who are saved by believing. For who can be pleased, or much satisfied,
with, or under, disappointments? Therefore Gods Intent of saving the World by
Jesus Christ, is not so to be conceived or understood, as if he intended to
save Men by him, upon any terms, or under any consideration whatsoever, or
without all Proviso's, Limitations, or Exceptions; but thus, he intended to
save the World by him, i. e. to put the World into a capacity of Salvation, and
to afford unto the Sons and Daughters of Men, means and opportunities in
abundance, whereby to repent, and believe, and consequently to be saved. So
that whenever Christ is faithfully and effectually Preached unto Men, in
order to their Salvation, God obtaines his end and intent concerning their
Salvation, whether they come to be saved, or no, i. e. whether they repent and
believe, or remain impenitent in unbelief.

2. For the Phrase, or manner of expression, that he might be the first borne.
50.
amongst many Brethren, I desire to give notice once for all (for there may be
frequent use of the observation, in these controversies) that it is frequent in
Scripture to express a thing after the manner of an event, or consequent that
will, or shall, come to pass, or follow upon such or such an occasion, or
means, somewayes likely to produce it, which yet frequently comes not to pass,
but only is intended or desired; nay the contrary whereof many times follows
and comes to pass, in stead thereof. According to this Dialect of Speech,
Moses expresses himself unto the People, thus: and the Man that will do
presumptuously, and not hearken unto the Priest, -- or unto the Judge, even
that Man shall die: and thou shall put away the evil from Israel: and all [or,
that all] the People shall hear, [or may hear] and fear, and do no more
presumptuously Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13.
. This hearing, fearing, and restraining of the People from doing
presumptuously, are mentioned, if we respect the precise form of the words, as
if they were such events, which would always follow and come to pass, upon
the occasion or means specified, viz. the inflicting of death upon the
Delinquent spoken of. Yet Moses his intent was not to affirm this, which had
been an untruth to affirm (such events as these many times failing, if at any
time obtained) but to show what God His intent was in commanding such severe
executions to be done in such cases, or rather (perhaps) to show, what fruits
might reasonably be expected from such just severity. So again in the same
Chapter, (speaking of the King, whom they should set over them, and the Book of
the Law,) And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord His God, to keep all the words
of this Law and these Statutes, to do them Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
. These words, that he may learn, etc. do not import the event, or effect,
that would certainly follow upon the duty or course prescribed; but either what
Gods Intentions were in Prescribing such a course, or what such a course was
proper and likely to effect. Many other places there are of like character and
import: amongst which that in Present debate is to be numbered. God
Predestinate, these and these, or rather, such and such, to be conformed to the
Image of His Son, that He might be the first borne, etc. These words, that He
might be the first borne, etc. do not necessarily import any event, or effect,
which should certainly come to pass, or be produced, by that Act of Gods
Predestination; but only such an event, as was intended by God (in such a sense
as intentions are appropriable unto him) in that Act of His, or which would
probably follow thereupon.

It may yet further be demanded (by way of Objection against any Explication.
51.
whatsoever of the Passage in hand, which makes the golden chain of Divine
acts therein, dissolveable in any link or part of it, in what case, or cases,
soever) If either they who are Predestined, may not be called; or they that
are called, may not be justified, or they that are justified, not be glorified,
how can the Apostles Proof stand, that all things work together for good to
those, who love God, which (as your self acknowledged) is the Doctrine or
Conclusion, the demonstration of the truth whereof the Apostle intends by the
Producing of this golden chain of Divine acts, taking hold, in a clear
subordination, one upon another? Can all things be said to work together for
good to him, who never comes to be glorified, but to be everlastingly
condemned? To this I answer,

That this Doctrine or saying of the Apostle, All things work together for good
unto those who love God, is to be understood with the like Explication, or
grain of spiritual salt, wherewith these two (and a thousand more) sentences
in the Scriptures, are to be seasoned; He that believes, and is Baptized,
shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be damned Mar. 16. 16
. The meaning of this latter saying (to proceed a notioribus ad magis ignota)
He that believes not, shall be damned, is not this: He that now, or at
Present, believes not, let him do all he will, or can, let him believe a
thousand times over hereafter, shall notwithstanding be damned; this (I say) is
not our Saviors meaning in that clause. His meaning is clearly enough this: He
that believes not, [viz. and continues an unbeliever to his dying day] shall
be damned. But it does not follow from hence, that he that is a present
unbeliever, must of necessity live and die in unbelief, and so be damned. So
that there is a sense, wherein it is as true that he that believes not may and
shall be saved; viz. if he repents of his unbelief, and returns to his vomit
no more. So (to search now into the former saying) when our Savior says, He
that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved, his meaning is not, that he
who at present believes, and has been, or shall be Baptized, shall be saved,
let him do what he will, or can, let him turn Apostate, make shipwreck of his
Faith, renounce his Baptism, and the like; but, he that believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved, i. e. He that believes, and continues a Believer,
or shall be found a Believer, and a Man standing fast by his Baptism, and
Review the 43 Sect. of this Chapter.
holding out his Profession with constancy, unto the end, shall be saved. Our
Saviors clear intent in these sayings, was to show and assert, in the former,
the blessed interest of Faith in conjunction with a Christian Profession, as
viz. that it gives unto Men a title and rightfulnesse of claim to Salvation;
in the latter, the dreadful danger, and formidable Property of unbelief, as
viz. that it exposes the Person, in whom it abides, to the vengeance of Hell
fire. But as it was no part of his intent, to assert any inseparablenesse of
unbelief, from the subject thereof, in the latter clause: so neither did he any
ways intend to assert any such property unto Faith, in the former. In like
manner when the Apostle lays down this Doctrine, All things work together for
good unto those that love God, his meaning is not, either to assert the
unquenchableness, or unremoveableness of this affection from its present
subject, or to imply, that whosoever is at present a lover, of God, is in any
such Possession of that Privilege he speaks of, (I mean, of having all things
to work together for good unto him) that, in case his love to God languisheth
and dies, and a contrary affection succeeds in the place thereof, he can, or
shall, never be cast out of it. But his entire and clear intent in that
Position or saying of his, is to show, that the love of God, in what Subject or
Person soever it resides, and whilst it there resides, does, by virtue of the
gracious Decree or Will of God in that behalf, invest him with this
Privilege; viz. to have all occurrences of things relating to him, even
afflictions and Persecutions themselves, benefactors unto him. To make this
good, he shows, what God has fully Purposed or Decreed to do for such Men, or
(which is the same) what he has Predestined, such men unto, as viz. to a
conformity with, or to the Image of His own Son, the Lord Christ, i. e. to make
them glorious and blessed in such a way, or upon such terms, as Jesus Christ
himself, who was the greatest lover of God that ever was, is now become
glorious; unto whose glorification all things that happened unto him in this
present World, and more especially his sufferings, jointly contributed and
wrought. And for further satisfaction, how, by what means, and degrees, God
actually brings these Persons, [ viz. continuing still lovers of him] to this
conformity with Christ in His glory, He adds: Moreover, whom he did [thus]
Predestinate, them He also called, [i. e. as was formerly interpreted Sect. 42.
of this Chapter.
, He Purposed to call, viz. to the knowledge of His Son, as the Savior of the
world, and calls them accordingly: in which respect they are said to be
Persons called according to his Purpose, Verse 28.] and whom He called, them He
also justified [i. e. Purposed to justify, and justifies accordingly,] and
whom He justified, them also He glorified: i. e. Purposed to glorify [or, to
bring to an actual conformity with Christ in His glory] and glorifieth them
accordingly. Why the purposed or intended actings of God are expressed in
Scripture, rather in the Preter-Perfect tense, then either in the present, or
future, is accounted elsewhere in this Discourse Cap. 4. Sect. 29.
. But in all these gradations mentioned of the Counsel of God concerning the
bringing of those, that love him, unto a conformity with Christ in His glory,
the same subject, formally considered, i. e. those that love him, as such, is
to be understood: so that in case the subject be changed, under, or between,
any of the said gradations, and he (for example) who loved God, being yet only
Predestined by God to be conformed unto Christ in glory, and not called, or
being called, and not yet justified, of being justified, and not yet glorified,
shall either before his calling, though Predestinate, or before his
justification, though called, or before his glorification, though justified, be
alienated in his affection from God, and having loved him, shall cease to love
him, and suffer an hatred of God secretly to grow upon him, it is not to be
conceived that God, notwithstanding such a change in him, should advance or
carry him on by the remaining steps, or gradations, unto glory; but that where
ever this heavenly affection of his Love to God shall expire and leave him,
there the Counsel of God also concerning his glorification should leave him,
and nothing be further done or acted by him, in order thereunto, unless
(happily) he returns unto his former affection. The Apostles intent in the
passage in hand, was to declare the series and tenor of Gods Counsels for the
glorious benefit and good of those who should love Him, not of those who should
cease to love Him, or apostatize from their affection toward Him; nor yet to
teach, imply, or insinuate in the least, the undecayablenesse, or
unquenchablenesse of this affection in Men. But enough for the clearing of this
place.

I shall only Propound and Answer one Scripture more, upon the account. 52.
we are now drawing up, which is frequently argued with great importunity for
the Doctrine of Perseverance. The tenor of the place is this. And I will give
them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of
them, and of their children after them. And I will make an everlasting Covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will
put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me Ier. 31. 39.
40.
. In these words (say our Antagonists in the present controversy) is
manifestly contained an absolute Promise of Perseverance made by God unto his
Church. To this I answer, that it can no ways be proved, nor is it any ways
probable, that the grace of Perseverance should be here absolutely Promised
unto Saints, or Believers. For,

1. Evident it is from the whole tenor of the Chapter, that the words contain a
special Promise made particularly to the Jews.

2. As evident it is, upon the same account, that the Promise here mentioned,
was not made only to the Saints, or sound Believers amongst the Jews, who were
but few, but to the whole body, or generality of them. Peruse the latter part
of the Chapter, from about, ver. 30. to the end.

3. It is yet upon the same account as evident, as either of the former, that
this Promise was made unto this Nation of the Jews, when, and whilst they
were, or at least, considered as now being, in the iron furnace of the
Babylonian captivity. Behold, I will gather them out of all Countries, whither
I have driven them in mine anger, and in my sury, and in great wrath, and I
will bring them again unto this place, etc. ver. 37.

4. From these words (now cited) so immediately preceding the Passages offered
to debate, it clearly appears, that the Promise in these Passages relates unto,
and concerns, their Reduction and return from, and out of, that captivity,
into their own Land. Therefore,

5. It cannot be a Promise of absolute and final Perseverance in grace unto
the end of their lives respectively. For, 1. The Promise was made unto the body
or generality of this People, even unto all those that God had driven into all
Countries in his anger and fury, and not only unto the Saints, or true
Believers amongst them, unless we shall say, that they were only the holy
Persons amongst them that were thus driven by him. The Promise then respects as
well the unfaithful, as the true Believers, in this Nation: and so cannot be a
Promise of Perseverance in grace unto these. 2. The Promise here exhibited, was
a Promise appropriated, and fitted to the present State and Condition of the
Jews, who were now scattered up and down the World, and in a sad captivity (at
least were thus considered in this promise, as was lately said) in which
respect it must needs be conceived to contain somewhat peculiar to that their
condition. Now the promise of perseverance in grace (according to the Doctrine
of our adversaries) was a standing promise amongst them, and so had been from
the first, equally respecting them, or the elect amongst them, in every estate
and condition. 3. The promise of perseverance in grace (according to the same
principles) includes in it, or supposes, such an interposure of God by his
spirit and grace, which shall, and will, and must needs, infallibly produce the
effect of perseverance, in all those, to whom it is made, i. e. true Believers:
wher^as, evident it is from the Prophet Ezekiel, that this promise
notwithstanding, the Jews might rebel against, and apostatize from, God. The
whole passage in Ezekiel is this. Therefore say, thus says the Lord God,
although I have cast them far off among the Heathen, and although I have
scattered them among the Countries, yet will I be to them as a little Sanctuary
in the Countries where they shall come. Therefore say, thus says the Lord God,
I will even gather you from the People, and Assemble you out of the Countries,
where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the Land of Israel. And they
shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof,
and all the abominations thereof from thence. And I will give them one Heart,
and I will put a new Spirit within you, and I will take the stony Heart out of
their Flesh, and will give them an Heart of Flesh, That they may walk in my
Statutes, and keep mine Ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my People,
and I will be their God Ezekiel. 11. 17. 18. etc.
. There is nothing more clear, then that the promise contained in these words,
is for substance and import the same, with that in consideration from the
Prophet Jeremy. Yet here it follows: But as for them, whose heart walks
after the heart of their detestable things, and their abominations, I will
recompense their way upon their own head, says the Lod God Verse 21.
. Which evidently supposes, that notwithstanding the former promise, pretended
to be a promise (either in whole, or in part) of persevering in grace, yet
they, to whom it is made, may walk after the Heart of detestable things: [i. e.
so practice detestable things, as to promote their interest, and cause them to
be practiced by others,] and that to their own ruin and destruction. For that
this threatening, But as for them, etc. concerns the same persons, or nation,
to whom the precedent promises were made, the carriage of the Context makes out
of question; and besides, is the general sense of Interpreters upon the place:
yea and Calvin Himself understands it of the Israelites Nec aliud vult
Propheta, quam Deum sore vindicem, si cor suum sequantur Israelitae, ut
ambulent in suis sp^rcitiis and abominationibus.
. So that no absolute perseverance can with reason be supposed to be contained
in the said promise. 4. (And lastly) If absolute perseverance should be here
promised, there is no time, or season can be imagined, wherein the promise
should have been fulfilled by God. If it be said, that it has always been
fulfilled in the Elect and faithful, I answer, 1. That it has been already
proved, that it was made to the maine body and community of the Jewish Nation,
and not only to the Elect or faithful amongst them. And therefore if it should
be fulfilled in these only, it should be fulfilled, but by half, and (indeed)
not to that proportion: and consequently, if propriety of speech be admitted,
not fulfilled at all. 2. If this be all the fulfilling of it, it was as much
fulfilled, during, and under the captivity, yea and before it, as at any time
afterward. For, in the sense of those against whom we now argue, the Elect and
faithful always persevered in Grace unto the end.

If it be yet demanded, but do not those words, I will give them one heart,
and. 53.
one way, that they may fear me for ever; as also those, I will put my fear
into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, plainly imply their
final Perseverance; I answer,

1. That these words, that they shall not depart from me, savor too much of the
Translation: the Original would rather have them thus, that they MAY not depart
from me, as the Translators also themselves render words of the same character
in the former Verse. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they MAY
fear me for ever. And thus both Arias Montanus Et timorem meum dabo in cord
eorum pro non recedere desuper me* in the margent; Ut non recedant a me. Arias
Mon. Which latter words the other two borrow from this Author for their
Translation.
, and Junius, and Tremellius also render them.

2. The words thus read, do not necessarily import the actual event or taking
place of the effect intended by God in the Promise, and his performance
thereof, but only his Intention it self in both these, together with the
sufficiency and aptness of what he promises, for the producing of such an
effect in them. As when our Savior expressed himself thus unto the Jews, But
these things I say, that ye might be saved John 5 34
; he did not suppose, that they either would, or should, be infallibly saved,
by means of what he spoke, (for a few Verses after, speaking still to the same
persons, he says, And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life;) but he
declared, that the real desire, and intent of his Heart and Soul, in speaking
to them as he did, was, that they might be saved; and withal, that the words,
which he spoke to them were such, as by the due minding, and harkening
whereunto, they might, and should, have been saved. There is the same
consideration of what God said unto Adam: Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof
I commanded thee, that thou should not eat Genesis 3. 10
? It cannot be inferred from hence, that Adam did not eat of this tree, (for we
all too well know, that he did eat thereof,) but only that the intent and
scope of Gods Commandment unto him concerning this tree, was, that he should
not eat thereof. See what was lately, and more largely observed touching such
expressions as these, Sect. 50. of this Chapter.

3. The certainty of the continuance of the external and civil prosperity. 54.
of the Jewish Nation, might much more colourably be concluded from sundry
passages in this promissory Contexture of Scripture, then the certainty of
their Perseverance in Grace, from those mentioned. For here G^d promises that
he will do thus and thus by them, for the good of them, and of their children
after them, Verse. 39. And again, that he will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, that he will not turn away from them to do them good: -- that he will
rejoice over them to do them good, and will plant them in that their Land
assuredly, with his whole heart, and with his whole Soul: Verse. 40, 41. And yet
we know, that all these Promises and Engagements on Gods part notwithstanding,
God, since the making of them, has turned away from them, and that in greater
displeasure then ever before; yea, and that (as the Apostle says) his Wrath is
come upon them to the uttermost 1 These. 2, 16
; and they are accordingly at this day the most contemptible and miserable
Nation under Heaven. This plainly shows, that all these Promises were
Conditional, though no* Condition appears in mention, and the performance of
them intentionally suspended upon their good behavior and obedience to him,
that made them. See more upon this account in the Premises Cap. 10. Sect. 43.
. If then the temporal Promises running along in the same current of discourse
with spiritual, and much more assertively expressed, then these, were
Conditional, and have suffered a nonperformance through a nonperformance of
the Condition intended; why may we not suppose the spiritual Promises also to
be subject to the same Law? Nay certainly,

4. Had the spiritual Promises been merely positive and unconditioned, the
temporal would have been such also, at least they had not been obnoxious to a
nonperformance. For had God actually, and with effect, given them one heart,
and one way, so that they had actually feared him for ever, or put his fear in
their hearts upon any such terms, that they had not departed* from him,
questionless all the temporal Promises had brought forth; God would not have
turned away from them to do them good, and their children after them, but would
have rejoiced over them to do them good, would have planted them in their Land,
etc.

5. That expression in the said passages, And I will make an everlasting
COVENANT with them, plainly supposes, that the whole Contexture of Promises
therein, was but Conditional; it being the nature and property of a Covenant,
never to engage one party alone, but both, or all, comprised in it: and when
one party refuses to make good the terms imposed thereby upon him, to dis
oblige and free the other. Therefore,

6. (And lastly) The true and clear intent and meaning of the spiritual
Promises. 55.
made unto the People of the Jews, now in captivity, in the Scripture in hand,
and particularly of the expressions last objected, is this: I will give them
one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever; and will put my fear
into their hearts, that they shall not, [or, may not] depart from me; i. e. I
will deal so above measure graciously and bountifully with them, as well in
matters relating to their spiritual Condition, as in things which concern their
outward Condition, that if they be not prodigiously refractary, stubborn, and
unthankful, I will overcome their evil with my goodness, will cause them to own
me for their God* and will reduce them, as one man, to a loving and loyal frame
and temper of heart toward me, that they shall willingly, and with a full and
free Purpose of heart, fear and serve me for ever. To secure this
Interpretation,

1. That is to be remembered, which has been offered to consideration already
Cap. 10. Sect. 20.
* viz. That it is the frequent and familiar Dialect of Scripture, to ascribe
the doing of things, or the effects themselves, unto those, whether God, or
men, who either minister occasion, or afford proper or likely means, or
endevors, for the doing of them, whether ever they be actually effected, or no.
A pleasant number of Instances in this kind you shall find drawn together
elsewhere Ibidem.
. Repetitions are needless, where Primitives are at hand. According to this
kind of expression, God may be said to give men one heart, and one way, that
etc. and so, to put his fear into their hearts, that etc. when he vouchsafes
and exhibiteth such motives, means and opportunities unto them, which are
efficacious and proper to work them to such a frame and disposition of Heart
and Soul, out of which men are wont firmly to resolve, to love, serve and obey
him for ever, whether they be actually wrought, or brought hereunto, or no. In
this sense it is easy to conceive, when, and how the said Promises were
performed or fulfilled, as, viz. to a good degree, in, upon, and soon after,
that famous Deliverance out of their seventy years Captivity, God hereby, as by
many other signal mercies vouchsafed unto them soon after their return, about
the repairing of their City and Temple, as likewise by the effectual Ministry
of several great Prophets raised up amongst them from time to time, mightily
engaging them all to devote themselves unto him and his service for ever: But
more fully, and gloriously when the great Messiah was sent unto them in the
flesh, by whose unparalled ^olinesse in Life and Conversation, together with
His frequent and wonderful miracles, and especially by His Doctrine so full of
Heavenly Authority, Light, and Power, they were only not compelled into such an
heart, and such a way, wherewith, and wherein, to have feared, [i. e. to have
religiously served and obeyed] Him for ever. In so much that proving such
Apostates, as they wilfully became, under such transcendent means as they had,
to have rendered them the best and most faithful People under Heaven unto
their God, they declared themselves to be the most stiff-necked and rebellious
Generation of Men in all the World; and were judged by God accordingly. Take
any other sense of the Promises, or words now in question, especially that,
which is so much contended for, and which imports a final Perseverance in
grace to be wrought in this People by the irresistible Hand of God; and it will
be impossible for any Man to find so much as by probable conjecture, when, or
how, they should ever be fulfilled. To say, that they might, even in that
sense, which I so much oppose, be fulfilled constantly in the Elect of this
People, is to say that, which reason will gainesay. For, 1. An absolute or
un-conditioned Promise made to a great number of Men, cannot be said to be
fulfilled, when the thing promised is exhibited only to some few of them. Now
the Promises under debate, were clearly made to the whole body or nation of the
Jews (as we have formerly proved from the express Context) and not to the
Elect only amongst them. 2. According to their judgments, who plead the
fulfilling of them in this sense, the Persons for whose sakes and comfort they
were made, the Elect, might, yea must needs have had, every whit as much
comfort without them, as they could have, with, or by them. For they knew,
before the making, of any of these Promises to them, that being Elect, and once
in an estate of grace, they should persevere therein unto the end. And thus
these great and signal Promises of God shall be rendered void, and mere
impertinencies unto those, for whose sake only they are supposed to have been
made. 3. (And lastly) to say they were fulfilled in the Elect, (in the sense
gainesaid) is to beg the question, instead of digging for it.

2. The Scriptures many times assert the futurity, or coming to pass. 56.
of things not yet in being, not only when the coming of them to pass, is
certain, or certainly known unto God, but upon a probability only, or
likelihood of their coming to pass, in respect of means used, or to be used,
for the bringing of them to pass. Upon this account, God Himself is
represented by our Savior in his parable of the Vineyard, as speaking thus, in
the person of the Lord of the Vin^yard, They will reverence my Son Mar. 12. 6.
, in case I shall vouchsafe to send Him unto them. And yet the event showed
that they were so far from reverencing Him, that when He came to them, they
took Him, and slew Him, and cast Him out of the Vineyard. So when He says;
upon occasion of the punishment, which he commands to be inflicted upon the
Man that should do presumptuously, that all the People shall hear, and fear,
and do no more presumptuously Deuteronomy. 17. 1^ 13.
. He does not speak it out of any certainty of knowledge in Him, that it would,
or should, actually so come to pass (for many, doubtless, of this People did
not so fear, as to forbear doing presumptuously, notwithstanding the
exemplarinesse of such a punishment) but because the severe and thorough
execution of Justice in this kind, was a proper and probable means to
restrain all sorts of persons amongst them from the like sins. See Sect. 50.
of this Chapter. In this notion and idiome of Scripture also, God may say, I
will give them one Heart, and one way, that they may fear Me for ever, not out
of a certainty of knowledge, or determination in Himself, that any such Heart,
or Way, should actually, and with effect, be given unto them, which would
infallibly produce such an effect in them, as is here specified; but because he
was purposed so to entreat them, and to afford such excellent administrations
of His Grace and Spirit unto them, which should be very Pregnant, Proper, and
Efficacious, to create such an Heart in them, and to put them into such a Way,
that they should never have declined from His Worship and Service, whilst the
Sun and Moon endure. This answer (I acknowledge) is of much affinity with the
former. Therefore,

3. And lastly, that no such sense was intended by God in the Words or Promises
yet under consideration, which imports any certainty of a final perseverance
in Grace, in those, to whom they are spoken and made, fully appears from all
those prophetical passages and predictions in the old Testament, which are
many in number, and very plain and pregnant in import, wherein that sad
breach, which afterward happened between God, and this People, to whom these
Promises were made, and which amounted even to a rejection of them from being
any longer a People unto Him, is foretold by Him. For that God should
absolutely promise such an Heart unto a People, which should infallibly cause
them to fear Him for ever, and not to depart from him; and yet withal
prophecy the great and general Apostasy of this People from him, and their
rejection, upon that account, by him, doubtless lies not within the verge of
any Man's belief, who takes any competent care what he believes. I trust, the
Scripture now last Opened, will from henceforth be put to no more trouble,
about any Contribution of aid toward the maintenance of the Doctrine of
absolute perseverance.

Some other Scriptures possibly there may be, besides those inquired into in
this Chapter, wherein some may imagine the treasure of such a perseverance to
be hid: but these which we have strictly examined upon the matter, have still
been counted the Pillars of that Doctrine; and yet, as we have seen, are no
supporters of it. Nor do I question, but that by those unquestionable
principles and rules of interpretation, by which the Mind of God in the
Scriptures discussed in this Chapter, has been brought into a clear light,
all seeming compliance that way in others also, may be reduced: and so the
wisdom, which has been revealed from Heaven, perfectly acquitted from all
interposure by way of countenance on the behalf of the commonlytaught Doctrine
of Perseverance. Two Texts I call to mind at present which are sometimes
called in to the assistance of the Doctrine of Perseverance hitherto opposed,
and have not received answer in this Chapter. The former is Mat. 7. 18. The
latter, Romans 11. 29. But for this latter, it has been sufficiently handled
upon another account, Cap. 8. Sect. 56. As to the former, we shall (I conceive)
have occasion to speak in the second part of this Discourse. We now proceed to
the Examination of such Arguments and Grounds otherwise, upon which the said
Doctrine, in some Men's eyes, stands impregnable.

CHAP. XI.
A further Continuation of the former Digression, wherein the Arguments and
Grounds, commonly alleged in defense of the received Doctrine of Perseverance,
are detected of insufficiency, proved, and declared null.

WE shall begin with that, which is the First borne of the strength of. 1.
our Adversaries in this kind. That (say they) which God has Promised in His
Word, is certain, and shall take place against all opposition and
contradiction whatsoever. But God has Promised in his Word that all true
Believers shall both totally and finally Persevere. Therefore all such shall
certainly so Persevere, against whatsoever may, or shall at any time oppose
their Presevering. To this I Answer*

1. By explaining the major proposition. What God has Promised in His Word, is
certain, and shall take place, etc. viz. in such a sense, and upon such terms,
as God would be understood in His promise. But what God Promises in one sense,
is not certain of performance, in another. As for example: God promised the
preservation of the lives of all that were with Paul in the Ship; but his
intent and meaning in this promise, was not this preservation against
whatsoever might possibly be done by those in the Ship, against it, or to
hinder it; but with this proviso, or condition, that they in the Ship should
hearken unto him, and follow his advice in order to their preservation; as is
evident from those words of Paul himself, to whom this promise was made: Except
these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be safe Acts 27. 31.
. So that had the Centurion and rest in the Ship suffered the Mariners to have
left the Ship, whilst it was yet at Sea, there had been no failing in promise
with God, though they had all been drowned. In like manner, though Christ
promised to His twelve Apostles, Judas being yet one of the twelve, that in the
Regeneration (i. e. in the Resurrection, or Restoration of the World) they
should fit upon twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel Mat. 19.
28.
, yet is he not to be judged a promise-breaker, though Judas never comes to sit
upon one of these Thrones. And in case the rest of the twelve had declined,
from that integrity of Heart, under which that promise was made unto them, as
Judas did, neither would it have argued any breach of promise in Christ, to
have advanced others upon these Thrones, instead of them. The reason whereof is
elsewhere noted from Peter Martyr, whose Doctrine it is, that the Promises of
God are wont to be made with respect had to the present estate and condition of
things with Men Promissiones itaque illae Dei pro stat^ praesentirerum sunt
intelligendae. P. Mar. Loc. Class. 3. c. 13. Sect. 4.
. His meaning is (as appears by the tenor of the adjacent Discourse) that all
Gods promises made unto Men, being, or considered as being, under such, and
such qualifications, are not to be understood as any otherwise intended by him
to be performed unto them, then as abiding, and whilst they shall abide, in
the same qualifications. As for example, what promises soever God makes unto
Believers, with respect had to their Faith, or as they are Believers, are not
to be looked upon as performable or oblieging the Maker of them unto them, in
case they shall relapse into their former unbelief. But of this we spoke
plentifully in our last Chapter Sect. 43. and 51. See also Sect. 9. of this
Chapter.
, and elsewhere. The major proposition thus explained and understood, we admit.
Whatsoever God Promises, is certain, etc. viz. according to the true intent
and meaning of the promise.

The Minor also, releived with an Orthodox and sober Explication, (as. 2.
likewise the conclusion it self, and whole Argument) is blameless, and
thinks no evil against the Doctrine now under vindication. For in this sense
it is most true, that God has promised that all true Believers shall
persevere; i. e. that all true Believers, formally considered, i. e. as such,
and abiding such, shall persevere, viz. in his grace and favor. But this (I
presume) is not the sense of the Argument-makers. Their meaning is, that God
has promised that all true Believers shall persevere thus believing, or in the
truth of their Faith, against all interveniences whatsoever: and that he will
so interpose with his Grace and Power, that none of them shall ever make
shipwreck of their faith, upon what quicksands of lust and sensuality* soever
they shall strike, against what rocks of obduration and impenitency soever they
shall dash. In this sense their Proposition (I confess) is sore against us, but
their Proofs are weak and contemptible: nor will any of the Scriptures, from
which they claim countenance and confirmation, own the cause, or comport with
them therein. Some of the fairest appearance and greatest hope that way, we
examined narrowly in the next preceding Chapter, and found them in heart much
estranged from them; as, viz. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Mat. 16. 18. Joh. 10. 9.
with some others. I acknowledge that there are several others, besides those
there discharged, chosen by men of that judgment, to serve in the same warfare:
but they are all of the same mind with their fellows, who (as we have heard)
detract that service. Most of these are Promises anciently made unto the Jewish
Nation in the Old Testament; all, or most of them, of like import, with that
Ier. 32. 39, etc. (largely opened toward the end of the former Chapter) and
are to be measured with the same line of interpretation. Nor can it ever be so
much as competently proved, that they were made with appropriation unto Saints,
or unto true Believers, but unto the body and generality of that People, or
Nation, which we mentioned. The particulars are these: For the mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has
mercy on thee Isai. 54. 10
. So again: As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit
that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart
out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever Isai. 59. 21
. And again: And I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will betroth thee
unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercy: I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness Hos. 2. 20, 21
, etc.

For the first of these Places, evident it is, that there is nothing asserted,.
3.
or promised by God therein, but only his faithfulness in his Promises, and
the sure and certain performance of his Covenant. But that the tenor or
substance of this Covenant should be, that they who once truly believe, should
be by him infallibly, and by a strong hand, against all interposals of sin,
wickedness, backsliding, rebellion, whatsoever, preserved i^ such a Faith, is
not so much as by any word, syllable, iota, or tittle, here intimated. Yea,
that it is contrary to the nature of a Covenant to impose Articles and
Conditions upon one Party only, and to leave the other free, was lately showed
Cap. 10. Sect. 54.
. And particularly, that God required terms of those, with whom he made, or was
about to make the Covenant here spoken of, is evident from Verse. 3. of the
following Chapter: Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your Soul
shall live: and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. The plain meaning whereof clearly is, that upon condition of
their obedience and faithfulness unto him, he would engage himself to be a God
and glorious Benefactor unto them for ever, and that the breach should never be
on his side.

Concerning the second Place, As for me, this is my Covenant with them, etc.. 4.
1. It may as well be conceived to hold forth a charge or injunction of
obedience unto the People, as a Promise from God of any thing. And Mr Calvin
himself, upon the Place, acknowledges that some translate the words in the
Imperative Mood, Let not my words depart, and grants withal, that the Future
tense will bear an Imperative construction. According to this sense, the
meaning of those words, this is my Covenant with them, is this; That Covenant
of Perpetual Grace and Mercy, which I make with them, requires this of them,
in order to the performance of it on my Part, that they quench not my Spirit,
which I shall put into them, nor forsake my Word, that I shall teach them. Or,

2. If we look upon the Passage as Promissory, there is little reason to judge
it as promising the gift, or Grace of Perseverance unto true Believers,
whatever their deportment shall be. (For, as for Conditional Promises unto
Believers of Perseverance in Faith unto the end, as, viz. upon their Christian
and good behavior, diligence, etc. I question not, but that the Scripture
abounds with them*) And that the Promise contained in this Verse (if there be
any such thing in it) be it a Promise of Perseverance in Faith, or of whatever
besides, is none other (I mean, then Conditional,) cannot reasonably be
gain-say'd, or the contrary proved. Nay,

3. Those words (in the beginning of the Verse) As for me (which Junius
translates, De me autem, i. e. but as much as concerns me,) seem to import, the
Promise ensuing to be Conditional, and that God is ready, willing, and
resolved, for his Part, to deal worthily and bountifully with them, even
according to all that which follows; always provided, that they, the other
Party, keep Covenant with him, and do what he requires of them. But,

4. Be it granted, that the words in debate are Promissive, and that whether. 5.
with Condition, or without Condition, yet nothing can be more clear, then
this, that they are, or were, directed and spoken, not (as was said concerning
the former Passage) to Saints, or true Believers only, but to the whole
Posterity of Jacob, or Nation of the Jews. The Apostle Paul (questionless)
understood them, thus directed and meant; as appears, Romans 11. 26. where he
applies the Promise contained in the words immediately preceding (with a little
expository variation of them, after the New Testament* manner) to this whole
Nation. And so (says he) all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there
shall come out of Zion a Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.
For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins. Meaning,
that when the time comes, that upon the Repentance of this Nation, he shall
pardon that great and grievous Apostasy and Rebellion, under the guilt whereof
they have layn for many generations, he will give Salvation unto them all, i.
e. freedom from all their present miseries and calamities, by the Hand of a
great Redeemer, or Deliverer, who shall come out of Sion, (i. e. whose descent
shall be of themselves: or, who shall come out of Sion, i. e. out of Heaven,
typified by Mount Sion, and which may be called, Sion mystical;) and he shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob; Ungodliness, i. e. (in that dialect, so
frequent in Scripture, wherein sin, is put for the punishment of sin, as
Righteousness also, for the reward of Righteousness,) the punishment of that
signal Ungodliness, from the house of Jacob [the Jews] for which they have
suffered the Heavy Displeasure of God so long. Or thus: He shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; i. e. partly by means of that wonderful Deliverance,
which he shall bring unto them, partly by other gracious Administrations of his
toward, and amongst them, he shall preserve them, or turn them away (for, to
turn away ungodliness from Jacob, is, I suppose, by an Hypallage, put for,
turning away Jacob from ungodliness,) from the Ungodliness of that
unthankfulness and backsliding, whereunto they and their Forefathers have been
so extremely subject from the beginning. Now then, the Verse and words
immediately preceding, being Promissory, and that to the whole Nation, it is no
ways like, but that the Verse and words following, being Promissory also, and
every ways as appropriable and appliable to the whole Nation, as they, should
be every whit as comprehensive, or extensive in respect of their object, as
they. Nor are there wanting amongst our best Reformed Expositors, who thus
understand them: let Musculus be consulted upon the place.

5. Whether the said Promise be conceived to respect, either the whole Nation.
6.
of the Jews, or only true Believers amongst them, it no ways so much as
sembles a Promise of final Perseverance unto either. Evident it is, that this
Promise exhibiteth and holds forth some new grace or favor, like unto which
God had not vouchsafed any formerly, either unto the persons to whom the said
Promise is now made, or to any other. The very Character and Tenor of ^^e
Promise imports this clearly. Let it be compared either with any for(...)
Promise in the Scripture, one, or more, or with any Dispensation of God toward
any person, or people, and there will be found no comportment between them. Now
for the grace or favor of final Perseverance, it is nothing (at least in the
Opinion of our Adversaries) but what is common to all true Believers, and what
God has conferred upon one, and other of this generation of men, from the
beginning of the world.

6. And lastly, It is very unproper, and does not look like one of the wise
Dispensations of God, to make a serious and solemn Promise unto men of that,
which they might, and ought, to expect of course, yea, and which they might,
with as much comfort and security, have promised unto themselves, as he. For
according to those Principles, which we now oppose, every true Believer, may,
and ought, to expect the grace of final Perseverance from God, as matter of
course, and of common and unalterable Dispensation; yea, and shall sin, if he
does it not.

If you ask, but if the Promise now in discourse, be not a Promise of final. 7.
Perseverance, what is the matter or substance of it, or what does God promise
in it? Let Musculus, a Learned and Orthodox Expositor, answer you. God (says
he) in this Promise, speaks of the Spirit and Word of the New Testament: both
which he did put upon [or, into] his people [meaning, the Iews] in the
beginning of the Dispensation of the Gospel: nor has he taken them away
hitherto, however blindness may seem to have wholly possessed Israel. For there
are some of this Nation that are continually converted unto Christ, in whom the
continuation of the Spirit and Word of God may [or, will] take place, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved Loquitur
omnino de Spiritu and Verbo novi Testamenti: Posuit utru^que super populum suum
initio Dispensationis Evangelii: nec ademit hactenus, quantumvis caecitas
Israelem prorsus occupasse videatur. Etenim perpetuo sunt, qui ex eo populo ad
Christum accedant, and spiritus hujus ac verbi continuationem eo usque
producant, donec tandem in fine ingressa plenitudine Gentium, omnis Israel
salvus fiat. Muscul. in Isai. 59. 21.
. So that he places the substance of the Promise in this, that the Nation of
the Jews shall never, from the days of Christ in the Flesh, be wholly,
altogether, or in all the members of it, destitute of the Spirit and Word of
Christ. This Exposition supposes nothing in the Promise for the business of
final Perseverance. Notwithstanding I conceive that God here rather promises
this; viz. that He will advance the Dispensations of His Grace and Goodness
toward, and amongst, this people, to such an excellency and height, that if
they prove not extremely unworthy, and neglective above measure of their own
Happiness, they shall have of the Spirit and Word of God abundantly amongst
them, and consequently abundance of Peace and Happiness for ever. The Promise
thus understood began to operate and work, and was performed in part, in, and
upon their Deliverance from that seventy years captivity; wrought yet more
effectually, at the coming of the Messiah unto them in the Flesh: but the full
and signal accomplishment of it remains yet behind, and shall take place,
when the Redeemer shall come out of Sion unto them, and their Messiah visit
them the second time.

For the third (and last) of the three places mentioned, And I will betroth. 8.
thee unto me for ever, etc. it is much of the same consideration with the
former; nor has any whit more in it to support the common Doctrine of
Perseverance, then they. For, 1. the Promise of the betrothing here specified,
is made unto the entire Body and Nation of the Jews, as well Unbeleevers, as
Believers, as appears by the carriage of the Chapter throughout. 2. It is
Conditional, and the performance of it (I mean, of the betrothing mentioned in
it) suspended upon the Repentance of this People (especially of their Idolatry)
and return to the true and pure Worship of God, as appears Verse. 14, 16, 17,
etc. which plainly shows, that it was made as well (nay, rather) to those
that were wicked and Idolatrous amongst this People, then unto others; as being
administered and held forth unto them chiefly for this end, to woo them away
from their Idols unto God. 3. Nor can it be proved, that this Promise so
properly, or directly, intends the collation of spiritual or heavenly good
things unto them, as temporal. Yea, the situation of it, between temporal
Promises immediately, both behind it, and before it, persuades the contrary.
Read the Context, from Verse. 18. to the end of the Chapter. Therefore, 4. and
lastly, the true intent and purpose of this place and Promise, And I will
betroth thee, etc. is, as if he should have said; When I shall by my Word and
Spirit and other gracious Administrations, wherein I shall appear to this
People, so far prevail with them, and overcome them, as to cause them to cast
away their Idols, and turn with their whole heart unto me, I will express my
self so, with so much love and affection unto them, that they shall not
lightly, neither they, nor their children after them, go awhoring from me any
more, but remain united unto me in a mutual chaste conjugal affection for ever.
I will betroth them unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercy: q. d. I will engage and attempt to insure, both them,
and their affections unto me, by all variety of ways and means, that are proper
and likely to bring such a thing to pass; as, 1. By showing my self just and
righteous unto them in keeping my Promise, concerning their Deliverance out of
Captivity at the end of seventy years: I will not fail them herein, no not to a
day, or hour. 2. By punishing and judging their Enemies, and destroying those
that led them captive, and held them in bondage and subjection. 3. By heaping
the fruits of my love and kindness upon them otherwise, as in giving them
peace, plenty, health, honor, etc. in abundance. 4. And lastly, by dealing
mercifully with them, in pardoning their sins and infirmities, which they will
commit daily against me; I will not be extreme to mark what they shall do
amiss, whilst their hearts shall remain perfect with me. I will even betroth
them unto me in faithfulness: i. e. By these and all other ways and means
likely to endear my self unto them, and to assure them and their affections
unto my self, for ever, I will really and effectually essay and try to do it.
An air of this Interpretation of the place breaths in the Annotations of our
English Divines themselves upon it, who Paraphrase it, thus: I will betroth
thee] I will re-establish my Covenant of Grace with thee, not only to observe
that Faith which is required in all Covenants, but also to forgive thee thy
sins, and not to take notice of thy unworthiness. But according to the Sense
and Exposition of the place given (which cannot reasonably be gainesaid) the
Promise therein is not absolute as to the effect of such a desponsation of this
People, which should stand for ever, but only as to the means, yet these very
efficacious and proper, to be used by God for the producing such an effect. And
thus, Tarnovius, a late and learned Expositor of the Reformed Religion,
understands it. I will betroth thee unto me] whom (says he) thou formerly
despised'st, and shamefully forsookest, and, AS MVCH AS IN ME LIES, whose
gifts are without Repentance, Romans 11. 29. this betrothing shall stand firm
for ever, nor shall this spiritual conjunction between us ever be dissolved, as
formerly Desponsabo te mihi, quem antea spretum turpiter dereliquisti; Et* quod
ad me, cujus dona sunt (...), Romans 11. 29 desponsatio illa durabit in seculum,
ut nunquam desinat haec spiritualis conjunctio quemadmodum ant^a, confer
Ezekiel. 16. 8, etc.
, etc. Those words, quod ad me, i. e. as far as in me lies, or, as far as
concerns me, plainly show, that this Author looked upon the Promise of
Betrothing, especially as to the perpetuity of it, but as conditional, and
such, which through the unfaithfulness and unworthiness of the party to be
Betrothed, might possibly never bring forth such a betrothment. We have once
and again (if not a third time also) given notice formerly, that the using of
means, endevors, or attempts to bring things to pass, are very commonly in
Scripture expressed by the effects themselves Cap 10. sect. 20, 55, etc.
. So that all things considered, it is a little strange to me, that learned and
sober Men should ever be tempted to build the Doctrine of Perseverance, as they
form and teach it, upon such Scriptures as this, and those lately opened.

But besides places of this imprese, and those dismissed in the former. 9.
Chapter, they insist upon others, to prove, that God has made an absolute
promise of final perseverance unto all true Believers. Let us then briefly try
the spirit of these: for if we can sinde so much as any one promise from God of
such an import, in all the Scriptures, all opposition must keep silence for
ever. Some suppose they descry such a promise as we speak of, in that of David,
They that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever Psalm. 125. 1.
. I answer, here is no promise that they that trust in the Lord, shall abide
trusting in the Lord for ever, or, that they shall not be removed from this
trusting in Him for ever; but only, that trusting in Him, and abiding so
trusting, they shall never be removed, [viz. from an estate, or condition of
peace and happiness, into an estate of trouble, or misery.] For it is a
stability of happiness or safety, not of Faith, that is here promised unto
those that trust in the Lord. If it be objected, that even a stability in
happiness, supposes, or includes, a stability in Faith; in as much as no Man
can make shipwreck of his Faith, but his happiness is wracked by it; I answer;
that the meaning of the promise in hand, is not, that they who at present trust
in the Lord, let them at any time herafter trust, or distrust Him, shall yet be
unremoveably happy: nor to imply, that they who once, or at any time trust in
the Lord, shall be necessitated by him to trust in Him for ever, but only to
show, that those that ^^st in the Lord, are as such, and whilst such, of that
kind of persons, for w^^se preservation and safety from evil, the mighty
Power of God Himself, stands engaged, and whom He will protect from evil. As
when the Apostle said to the Corinthians, that they were in his Heart to die
and live together with them 2 Cor. 7. 3.
, His meaning was nor, that they were so in his Heart to die, etc. that what
manner of persons soever they should prove afterward, though they should
apostatize to Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heathenisme, or the like, He could
notwithstanding be well content to live and die with them; but thus, they were
in His heart, etc. i. e. they were for the present such persons, whom he
singularly affected, and with whom he could be well content to hold Communion
both in death and life. We have given notice formerly more then once Cap. 10.
Sect. 43. and Sect 51. and Sect. 54 and Sect. 1. of this Chapter.
; that the Promises of God made unto Men with respect to such and such special
qualifications, are to be understood with such an Explication or Caution,
wherewith His threatenings against such and such particular sins are to be
interpreted. As for example: when God threatens that unrighteous persons shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor 6. 9.
, and John Baptist, that he that believes not the Son, shall not see life,
Joh. 3. 36.
etc. the meaning is not, that they that are now unrighteous, or unbelieving,
though they should repent and believe hereafter, should yet be excluded from
the Kingdom of God; but that unless they shall repent of their sins, they
should for them be excluded. In like manner, when God Promises stability of
condition, safety, salvation, or the like, unto those that believe, and trust
in Him, He intends no obligation hereby to these persons, otherwise then upon
their abiding such in those qualifications, as of Faith, and trusting in Him,
in regard whereof the said Promises were made to them. God Himself leads us
as it were by the hand to such an interpretation as this, as well of His
Promises, as of His Threatenings. (Such I mean of both kinds, as those
specified.) At what instant* (says He) I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If
that Nation, against wh^m I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent me of the evil, that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant I
shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build and to
plant it (i. e. shall promise to build, or to plant, either the one, or the
other) if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will
repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them Jer. 18. 7. 8.
. Much after the same manner elsewhere, having promised, or said, that He that
has walked in his statutes, and kept his judgments to deal truly, being
righteous or just, shall surely live Ezekiel. 18. 7.
; adds afterward: But when the righteous turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations, that the wicked Man does, shall he live Verse 24.
? In this passage we clearly see, that this Promise made by God to a righteous
Man, He shall surely live, is to be understood with this Proviso and Condition,
that he departs not from his righteousness; which is here plainly enough
supposed that he may very possibly do. Therefore this Promise also, They that
trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, etc. being of that kind of Promise,
which God makes out of those gracious respects, which He bears to some
special qualification in Men, carries no further obligation in it on Gods
Part unto those, to whom it is made, then as, and whilst, they remain so
qualified, as they were, when first they came under the Grace of the said
Promise, i. e. as, and whilst, they trust in the Lord. So that this Promise
has nothing to do, little or much, with that Doctrine of Perseveranc^ which
we oppose, but looks quite another way.

Another Text of Scri^ture sometimes urged to prove the Proposition of. 10.
our present Contest viz. that God has made an absolute Promise of
Perseverance unto tr^^ Believers, is that of our Savior: But whosoever
drinks of the water, that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up to eternal
life John 4. 14
. But neither does this Scripture any whit more (if so much) then only face
the business in hand. For here is no Promise made, that they who once believe,
how unworthily soever they shall behave themselves, shall still be preserved by
God, or the Spirit of God, in believing, or that they shall be necessitated
always to believe: but only a Declaration and Assertion made by Christ, of the
excellency and desireableness of that life, which he comes to give unto the
World, above that life of Nature, which is common unto all. This, by comparing
the words transcribed, with those in the former Verse, is evident: Jesus
answered, and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this water, (i. e. of
material water, such as this well affords,) shall thirst again; [i. e. is
subject, notwithstanding his drinking hereof, to thirst again.] But whosoever
drinks of the water, that I shall give him, etc. q. d. The best means that
can be had, or enjoyed, to render this present life, which we live, free from
inconvenience, and that which is troublesome, and contrary to it, will not
effect it, the condition of this life, being subject to dissolution, will not
admit of any such freedom, or perfection: but whosoever shall drink [inwardly
receive and beleeve] that Doctrine, which I shall administer unto him, shall
hereby be made partaker of such a life, which shall within a short time (if men
be careful in the interim to preserve it) by reason of the nature and perfect
condition and constitution of it, be exempt from all sorrow, trouble, and
inconvenience whatsoever, as being eternal.

But, 1. that he does not oppose that life, which accrues unto men by. 11.
drinking the water, which he gives them, unto that natural life, which they
live, by other means, in respect of the present condition or constitution of
it, or as it is enjoyed by men in this present world, is evident from hence,
because he asserts it free from thirst, [shall never thirst.] Now we know, that
the Saints themselves, notwithstanding the life of Grace which is in them, by
drinking the water that Christ has given them, are yet subject to both kinds
of thirst, as well that which is corporal, or natural, as that which is
spiritual: yea, that spiritual thirst, unto which they are now subject, though
it argues a deficiency of what they would further have, or desire to be, and in
that respect is troublesome, yet is it argumentative of the goodness or
blessedness of their condition. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after
Righteousness: for they shall be filled Mat. 5 6.
. By the way, this spiritual thirst, which is incident even unto that life
which is derived by Christ, and the waters given by him, unto men, as it is
enjoyed or possessed by them in this present world, is, according to the
purport of our Saviors own arguing in the Scripture under debate, an Argument,
that for the present, and whilst it is obnoxious to such a thirst, it is
dissolveable, and may fail. For in the latter part of the said passage, he
plainly implies, that the eternalness of that life, which springs from the
drinking of his waters, is the reason or cause why it is exempt from thirst.
Let the whole passage be read, and minded, and this will clearly appear. If
then the eternality of a life be the cause or reason why it is free from the
inconveniency of thirst, evident it is, that such a life, which is not free
from thirst, is not, during this weakness or imperfection of it, eternal, or
privileged against all dissolution. I easily grant, that such a life as we now
speak of, may, notwithstanding the dissolvableness of it, be (in a sense)
called, Eternal, (as it is frequently called in the Scriptures) viz. in semine,
or in fieri (as they say) as the conception of a man in the womb, may be
called, a man; or because in respect of the native and inbred tendency of it,
and being duly nourished and preserved, it is apt in time to become Eternal
(formally and properly so called) even as the conception of a man in the womb,
by reason of the natural frame and tendency of it, will in time, if it meets
with no unnatural and destructive accident by the way, come to be a man in his
full stature and strength. But as this frame or tendency of the conception we
speak of, does no ways prove, that therefore it must of necessity, or what
will, or can, befall it, come in time to be a perfect man: so neither is it
necessary, that that life in the Saints, which is seminally, inchoately, and
conception-wise, Eternal, should against all possible occurrences of things
adverse to it, come to be actually, properly, and completely Eternal. The
result of this discourse amounts clearly to this, that our Savior, in the
words in hand, does not oppose the life which comes by drinking his water, to
the life of Nature, in respect of the present and imperfect condition of it, in
this World, but in respect of the future and complete growth and condition of
it in the World to come. Therefore,

2. When he says, that the water which he shall give him, shall be in him. 12.
a well of water, springing up, etc. his meaning is not, as if either the
Doctrine, or Spirit, which He gives unto men, and they drink, or receive from
His Hand, should always actually, necessarily, and infallibly, end, or issue in
Eternal Life (properly and completely so called, the Scriptures in many places
testifying the contrary, of both Mat. 13. 20, 22. Ma^k 6. 20. Act. 8. 13
compared with Verse. 20, 21. Hebr. 6. 4, 5, etc.
,) but that their natural course, and tendency always stand that way; as the
course, motion, and inclination of waters in a river always stand bent toward
the Sea, though they may be turned by force out of their channel, or dried up
by the violent and scortching heat of the Sun. Therefore neither is there any
Promise in this Scripture, of such a Perseverance of the Saints in Faith, as is
commonly notioned amongst us, and has been opposed hitherto.

Another place wherein the said Minor Proposition (in the sense intended. 13.
by the Assertors) is pretended to be found, consists of these words: And I
will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may*
abide with you for ever John 14. 16.
. But,

1. Evident it is that our Savior does not in this place oppose the abiding or
remaining of the Holy Ghost, to his own discession or departure from the Hearts
or Souls of men, into which He is entered or come; but to his departure out of
the World by death, which was now at hand. Therefore,

2. By the abiding of the Comforter, or Holy Ghost, with them for ever, he does
not mean his perpetual or un-interruptible residence, or abode, in their
Hearts, or Souls, or in the Heart or Soul of any other particular man
determinately; but His constant abiding in the World, in, and with the Gospel*
and the children thereof, until the consummation and end of it. In respect of
which permanency of His Spirit, with them and their spiritual Successors or
Posterity, He says of Himself elsewhere, And ^o I am with you always, to the
end of the World Matt. 28. 20
. And to put our Saviors meaning in the words in hand, into words of more
plainness, it was as if He should have said to His Disciples, thus: The Counsel
and Purpose of my Father, in sending me into the World, required that I should
make no long stay, or abode in it, but that I should return by the way of Death
again unto Him, after a season; and accordingly I am now upon my Return, and so
must leave you: but when I shall have finished my Return unto my Father, and am
come to Him, I will intercede for you, and he will send you another Comforter,
the Holy Ghost, upon better terms, for staying and continuing with you, then
those on which I came: for He shall be sent, not to be taken out of the World
by Death, as I must be, but to make His residence with, and amongst you, my
friends and faithful ones, for ever. This to be our Saviors express drift and
scope in the words, appears by the carriage of the greatest part of the
Ch^pter. Now from such an abiding of the Holy Ghost with them, as this, cannot
be inferred His perpetual abiding with any one person, or Believer,
determinately, much less with every one.

3. This Promise concerning the abiding of this other Comforter for ever,. 14.
must be conceived to be made, either to the Apostles, personally considered;
or else to the whole Body of the Church, of which they were principal Members.
If the first ^f these be admitted, then it will not follow, That because the
Apostles had the perpetual Residency of the Spirit with them, and in them;
therefore every particular Believer has the like; no more then it will follow,
That because the Apostles were infallible in their Judgments and Doctrine,
through the Teachings of the Spirit in them; therefore every Believer is
infallible upon the same account also. If the latter be admitted, neither will
it follow, that every Believer, or every Member of the Church, must needs have
the Residence of the Spirit with him for ever. There are Privileges
appropriate to Corporations, or Bodies Politic, which every particular Member
of these Bodies cannot claim. The Church may have the Residence or Presence of
the Spirit of God with her for ever; and yet every present Member hereof lose
his present Interest and Part in Him. Yea that the abiding for ever of the
Spirit in the Apostles themselves, was not absolutely promised unto them,
appears from those, and such like passages of our Savior unto them. If ye
shall keep my Commandments* ye shall ABIDE in my John 15. 10
, etc. If any man love me, he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and will DVVELL with him John 14. 23
.

4. And lastly, Notice has been taken and given formerly, that this Particle
(...), ut, that, does not always import the certainty of the thing spoken of,
by way of event, no not when speech is of God Himself, but oft-times the
Intention only of the Agent See Cap. 10 Sect 50. and 53
. In this Dialect of speech, those words, that he may abide with you for ever,
do not imply an absolute necessity of his abiding with them for ever, but only
that that should be the intent of Him that should send Him, and that He would
send Him in such a way, or upon such terms, that if they were true to their own
Interest in so weighty a matter, and proportionably careful, they might retain
Him, and have His presence and abode with them for ever. Turn the words any way
with any tolerable congruity, either to the scope of the place, manner of
Scripture* expression, or Principles of Reason; and the Doctrine of
Perseverance, which we implead, will be found to have nothing in them.

As for such Passages as these, He that hears my Word, and believes on. 15.
Him, that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation
John 5. 24
, etc. And again: He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life John 3. 36
. And He that eats me, shall live by me John 6. 57
: (with many others of like import) enough, and that with advantage, has been
said already, to evince them innocent from all compliance with the common
Doctrine (heterodoxly surnamed Oxthodox) of Perseverance See cap. 10. Sect: 11.
and 54. And this cap. Sect. 1. and Sect. 9. and Sect. 11.
. These indeed are all Promises of eternal life unto those that believe; but
that the condition of Perseverance rules, though invisibly, in them all, but is
it self absolutely Promised in none, clearly appears by what has been already
argued from the Scriptures; and might easily be made to appear yet further, by
the consideration of all those Scripture Texts, wherein salvation is suspended
upon Perseverance: and Perseverance, upon the watchfulness and diligence of
Men. But it is like we shall have better occasion to survey such Texts as these
hereafter. We have now done with the first argument of our opponents in the
Present Controversy.

Their second is built upon such Texts, which affirm and teach, that God. 16.
Argum. 2.
will, according to his Promise, so Preserve and keep all true Believers, that
none of them shall ever fall away from their Faith, either totally, or finally.
Let us hearken to what they bring forth upon this account. From the Apostle
Paul they furnish themselves with such sayings as these* Who (speaking of Jesus
Christ) shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful by whom ye were called, 1 Cor.
1. 8, 9
etc. Again: But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you
from evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. ^
etc.

That neither of these Scripturs, nor any of like Character, has any communion
with that Doctrine of Perseverance, which has been disowned hitherto, has
been sufficiently proved already Cap. 10. Sect. 20.
, where the passages themselves were briefly opened, and a clear sense
rendered, wherein God (according to Scripture Phrase) may be said to establish,
and confirm Men unto the end, though these Men be neither actually, or with
effect, established, nor confirmed, thereunto. The Scripture frequently
attributes Actions, Events, or Effects, where means, or endeavors are, or have
been used, or attempts made, yea and when intentions only have been
entertained, in order to the acting, or effecting such things; yea and
sometimes, where occasion only has been administered for the effecting of them.
Instances have been given formerly of all these kinds of expression in the
Scripture. So that God may properly enough (as the Scripture counts propriety)
be said to establish or confirm Believers unto the end, when he vouchsafes
unto them means sufficient both inward and outward, for their establishment and
confirmation in this kind; or when he does that, which is proper and fitting
for him to do, for, and toward the procuring and effecting the one and the
other. Now God may do all this, and yet Men neither be completely, and to
Salvation, established nor confirmed unto the end, through their own negligence
and carelessnesse to comport with the grace of God toward them in this behalf,
and to do that, which is required on their part toward the working out of
their Salvation. And,

2. That the Apostle in neither of these places, does undertake or affirm,. 17.
that God will establish or confirm them unto the end, after any such manner,
or in any such sense, but that they may possibly miscarry notwithstanding,
appears from the Context it self, where the latter of them stands. For having
comforted them with the words mentioned, Verse 3. But the Lord is faithful,
who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3
, and professed ( Verse 4.) a confidence [i. e. a confident hope] in the Lord
touching them, that they both did, and would do, the things which He commanded
them, (which by the way, had been a very weak saying, if he had known that
they must of necessity do them, and could not choose to do otherwise.) Verse
5. He lifterh up this Prayer for them; And the Lord [or now the Lord] direct
your Hearts into [or, unto, (...)] the love of God, and into [or, unto] a
patient waiting for Christ. Doubtless had he first absolutely promised unto
them such an establishment, and keeping from evil, by God, the saving success
or event whereof had no ways depended upon them, nor upon any such comportment
on their part with it, which they might possibly have neglected, or refused, He
would not so immediately have conceived such a Prayer for them, as we heard,
viz. that God would direct their Hearts, into [unto, or toward, as the
preposition, (...), might very well be translated] the love of God, etc. It is
of no good consistence, that a Man should first absolutely and confidently
affirm, that such, or such a thing should, or would be done, by God, against
all opposition whatsoever; and then presently Pray unto God, that He would
direct the Hearts of Men to such a course, upon their walking wherein, the
event or coming to pass of the thing so promised, depended; especially
considering, that a drecting of the hearts of M^n, into, or toward, such a
course, or way, does not necessarily suppose, that therefore they will, or of
necessity must, walk in them. Therefore certainly that stablishment, and
keeping from evil, which the Apostle (in the place in hand) promises unto
them, imports nothing else, but his willingness and readiness at all times to
furnish and follow them with such means of grace, which would be proper, and
abundantly sufficient to stablish them, and to keep them from evil, yea and
which would actually stablish, and keep them from evil, if they proved not
extremely negligent and unfaithful to their own Souls, in despising them.
Therefore,

3. Whereas the Apostle (in both places) mentions the faithfulness. 18.
of God, God is faithful by whom ye were called, etc. as that Divine
Principle in Him, or Attribute, out of which He is moved to establish and
confirm them unto the end, and so to keep them from evil; by faithfulness,
He does not necessarily mean that property or attribute in Him, which renders
Him true, and just, or constant in the performance of His Promises (I mean, of
His Promises* properly and commonly so called, and which are exhibited in
words) as if the Apostle in these, or any the like places, supposed, such a
Promise, one, or more, by Him, by which He stands obliged to stablish or
confirm His Saints unto the end, by a strong and irresistible Hand; but such a
kind of faithfulness, or disposition in Him, as that meant by Peter, when He
styles Him, a Faithful Creator 1 Pet. 4. 19*
. Now God (as we formerly showed Cap. 4. Sect. 39.
) is, and may properly be termed, a Faithful Creator, because He constantly
performs unto His Creature, whatsoever the Law, or Relation of a Creator
Promises in an equitable and rational way, unto it, which we there signified*
to be a great care, tenderness, and love toward it for the preservation and
well being of it, according to the nature and condition of every Creature
respectively. In like manner He may (yea it is most likely that He is) called,
Faithful, in His calling of Men, [ God is faithful by whom ye were called]
i. e. as He is a Spiritual Father, or Creator, a giver of a new and more
excellent being unto Men, because He never fails to perform unto these new
Creatures of His, whatsoever such a being as this regularly interpreted,
promises unto Him, who receives it, from Him who is the Donor or Collator of
it, i. e. convenient and sufficient means for the preservation and well being
of it. Eadem est causa procreans and conservans (says the natural
Philosopher.) So that the Faithfulness of God, in the Scriptures in hand,
suppose no such Promise made by God, as our Opposers imagine, as viz. whereby
he should in terms, or words, stand engaged, ^o stablish, confirm, or keep
from evil, His new Creatures, His Regenerate ones, after any such manner, but
that they, if they be careless and negligent of themselves, may be shaken,
decline, and commit evil notwithstanding.

4. (And lastly, for this) by the tenor of other passages from the same
Apostles Pen, and upon like occasion, where He expresses the care and
diligence of the Saints themselves to cooperate and join with God and His
Grace, by way of condition, to their establishment to the end, it fully
appears, that all such Promises, which are made by Him concerning such
establishment, are conditional, and that the full and complete Performance of
them is suspended upon the said voluntary conjunction or cooperation of the
Saints themselves with Him. Such Passages as we now hint, are these: And you
which were in times past, strangers and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has He reconciled, in the body of His Flesh through death, to present
you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in His sight, IF ye continue in
the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel, Colos. 1. 21, 22, 23.
etc. So again: For we are made partakers of Christ* If we hold the beginning
of our confidence steadfast unto the end Heb. 3. 14.
, etc. So that there is no such Promise of Perseverance unto the end, made by
God unto the Saints, but what they may possibly be dis-inherited of by their
own Sloathfulnesse and Unworthiness.

Another piece of Scripture, by which the Argument, now shaking, is supposedly.
19.
strengthened, is that of the Apostle: There has no temptation taken you, but
such as is common to Man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way
to escape, that ye may be able to bear it 1 Cor. 10* 13
. I answer,

1. That this Scripture notably confirms the Interpretation and Explication
lately given, of the Faithfulness of God, where ever it is asserted upon the
occasion mentioned (which is manifest enough in the words now before us) viz.
that it signifies or imports, such a carfulness, or respectfulnesse in Him
toward His Saints, which answers the nature and ^erms of such a Relation, that
accrueth unto Him, by making Himself the Founder, Father, or Author of this new
Being of Saintship unto them, and withal, which answers the nature and
condition of such Creatures or Persons. Now such a love or respectfulnesse in
God, toward the Persons we speak of, which expresses it self in vouchsafeing
unto them a liberal and bountiful sufficiency of means, for, and toward, the
perpetual Preservation of themselves in well-being, fully answers both the
nature and import of the said Relation, as also the frame and condition of
these new Creatures; with whose frame, or state and manner of Being, viz. as
they are Men, it well consists, that they should have all things requisite and
necessary for their happiness and well-being, both present, and future,
supplied unto them by God, but not to be simply and absolutely, or by a
forcible and strong hand, necessitated to use them in order hereunto. And
accordingly the Holy Ghost in the words before us, expressly testifies on the
behalf of God, that He will not suffer the Saints to be tempted above what they
are ABLE, i. e. that He will afford them a sufficiency of means or strength to
stand it out against all temptations whatsoever, that shall be permitted by Him
to befall them; not, that He will not suffer them to be tempted above what they
shall be willing [to overcome, or keep themselves upright under,] nor, that He
will not suffer them to be overcome. Nor is this sense or notion of Gods
faithfulness, any whit differing from what Mr. Calvin himself conceives upon
the Place. The Apostle (says he) calls God faithful, not only because He is
true in His Promises; but it is as if He should say, the Lord is a certain
Keeper of those that are His, under whose tuition you are in safety: for He
never leaves His destitute. Therefore when He has once received you into His
Care, or Trust, there is no cause why ye should fear, IN CASE YOU DEPEND
WHOLLY ON HLM Fidelem Dominum vocat, non tantum quia verax sit in promissis,
sed perinde ac si diceret, Dominus est certus custos suorum, sub cujus tatela
estis in tuto: nunquam enim suos relinquit destitutos. Ergo c^m vos receperit
in suam fidem, non est quod timeatis, modo pendeat^s toti ab ipso. Idem alibi:
Fidelis qui vocavit] Observa autem quo Argumento perpetuum illis Dei auxilium
promittat, nempe quia eos vocavit. Quibus verbis significat, sperandam esse
Gratiae continuationem ex quo semel Dominus nos sibi in filios cooptavit* Neque
enim uniu^ Dieise Patrem nobis fore pollicetur, sed hac lege nos adoptat, ut
perpetuo nos foveat. Calv. in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
. So that He Promises no absolute safety, or security, unto the Saints, upon
Gods faithfulness, but only conditional, viz. if they shall wholly depend on
Him. Therefore,

2. For those words, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it, they do not imply, that God will make such a
way for their escape from under Temptation, that they shall, and must,
necessarily bear it, [viz. without falling under it, or miscarrying by it;]
but that they may be ABLE to bear it [without suffering any such loss, or
misery by it,] and make an escape from under it, in due time. This Exposition
of the place is confirmed by our English Divines themselves in their
Annotations upon it. Common, or incident, to Man,] i* e. (say they) such as
usually befalls Men, even Gods dearest Children, or such as MAY be borne by
Man in this life especially, assisted by Gods Grace, which is always
SVFFICIENT for Gods Children* That which is always sufficient, is not
necessarily at any time efficient as to the actual Production of that, for
which it suffices: and that which MAY be Borne by Man without inconvenience,
MAY also possibly be an occasion of evil unto him.

3. (And lastly) the Exhortation, or Dehortation, immediately following,
wherefore my dearly Beloved, flee from Idolatry, plainly shows, that there
is no absolute Promise from God concerning their safe bringing off from their
temptation, intended by the Apostle in the words in hand. The mention or
assertion of such a Promise, is no Proper motive to that duty, which he
requires of them in that Exhortation, but rather a Temptation from it.

Another place insisted upon, (upon the last mentioned account) presents. 20.
it self in these words: And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly: and I
pray God that your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be preserved blameless,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Thessalonians* 5. 23
. I answer;

1. These words suppose no Promise, much less any absolute Promise, made by
God, to preserve their Spirit, Soul, or Body, blameless; but only contain a
Prayer, or holy desire conceived by the Apostle for such a gracious
vouchsafement from God unto them. Which rather proves, that such a
preservation might possibly have been withheld, or denied by God unto them,
then the contrary. For those things are more likely to be sought by Prayer,
which may possibly not be granted, or obtained otherwise, then such, which
might with the greatest confidence be expected upon another account, and
without such Prayer. And besides, what Efficacy or Prevalency with God can be
ascribed unto such a Prayer, which seeks such things at His hand, to the
exhibition whereof He stands absolutely engaged by Promise, Purpose, or the
like, and which should have been exhibited and given by Him, whether such
Prayer had been made unto Him, or no?

2. The same thing (in effect) which the Apostle here prays that God would do
for the Thessalonians, in other places he exhorts men themselves to do: which
plainly shows that the intent and purport of the Apostles Prayer in this
place, was not that he would by a peremptory and irresistible hand preserve
them blameless, etc. (which is His manner of acting in the Performance of all
His absolute Promises) but that he would afford unto them such gracious
excitements, quickenings and enlargements of Heart and spirit, by His Spirit,
whereby they might be effectually provoked and engaged to put forth themselves
to do what was requisite on their parts, for, and toward, such an actual
preserving of themselves; which notwithstanding, he clearly supposes (in the
Passages immediately subjoyned) that they very possibly might not do, even
under such excitements and enlargements. I give thee charge (says this Apostle
to Timothy) in the sight of God, who quickens all things, and before Jesus
Christ, -- That thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14
. So also Peter to his Proselytes: Wherefore (beloved) seeing that ye look for
such things, BE DILIGENT, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot,
and blameless 2 Pet. 3. 14
: wherein that very possibly they might miscarry, appears yet further from
these words (not long after) Ye therefore (Beloved) seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from your own ste^fastness 2 Pet. 3. 17
.

3. If it shall be supposed, that the Apostle in the Passage in hand, any ways
supposes a certainty, or necessity, in respect of any absolute Promise, or
Decree, that God would, actually and with success, preserve them blameless,
etc. he should clearly destroy, or at least much shake and weaken, what he had
built up in all his preceding Exhortations and Admonitions; the joint tendency
of them all being this, to preserve them blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. For to inform, or insinuate unto such men, whom we have most
seriously admonished and exhorted to be studious and careful of doing such and
such things, that so they may be blameless unto the coming of Christ, that they
shall certainly, and without any possibility of miscarrying, be preserved by
God blameless hereunto, is nothing else, being truly interpreted, but to tempt
them to neglect all our Admonitions and Exhortations in that behalf.

4. Nor do the words following, Faithful is he that calls you, who also. 22.
will do it 1 These. 5. 24
, imply any such thing; but only this, that God was, and would be, careful and
tender over them, in preserving them blameless, etc. so far as His Interest
lies, or is any ways meet for Him to interpose, act, or assist, in, or
toward, such their preservation. This sense we have formerly asserted unto
like passages and expressions, in this Chapter Sect. 17, 18, 19, etc. See also
Cap. 10 Sect. 20.
. To heal the offense of such explications, or limitations, as these, as far as
His Interest lies, as far as is proper, or appertains unto him to do, (with
the like) when the doing or performance of such things is attributed unto God,
wherein men also are to join and act with Him, I shall here add,

1. That such explications, or limitations as these, in the said cases, and
others of like consideration, are frequently used, both by the Ancient Fathers,
and by our late Divines also, even such as are supposed our greatest
Adversaries in the present Controversies. Therefore (says Austin, speaking of
Christ's coming to save the world) AS MVCH AS LIES IN THE PHYSICIAN, he came to
[save, or] heal the sick. He slays himself, who will not observe the Precepts
of the Physician Ergo, quantum in Medico est, sanare venit aegrotum. Ipsese
interimit, qui praecepta Medici observare non vult. Aug. in Johan. Tract. 12.
. So Chrysostom; For what (says he) if all men do not believe, yet HE HAS
DONE HIS PART, [or fully performed that which was proper for him to do (...).
Chrysostom. in Heb. Sermon. 4.
.] And elsewhere: For although Christ was not like to win, or gain, all men,
yet did he dye for all men, So FVLFILLING THAT WHICH WAS PROPER FOR HIM, [or
which appertained to Him (...). Chrysostom. in Romans Sermon. 26.
.] Yea, AS MVCH AS IN THEM LIES (says Calvin, speaking of wicked Apostates)
they profane and abrogate the inviolable Covenant of God, ratified by the blood
of Christ Imo, quantum in se est, inviolabile Dei foedus, ac sancitum Christi
sanguine, profanant and abrogant. Calv. in 2 Pet. 2. 20.
. Piscator also, in a like case, uses the same explication. Thy weak Brother
shall perish] viz. (says he) AS TO THEE, or as much as in thee lies Peribit]
nempe per te quidem, seu quantum per te stat. Piscat. in 1 Cor. 8. 11.
. Our English Divines make use of the same explicatory expression in their
Annotations upon the same place.

2. Upon the same account I add this further; that there is very good reason.
23.
for such Attributions, as we now speak of, whether unto God, or men, or any
other efficient cause; I mean, why such effects should be ascribed unto them,
toward the production whereof they contribute any considerable degree of
efficiency, whether the said effects be ever actually produced, or no; viz.
because they do as much, and altogether the same, in such a case of a
non-production of the effect, as they should do in a case of an actual
production; and the reason of the non-attainment, or non-production of the
effect, rests not at all in them, but in some other cause, one, or more,
which should have contributed their efficiency, or strength likewise, toward
the same production, but did not. As for example: Suppose four or five Horses
yoked in a Team, and that one or two of these should pull or draw lustily, yet
because the rest are jadish, and lazy, and will not put their shoulders to it,
the wain, being heavy laden, sticks fast in the slow, and is not drawn out; in
this case, because the Horses supposed to pull stoutly, do as much for their
parts, as was requisite for them to do toward the drawing of it out, and that
which would actually have drawn it out, in case their fellows had joined, as
they ought and might, in the same act of drawing with them, there is no reason
why they should lose the credit or commendation of their activity, through the
jadishness of their fellows, nor [consequently] why they should not be said to
have drawn the Wain out of the mire. In like manner when God contributes his
efficiency toward the keeping of men blameless, and that such an efficiency,
which being seconded and complied with by them, according to their duties, and
abilities for the action, would actually produce the effect, and keep them
blameless indeed, there is no reason why he should be deprived of the honor of
his action because men are slothful, and will not act with him; and
consequently why he should not be said to keep them blameless, how blameworthy
in the mean time soever they be, through their own default. For of the two it
is a more honorable expression, to say, that a man did such, or such a worthy
action, then, that he did somewhat toward it. And for as much as, 1. God does
no more toward the keeping of those Saints of his, blameless, who are actually
and indeed kept blameless, then he either does, or is ready to do in a regular
way, toward the keeping of others of them blameless, who yet miscarry: And, 2.
considering, that when any of the Saints are actually kept blameless through
that gracious supply of his Spirit, and other means vouchsafed by him in order
thereunto (though not without their own care and concurrence with him herein)
the honor of this action, or keeping blameless, is most properly due unto him;
there is no reason why it should not be ascribed unto him in the former case,
as well as in the latter, or that he should not be as well said to keep those
blameless, who only through their own unworthiness, prove blameworthy, as
those, who through his grace attended with their own endeavors, are kept
blameless. It is a saying approved (I suppose) on all hands,

-- careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet, i. e.
Success in his attempts I wish him none,
Who by the event will judge an action.
Therefore when God acts uniformly in a way of grace, he is uniformly to be
honored, what difformity soever there be found in the event, issue, or
consequent of his action.

5. (And lastly) the words in hand cannot be judged Promissory, or to suppose a
Promise, because then it would follow, that God should stand engaged by
Promise, to preserve Believers, not only from total and final Apostasy, but
from all partial and temporary declinings also. For they that are sanctified
wholly, [or, throughout] and whose whole Spirit, and Soul and Body are
preserved blameless, etc. are, in the same sense, preserved from all, and all
manner of declining.

The last piece of Scripture frequently called upon for support of this second.
24.
Argument, answers in these words: Being confident of this very thing, that
He which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ Philip. 1. 6
. This Text is of the same interpretation with the former; only it has not so
much of the letter, or face, as some of them have, for an absolute Promise from
God unto the Saints, that He will cause them to Persevere. For,

1. That confidence [or, persuasion rather, (...)] which the Apostle here
professes, is not said, nor insinuated, to be built upon any Promise, much
less upon any absolute Promise of God to interpose after any such manner for
their Perseverance, that it should not be possible for them to decline, or not
to persevere: but upon a charitable or equitable apprehension he had of the
ingenuous integrity, and simplicity of their hearts toward Christ, His Saints,
and Gospel; which kind of temper or frame of spirit in Men, is of all others
most promising of perseverance in well doing through the Grace of God; and
consequently, of the continuation of this grace unto Men, in as much as
(according to the common saying of Divines) Deus non deserit, nisi deserentem,
God forsakes no Man, but those who forsake Him first. That such an apprehension
of the holy ingenuity and uprightness of their Hearts, as we speak of, in
conjunction with that gracious Principle or Disposition in God now hinted, was
the ground of that good persuasion, which he here expresses, most evidently
appears from the words immediately following: Even as it is meet for me to
think this of you all [viz. that He, who has begun a good work in you, will
perform it, etc.] because I have you in my Heart, in as much as both in my
bonds, and in the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, ye all are
partakers of my Grace Philip. 1. 7.
. Therefore it was the present goodness or honestnesse of their Hearts,
expressed by their willingness to partake of the afflictions of the Gospel,
and of the Saints, not any Promise of God, which was the ground of that
persuasion in him, which he here mentions.

2. Had he had any absolute Promise of God for the ground of that his
persuasion, doubtless he would not have expressed himself with so much
tenderness, and wariness, as to say, even as it is meet for me to think, etc.
The Promises of God would have taught Paul to speak at another manner of rate
of confidence, then so.

3. (And lastly) had he here given unto these Philippians any absolute
assureance of Gods performing the good work begun in them, until the day,
etc. or such, which might have satisfied, or made them confident, that the good
work He speaks of, should have been continued and perfected by God, without
all interposall, or means to be used on their part; he had laid a very
slippery foundation, to build all those Exhortations upon, which with much
earnestness he presses upon them in the sequel of his Epistle; and more
particularly these, Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel
of Christ -- that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the Faith of the Gospel, Philip. 1. 27.
etc. And again: Wherefore my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in
my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own Salvation
with fear and trembling Cap. 2. 12.
, etc. Hope, or confidence of obtaining, by, and upon the use of means to
obtain, is a spur unto action: but hope and confidence of obtaining whether
any means be used, or no, is a temptation unto sloth.

Nor do our Reformed Expositors of best account, interpret the place. 25.
in hand concerning any certainty that the Apostle had of the perpetual
continuance of the grace of God with them, but only of a charitable or humane
persuasion hereof. But wheresoever (says Calvin upon the place) we see any
such signs of a Divine Election, which we are capable to apprehend, it
becomes us to be presently stirred up to a good hope, as well for this end,
that we be not evill-minded toward our Neighbors, or defraud them of an
equitable and humane judgment of charity, as that we may be thankful unto God
Sed ubi cunque cernimus quaecunque Divinae electionis indicia a nobis
apprehendi possunt, protinus ad bonam spem excitari nos oportet: tam ne* simus,
in proximos maligni, eosque aequo and humano charitatis judicio fraudemus quam
ut Deo gratissimus.
. Musculus yet somewhat more fully. God indeed (says he) had begun a good
work in the Philippians: but from whence was the Apostle certain that he
would perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ? I Answer, he does not say, I
am certain, but, I am persuaded: It is one thing to be certain of a matter;
another, to be persuaded. A certainty of Gods works may be had out of His Word:
but a persuasion [may be had] from a good belief or reliance upon His
goodness, and from some Arguments of such His Works. Certainty deceives no
Man: but a Man's persuasion often falls out otherwise then was hoped Caeperat
quidem bonum hoc opus in Philippensibus Deus: verum unde certus erat Apostolus,
quod ess^t illud perfecturus usque in diem Jesu Christi? Respondeo, non dicit,
Certus sum, sed persuasus sum. Aliud est, esse certum de re aliqua, aliud vero
esse persuasum. Certitudo de operibus Dei haberi potest ex ipsius verbo:
persuas^o vero, ex bona erga bonitatem ipsius fiducia, and quibusdam operum
illius Argumentis. Certitudo fallit neminem: persuasio autem saepenumero aliter
cadit, qua sperabatur.
.

A third Argument laid hold on, for the service of the Doctrine of
Perseverance,. 26.
is founded upon the immutable Decree of Election from eternity; and operates
after this manner. A living or saving Faith is given to none, but to those that
are Elect: in which respect, such a Faith is called the Faith of the Elect of
God Tit. 1. 1.
. And God has determined, to bring his Elect to Salvation by Faith, with the
greatest certainty, that can be. From hence then it follows, either that the
Elect must be brought to Salvation by Faith with so much certainty, that they
shall never fall away from it, either totally, or finally, or that God is
changeable in His Counsel. But this latter is at no hand to be admitted:
therefore the former must stand. To this I Answer,

1. That this Argument demands that, which is sacrilegious to grant, viz. that
God has from eternity elected a certain number of Men personally, and (as it
were) by name, considered, unto Salvation, whom he purposes to bring
thereunto, infallibly, and without all possibility of miscarrying. The
inconsistency of this notion or conceit, with the nature, and attributes of
God, has been already intimated: and the inconsistency of it with the maine
current of the Scriptures, Reason, and Truth it self, shall (with Gods
assistance) be demonstrated at large, in the second part of this work. In the
mean time to the Argument in hand (in respect of other particulars in it) we
answer.

2. That by the Faith of Gods Elect (Tit. ^. 1.) is not meant, such a Faith, as
he gives unto Men elected unto Salvation under a mere personal consideration,
from eternity (which are a kind of Men allied to Paracelsus his non-Adami)
but, the Doctrine of the Gospel, which Paul was to Preach to the Saints, and
the chosen ones of God. The carriage of the whole sentence evinceth this. Paul
a Servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the Faith of
Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which is after godliness;
meaning, that he served God, and performed the Office of an Apostle of Christ,
according to the exigency and requirement of that Doctrine, which God had now
revealed and sent into the World, to be Preached unto His Saints, (every where
termed His chosen ones) as likewise, according to the acknowledging of the
Truth, which is, etc. meaning, that He did not only serve God, and Jesus
Christ, in Preaching the Gospel unto the Saints, and Persons already called
and gained in to the Faith, as became Him, and as the Nature of the Gospel
required of Him in this behalf; but that he was faithful and serviceable also
unto them in Preaching it unto such, as were yet Infidels and unconverted, upon
such terms, that they also might be brought to the acknowledgement of it. That
which in the former Clause, He calls, the Faith of Gods Elect; in the latter He
calls, the Truth which is after godliness; meaning in both, the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which in twenty places besides (especially in the writings of this
Apostle) by a kind of metonymie, where the object is put for the act, is
called, Faith. It was needful (says Jude) for me to write unto you and exhort
you that you should earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered
unto the Saints Jude. Ver. 3.
. Peruse the Texts cited in the margent Act. 6. 7. Gal. 1. 23. Philip. 127.
Gal. 3. 2. 5. etc.
. There is one place (amongst the rest) of like construction with this in hand;
and that within two or three Verses of it, where the Apostle calls Titus, his
natural Son, or, a natural Son, after the common Faith, or, according (as it
is the same Preposition, (...)) to the common Faith; meaning, that he was a
genuine and true Saint, or Son o^ God, and of His (as an instrument of his
spiritual being,) according to all those holy qualifications, which the
Gospel, now commonly Preached and known in the World, requires of those, whom
it owneth, or adjudgeth for Sons. The Preposition (...), is frequently used in
such a construction, or sense as this. But if for meat thy Brother is made
sorrowful, now walk thou not (...), according to Charity, Romans 14 15.
i. e. according to exigency of charity, or, as Charity requires. So, (...),
according to His Works Romans 2. 6.
, i. e. according to the exigency of His Works, or, as His Works require. To
pass by other instances without number, in the latter end of the Verse in hand,
the truth which is (...), according unto godliness, is a kind of Periphrasis,
or Description of the Gospel, as being such a Truth, which godliness (as it
were) requires for her promotion and advancement in the World.

3. If by the Faith of Gods Elect, we shall understand, either the grace of. 27.
Faith given unto the Elect of God, or the act of believing wrought in the
Elect of God, we shall make no good consistency of sense, in the sentence. For
if Paul should style himself the Servant of God, and Apostle of Jesus Christ
according to the grace of Faith, or act of Believing, in the Elect of God, what
can we reasonably imagine his meaning should be? Verily I understand not. Or if
there could be any commodious or tolerable sense made with such a construction
of the Word, Faith, yet by the Elect of God, we need not understand the
generality of the Saints, much less such as are supposed to have been chosen
unto Salvation by God from eternity, (of which number there are always some,
as our Adversaries themselves confess, unconverted, and consequently have no
such Faith, as is here pretended) but the excellent ones (as David calls
them) among the Saints, whose Faith is most signal and glorious. It is a
frequent Hebraisme in the Scriptures, to call, both things and persons, of
special worth and excellency in their kind e^ect, or chosen. See 1. Sam. 26.
2. Esa. 22. 7. Jer. 2^. 7. In this sense the Messiah wa^ notioned and termed
among the Jews, (...) the Elect of God. Luke 23. 35. And Christ Himself is
called, a corner Stone, Elect, and Precious, 1 Pet. 2. 4. So Paul, a chosen or
elect Vessel, etc.

4. Nor do I know any ground, either in Scripture, or good reason, why, by,
Gods Elect, we should understand, persons under a personal consideration,
segregated, or chosen by God from eternity from amongst other Men, to be
infallibly conveyed by Faith unto Salvation. The Scripture knows no such
sense or signification of the Words, as this. Nor can it be proved from hence,
nor otherwise, that Men are in any other sense chosen or said to be chosen,
from eternity, but only as that Law or Decree of God, by virtue whereof Men
come to be elected in time, was from eternity. The tenor of Gods Law or Decree
of Election, which was from eternity, is (as the Scripture evidenceth) this, or
the like. Whosoever shall believe in my Son Jesus Christ, whom I purpose to
send into the World, shall hereupon become a Man of that species, sort, or
kind of Men, whom I have chosen from amongst all other Men, or sorts of Men in
the World, and designed to Salvation. For that men cannot, in propriety of
speech, be said to be elected from eternity, is evident, because they were not,
had no being from eternity, nothing having been from eternity, but God Himself
alone. Now that which is not, cannot be said, unless happily it be in some
unproper and by sense, to be elected, or to be the object of any act, or action
whatsoever. And as Men are properly said to be justified in time, as viz. when
they believe, though the Decree of Justification, by virtue whereof they come
to be ^ustified in time, was from eternity; In like manner though the Decree of
Election, by virtue whereof Men come to be elected, was from eternity, yet it
brings forth in time, and in propriety of speech Men cannot be said to be
Elected, but in time. But concerning Election from eternity, as somewhat has
occasionally been spoken already, so much more remains to be spoken in due
place.

5. And lastly, nor is there truth in this Assertion (in the Argument) God has
determined to bring his Elect unto Salvation by Faith, with the greatest
certainty that can be. God has indeed determined with the greatest certainty
that can be, to bring his elect to Salvation by Faith [persevered in, or, if
persevered in] but this is not to determine to bring them to Salvation with the
greatest certainty that can be by Faith simply, or by Faith whether persevered
in, or no. So that the whole frame of this argument is crasie and loose: scarce
is there a sound part in the whole body of it.

A fourth Argument for the countenance of the said Doctrine of Perseverance,.
28.
is taken from the intercession of Christ, and pleads thus. Whatsoever Christ
Prays for unto the Father, shall certainly be granted unto him, and done. But
Christ prays for the Perseverance of all true Believers, as appears by his
praying for Peter in this kind Luke 22. 32
. Ergo. I answer,

1. To the major Proposition, by granting it, rightly understood, and with some
such Explication as this. Whatsoever Christ prays for, unto the Father, shall
certainly be done; viz. So, or after such a manner, and upon such terms, as
Christ in His Prayer intends, not simply or absolutely, as the words of the
Prayer may sometimes seem to some to import. Hanging upon the cross, He
Prayed for His enemies, and those that crucified Him, that they might be
Forgiven Luke 23. 34
. May it not be as well inferred from hence, that therefore all his enemies,
and all such, who (in any sense) Crucify Him, shall be Forgiven by God, as it
is argued from His Praying for Peter, that his Faith might not fail, that the
Faith of no true Believer shall fail? Doctor Twists notion upon the case is
not so authentic: and though admitted, will not heal the difficulty. Christ
(says he) Prayed for his enemies, ex officio hominis Privati, i, e. according
to the duty of a private Man: but for His Elect, as Mediator. This is said, but
not proved, nor (indeed) probable. For very unlikely it is, that Christ, being
now in a full investiture of his great Office of Mediator, should wave his
Interest in Heaven by means hereof, in his addressements unto God for Men, and
pray only in the capacity, and according to the interest and duty, of a private
Man. This would argue that He Prayed not for them with His whole heart, nor with
an effectualnesse of desire to obtain what He Prayed for. But let it be
granted, yet still it follows, that whatsoever Christ Prayed, for, was not
simply or absolutely granted, or done. And if whatsoever Christ Prayed for, was
absolutely granted, it is not material, as to matter of impetration, whether
He Prayed as Mediator, or as a private Man. But the intent of Christ's Prayer
for those who Crucified him, was not that all their sins should be Forgiven
them, much less that simply and absolutely, [ i. e. without any interveening
of Faith or Repentance] they should be Forgiven (which had been to pray for
that, which is expressly contrary to the Revealed Will of God) but that that
particular sin of their Crucifying him, should be Forgiven them, i. e. should
not be imputed unto them, by way of bar to their Repentance, either by any
sudden or speedy destruction, or by a delivering them up to such a spirit of
obstinacy, or obduration, under which Men seldom or never repent: which was
also the sense of Stephens prayer for those who stoned him: (...): lay not this
sin to their charge Acts 7. 60.
. So from Christ's Prayer for all those that should believe in him, that they
might all be one, as the Father and He were one, and as the Father, was in Him,
and He, in the Father Joh. 17. 21, 22.
, it cannot be concluded, that therefore there should never fall out any
difference in judgment, any disunion in affection between the Saints, because
there is neither between him, and the Father; the intent of this Prayer being
only this, that God would vouchsafe gracious and plentiful means unto them, as
well for the uniting of them in judgment, as affection; not that he would
necessitate or compel them into either of these unions, either by such means,
or without. So again, when he Prays to the Father to keep his Disciples
from evil Joh. 17. 15.
, it cannot be gathered, that therefore they never sinned, or never did that
which was evil: or if it be to be understood of the evil of suffering, (as
some conceive,) that they never suffered. Therefore,

2. To the Scripture cited for proof of the said Proposition, And I knew. 29.
that thou hear me always Ioh. 11. 42.
, I answer that the clear sense of these words is, that Christ knew, and
doubted not, but that God the Father, perfectly knowing the secret of his heart
and soul in every Prayer that he made unto him, had formerly, and would still
accordingly answer him, and gratify him in every thing according to the true
intention of his Prayer. He knew, that what he prayed for absoutely, God the
Father would absolutely grant, and do: and what he prayed for with, or under a
reserve, exception, or condition, that he would grant and do, where, and as
far, as such a reserve, exception, or condition, did not take place and
interpose. Whenever he prayed for the Fathers concurrence with him to work
Miracles for the confirmation of his Doctrine, he prayed absolutely, and
consequently, was heard absolutely, the matter and letter of his Prayer was
never denied unto him in such cases: but when he prayed that the Cup, which he
afterward drank, might pass by him without his drinking it, though he prayed
thrice, and that very earnestly (as the Text says,) yet because he prayed this
Prayer with a Reservation, desiring what he prayed for, only conditionally, and
with submission to his Fathers Will, and the great exigency of Mankind, these
standing in opposition to what he prayed for, it was not granted unto him. Now
certain it is that Christ never prayed for, the absolute Perseverance of
Believers in their Faith: yea it is no ways likely, that he would have prayed
for it, as he did, (I mean, with so much seriousness and affectionatenesse of
spirit) if God had absolutely Decreed the giving of it unto them, whether he
had prayed for it, or no. Therefore,

3. And lastly, concerning His praying for Peter, that his Faith might not
fail (which is all the strength of the minor proposition) I answer;

1. That from hence it apparently follows, that therefore Peter's Faith. 30.
was in danger of failing, or might have failed, had not Christ interceded for
him: and consequently that God had not absolutely decreed the Perseverance, or
non-failing of Peter's Faith, or of the Faith of any other Man. Otherwise, what
efficacy can we ascribe to the Prayer of Christ for Peter's Faith? Or how can it
be known upon what account Peter's Faith was preserved; whether that of Christ's
Prayer, or that of Gods Decree, for the non- failing of it?

2. Neither can it be proved, that Christ, Prayed that Peter's Faith might never
fail totally, but only (if so much) that it might not fail upon that
particular and sore rentation, which He knew would soon after come upon Him.
It is evident from the Context that this was all (if not more then all) that
Christ Prayed for on the behalf of Peter's Faith. And the Lord said, Simon,
Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat:
But I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not; and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren Luke 22. 31* 32.
. Now then to infer from Christ's Prayer that Peter's Faith might not fail, by,
or under, a particular temptation, that therefore it could, or should, never
fail, is a strain of no better Logique, then it would be to conclude, that
those who were with Paul in the ship, never died, because God made a Promise
unto Paul, that He would give their lives unto Him Act. 27. 24.
, [as for that Voyage.]

3. If it be by the virtue and efficacy of Christ's Prayer for Peter's Faith,
that the Faith of true Believers can never fail, then was the Faith of all
true Believers before this Prayer made by Christ, obnoxious unto a failing. If
this, then neither was there, nor is there, any peremptory Decree of God
concerning the non- failing of the Faith of Believers. If so, then is there a
possibility that their Faith may fail. For whatsoever is possible in respect
of the nature of the thing, and of second causes sufficient to produce it, may
very possibly come to pass, where no Decree of God to the contrary obstructeth
the possibility. Now our adversaries themselves acknowledge, that the Faith of
true Believers, is in it self, faileable, and in respect of several causes
destructive to it, might perish.

4. Nor is it so clear from the tenor of Christ's Prayer (intimated by him). 31.
that He prayed against the total failing of Peter's Faith under the said
temptation, much less against the final failing of it afterward; but most
likely it is, that what He Prayed for, was only this, that Peter's yielding to
the tentation, or his being overcome by it might not extinguish his Faith upon
any such terms, but that he might, and should, eft-soones recover it by
Repentance. If this were that, which Christ Prayed for on His behalf, then
might His Faith fail totally under the temptation, (as Ambrose, amongst the
Fathers, conceives that it did) notwithstanding Christ's Prayer, though not
finally. And that Peter's Faith did indeed fail totally by the force of the
temptation, seems very probable (at least) from those words of Christ to Him;
when thou art CONVERTED, strengthen, etc. Men are not said to be CONVERTED a
gradu ad gradum, sed a specie ad speciem; i. e. from a lesser degree of Faith
to a greater, but from unbelief unto Faith. And besides, that Peter, upon His
denial of Christ, was, until His Repentance, in the state and condition of
those, who shall be denied by Christ at the great day (which could not be under
any degree of true Faith remaining in Him) is evident from that general and
express intermination of Christ, Mat. 10. 33. Whosoever shall deny Me before
Men, Him will I also deny before My Father which is in Heaven.

5. (And lastly) whatsoever the intent or subject matter of Christ's Prayer for
Peter, was, evident it is, that as His temptation, with an eye whereunto this
Prayer was made for Him by Christ, was singular and particular, so was Christ's
Prayer also for Him. And a Man may as well from Peter's temptation, argue, that
all true Believers shall be tempted after the same manner, and to the same
degree; as from Christ's Prayer for Peter, that His Faith might not fail,
conclude, that the Faith of no true Believer shall fail. So likewise from
Christ's looking back upon Peter, to provoke Him the more effectually to
Repentance, as good an argument, as that now under Contest, may be framed, to
prove, that Christ will visibly look upon all true Believers, when they sin, to
provoke them to Repentance. It is in the case of Christ's Prayer, as it is of
His Precepts. When He commands any thing upon a particular occasion, or ground,
the obliging force of the command is to be extended no further, then where the
same, or like occasion and ground take place. And intimation has been given
formerly, that the Apostles, in respect of that great and extraordinary service
of carrying the Name of Jesus Christ up and down the World, so full of enmity
and opposition to it, had many prerogative favors vouchsafed unto them by
Christ, wherein the generality of Believers, having no such engagement lying
upon them, have no ground or reason to expect an equality, or share with them.
Therefore there is nothing of any value in Christ's Praying for Peter's Faith, to
support the falling cause of the common Doctrine of Perseverance.

A fifth Argument advanced in defense of the same Doctrine, is drawn from. 32.
the Intercession of Christ at the Right Hand of God for His Saints. Who is He
that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who
is even at the Right Hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ, Rom: 8. 34, 35.
etc. So again: Christ is entered into Heaven it self to appear in the
presence of God for us Heb. 9. 24.
: and, since he ever lives to make intercession for them Heb. 7. 25.
. From hence it is thus argued: If those for whom Christ intercedes at the
Right Hand of God, may fall away from their Faith, so as to perish
notwithstanding, then is the intercession of Christ ineffectuall, and
insufficient to preserve them. But the Intercession of Christ is not
ineffectuall, etc. Ergo. To this I answer:

1. It is no where affirmed that Christ intercedes for the Perseverance of the
Saints in their Faith, or, that they who once believe, should never cease
believing, how sinful and wicked soever they shall prove afterward. But
Christ intercedes for His Saints, viz. as such, and as continuing such, that no
accusations from any hand whatsoever, may be heard against them, that no
afflictions or sufferings which they meet with in the World, may cause any
alienation, or abatement, in the Love of God toward them, but that God will
preserve and protect them under them, etc. and consequently, that they may be
maintained at an excellent rate of consolation, in every estate and condition,
and against all interposures of any Creature whatsoever to the contrary. This
to be the tenor and effect of Christ's Intercession for His Saints, is evident
from the first of the three passages cited. And for that demand, who shall
separate us from the love of Christ, it is not meant of separating us from that
love, wherewith we love Christ, but from that love, wherewith Christ loves us,
viz. as we are Saints, and abide in His love by keeping His Commandments Ioh.
15. 10.
. Neither is it to be so conceived, as if sin, wickedness, looseness,
profaneness, etc. could not un-Saint Men, and hereby separate them from the
love, wherewith Christ sometimes loved them; (for that iniquity will separate
between Men, and their God, is evident from Esa. 59. 2.) but the clear meaning
is, that nothing, no Creature whatsoever, person, or thing, can make Christ an
enemy unto those, who shall in Faith and Love cleave fast unto Him.

2. Were it granted, that part of Christ's Intercession for his Saints, is, that
their Faith may never fail, yet the meaning hereof would not necessarily, nor
indeed with any competent probability, be this, that no sin or wickedness
whatsoever that shall, or can, be perpetrated by them, might cause them to make
shipwreck of their Faith; but rather that God would graciously vouchsafe such
means, and such a presence of His Spirit unto them, whereby they may be richly
enabled to keep themselves in Faith and a good Conscience unto the end. If
Christ should simply and absolutely intercede that no sin or wickedness
whatsoever may destroy the Faith of any true Believer, and consequently,
deprive Him of Salvation, should He not hereby become that, which the Apostle
rejects with indignation, as altogether unworthy of Him; I mean, a Minister of
sin? Is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid Gal. 2. 17.
. Or whereby, or wherein can it lightly be imagined, that Christ should become
a Minister of sin, rather then by interceding with His Father, that such and
such Men, how vile and abominable soever they shall become, may yet be precious
in His sight, and receive a Crown of Righteousness from His Hand? Or does not
such an intercession, as some Men put upon Him, as viz. they, who make Him to
intercede simply and absolutely for the Perseverance of Believers in their
Faith, amount to an Intercession of every whit as vile and unworthy an import,
as this?

If it be said, that the Men I speak of, do not make Christ an Intercessor. 33.
for the non-failing of the Faith of His Saints, upon such terms as I pretend,
as, viz. that their Faith may not fail, how wicked or abominable soever they
shall be; but thus, that God will preserve them from such wicked and abominable
ways and practices, which, should they fall into them, would be the ruin of
their faith, and that he would effectually direct, and persuade them into the
use of such means, which thorough His grace and blessing on them, shall
preserve them, at least from a total and final declining; To this I Answer;

1. If this be asserted for the tenor of Christ's intercession for His Saints,
that God will Preserve them from such sins, which would be the bane and ruin
of their Faith, should they fall into them, the assertors render the
intercession of Christ every whit as invalid and ineffectuall, as they pretend
such Men do, who deny the necessity of the Saints Perseverance, notwithstanding
Christ's interceding for them. For evident it is that the Saints are not
preserved by God (at least in their sense of preserving) from such sins as
these, unless we shall say that murder, incest, drunkenness, adultery;
dissembling, denying of Christ, etc. are none of these sins. For that the
Saints of God did fall into such sins as these, is notoriously known from the
Scriptures.

If it be said, that though Christ does not intercede that His Saints should.
34.
simply* and absolutely be preserved from such sins, yet He intercedes, that in
case they fall sometimes into them, they may not be wholly overcome by them; or
continue in them, so as not to recover themselves any more, etc. I Answer;

If so, then Christ does not intercede for the preserving of His Saints from
sin, simply, no nor from the greatest or foulest of sin, simply, but only so
far, as they are wholly and absolutely inconsistent with their Salvation. Here,
1. I would willingly know, from what quarter of the Scriptures, the least or
gentlest air of such a Doctrine, or conceit as this, breaths: or where the
intercession of Christ for the Saints is thus stated, or taught, by the Holy
Ghost. 2. The purport, end, and intent of the intercession of Christ for the
Saints, is the same with those of His death for them: only the Scripture
places, though not more virtue, yet a clearer ground of hope or confidence
unto the Saints, for their obtaining the same ends and blessings, in the
Intercession of Christ for them, then in His death. This is clear from the
place lately cited: who is He that condemns? it is Christ that Died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us Romans 8. 34.
. In which tenor of words He plainly builds one and the same hope, or
consolation to the Saints, upon all these four grounds, the Death of Christ,
His Resurrection, His sitting, or being at the right Hand of God, His making
intercession for them; only with this difference, that he places more
pregnancy of strength to bear or to exhibit, the consolation, in every latter
of these grounds respectively, then in the former. Now certain it is, that the
adequate end or intent of Christ dying for His Saints, as to the matter of
Sanctification, was not to redeem or preserve them only from high misdemeanors
in sinning, and such as are incompatible with their Salvation, but from all,
and all manner of sin whatsoever. Who gave Himself for us (says the Apostle)
that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to Himself a peculiar
People zealous of good works Tit. 2. 14:
. See also 1 Pet 1 18. 19. with many other places. Thus then we clearly see,
that Christ's Intercession no ways mediates in the behalf of the common
Doctrine of Perseverance. However,

A sixth Argument for the confirmation of it, is this: whatsoever true
Believers. 35.
ask, or pray for, unto the Father in Christ's Name, especially being necessary
unto Salvation, that they certainly and always, obtain. Joh. 16. 23. 1 Ioh.
5. 14. But they daily pray for constancy or perseverance in true Faith, as viz.
when they pray unto God, that He would not lead them into temptation, but
deliver them from evil Mat. 6. 13.
. Therefore certainly they obtain perseverance of Him. I answer,

1. This whole Argument might be granted, both without any prejudice to the
Doctrine which we maintain, as also without advantage to that Doctrine, which
it undertakes to protect. For the question is not, whether the Perseverance of
the Saints be a thing possible, or whether it may not be obtained by a diligent
use of means, such ^s frequent or daily Prayer unto God in Faith, is: but
whether there be not a possibility that the Saints may neglect the use of such
means, which are necessary and proper for the obtaining, or maintaining of it.
Therefore,

2. When the minor proposition says, that true Believers daily pray for
Perseverance, etc. it does (in effect) assert that which is questionable
between the controverters, for a proof of it self, and so is guilty of that
infirmity in arguing, which Logicians call Petitio Principii, a begging of the
qu^stion. For to say, that the Saints daily pray in Faith unto God for
perseverance, etc. is, being interpreted, to say, that they will persevere. So
that this proposition is every whit as doubtful, as the conclusion it self:
and a substantial proof of it is desired. And though this could be
sufficiently proved, yet

3. The major proposition it self, in those general terms, wherein it is
propounded, is no proposition of Faith. For it is not sufficient, for the
obtaining of what they ask, that the Saints should simply pray in the Name of
Christ, or in Faith, i. e. with a confidence of receiving what they ask, but
further, that they ask, or pray, according to his Will. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing ACCORDING TO HIS
WILL, he hears us 1 John 5. 14.
. So that the frequent praying of the Saints for Perseverance, though in the
Name of Christ, and in Faith, is no competent proof that they shall certainly
obtain it, ( i. e. how wickedly or abominably soever they shall live) until
it be first proved, that it is according to the Will of God, that they should
pray for it upon such Terms.

4. (And lastly) if both the propositions were granted, yet would the
conclusion follow upon none other terms, then perfection in this life is proved
by this Argument of the Perfectionists. Whatsoever true Believers pray for
according to the Will of God, that they shall certainly obtain, according to
the Promises, Joh. 16. 23. 1 Ioh. 5. 14. But the Saints, according to the Will
of God, and in order to his glory, pray, that his Will may be done on Earth, as
it is in Heaven, i. e. perfectly (for so it is done in Heaven.) Therefore His
Will is done perfectly on Earth: and consequently perfection is actually
attained in this life. Let the Perseverists answer this Argument of the
Perfectionists, and they will be able to answer their own.

A seventh Argument upon the former account, is this: They who shall. 36.
certainly and faithfully be preserved and kept by Christ unto the end, shall
never, either totally, or finally, miscarry, or fall away. But all true
Believers are, and shall be, thus kept by Christ. Ergo. The Minor is proved by
these Texts of Scripture, Ioh. 6. 37. and Verse 39. Ioh. 10. 27, 28. Joh. 17.
12. Ioh. 13. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 8. Ephesians. 5. 23. Jude. Ver. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 12. Heb. 12.
2. 1 Pet. 1. 5. I answer;

1. That the strength and substance of this Argument has received answer in
full already, where we opened at large several of the principal Texts
insisted upon for the proof of the assumption: whereof we shall give notice
presently. Yet,

2. We answer, that the conclusion it self, That all true Believers shall never
miscarry, or fall away, rightly understood, opposes not our sense in the
present controversy. We firmly hold and believe, that no true Believer shall
fall away [from the grace of God,] or miscarry [in point of Salvation,] and
that all, who either do thus fall away, or miscarry, are no true Believers,
but wicked Apostates, at the time of their falling away, or miscarrying. But
this (we presume) satisfies not the Argumentators. Therefore,

3. If these words, shall certainly and faithfully be preserved and kept by
Christ unto the end, import no other preservation or keeping by him, but what
is meant in, and can be proved from, the Texts specified for proof of the Minor
proposition, the Major is denied: They who are preserved, and kept by Christ,
in such a sense, as the Scriptures affirm Men to be preserved and kept by Him,
may possibly miscarry, or fall away, both totally, and finally from their
Faith; viz. in case themselves shall not comport with Christ in His act of
preserving or keeping them, with their diligence and care to preserve
themselves. Nor do any of the Scriptures cited prove the contrary; no nor yet
that those that are preserved by Christ, must, by any compulsory or
necessitating power, join with him their care and diligence in preserving
themselves. Let us take a brief survey of such of the particulars, which have
not been taken off already from the engagement.

The first place, Ioh. 6. 37. affirms, that Christ will in no wise cast out.
37.
him that comes unto him, or, that is coming unto Him, (...). But this
proves not, but that he that is on his way toward Christ, may go back before
he comes fully to Him; nor that he that is fully come to Him, is under no
possibility of departing from him. It only proves, that there is not the least
disposition or inclination in Christ to discourage any Man whatsoever from
coming to him, nor to deny entertainment or acceptance, to whosoever shall come
to him, and whilst he shall be willing to stay, or abide with Him. And
elsewhere he persuades and exhorts those, that are come to Him, to abide in
him, or with him, as Ioh. 15. 4. and threatens those who shall not abide with
him. Ioh. 15. 4. 6. Heb. 10. 38. both which evidently suppose a possibility of
their departure from Him, who at present are with him.

Whereas Ver. 39. he expresses himself thus: And this is the Fathers will,
that has sent Me, that of all which He has given Me, I should lose nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last day, it is evident that He speaks
not of losing Believers by defection from Faith, but by Death. And to assure
all Believers of this, He declares that it is His Fathers Will and Pleasure,
that He should raise them all up [all, that should die Believers] unto a
blessed estate and condition of life, at the last Day. Besides, if the place
should be meant of losing by defection from Faith, the losing of such, who
should be lost this way, could not be imputed to Christ, who fulfils His
Fathers Will and Pleasure to the uttermost for their preservation, but to
themselves, who withdraw themselves from His custody.

Concerning the third place, Ioh. 10. 27. 28. we spoke largely in the next
preceding Chapter, Sect. 37. etc. where we showed in what sense* Christ,
speaking of His Sheep, says that no Man should pluck them out of His Hand. The
next place, Ioh. 17. 12. presents us with these words from Christ in His
Prayer to the Father; Those that thou gave Me, I have kept, and none of them
is lost. But neither can it be inferred from hence, either that Christ so
keeps all true Believers, that none of them at any time perishes, or is
lost; much less that He so keeps them, that there is no possibility that any
of them should ever be lost; no nor yet that He had kept His Apostles
themselves (of whom it is a plain case that He speaks particularly in the
place) so, or upon any such terms of keeping, that there was no possibility
that any of them, should be lost, or perish; but only that He had so kept them,
that none of them was lost; excepting only the Son of perdition (as it
immediately follows) who was not lost neither for lack of good and sufficient
keeping, (wherein doubtless He did partake with his fellows) but through the
great malignity or wretchedness of his own will, his good keeping
notwithstanding. So that neither can hence any thing be gathered to prove any
such preservation of the Saints by Christ* but that they may nevertheless
decline, both totally, and finally.

The two next places, viz. Ioh. 13. 1. and 1 Cor. 1. 8. upon former
examinations,. 38.
have been found strangers to that cause, which they are here brought to plead.
The former, cap. 10. Sect. 38. The latter, in the same Chap. Sect. 20. and
Sect. 16. of this present Chapter.

The Scripture next to these, is Ephesians. 5. 23. where Christ (according to the
more general sense of Interpreters; for some understand it, not of Christ, but
of the Husband) is termed, the Savior of His Body. But neither does this
expression import any such preservation of the body, or Church of Christ, by
Him, which supposes an impossibility of the defection of any one member from
it. For (to follow the ducture of the Parable, or Similitude here used by the
Apostle) the Husband is the conservator or keeper of his wife: yet
notwithstanding the wife may possibly miscarry, and break the Marriage
Covenant, yea, though the Husband acts his part upon the best and most
commendable terms, for the preserving of her from that folly, that may be. The
reason is, because the wife, being a reasonable Creature, is to be dealt with,
in order to her preservation or keeping in that kind, accordingly, as viz. by
rational arguments or motives only, as by an exemplary, loving, and prudent
carriage in the Husband toward her, by Seasonable instructions, gentle
admonitions upon occasion, etc. not by keeping her under Lock and Key as in a
Prison, where no Man may come near her, nor by any compulsory or violent means,
in one kind or other. All such ways of securing her from solly, as these,
would ill become the Husband, and be very unacceptable to the Wife, whether
virtuously, or viciously, disposed. In like manner Christ is the Savior of His
Spouse, the Church, and not only of the Church in general, but of every member
thereof: but He executes and performs the interest or office of a Savior, by
ways and means meet to be exercised toward, and about, such a Body, and such
Members, for their preservation (if we speak of their preservation from sin) as
viz. by inward motions and excitements of His Spirit, unto well doing, and to a
continuance therein, by vouchsafing the Ministry of His Word, the examples and
converse of his Saints, many providentiall opportunities, apt and proper to
prevail with a rational Creature, to mind the things of God, and of its own
Peace, etc. but not by any necessitating administrations, or applications of
Himself whatsoever. So that though Christ performs the office of a Savior
toward His Body, upon the most faithful, careful, and honorable terms, that
can be imagined, yet there must needs be a possibility at least left, for any
Member thereof to miscarry. But,

2. I rather conceive that Christ is here called, the Savior of His Body, in
respect of that protection, which He affords unto it, and to every particular
Member of it, as such, and whilst it continues such; or rather in respect of
that great Salvation and Deliverance from Death, and Hell, and all manner of
penal evils, which He has purchased for it with His Blood, and with which He
will actually invest the members of it in due time. But this does not prove,
that every present Member of His Body, though it corrupts, and putrifies, and
falls off from it, should nevertheless partake in Privileges with the sound:
nor yet that every Member, sound at present, will never hereafter putrify or
corrupt. Nor is it any whit more dishonor, or disparagement unto Christ, to
have such Members relating to His Body, which are capable of spiritual, then
which are liable to corporal, putrefaction. He that vouchsafes to be the Head
of a Body consisting, either in whole, or in part, of flesh and blood, in, and
by, this very act of grace, condescendeth to be an head of such Members, which
are very capable of sinning, and therefore not incapable of dismembring
themselves through sin.

To that of Jude, Verse 1. to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and.
39.
preserved in Jesus Christ, and called, I answer;

1. It is not denied, but that Christ does preserve His Saints, and that with
much care and tenderness, yea and watches over them for good: The question
is, whether by His preserving them, He imposes an unconquerable necessity upon
them of persevering in Faith unto the end. The simple preservation of the
Saints by Christ, is all that can be concluded from this Scripture: the manner
of it, or the terms, on which it is performed, are not at all so much as
intimated here.

2. The Participle, (...), preserved, being of the Preterperfect-tense, imports
only that the Persons to whom he speaks, had been [ viz. hitherto] preserved,
or kept, by Jesus Christ: or, for Jesus Christ (for so the words will bear)
not that He intended, whatsoever their after-misdemeanors in sin should be, to
preserve them in Faith unto the end. Here is no Word, Sylable, Letter, or Iota,
of any such thing as this. And if His intent had been to inform them, that
they were so kept by Jesus Christ, that there was no danger or possibility for
them finally to miscarry, He had laid a very slippery and incongruous
foundation to build that serious exhortation upon, wherein He addresseth
Himself unto them, Verse 3. viz. to contend earnestly for the Faith. For what
need they contend earnestly for the Faith, who have assureance from God, that
they shall be preserved in the Faith, whether they contend for it, or no? And
if they were, against all possible interveniencies whatsoever, to be preserved
by Christ in the Faith, to what purpose, or with what co-herence of discourse,
does He re-mind them of the example of Gods Severity upon many unbelieving
Israelites, even after he had delivered them out of the Land of Egypt; as
likewise upon those Angels, who kept not their first standings? Verse 5. 6. The
very proposal of such examples unto them, as these, plainly enough supposes,
that they also were liable to suffer the same severity from God, upon the like
terms.

The next place, 2 Timothy 1. 12. acquaints us with the Apostle Paul's spirit, as.
40.
far as these words will extend: I know whom I have believed, and I am
persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him, against
that day. I answer,

That this place of all the rest is eccentricall to the business in hand. For
it speaks only of the Power of God to keep; whereas this never came within the
verge of the question. Or if the Will of God to keep, be here included, or
supposed also; neither was it ever questioned by me, whether God be willing to
keep His Saints, or no. That which I oppose, is that manner, which some
obtrude; affirming, that God preserves his Saints upon such terms, after such a
manner, that he peremptorily hereby necessitates their Perseverance. Certain I
am that the Scripture in hand gives no such sound as this. Besides, that
depositum, or thing committed by him unto God, which the Apostle here speaks
of, was not his Faith (this can in no very tolerable sense be said to be
committed unto God) but rather his Soul, which he committed to the care and
safe-keeping of God. Nor is there the least doubt or question to be made, but
that God was both able, and willing, to keep this safe, as long as the Apostle
was desirous and willing to entrust him with it, and to suffer it to lie in his
hand. But this proves not, but that the Apostle himself was at liberty, to
have recalled, or taken back this his depositum out of the hand of God: in
which case he had been discharged from taking further care of it.

Whereas Heb. 12. 2. Christ is styled the Author and Finisher of our Faith,. 41.
[or rather, of the Faith, (...) the Particle, ours, is not in the Greek] it
does not imply any acting of Christ, in, about, or upon, our Faith, in a
Physical way, or with any efficiency (properly so called) much less with any
necessitating efficiency; but that he was an absolute or perfect Captain, or
Leader, in that way of Faith, wherein we all stand bound to follow him at the
peril of our Souls; He was dismayed, discouraged, danted at nothing, which he
was called to suffer or endure, in his course; but with an excellent and
unconquerable spirit of Faith, held on his way through the midst of those
threatenings and devouring afflictions, which incountred him, until he came
where glory and blessedness waited for him, and attended his coming. This to
be the sense and meaning of the said words, the carriage of the Context round
about does perfectly manifest: we shall not need to argue for it. So that
Christ is called (...), i. e. the Arch-leader, or Captain, of Faith, not
because by any Physical or proper efficiency, much less because by any
irresistibleness of Power, he works the beginning of Faith in his Saints, but
because he marched (as it were) in the head of his Saints, and like a valiant
and resolute Captain, lead the way of Faith unto all that should believe in
him, and showed them how to walk in it. And so, (...), the Perfecter of Faith,
not because he actually consummates, or perfecteth, the work, or grace of Faith
in his Saints (for this work is never brought to perfection in them, in this
life; and though it be, in a sense perfected, in the life to come, yet this
perfection is extra speciem, i. e. not by adding degrees to it of the same
kind, but by a transmutation of it into vision;) but because by his most noble
example he taught Men the very perfection of Faith, or believing; which
consists, in a quiet, patient, and contentfull suffering of all manner of
Tentations and Tribulations, which a Man is called to suffer in the World, and
the suffering whereof he cannot decline without sin, out of settled and firm
belief of receiving that incorruptible Crown of blessedness and glory in the
end of his Race, which God has promised unto all those that are faithful unto
Death.

To the last of the Texts cited in favor of the argument in hand, (1 Pet. 1.
5.) plenty of light has bin already given Cap. 10. Sect. 18.
; whereby it fully appears, that it holds no correspondency at all with the
opinion, or Doctrine, which pretends unto it in the argument.

A further argument advanced by some to promote the common Doctrine. 42.
of Perseverance (incapable of Preferment) is this. They who are sealed in
their hearts by the Holy Ghost, that they shall certainly be saved, can neither
totally, nor finally, lose their Faith: But all true Believers are thus sealed.
Ergo, they cannot but Persevere, without any either total, or final, amission
of their Faith. For the proof of the Minor, these Scriptures are produced, 2
Cor. 1. 21. Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. Ephesians. 4. 30. which all speak of the Obsignation of
Believers by the Spirit of God. To this also we Answer;

1. By distinguishing the Major Proposition, thus: They who are sealed, etc.
that they shall certainly be saved, etc. [viz. with such a sealing, which is
unchangeable or irreversible, by any interveniencies whatsoever, as of sin,
wickedness, apostasy, etc.] cannot lose their Faith. But if the sealing be
only such, the continuance whereof depends upon the continuance of the Faith of
the sealed, and consequently, may be reversed, or withdrawn, it no ways proves
that all they, who are partakers of it, must of necessity retain their Faith,
without all possibility of any either total, or final, miscarriage of it.
Therefore,

2. We answer further, that the sealing with the spirit, spoken of in the
Scriptures specified, is the latter kind of sealing, not the former, i. e.
such a sealing, which depends upon the Faith of those that are sealed, as in
the beginning or first impression of it, so in the duration or continuance of
it ^ and consequently, has none other certainty of its continuance, but only
the continuance of the said Faith, which (as we have already proved in part,
and shall, God willing, further prove, ere long) being uncertain, the sealing
depending on it, must needs be uncertain also, and reversible. That the
sealing proveable from the Scriptures mentioned, depends upon the Faith of the
sealed, is evident by the tenor of one, and by the Contexts, and plain
circumstances relating to them all. In whom also (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.
13.) AFTER that ye BELIEVED, ye were sealed with the spirit of Promise.

Nor can it reasonably be here objected, that this indeed proves the dependence
of the sealing spoken of, upon the Faith of the sealed, in the first act, or
impression, but not in the duration of it; for the answer hereunto is plain;
viz. that if it depends upon it in respect of the beginning, or first act of
it, much more does it thus depend in respect of the perpetuation of it. The
reason is, because he that has once believed, and afterward shall make
shipwreck of his Faith, is far more incapable of this grace of sealing, then he
was, before his believing.

If it be objected, that Believers are said to be sealed by the Holy Spirit of.
43.
God against the day of Redemption Ephesians. 4. 30.
, and God is said to give them the earnest of the Spirit in their hearts 2 Cor.
1. 22.
; which gift of the Spirit, is likewise said to be the earnest of their
inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased possession Ephesians. 1 14.
. ( i. e. by an Hypallage, until the possession of the purchased Redemption,
meaning, their full deliverance from sin, and sorrow) which expressions seem
to import, that the sealing of the spirit once granted unto Believers, is
granted upon such terms, that it shall continue in them, and upon them, until
their Resurrection unto life and glory; to this I answer,

1. By concession: it is very true, the sealing of the spirit granted unto
Believers, is granted with an intent or purpose, on Gods Part, that it should
remain perpetually with them. So that if there be an interruption, or
cancelling of it, it shall not arise from any variableness or mutability in
him, nor from any change of mind or affections in him, from what he was in
both, when he first vouchsafed it unto them. But,

2. I answer further (by way of exception) that the sealing we speak of is
never granted by God unto Believers themselves, upon any such terms, that upon
no occasion, or occasions whatsoever, as of the greatest and most horrid sins
committed, and long continued in, by them, or the like, it should never be
interrupted, or defaced. For this is contrary to many plain Texts of
Scriptures, and particularly unto all those, where either Apostates from God,
or evil doers and workers of iniquity, are threatened with the loss of Gods
favor, and of the inheritance of like. Such are Heb. 10. Verse 26, 27. and
again Verse. 38, 39. Ezekiel. 18. 24. Ephesians. 5. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. with many
more of like import. Therefore,

3. Believers are said to be sealed by the Holy Spirit of God against, or
until, or for, [(...)] the day of Redemption, because that Holiness, which is
wrought in them by the Spirit of God, qualifies them, puts them into a present
and actual capacity of partaking in that joy, blessedness, and glory, which
the great Day of the Plenary and full Redemption of the Saints [ i. e. of those
who lived, and died, and shall then be found, such] shall bring with it. And it
is called the earnest of their Inheritance, because it is binding or obliging
on Gods Part, as well in respect of His Promise, [for He Promises Part and
Fellowship in this Inheritance, unto those that shall live holily, and not
turn aside into ways of sin] as of the nature of the thing it self, being
somewhat, for kind and Property, of that undefiled inheritance, which He has
Promised unto holy Persons, and which is reserved for them in the Heavens. But
as earnests, given and received amongst Men, though they be engaging and
obliging on both sides, simply, and in case of a non-intervention of very
material circumstances, in order to the breaking or dissolving of the contract
ratified by them; yet are they seldom or never engaging, or obliging on either
side upon such terms, that no possible interposition, whether of Providence,
or other things, can discharge them. A contract of marriage, ratified and
confirmed by both parties, with earnest given, and received, may
notwithstanding lawfully be dissolved upon an act of adultery committed by the
one party, if the other pleases. There is the same consideration likewise of
confirmation by earnests in other cases.

4. (And lastly) if the Apostles intent had been to inform the Ephesians, that
the gift of the Holy Spirit, which they had received from God, was the earnest
of their inheritance upon such terms, that no unworthiness or wickedness
whatsoever on their parts, could ever hinder the actual collation of this
inheritance upon them, he had plainly prevaricated with that most serious
admonition, wherein he addresseth Himself unto them afterward. For this ye
know that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor Covetous Man, who is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no
Man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things comes the Wrath
of God upon the Children of disobedience Ephesians. 5. 5. 6.
. To what purpose should he thus severely discipline and nurture those, in
order to their escaping the wrath of God, which would certainly come for such,
and such, sins upon Men, whom he had a little before assured that there was no
danger, no possibility of their falling under the Wrath of God, or of their
miscarrying in Point of Salvation.

A ninth Argument taught by some to speak for the Doctrine of Perseverance,. 44.
hitherto opposed, consists of such Scripture similitudes, wherein true
Believers are resembled to such things, which seem to import the certainty of
their Perseverance. As viz. Psalm. 1. 3. they are compared to a Tree planted by
the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, whose leaf
also shall not wither, etc. Mat. 7. 24; 25. to a wise Man that built his House
upon a Rock, so that though the Rain fell, and the Floods came, and the Winds
blew, and beat upon that House, yet it fell not. Luke 8. 8. to seed that fell
upon good ground, which sprang up, and bare fruit an hundred fold. To this I
answer,

1. In the general, that no similitude whatsoever, whereby the Prosperity,
Safety, or Glory of the Saints or Children of God are set forth in the
Scriptures, do any ways reach the Point in Question. Because the question is
not whether the Saints, viz. as such, and abiding such, shall stand for ever in
the greatest Prosperity, Safety, and Glory: but (as has often, in effect, been
said) whether those, who have been Saints at any time heretofore, must
necessarily be such at this day, and cannot possibly degenerate into any other
kind, or sort of Men for ever. The similitudes produced evince no such thing as
this. And therefore,

2. I answer in Particular, 1. That the comparison of a Man delighting in the
Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. to the Tree there described, does not suppose, that
he can never cease delighting in His Law; nor is any such thing as this
signified by the non- falling of the leaf of this Tree; too too frequent
experience commands acknowledgement on both sides that the Saints themselves,
or Men sometimes delighting in the Law of the Lord, may otherwhile delight
themselves in ways of vanity and great wickedness. But the Purport of the
similitude is only to show, that the condition of a Person eschuing evil, and
observing the Law of God, and continuing such, shall be ever prosperous and
blessed. There is nothing more ordinary in Scripture, then to attribute or
predict unto Men, both future Punishments, and Rewards, in respect of their
present ways, whether good, or evil, simply, and without any clause of
exception in case of an after change in either; whereas notwithstanding the
Possibility of a change is clearly supposed, and a suspension likewise, as well
of the said Punishments, as Rewards hereupon, according as the change shall be.
Thus wicked Men in several kinds, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Idolaters,
Extortioners, Drunkards, etc. are very frequently 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, Heb: 13. 4.
threatened with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven, without any mention made,
either of that Possibility they are in of Repenting afterward, or of any
reversall of such a Punishment, in case they shall Repent: whereas it is a
clear case (from other Scriptures) that both the one and the other are supposed
notwithstanding, as viz. where forgiveness of sins is Promised unto sinners of
all kinds, upon Repentance. I forbear to cite places, being so frequent and
obvious. So God often Promises life and salvation unto just and righteous Men,
without mentioning that Possibility they are in of turning aside from their
Righteousness, or any deprivation or loss of Life and Salvation, they are
like to sustain, in case they shall thus turn aside; yet evident it is from
other places, (of which we shall have occasion to produce many in the following
Chapter) that both the one and the other are there supposed; as viz. where
backsliders are threatened with the displeasure of God, and destruction. But of
this idiome of Scripture expression we have taken knowledge formerly, and that
more then once. See Sect. 9. of this Chapter. And that by the Man delighting in
the Law of God, compared unto a Tree planted, etc. (in the Passage in hand) is
meant not simply that Man thus delighting, at present, but such a Man, who
should constantly and with Perseverance thus delight, is evident from the
antithesis which the Psalm makes between him, and the wicked Man, who is
described as perseveringly wicked unto the end. Therefore the wicked shall not
stand in the judgment, Verse. 5. and again: and the way of the wicked shall
perish, Verse. 6. which expressions clearly show, that by the Sinner, or wicked
Man, here opposed to the godly, is not meant, simply such a Person, who at
present is wicked, or a sinner, but who shall continue such without Repentance
unto his end.

2. There is the same consideration of the second comparison, Mat. 7. 25. By.
45.
him, who should hear Christ's sayings, and do them, and in that respect is
compared to a wise Man, who built his House upon a Rock, etc. is not to be
understood such a Person, who shall at present, and for a time after hearing,
do the sayings of Christ, and afterward do that, which is contrary unto
them; but who shall do them, and continue in the Practice and doing of them,
unto the end. This is evident by the course of the Scriptures in such Passages
as these. Look to your selves, that we loose not the things, which we have
done, but that we may receive a full reward 2 John ve. 8.
. Which words plainly suppose, that we may do many things of a beneficial
tendency and import (which must needs be by doing the sayings of Christ) and
yet lose the benefit of such doings, by turning-aside out of the way of them,
before we come to receive our reward. So again: -- the love of many shall wax
cold* but he that continues unto the end, shall be saved Mat. 24
. The Galatians did for a time, run well Gal. 5. 7.
, yea and suffered many things for Christ's, and the Gospells sake Gal. 3. 4.
: but afterward they were bewitched Gal. 3. 1.
, proved disobedient to the Truth, and so fell from that Grace Gal. 5. 4.
and favor of God, wherein they stood, whilst they obeyed the Gospel. But we
shall (God willing) in due time muster greater numbers of such passages as
these.

The third and last comparison, Luke 8. 8. has less color in the face of. 46.
it, then either of the former. In this, they who receive the Word with good
and honest Hearts, are compared unto seed, that fell on good ground, which
springs up, and bears fruit an hundred fold. For,

1. It is not said, that the seed which fell on good ground, are they, who hear
the Word with a good and honest Heart, but, who having heard the Word, detain
or keep it in a good and honest Heart. The tenor of the place in Luke, is
this: (...) (...) Luke 8. 15.
. So that it is not simply the hearing of the Word with a good and honest
Heart, that brings Men under the comparison of the seed that fell into good
ground; but the retaining and keeping of it in such an Heart, and that so, as
to bring forth fruit with patience: i. e. with parient continuance in well
doing (whatever temptations they shall meet with to interrupt them in their
way) as the word is translated, Romans 2. 7. both by our English Translators, and
by Calvin himself, who interprets the place accordingly.

2. Our Saviors intent in describing the several tempers and conditions of
those that should hear the Gospel, together with the event and consequence of
their hearings respectively, by that variety of grounds, which the Parable of
the Sower speaks of, was not to assert the absolute necessity of the several
events specified upon the respective hearings, as if (for instance) those who
at the time of their first hearing, were like unto the thorny ground, must
necessarily miscarry, and never afterward believe savingly; but to inform and
admonish the World, what is like to be the event and consequence, and what
ordinarily is the event and consequence, of such hearings, as are here
described by the several tempers of those that hear, being habitual, and of
long standing with them. For otherwise there is no absolute impossibility, but
that he, in whose Heart the Gospel is for the present much encumbered and
choked with the Cares and Pleasures of this life, and so has been for a long
season, may yet recover Himself from under this great disadvantage, and so
believe unto Salvation; though such a recovery as this be very difficult and
rare; which is all that our Savior intended to show, or teach, in this part of
the Parable. There is the same consideration of all the other grounds, or kinds
of hearers. So that though he that should hear the word with a good and honest
heart, should be compared to the seed falling on good ground, yet could there
not an absolute necessity be concluded from hence, that therefore such a Man
must bring forth fruit unto Salvation; but only a great likelihood, and
hopeful Probability, that such an heater will not miscarry by the way, but
will hold out with Patience in well doing unto the end, and so be saved. So
that there is nothing in this Argument neither, to keep that Doctrine from
falling, which is already shaken. Therefore,

A tenth Argument is built by some for the honor of the said Doctrine,. 47.
upon such Scriptures, which testify, that such as do not Pesevere, but make
either a total, or final defection, in, or from the Faith, were never true
Believers, or by a true Faith ingrafted into Christ: and that make it the
Property, or badg of a true Believer, that he still does continue in the Faith.
The Scriptures Produced to justify this account, are Joh. 8. 31. 1 John 2. 19.
Heb. 3. 6. 14. To this also we answer,

1. (In general) three things, 1. That there is no good consistency of sense
in it, to say, that they fall away from Faith, who never were at it, never were
true Believers. If it be said, that Men are said to fall away from Faith, when
they fall away from such a Faith as they had, as viz. from a temporary Faith,
or a light and superficial believing of the Gospel, etc. I answer, 1. If this
be the Faith, from which Men are said to fall, in the Scriptures, then must
this needs be the Faith also, wherein they are exhorted and charged to
Persevere. For those that have in any kind, or with any Faith embraced the
Gospel, and made Profession of it, are exhorted to continue in the Faith. Now
that the Holy Ghost should persuade Men to continue in a temporary Faith (I
mean in such a Faith, which is not accompained with justification, or, which
works not by love, or which will certainly fail) imports a kind of impious
contradiction. 2. If this were all the apostasy or backsliding from Faith,
mentioned in the Scriptures, viz. to apostatize from a temporary, false,
hypocritical, dead Faith, the sin of apostasy would not be a sin of that deep
demerit, or high Provocation unto God, which the Scripture so frequenly
declares it to be. Nor has God any reason to say, that his Soul shall have
no pleasure in such Men, who withdraw themselves from an Hypocritical, feyned,
or unsound Faith. 3. And lastly it is no where to be found in the Scriptures,
either explicitly, or implicity, that they who make Shipwreck of Faith, or
prove Apostates, were no true or sound Believers at any time, before this
shipwreck; but the contrary hereunto will be made manifest in due time. In the
mean while to the Scriptures, upon which this argument is built, I answer,

2. And in Particular, 1. That these words of Christ (Joh. 8. 31.) If ye. 48.
continue in my words, then are you my Disciples indeed, do not imply, that in
case they should not continue in his words for the time to come, it would argue
that they were not His Disciples at the present; but that they could not
approve themselves Disciples of His upon those excellent and blessed terms,
which being Disciples of His at present, they very well might do, and were
hereby in a ready way of doing, unless they did continue in his words, [i. e.
in obedience unto His Commands] unto the end. For that they were His Disciples
at present, without any respect to their continuance, or non continuance in his
words, for the future, is evident from the words immediately preceding in the
same Verse: Then said Jesus to those Jews who believed on him. Therefore being
such who believed on him, they were His true Disciples; though they had not had
opportunity as yet to approve themselves His Disciples indeed, i. e. so as to
obtain eternal happiness by their Discipleship in this kind.

2. For those words, Heb. 3. 6. -- whose house are we, if we hold fast the. 49.
confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end; together with
those (of like character, Verse. 14.) For we are made partakers of Christ, if
we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end, there is much
the same consideration of them with the former. The meaning is not (as the
rigor of the letter seems to hold forth) as if their being the House of God, or
partakers of Christ, at present, depended upon their future being, of what for
the present they were (things that are, are what they are, so, or so, such or
such, determinately, whatsoever follows, or not follows, in the future,) no
nor yet as if their future Perseverance would declare, that their present
estates or standing in the Faith, was good; (for they, whose Faith for the
present, is weak, and not able to justify them, may notwithstanding
insensibly, both to themselves and others, grow up in time to such a Faith,
which is justifying, and may persevere in it accordingly) but only to show,
that their being the House of God, for the present (and so, their being
partakers of Christ, for the present) would stand them in little stead, would
in the end and upshort of all be, as if they had not been, yea and of a worse
consequence too, then so, unless they persevered in the same Faith and
Profession unto the end. This Exposition of the places is fully consistent with
the maine drift and scope of the Epistle, which was, not to teach the Hebrews
to know whether they were true Believers, or no, at present, much less to
teach them this knowledge, by what they should approve themselves to be, to the
day of their death (which had been to give Men darkness to see by) but to
animate, encourage, urge, and press them to continue constant in that Faith,
which at present they had embraced, and made profession of, unto the end.

3. (And lastly) as to those words, 1 Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us,. 50.
but they were not of us. For if they had been of us, etc. we gave a large
account in the preceding Chapter Cap. 10. Sect. 21, 22, etc.
, where we gave evidence upon evidence that there is no such thing so much as
supposed, or insinuated, in them, as that they, who once truly believe, must of
necessity always persevere believing. The clear scope and drift of the
Context carries them quite another way. I shall here only add this: that the
Apostles scope being (as is evident from that verse, and the words next
preceding) to caution them against those Antichristian Teachers, that were
abroad in the World, lest they should be seduced by them, it had been very
incongruous, and enough to blunt, if not quite to take off the edge of such a
caution, so imediately to subjoyne such a Doctrine, from whence they might
conclude, that it was a thing unpossible for them to be seduced, at least to
the making shipwreck of their Faith. Besides, that it was not unpossible for
them to be thus seduced, is fully evident from Verse 24. Let that therefore
abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning: if that which you have
heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the
Son, and in the Father. If there had been an impossibility, either that the
word, which they heard from the beginning, should not have remained in them, to
the end; or that they should not have continued in the Son, doubtless the
Apostle would never have subjected the former unto question, nor suspended the
latter upon the taking place of it: both which are manifestly done by Him in
the said words. No Man speaks at so poor a rate of reason and sense, as this:
If the light makes things visible, then may an Horse, or a Man, be seen by it.

Another Argument calculated for the support of the received Doctrine. 51.
of Perseverance, pretends regulation by many pregnant places of Scripture,
which bear, that true Believers, who are partakers of the quickening Spirit of
Christ, and of Regeneration, cannot either totally, or finally lose them, or
fall away from them. The places levied upon this account are, Romans 6. 2. and
Verse 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 John 3. 9. 1 John 5, 4. 18. Jude. Ver. 3. Apoc. 20. 6. To
this I answer.

That upon due examination none of these places will be found guilty of any
such Doctrine, as they stand charged with in this Argument. We have at large
(in the former Chapter) cleared the innocence of one of them ( viz. 1 John 3.
9.) which bears the greatest heat and burden of the charge: to the rest we
answer in course.

Romans 6. 2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? These
words import no impossibility of their returning unto sin, who are dead to it
(at least, who by the tenor and band of their Christian Profession are dead to
it, for of this kind of death to sin the Apostle seems here to speak) but
only a great and signal unworthiness in them so to do. So that the
interrogative particle, (...), how, carries some such sense with it, as this:
with what face; or, with what conscience; or, with what comfort, peace, or the
like. HOW then (says Joseph to His Mistress) can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God Genesis 39. 9.
? HOW can I do it, does not here imply an impossibility for Joseph to have
committed the sin, but only a great unseemlinesse, or unworthiness. See also
Mat. 6. 4. Gal. 4. 9. etc. Calvin Himself* stretches the same line of
interpretation over the Scripture in hand, which we have done, affirming, that
Paul here discourses what manner of persons it becomes us to be, when God
has showed mercy to us, and adopted us freely: and by an Adverb of the
Future-tense shows what kind of change ought to follow our justification
Porro memoria tenendum est (quod nuper attigi) Paulum non hic tractare quales
nos Deus inveniat, dum vocat in societatem Filii sui, sed quales nos esse
deceat, postquam nostri misertus, gratis nos adoptavit. Adverbio enim futuri
temporis, qualis justiciam sequi debeat mutatio, ostendit. Calvin. Romans 6. 2.
.

The Contents of Verse 8. 9, 10, 11. of the same Chapter, are of the same. 52.
import and interpretation with the former. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with Him; Knowing that Christ being raised
again from the dead, dies no more: death has no more dominion over Him. For
in that He died, He died unto sin once: but in that He lives, He lives unto
God. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, etc. The
intent of the Apostle in these passages, is nothing less, then to teach, or
insinuate a non-possibility of their returning or living again unto sin, who
at present are dead unto it: such a supposall as this is diametrally
inconsistent, with the emphaticall energy of His exhortation, Verse 12. Let not
sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, as likewise with many other
pregnant Scriptures (which shall be consulted with in due time) but to set
forth the spiritual condition of the Children of God, partly in respect of
what it is, partly in respect of what it should, or ought to, be, by a metaphor
or similitude borrowed, from what happened unto Christ corporally, or
literally, after this manner. As Christ died once corporally, (for the
abolishing or taking away of the sins of Men) but now lives and acts for the
advancement of the Glory of God, and is not obnoxious unto any more dyings in
that kind: in like manner, they who are his, or desire or profess themselves,
to be His, ought to be conformable to Him in these things, in a spiritual way,
as viz. by dying unto sin (i. e. by endvouring to destroy and work out all
sinful dispositions from within them, and by ceasing from all Sinful actions
and ways) and again, by living unto God (i. e. Righteously, Holily, and so
that God may be glorified in the World by the excellency of their
conversations) and by persevering and continuing in this course of living unto
God, without relapsing into that death in sin, which is opposite hereunto, even
as Christ lives unto God, so as never to cease thus living unto Him. Therefore
all that can be inferred from this contexture of Scripture, is the duty of
Perseverance in Faith and Holiness, or necessity of it, in respect of the
great obligation to it, that lies upon the Saints, and that profess interest
in Christ, and expect Salvation by Him; not any absolute, not any such
necessity of it, which is unavoideable or undeclineable by the Saints. For to
what purpose should they be so solemnly, so seriously cautioned against that,
whereby they were not in any possibility of suffering inconvenience? If it were
impossible that sin should reign in their mortal bodies, after they were once
dead to it, needless and vain had that exhortation been, Let not sin reign
in your mortal bodies. The common maxim among Divines and interpreters of
Scriptures, is, that Similitudes, or Metaphors; do not run on all four;
meaning, that they are not to be extended or applied to the spiritual thing
intended to be illustrated by them, in all the properties or relations which
are found in those things, from which they are taken; but in respect of that
only, which suits naturally with the scope of the place, where they are used.
From the consideration of Christ's death once suffered by him, without being
liable to die the second time, and so of His living unto God, without danger of
ever having this life extinguished, or taken from Him, cannot be proved, either
that Men, who are once dead unto sin, can no more live to it; or that Men once
alive unto God, cannot possibly suffer any interruption, or loss, of this
life. Because these particulars are not mentioned, or insisted upon by the
Apostle, to prove the absolute, but only an Hypotheticall or conditional
necessity of the Saints conforming themselves spiritually unto them, or unto
Christ Himself in respect of them, viz. if they mean to answer the tenor and
import of their* holy Profession, or to obtain Life and Salvation herein, in
the end.

Nor do these words, 1 John 5. 4. For whatsoever is borne of God, overcomes.
53.
the World; and this is the victory [i. e. the means of the victory or, that
victorious thing] that overcomes the World, even our Faith, imply any absolute
necessity, that he that is borne of God, or, that truly believes [ viz. at the
present] and in this respect is victorious over the World, must always retain
the strength and vigor of His new Birth, or true Faith, and so be victorious
always, and to the end. All that can be, reasonably, and according to the
usual import of such Scripture expressions, concluded from this place, is, 1.
That all the true-borne Sons and Daughters of God, by means of that Spirit of
Faith which works in them, in this estate of Regeneration, are for the present,
above the temptations and allurements of the World, wherewith others are
overcome, and hereby remain in imminent danger of perishing. 2. That they are
likewise in such a posture, or condition, by means of their Faith, that if they
shall (...) (as the Apostle Paul's word is) quit themselves like Men, and act
their Faith, or with their Faith, according to the virtue, vigor, and
usefulness of it, they may make good the ground, or standing, which they have
gained, and maintain their present victory or conquest over the World, unto
the end. But here is not the least or lightest intimation given, but that
those, who are at present, victorious over the World, by the aid and working of
their Faith, may through carelessness, security, and inconsiderateness, suffer
the World to recover her former advantage, and so far to insinuate with them,
as to cause them to let fall the Shield of Faith out of their hand, before they
be aware of it. See more to this point Sect. 9. of this Chapter.

Nor is there any whit more relief for the cause now in distress, in that. 54.
other place, Ver. 18. of this Chapter. We know that whosoever is borne of God;
sins not: but he that is begotten of God keeps Himself, and that wicked
one touches Him not. For that which is here asserted and held forth by the
Holy Ghost, is only this, that the natural genius or property of a true-borne
In Scriptura, saepe ea facta, vel futura dicuntur, quae fieri ^ec^t, aut
debent, sive qu^ ut fiant, honestas and rerum natura postulat, vel quibus ut
s^ant, justa gravisque causa datur. Cornel. Lap. in Zachar. 13. 12.
Child of God, as such, and whilst such, is to refrain from ways or
customary practices of sin, and to set a guard (as it were) of holy and potent
considerations, and resolutions, about his Heart, that the Devil may have no
entrance or access thither, by the mediation of any temptation whatsoever. Not
that such vigilance and care as this, are always performed, and taken by Him,
(the contrary hereunto is too much experimented) but that there is a certain
propensnesse in that Divine nature, wherein He partakes by being borne of God,
that inclines Him hereunto. Men are often in Scripture Dialect said to do
that, not which they always do, but which they are apt and likely to do, and
which very frequently, or customarily they do (indeed;) and sometimes, that
which is their duty to do. In this Dialect our Savior speaks, when He
says, If any Man walk in the day, He stumbleth not [i. e. He is not apt to
stumble, or, He does not ordinarily stumble] because He sees the light of the
Sun. But if a Man walk in the night, He stumbleth [i. e. He is apt to stumble,
or He often stumbleth] because there is no light in Him Joh. 11. 9, 10
. So likewise the Apostle Paul: He that is unmarried, cares for the things of
the Lord, how He may please the Lord [i. e. frequently He does so, or He has
an opportunity, which the married has not, to do it: for otherwise we know,
that many unmarried Persons are far from caring for the things of the Lord.]
But He that is married, cares for the things of the World, how He may please
His Wife 1 Cor. 7. 32. 33.
. His meaning is not, that the married, always, and without exception of any
one in that condition, thus miscarrieth; there are some Married Persons, that
tread lighter on the Earth, I mean, that are less addicted to the World, then
many that are unmarried. But only that Persons so engaged and related, have a
temptation upon them, more then the unmarried, and so are apt to turn aside on
that hand, yea and frequently do so. That which follows is of the same
character. There is a difference also between a Wife, and a Virgin: the
unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy, both
in body and in spirit: but she that is married, cares for the things of the
World, how she may please her husband. The Book of the Proverbs abounds with
such veins of expression as these, viz. where Men of such or such a
qualification, or relation, are simply said to do so, or so, according to the
nature and genius of either, not because they do always and universally so,
but because they are disposed, apt, and likly, by reason of such a
qualification, or relation, to do it, and accordingly, often do it. Thus it
is said, A Man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes surety for
His Neighbor Pro. 17. 18.
, i. e. He is apt to do it: Men weak in understanding and less considerate,
often bring themselves into this snare; not that they always do it, or that
every Man thus weak does it. So again: The poor uses entreaties, i. e.
Poverty ministers occasion unto Men thus to do, and poor Men ordinarily do
it: yet some poor there are, who are so far from using entreaties, that they
are more surly and rough in their answers, then many, that are rich; though it
follows, But the rich answers roughly Pro. 18. 23.
. Meaning only, that they are apt to do it, and do it frequently. Other
instances of like interpretation, are obvious in this Book. See Cap. 18. 11.
15. 18. 16, 17, 28, etc. Therefore when John says, whosoever is borne of God,
sins not: and, that he that is begotten of God keeps himself, etc. nothing
can be concluded from such sayings, but only* that Men Regenerate have a
Principle within them, disposing and inclineing them unto ways of
righteousness, and to vigilance over themselves; or that Regenerate Men do
frequently abstain from the customary ways of sinning in the World, and watch
over themselves; not, that every Regenerate Man without exception, does these
things.

2. Some understand the words, whosoever is borne of God, sins not, but. 55.
keeps Himself, etc. in a declarative sense, thus: Whosoever desires to
approve himself, whether to himself, or others upon any sufficient ground, for
a Man Regenerate, or borne of God, he must abstain from ways of sin, and
watch narrowly and carefully over himself, that the Devil may not do him the
least hurt (as our English Annotators interpret the Phrase, touches him not:)
This interpretation reduces the place to a like sense and notion with that in
the same Epistle, (formerly opened) Little children, let no Man deceive you: He
that does righteousness, is righteous 1 John 3. 7.
; meaning, that no Man has any sufficient ground, either to judge Himself a
righteous Person, or to expect to be so judged by others, unless he does
righteousness, i. e. lives holily, and in a conscientious observance of the
Commandments of God See Cap. 9. Sect. 11.
. There are many assertions and sayings in Scripture of like consideration with
this. Now this Interpretation does not find in the words any impossibility for
the Regenearte Man to sin, or any absolute necessity that he must so keep
himself, that the evil one shall not touch him; but only a necessity for him
to refrain the one, and to practice the other, if he desires upon good and
sufficient grounds, either the comfort within, or the honor without, of being
born of God.

As for that Argument, which some build upon the metaphor or similitude. 56.
of the natural Birth, or generation, viz. that as Men are capable only of
being once borne, and cannot lose the substance of that nature, wherein they
were borne, or change their species afterward; so neither are men capable of
being borne of God, more then once, or of losing the substance or nature of
this birth, being once made partakers of it; this Argument (I say) is built
upon one of the lame feet of the similitude, on which it neither runs, nor
stands. For it cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that the similitude of the
natural generation, or birth, is borrowed or used by the Holy Ghost, to
signify, teach, or import any such thing, as this; but only to show, either,
1. That Men have no being, no complete, perfect, or desirable being, till they
be spiritually born of God (in which respect they are said to be, nothing, who
are not regenerate, or born of him Gal. 6. 3.
:) or else, 2. To show, that as no Man comes to partake of the nature, or
natural properties or endowments of Men, but by a suitable generation, i. e.
by a generation or propagation from Man, so neither do or can, men partake of
the Divine Nature, or true holiness, but by a proportionable descent from God:
or 3. To show, that as Men, in, and by means of their natural generation and
birth, come to partake of the same Properties, Principles, and Propensions,
which are natural to their Parents, who beget them, and act according to the
genius of such Properties, Principles, and Propensions; so do they, who are
spiritually Propagated by God, in, and by means of this Propagation, receive
such Principles and Impressions, which are in God Himself, and withal act and
move in the World, according to the Heavenly genius, ducture, bent, and
tendency of these; or else perhaps (4. And lastly) to show, that as the effect
of natural generation, i. e. the conception of the Person generated in the
Womb, is secret, and unseen, and for the manner of it, in a great measure
unknown, unto Men; ( as thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how
the bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child Eccles. 11. 5
.) So is the manner of Gods dealing with the Heart, Soul, and Conscience of a
Man, in and about the act of Regeneration, of a very abstruse consideration,
and remote from the apprehensions and understandings of Men, according to that
of our Savior, The wind blows where it lists: and thou hear the sound
thereof: but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is
every one that is borne of the Spirit Joh. 3. 8.
. That these Particulars are, or may be, imported in the Metaphor or
Resemblance of the natural generation; may be proved from the Scriptures. But
that by the impossibility for a Man to pass from that species, wherein he was
borne, into another, which attends the birth natural, was intended to
signify a correspondent impossibility in the birth spiritual, can no more be
proved, then that this generation or birth consists in a change of essentialls,
and not of qualities only, or that it is a generation of a corporeal
substance, because both these are found in the natural generation. And who
knows not, that by straining and stretching similitudes beyond their staple, I
mean, beyond what is intended to be signified by them, an endless generation
of absurd, in-coherent and monstrous conceits may be produced? But,

2. The Scriptures do not only no where countenance any such deduction. 57.
from the said simile, but plainly enough assert the contrary, viz. that Men
may pass from one spiritual species into another, and repasse into the former
again. My little children (says Paul to the Galathians) of whom I travel in
birth again until Christ be formed in you Gal. 4. 19.
. And again: ye did run well: who did hinder you, that you should not obey
the truth Gal. 5. 7.
? yet again: Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law: ye are fallen from Grace Verse 4.
. So when the Apostle affirms it to be impossible to renew those by Repentance,
who have once been enlightened, etc. in case they fall away Heb. 6. 4. 6.
, He clearly supposes, 1. That some Men may fall away, who may be renewed by
Repentance, i. e. restored to their former species in Faith and Holiness, from
which they had been transformed by sin. 2. That others may fall away, and be
trans-speciated upon such terms, that they are incapable of such restoration.
But of these passages more hereafter.

Nor does that of Paul to the Corinthians, Though you have ten thousand
instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the Gospel 1 Cor. 4. 15.
, import the contrary. For 1. He does not say, that it was not possible for
them to have many Fathers, but only that de praesenti, they had not many. This
implies, that Paul was the instrument of God, for, and in, their conversion to
the Faith, at the beginning; and withal, that they at present persisted in
that Faith, or species of Believers, whereunto, or wherein, He had begotten
them. But it no ways supposes, or implies, either that they were unchangeable
in that Divine Nature, wherein He had begotten them; or incapable of being
begotten the second time, in case they had been actually changed. 2. Our
English Divines in their Annotations upon the place, by Fathers, understand
such as were tender over them, and free, in their Teachings: as by Instructors,
(...), Schoolmasters, who are imperious in their Teachings, and teach for hire.
3. (And lastly) in saying that they had not many Fathers, He does not
necessarily imply, that they had no more but one Father; but (possibly) that
they had but very few. For many, is not always, nay seldom, opposed to, one;
but sometimes, and more frequently, unto few.

The next Scripture attempted in favor of the said Argument, is that. 58.
wherein the Saints are exhorted to contend earnestly for the Faith, which was
once delivered unto the Saints Jude. v. 3.
. But neither does this place, so much as in face, look like Pillar, or Prop,
of the Doctrine we oppose. For,

1. By Faith, is not here meant the Grace of Faith, or justifying Faith, but
(by a metonymie, either of the efficient, for the effect, or of the object, for
the faculty) as in twenty places besides, the Doctrine, or word of Faith. Faith
(say our English Annotators upon the place) is not here taken for
faithfulness, nor for credulity, nor for confidence, nor for Faith of
miracles, but for the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is to be believed. So hope
is taken for the thing hoped for, Romans 8. 24. Colos. 1. 5. This exposition of
the word, Faith, is confirmed by the Apostle Himself, affirming it to have been
(...) once delivered, not once given, to the Saints; or rather, to holy Men. It
it very unproper to say of the grace or habit of Faith, that this was
delivered: but most proper, of the Doctrine of Faith. This Doctrine is said to
have been once delivered [to holy Men] to imply, either that it has been
delivered by God so, that He intends never to make any change or alteration of
it, or addition to it (which implies the Perfection of it;) or else, that He
intends to reveal or deliver it no more, in case the Saints, who are, and
ought to be, the guardians and keepers of it, should suffer it to be cashiered,
or wholly extinguished in the World. See the aforesaid A^notations upon this
clause. In saying that it was delivered to holy Men, or Saints. He intends to
lay so much the greater and more effectual Obligation upon this Generation, to
contend earnestly for it, i. e. for the maintenance and preserv^tion of it, in
its purity of being.

2. If the place should be understood of the Grace of justifying Faith, nothing
could be inferenced from it, but only that they, who are once possessed of such
a Faith, shall keep and m^ke good this their Possession, if they quit
themselves like Men, and shall strive in good earnest to effect it. This is
nothing but what is fully consonant with the Doctrine asserted by us.

Neither has the last Scripture mentioned any right hand of fellowship to. 59.
give unto the Doctrine now gainsaid. For the Holy Ghost pronouncing, Blessed
and holy is He, that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the second
death has no Power Revel. 20. 6.
, does not, by the first Resurrection, necessarily mean, Regeneration, or
Renovation by Faith, or if this should be granted, does He necessarily suppose,
that the second death shall have no power on those, who have part in
Regeneration, unless, they keep possession of what they have at present, unto
the end. Some learned and grave Authors by the first Resurrection (in this
passage) understand, not a spiritual, or metaphorical, but a literal and
proper Resurrection; which shall take place and be effected by God, in the
beginning, and (as it were) in the morning of the great day of Judgment; as
they conceive another (far greater then it) to follow after it, in the close or
evening of this day Mede. Comment. Apocalyp. p. 277.
. This interpretation of the first Resurrection, is marvellously probable from
the Context it self. For John having Ver. 4. described the happy condition of
those, who had borne the heat and burden of the day of Antichrist, without
fainting, in this, that they sat upon thorns, and had judgment (i. e. power
of judging the World) given unto them, and that they reigned with Christ a
thousand years, He adds, Ver. 5. This is the first Resurrection: where likewise
He says, that the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years
were finished. Much more might be argued for this Exposition: but our present
engagement craveth it not.

2. Nor does the sense contended for of the Resurrection, any ways opitulate
the cause in distress. For in case it should be said, that the second death
shall have no Power, on those that are Regenerate, it must, according to the
constant Rule (formerly delivered Sect. 9. and Sect. 44. of this Chap. and Cap.
10. Sect. 43*
) for the interpretation of such like passages, be understood with this Proviso
or Explication, viz. if they continue Regenerate, or be found in the estate of
Regeneration at their death. Which condition is expressed and insisted upon in
several places; and particularly Rev. 2. 11. where ou^ Savior Himself in His
Epistle to the Church of Revel. 2. 11.
Smyrna promises exemption from harm by the second death, only upon condition
of victory, i. e. of such a victory, which imports a standing fast and
faithful unto Christ in the Profession of the Gospel, against all
temptations, allurements, persecutions, and whatsoever should attempt their
loyalty and faithfulness in this kind, unto the end; He that overcommeth,
shall not be hurt of the second Death. The sense now given of these words, is
fully confirmed, by those in the Verse immediately preceding: be thou faithful
UNTO DEATH, and I will give thee a Crown of life; as also by other passages
from the same blessed Hand, to other Churches. And He that overcomes (says He
to the Church of Thyatira) and keeps my words UNTO THE END, to Him will I
give power over the Nations Revel. 2. 26.
. So to the Church of Sardis: Behold I come quickly: HOLD that FAST, which thou
have, that no Man take thy Crown Revel. 3. 11.
. To which many others of like character might be added from other places: but
this has been done already in part: and remains to be done more fully in
place more convenient. In the mean time we clearly see, that however the
received Doctrine of Perseverance says unto the Scriptures, Scriptures,
Scriptures, yet these make no other answer, but, Depart from us: we know you
not, you are a Doctrine that gather not with us, but scatter, what we gather.

CHAP. XII.
The former Digression yet further prosecuted: and a Possibility of Defection
in the Saints, or true Believers, and this unto Death, Clearly Demonstrated
from the Scriptures.

IT is the saying (as I remember) of Quintilian: Many men might have. 1. Multi
ad Sapientiam pervenire potuissent, nisi se jam pervenisse putassent.
been wise, had they not prevented themselves with an Opinion of being wise,
before they came to it. Nor is there much Question to be made, but that many
have miscarried, and do miscarry daily, in the great and important affair of
their everlasting Peace, out of a presumption or conceit, that they are under
no danger, in no Possibility of any such miscarrying; whose most deplorable and
irremediable diaster and loss in this kind, might otherwise have been
prevented, and their Persons Crowned with eternal glory, which now are like to
suffer the vengeance of eternal Fire. Of so dismal a consequence it is to
misunderstand, pervert, or wrest the Scriptures, especially in order to the
gratifying of the flesh, or to the occasioning, or encouragement of Men to
turn the Grace of God in the Gospel into wantonness. The truth is, that the
Scriptures seem in many Points and matters of question, to speak very
doubtfully* and to deliver such things in several places, and sometimes in the
same, which Men of contrary judgments may very plausibly interpret into a
compliance with them in their respective Opinions: though the unquestionable
truth be, that even in such cases as these, they love the one Opinion, and hate
the other. It is no part of our present engagement to prescribe any perfect or
complete method, or rule, how to discover which way the Heart of the Scripture
leans, when the Tongue or Mouth of it seems to be cloven, or divided between
two inconsistent Opinions. I shall only (by the way) make my Reader so far of
my counsel in the business, as to give him to know, that when the letter of
the Scripture has for a time left me in a great strait and exigency of
thoughts, between contrary Opinions, (a condition that has more then once
befallen me) that brief Periphrasis or Description of the Gospel, which the
Apostle delivers, calling it the Truth which is according unto godliness (...)
Tit. 1. 1.
, has upon serious consideration, often delivered me; yea and brought me to such
a clear understanding of the letter it self, wherein before I was entangled,
that I evidently, and with the greatest satisfaction I could desire, discerned
the mind of God therein; and that with full consonancy to the ordinary Phrase
and Manner of speaking in the Scripture, upon a like occasion. For having this
touchstone by an unerring hand given unto me, that the Gospel is a Truth
according unto Godliness, i. e. a Systeme or Body of Truth, calculated and
framed by God, in all the veyns and parts of it, for the exaltation of
godliness in the World, I was directed hereby, in the case of Doctrines and
Opinions, incompatible between themselves, to own and cleave unto that, as the
truth, and comporting with the Gospel, the face whereof was in the clearest
and directest manner set for the Promotion, and Advancement of Godliness
amongst Men; and to refuse that, which stood in opposition hereunto. Nor did I
find it any matter of much difficulty, or doubtfulnesse of dispute within my
self, especially in such cases, and between such Opinions, wherein I most
desired satisfaction; to decide and determine, which of the two Opinions
competitors for my consent, was the greater friend unto Godliness. That
competent knowledge which God had given me, of the general course of the
Scriptures, together with the experimental knowledge I had of mine own Heart,
the workings, reasonings, and debates thereof, seconded with that long
observation which I had made of the Spirits, Principles, and ways of Men in
the World, together with their ebbings and flowings, their risings and
fallings, their advancings and retreats, their firstings, and lastings, in
matters of Religion, in conjunction with that light of Reason and
Understanding, which I have in common with other men; these together were
sufficient to teach me, and that to a plenary satisfaction in most cases, what
Doctrines, what Opinions are of the richest and most cordial Sympathy and
compliance with godliness, and what on the other hand are but faint and loose
in their correspondency with her, or otherwise secret enemies unto her.

That that Doctrine, which asserteth a Possibility even of a final defection.
2.
from Faith, in true Believers, well understood, rises up in the cause of
Godliness with a far higher hand, then the common Opinion about their
Perseverance, has been sufficiently, though but in part, proved already Cap. 9.
: the further demonstration hereof sleeps not, but only awaiteth its season.
Our present tasque is to argue the letter of the Scripture for confirmation of
the said Doctrine, and to evince the truth thereof from the Oracles of God.
This done, we shall (God willing) advance some grounds of reason also built
upon the Scriptures, for the further countenance and credit hereof. And because
security upon security will not (we suppose) be unacceptable in a business of
such grand concernment and import, we shall afterward produce some examples,
upon the same account: and then conclude our Discussions of this subject, with
an enterview of some sayings, wherein it will appear that the God of Truth
has drawn a confession and acknowledgement of that Truth of His, which we now
maintain, from the judgments and consciences of some of the greatest
Adversaries thereof, or at least so esteemed.

First, for the sense of the Holy Ghost Himself in the Question depending,. 3.
we cannot lightly desire any account more satisfactory, then that given by
Himself in the Old Testament. But when the righteous turns away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked Man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done, shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. Yet ye
say, the way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O House of Israel, is not my
way equal? are not your ways unequal? When a righteous Man turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in them; for his iniquity
that he has done, shall he die Ezekiel. 18. 24. 25, etc.
. What more can the understanding* Judgment, Soul, or Conscience of a Man
reasonably desire, for their establishment in any truth whatsoever, then is
delivered by God Himself in this passage to evince the possibility of a
righteous Man's declining from his righteousness, and that unto Death? The
latter words of the passage are conclusive hereof, against, and above, all
contradiction. When a righteous Man turns away, etc. and dies in them, [i.
e. repents not of them, forsakes them not, before his Death] for his
iniquity that he has done, shall he die: [viz. the second Death, or perish
everlastingly.] For that this Death is meant, at least included, in this latter
clause, is evident, because otherwise we shall both make an unsavory tautology
in the sentence, and destroy all congruity of sense besides. For without such a
supposition, the Prophet must be supposed to speak thus: when a righteous Man
turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity, and dies in them,
[i. e. leaves his natural life under the guilt of them, and without
Repentance for them] for the iniquity that he has done shall He [leave his
natural life, or, have his natural life taken from him.] When a Man dies in,
or under the guilt of His sin, He shall die for His sin, or because of the
guilt of His sin, the same death, which He dies in His sin. Who tastes not a
palpable absurdity, and incoherence of sense, in such a construction as this?
whereas, if by dying, in the latter clause, we shall understand, dying, or
perishing for ever, the sentence will run clear, and in full consonancy with
the general current of the Scriptures, the sense rising thus: when a righteous
Man shall forsake the ways of righteousness, wherein he has formerly walked,
and turn aside into ways of wickedness, and not repent of these ways before
His death, this Man shall die the death of the impenitent and unbelievers, which
is the second Death. In this sense, the sentence perfectly accords (for
substance of matter) with such passages as these: Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? B^ not deceived: neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of
God 1 Cor. 9. 10.
. And again: For this ye know, that no Whore-monger or unclean person, or
covetous Man which is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God. Let no Man deceive you with vain words: for because of
these things comes the Wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience Ephesians. 5.
5, 6.
; And (to omit many others) with that of the same Prophet, Therefore thou son
of Man, say unto the Children of thy People, The righteousness of the righteous
shall not deliver Him in the day of His Transgression -- when I shall say to
the righteous, that He shall surely live, if He trust His own righteousness,
and commit iniquity, all His righteousness shall not be remembered, but for His
iniquity that He has committed, He shall die for it Ezekiel. 33. 12, 13.
. If the righteousness, which an Apostate or back-slider from ways of
righteousness, has wrought, whilst He was yet righteous, shall not deliver
Him, when He turns aside unto wickedness, what can be imagined should deliver
Him? Doubtless His wickedness, whereunto He has turned aside from His
righteousness, will not befriend Him with a deliverance. Nor can it any whit
more reasonably be said, that though His former righteousness will not deliver
Him from a temporal death, yet it may deliver Him from eternal death; then in
the case of a true Repentance it may be said, that though such a Repentance
will deliver a Man from a temporal death, yet will it not deliver Him from
eternal death. For as the truest Repentance that is, though continued in, will
not deliver a Man from a temporal or natural death, but will most certainly
deliver him from eternal death: in like manner, though Apostasy and
backsliding from ways of righteousness, persevered in, do not always expose
a Man to a temporal death, or bring this death upon Him, yet they always
render Men obnoxious to eternal death.

Besides, when God threateneth such backsliders as we speak of, that when. 4.
they shall commit iniquity, etc. all the righteousness that they have done
formerly, shall not be mentioned, i. e. (as Calvin Himself interprets) shall
not come into any account, as to matter of reward Cum autem satis liqueat non
venire justiciam ejus, qui defecit, in rationem, ut quicquam mercedis sperare
debeat, etc. Calv. in Ezekiel. 18. 24
, evident it is, that if it shall not come into any account at all, (as for
example) to obtain from God so much as the reward of a temporal deliverance,
much less shall it turn to any such account, as to be rewarded with that
great recompense of reward, Salvation.

Again, that Death which God here threateneth against that double, or two fold
iniquity of backsliding, is opposed to that life, which is promised to
Repentance, and Perseverance in well doing. But this life is confessed by all,
to be eternal life: therefore the death opposite to it, must needs be
eternal, or the second death. When the Apostle says, the wages of sin, is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Christ Jesus our Lord Romans
6. 23.
; is it not evident from the antithesis or opposition in the sentence, between
the death, and life, mentioned in it, that by that death, which He affirms to
be the wages of sin, is meant eternal death? How else will the opposition
stand?

Yet again: when God in the Scriptures threatens impenitent Persons with Death
for their sins, doubtless He intends and means, eternal Death, or that Death
which is the wages of sin. Otherwise we have no sufficient ground to believe or
think, that Men dying in their sins without Repentance, shall suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire, but only a temporal or natural Death; which the
righteous and truly penitent themselves suffer as well as they. Therefore to
say that God threatens impenitent Apostates, (in the place in hand) with a
temporal Death only, when as elsewhere He threatens impenitency under the
lightest guilt of all, with eternal Death, is (in effect) to represent him, as
vehement and sore in his disswasives from ordinary and lesser sins; but
indifferent and remiss in dissuading from sins of the greatest Provocation.

Once more: if it be only a temporal Death, which God here threatens against
the Sons of Apostasy, dying under the guilt of their Apostasy, and of all the
sins they have committed therein, without Repentance, then may Men under the
guilt of the greatest and foulest abominations, remain in the greatest love
and favor of God, as just and righteous Men; yea and without Repentance, not
only escape damnation, but also inherit eternal life. And where then is the
God of judgment Mal. 2 17.
? Or what will become of that great voice of the Scriptures, which every where
calls Men to Repentance for the forgiveness of sins?

That comparative allusion, of the Leper under the Law, wherewith the. 5.
Synod of Dort (it seems) much pleased themselves* and others also since, of
the same judgment with them, reaches not the case; nor administers any relief
at all to their cause, against the Scripture in* hand. The Leper (say they)
among the Jews, was enforced for a time [meaning, whilst his leprosy was upon
Him] to want His House: but yet He did not in this time, lose the right of
Title which He had to this House, because upon His healing, or cleansing, He
might again possess it Leprosus siquidem apud Judaeos, cogebatur pro tempore
domo ca^ere: non tamen jus ad domum amisit, quia sanatus potuit illam rursus
possidere. Dr. Pride. Lect. 6. De Persever, Sanct. p. 202.
. This comparison (I say) squares not with the business in hand. For 1. The
reason why the Person leprously affected, did not lose the right He had to His
House, before He was leprous, by His becoming a Leper, was, because there was
no Law, by which any Man's right or title to His House, was disabled or made
void, by Leprosy: whereas in the case of Apostasy, there is a plain Law (or
rather many Laws) established and declared by the great Lawgiver of Heaven,
by which backsliders from ways of righteousness into ways of sin and
abomination, are without Repentance, cut off from all right of title or claim
to the inheritance of Heaven. For this ye know (says the Apostle, as we heard
lately) that no Whore-monger, or unclean Person, nor covetous Man (who is an
Idolater) has any inheritance [i. e. any right of inheritance, or to inherit:
for otherwise no righteous Person, yet living in the flesh, has any actual
inheritance] in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God Ephesians. 5. 5.
. To object, that this Law or Decree of Heaven holds good against such sinners
in every kind, Whoremongers, covetous, etc. who never were righteous; not
against such, who have been righteous, though now lapsed into these ways of
abomination, is not only to declare a Law without the sense or authority of the
Lawmakers, but against that Declaration which he has made of it; who still
declares those the worst and greatest of sinners, who with the lapsed Angels,
which we call Devils, revolt from his service and ways, to walk in ways that
are an abomination to Him. Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this, and be
horribly afraid: be ye very desolate, says the Lord. Why? what is it that
causes the Glorious God to appear in such an ecstasy of Passion? For my
People (says He) have committed two evils: they have forsaken Me the
Fountain of living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that
can hold no water Jer. 2. 12, 13.
. The Scripture is full of such Declarations from God, as this, against
Apostates. So that the Dort comparison palpably faulters in that circumstance,
which should have rendered it apposite to their Purpose.

2. The leprous Person they speak of, was cureable before his Death, and. 6.
so (as they say) being healed might re-enter, and possess His House again.
But the Revolter from Righteousness, of whom Ezekiel speaks, is supposed (as
we heard before) to die under the guilt of his revolt, without healing; and
consequently to be without all Possibility of cure, being dead. Therefore as
the Leprous Person they speak of, though whilst he lived, had a right to His
House (no Law, as was said, depriving Him of this) yet during His leprosy upon
Him, He had no right to enter, take Possession, or dwell in His House, the Law
disabling him hereunto, in respect of his leprosy; and in case he had been
leprous until his Death, he should have had no more Power or Right to Possess
His House, then if his title to it had been wholly lost: in like manner, should
it be granted or supposed, that the spiritual Leper, of whom Ezekiel speaks,
had a right to the Kingdom of Heaven, during his Leprosy, yet supposing the
cleaving of this Leprosy to him until death (which is the Prophets
supposition) he could never, (according to the terms of the comparison) have
any right to enter, or to be admitted thereunto: and consequently his Leprosy,
I mean, his apostasy, had been final, and so unto death. Therefore there is
nothing gained to the Dort cause by this Similitude, though it should be
allowed a Pre-eminence above similitudes, and permitted to run on all four. And
whereas they say and grant, that a truly righteous man, may for a time, viz.
from his turning aside into ways of wickedness, until his renewing by
Repentance, lose, though not Jus, his right unto, yet aptitudinem, his fitness
or meetness for, the Kingdom of Heaven, they argue quite besides the Argument
levied against them from the Passage in hand. For in this reasoning they take
it for granted, that their righteous man never dies in those ways of
wickedness, into which he turns aside, but always comes to be ^enewed again
by Repentance, before his Death; whereas Ezekiel, expressly, and in terminis,
supposes a possibility at least, that his righteous man may dye, in, or under
his Apostasy from Righteousness, and in his committing of iniquity. When a
righteous man (says he) turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity* AND DIES IN THEM, for His iniquity that He has done, shall He dye
Ezekiel. 18. 26
Therefore all this while the Prophet of God, and the Synod of Dort, are two.

Nor is that Distinction, made choice of by Dr Prideaux to arbitrate and. 7.
umpire the difference between them, able to set them through, or make them
friends. There is (says He) a double Righteousness, one, inherent, or of
Works, by which we are sanctified; another, imputed, or of Faith, whereby we
are justified. A righteous man may turn aside from His own Righteousness, viz.
from His Holiness, and fall into very heinous sins: but it does not follow from
hence, tha^ therefore He has wholly shaken off from Him [or out of Him] the
Righteousness of Christ Duplex enim est Iusticia, inhaerens sive op^rum, q^a
sa^ctificamur; and imputata Christi, seu fidei, qua justificamur -- Quibus
positis, ex ^copo Prophetae respondeo: justum posse se a vertere a Justicia
sua, sua nimirum sanctitate, et in atrocia incidere peccata -- non inde tamen
sequitur* illum, justic^am Christi, seu fidei, penitus excussisse. Dr Pride.
Lect. 6. de Persever. Sanctorum.
. But,

1. The Doctor here presents us with a piece of ^ew Divinity, in making
Sanctification, and Justification, no more intimate friends, then that one can
live without the company and presence of the other. Doubtless if a man's
Justification may stay behind, when his Holiness is departed, that assertion
of the Apostle will hardly stand; Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord
Hebr. 12. 14
. And if they that are Christ's, [i. e. who believe in Christ, and thereby are
justified] have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, (another
assertion of the same Apostle) how their relation unto Christ should stand, and
yet their Holiness sink and fall, I understand not. But I leave his friends to
be his enemies in this.

2. He seems by his word, penitus, wholly, thoroughly, or altogether, to be
singular also in another strain of Divinity, and to teach magis, and minus, in
Justification. For in saying, that from a man's aposta^izing from his own
righteousness, it does not follow, that therefore he has WHOLLY, or ALTOGETHER
shaken off the imputed righteousness of Christ, does he not imply* that a man
may shake off some part of the righteousness of Christ from him, and yet keep
another part of it upon him? or else that by sinning, he may come to wear the
entire garment or clothing of it so loosely, that it will be ready to drop, or
fall off from him every hour? and consequently, that the righteousness of
Christ sits faster and closer upon some, then upon others; yea, upon the same
person at one time, then another.

3. (And lastly) Were it granted unto the Doctor, that from a man's turning
aside from his own Holiness, it does not follow, that therefore he has wholly
divested himself of the Righteousness of Christ imputed; yet from Gods
determination or pronouncing a man to be in an estate of condemnation and of
death, it follows roundly, that therefore he is divested of the Righteousness
of Christ imputed (if ever he were invested with it before,) because no man
with that Righteousness upon him, can be in such an estate. Now we have upon
several grounds proved, that the Righteous man under that Apostasy, wherein
Ezekiel describes and presents him, is pronounced by God, a child, not of a
temporal, but of eternal death and condemnation. This indeed the Doctor denies:
but gives no Reason of his denial, for which I blame him not. Only I must
crave leave to say, that the Chair weighs not so much as one good Argument,
with me; much less, as many. So that all this while, he that spoke, and still
speaks, unto the World, by Ezekiel, is no friend to that Doctrine, which
denies the possibility of a righteous man's declining even unto death.

Notwithstanding some formerly (it seems) in favor of this Doctrine, attempted.
8.
an escape from that sword of Ezekiel lately drawn against it, by pretending
that by the righteous man mentioned in the Passages in hand, is not meant a
person truly and really righteous, but a kind of formal Hypocrite, or outside
Professor of Righteousness. But this shift had so little color in the face of
it, that it caused the after-Patrons of the Doctrine to blush, and be ashamed
of it. The Synod of Dort it self, though it accepted of many helps in other
cases, of every whit as little strength, as this, yet judging it self better
provided at that point, where this was offered to relieve it, it was rejected
by the Members of this Synod, and that with some kind of disparagement put
upon it; I will not say, with any such intent, or eye, that they who thus
rejected it, might be looked upon as men, who would own nothing but what was
solid and substantial. The forementioned Doctor also rewards the Synod of Dort
with his approbation, for refusing to entrust their cause in the hand of such a
sorry Advocate, as this. So that we shall not need to cause this Interpretation
to pass through the fire, for the trial of it, in as much as it has been
publicly stigmatized for reprobate silver, by the greatest Masters of that
cause, for the maintenance whereof it was devised. And indeed the whole series
and carriage of the Context from Verse. 20. to the end of the Chapter,
demonstratively evinceth, that by the righteous man all along is meant such a
man, as was, or is, truly righteous, and who, had he persevered in that way of
Righteousness, wherein he sometimes walked, should have worn the Crown of
Righteousness, and received the reward of a righteous man. As by the wicked man
all along, opposed to him, is meant, not a person seemingly wicked, but truly
and really so, (as is acknowledged on all hands.) So that the Antithesis, or
opposition, between the righteous, and the wicked, running so visibly quite
through the body of the Discourse, must needs be dissolved, if by the righteous
man, should be meant, a Person seemingly righteous only; he that is righteous
in this sense, being truly and really wicked. Yea, Calvin writing upon the
place, though he sets himself to manage it so, that the cause of Perseverance
may not suffer damage by it, and in order hereunto turns many a stone to make
the righteous man, a man seemingly righteous only, yet now and then by the
force* and Power of the Truth, is turned quite out of the way of his design; so
as to make this righteous man, righteous in such a sense, that nothing should
be wanting unto him, but Perseverance in his way, to make him blessed Nunc
autem terret eos, qui ad tempus professi fuerant se puros and sinceros esse Dei
cultores, si deficiant in medio cursu -- C^terum colligimus ex hoc loco,
quemadmodum Christus docet, sol^s esse beatos qui perseveraverint; quia nihil
pr^derit temporalis Justicia Apostatis, qui postea s^^a Deo avertunt. Et paulo
post; Rursum ut in officio contineat eos, qui fecerunt aliquos progressus, and
correcta omni ignavia, eos ad solicitudin^^ ^dducat, minari nis^ ad extremum
usque prosequantur cursum Sanctae and piae vitae, Justiciam superiorem pro
nihilo fore, etc.
. Which clearly sounds an acknowledgment, of true Righteousness in the man
styled righteous by the Prophet: in as much as Perseverance in a way of
Formality, or of a pretended and seeming righteousness only, is quite out of
the way to any man's blessedness. To this we may add that of Dr Prideaux (in the
forecited Lecture,) But if the righteous man (says he) should turn himself
away from his counterfeit and hypocritical righteousness, should he not rather
live, then dye; in as much as he should put off the Wolf, to put on the Lamb
Quod si justus se averteret a Iusticia simulata and hypocritica, an non potius
viveret, quam moreretur? quia exuisset Vulpem, ut Agnum indueret.
?

Others have sought for a door of escape from that Exposition of the place. 9.
yet in hand, which we have asserted, in the Hypothetical tenor and form of the
words themselves. Ezekiel (say these) does not affirm, that a righteous man
may* tur^ aside from his righteousness, etc. or that he may dye in his
Apostasy; but only speaks conditionally, or by way of supposition, viz. that
if, or when, he shall turn away from his righteousness, etc* then he shall dye,
etc. And from such conditional sayings as this, nothing positive can be
concluded. But this Sanctuary also has been profaned by some of the chief
Guardians themselves of that cause, for the protection and safety whereof it
was built. There needs no more be done (though much more might be done, yea,
and has been done by others Vid. Defens. Senten. Remonstr. circa Art. 5. de
Persever. p. 220.
) then what the learned Doctor (so lately named) has done himself, for the
demolishing of it. Having propounded the Argument from the place in Ezekiel,
according to the import of the Interpretation asserted by us; Some (says He)
answer, That a Condition proves nothing in being: which how true soever it may
be, in respect of such Hypotheticals, which are made use of only for the
amplification of matters, and serve for the aggravating either of the
difficulty, or indignity of a thing, (as, if I should climb up into Heaven,
thou art there, Psalm. 139. it were ridiculous to infer, therefore a man may
climb into Heaven;) yet such conditional sayings, upon which Admonitions,
Promises, or Threatenings are built, do at least suppose something in
possibility, however by virtue of their T^nor and form they suppose nothing in
being. For no man seriously intending to encourage a Student in His way, would
speak thus to Him; If thou will get all the Books in the University Library by
Heart, thou shall be Doctor this Commencement. Besides, in the case in hand. He
that had a mind to deride the Prophet, might readily come upon Him thus: But a
righteous man, according to the judgment of those that are Orthodox, cannot
turn away from His Righteousness: therefore your Threatening is in vain. Thus
we see to how little purpose it is to seek for starting holes in such Logique
quirks as these Respondent no^nulli, conditionem nil ponere in esse: quod
utcunque verum sit, de Hypotheticis, quae ad (...) solummodo, sive
amplificationem adhibentur, and aggerandae rei alicujus difficultati, vel
indignitati inserviunt (ut si scanderem Coelos, ibi es, Psalm. 139. ridiculum
esset infer, ergo potest aliquis Coelum scandere:) Conditionales ta^en,
quibus Commonefactiones, Promissiones, vel Comminationes superstruntur,
supponunt saltem aliquid in posse, licet nil ponant ex vi connexionis. Nemo
enim serio aliquem ad progressum in studiis sic adhortaretur: Si omnes in
publica Bibliotheca libros mand^s memoriae, eris Doctor hisce comitiis. Quid?
quod in praesenti negotio, irrisori in promptu esset, sic adversus Prophetam
subsumere: At justus secundum Orthodoxorum the sin non potest se avertere; ergo
in nihilum recidit tua interminatio. Videtis quam parum opus sit, in Logicis
hujusmodi tricit, diverticulum quaerere. Dr Pride. Lect. 6. de Perseverant.
Sanct. p. 201.
. Thus far this Great Assertor of the Synod of Dort, and of the cause which
they maintained, to show the vanity of such a sense or construction put upon
the words now in debate, which shall render them merely conditional, and will
not allow them to import so much as a possibility of any thing contained, or
expressed in them. To which much more of like demonstration might be added, if
I conceived that light stood in need of light for the manifestation of it. To
say, that God puts a case, in such solemnity and emphaticalness of words and
phrase, as are remarkable all along the carriage of the place in hand, of which
there is no possibility that it should ever happen, or be exemplified in
reality of event; and this in vindication of himself, and the equity of his
dealings and proceedings with men, is to bring a scandal and reproach of
weakness (such a weakness, as is scarce to be paralleld in men) upon that
infinite wisdom of his, which magnifies it self in all his words and works.
Which also is so much the more unworthy and unpardonable, when there is a sense
commodious, every ways worthy, as well the infinite wisdom, as goodness of God,
pertinent and proper to the occasion He has in hand, which offers it self
plainly, clearly, without any straining of word, or Phrase, unto us.

Lastly, Some there are, who, being loath to see the cause of their
long-magnified. 10.
Doctrine of Perseverance, dying by the Hand of the Scripture yet before us,
and despairing of help for it by any, or by all, the forementioned
applications, have thought it not amiss, in a case of such imminent and extreme
danger, to try conclusions by administering this Antidote unto it. When God
threatens (say they) the righteous man apostatizing, that for the iniquity
which He commits, He shall dye; He speaks, neither of the first Death
(properly so called,) nor yet of the second Death; but of Afflictions,
Judgments, and Calamities (often signified in Scripture by the word* Death, as
Prosperity is by the word, Life,) which God often brings upon truly good and
righteou^ men, when they greatly provoke Him by their sins. To this I answer;

1. That this mist has been already scattered and dispel'd, by the strength of
that light, which shines in Sect. 3. of this Chapter; by which it clearly
appears, that by the Death threatened by God against a righteous man
backsliding, and persevering in His backslidings, unto death, (which we there
show to be the case put by God in the Scripture in hand) is meant, Eternal
Death. Therefore not any temporal Judgments or Afflictions; at least, no^
only, or principally these. Yet here we add;

2. That it ill becom^ an Interpreter of Scripture, to recede from the plain,
proper, and best known signification of words, save only when necessitated by
the exigency, either of the Context and scope of the Place in hand, or else of
the nature and condition of the matter; as, viz. when the sense, which the
common signification of the word raises and exhibiteth, is inconsistent either
with the course of the Scriptures, or with Principles of Reason. Neither of
which can be reasonably pretended in this Place.

3. The express Tenor of the Context it self rises up like an armed man,
against this Interpretation. For the execution, or infliction of that Death,
which is here threatened against the righteous man, that shall apostatize, is
not threatened but upon his dying under His Apostasy: in which case there is no
opportunity for God to inflict any temporal Judgments upon men. When a
righteous man turns away from His Righteousness, and commits iniquity, and
DIES IN THEM, for His iniquity that He has done shall He dye Ezekiel 18 26
.

4. When God threateneth at any time such and such sins, or such and such
sinners in one kind, or other, with Death, it is of very dangerous
consequence, and tending to allay and break the energy and Power, and
consequently to hinder the operation, of such Threatenings upon the Consciences
of men, for any Man to put a qualified or mitigating sense upon the word,
death; especially not being authorized by God Himself so to do.

5. (And lastly) the Authors themselves of this Interpretation seem to be half
heartlesse and hopeless of doing any great matters for their cause by it, and
in their Explication of themselves about it, they distinguish themselves quite
besides that, which should relieve them. The word, Death (they say) in the
Prophet, does not IN THE FIRST SENSE of it, signify eternal Death, as neither
does the word, life, in the opposite* part of the sentence, signify eternal
life. But what though the word* Death, does not in the controverted Passage,
signify eternal Death, in the first sense or signification of it* yet if it
signifies it in the second, third, or fourth sense, or if it signifies it at
all, it is of one and the same consideration, for the eviction of what is
claimed by us from the place; which is, that a Man truly righteous may so
degenerate and Apostatize, that God will inflict eternal Death upon Him. I
omit to demand of these Interpreters, by what Authority or Confidence of
genius, they undertake thus particularly to range and marshall the several
senses, which (they say) God intended in such and such words, giving the
Pre-eminence to such, or such a sense, and saying to another, stand back, or
come behind.

If we had mere ignorance or nescience of the Truth to encounter, or
satisfy,. 11.
though in conjunction with the greatest parts of judgment and understanding
on the one hand, and with the greatest wariness and scrupulousness of
circumspection on the other hand, the traversing of the Scripture already
insisted upon, were sufficient (I conceive) without any further labor of
arguing, to gain credit and fulness of consent to that Truth, which is now
upon the advance. But Prejudice and Pa^tiality are hydropicall, and hardly
satisfiable: and these are our chief adversaries in the business in hand.
Therefore to reconcile (if Possible) the diaffections of these, with the truth,
we shall show them more visions from Heaven of the same light and truth with
the former. And first (upon this account) we shall remember them of a Passage,
formerly argued; and gather up (at present) only so much of the substance of
the Discussion, and that with what brevity may be, as we judge serviceable for
our present Purpose, referring the Reader to a review (if he please) of the
large^ examination. The tenor of the place is this: Then His Lord, after He had
called Him, said unto Him: O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all the debt,
because thou desiredst Me; should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and
delivered Him to the Tormentors, till He should pay all that was due to Him. So
likewise shall My Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts
forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses Mat. 18. 32, 33, etc.
. Evident it is from our Saviors reddition or application of the Parable, So
likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if etc. (speaking unto His
Disciples, Ver. 1. and to Peter, more particularly Ver. 21.) that Persons truly
regenerate, and justified before God (for such were they, to whom in special
manner he addresseth the Parable, and the application of it, and indeed the
whole carriage of the Parable shows that it was calculated and formed only
for such) may through high misdemeanors in Sinning, as (for example) by
unmercifulness, cruelty, oppression, etc. turn themselves out of the
justifying grace and favor of God, quench the spirit of Regeneration, and come
to have their portions with Hypocrites and Unbelievers. If Men will make any
thing at all of the Parable in a clear and direct way, without troubling or
obscuring, without wresting or straining, the carriage, scope and pregnant
tendency of it, such an inference cannot be avoided. Further satisfaction
herein may be had for the Price only of so much Pains, as the Perusal of the
54. and 59. Sections of the 8. Chapter of this Discourse will require.

Nor does the reversall of such acts of grace in God as we speak of, argue. 12.
the least mutability, or shadow of change in Him, either in respect of His
Love, Counsels, or Decrees; it only argues a change and alteration in Men.
For at that very instant, when God loves a Person, and justifies him, in
respect of his Faith, he hates with a perfect hatred, and such which has
death and destruction in the Womb of it, all wicked, cruel, and unmercifull
Men whatsoever. So that in case that Person, whom God now loves and
justifies, shall at any time hereafter turn wicked, cruel, unmercifull, or
the like (which is very possible for him to do) he falls under that hatred
of God, which was in him, even whilst he loved him, and which is always in
him, unchangeably, unalterably, and indispensably, in respect of any Person, or
Persons whatsoever. Therefore in such a case as this, there is no alteration or
change of affection in God, but only a change of mind, will, and ways in
Men, and that from better unto worse. A Man living, or traveling in a
temperate climate, finds no inconvenience or offense, either from cold, or
heat: but let him remove his dwelling, or travel, either so far North, where
extremity of cold reigns, or so far toward the South, where heat rages, he
will accordingly suffer, from the one, and the other. Yet this alteration in
the state or condition of his body, does not argue any alteration at all in the
Heavens, or in the Earth, or in the Air: these remain so affected, whilst he
suffers from them, as they were, when he was no ways inconvenienced by them. A
Man who by the Laws of the Land, or State where he lives, is at present
obnoxious to no penalty at all, inflicted by these Laws upon Malefactors, but
is capable of the greatest dignity or preferment, which that State affords,
as soon as he turns a Murderer, or Traitor to this State, devests Himself of
that capacity of honor, wherein He stood before, and becomes liable to the
severest Punishment, which those Laws inflict. The Man's condition hereby is
much altered, from what it was, and that by reason of the Law; but yet the Law
it self is altogether the same which it was, under the one condition of this
Man, and the other. In like manner God justifies a Man this day, upon his
believing: to morrow, upon a return to His v^mit of unbelief, He devests Him
of His justification, and requires his sins at his hand: yet God,
notwithstanding these contrary acts in reference unto, and about, one and the
same Person, remains entirely one and the same, no ways changed, no ways
altered, in his affections, or in any thing else relating to him. But of this
(...) already b. a See Cap. 4. Sect.


The root or grand occasion of the common mistake in this point, (I mean,. 13.
why Men conceive and judge, that if God loves a Man at one time, and hates him
at another, he must needs be variable in his affection) is that capital error
of a personal Election, and Reprobation, or of such a love in God, which
should produce the former; and hatred in him, that should cause the latter. For
if there were any such Affection or Love in God, which did directly and
immediately respect, or relate unto the Person of any Man, then (I confess) it
would follow, that if he should at any time hate that Person, whom he ever
loved, he should be changeable in his affections. But supposing that (which we
shall, God sparing life, and affording opportunity otherwise, demonstratively
prove in due time) viz. that God bears no Affection, no Love, to the Person of
any Man, simply in respect of his* Personality, or because he is this Man, and
not another, but that all the love that he bears to Men, or to any Person of
Man, is either in respect of their nature, and as they are Men, in respect of
which He bears a general or common love to them; or in respect of their
qualifications, as they are good Men, in one degree or other; in respect
whereof, He bears a more special love to them: and again, that He bears no
hatred to the Person of any Man simply, or, as he is this Man, and not another,
but only as he is sinful and wicked; it may very easily be conceived, how Men
may gain, and lose, and regain, and again lose, the love of God, without the
least change or alteration in this his Affection. Suppose a Prince loved no one
of his subjects, more then another, as they were his subjects, but thus far
loved them all with a gracious and benevolous affection; yet in case any of
them should prove more virtuous and deserving then their fellows, should upon
such an account, express signal and high respects of favor unto them; and on
the other hand, in case any of them proved vicious and ill deserving, should
frown upon these, and threaten to punish them, in case of a non-amendment, it
may well be apprehended, how the subjects of such a Prince, may often both rise
and fall in their Princes affections, He Himself remaining uniforme and
constant herein.

Another testimony from Scripture, evidencing the same Truth with. 14.
the former, speaks these words. But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection, least by any means, when I have preached unto others, I my self
should be a castaway 1 Cor. 9. 27.
. From which words I argue thus: If Paul, after his conversion unto Christ, was
in a Possibility of being, or becoming a Reprobate, or castaway, then may true
Believers fall away both totally and finally (for finally ever includes
totally,) But the Antecedent is true: Paul after his conversion, was in the
possibility mentioned. Ergo. The Major Proposition (I presume) will pass
without control. The Minor is proved from the place in hand, thus: That which
Paul was very sollicitous, and industrious to prevent, he was in a possibility
of suffering, or being made. But Paul was very sollicitous and industrious to
prevent his b^ing made a castaway (as the Scripture in hand plainly avoucheth;
he kept under his body, and brought it in subjection, in order to prevent his
becoming a castaway.) Ergo, He was in danger or possibility of being made a
castaway. The reason of the consequence in the Major Proposition, is, because
no Man of understanding will be sollicitous to prevent or hinder the coming to
pass of such a thing, the coming to pass whereof he knows to be impossible.

It is like it will be here said; that the word (...), translated, a
castaway,. 15.
does not always signify a Person wholly rejected of God, but sometimes, a
Person reproveable, in respect of some particular action, omission, or course.
I answer,

1. The word (...) in the writings of this Apostle, is constantly translated,
Reprobate. See Romans 1. 28. and 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Tit. 1. 16.
unless it be once, as viz. Heb. 6. 8. where it is Englished, Rejected* which
in sense and import, is as much as, Reprobate, as is evident from the
expressions which accompany it. But that [Earth] which bears Thorns and
Briers, is REJECTED, and is NIGH UNTO CVRSING, WHOSE END IS TO BE BVRNED Heb.
6. 8.
.

2. Chrysostom, who is generally acknowledged to be the best Expositor of
Scripture amongst all the Fathers, by the word (...), understands a a Person
rejected from Salvation by God. Do not think, says Paul (as this Author
commenteth the place) when once you have believed, that it is sufficient to
save you: for if it be not sufficient for me to Salvation, to Preach, to Teach,
to bring thousands unto God, unless I be unreproveable also in my personal
ways and actions, much less will it be so unto you (...).
.

3. Pareus Himself acknowledges, that, besides Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Theophylact, and Lyra, interpret the word, and place, accordingly Par. ad
Roman. page 780.
.

4. Our best modern Expositors themselves, though for the most part they
strain hard to deliver the common Doctrine of Perseverance out of the hand of
the word, (...), yet by the tenor of the sentence, and manifest scope of the
place, are so amused in their design, that in their expressions they fall into
the way of the ancient Interpretation mentioned. Calvin, having mentioned the
Exposition of some to this effect, lest when I have well and faithfully taught
others, I my self, by an evil course of life, should receive the sentence of
damnation from God, does not at all tax this Exposition, but only presents
another, which (as He* supposes) does melius quadrare, better suite with the
place. And yet immediately after, acknowledges, that the sentence may cohere
with the former saying, thus: lest I be defrauded, or, deprived, of the
Gospel, whereof others, by my means, are made partakers Nonnulli exponunt,
necum alios been ac fideliter docuero, male vivendo, damnationis judicium a Deo
reportem --

Potest etiam conjungi cum superiore dicto, in hunc modum; ne Evangelio
defrauder, cujus alii mea opera fiunt participes.


. Which sense, with that contended for by us, are no more two, but one
Interpretation. Musculus is right down for the same sense, upon the place. The
first reason (says he) is lest he should become a Reprobate, i. e. lest he
should be amongst those, who do not run [or strive] lawfully, and so never come
to obtain the Prize Ratio est, i. e. ne reprobus fiat. Hoc est, ne inter eos
sit, qui non rite currunt, adeoque nec brabio potiuntur.
. Mr. John Deodate (as He is Englished upon the place) thus: a castaway.] i.
e. found unworthy of being approved and rewarded, as one of Gods hold
Champions. He has a relation to that there were certain Colleges or Schools
of these exercises of Arms, in which those that were entered, if they did not
submit themselves to the rigor of the Discipline, or did not prove as they
should do, were CROSSED OVT by the Masters. Our English Annotators, who plow
much of their ground with Mr. Deodates Heyfer, incumber their Opinion about
Perseverance, with words of the same import upon the place. So that the best
ancient Expositors, freely, and with perfect agreement to themselves, and their
judgments otherwise; and the best modern Interpreters, unwillingly, and
without sparing themselves in their Opinions otherwise, give testimony to such
a sense of the word, (...), and (and so of the whole Period) which clearly
asserteth a Possibility of a(...)ll fall in true Believers.

5. (And lastly) the scope of the place, from Verse 23. evinceth the legitimacy
of such a sense in both, above all contradiction. For the Apostle, having
asserted this for the Reason, Motive, or End, why He had made Himself a servant
unto all Men, in bearing with all Men's humors and weaknesses in the course of
His Ministry, viz. that He might be partaker of the Gospel (i. e. of the
saving benefit or blessing of the Gospel) with them, Ver. 23. and again, that
what He did, He did it to obtain an incorruptible Crown, Ver. 25. plainly
shows, that that which He sought to prevent, by running, and fighting at such
an high rate as He did, was not the blame or disparagement of some such
misbehaviour, under which notwithstanding He might retain the saving Love of
God, but the loss of His Part and Portion in the Gospel, and of that
incorruptible Crown, which He sought by that severe Hand, which He still held
over Himself, to obtain.

Pareus, seems not to be very difficult in admitting the sense of the place.
16.
contended for, but denies that this sense does any ways imply, or suppose any
danger or possibility of Paul's becoming a Reprobate. To which Point He
reasons thus: As it follows not; Christ died, lest Believers should perish;
therefore Believers are in danger of perishing; but on the contrary, that
Believers are out of the danger of perishing, because Christ Died for them. So
(says He) it does not follow: I keep under my Body, lest I should be a
Reprobate: therefore I am in danger of being a Reprobate: but on the contrary;
therefore there is no danger of my being a Reprobate, because I keep my Body*
under, etc Sicut igitur non sequitur: Christus est mortuus, ne credentes in eum
pereant: ergo periculum est, ne credentes pereant: sed contra: ergo non est
periculum, quia Christus est mortuus. Ita non sequitur, contundo corpus, ne
Reprobus fiam: ergo periculum est, ne reprobus fiam: sed contra: ergo non est
periculum, quia contundo corpus, etc. Pareus in 8. Romans Dub. 15. p. 780.
.

To this I answer; if this Author intends only to assert by this arguing, that
Paul was in no danger of being a Reprobate, whilst He did continue that holy
exercise of keeping under his Body* which He speaks of, I am not He that shall
oppose Him. Doubtless Paul* was in n^ danger, no nor yet in any possibility
(which is much less then a danger) of being a Reprobate, or of being rejected
by God, whilst He used the means specified to prevent it* But,

2. If his intent be, to assert, or affirm, either that Paul, whilst he did
keep under his Body, was in no possibility of giving over his exercise in this
kind; or, that in case of giving it over, he was in no Possibility of becoming
a Reprobate hereby; my answer is, that his Argument reaches neither of these,
unless it be in a way of confutation. For as there was a Precedaneous
Possibility, that Christ who did die, might not have died; and again, in case
he had not died, that the Persons who now believe in him, and are saved, should
not have been saved; in like manner, there was a Possibility, both that Paul,
who did now keep under his Body, might not have kept it under, or might not
continue to keep it under, and that in case he had not continued to keep it
under, he might be a Reprobate. Nay, as in case Christ had* not died, there had
not been a Possibility only, but even a certainty, of their perishing, who now
by believing on him, are saved: in like manner, in case Paul had deserted his
exercise of keeping under his Body, there had been more then a possibility, and
no whit less then a certainty, of his proving a Reprobate; though now, by
means of his persevering therein unto the end, (as we have cause in abundance
to judge concerning him] he be saved. So that the Argument recoyles, as we see,
upon the Author himself, and the cause, which he seeks to maintain by it.

Our English Annotators upon the place are very tender of admitting any. 17.
such sense of the word, (...), which should imply any uncertainty in the
Apostle of his Election, or of obtaining the prize. But the truth is, that that
sense of the Word, for which we have contested, does no ways imply the former;
nor yet, if by uncertainty be meant any thing grievous or discourageing to the
Apostle, the latter. For, 1. He might, notwithstanding a possibility of
becoming a Reprobate afterward, know certainly that for the present He was
elected, in as much as know He might with the greatest certainty (and
doubtless, did) that He did believe. And that all those, who truly believe,
are elected, our Adversaries themselves will not deny. 2. Notwithstanding such
a possibility as we suppose, of his becoming a Reprobate, He might have as much
certainty of obtaining the prize, as He desired, or was any ways meet or
reasonable, for him, either to desire, or enjoy. This certainty He might have
(and questionless, had) upon his continuance in well doing: and for any Man to
be certain of obtaining the prize, though He should apostatize and decline
into ways of wickedness, is not a certainty either meet for God to give, or
for any Man to receive. Somewhat more was said upon this account in the nineth
Chapter.

The next passage we shall insist upon, to evince the possibility of a final.
18.
defection in the Saints, opens it self in these words. For it is unpossible
for those, who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God,
and the powers of the World to come, If they shall fall away, to renew them
again unto Repentance, seeing they Crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put Him to an open shame. For the Earth, which drinks in the
rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them, by whom
it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that which bears Thorns and
Briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned Heb.
6. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
. Answerable hereunto is another in the same Epistle: For if we sin wilfully
after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sins, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. He that despised Moses Law
died without mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace Heb. 10. 26, 27,
etc.
. Evident it is, that in these two passages, the Holy Ghost, after a most
serious manner, and with a very pathetique and moving strain of speech, and
discourse, (scarce the like to be found in all the Scriptures) admonishes
those, who are at present true Believers, to take heed of relapsing into the
ways of their former ignorance and impiety. This Caveat or admonition he
vehemently presses by an argument of this import; that in case they shall thus
relapse, there will be very little, or no hope at all, of their recovery, or
return to the estate of Faith and Grace, wherein they now stand. Before the
faces of such sayings and passages as these, rightly understood, and duly
considered, there is no standing for that Doctrine, which denies a possibility,
either of a total, or final, defection in the Saints. But this light also is
darkened in the Heavens thereof, by the interposition of the vailes of these
two exceptions. 1. That the Apostle in the said passages affirms nothing
positively concerning the falling away of those he speaks of, but only
conditionally, and upon supposition. 2. That he does not speak of true and
sound Believers, but of Hypocrites, and such who had Faith only in show, not
in substance. The former of these exceptions has been already nonsuited, and
that by some of the ablest Patrons themselves of the cause of Perseverance Cap.
11. Sect. 9.
; where we were taught from a pen of that learning, That such conditional
sayings, upon which Admonitions, Promises, or Threatenings are built, do at
least suppose something in possibility, however by virtue of their Tenor and
Form they suppose nothing in being. But,

2. As to the Places in Hand, there is not any Hypothetical sign, or
conditional Particle to be found in either of them, as they come from the Holy
Ghost, and are carried in the Original. Those two, iffs, appearing in the
English Translation, the one in the former Place, the other in the latter, show
(it may be) the Translators inclination to the cause, but not their
faithfulness in their engagement; an infirmity whereunto they were very
subject, as we shall have occasion to take notice of the second time ere long,
in another instance of like partiality. But the Tenor of both the Passages in
hand is so ordered by the Apostle, that He plainly declares, how great and
fearful the danger is, or will be, when Believers do, or shall, fall away, not,
if, or in case, they shall fall away.

To the latter exception, which pretends to find only Hypocrites, and. 19.
not true Believers, staged in both Passages, we likewise answer, that it
glosseth no whit better, then the former, if not much worse; considering, that
the Persons presented in the said Passages, are described by such characters
and signal excellencies, which the Scriptures are wont to appropriate unto
Saints, and true Believers, and that when they intend to show them in the best
and greatest of their glory. What we say herein, will (I suppose) be made above
all gainsaying by instancing Particulars.

1. The Persons spoken of, are (in the former of the Passages) said to be
(...), i. e. enlightened, [meaning, with the knowledge of God, and of Jesus
Christ, in the Gospel.] How frequently is this Grace of illumination, or
enlightening, attributed unto the Saints, or true Believers? The Apostle having
said, that the god of this world had blinded the eyes of those, who believe
nor* lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ -- should shine unto them;
He adds soon after: For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
has shined in our Hearts, (...), to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6
, etc. So that true Believers, are here distinguished from Unbeleevers, by
this, that they are enlightened, the other having their eyes blinded, by reason
whereof they are without any such illumination. So again, where He says to
these Hebrews, But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were
enlightened, (...), ye endured a great fight of afflictions Heb. 10. 32
; He clearly rermeth their Conversion it self to the Faith, their illumination,
or enlightening. Yea, this illumination is so appropriate unto the Saints, or
sound Believers, that our Savior Himself styles the generation of them, (...),
Children of light Luke 16 8.
. So the Apostle Paul admonishes the Ephesians, to walk, (...), as children of
the light E^hes. 5. 8.
, meaning, as Saints, or true Believers. And in the same Verse, he
distinguishes their present estate in Faith, from their former, in unbelief,
thus: For ye were sometimes darkness: but now are ye light in the Lord.

2. In the latter of the said Passages, the Persons spoken of, are said to
have. 20.
received (...), i. e. the acknowledgment of the Truth. Which expression, does
not signify the bare notion or apprehension of what the Gospel teaches, and
holds forth, of which they are capable, who are the most professed enemies
thereof, but such a consenting, and subjection hereunto, which works
effectually in men to a separating of themselves from Sin and Sinners. This is
the constant acception and import of the Phrase in the Scriptures. Always
learning (says the Apostle, of silly women, laden with Sins) and never able to
come (...), to an acknowledgment of the Truth 2 Timothy 3. 7.
: i. e. to a through and cordial assent to it, which is wont to utter it self
in a suitable Conversation. So when He says, that God will have all men to be
saved, and to come (...), to the knowledge [or acknowledgment rather] of the
Truth, by coming to the acknowledgment of the Truth 1 Timothy 2. 4
, He cannot mean any thing ineffectual, or unavailable to Salvation; such a
sense would render the sentence senceless, and exhibit it in this form: God
will have all men to be saved, and to come to that which is not able to save
them. Therefore by the acknowledgment of the Truth, is meant such a cordinal
and through assent to it, which consists in a sound and saving Faith. So when
He says, that the Servant of the Lord must be gentle -- in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God per adventure will give them
Repentance (...), to, or for, the acknowledgment of the Truth, He clearly
supposes the acknowledgment of the Truth, to be either the end, or specifical
Perfection of Repentance, i. e. such a thing, which demonstrates Repentance to
be sound, and of the saving kind, where ever it is found. There is but one
Place more, where the Phrase is used, and here also it bears as high a sense,
as in the testimonies already opened. Paul a Servant of God, and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the Faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledgment of
the Truth, which is after godliness Tit. 1. 1.
. By the acknowledgment of the Truth, cannot any such knowledge of it be meant
in this place, which should stand with unregeneracy, or unbelief, because then
Paul should style himself an Apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the exigency
or requirement of such a knowledge of the Gospel in men, which is insufficient
to save them. A sense ridiculous and preposterous. Somewhat was done by us in
the preceding Chapter Sect. 26, 27
, toward the unfolding of this place: Yea, the word (...), acknowledgment, in
construction with other words of like import, as the acknowledgment of Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 17. of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 13. of God, Colos. 1. 10. of the
mystery of God, Col. 2. 2. of Him that has called us, 2 Pet. 1. 3. (to omit
many the like) still imports such a knowledge which accompanies a sound and
saving Faith.

3. The Persons queried about, are said to be sanctified with, or by, the. 21.
blood of the Covenant, i. e. by their being sprinkled herewith to be separated
from such who refuse this sprinkling, as likewise from the pollutions and
defilements of the world. To be sanctified, when applied unto Persons, is not
found in any other sense, throughout the New Testament, unless it be, where
Persons bear the consideration and respect of things, rather then of persons;
and this only in that one place, 1 Cor. 7. 14. But of this signification of
the word, which we claim in this place, instances are so frequent and obvious,
that we shall not need to mention any. And we have formerly (I remember)
demonstratively evinced, that the Scripture in hand speaks of none other, but a
true and real Sanctification C^^ 8. Sect. 50, 51, etc.
, and such which is appropriate unto Saints.

4. They are said to taste, or to have tasted, of the Heavenly gift. By this.
22.
Heavenly gift may, be meant, either, 1. Christ himself, who is called, the
gift of God, Joh. 4. 10. Or, 2. the Holy Ghost, who is said to be given to them
that believe, Act. 11. 17, and again, to them who obey God, Act. 5. 32. Or, 3.
the gift of Righteousness, or Justification: for this also is called a gift,
Romans 5. 15, 16, 17. Or, 4. (and lastly) Salvation, or Eternal Life. This also
is termed the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. Now all these gifts, are given only
unto true Believers. Whatsoever is meant by this Heavenly gift, certain it is
that by tasting, is not meant any light or superficial impression made upon the
Hearts or Souls of Men through the sense, or apprehension of it, but an
emphaticall, inward and affectuous relish and sense of the excellent and
Heavenly sweetness and pleasantness of it, opposed to a bare speculation, or
naked apprehension thereof. The reason hereof is clear, viz. be cause the
tasting of this Heavenly gift here spoken of, is not mentioned by the Apostle
in a way of easing or extenuating, the sin of those that should fall away from
Christ, but by way of aggravation and exaggeration of the heynousnesse and
unreasonablenesse thereof; and withal, more fully to declare and assert the
equitablenesse of that severity in God, which is here denounced against those,
that shall sin the great sin of apostasy here spoken of. It must needs be much
more unworthy and provoking in the sight of God, for a Man to turn His back
upon, and renounce those ways, that Profession, wherein God has come home to
Him, and answered the joy of his heart abundantly, then it would be, in cause
He had only heard of great matters, and had His head filled, but had had really
found and felt nothing with His he^rt and Soul, truly excellent and glorious.
Therefore to understand the Phrase of tasting the Heavenly gift, in any
diminutive or extenuating sense, is to break the heart (as it were) to
dissipates the strength and Power of the Apostles arguing in this place. And
besides, the very word it self, to taste, ordinarily in Scripture, imports a
real communion with, or Participation and enjoyment (if the thing be good) of,
that which is said to be tasted. Oh TASTE and see (says David.) that the Lord
is good Psalm. 34. 8.
. His Intent (doubtless) was not to invite Men to a slight or superficial
taste of the goodness of God, but to a real, cordial, and through
experiment, and satisfactory enjoyment of it. So when He that made the great
invitation in the Parable, expressed Himself thus to His servants: For I say
unto you that none of those that were bidden, shall TASTE of my Supper Luke 14.
24.
, His meaning clearly was, that they should not partake of the sweetness and
benefit thereof with those, who should accept of his invitation, and come unto
it. In like manner, when Peter speaks thus to his Christian Jews, If so be
that ye have TASTED that the Lord is gracious 1 Pet. 2. 3.
, his meaning (questionless) is not, to press his exhortation directed unto
them in the former Verse, upon a consideration of any light or vanishing taste,
such as hypocrites and false-hearted Christians might have, of the
graciousnesse of the Lord, but of such a taste, wher^^n they had had a real,
inward, and sensible experiment thereof. See other instances of the like import
of the word, Acts 10. 10. Mat. 16. 28. Mar. 9. 1. Heb. 2. 9. etc. Sometimes (I
acknowledge) the word (...) to taste, signifies only a slender Perception of
the quality or taste of a thing; but this is only or chiefly when the relish or
taste of a thing is desired to be known; as Joh. 2. 9. Mat. 27. 34. which
cannot be affirmed in the Scripture in hand. And besides, according to the
sense of our adversaries in the present debate, if the taste of the Heavenly
gift we speak of should imply no more, but only a faint or weak perception of
the sweetness and glorious excellency of it, yet even this may be sufficient
to evince truth of Grace and Faith in Men. For their Opinion is, that a Man may
be a true Believer with a grain of Mustard seed only, i. e. with a very
slender relish and taste of spiritual things; yea their sense is, that in some
cases of desertion, and under the guilt of some enormous courses, they may have
little or no taste of them at all. Therefore we may safely conclude, that the
Persons, whose estates and conditions are exibited unto us by the Holy Ghost,
in the Scriptures in hand, are true Saints, true Believers.

5. This conclusion may be rendered yet more authentic, and full of. 23.
light unto us, by considering further, that the said Persons are here
represented as having sometimes worn this Crown of Saint-ship upon their heads;
they were made partakers of the Holy Ghost. To be made partakes of the Holy
Ghost signifies no less then to be made partaker of His regenerating virtue or
power (as to be made partaker of Christ, signifies a saving Communion with Him
by Faith. Heb. 3. 1. and so Communion or Partnership with God, 1 John 1. 2. 6.
imports an estate of Salvation, at least:) it usually signifies more, viz. some
additionall and richer communion with Him by way of obsignation, or earnest; i.
e. such a communion with Him, by which true Believers become mightily
strengthened in their inner Man, and filled with confidence of receiving the
great inheritance of Heaven in due time. Upon this account the Apostle Prays
on the behalf of the Corinthans, whom he supposes all along to have been true
Believers, that (...), the Communion of the Holy Ghost might be with them 2
Cor. 13. 13
; meaning, some richer and greater presence of his, then yet they had found
with them. And if we mind the course of the Scriptures, they will inform us,
that the Holy Ghost was not wont to be given unto Men (and consequently, they
could not be partakers of Him) but upon, and after their believing. See to this
purpose. Joh. 7. 39. Acts 19. 2. Ephesians. 1. 13. Acts 2. 38. Acts 8. 15. 17. Acts
10. 47. Acts 11. 17. Acts 15. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Acts 5. 32. etc. Therefore
certainly, those are said to be made partakers of the Holy Ghost, are at least
true Believers.

If it be objected, but many had the gift of Miracles (and in this respect. 24.
may be said to have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost) who yet never were
true Believers, as appears from those words of Christ unto some of them; I
never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity Mat. 7. 23.
. To this I answer; It is very true, some who made Profession of the Faith of
Christ, and yet wrought iniquity all the while they made this Profession, had
the gift of Miracles, for the confirmation of that Faith, which they professed.
But such Persons as these are no where in Scripture said to have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, or to have had communion, or fellowship with Him.
Even all the while that they wrought Miracles in the Name of Christ, they had
communion or fellowship with Satan, and were partakers of His Spirit. Communion
with, or partaking of, the Holy Ghost, is (as has been showed) in Scripture
Dealect, appropriated only to true Believers. And whereas Christ will say to
them, (...), I never knew you, i. e. approved you, or liked your ways, the
computation of the time of His dislike of them, is here intimated to begin,
when they began to work iniquity, and more particularly, when they entered
upon the Profession of his Nam^, without ceasing from their works of iniquity.
So that the meaning of the clause, I never knew you, is only this: from first
to last of your Profession of my Name, even when others honored and highly
esteemed you for those excellent gifts, which were given you, and for your
exercise of them to the benefit of many, I never looked upon you as any true
Disciples or Friends of mine, seeing and beholding your evil ways and works.

6. The Persons yet sought after, whither Hypocrites, or true Belivers, are. 25.
further said to have tasted the good Word of God. i. e. (according to the
import of the word, tasting, lately opened) to have had a lively and
satisfactory impression upon their hearts and consciences, of the goodness, i.
e. of the great beneficialnesse, of the Word of God, or the Gospel, unto them;
as being able to build them up, and to give them an inheritance amongst those
that are sanctified Acts 20. 32
. Goodness seems to be interpreted by the Holy Ghost Himself, by
bountifulness, or beneficialnesse. For s^arcely for a righteous Man will one
die: yet peradventure for a GOOD Man, some would even dare to die Romans 5. 8.
. For a good Man, i. e. for a liberal, or bountiful Man, and who is a
benefactor unto many. So again; Is thine eye evil, because I am good Mat. 20.
15.
. i. e. because I am bountiful, or beneficent unto Men? Upon this account
(doubtless) it is, that the Law of God is termed, good Romans 7. 12.
; viz. because (as David says) in keeping it, and the Precepts of it, there is
great reward Psalm. 19. 11.
: the Law of God is a great benefactresse to those that observe it. Now then
this tasting the goodness of the Word of God, the Scripture clearly
appropriateth unto the Saints. Are not My Words GOOD [or, do not My Words
good, as our last translation readeth] unto him that walks uprightly Mic. 2.
7.
? implying, that they are not so to wicked Men. The Law of thy Mouth (says
David in his holy applications unto God) is better unto me then thousands of
Gold and Silver Psalm. 119. 72
; unto me; tacitly implying, that other Men, of a different spirit from Him,
do not Taste any such sweetness or goodness in them. And the Apostle Paul
puts the Point in question, out of question; in that decision of His: To the
one [meaning, to unbelieving and wicked Men] we are the savor of death unto
death: and to the other [i. e. to those that truly believe] the savor of life
unto life 2 Cor. 2 16
. So that Hypocrites and Unbelievers are incapable, whilst such, of Tasting
the good Word of God, i. e. the Word of God in the goodness, sweetness,
bountifulness of it: the taste which they have of it, is in the terror and
severity of it against wicked Men. And whereas Tasting, is not without
touching, nor touching without application of the Object, it appears that
those who Taste the good Word of GOD, must needs make application of the
goodness of it unto themselves, and their own Souls: which our Adversaries
frequently make a distinguishing character between Hypocrites and true
Believers.

7. (And lastly) the Persons we speak of, are yet further said to have. 26.
Tasted (...), the powers of the World to come, i. e. not the powers of
Miracles (as Pareus interprets) there is a manifest incongruity in such an
Interpretation, which we leave to the Reader to conceive: but either, the joys
of Heaven (as our English Annotators) or the might and glorious things of
immortality (which is the more general Interpretation) or rather (as Cameron
expounds) the Incarnation, Humiliation, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc. of the Son of God Cameron. Myroth. p. 320.
; which may therefore be termed, (...), the powers of the World to come, either
because they are in respect of their full notification unto Men, appropriate to
the times of the Gospel, (wherein the great change and new state of spiritual
affairs, in comparison of what they were under the Law, may well be termed,
the World to come, as Pareus and other understand the expression, both here,
and elsewhere in the same Epistle) and w(...)ll, are exceeding full of efficacy
and power, to ravish the Hearts of Men into the Heavens; or else because the
glorious estate of life and immortality in the World to come, as it is
attainable, and enjoyable by Men, depends upon them, as a means full of
efficacy and power to bring them hereunto. But whatsoever in particular be
meant by these powers of the World to come, incontrovertible it is, that in the
general, somewhat transcendently excellent and glorious was intended by the
Apostle to be signified by them. So that for any person to be admitted to the
taste of them, i. e. to a real and inward feeling of their virtue, influence,
and vigor, upon his Heart and Soul, fully evinceth him to be a member of the
Congregation of the first borne, to have spiritual Communion by Faith with
Jesus Christ.

The Premises relating to the two Passages yet under debate, considered,. 27.
I am so far from questioning whether the Apostle speaks of true and sound
Believers in them, that I verily judge that He purposely sought out several of
the most emphaticall and signal characters of Believers, yea such which are
hardly, (or rather not at all) to be found in the ordinary sort of true
Believers, but only in those that are most eminent amongst them, that so he
might give them to understand, and consider, that not true Believers only, and
such, who though sound, yet were weak in the Faith, might fall away and
perish, but that even such also, who were lifted up nearer unto Heaven, then
their fellows, might through carelessness and carnal security, dash
themselves in pieces against the same stone, and make shipwreck of their Souls,
as well as they. Yea, I conceive yet further, that that impossibility of being
renewed again by Repentance, upon, or after a falling away, which he asserts
in the former Passage of the two, was not asserted by him with an eye to the
state or condition of ordinary believers, in case of their falling away, as if
he intended to conclude them under the heavy doom of such an impossibility,
but with an eye only to the most deplorable condition of such, who, having been
Sons of the Morning, and shined with more luster and brightness, then other
Stars, in the firmament of Christian Profession, should notwithstanding
afterward, fall (with Satan) like lightening from Heaven Luke 10. 18.
. My meaning is not to imply, that true Believers, if but of a mean statute and
growth in the Faith, are in no danger of final obduration, or under no great
difficulty of recovering their former standing, in case they shall fall away,
but only to observe, that that most serious and severe admonition, administered
by the Apostle (in the Passages in hand) by way of Antidote against the great
evil of Apostasy, was in a more special manner calculated for the estates
and conditions of grand Believers.

But that it was no part of his intent in the said passages to caution
Hypocrites. 28.
or outside Professors, against falling away, but true Believers only, besides
the characters already observed and examined upon the Point, there are these
reasons Pregnant of Proof.

1. There is no Clause, Phrase, or Word in either of the places, any ways
characteristicall or Descriptive of Hypocrisy, or Hypocrites: there are none
of those colors to be seen, which are wont to be used in drawing or limming
the Portraitures, or shapes of these Beasts, as distinguished from Creatures of
a better kind. All the lineaments of the Persons presented in these Tables,
before the mention of their falling away, become the best and fairest faces of
the Saints, (as has been proved,) and are not to be found in any other. Yea,
the greatest, and most intelligent Believer under Heaven, has no reason but to
desire part and fellowship with the Hypocrites here described, in all those
Characters and Properties, which are attributed unto them before their falling
away, or sinning wilfully.

2. True Believers, are in an estate of honor, and are lifted up on high,
toward the Heavens; in which respect they have from whence to fall. But
Hypocrites are as near Hell already, as lightly they can be, till they be
actually fallen into it. From whence then are they capable of falling? Men of
estates* may fail, and break: but beggars are in no such danger. If Hypocrites
fall away, it must be from their Hypocrisy; but this is rather a rising, then
a Fall. A Beggar cannot be said to break, but only when he gets an estate.
When he does this, the beggar is broke.

3. It is no punishment at all to Hypocrites, to be under no Possibility of
being renewed again by Repentance. Nay, in case they should Fall away, it
would be a benefit and blessing unto them, to be under an impossibility of
being renewed again. For if this were their case, it would be unpossible for
them to be ever Hypocrites again: and (doubtless) it is no great judgment
upon any Man to be made incapable of such a preferment.

4. (And lastly) it stands off forty foot at least from all probability, that
the Apostle writing only unto those, whom he judged true and sound Believers
(as appears from several places in the Epistle, as Cap. 3. 14. 6. 9. etc.)
should in the most serious, emphaticall and weighty passages hereof, admonish
them of such evils, or dangers, which only concerned other Men, and whereunto
themselves were not at all obnoxious: yea and whereunto if they had been
obnoxious, all the Cautions, Admonitions, Warnings, Threatenings in the World,
would not (according to their Principles, with whom we have now to do) have
relieved, or delivered them. To say that such admonitions, are a means to
preserve those from apostasy, who are by other means (as suppose the absolute
Decree of God, or the interposall of his irresistible Power, for their
Perseverance, or the like) are in no possibility of apostatizing, is to say
that washing is a means to make Snow white, or the rearing up of a Pillar in
the Air a means to keep the Heavens from falling. But more of this in the
Chapter following.

Thus then we clearly see by the unpartiall discussion of the two Scriptures.
29.
lately insisted upon, that there is a possibility that true Believers, yea the
greatest in this rank or order of Men, may fall away, and that to an
impossibility* of a return to their former standing, by Repentance. Whither
the Apostle speaks of a distri^^* and absolute impossibility in this place, or
of such an impossibility only* which our Savior expounds by a difficulty
Mat. 19. 23. 26.
, does no ways alter the state of that conclusion, which we have wrought from
it. P^re^s from Nazianzen, mentions six several significations of the word,
impossible; and prefers two of them with equal approbation, to the Apostle*
service in this place. Neither of them imports that rigid or district
impossibility we speak of; but the one, such an impossibility, which is caused
through want* of strength in Him, that should perform a thing; the other,
such, wh^^h exceeds the course of nature, and efficiency of second causes. So
that he supposes a liberty or Power remaining in God to renew again by
Repentance the Persons here spoken of, after their falling away,
notwithstanding that impossibility which is here asserted of their recovery.
Which ^nterpretation of his I willingly subscribe unto; and could plead the
cause of such a subscription, if it were pertinent to the pro^^sse of the
business in hand.

That which is commonly alleged in opposition to what has been argued. 30.
concerning the two last Scriptures, is of little consideration, excepting
only those Scriptures and Arguments, by which the Doctrine of Persevevance in
the general is wont to be maintained: both which we have answered at large in
the two next preceding Chapters. To say (with Pareus) that the Apostasy and
event, prove the persons spoken of to have been Hypocrites Hypocritas fuisse,
apostasi^ and eventus declarat.
, is to cause a Man's opinion to rise up early to praise it self. His refuge of
an Hypotheticall form in the words is but a sanctuary built in the Air (as we
showed formerly.) There is nothing Hypotheticall in either of the passages: if
there were, his greatest friends and abettors have polluted that Sanctuary, and
made it unclean for his use (as has once and again been declared.) And with
how little truth, he, or any Man can affirm, that all things here attributed
to the Apostates spoken of, illumination, gifts of Tongues and Miracles, the
tasting of the good Word of God and Faith, etc. amount to nothing more then to
what Hypocrites may have Apostolus autem non dicit categorice, semel
illuminatos prolabi, sed Hypothetice si prolabantur. Ab Hypothetica autem non
valet consequentia, nisi condition posita.
, has been our chief design in the traverse of the places, to show and prove.

The next Scripture testimony we shall produce, and briefly urge in the. 31.
cause now under maintenance, is in the same Epistle with the former, and
speaks these words. Now the Just shall live by Faith: but if any Man draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him Heb. 10. 38.
. Our English Translators, out of good will (doubtless) to a bad cause, have
almost defaced this Testimony, by substituting, any Man, for* the just Man. For
whereas they ^ranslate, but if any Man draw back, the original reads, (...),
i. e. and if [or, but if] H^ [ i. e. the just Man, who should live by his
Faith, viz. if he continues in it] shall draw back. Beza Himself likewise
before them, had stained the honor of his faithfulness, with the same blot in
his Translation. But the mind of the Holy Ghost in the words, is plain, and
without Parable; viz. that if the just Man, who lives [i. e. who at present
injoyes the favor of God, and thereby is supported in all his trialls] and
should live always, by his Faith [if he continues in it, as Pareus well
glosseth] shall draw back, or, shall be withdrawn [ viz. through fear, or
sloth, as the word properly signifies: see Acts 20. 27.] from his believing,
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, i. e. (according to the import of the
Hebraisme) my Soul shall hate or abhor him to the Death; as it is Apud Hebr^os,
adverbia negandi contrarium eju^, cui adhibentur, significant. Med. Apoc. p.
172.
also expounded in the words immiediately following: But we are not of those,
who draw back to perdition, but, etc. From hence then evident it is, that such
a Man who is a just, or righteous Man, and under Promise of living for ever by
his Faith (and therefore also, a true and sound Believer) may draw back, or be
withdrawn, to the contracting of the hatred of God, and to destruction in the
end. The forlorn hope of evading, because the sentence is Hypotheticall, or
conditional, not positive, has been routed over and over, yea and is
abandoned by some of the great masters themselves of that cause, unto the
defense whereof it pretends. And however, in this place, it would be most
preposterous. For if it should be supposed, that the just Man, who is in a way,
and under a Promise, of living by his Faith, were in no danger or possibility
of drawing back, and that to the loss of the favor of God, and ruin of His
Soul, God must be conceived to speak here at no better rate of wisdom or
understanding, then thus: The just shall live by his Faith: but if he shall do
that* which is simply and utterly impossible for him to do* my Soul shall
have no pleasure in him. What savor of wisdom, yea or of common sense, is
there in admonishing or cautioning Men against such evils, which there is no
possibility for them to fall into* yea and this known unto themselves*
Therefore this testimony, for confirmation of the Doctrine we maintain, is
like a King upon his Throne, against whom there is no rising up.

The same Doctrine is clearly taught and asserted by our Savior Himself. 32.
in the Parable of the Sower. But He (says He) that received the seed into
stony places, the same is He that hears the Word, and anon with joy receives
it. Yet has he not root in Himself, but dureth for a while: for when
Tribulation or Persecution arises because of the Word, by and by He is
offended Mat. 13. 20, 21.
. The words are part of the Explication, or Application of the said Parable,
wherein our Savior plainly declares that the Persons typified by the several
grounds specified therein, were several kinds of hearers of the Gospel, some
whereof should, or would, hear upon such terms, that their hearing would turn
to the blessed account of saving their Souls: these (says he) were signified
by the good ground [spoken of in the Parable.] Others of them, would hear
without reaping any such benefit thereby; and this partly by not setting their
minds at all upon what they should hear, who were resembled to the high way:
partly by a neglect to ground and establish themselves thoroughly in the truth
and goodness of the Gospel, after their hearing and embracing of it; these
(says he) were shadowed by the stony ground; partly also, by suffering the
cares and lusts of the World to overgrow ^^e sproutings or puttings forth of
the Gospel in their Hearts and Souls, by means whereof they came, after (...),
to wither, and die quite away: and these (says He) were pointed at by the
Thorny ground. Now those signified by the stony ground, He expressly calls
(...), i. e. Persons who continue for a time, or a season, i. e. (as Luke
explaineth) (...), who BELIEVE for a season Luk* 8. 13.
. So that those, who only for a time Believe, and afterward make defection
from Christ, and from the Gospel, are nevertheless numbered and ranked by him
amongst Believers. The words in Luke are very particular: They on the Rock, are
they which when they hear, receive the word with joy: and these have no root,
which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. From whence it
appears, that the hearers here described, are not compared to the Rock, or
Stony ground, for the hardness of their hearts; in as much as they are said to
receive the word with joy; which argues an ingenuity and teachablenesse of
spirit in them; and is elsewhere ( viz. Acts 2. 41.) taken knowledge of by the
holy Ghost, as an Index or Sign of a true Believer: but for such a Property,
Disposition, or Temper as this; viz. not to give or afford the word so
received, a radication in their hearts and souls, so intimous, serious, and
solid, which should be sufficient to maintain their belief of it, and good
affections to it, against all such occurrences in the World, which may oppose,
or attempt, either the one, or the other. For this is the nature or condition
of a Stony, or Rocky soil, which has but a thin coat or covering of Mould,
or Earth upon it; viz. to exhibit a speedy and sudden Spring, or Blade, from
the seed that is sown in it, but not to afford this Blade, or seed, any such
rooting, which is sufficient to preserve it from scortching, when the Sun beats
violently and for any considerable space of time together, with his fiery
Beams upon it. But as the Blade which springs from one and the same kind of
seed, as suppose from Wheat, or any other grain, though sown in different, yea
or contrary soyles, is yet of the same Species, or kind, the nature of the
soil not changing the specificall nature of the seed that is sown in it, and
God giving to every seed its own body, of what temper soever the ground is,
where it is sown: in like manner that Faith, which springs from the same seed
of the Gospel, must needs be of one and the same nature and kind, though this
seed be sown in Hearts of never so differing a constitution and frame; the
temper of the Heart, be it what it will be, not being able specifically to
alter, either the Gospel, or the natural fruit issuing from it. And as a
blade or ear of Wheat, though it be blasted before the Harvest, is not hereby
proved not to have been a true blade or ear of wheat before it was blasted: in
like manner the withering or decay of any Man's faith, by what means or occasion
soever, before his death, does not prove it to have been a false, counterfeit,
or Hypocritical faith, or a faith of any other kind, then that which is true,
real, and permanent unto the end. Therefore the possibility of a final
defection in those, who for a time truly believe, believe with the same kind
of Faith, whereby others, persevering in it to the end, are saved, is clearly
asserted by the Lord Christ Himself in the said Parable: yea, there is not
only a possibility in this kind asserted by Him, but a futurity also of many
instances, wherein this possibility would be acted upon the great stage of the
World.

Against the interpretation given, and the inference drawn from the words. 33.
lately opened, it is commonly objected, that our Savior in the second ground
(and so in the third) does not set forth the condition of true Believers, or
speak of true justifying Faith, but of temporary Believers, and of a temporary
Faith. I answer,

1. That if by a temporary Faith the Objectors mean, a Faith which is
eventually only such, it is acknowledged that the Scripture owneth both the
term, and notion. But if by a temporary Faith, they mean, a Faith,
intrinsecally, in the nature and kind of it, differing from that which is
true, and truly justifying, they devise a new kind of Faith, which the
Scriptures know not of. And of how dangerous a consequence the introducing of
an exotique Faith into the affairs of Christian Religion may be, I leave to
themselves to judge. For those Hearers or Professors, which in Mathews relation
of the Parable, our Savior calls (...), temporaries, are explained by Luke to
be such, (...), who BELIEVE for a season (as we heard before.) Now the ordinary
and most familiar signification of the word, (...), to believe, in such cases
and constructions as this (I mean, when it is used indefinitely, and without a
specification of some particular Object) is to signify, true Believers, or
such who believe unto justification. Instances hereof are too many to be
numbered. And to turn words out of their native, proper, and best-known
significations, into unusual, by, and improper senses, no exigency of the
Context compelling hereunto, has always been adjudged a dangerous breach of
the Laws of Scripture-Interpretation.

2. The temporarinesse of the Faith found in the Stony ground, did not arise.
34.
from the nature, essence, or any internal property in this Faith, wherein it
was specifically distinguished from the Faith of those emparabled by the good
ground, but partly from the ill temper or inconsiderateness of the Persons, in
whom it was seated, who neglected to give it sufficient rooting or
establishment within them; partly from the outward occasions of trouble and
persecution for the Gospel which came upon them. Nor is there any sufficient
ground or reason to conceive, that it would have proved temporary, and not
perseverant unto the end, had not the persons in whom it was, been attempted
with persecution. When the year proves very moist, showers of R^ine ever and
anon falling from Heaven upon the Earth, the seed that is sown even in stony
ground, is wont to prosper, and to yield a competent increase (at least) at
harvest, to the husbandman. Otherwise such ground as this would never be sown:
nor would our Savior have had the opportunity of furnishing his Parable with
the mention of that event, or ill success, which frequently befalls the seed
sown in such ground. Now if the temporarinesse of the Faith we speak of, was
occasioned only ab extra, or by means accidental and extraneous to it,
evident it is that it did not arise from any thing in the nature or essence of
it: and consequently, that it was of the same kind, with that Faith which did
persevere unto the end.

3. If the temporarinesse of the Faith now under consideration, either caused.
35.
it, or declared it, to be specifically distinct, from that which was sound and
justifying, and which held out to the end, then must perseverance, or an
impossibility of failing, be of the nature and essence of true Faith: The
consequence is evident, and needs no proof. Now, 1. If perseverance be of the
essence of true Faith, no person can be looked upon as a true Believer, either
by Himself, or others, until he gives up the Ghost, and dies. 2. If an
impossibility of failing be of the essence hereof, no Man can be looked upon as
a true Believer, neither before, nor after, he be dead. For what though a Man's
Faith should not fail before he dies, yet this amounts to no sufficient
proof, that therefore it was impossible that it should fail. A thousand things
come to pass, which yet very possibly might not have come to pass.

Again, that Perseverance, is not an intrinsecall or essential property of
true Faith, but only a consequent of it, and that contingent, appears, 1. From
the Principles of our Adversaries themselves, who commonly distinguish between
the gift of Faith, and the gift of Perseverance. Wonderful it is (says
Austin) and much to be wondered at, that God should, unto some of his Children,
whom he has regenerated in Christ, to whom he has given FAITH* hope, and
love, NOT GIVE PERSEVERANCE Mirandum est quidem, multumque mirandum, quod
filiis suis D^us quibusdam quos regeneravit in Christo, quibus fidem, spem,
dilectionem dedit, non dat ^rseverantiam* Aug. de Corrept. Et Great. c. 8.
. Therefore (by the way) Austin is no friend to the common Doctrine of
Perseverance, as it is taught and received, amongst us. 2. Adam (they say)
before his fall had true Faith, or (at least) a Power of believing truly,
(which now they acknowledge in none, but in those who truly believe) however,
certain it is that he had true holiness; yet the event in his fall declared
that Perseverance was not essential unto any of these; and consequently, that
in case he had persevered in them, this Perseverance had been but
consequentiall to them, and that contingently. 3. That which is true, is not
wont to be opposed, or contra-distinguished, to that which is temporary; but
may commodiously enough be distinguished into that which indureth for a season,
and that which continues for ever. Therefore that which is temporary, and
which stands by a Man only for a short time, may be as real, and true in
the same kind, as that which continues with him all his days. 4. If the
Faith under dispute, were temporary in the nature of it, and not by consequence
only, then could not a falling away from it, by those who were possessed of
it, be the cause of their final miscarriage (which yet our Savior plainly
supposes) because should they have persevered in it, they should not have been
any whit more saved by it, then now they were under a falling away from it. The
losing of that, which being kept, would not have saved a Man, cannot be the
cause of his loss of Salvation. 5. (And lastly) if the said Faith were
temporary, and not true, justifying or saving, in the nature of it, then the
lack of moisture afterward, could not be the reason or cause thereof; I mean,
why it was, or proved, temporary, and not true, or saving. The reason hereof is
plain: viz. because what is so, or so, such or such; in the nature of it,
cannot be made, or become such, by any after means, or occasion whatsoever,
whether act, or neglect. But evident it is, from the express words of the
Parable, that the reason why the said Faith, was, or proved, temporary, was
because the seed, from whence it sprang, wanted moisture. And some fell upon a
Rock (says Luke) and as soon as it was sprung up (i. e. within a short time
after, as appears, Mar. 4. 17.) it withered away, because it lacked moisture
Luke 8. 6.
. So that the withering of it away, i. e. the temporarinesse of it, was
occasioned or caused by a means accidental and extrinsecall to it, viz. the
want of a thoroughnesse or cordialness of affection to the Gospel, by which
the faith or belief of it now sprung in Soul, should have been fed, nourished,
and maintained, against all attempts made by persecution to destroy it.

If it be demanded* but why are true and sound Believers compared to the. 36.
good ground, if they also were true Believers, who are resembled by the stony
ground? I answer, the reason hereof is plain; viz. not because the Faith in
the Persons signified by these different grounds, was different in the nature
or kind of it, but because the issue or event of their respective Faiths
differ, and this by way of similitude to the different success or event of the
same Corn (for kind) growing in stony ground, and in good or fruitful ground.

If it be objected; that the Faith of the stony ground, is said to have no
root, whereas it is evident, that the Faith of the good ground, which
persevered, had root. And does not this argue a specificall or essential
difference between them? I answer; when the Faith of the stony ground is said
not to have root, the meaning cannot be that it had no root at all: for then
it could not have sprouted, or sprung up, as it did; but that it had no
considerable root, no sufficient rooting to carry it through unto the Harvest:
or, no root comparatively, viz. in respect of the Faith of the good ground.
The seed that is sown in stony ground, though it wants depth of Earth, and so
must needs want depth of rooting, yet it has some kind of rooting
proportionable to the Earth which it has, as well as that, which is sown in
the best and fruitfulest soil that is. So that as a sprout, or blade of Wheat
sown in stony ground, does not differ specifically from a blade of the same
grain growing in good ground, though this has, by the opportunity of the
soil, the better rooting: in like manner the Faith of Him that believes only
for a time, and afterward declineth, may be essentially, and for nature, the
same Faith with His, who persevereth unto the end. If difference in rooting,
should cause, or prove, a specificall difference between blade and blade of the
same grain, it is like that every blade, though growing in the same field, or
ground, would differ specie from all its fellows: in as much as it is no ways
probable but that there constantly is some difference, more, or less, between
the respective rootings of every particular Corn that is sown in the same
Field. Yea, there is little question to be made, but that some individualls of
the same seed, sown in the same ground, suppose the best and richest ground of
all, may have, yea and have commonly, so slight and faint a rooting, that heat
and drought will cause it to wither away before the Harvest. Therefore no
specificall difference can be inferred between Faith and Faith, from a graduall
difference in their rootings.

If it be yet further objected; The Faith of the stony ground, yielded no. 37.
fruit: whereas the Faith of the good ground, is said to bring forth fruit with
patience. Does not this argue a specificall difference between them? I answer,
neither: yea those very words, with patience, which are distinguishing clearly
imply, that the Faith of the stony ground did bring forth fruit also; and that
it came short of the good ground only in this, that this brought forth fruit
with patience. [i. e. the fruitfulness of it was not extinguished by any
persecutions or sufferings from the World] whereas the fruitfulness of the
other gave up the ghost through fear of sufferings. And indeed had not this
stony ground been some ways fruitful, and made such a Profession of the
Gospel, which renders Men obnoxious to persecution from the World, there had
been no cause why it should either have suffered, or feared Persecution.
Besides, fruitfulness, and unfruitfulnesse, make no specificall or essential
difference, between subject and subject, more then strength and weakness,
speech and silence argue one Man to differ specie from another. If they did,
the same Tree that bears fruit one year, and is barren another, should differ
specie from it self; yea and the Faith of true Believers themselves, who
(according to the known sense of our Adversar^es themselves) may go^ astray
like lest Sheep, and live for a long time together in ways of the greatest
unworthiness, without Repentance, all which time their Faith must needs be
unfruitful, should come in time to differ specie from it self.

The last Objection, which I think knows how to appear against the Truth. 38.
of the Faith of the stony ground, or Temporaries, in the Parable, is this:
true Faith, such as was found in those resembled by the good ^round, always
includes a purpose of heart to bear the cross of Christ and suffer
persecution: But the Faith of the Temporaries wanted this property. Therefore
it was not true Faith* but another kind of Faith essentially distinct from it.
To this also we answer;

1. That true Faith does not in the precise or formal conception of it include
such a purpose of heart, as the Objection speaks of: n^r can such a thing be
proved, either from the Scriptures, or from any sound Principle of reason. That
such a purpose is seminally or vertually included in true Faith, may be
granted. But,

2. That such a purpose of heart was not in those that are called Temporaries
in the Parable, cannot be proved: there is no word, or clause herein, that does
import it. That they did not take up the Cross of Christ, when it lay in their
way, nor endure persecution for the Gospel, does not at all prove, that there
was no real purpose in them of doing either. The Apostle Paul said of Himself:
to will (i. e. to purpose or intend) is present with me* but how to perform
that which is good, I find not Romans 7. 1^.
.

3. (And lastly) evident it is from other Scriptures (and in part from the
Parable it self in hand) that such Believers, who proved temporaries did yet
endure persecution for a time. Which plainly proves, that they had a true
p^rpose of heart to endure it. Yea, and probably, that they had a purpose of
heart to endure it unto the end. Have ye suffered so many things in vain
(says Paul to the Galathians) if yet it be in vain Gal. 3. 4.
? That these Galathians, to whom he bears witness that they had suffered many
things for the Gospel, were Temporaries, appears from those words: I marvel
that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of
Christ, unto another Gospel Gal. 1. 6.
. And as the seed that sprang up in the stoney ground, endured the scorching
heat of the Sun for a time, before it withered away by means of it; So did the
Believers portraitured hereby suffer Persecution a while* before their* Faith
expired. So that the Faith of those, who in the Parable are called Temporaries,
can by no argument, or allegation, be ^victed of any degenerateness, or
unsoundnesse in kind, but only of a deficiency in point of rooting, or firm
fixation in the Soul. Nor does our Savior any ways blame, or reprove it, but
upon this account only. Yea, in blaming it upon this account only, and
reproving those, who had it, for being no more diligent and careful in the use
of means for confirming, and establishing themselves better in it, He plainly
gives testimony unto it in Point of truth and soundness; in as much as no Man
deserves blame, for not consulting, or endeavoring the Perpetuation of an
Hypocritical Faith in his Soul, or such, which though Persevered in, would yet
have left Him in the hand of eternal Death. These Considerations and
Discussions are so full of Light, Evidence, and Power, that were not the foot
of our Adversaries held in this snare, to judge of the truth and Soundness, and
so of the Hollowness and Unsoundness, of Faith, by the issue and event of it,
as viz. the Perseverance, or non-Perseverance of it unto the end, they could
not lightly stand in the way of their present judgments before them. And yet
this Rule or Method of judging, is not of any good accord with their own
Principles otherwise. Concerning those helps or assistances of grace (say our
English Divines present in the Synod of Dort) which are afforded by God unto
Men, we are to judge of them [meaning, in point of sufficiency, or
efficaciousness] by the nature of the benefit offered [as attainable by them]
and by the most manifest Word of God, NOT BY THE EVENT, or abuse of them Ex
natura benefi^ij oblat^, and verbo Dei ^pertissimo iudicandum est d^ illis
Gratiae auxilijs, quae hominibus suppeditantur, non autem ex eventu aut abusu.
Synod* Dordr. Act. Page 128.
.

The last proof from the Scriptures, which we shall (at present) insist. 39.
upon, and urge, for the confirmation of the Doctrine under Protection, shall
be that passage, which holds forth these things unto us. For when they speak
great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh,
through much wantonness, those who were CLEAN ESCAPED from those who live in
error. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption: for of whom a Man is overcome, of the same he is brought in
bondage. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the World through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them, then the beginning,
For it had been better for them* not to have known the way of Righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered
unto them. But it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb: the
Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to his
wallowing in the mire Pet. ^. 18, 19, etc.
. The Possibility of a total and final defection in true Believers lies as
large and full in these quarters, as truth lightly can be lodged in words; the
Holy Ghost here plainly supposing, that which is clearly consistent with, yea
and equipollent thereunto, viz. that they, who by the acknowledgement of Jesus
Christ, have clean [or truly, or really, (...)] escaped the pollutions of the
World, being again entangled therewith, may be overcome, so as that their
spiritual state and condition will be worse at the last, then it was at the
first, or before they believed. What is this, being interpreted, but that true
Saints, or Believers, may possibly apostatize from their believing condition,
so as to perish everlastingly?

But here also our Adversaries attempt to hide the Truth shining in the
recited. 40.
passage, under that old covering or veyle, which has been rent in twain
already, both in this Chapter, and elsewhere. Th^se expressions (say they) who
were clean escaped from those, who live in error, who have escaped the
pollutions of the World through the acknowledgement of Jesus Christ, to have
known the way of righteousness, etc. do not suppose the Persons spoken of to
have had true Faith; nor import any thi^^, but what may very possibly be found
in Hypocrites. But with how little truth, yea or semblance of truth, these
things are asserted, has been already exposed to open view, when we traversed
the Scripture in hand upon another occasion Cap. 8. Sect. 4 5, 46, etc.
. Nevertheless we here add;

1. If the said expressions import nothing, but what Hypocrites, and that in
sensu composito, i. e. whilst Hypocrites, are capable of, the^ may those be
Hypocrites, who are separated from Men that live in error, (...) from the
pollutions of the World, and that through the knowledge of Jesus C(...); and on
the other hand, those may be Saints, and sound Believers, who wallow in all
manner of filthiness, and defile themselves daily with the pollutions of the
World. This consequence, according to the Principles and known Tenets of our
Adversaries, is legitimate and true, in as much as they hold, that true
Believers may fall so foul, and so far, that the Church, according to Christ's
institution, may be constrained to testify, that they cannot bear them in
their outward communion, and that they shall have no part in the Kingdom of
Christ, except they repent Repondemus, posse quidem vere credentes eousque
prolabi, ut Ecclesia, juxta constitutionem Christi cogatur ^esta(...) ipsos in
externa ipsorum communione non posse tolerare, neque habituros partem ullam in
regn^ Christ^, nisi convertantur. Contr-Remonstr. in Coll. Hag. p. 399.
, etc. But whether this be wholeso^^ and sound Divinity, or no, to teach, that
they who are separate from sinn^^ and live holily and blamelesly, in this
present World, and this by means of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, may be
Hypocrites, and children of perdition; and they on the other hand, who are
companions with Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, etc. Saints, and sound
Believers, I leave to Men, whose judgments are not turned upside down with
prejudice, to determine.

2. The Persons here spoken of, are said to have, (...), truly, or really
escaped from those, who live in error. Doubtless an Hypocrite cannot be said,
truly, or really, but in show, or appearance at most, to have made such an
escape (I mean, from Men who live in error) considering* that for matter of
reality and truth, remaining in Hypocrisy, he lives in one of the greatest and
foulest errors, that is.

3. An Hypocrite, whose foot is already in the snare of Death, cannot upon any
tolerable account, either of reason, or common sense, be said to be allured (i.
e. by allurements to be deceived) or overcome, by the pollutions of the World,
no more then a Fish, that is already in the net, or fast upon the hook, can be
said to be allured, or deceived by a bait held to her.

4. Hypocrites are no where said, neither can they with any congruity to
Scripture Phrase, be said to have escaped the pollutions of the World through
the acknowledgement (for so the word (...), should be translated) of Jesus
Christ, the acknowledgement of the truth, and so of Christ, and of God,
constantly in the Scriptures importing a sound and saving work of conversion*
as we lately observed in this Chapter Sect. 20.
.

5. (And lastly) the Persons to whom the Apostle addresseth Himself in this
Epistle, being looked upon by him as true Believers, yea ^^ partakers of like
precious Faith with Himself and the rest of the Apostles 2 Pet. 1. ^.
* ^^ cannot reasonably be imagined, that in so short an Epistle, He should
hang* so ^ong, as the whole second Chapter amounts unto, upon a subject or
discourse, which little or nothing concerned them, to whom He Writes, nor much
(indeed) any other Man, if the Principles and Tenants of our Adversaries would
stand. If true Believers be incapable of any such backsliding, which should
make their latter end worse then their beginning, to what purpose, should the
Apostle make a large Discourse unto them concerning such Men, who had
miscarried by such backslidings? Or would there be, upon such a supposition,
any more savor in this Discourse, then if Solomon should have made a journey
to the Queen of Sheba's Court, to inform Her that Thieves and Murderers were
sorely punished in His Kingdom? And for Hypocrites themselves, neither would
the Discourse have been of much concernment unto them, in case such a Personal
and Peremptory Election, and Reprobation, as our Opposers contend for, could be
with truth obtained. If I be upon such terms elected, I am in no danger of
falling under that heavy doom of Hypocrites, whose latter end is worse then
their beginning: or if I be so Reprobated, I am in no capacity, in no
Possibility of redeeming my self, by the tender of any Admonitions, Cautions,
Exhortations, Threatenings, or Examples whatsoever of Persons, who have made
Shipwreck of their Souls against the same Rock, before me. To what purpose
then, be I elected, or be I Reprobated, be I a sound Believer, or be I an
Hypocrite, should any application be made, either by God, or Men, unto me,
either in order to my obtaining of that, which all my sin and wickedness
cannot keep from me, or for the avoiding or preventing of that, from which all
my Care, Diligence, Faithfulness, cannot deliver me? Therefore (questionless)
the Apostle Peter all along that quarter of Discourse, which we have lately had
under consideration, clearly supposes, that even true Believers, such as upon
good grounds He concluded those, to whom He Writes, to be, are obnoxious to
such an Apostasy and declining, in, and from their Faith, which is accompanied
with the signal ruin and destruction of those, who value holiness, and close
walkings with God at no higher rate, then to cast them behind their back,
without looking after them any more. Which Doctrinall conclusion might be
further argued, and confirmed abundantly, from very many Scriptures, besides
those insisted upon in this Chapter, and particularly, from those frequent and
Pathetique Admonitions, Cautions, Exhortations, Encouragements, etc.
administered by the Holy Ghost unto the Saints to engage them in such ways of
care, diligence, and faithfulness to themselves and their own Souls, whereby
they may be strengthened to Persevere unto the end. But of these, at least of
some of the most Pregnant of them, we shall have occasion to consider in the
Chapter following; where we shall further plead the cause of the said Doctrine
by force of Argument and Demonstration.

CHAP. XIII.
Grounds of Reason from the Scriptures, evincing a Possibility of such a
defection even in true Believers, which is accompained with destruction in the
end.

THE Opportunity which Error commonly finds to build Her self. 1.
a Throne amongst Men, and to reign over the Judgments and Consciences of
those, who are debtors of Homage and Subjection to the Truth, lies not so much
in the strength, or beauty, of those Arguments or Pleas, which she is able to
engage in Her cause, as either in the weakness, or negligence, of the Friends
and Professors of the Truth; as when they are either not able, or not
industrious enough, to show her unto the World like Solomon in all his glory,
and to spread that light of Evidence and Conviction round about Her, which
belongs unto Her, and which would commend Her like a Daughter of God, in the
Eyes of Men. Truth, whose native residence and seat, is (as the old
Philosophers were wont to express it) in profundo, in the depths, remote from
the common thoughts and apprehensions of Men, cannot in many Particulars, be
drawn up into a clear and perfect light, but only by a long coard well
twisted, of much labor, attentive Meditation, together with some dexterity for
the Work. God Himself is said to inhabit a light that is inaccessible 1 Timothy 6.
16.
, that is (as I conceive) to be capable of more and more glorious attributions,
or of having a greater number of excellent things, and things of a greater
excellency, spoken of Him, and that with Evidence and clearness of Truth, then
either Men, or Angels, are able to discover, or comprehend; much more to utter
or declare unto the World. And the Truth is, that many Truths dwell in such a
light, which is not accessible without much difficulty, to the Judgments and
Understandings of Men, being only manifestable in their certainty and perfect
beauty, by such Arguments and Considerations, which they must dig deep, who
desire to discover; and they look narrowly and with a single Eye, who desire to
be made fully capable and sensible of them, being set before them. Whereas
Error, being of near affinity to the corrupt and dark minds and understandings
of men, dwells in propinquo, and (as it were) at their right hand: and though
Her servants (the reasons I mean, which negotiate Her affairs with the
judgments of Men) be all flesh, and not spirit, all show, and no substance;
yet having the advantage of a natural sympathy and compliance in those, with
whom they have to do, their cause is readily accepted, and approved as just
and good. When the Disciples saw the Lord Christ by no better light then what
the night afforded, and that at a distance; walking upon the Sea toward them,
they were troubled, thinking he had been some unclean spirit that would have
destroyed them, and cried out for fear: but when He came near them, and said
to them, Be of good comfort, it is I: be not afraid Mat. 14. 26, 27.
, they perfectly knew that it was their dear Lord and Master. So many looking
upon that Doctrine, which opposes the un-conditioned Perseverance of the
Saints, and asserteth a Possibility of their final fall, by the dim light of
some sensual Principles and Apprehensions, and in an overly and superficial
manner, as it were at a distance, are much troubled at it, as if it were a
Doctrine of an Anti-evangelicall spirit, that would bring them into a Bondage
of fear, and torment them. Which Doctrine notwithstanding, would they look upon
it narrowly, and with an unprejudiced attention, and this by the clear light of
such considerations, which exhibit it like it self unto them, they would then
soon confess to be a Doctrine, which was set, not at all to curse, but to
bl^ss them altogether.

The sole undertaking of this Chapter is to commend the said Doctrine unto. 2.
Argum. 1.
the Judgments and Consciences of Men, for a Truth, by a Proposal of such
worthy things which relate to it, either by way of causality, or affinity in
Truth. In the first place I plead the cordial sympathy it has with that
righteousness of God, which the Scripture calls (...), or a non-acceptation of
Persons, thus:

That Doctrine which rendereth God free from that unrighteousness, which the
Scripture calls a respecting the Persons of Men, is a Doctrine of perfect
consistency with the Scriptures, and the Truth.

The Doctrine which teaches a Possibility of the Saints declining, and this
unto death, is a Doctrine of this import. Ergo.

The reason of the former Proposition, is plain: in as much as the Scriptures
frequently assert that Principle, of non-respecting Persons, most worthy the
judge of all the Earth, unto God. Deuteronomy. 10. 17. Gal. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 17. etc.
The latter Proposition needs no labouriousnesse of Proof neither. Evident it
is that the Doctrine here spoken of, represents God, as a nonrespecter of
Persons, in as much as it renders him a Judge of the same righteous severity
against the enormous transgressions of his own Children and Friends, which he
exercises toward his enemies, and those that are strangers unto Him, upon the
like Provocations. This Doctrine subjecteth Saints, as well as others, to this
righteous Law of God: Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor The^ves, nor Covetous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God
1 Cor. 6. 9.
; meaning (as is evident from other Scriptures) without Repentance. Whereas the
common Doctrine of Perseverance, exempteth all such, who have at any time been
true Believers, or Children of God, from the penalty or doom of this Law;
teaching, that though such as these should turn Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, etc. and continue never so long in these abominations, without
Repentance, yet they retain their Right and Title of Inheritance in the
Kingdom of God, and that they remain under the greatest love, that God can
show, or bear toward Men, the love of Election and of Children, even in the
midst of these deep and desperate Provocations. And thus it makes God the
greatest accepter of Persons in the World, rendering Him implacably severe
toward lesser sinners, and indulgent above measure to the greater. For that
such, who have* or have had the knowledge of God, and have believed in Jesus
Christ, and made Profession of love and service to Him, when they turn
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. are far greater sinners, then Men
committing the same sins in ignorance and unbelief, is (I think) no Man's doubt
or question. Certain I am that the Scripture still represents God as more
severe in punishing, where greater means of Righteousness and well doing have
been vouchsafed. You (said He to His own People, the Children of Israel, of
old) only have I known of all the Families of the Earth: Therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities Am. 3. 2.
. In the Gospel: And that servant which knew His Lords will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to His Will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. For unto whom much is given, of him shall much be required,
Luke 12. 47, 48.
etc. It cannot be denied (and confessed it is by our Adversaries themselves,
as has been formerly observed) but that true Believers, have fallen into the
Practice of the foul transgressions mentioned, yea and have remained
impenitent in them for a long season. Therefore if during the time of such
Practice and impenitency, they should not be in the same, or worse condition to
Godward, and Salvation-wise, then ignorant Persons, and such who were always
strangers unto God, are, when they live in the same impieties, God must needs
be an accepter of Persons in the highest, and show a thousand times more favor
to grand and signal Delinquents, then to ordinary and lighter Offenders, (in
comparison.) So that to pretend, though true Believers, may, and often do, fall
into the forenamed sins, and continue for a time in them without Repentance,
yet God always renews them by Repentance before their death (though this was
never yet proved, nor ever will be) it does not at all salve the honor of the
said Doctrine. Because such a supposall notwithstanding, the Persons contended
about, may, and do, according to the tenor of the Premises lately Proved,
suffer a total eclipse and intercision of the grace and favor of God, in the
mean season.

Secondly, for a Possibility of the Saints defection, either total, final,
or. 3.
both, I thus argue.

If the common Doctrine of Perseverance, rendereth the Ministry of the Gospel,
so far as it concerns the Perseverance of the Saints, vain, impertinent, and
void, then is it not a Doctrine of God, but of Men: and consequently, that
which opposes it is the Truth. But certain it is, that the said Doctrine is
of this un-Christian tendency and import: Ergo.

The consequence in the Major Proposition is pregnant of truth: in as much as
the Preservation of the Saints in Faith and Holiness unto the end, is one of
the most considerable ends of the Ministry of the Gospel, about the effecting
whereof it is mainly conversant. Therefore if God, who has ordained the
Ministry of the Gospel for the advancement of this end, should assert any such
Doctrine, which rendereth it unnecessary and impertinent in Reference to this
end, He should be divided in Himself, and pull down with one hand, what He
builds up with another.

The Minor Proposition is demonstrable, thus: That Doctrine which renders the
labor and faithfulness of a Minister in pressing such Exhortations,
Threatenings, and Promises, which tend to the Preservation of the Saints in
Faith and Holiness unto the end* useless, rendereth the Ministry of the
Gospel, as far as it concerns the encouragement or inabling of the Saints to
Persevere* needless and vain: but guilty of such a tendency as this, is the
commonly-received Doctrine of Perseverance. Ergo.

The truth of the Major Proposition here, shines clearly enough with its own
light: or however, there is this Reason for it; viz. because Ministers of the
Gospel can have little else from the Scriptures, but only Exhortations,
Threatenings, and Promises, whereby to build, or effect the Perseverance of the
Saints. Therefore if the pressing, or putting on of these upon Men, be
needless in Reference to such an end; certainly their Ministry, as far as it
relates to this end, is needless also.

The Minor is thus Proved: The common Doctrine of Perseverance, requires and
commands all Saints, or true Believers, to be fully persuaded, and this with
the greatest and most indubitable certainty of Faith, that there is an absolute
and utter impossibility, either of a total, or final defection of their
Faith: and that though they should fall into ten thousand enormous and most
abominable sins, and lie wallowing in them, like a Swine in the mire, yet they
shall remain all the while in an estate of grace, and that God will by a
strong hand of irresistible Grace, bring them off from their sins by
Repentance, before they die. But that Doctrine, which requires and commands
all this, and much more of like import* to be confidently believed by true
Believers, renders the pressing of all Exhortations, Threatenings, Promises,
upon them, in order to prevail with them, or to make them careful, to
Persevere, bootless and unnecessary. Ergo.

The Major in this Syllogism, is the known voice of the common Doctrine of
Perseverance. The Reason of the Minor, is, because a certain knowledge and
persuasion that God will by an irresistible hand of Power preserve a Man in the
state of Grace, how desperately careless, negligent, or wicked soever he shall
be, clearly dissolves the usefulness and necessity of all other means
whatsoever in Reference to this end. If I know certainly, that the Corn, which
I have sown in my Field, will, whether I wake, or sleep, grow and prosper,
would it not be a very impertinent address for any Man to come to me, and
admonish me in a serious and grave manner, to take heed I sleep not, but keep
my self waking, least my Corn should not grow, or prosper? or, that it may
grow and prosper? If my Corn grows, thrives, and prospers, by the irresistible
Hand of God in the course of His natural and standing Providence; my
watchfulness, in order to a Procurement of these things, is absolutely vain.
This is a truth, which prejudice and partiality themselves cannot lightly but
subscribe; viz. that there is no Force, Power, or Authority in such an
Exhortation, wherein we are pressed to use means, either for the avoiding or
escaping of such a danger, which we are upon sure grounds persuaded cannot
possibly fall upon us; or for the performance of what we are assured upon the
like terms of certainty, that we cannot but perform, or that God Himself will
certainly by any irresistible and unfrustrable hand of grace, perform and work
in us. So again; that there is no efficacy or power in such a threatening,
which threatens us with such an evil or danger, which we infallibly know our
selves out of all possibility of suffering, or falling under. And lastly, that
there is no weight, or quickening Power in such a Promise, wherein only such a
benefit or blessing, is promised unto us upon the performance of a condition,
which we infallibly know to be ours, before the condition be performed, yea and
which we are. 4.
most certainly assured we shall not, we cannot, upon any terms whatsoever, be
deprived of.

That which is commonly pleaded to salve the consistency of the common Doctrine
of peremptorily-decreed Perseverance, with an usefulness, or necessity, of the
Exhortations, Threatenings, and Promises mentioned, has neither any logical,
nor theological virtue in it for such a purpose. For, is it any other, then
this; viz. that the Exhortations, comminations, and Promises, which we speak
of, are means appointed by God (and used by him accordingly) for the
accomplishment and effecting of that Perseverance in the Saints, which he has
made simply and absolutely necessary by his decree? Now that such a notion as
this is altogether irrelative to the business, the accommodation whereof it
pretends, will be made evident, by weighing the particulars severally.

First, that the Exhortations, wherein the Saints are exhorted unto
Perseverance, are no means, by which the Promises of Perseverance, made (as our
Adversaries suppose) unto them, are accomplished, or effected, is thus clearly
evinced, Whatsoever is a means for the bringing of any thing to pass, ought
not to contain any thing in it repugnant or contrary unto that, which is
intended to be brought to pass by it. For means ought to be subordinate to
their ends, not Repugnant. But the Scripture exhortations unto Perseverance
contain that which is repugnant to the pr^mises of Perseverance, if supposed
such, as our Adversaries suppose them to be. Therefore they can be no means to
effect these Promises. The Minor is evident by the light of this consideration.
Such Exhortations as these, unto the Saints, Take he^d lest at any time there
be an evil heart of unbelief in you, lest you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, lest you fall from Grace, lest you receive the Grace of
God in vain, lest you fall from your own steadfastness, etc. in their native
and proper tendency import a danger, and serve to raise a fear in Men, lest
the danger imported should come upon them. Whereas such Promises as these made
unto the same Persons, and that unconditionally (as is supposed) that there
shall never be an heart of unbelief in you* that you shall never be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, that you shall never fall away from the
Grace of God, etc. exclude all danger, yea or possibility, of falling away* and
tend directly to prevent or extinguish all fear in Men of any such danger.
Therefore such exhortations are in their very natures and genuine import,
contrary to such promises, in theirs: and consequently, can be no means of
bringing them to pass.

Again, if such exhortations as we speak of, be a means to effect that
Perseverance, which our Adversaries suppose to be promised unto the Saints,
then must the act of Perseverance in the Saints, necessarily depend upon them,
so as that it cannot, or will not, take place, or be effected, without them, i.
e. without the Saints submitting of themselves unto them. But persevering upon
these terms, clearly supposes a Possibility of a nonpersevering. For
whatsoever depends upon a mutable condition and which possibly may not be
performed* may it self as possibly never come to pass.

If it be said, that the said Exhortations are means of the Saints
Persevering,. 5.
in this respect; viz. because God by His Spirit irresistibly, or infrustrably,
draws, and persuades the Saints to obey these Exhortations, as means of their
persevering; I answer,

1. It cannot be proved that God does draw, or persuade his Saints upon any
such terms, to obey these exhortations. Nay frequent experience shows, and
our Adversaries own Doctrine (frequently mentioned) expressly grants, that the
Saints many times are so far from obeying these Exhortations, that they walk
for a long time in full opposition to them, as in security, looseness, vile
Practices, etc. Nor have they yet proved, nor (I believe) ever will prove, but
that they may walk, yea and that many, have thus walked, (I mean, in full
opposition to the said Exhortations) to their dying day.

2. If God by his Spirit irresistibly draws his Saints to obey the
exhortations we speak of, he thus draws them, either by such a force or Power
immediately acted upon their wills, by which they are made willing to obey
them* or else he makes use of the said Exhortations so to work, or affect
their wills, that they become willing accordingly. If the former be asserted,
Then,

1. The said Exhortations are no means, whereby the Perseverance of the Saints
is effected, but God alone, and immediately, by His Spirit. For if the Will be
immediately affected by God after such a manner, or brought to such a bent and
inclination, as that it cannot but obey the said Exhortations, i. e. do the
things, which the said Exhortations require, then would it have done the same
things, whether there had been any such Exhortations in being, or no; and
consequently, these Exhortations could have no manner of efficiency about their
Perseverance. For the will (according to the common saying) is (of it self)
caeca potentia, a blind faculty, and follows its own predominant bent and
inclination, without taking knowledge whether the ways or actions, toward
which it stands bent, be commanded, or exhorted unto by God, or no.

2. If the will of a Saint be immediately so affected by God, that it stands
inclined and bent to do the things, which are proper to cause them to
Persevere, then is this bent and inclination wrought in the will of such a
Person, after his being a Saint; and consequently is not essential to him as a
Saint, but merely accidental and adventitious. And if so, then is there no
inclination or bent in the will of a Saint, as such, or from his first being a
Saint, to Persevere, or to do the things, which accompany Perseverance; but
they come to be wrought in him afterward. Which how consistent it is with the
Principles, either of Reason, or Religion, or their own, I am content that my
Adversaries themselves shall judge.

3. If God does immediately and irresistibly incline, or move, the wills of the
Saints to do the things which accompany Perseverance, the said Exhortations
can be no means of effecting this Perseverance. For the will being Physically
and irresistibly acted and drawn by God to do such and such things, needs no
addition of moral means, such as Exhortations are (if they be any) in order
hereunto. What a Man is necessitated unto, he needs no further help or means
to do it.

4. (And lastly, for this) the things which accompany Perseverance, import a
continuance in Faith and Love unto the end* If then the wills of the Saints be
immediately and irresistibly moved by God thus to continue (I mean, in Faith
and Love) unto the end, what place is there for Exhortations to come in with
their efficiency, toward their Perseverance? Need they be exhorted to continue
in Faith and Love, or to Persevere, after the end? Thus then we clearly see
that the former of the two consequences mentioned, cannot stand. God does not
by His Spirit irresistibly draw or move the wills of the Saints to do the
things, which are necessary for the procuring their Perseverance, immediately,
or without the isntrumental interposure of the said exhortations.

Secondly, neither can the latter of the said consequences stand, God does. 6.
not make use of the said Exhortations to influence or affect the wills of the
Saints upon any such terms, as hereby to make them infallibly, infrustrably,
necessitatingly willing to Persevere, or to do the things upon which
Perseverance depends. For,

1. If so, then one and the same act of the will, should be both Physical, and
moral; and so be specifically distinguished, in, and from it self. For so far
as it is produced by the irresistible force or power of the Spirit of God, it
must needs be Physical, the said irresistible working of the Spirit being a
Physical action, and so not proper to produce a moral effect. Again, as far
as the said Exhortations are means to produce or raise this act of the will, or
contribute any thing toward it, it must needs be moral; because Exhortations
are moral causes, and so not capable of producing natural, physical, or
necessary effects. Now then if it be unpossible that one and the same act of
the will should be, both physical, and moral, that is, necessary, and no^
necessary, unpossible also it is, that it should be produced, by the
irresistible Working of God, and by Exhortations, in a joint efficiencie.

It may be objected* They who hold, or grant such an influence, or operation of
the Spirit of God upon the will, which is frustrable and resistible, do, or
must suppose it, to be a physical action, as well as that, which is
irresistible. If so, then the act of the will, so far as it is raised by means
of ^his action, or operation of God, must, according to the tenor of the former
argument, be physical also: and so the pretended impossibility is no more
avoided by this Opinion, then by the other. I answer,

Though such an operation of God upon the will, as is here mentioned, be, in
respect of God, and of the manner of its proceeding from Him, physical, yet in
respect of the nature and substance of it, it is properly moral, because it
impresseth or affects the will, upon which it is acted, after the manner of
moral causes properly so called, i. e. perswadingly, not Ravishingly, or
necessitatingly. When a Minister of the Gospel, in his Preaching, Presses or
Persuades Men to such and such duties, or actions, this act as it proceeds
from Him, I mean, as it is raised by His natural abilities, of understanding
and speaking, is physical or naturall^; but in respect of the substance or
native tendency of it, it is clearly moral, viz. because it tends to incline
or move the wills of Men to such or such elections, without necessitating them
hereunto: and so comports with those Arguments or Exhortations, in their manner
of efficiency, by which he presses or moves them to such things. By the way,
to prevent stumbling, and quarrelling, it no ways follows from the
Premises, that a Minister by his Preaching, and persuading unto duties, should
do as much as God Himself does, in, or toward a persuading of Men hereunto.
It only follows, that the Minister does cooperate with God (which the
Apostle Himself affirms 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 1.
) in order to one and the same effect, i. e. that he operateth by one and the
same kind of efficiency with God, viz. morally, or perswadeingly, not
necessitatingly. For when one necessitates, and another only persuades, they
cannot be said to cooperate, or to work the one with the other. No more then
two, when the one runs, and the other walks a soft pace, can be said to go or
walk together. But when two persuade to one and the same action, one may
persuade more eff^ctually by many degrees, then the other; may have a peculiar
Act or Method of persuading, above the other.

But it may be further objected; If that Act of God, by which he affects. 7.
or moves the wills of Men, be in any consideration, physical, must it not
thus far, and in this respect, have a physical effect assignable unto it? If
so, what effect of this kind can we assign unto that Act of His we speak of,
unless it be the determining or necessitating of the will to that action, or
course, whereunto it is moved by it? I answer:

1. They who make the Act of God, inquired after in this demand, merely and
solely physical, do not suppose the effect, which they ascribe to it; I
mean, the necessitating of the will to that election, whereunto it moves, to
be a physical effect, but moral; affirming (but with what consistency, either
with Reason, or Truth, I understand not) that the will, though necessitated by
God, is yet free in her election of that, whereunto she is so necessitated;
whereby they conceive the morality of the action salved. But,

2. The Physical or necessary effect, which answers that Physical act, or
efficiencie of God upon the will, (now under consideration) is that inclineing
or moving impression toward such or such an election, which is acted upon the
will by this act of His, together with the persuading force or weight of the
Exhortation, wherein, or wherewith, he so inclines it, or at least attempteth
to incline it. Thus far, and in this sense, it is granted, that the Act of God,
whereby he inclines or moves the wills of Men, either to believe, or to
Persevere believing, is irresistible* or infrustrable, i. e. Men cannot hinder,
or prevent those moving impressions unto good, in one kind or other, which God
is pleased at any time to impart unto them, or to act upon their wills; though
they may hinder and pr^vent the further and full prevailing of them to that
desirable end or issue, which is intended by God, in, and by them. As the
Jews of old could not hinder, or prevent, God from rising early, and sending
His Prophets unto them, to call them by Promises and Threatenings to Repentance,
but they could, and did, hinder and prevent the desired event and success, of
these applications of God unto them, which was the actual Reducement of them
to Repentance. It is true, they neither did, nor could, hinder, or prevent,
that seco^dary end (as we may call it) or intention of God, in th^se
applications of Himself unto them, which was, to render them inexcuseable* and
more worthy punishment, in case they remained still impenitent. Nor is it in
the power of Men to frustrate* disappoint, or defeat the like intentions of God
in his administrations of Grace unto them. If they receive this grace of his in
vain, or so, as not to believe, not to be converted, not to persevere* by it,
they will be, will they, nill they, altogether inexcuseable* and deeply
obnoxiou^ to the wrath and vengeance of God, who will take vengeance on them
accordingly.

3. If God makes use of Scripture Exhortations unto Perseverance, to cause the
Saints, irresistibly and necessitatingly to Persevere* then are all his
Promises, made unto them* that they shall Persevere, or that he will infallibly
work Perseverance in them, in vain. If a Father should first promise with the
greatest assureance he could give, or make, that he would make his Son his
heir, and bestow his inheritance upon him, yea and should earnestly press and
persuade this Son of his to believe and expect as much from him, would it not
be very incongruous, (or rather indeed, ridiculous) for this Father, afterward
to exhort, admonish, entreat, and beseech this his Son, that he would take heed
that he lose not the inheritance assured, [ i. e. made past losing] unto him?
Indeed if this Father should only purpose in himself, though with a purpose
absolutely unchangeable, to make his Son his Heir, and not declare his purpose
in this behalf unto his Son, it might be somewhat prudentiall in him, to
admonish and exhort his Son to behave Himself so, that the inheritance may not
be given away from him. But thus to exhort, or admonish him, after a
Declaration made to him, that he is unchangeably resolved to make him his
heir, would be to send him into a far Country to fetch that, which he
certainly knows, before he goes, is at home. In like manner, if it shall be
supposed, that God has no where absolutely promised Perseverance unto the
Saints, though it should be supposed withal, that his intent is to work it
with a strong and irresistible hand in them, there were some face of Reason in
it, that he should seriously admonish, and exhort them to persevere (though the
truth is, that even such a dispensation as this, upon due inquiry, will hardly
be found a dispensation worthy of God; I mean, to exhort Men to do that,
which he intends by a strong Hand to necessitate, or make them to do.) But that
first he should enjoin them to believe beyond all question or fear, that they
shall persevere, yea, and that He will engage His Omnipotency to effect it; and
afterward, with a profession of much love and care over them, shall exhort and
admonish them to take heed of falling away, is such a broad Soloecism in
Reason, tha^ no considering man can lightly imagine should be incident to a
Wisdom tha^ is infinite.

Some notwithstanding, to salve the consistency of such a course, with. 8.
Principles of Wisdom, alledg the Passage, Act. 27. where Paul, notwithstanding
the Promise, which He had clearly received from the Angel, which likewise He
made known unto all that were with Him in the ship, viz. that there should be
no loss of any man's life amongst them, yet when the Mariner^ were about to
leave the ship, said to the Centurion and the Soldiers, Excep^ these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be safe. From whence they infer, that an absolute Promise,
though declared and made known to the Persons concerned in it, does not take
away the usefulness of Exhortations, for the obtaining of the good things
promised. But how irrelative this allegation is to the business in Hand, is
visible enough by the light of these considerations.

1. It is the generally received Opinion of Divines, that Promises of temporal
good things, are still conditional, and not absolute: which Opinion they
maintain upon grounds not easily shaken. Now evident it is, that the Promise
under question, was a Promise of this nature and kind, relating only to the
Preservation of the temporal lives of men.

2. It has been formerly observed, and that more then once* and confirmed by
pregnant instances, that many Promises in Scripture, though absolute in form,
are yet conditional in matter, and meaning See Cap. 1^ Sect 43 and 51 And Cap.
11. Sect. 1. 9.
. So that from the tenor or form of words, wherein the said Promise was
represented by the Angel unto Paul, nothing can be concluded ^o evince it
absolute.

3. Those words of Paul to the Centurion and Soldiers lately mentioned, Except
these abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe, und^^iably prove the said Promise
to have been, not absolute, but conditional. For in case God should have
promised absolutely, and without all exception or condition, that they should
have been safe, Paul had plainly contradicted the truth of it, by affirming,
not that they should not, but that they could not, be safe, otherwise then upon
condition of the Mariners abiding in the ship.

4. The Apostle exhorts those in the ship, after long abstinence, and weakness
Verse 34.
thereby, to take meat, and that upon this reason, or motive; (...), i. e. for
this is for your preservation, or safety. Which plainly shows, that
notwithstanding the Promise made unto Paul, that there should not an hair of
any of them fall to the ground, they yet might have perished by overlong
fasting. Therefore the said Promise was not absolute.

5. When by receiving sustenance they had recruited their spirits, and
recovered strength, by the Apostles direction, as is most probable, they
lightened the ship, and cast out the lading of it, which was Wheat, into the
Sea, and did other things in order to their Preservation. Which is a strong
presumption at least, that Paul did not understand the Promise made to him
concerning the lives of these men, in an unconditioned sense; but thus, that if
they were careful and diligent to do what was meet for them to do, in order to
their own safety, he would stand by them herein, and prosper it accordingly. As
when he promised unto the Jews of old, that he would bl^ss them in the City,
and bless them in the field, bless them in the fruit of their body, and in the
fruit of their ground, of their cattle Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4, etc.
, etc. His meaning only was, that he would bless and prosper their care and
industry, in, and about these affairs, and concernments of theirs; not that he
would absolutely bless them in any of them, I mean, whether they minded or
looked after their own welfare in such things, or no.

6. If those words of Paul be narrowly scanned, Verse. 22. And now I exhort you
to be of good cheer: For there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but
of the ship, it will appear, that the meaning of the Promise signified unto him
by the Angel, was not simply or adequately this, that none of their liv^s
should miscarry; but that though the ship should miscarry, and be lost, (which
was declared unto him that it would) yet the lives of none of them should
hereby, or upon this occasion, miscarry. And the Reason why God so ordered the
matter, that the ship should be wrecked and lost, notwithstanding all the means
used to preserve it, was, that they who went along with Paul in it, might
plainly know and understand, not only that their Preservation was from God,
and that more then in an ordinary way, but that it was vouchsafed to them upon
such terms, for his servant Paul's sake, who was amongst them: which they could
not so well have understood, had the ship come whole and safe into Harbor. For
then they might very possibly have thought, that they had escaped by their own
labor and skill.

If it be said, that they might as well think such a thought as this, upon
that. 9.
escape which they did make at last, some by swimming, others by laying hold on
planks, and broken pieces of the ship, etc. I answer, No: For when, 1. They had
a fresh experiment that they could not by all their diligence and skill escape
shipwreck, but that this, according to Paul's word had befaln them: And 2. saw,
that they we cast upon an Island, which Paul also had foretold them; And 3.
(and lastly) that now they were all come safe to Land, as Paul had likewise
pre-assured them they should, and that by way of a gratuity unto him, according
to his expression unto them, Verse. 24. And lo, God has given THEE all them
that sail with thee; they could not lightly but apprehend, and conclude, that
the preservation and safety of their lives was not the achievement or reward
of their own labor or skill, but a special benefit or blessing vouchsafed unto
them by God, for his Servant Paul's sake. By this discourse it appears, how, and
upon what terms, those words of Paul, Verse. 31. Except these abide in the ship,
ye cannot be safe, accord with the Promise of God made unto him concerning the
safety of all that were in the ship with him. The purport of the Promise was
this, that the ship being wrecked and broken, they should all escape with their
lives, because God had given them unto Paul; i. e. had purposed to honor Paul,
by sparing or preserving them in so eminent a danger. This Promise was
fulfilled and made good, when, the ship being broken, they came all safe to
Land. Therefore when some of the Mariners went about to leave the ship, before
it was broken, the Apostle told the Centurion and the Soldiers, that they took
a course to deprive both themselves, and them, of that Hope and certainty of
Preservation, which God had promised unto Him, and He declared unto them: in as
much as the intent of that Promise was, that they should all be preserved, in
case they all continued in the ship, until it should be broken. So that in case
any of them should leave the ship, before it was broken, and attempt their
safety in any other way, they left no opportunity, or possibility unto God to
perform the said Promise unto any of them, in as much as this Promise did not
assert the safety of any one, or of any lesser number of them, apart from the
rest, but of the whole and entire number of them, and that in case they should
be all found together in the ship, when it should suffer wreck, and be broken.
Nor can there any other Reason be given, why Paul should say, Except these
abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe, but only because their non* abiding in
the ship had left no place or opportunity for the Promise of God concerning
their safety, to take effect. For that their abiding in the ship (being
compelled hereunto by the Centurion and Soldiers) was any instrumental means
of their safety, no where appears, nor is it any ways probable: we do not find
that they assisted any of those, whose lives were preserved, in, or toward the
Preservation of them; but that every man shifted for himself, and took the best
course he could for his safety. Verse. 43, 44. So that the allegation of these
words, Except these abide* etc. to prove the usefulness of Exhortations, or the
necessity of means (properly so called) for the accomplishment of any absolute
Promise of God, is as broad an impertinency, as is lightly incident to ink and
paper.

By the way (to search as near to the bottom of the Pass^ge in Hand, as we can)
when the Apostle said to the Centurion and Soldiers, Except these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be safe, His intent was not, simply to deny all Possibility of
safety unto them, save only upon the abiding of the Mariners in the ship; but
to deny all Probability or likelihood Cannot, in Scripture, frequently notes
the difficu^ty, or great unlikelyhood of a thing, not always a district
impossibility. See Cap. 10. Sect. 28.
of safety, but upon this condition only; in as much as there was very little
or no hope, or likelihood of their escaping with their lives, in respect of the
imminent dangers, wherewith they were now encompassed on every side, in case
they had rendered themselves, or suffered themselves to have been rendered by
any, incapable of that safety, which God had revealed Himself willing for Paul's
sake to grant unto them. And of this safety (as has been showed) they had been
incapable, in case any one of the company had left the ship, before it was
broken.

Other Scriptures there are, by which the Teachers of unconditioned
Perseverance. 10.
conceive they are able to prove a rational consistency between an absolute
Promise of Perseverance, and an Exhortation hereunto. Of this sort are these:
Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. There has
no tentation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the
temptation also make away to escape, that ye may be able to bear it 1 Cor. 10.
12, 13.
. So again: Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God
that works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure Philip. 2
12, 13.
. So the Apostle having admonished the Hebrews to take heed of falling away,
yet professes thus concerning them: But (beloved) we are persuaded better
things of you, and such as accompany Salvation, though we thus speak Heb. 6. 4,
5, 9.
. In these and such like places (say they) Exhortations unto Perseverance, and
Promises of Perseverance, are joined together by the Holy Ghost; therefore men
who deny a regular and due consistency between them, impute folly or weakness
to the Holy Ghost. I answer;

1. They are ten degrees nearer to the guilt of the crime specified, who affirm
the conjunction mentioned to be found in the said Scriptures, then they who
deny the Legitimacy of such a Conjunction. The incongruity of the Conjunction
has been sufficiently evinced: but that any such Conjunction is to be found,
either in the Scriptures cited, or in any others, is no man's Vision, but His,
who has Darkness for a Vision. For,

2. That in none of the Places cited, is there any Promise of Perseverance, is
evident to Him, that shall duly consider the Tenor and import of them. For, 1.
It is one thing to say, and teach, that God will so limit, as well the force,
as the continuance, of Temptations, that the Saints MAY BE ABLE to bear them:
another, to make a Promise of absolute Perseverance. Yea, those very words,
that ye may be able to bear it, clearly import, that all that is here promised
unto the believing Corinths, is a sufficiency of means to persevere, if they
will improve them accordingly, not an infallible certainty of their
Perseverance. And that Caveat, Let Him that thinks that He stands, take
heed, etc. plainly supposes a possibility of His falling, who thinks [upon
the best Terms and Grounds for His Thought] that He stands sure. For that
this Caveat is not given to Hypocrites, or unsound Believers, or unto such, who
please themselves with a loose and groundless conceit of the goodness of their
condition God ward, is evident; because it were better that such men should
fall [from their present standing in a groundless conceit] then continue their
standing: nor would the Apostle ever have cautioned such, to take heed of
falling, whose condition was more like to be made better, then worse, by their
falling. And besides, to understand the said Caveat, of loose Believers,
overthrows the pertinency of it to their cause, who insist upon it, to prove a
due consistency between Exhortations to Perseverance, and Promises of
Perseverance, as is evident. If then it be directed to true and sound
Believers, it clearly supposes a possibility (at least) of their falling, in
case they shall not take heed: otherwise their taking heed would be no means
(at least, no necessary means) of their standing: and further, it supposes
also a possibility (at least) of their non-taking heed, or that they might
possibly not take heed hereof: otherwise the Caveat, or Admonition had been in
vain. Men have no need of being admonished to do that, which they are under no
possibility to omit. If then the standing, or persevering of the Saints,
depends upon their taking heed lest they fall; and their taking heed in this
kind, be such a thing which they may possibly omit, evident it is, that there
is a possibility of their non persevering. Again,

2. It is one thing to affirm, that God works in men, as to will, so to do,.
11.
[ i e. to enable men to do, or put in execution, what they first will: or to
assist them in the doing, or execution, it self:] another, to promise, or work
[infallibly, and without all possibility of frustration, by men] Perseverance.
There is little or no affinity between these: but how, and in what sense, God
is said to be (...), working in men, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure, we shall have occasion (God willing) to open more at large in the
latter part of this Work.

3. (And lastly) It is one thing to promise Perseverance; another, to hope, or
to persuade our selves, that such or such of our Christian friends, will not
fall into those horrid sins, from which it is very hard, and next to an
impossibility, for them to be renewed by Repentance. But such Arguments and
Proofs from the Scriptures as these, are (of the two) fitter to harden, or
strengthen our wills, in what we hold, then to balance our Judgments. There is
not in all, nor in any one of, the Scriptures pretended, the least whisper or
breathing of any such Promise of Perseverance, as our Adversaries lift up their
imaginations unto. It is true, there are in many places, express Promises of
such Grace, and precious vouchsafements from God unto the Saints, whereby they
shall be enabled, yea, and whereby they are encouraged* to persevere: and if
men will call such Promises, as these, Promises of Perseverance, and explain
them according to the true intent and mind o^ God in them, I shall not contend
against the appellation. But for any such Promise of Perseverance, which should
import an impossibility of the Saints falling away, either totally, or finally,
the Scriptures cited are so far strangers unto, that if they were narrowly
examined with their respective Contexts, they would be found clearly to import,
that unless the Saints shall (...), quit themselves like men, in comporting
with the Grace of God exhibi^ed unto them in order to their Perseverance, the
Great Evil of Apostasy will be their Ruin.

And thus we have abundantly evicted the truth of this Position, that the
Received Doctrine of Perseverance, absolutely overthrowes all the usefulness,
necessity, and rational congruity of such Admonitions and Exhortations unto
Perseverance, wherein the Holy Ghost addresseth Himself in the Scriptures, unto
the Saints. There is the same consideration of all those most serious and
Affectionate Desires, Obtestations, Wishes, and Complaint^ wherein God
expresses Himself in the Scriptures, unto His S^ints, either as desirous of
their Perseverance, whilst yet they stand; or as aggrieved in Himself for
their backslidings, when they fall. That God should seriously exhort, or
entreat a Man, to do that, which he has promised unto Him, that Himself will
infallibly work in Him, or necessitate Him to ^oe* and withal has commanded
Him, to rest assured with the greatest confidence that may be, upon the. Truth
of this Promise; and much more, that H^ should affectionately wish, that this
Man would do that, which He shall be necessitated, and that by God Himself, to
do; are dispensations* or deportments of so notorious an asystasie, and
incomportment, with an infinite wisdom, that consideration must needs cease
from Men, whilst they ascribe them unto God.

What we have asserted* and proved at large, concerning Exhortations. 12.
unto Perseverance, ( viz. that these are dis-senced by such promises of
Perseverance, as are commonly formed in the Minds, and Writings of Men a among
us) we shall now (with what brevity we can) show concerning such comminations,
or threatenings also, wherein God threatens all those with eternal Death, who
shall not persevere; and shall prove, that these also are infatuated, and
rendered unsavory, by the Principles of the said Doctrine, or at least
useless and vain, in respect of any efficiency contributable by them toward
the effecting of Perseverance in the Saints. This I demonstrate by the light of
this Argument.

If the Principles of the Doctrine we speak of, dissolve the efficiency of the
said threatenings, toward the end, for the accomplishing whereof they are
given, then they render them unsavory, useless, and vain.

But the Principles of this Doctrine are guilty of this offense. Ergo. The
terms of the Major Proposition are sufficient witnesses of the Truth thereof.
In order to the proof of the Minor, we suppose, 1. (That which is evident
enough) viz. that the end intended by God, in such threatenings, which threaten
those that shall Apostatize, with eternal Death, is to prevent Apostasy in the
Saints, and to work, or cause, them to Persevere. 2. That this is one of the
Principles of the common Doctrine of Perseverance; God has absolutely promised
final Perseverance unto the Saints: and this another: God will certainly,
infrustrably, and infallibly work this Perseverance in the Saints. These two
things only supposed, the light of the truth of the said Minor Proposition
breaks forth from between them, with much evidence and power. For, 1. If the
said threatenings be intended by God, for the prevention of Apostasy in the
Saints (and consequently, to effect their Perseverance) the way, or manner,
wherein this end, intended by God, is to be effected by them, must needs be by
their ingenerating or raising a fear or apprehension in the Saints, of
eternal death; it being the native property of fear, mixed with Hope, to
awaken and provoke Men to the use of such means, which are proper to prevent
the danger, or evil feared. There is no other way imaginable, how, or wherein
the Threatenings we speak of, should operate toward the Perseverance of the
Saints, or the prevention of their Apostasy, but that mentioned, viz. by
working in them a fear or dread of the evil Threatened. Therefore, 2. Evident
it is, that such promises made, and made known, unto the Saints, by which they
are made incapable of any such fear, are absolutely destructive of that
efficiency, which is proper to the said Threatenings, to exhibit toward the
prevention of Apostasy in the Saints, or for the causing of them to persevere.
3. And lastly, it is every whit as evident, that such promises, wherein God
should assure the Saints that they shall not Apostatize, but persevere, are apt
and proper to render them incapable of all fear of eternal Death: and
consequently, are apparently obstructive of, and destructive unto, the native
tendency and operativenesse of the said Threatenings, toward, and about the
perseverance of the Saints. These Threatenings can do nothing, contribute
nothing, toward the perseverance of the Saints, but by the mediation of the
fear of evil in them, upon their non-persevering. Therefore whatsoever
hardens them from this fear, or renders them incapable of it, supersedes all
the virtue and vigor, which are to be found in these threatenings, for, or
toward the effecting of their perseverance.

If it be said, that the intent of God in the threatenings we speak of, is not.
13.
to draw the Saints by fear of the punishment, or evil threatened, to do the
things which accompany perseverance, but that they are moved and drawn
hereunto, by a more Heavenly principle, as viz. the pure and mere love of God;
I answer,

1. By demanding, what other intent can it be imagined that God should have in
the threatenings specified, but only that asserted? Evident it is (as was
lately observed) that they are not directed unto Hypocrites, or unsound
Believers: these are not threatened with the loss of Salvation, or with
eternal Death, in case they shall not Persevere unto the end. They are in
danger of losing the one, and gaining the other, by persevering [in the way
they are in] unto the end, not by non persevering, or by departing from it.
Besides, Hypocrites and counterfeit Believers, being at present in a state of
wrath, and in a way of perishing, it is no ways agreeable with the Wisdom of
God, that He should threaten them with perishing, upon the account of such a
sin, under the guilt whereof they were never like to come. And evident it is
from, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 9. and so from, Heb. 10. 26, 27. 29. and other
places, that such threatenings, as are now under consideration, were directed
and administered unto such, as were at present true Believers, and in a state of
life. If then the threatenings we speak of, be directed by God unto true and
sound Believers, it must consequently be conceived, that they were directed
unto them for good, or with an intent on Gods Part, to accommodate and bless
them, in one kind, or other. I will hear (says David) what God the Lord will
speak: for He will speak peace unto His People, and to His Saints: but let them
not [or, that they may not: See Piscator upon the place] turn again unto
folly Psalm. 85. 8.
. He will speak peace unto His People, etc. i. e. He will speak only such
things, which have a proper and kindly tendency to do them good, and to
procure their Peace and welfare. If so, then must the threatenings we speak of,
be, in respect of the intentions of God, of a gracious import unto Believers,
to whom (as has been said) they are administered. Which gracious import cannot
be conceived to stand in any other thing, but only in that powerful aptness,
which is so apparently visible in the said threatenings, to cause the Persons,
to whom they are directed, through fear of the sore evil threatened, to
bethink themselves; how, and by what means they may escape it, and to engage
them accordingly in the use of them; there being no Virtue, Property, or
Tendency in these threatenings to affect, or work upon those, whom they concern,
in any other way, then this. From whence it clearly follows, that it is no
ways unworthy the greatest Saints, or soundest Believers under Heaven, to act
in order to their Salvation, out of a Principle of fear, lest by their
negligence, they should deprive themselves of so unvaluable a treasure; in as
much as in such a course and method of acting, as this, they conform themselves
to that gracious counsel and advice, which God out of his signal love, and care
over them, has recommended unto them. And upon these very terms our Savior
expresses Himself to His Apostles, who were Saints of the highest elevation,
and the first born of His delight: And I say unto you MY FRIENDS, be not afraid
of them that kill the body, and after that, have no more that they can do: But
I will forewarn you whom you shall FEAR: FEAR HIM, which, after he has killed,
has power to cast into Hell: yea, I say unto you, FEAR HIM Luke 12. 4, 5.
. Therefore certainly it is no ways unlawful, no nor matter of disparagement or
dishonor in the least, to the greatest Friends, or Lovers of God, and of Jesus
Christ, to act righteously, out of a Principle of Fear of being cast into Hell
by God for unrighteousness. That pronoun Relative, who, or which [WHICH, after
He has killed, etc.] is not so much descriptive in the sentence, as
ratiocinative, or causal; i. e. it imports the reason or motive of that
counsel, which our Savior here gives His Disciples of Fearing God, to be His
Power of casting in Hell. Which is further manifest, by the force of the same
Particle in the opposite clause of the Passage* Be not afraid of them, WHICH,
or who, kill the body, etc. Our Saviors intent in these words, was not so much
to describe those, whom He would not have His Disciples to Fear, viz. men; but
to assign a Ground or Reason why they (...), etc. (...), etc.
should not fear men, viz. because they had power only to kill the body. In
the Original, the said Relative Particle does not appear, in either of the
clauses mentioned; but the force and import assigned unto it, in both, are here
more significantly implied, by the use of the Participle in both; it being a
known Propriety of the Greek Tongue, to import the Reasons or Grounds of things
by their Participles. See 1 Timothy 5. 17. H^br. 6. 6. Hebr. 10. 26, 28, 29.

2. Though the Saints and true Believers, do many things, and should do. 14.
more, out of a Principle of love to God; yet are they not bound to wave, or
decline the influence, or assistance of other Principles, which incline and
lead them to the same actions and ways with the love of God. For in this case
also, that of Solomon is true: Two are better then one; because they have a
good reward for their labor. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow
-- and if one prevail against Him, two shall withstand Him Eccles. 4 9, 10, etc.
, etc. The fear of evil threatened, is as natural and genuine a fruit of Faith,
as love it self: yea, and of very choice acceptance with God. By Faith (says
the Apostle) Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, MOVED WITH
FEAR, prepared an Ark for the saving of His House, by the which He condemned
the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness, which is by Faith Hebr. 11. 7.
. So that men may condemn the World, and save themselves and others, as well by
actions done out of a Principle of Fear, as of Love. Because thine Heart was
tender (said God to King Josiah by Huldah the Prophetess) and thou have humbled
thy self before the Lord, when thou heardst what I spoke against this place,
and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a
curse, and have rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have HEARD THEE,
SAYS THE LORD. Behold therefore I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou
shall be gathered into thy grave in peace 2 King. 22. 19, 20.
, etc. By these, and many more instances of like consideration, which may
readily be added, it fully appears, that the Holiest and best of men, yea, even
the Greatest Friends and Lovers of God, and those that have acted as much, and
as freely out of a Principle of Love at other times, as any, have yet been
afraid of the Judgments and Displeasure of God threatened, yea, and suffered
themselves to be conducted, and carried out, by the Hand of this Impression, to
such actions and ways for the Preservation of themselves and others, wherein
they were accepted with God, and found peace and safety for both. Yea,

3. (And lastly) the present state, and frame of the Hearts and Souls of the
Saints, duly considered, which are made up, as well of flesh and corruption, as
of Spirit and Grace, the former having need of bridles for restraint, as well
as the latter of spurs, for quickening; evident it is, that Arguments or
Motives drawn from fear of punishment, are as necessary and proper for them in
respect of the one, as incitements from love, in respect of the other. A whip
for the Horse, (says Solomon) a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the Fools
back Prove. 26. 3.
. The flesh, even in the wisest of men, is a Fool, and would be unruly without
a rod ever and anon shaken over him. Nor should God have made such gracious,
bountiful, and effectual provision for the Perseverance of the Saints, as now
he has done, had he not engaged as well the passion of fear within them, as of
love, to be their guardian and Keeper. It is true, Perfect Love casts out
Fear 1 John 4. 18.
: but who amongst the Saints themselves can say, either that His Heart is
clean, or His Love perfect? Perfect Love casts out Flesh, as well as Fear:
yea, true Love, until flesh be cast out, preserves Fear, for its assistant,
and fellow-helper. The flesh would soon make Love a Wanton, and entice her unto
folly, did not Fear dissolve the enchantment, and protect her chastity. But
enough of this.

Notwithstanding if it be yet further demanded; But does it not argue
servility. 15.
in men, to be drawn by the iron coard of the fear of Hell, to do what is their
duty to do? Or does any other service, or obedience, become sons and children,
but only that which is free, and proceeds from Love? I answer,

1. If the great Lawgiver, God, judged it not unworthy of Him, or His Wisdom,
to persuade and press obedience to His Laws, and that as well upon true
Believers, and such who are His Children by Faith, as upon others (as we lately
showed from Luke 12. 4.) by Arguments drawn from fear of punishment, they have
no reason to judge it unworthy of them, to suffer themselves to be persuaded and
wrought upon accordingly. Nay (doubtless) if the Lord Christ commands, or
requires of us, to fear him, who when he has killed, is able to cast both
body and Soul into Hell, and that upon this very account (as we lately
interpreted the place) we shall not be found obedient Children unto Him,
unless we do fear accordingly.

2. There is a very different consideration of the obedience of Children to
their natural Parents, and of the obedience of the Children of God unto their
Heavenly Father. The obedience of the former, is taught by the inspiration of
nature, and is an act, not so much raised by deliberation, or flowing from the
will by an interposure of the judgment and conscience to produce the election,
as arising from an innate propension in Men, accompanying the very constituting
Principles of their nature or being: whereas the latter (the obedience of the
Children of God) is taught by Precept, and the Principle of it (I mean that
obedientiall frame of heart out of which they subject themselves unto God)
planted in the Souls of Men by the engagement of Reason, Judgment, and
Conscience, to consider those Grounds, Arguments, and Motives, by which their
Heavenly Father judges it meet to work and fashion them unto such a frame. So
that though the obedience of natural Children to their natural Parents, be
the more genuine and commendable, when it flows freely from the pure instinct
of nature, and is not drawn from them by fear of punishment; yet the obedience
of the Children of God is then most genuine, commendable, and like unto it
self, when it is produced and raised in the Soul by a joint influence, and
contribution, not of one, or of some, but of all those Arguments, Reasons,
Motives, Inducements, whatsoever, and how many soever, they be, by which their
Heavenly Father desires to plant and work it in them. For in this case, and in
this only, it has most of God, of the Spirit of God, of the Wisdom of God,
of the goodness of God in it: and upon this account i^ liklyest to be most
free, uniforme, and permanent. Therefore,

3. (And lastly) that service or obedience unto God, which is exhibited and
performed unto him, either out of a desire and hope of that great recompense of
reward, Salvation, or out of a fear of suffering the vengeance of eternal
fire, upon disobedience, is not to be termed mercenary, or servile, merely or
simply because such an hope, or such a fear, are interessed in the raising or
procurement of it, unless with all the exhibition and perform^nce of it, be
burdensome, grievous, and offensive unto those, who do perform it. For Men
may act as willingly, as freely, as cheerfully, as contentedly, out of a
Principle of Hope, yea and of fear it self also, as from love it self; yea and
more willingly and freely, from the two former, then from the latter, unless
the Principle of love be advanced to a very considerable Degree, Height, and
Power in Men. There is no reason but to judge that Noah went about the making
of his Ark, and continued in the work until the finishing of it, with as much
willingness, cheerfulness, and contentment of mind, as he performed any
other Act of obedience unto God, at any time, notwithstanding (as the Scripture
informs us) he was moved thereunto through fear Heb. 11 7.
. Nor is it credible but that Paul followed the work of mortification, keeping
under his body, and bringing it into subjection, with all Willingness,
Freeness, Cheerfulness, and contentment, though he was engaged and provoked
hereunto by a fear, lest by any means, when he had Preached the Gospel unto
others, he Himself should prove a castaway 1 John 4. 18
, [or Reprobate]

If that of the Apostle John be objected, fear has torment 1 John 4. 18.
: and a demand. 16.
made upon it, How can a Man act willingly, or freely, out of such a Principle,
which has pain, or torment, in it; I answer,

That fear, of which John speaks, and which he says has pain, or torment
in it, is such a fear, which has little, or no hope, in conjunction with it.
For such a fear, which is accompanied with a certainty of Hope, that by the use
of such and such means, which he is sure he shall, or may, have, if he please,
especially the use of these means being otherwise honorable and delightful
unto him, the evil feared shall be prevented; such a fear (I say) as this,
has little, or no pain, or torment, in it at all. Now of this kind is the
fear, out of which the Children of God many times act, (as with Honor and
Peace, they may) it is attended with a living hope, that by comporting or
cooperating with the Grace of God, which they are assured they may, and shall
have, for the asking, which cooperation is in it self matter of honor and of
delight unto them, they shall be delivered from the great evil feared, which
is Hell, or the casting out of the Presence of God for ever. Though Noah was
moved through fear (as we heard) to prepare the Arc, for the safety of
Himself, and his, yet he was as well moved hereunto through Faith, as Fear. By
Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Arc Heb. 11. 7.
, etc. By Faith Noah prepared, etc* i. e. out of a settled Persuasion and belief
that God would preserve him and his from perishing in the Waters, by means of
the Ark, which he had directed him to make for that purpose, he readily and
cheerfully betook Himself to the framing and making of it. In like manner,
Paul, though he kept under his Body, and brought it into subjection, lest (i.
e. through fear, lest) when He had Preached unto others, He Himself should be a
castaway; yet was He full of assureance, that by this means, ( by keeping
under his Body, etc.) He should prevent His being a castaway, and remain for
ever in the love and favor of God; upon the account of which assureance,
notwithstanding his fear, he rejoiced that joy unspeakable and glorious, who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? -- For I am persuaded, that neither
Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord Romans 8. 35. 38, 39.
. So that that fear and trembling, with, and out of, which, the Children of
God, not only lawfully may, but of duty ought, to work out their own
Salvation Phil. 2. 13*
, [or, which is the same, deliverance from condemnation] are not of those
kinds, of fear and trembling, which have torment, or expectation of evil, or
doubtfulnesse of safety and well doing, attending them; but of those, which are
quickening and provoking to the use of means for safety, upon an apprehension of
danger coming upon the negligent and sloathfull, and accompanied with a
peaceable and blessed confidence of obtaining safety thereby. So that we may
safely conclude that the threatenings of eternal death in the Scriptures, which
are bent against the faces of Apostates and Backsliders, are a means graciously
vouchsafed by God for the preserving of His Saints from Apostasy, and this by
raising a fear of Hell within them, in case they shall neglect His Counsel
for their Perseverance: and consequently, that all such threatenings are turned
into stubble and rotten wood (in the Dialect of the Almighty, Job 41. 27.) I
mean, are made powerless and useless, by the Principles of that Doctrine,
which teaches any absoluteness of Promise made unto the Saints for their
final Perseverance.

Thirdly, (and lastly) as this Doctrine evacuateth all the Exhortations,. 17.
and Comminations, which the Scripture holds forth as means to preserve the
Saints in Faith and Holiness, unto the end, so does it all the Promises also,
which are here given in order to the procurement of the same end: the Virtue,
Efficacy, and Power whereof are merely nullified by such a supposition as this,
that Believers stand bound to believe an absolute impossibility of their final
declining, or falling away to Perdition. For when Men are secured, and this by
the infallible security of Faith, that the good things promised are already
theirs, by the right and title of Faith, and that they shall certainly
Persevere in Faith unto the end, what need, or occasion, is See more of this
Sect. 33. of this Chap.
there to persuade or move these Men to do that, which becomes them, in order
to their Perseverance, by any argument drawn from the Promise of such things? A
promise made to a Man of having, or keeping that, which is His own already, and
which he certainly knows, shall not, cannot be taken away from Him, can have
no manner of influence upon Him by way of excitement, or inducement, to labor
for the obtaining of it, or to do the things, by which it is to be obtained.
For as the Apostle reasons in somewhat the like case; hope that is not seen, is
not hope [i. e. that which sometimes was the object of Hope, when it comes to
be seen, or enjoyed, is no longer the object of Hope] for what a Man sees, why
[or how] does he yet hope for Romans 8. 24.
? So may we argue in the case in hand: a Promise of what is already enjoyed and
possessed, is no Promise: has not the nature, property, or operation of a
Promise in it, especially not of a Promise engaging unto action, in order to
the obtaining of the good promised. A promise of this import, I mean, that is
any ways likely to engage unto action, must be of some good thing so
conditioned, in relation to Him, to whom the promise is made, that he has no
ground to expect the enjoyment of it, but upon condition of the performance of
such, or such, an action, one, or more. For if such actions and ways, which
are proper and requisite for the obtaining of the good promised, be otherwise,
and in themselves desirable, and would howsoever be chosen by him, to whom the
promise is made, evident it is that the promise we speak of, does not in this
case work at all upon Him, or raise such an election in Him. Again, if those
actions and ways, which are proper and necessary for the obtaining of the good
promised, be in themselves unpleasant and distasteful unto the Person we speak
of, to whom the Promise is supposed to be made, it is a clear case, that he
will not lift up his Heart, or Hand unto them, but only for the obtaining of
such a good and desirable thing, which he has reason to judge will never be
obtained by Him, but only by the performance of such things. For who will
trouble Himself to run for that, which He knows He may, and shall, obtain by
sitting still? Thus then it every way appears, that the common Doctrine of
absolute and certain Perseverance, makes nothing but wind and vanity of all
those most serious and weighty Exhortations, Threatenings, and Promises in the
Scriptures, which concern the Perseverance of the Saints, and are directed by
God unto them for this end and purpose, that by them they may be enabled, i. e.
made willing, watchful, and careful to Persevere: and consequently the very
face and spirit of the said Doctrine, is directly set and bent against that
high concernment of the Saints, I mean, their Perseverance. For whatsoever
nullifieth the means, is clearly destructive unto the end. And thus we have
done with our second Argument, for the confirmation of that Doctrine, which
teaches a possibility of the Saints defection, and this unto Death.

A third Argument is this. That Doctrine which represents God, as. 18. Argum.
3.
weak, incongruous, and incoherent with Himself, in His applications unto Men,
is not from God; and consequently, that which contradicts it, must needs be
the Truth. But the Doctrine of Perseverance opposed by us, puts this great
dishonor upon God; represents Him weak, incongruous, etc. Ergo. The Major
Proposition in this Argument is too great in evidence of Truth to be
questioned. The Minor is made good by this consideration; viz. that the said
Doctrine brings God upon the great Theater of the Scriptures, speaking thus,
or to this effect, in the audience of Heaven and Earth, unto His Saints. You
that truly believe in my Son Jesus Christ, and have been once made partakers of
my Holy Spirit, and therefore are fully persuaded and assured, according to my
Will and Command given unto you in that behalf, yea according to that
ensealing of truth within you, which you have from me, that you cannot
possibly, no not by all the most horrid sins, and abominable practices, that
you shall, or can, commit, fall away, either totally, or finally, from your
Faith, that in the midst of your foulest actions and courses, there remains a
seed of Grace, or Faith, within you, which is sufficient to make you true
Believers, and to Preserve you from falling away finally; that it is unpossible
you should die in your sins; you that know, and are assured, that I will, by an
irresistible Hand, Work Perseverance in you, and consequently, that you are
out of all danger of condemnation, and that Heaven and Salvation belong unto
you, and are as good as yours already, so that nothing but giving of thanks
appertains unto you, which also you know that I will, do you what you will in
the mean time, necessitate you unto; you (I say) that are fully and thoroughly
persuaded, and possessed with the Truth of all these things, I earnestly charge,
admonish, exhort, and beseech, that you take heed to your selves, that ye
continue in the Faith, that there be not at any time an evil Heart of
unbelief in you to depart from the Living God, that you fall not from your own
steadfastness. Yea, I declare and profess unto you, that if you shall draw
back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in you, that if you shall deny Me, I will
deny you; that if you be again overcome of the lusts of the World, and be
entangled herewith, that your latter end shall be worse then your beginning:
that if you shall turn away, all your former Righteousness shall not be
remembered, but you shall die in your sins, and suffer the vengeance of eternal
Fire. On the other hand, if you shall continue unto the end, my Promise is,
that you shall be saved. Therefore strive to enter in at the strait Gate: quit
your selves like Men: labor for the Meat that indureth unto everlasting life;
and be not sloathfull, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises. He that shall duly weigh and consider, what a senseless,
and (indeed) ridiculous incongruity there is, between these Exhortations,
Adjurations, Threatenings, and latter Promises, and those Declarations,
Applications, and former Promises, doubtless will confess, that either the
one, or the other of them, are not from God, or according to the Mind of God.
For how preposterous a thing is it, to threaten a Man with suffering the
vengeance of Hell Fire, in case he shall not Persevere, whom we have charged
before confidently to believe that God will irresistibly cause him to
Persevere, and eternally save him? But the Exhortations, Threatenings, and
latter Promises, are expressly from God, as our Adversaries themselves will not
deny: therefore the former, Applications and Promises are the mere Notions and
Conceits of Men, and have no Foundation in the Word of God: and consequently
the Doctrine of Absolute Perseverance is to be rejected, as a Doctrine
rendering the onely-wise God strangely irrational, and inconsistent with
Himself.. 19. Argum. 4.


4. If there be no possibility of the Saints falling away finally, then is
their persevering unto the end incapable of reward from God. But their final
Perseverance is not incapable of reward from God. Ergo. The Minor Proposition
(I presume) contains nothing, but what is the sense of those, who deny the
Conclusion: or however, it contains nothing, but what is the express sense of
the Lord Christ, where He says, But He that endures to the end, the same
shall be saved Matt. 24. 13.
. Therefore we shall (I suppose) be excused from further proof of this, without
any prejudice to the cause in hand. The consequence in the Major Proposition,
stands firm upon this Foundation: No act of the Creature, whereunto it is
necessitated, or which it cannot See more of this Sect. 39 and 40. of this
Chapter.
possibly decline, or but do, is by any Law of God, or Rule of Justice,
rewardable. Therefore if the Saints be necessitated by God, to persevere
finally, so that He leaves unto them no possibility of declining finally, their
final Perseverance is not according to any Law of God, or man, nor indeed
according to any Principle of sound Reason, or Equity, capable of reward, no
whit more, then actions merely natural are. Nay, of the two, there seems to be
more Reason, why acts merely natural, as (for example) eating, drinking,
brea^hing, sleeping, etc. should be rewarded, in as much as these flow, though
in a way of necessity, yet from an inward Principle, and connatural to the
Agent; then such actions, whereunto the Agent is constrained, necessitated, or
determined by a Principle of Power from without, and which is not intrinsecal
to it. It is true, a Prince, or great man, may, if He please, bestow gifts of
what value He pleases, upon those, who live, breathe, eat, etc. but He cannot
be said to reward them for living, breathing, eating, etc. because a Reward (in
the proper signification of the word) imports a relation to such actions, or
services, one, or more, which were in the Power of Him to have omitted, or
refrained, who performed them. In like manner, God, if He judged it meet, may,
or might, confer life and Salvation upon those, who shall persevere unto the
end, though it should be supposed that they were necessitated by Him thus to
persevere: but upon such a supposition, as this, He could not be said to reward
them with Life or Salvation, for, or in respect of, such their Perseverance,
for the Reason specified. If we speak of Rewards promised in order to the
moving, or inclining, of the wills of men toward such, or such actions, or
ways, (of which kind also the Rewards mentioned in the Scriptures, as yet
remaining to be conferred by God upon men, are,) the case is yet more clear,
viz. that they are appropriate unto such actions, and ways, unto the election
and choice whereof men are not necessitated, in one kind, or other, especially
not by any physical, or foreign Power. For to what purpose should a Reward be
promised unto me, to persuade or make me willing to engage in such, or such a
course, or to perform such or such a service, in case I be necessitated unto
the same engagement, or performance, other-ways? Or what place is there left
for a Moral Inducement, where a Physical Necessity has done the execution? Or
if the Moral Inducement has done the execution, and sufficiently raised and
engaged the Will to the action, with what congruity of Reason, yea or common
sense, can a Physical Necessity be super-induced? Now that all the Rewards,
which God in the Scriptures promises unto Perseverance, or unto those, who
shall persevere, are promised upon this account, viz. to work upon the wills of
men, to make them willing and careful to persevere, is a thing so rich in
evidence, that it needs no proof. When Christ says to the Church of Smyrna, Be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life Rev. 2. 10.
, can any man reasonably imagine, but that the crown of life is promised by way
of motive or encouragement, to make them faithful unto death? In like manner,
when in His Epistle to the Church of Thyatira He writes thus; And He that
overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to Him will I give power over
the Nations Rev. 2. 26.
, does He make this Promise (of giving power over Nations) with any other eye,
or intent, then to raise hereby a spirit of Christian valor and resolution in
them, not to give over fighting the good fight of Faith unto the end, which
would be the victory or conquest here intended? Not to instance more
particulars; when He speaks thus (to His Disciples) but He that shall endure
(meaning, in the loyalty of His affection, unto Him, and the Gospel) unto the
end, the same shall be saved Mat. 24. 13.
, does he promise Salvation, to him that must, or shall be necessitated, will
he, nill he, to endure unto the end? Or is there any more savor in the Promise,
thus interpreted, then there would be in such a Promise as this, But He that
breaths unto the end, the same shall be saved? Therefore (questionless) our
Saviors intent in promising Salvation, unto him that should endure unto the
end, was, by this Promise of so great a Reward, to provoke, animate, and
encourage men to persevere unto the end. Let all Expositors, both ancient, and
modern, be consulted upon the place. Although (says Calvin upon the place) the
love of many, being surcharged with the weight of iniquities, shall fail, yet
Christ admonishes, that this obstacle also [or impediment, in their way] must
be overcome, lest those that are faithful, and believe, being wearied [or,
tired out] by evil examples, should start back [or recoyl from the Faith.]
Therefore He repeats that saying, that none shall be saved, but He that shall
strive lawfully, so as to persevere unto the end Quanvis ergo iniquitatum mol^
oppressa multorum charitas deficiat, hoc quoque obstaculum superandum esse
admonet Christus ne fideles malis exemplis fracti resi^ant. Ideo sententiam
illam repetit, neminem posse salvum evadere, nisi qui legitime certa verit, ut
in finem usque perseveret.
. So that his sense clearly is, that Salvation is here particularly promised,
or appropriated, by Christ unto Perseverance, and consequently, and by way of
intimation, destruction threatened against backsliding, to persuade, and to
prevail with those, who do believe, so to strive, as to hold out and persevere
striving, unto the end. The matter is so clear, that we shall need to produce
no more witnesses. So then, it being evident, that final Perseverance in the
Saints is truly and properly rewardable by God, evident likewise it is, by the
light of what has been argued, that it is not any thing physically
necessitated upon them, or irresistibly wrought in them, by God; but that it is
such a service, or course of obedience unto God, wherein they are volunteers,
and the performance whereof is as well in their power to decline, as to exhibit.

A fifth Reason evincing the same Conclusion, is this. They who are. 20. Argum.
5.
in a capacity, or possibility* of perpetrating the works of the flesh, are in
a possibility of perishing, and consequently in a possibility of falling away,
and that finally, from the Grace and Favor of God, in case they be in an estate
of this Grace and Favor at the present. But the Saints, or true Believers, are
in a possibility of perpetrating the works of the flesh. Therefore they are in
a possibility also of perishing; and so of falling away from the Grace and
Favor of God, wherein at present they stand. The Major Proposition in this
Argument, viz. that they, who are in a possibility of perpetrating, or
customary acting the works of the flesh, are in a possibility of perishing,
etc. is clearly proved from such Scriptures, which exclude all workers of
iniquity, and* fulfillers of the lusts of the flesh, from the Kingdom of God:
of which sort there are many. Of the which (says the Apostle, speaking of the
lusts of the flesh* Adultery, Fornication, etc.) I tell you before, as I have
also told you in time pa^^* that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God Gal. 5. 21.
. So again: For this ye know, that no whoremonger, or unclean person, nor
covetous man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience Ephesians. 5.
5, 6.
. Yet again: Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Be not ye deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers,
etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor. 6 9, 10.
. From such Passages as these, which are very frequent in the Scriptures, it is
as clear, as the light of the Sun at noon day, that they who may possibly
commit such sins, as those specified, Adultery, Fornication, Idolatry, etc. may
as possibly perish, and be for ever excluded the Kingdom of God.

Now that true Believers, are under a possibility of perpetrating and
committing such sins as these (which was the effect and sense of the Minor
Proposition) is altogether as evident, as the former, as both the Scriptures
last cited (with their fellows) being in special manner directed unto true
Believers, as also the sad and frequent experience of such Persons as these,
falling into such sins, do abundantly manifest. Nor is this Proposition denied
by our Adversaries themselves. Therefore when they deny, that the Saints, when
they commit such sins, do fall away from their Faith, do they not grant the
Premises in a lawful Syllogism, and deny the conclusion?

To pretend, that the Threatenings of non-inheriting the Kingdom of God, in. 21.
the Scriptures last quoted, are not bent against true Believers, or the
execution of them intended upon them, though they shall commit the sins
specified, but only against Unbeleevers, is to set up Darkness against Light.
For,

1. The said Passages are all directed to true and sound Believers, yea to
these only; or at least to those, and only those, whom the Apostle judged to
be such. If then this saying, or Threatening, They that do the works of the
flesh, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, concerns only Unbeleevers, when
they do such works, and shall be executed only upon them, if they come under
the dint of it, to what purpose should it be directed, especially with so much
seriousness and particularity, as it is, unto true Believers only? Or what is
it to true Believers, that God will shut out Unbeleevers from His Kingdom, for
the perpetration of such and such sins, if they (these true Believers) may
commit them without any such danger?

2. As concerning Unbeleevers, they are (at least according to the Judgment of
our Adversaries) in an estate of exclusion from the Kingdom of God, whether
they perpetrate the works of flesh mentioned, or any others like unto them, or
no. Their unbelief alone is sufficient matter of exclusion, against them. Now
how vain a thing, and unworthy the Spirit of God, is it to threaten men with
such a punishment, in case they shall commit such or such particular sins, who
are at present obnoxious unto it, and shall certainly suffer it, whether ever
they shall commit any of these sins, or no?

3. There is not in the said Dehortations or Threatenings, the least intimation
of any difference of Persons, in respect of their present estates, or
conditions; but only a designation or nomination of such things, which exclude
from the Kingdom of God.

4. To affirm, that God excludes Unbelievers from His Kingdom, for the
committing of such sins, which (according to the sense of our Adversaries) they
have no sufficient Power to refrain; and according to truth, have no such
provision, or furniture of means to refrain, as true Believers have; and to
affirm withal, that yet He excludes not Believers for such commissions, whom
they acknowledge to have sufficient power to refrain them, is to render, or
represent God notoriously partial, or unjust. For he that sins, having
less means to refrain, is a less sinner, then he that sins the same sin,
or sins, having more, or greater. Now to punish, and that with the utmost
severity, lesser, or lighter offenders, and not only to discharge greater and
more heinous offenders in the same kind, but highly to reward them, the
hainousness of their demerits notwithstanding, is an act of the broadest
injustice that lightly can be.

5. (And lastly) though the tenor or form of the said Dehortations, or
Threatenings, in the Scriptures mentioned, be indefinite, and not universal;
yet from other passages of the same sense and import with them, where the sign
of universality is expressed, it may be clearly evinced, that they are, in
sense and meaning; universal; and so comprehensive, as well of true Believers,
as Unbelievers. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
Murderers, and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and ALL Liars,
shall have their part in the lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone Revel.
21. 8
, etc. Again: And there shall IN NO WISE enter into it [the new Jerusalem] ANY
THING that defiles, neither WHATSOEVER works abomination, or makes a lie
Verse. 27.
, etc. In the former of these passages, ALL liars, and consequently* ALL
Murderers, and ALL Whoremongers, etc. are adjudged to have their Portion in
the lake that burns with Fire, etc. In the latter, that ANY THING that
defiles, or WHATSOEVER works abomination, shall IN NO WISE [(...)] or, upon
no terms, or conditions whatsoever, enter into the new Jerusalem. Therefore
when God threateneth and says, that neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God, evident it is that he
includes as well Believers, as Unbelievers.

If it be objected; but true Believers have a promise from God, that they. 22.
shall never lose their Faith; I answer, 1. That this has often been said, but
never so much as once proved. 2. Upon examination of those Scriptures, wherein
such promises of God are pretended to reside, or to be found, we found no such
thing in them. We found (indeed) many promises of Perseverance, but all of
them, conditional, and such, whose performance, in respect of actual and
complete Perseverance, is suspended upon the diligent and careful use of means
by Men to Persevere. See Chap. 11. Sect. 16, 17. etc. 3. And lastly, to
affirm, that true Believers, can by no commission of sin, or sins whatsoever,
how vile, horrid, abominable soever, how frequently reiterated, how long
continued in soever, either make shipwreck of their Faith, or fall away from
the grace and favor of God, so as to perish; what is it but to provoke the
flesh to an outragiousnesse in sinning, and to encourage that which remains of
the old Man in them, to bestir it self in all ways of unrighteousness? And
doubtless the teaching of that Doctrine has been the casting of a snare upon
the World, and has caused many, whose feet God had guided into ways of Peace,
to adventure so far in desperateness of sin^ing, that through the just
judgment of God, their Hearts never served them to return. But of these
things we spoke somewhat more at large, Cap. 9.

Others plead, that there is no reason to conceive, that true Believers,
though. 23.
they perpetrate the works of the flesh, should be excluded from the Kingdom
of God, upon this account, because what they sin in this kind, they sin out of
infirmity, and not out of malice. I answer,

1. By concession; that there are three several kinds of sin (in the general)
which also make so many degrees in sinning, in point of demerit. There are sins
of ignorance, and sins of infirmity, and sins of malice. And sins of this last
kind, we acknowledge to be far greater in demerit, then either of the former.
But,

2. (By way of exception,) To say, that true Believers, or any other Men, do,
or perpetrate, the works of the flesh, out of infirmity, in strictness of
interpretation, involves a contradiction. For to do the works of the flesh,
implies the dominion or predominancy of the flesh, in the doers of them; which
in sins of infirmity has no place. The Apostle clearly in sinuates the nature
of sins of infirmity, in that to the Galatians: Brethren* if any Man be
^vertaken with a fault, [(...), i. e. be prevented, or taken at unawares, in,
or with some miscarri^ge, or sin] ye which are spiritual* restore such an one
in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1.
etc. When a Man's foot is taken in the snare of a temptation, only through a
defect in that spiritual watchfulness over himself, and his ways, which he
ough^ to keep constantly, and so sins contrary to the habitual and
standing frame of his Heart, this Man sins out of infirmity. But he that
thus sins, cannot (in Scripture phrase) be said, either to walk, or live,
according to the flesh, (Romans 8. 4. 12, 13.) or to do the works of the flesh,
(Gal. 5. 21.) or to do the lusts, or desires, of the flesh, (Ephesians. 2. 3.)
because none of these are any where ascribed unto, or charged upon, true
Believers, but only upon such persons, who are enemies unto God, and children
of death.

3. If by sinning out of malice, they mean, sinning with deliberation, with
plotting and contriving the method and means of their sinning, sinning against
judgment, against the dictates of conscience, etc. (and what they should, or
can, mean by sinning out of malice, but sinning upon such terms as these, I
understand not;) certain it is that true Believers (or at least such as were
true Believers, before such sinning) may sin out of malice. Yea, and this our
Adversaries themselves, forgetful of their own occasions at this turni^^,
otherwhile plainly enough suppose, and grant. Pareus, observing the difference
between Sin reigning, and not reigning, of the former speaks thus. Sin
reigning, is all [or every] Sin in Men unregenerate: or in Men regenerate, an
error contrary to the Articles of Faith, or against conscience, excluding out
of the heart actual belief of remission of sins, and making the sinner liable
to eternal Death, unless he should be forgiven. -- In one word, Sin reigning,
is to obey the lusts of the flesh. Even those that are regenerate, sometimes
fall into this sin, as David, Peter: and this the Apostles exhortation
witnesses Regnans, est omne peccatum in non renatis: aut in renatis, error
contra articulos fidei, aut conscientiam, excludens ex cord actualem fiduciam
remissionis peccatorum, and obnoxium faciens peccantem exitio aeterno, nisi
fiat remissio. -- uno verbo, est obedire cupiditatibus carnis. Renati etiam
aliquando incidunt in tale peccatum, ut David, Petrus: quod testatur hortatio
Apostoli, etc. Par. ad Romans 6. ver. 13. Hi enim etiam mortaliter contra
dictamen conscientiae aliquando ruentes, ut Aaron, David, Petrus, etc. ibid. in
Dub. 7.
. And afterward, speaking of Regenerate Men and true Believers, he grants that
they may mortally, and against the dictate of their consciences rush [into Sin]
as Aaron, David, Peter, did: and says moreover, that when they thus sin, they
lay waste their Consciences, disturb the Holy Ghost, lose the joy of their
heart, and incur the wrath of God. Doubtless these are not the symptoms, or
effects, of sins of infirmity; though the Author is pleased to say (that which
I think pleases few Men to believe) that the sins of Aaron, David, Peter, were
not committed by them, ex contemptu Dei, out of any contempt of God, but out of
a preoccupation, with, or through, the infirmity of the flesh. Concerning the
Sin of David, certain I am that the Prophet Nathan, by the Word of the Lord,
charge it upon his despising, or contempt, of the Commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Ursine is yet more cordial and through in the point. The most sad
falls* (says he) of holy Men, as of Aaron, making the golden Calf, for which
God being angry was minded to slay him; and of David, committing Adultery and
Murder, to whom Nathan said, Thou art a Man of Death, do plainly show, that
even Regenerate Men may rush [or, fall headlong] into reigning sin Quod etiam
renati possunt ruere in peccatum regnans, satis ostendunt lapsus tristissimi
etiam Sanctorum hominum: ut Aaronis vitulum aureum facientis, quem Deus iratus
propterea voluit perdere. Et Davidis committentis, adulterium and homicidium,
cui Nathan dixit, Tu es vir mortis. Ursinus vol. 1. page 207.
. And those of the Contra-Remonstrancie in the Conference at the Hague, held
Anno 1613. confess and teach, that true Believers may fall so far, that the
Church, according to the Commandment of Christ, shall be obliged to pronounce,
that she cannot tolerate them in her external Communion, and that they shall
have no part in the Kingdom of Christ, except they repent Deinde respondemus
ad mi^orem, fieri posse ut vere fideles eo prolabantur, ut Ecclesia, ex mandato
Christi, cogatur pronunciare, se eos in externa communione tolerare non posse,
neque eos partem in regno Christi habituros, nisi resipiscant. Coll. Hag. p.
399.
. Therefore certainly their sense was, that true Believers, may sin, above the
rate of those, who Sin out of infirmity, in as much as there is no Commandment
of Christ, that any Church of his should eject such persons out of their
external Communion, who Sin out of infirmity only. So that by the confession
of our Adversaries themselves, even true Believers may perpetrate such Sins,
which are of a deeper demerit, then to be numbered amongst Sins of infirmity:
yea such Sins, for which the Church of Christ, according to the Commandment of
Christ, stands bound to judge them for ever excluded from the Kingdom of God,
without Repentance. From whence it undeniably follows, that they may commit
such Sins, whereby their Faith in Christ will be totally wrecked and lost,
because there is no condemnation, or exclusion from the Kingdom of God, unto
those that are [by Faith] in Christ Jesus, whether they repent, or not. And
therefore they that stand in need of Repentance to give them a right and title
to the Kingdom of God, are no Sons of God by Faith: for were they Sons, they
would be heirs also Romans 8. 17.
; and consequently, have the clearest right and title to the inheritance, that
is. So that to pretend, that however the Saints may fall into great and
grievous Sins, yet they shall certainly be renewed again by Repentance, before
they die, though this be an Assertion without any bottom of Reason, or Truth,
yet does it no ways oppose, but suppose rather, a Possibility of the total
defection of Faith in true Believers.

Some, to maintain this Position, that all the Sins of true Believers, are. 24.
Sins of infirmity, lay hold on this Shield. Such Men as these (they say) never
Sin with their whole wills, or with full consent. Therefore when they Sin, they
never Sin but through infirmity. That they never Sin with full consent, they
conceive they prove sufficiently, from that of the Apostle; For the good that I
would, I do not; but the evil, which I would not, that I do. Now if I do
that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me Romans
7. 19, 20.
. I answer,

1. That the Saints often Sin with their whole wills, or full consents, is
undeniably proved, by this consideration; viz. because otherwise there should
be not only a plurality, or diversity, but even a contrariety of wills in the
same person, at one and the same instant of time, viz. when the supposed act of
Sin is produced. Now it is an impossibility of the first evidence, that there
should be a plurality of acts, and these contrary the one unto the other, in
one and the same subject, or agent, at one and the same instant of time. It is
true, between the first moving of the flesh in a Man toward the committing of
the Sin, and the completing of this Sin by an actual and external patration
of it, there may be successively in him, not only a plurality, but even a
contrariety of volitions, or motions of the will, according to what the
Scripture speaks, concerning the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh: but when the flesh, having prevailed in the combat,
brings forth her desire into act, the spirit cease from his act of lusting:
otherwise it will follow, that the flesh is greater and stronger in her
lustings, then the Spirit of God in his, and that when the flesh lusts after
the perpetration of such, or such a Sin, the spirit, as to the hindering of it,
lusts but in vain: which is contrary to that of the Apostle John; greater is
he that is in you (speaking, as it is clear, of the Spirit of God, unto true
Believers) then he that is in the World 1 John 4. 4.
; meaning, Satan, and all his auxiliaries, Sin, Flesh, Corruption, etc.

If it be demanded, but if the Spirit of God in true Believers, be greater. 25.
and stronger in his lustings, then the flesh in his, how comes it to pass,
that in the spiritual duel, the flesh so frequently prevails? I answer, the
reason is, because the spirit acts not, at least to the just efficacy of his
vigor and strength, but only when his preventing or first motions are
entertained or seconded with a su^eable concurrence by the hearts and the wills
of Men; through a deficiency or neglect whereof, he is said to be grieved or
quenched, i. e. to cease from other actings, or movings, in Men. This truth is
the ground of these, and such like sayings, in the writings of Paul: If ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as
many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God Romans 8. 13, 14.
. Believers do then mortify the deeds of the Body, by the Spirit, when they
join their wills unto his in his preventing motions of grace, and so draw, or
obtain, further strength and assistance from him, in order to the great and
difficult work of mortification. In respect of which concurrence also with the
Spirit in his first and more gentle applications of himself unto them, they are
said to be led by the Spirit; as by their comportments with him in his higher
and further applications, they become filled with the Spirit, according to that
exhortation of the same Apostle to the Ephesians: but be ye filled with the
Spirit Ephesians. 5. 18.
; i. e. follow the Spirit close in his present motions and suggestions within
you, and you shall he filled with him, i. e. you shall find him moving and
assisting you upon all occasions, at an higher, and more excellent and glorious
rate. But this by the way. However, by that which has been now said, it
clearly appears that the reason why Believers, are so frequently* overcome by
the lustings of the flesh, notwithstanding the contrary lustings of the spirit
within them before their foil, is not because the flesh has more strength to
lust, then the spirit, but because they (the Men, Believers) have more will to
hearken unto, and to go along with the flesh, in her lustings, then with the
Spirit, in his; it being the Law, or Property of the Spirit, not to advance, or
go forward in his exertions of Himself, when he is deserted and forsaken in
his way, by the wills of Men. It is true, after such desertions of him in his
motions, by the wills of Men, He does not always, wholly, and for ever, desert
them; but most frequently returns again in his motions and excitements unto
them. Only in His first applications unto Men, after He has been so deserted
by them, as has been said, He does not (I conceive) begin, where He left, but
where He began first of all; my meaning is, that He does not move, or act in
them at any such high, or filling rate, as at which He wrought, or was ready to
work, when He was forsaken; but according to the line, or proportion, of His
preventing motions, which generally are of a cooler and softer inspiration,
then His subsequent. But thus we see it an apparent error, to say, that true
Believers never sin with their whole wills, or fullness of consent: which yet
might be made more apparent, by the consideration of David's case, in, and upon,
His committing of those two great Sins, Homicide, and Adultery. For doubtless
had there been any reluctance of will, or renitency of Conscience, or of the
spirit within Him, when He committed the former of the two, Adultery, He would
not have added the second, Murder, so soon after, to it. Again, had there been
any such Reluctance or Renitency in Him, as we speak of, when He perpetrated,
either the one abomination, or the other, doubtless He could not have digested
both the one and the other without any remorse, or self-condemnation, for so
long a time together, as passed between the acting of His said sins, and the
time, when the Prophet Nathan was sent from God unto Him to awaken Him unto
Repentance. Which space of time, by the best calculation of Divines, was ten
Months, at the least Per december minimum menses distulit [Deus] correctionem --
Quod ad eos [Sanctos] attinet, perpetuo agerent in sordibus, nisi Deus potenti
Verbo eos educeret. Quod ex tanto spacio intelligi potest, quo David ad Deum
non est conversus, and isto peccato irretitus non emerserit. P. Martyr. in 2.
Reg. c. 12. ver. 1.
. From the consideration of which distance of time between David's Sin, and His
Repentance, P. Martyr makes this observation, that the Saints themselves being
once fallen into sin, would always remain in the pollution of it, did not God
by his mighty Word bring them out of it. Which saying of his clearly also
implies, that the Saints many times Sin with their whole wills, and full
consents: because, were there any part of their wills bent against the
committing of the Sin, at the time when it is committed, they would
(questionless) return to themselves, and repent immediately after, the heat
and violence of the lust being over, by reason of the satisfaction that has
been given to it. Therefore,

2. To that which was alleged from, Romans 7. 19. to prove the contrary,. 26.
viz. that the Saints never sin with their whole wills, or full consent; I
answer; 1. That when the Apostle says, the evil which I would not, that I
do; His meaning is not, that He did that, which at the same time when He did
it, He was not willing, either in whole, or in part, to do: but that He
sometimes did that, upon a surprizall by temptation, or through incogitancy,
which He was not habitually willing, or disposed in the inner Man, to do. But
this no ways implies, but that at the time, when He did the evil He speaks
of, He did it with the full and entire consent of His will. Or if we shall
affirm, that the contrary bent, or motions, of His will at other times, is a
sufficient proof, that when he did it [the evil we speak of] he did it not
with his whole will, or fullness of consent, and so make this doing of evil,
or committing of Sin, without fullness of consent (in such a sense) a
distinguishing Character between Men regenerate, and unregenerate, we shall
bring Herod, and Pilate, yea and probably Judas himself, into the List or Roll
of Men Regenerate, with a thousand more, whom the Scriptures know not under any
such Name, or relation; as viz. all those, whose Judgments and Consciences
stand against the evil of those ways and Practices, wherein they ^alk.
Concerning Herod, it is evident, that He did not give Commission for the
beheading of John the Baptist, with fullness of consent, in the sense mentioned:
for when Herodias, to whom He had promised with an Oath to give, whatsoever she
would ask, had demanded John Baptists Head in a Charger, it is said, that the
King was sorry: nevertheless for the Oaths sake, and them that sat with Him at
meat, He commanded it to be given Her Mat. 14. 8, 9.
. Which plainly shows, that He had a renitency of will against the evil which
He did, immediately before the doing of it: yea, and that He would not have
done it, had not the temptations mentioned overcome that inclination. The case
is every whit as clear in Pilate; viz. that He gave the sentence of Death
against Christ, with great relunctancy of mind and will preceding, and so not
with fullness of consent (in the sense declared.) He would gladly have washed
His Hands of the business, and desired Ca^apha* and the rest of the Priests and
Elders to take Him, and judge Him according to their own Law John 18. 31.
: yea, it is said that before the sentence pronounced against Him, that He
sought to release Him John 19. 12.
: which how seriously and effectually He did, all the four Evangelists
unanimously relate. Thus we see of how dangerous a consequence it is, to make
this an essential difference between a true Believer, and an ungodly man, that
the former never sins with his whole will, or full consent, and that the latter
sins with both. But,

2. As to the Passage of the Apostle mentioned, Romans 7. I answer further, that
when He says, the evil which I would not, that I do, He does not speak of what
He always, and in all cases, did, much less of what was possible for him to do;
but of what He did ordinarily, or frequently; or of what was very incident unto
him through the infirmity of the flesh; viz. through inconsiderateness, and
anticipation by temptations, to do such things, which, whilst He was in a
watchful and considering Posture, and from under the malign influence of a
tentation, He was altogether averse unto. Now what a man does ordinarily, is
one thing, and what He does sometimes, and in some particular case, especially,
what it is possible for Him to do, is another. That true Believers, whilst
such, ordinarily sin not upon worse terms, then those mentioned by the Apostle
concerning His sinning, I easily grant: but it no ways follows from hence,
that therefore they never sin upon other terms, much less, that it is
unpossible that they should sin upon other. And thus we see, all things
thoroughly and unpartially argued and debated, to and fro, that even true
Believers themselves, as well as others, may do those works of the Flesh, which
exclude from the Kingdom of God; and that in respect hereof they are subject to
this exclusion, as well as other men.

Whereas some object against this Argument and Doctrine, that it maimeth,. 27.
or dismembereth the Body of Christ, and brings in an uncouth and unseemly
interchange and rechange of members between Christ and the Devil, that it
makes Regeneration iterable, etc. I answer; that all these, with the like, are
but pretended inconveniences, and such only to appearance; the Scripture
justifies them, and judges them no inconveniences at all: yea, it holds
them forth as things necessary and comely in the institutions and Dispensations
of God.

1. For dismembering the Body of Christ; is it not the Law of Christ himself in
every particular Church, or Body of His, that as any of their members putrify,
and discover themselves to be rotten and corrupt, they should be cut off by the
spiritual sword of excommunication? And does not such a dismembering as this
rather tend to the honoring and adorning the Body of Christ, then any ways to
maim, or deform it? And for such a dismembering of the Body of Christ, which
the Doctrine in hand supposes to be causable by the Members themselves, as,
viz. by the voluntary dis-faithing of themselves through sin and wickedness,
neither is the permission of this, upon such terms as it is permitted, either
unworthy Christ, or inconvenient to the Body it self. For as in a Politic or
Civil Corporation, it is better that the Governors should permit the Members
respectively to go, or be, at liberty, that so they may follow their business
and occasions in the world upon the better terms, though by occasion of this
liberty, they may be have themselves in sundry kinds very unworthily, then it
would be to keep them close Prisoners, though hereby the said inconveniences
might certainly be prevented: in like manner, it is much better for the Body
of Christ, and for the respective Members of it, that He should leave them at
liberty (especially upon such terms as He does, and which have formerly been
declared) to obey and serve God, and follow the important affairs of their
Souls, freely, and without any Physical Necessitation, though some do turn
this liberty into wantonness, and so, into destruction, then it would be, to
deprive them of this liberty, and to cause and constrain them to any course
whatsoever out of necessity, though (it is true) the committing of much sin and
iniquity would be prevented hereby in many. The Reason of the comparison
between the one course, and the other, as now it has been stated and
asserted, has been already laid down, and argued, in this Chapter Sect. 19.
. The dismembering of the Body of Christ's Apostles by the Apostasy of Judas,
was no disparagement either to Christ Himself, or it.

2. For the interchange of Members between Christ and Satan, the Scripture. 28.
presents it as a thing possible, yea, as frequent, and ordinary. Know ye not
(says the Apostle) that your Bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I then
take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot 1 Cor. 6. 15.
? In the Original it is, (...), etc. i. e. taking AWAY the Members of Christ,
shall I make them, etc. meaning, that true Believers, who only are the Members
of Christ, dis-relate themselves to Him, cease to be Members of His, when, and
whilst they live in a course of Whoredom and Adultery, and make themselves
Members of another far different Relation, viz. of those Harlots, with whom
they sinfully converse, and consequently, by such a mediation, of the Devil.
Calvin Himself, commenting upon the next words, Know ye not, etc. expressly
affirms, that He that couples Himself with an Harlot, hereby becomes one body
with Her, and therefore pulls away a Member from the Body of Christ Melius
exprimit, quantam injuriam Christo inferat, qui se cum scorto miscet; Unum enim
corpus efficitur; membrum igitur a Christi corpore avellit.
. And both Jerome and Ambrose long before Him, carried the Apostles meaning in
the words the same way, as they are cited, and owned in their respective
Interpretations by Musculus upon the place. (...), tollens, taking (says He)
is so expounded by Jerome, as that it is declared [by the Apostle] that those
Bodies, which are made the Members of an Harlot, are taken away, and cut off
from [or, out of] the Body of Christ. He takes (says He) the Members of
Christ, i. e. He cuts Himself off from the Body of Christ, who is joined unto
an Harlot. Ambrose avoucheth the same, when he says; He [meaning the Apostle]
says [thus] because such Members, which adhere unto an Harlot, cease to be the
Members of Christ. Certainly it cannot be, that a Member of Christ should be a
Member [also] of an Harlot Tollens ita exponitur a Hiero^ut indicetur ea
corpora, quae scorti Membra fiunt, sublata esse and abscissa e corpore Christi.
Tollit (inquit) membra Christi, i. e. abscindit se a corpore Christi, qui
junctus est meretrici. Idem ponit and Ambr. cum dicit: Ait, quia meretrici
adhaerentia membra, desinunt esse membra Christi. Certe non potest fieri ut
membrum Christi sit membrum scorti, etc.
, etc. And if it be no dishonor unto Christ, to admit and take in such, who
have been the foulest and most deformed Members of the Devil, upon their
Repentance, for Members of His Body, (which is nothing but what He does daily,)
why should it be any disparagement unto Him, to reject such, from being Members
of this His Body, who by their wicked and abominable ways render themselves
altogether unworthy the great dignity of such a Relation?

3. And lastly, for the frequent repetition of Regeneration, it is of the same.
29.
consideration with the two former Particulars: there is no inconvenience,
nothing unworthy God, or of Christ, in it: and for men, it is of a most happy
and blessed accommodation unto them. When the Scripture speaks of an
impossibility of renewing some by Repentance, in case they fall away Heb. 6. 6.
, it plainly supposes that there is such a thing incident unto men, or whereof
some men are capable, as renewing again by Repentance. And what is
Regeneration, being interpreted, but a renewing again by Repentance? And if men
may dye twice, spiritually, (as Jude speaks of some that were twice dead,
Verse. 12.) why may they not live twice, or twice receive the life of grace
opposite hereunto? As it is agreeable to the Righteousness and Holiness of God,
to denounce the sentence of exclusion from his Kingdom against men, whoever
they be, or have been, when they turn Adulterers, Fornicators, Idolaters, etc.
yea and to execute this sentence accordingly, in case they return not from
these sins by Repentance, before they dye; and so to leave them no footing, or
foundation for their Faith, I mean, to believe, or to expect Salvation by Jesus
Christ, but only upon their Repentance; so is it no less agreeable to the
Mercy, Patience, and goodness of God, to promise unto backsliding sinners, a
re-injoyment of his Favor, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, upon condition
of their renewing again by Repentance, and to exhibit unto them accordingly the
full fruits thereof in the Salvation of their Souls, if they persevere in a
course of Repentance unto the end. And how sad and deplorable above measure
would the condition of many thousands of Saints be, in case there were no
reiteration of Regeneration; I mean, of all such, who at any time fall into
such ways and practices of sin, which (according to what we have lately heard
from the Scriptures) exclude from the Kingdom of God! Doubtless there is no
more inconvenience for the same person to be twice regenerate, then it was, or
would have been, under the Law, for the same man to have taken Sanctuary the
second time, in case He had the second time miscarried in slaying a man at
unawares. And for Regeneration it self, according to the Grammatical and proper
signification of the word, it imports a reiteration, or repetition, of some
generation, or other. It cannot import a repetition of the natural generation
of men: the sense of Nicodemus in John 3. 4.
this point, was orthodox, who judged such a thing impossible: therefore it
must import a repetition of a spiritual generation; unless we shall say (which
I know is the road Opinion) that it signifies only the spiritual generation,
with a kind of reference unto, or reflection upon, the birth natural. But it is
the common sense of Divines, that the two generations mentioned, the natural,
and spiritual, are membra dividentia, and contradistinguished the one unto the
other: and so the Apostle Peter seems to state and represent them 1 Pet. 1. 23.
; as also our Savior Himself, Joh. 3. 6. Now I suppose there can hardly any
instance be given, where the introducing of one contrary form, or quality, into
the subject, is termed a reiteration, or repetition of the other. Calefaction
(for example) is never termed a repetition of frigefaction: nor is albi-faction
called a reiteration of nigri-faction: nor when a regenerate or mortified man
dies His natural death, is He said to reiterate, or repeat His spiritual
death. Therefore I rather conceive that Regeneration, which the Scripture makes
appropriable only unto persons living to years of discretion, who generally in
the days of their youth degenerate from the innocence of their childhood and
younger years, and corrupt themselves with the Principles and ways of the
world, relates, not unto the natural generation, as such, (I mean, as natural,)
but unto the spiritual estate and condition of men in respect of their Natural
generation and birth; in, and upon, which, they are, if not simply and
absolutely, yet comparatively, innocent, harmless, free from pride, malice,
etc. and in respect of these qualifications, in grace and favor with God, upon
the account of the death and sufferings of Christ for them; (as we shall, God
willing, prove more at large in the second part of this Discourse.) In the mean
time, what we now offer as most probable, touching the Reason of the name, and
relation, of Regeneration, I conceive our Savior Himself implies in that
Passage of His with His Disciples. At the same time came the Disciples unto
Jesus, saying, who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? And Jesus called a
little child unto Him, and set Him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I
say unto you, except ye be CONVERTED, AND BECOME AS LITTLE CHILDREN, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 18. 1, 2, 3.
. (...), except ye be turned back (as Calvin interprets,) i. e. unless ye
recover and re-instate your selves in that estate, or interest in the love and
favor of God, which you are in danger of losing by your ambition, by returning
to such an humility, innocence, and simplicity, wherein, whilst you were
children, you were accepted with Him, ye shall not enter, etc. Calvin's words
(in English) are these: And the conversion whereof He speaks, imports, that His
Disciples had at this time too much accustomed themselves to the common course
and manners of men [in the world] and therefore, that they might aspire to the
mark [at which they aimed: I suppose He means, greatness in the Kingdom of
Heaven,] they must turn back in their course Atque huc spectat conversio cujus
meminit, quod scilicet ad communes hominum mores jam nimis assuevissent
Discipuli, ideo que ut ad scopum adspirent, cursum illis retroflectendum esse.
. And unless we shall suppose, that children, to whom our Savior says that
His Disciples must be like, or else never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, are
in an estate of grace and favor with God, we shall make Him to say (in effect)
that unless they be like unto those, who are in an estate of condemnation, they
cannot be saved. For (as Musculus upon the place well observes) our Savior
does not say unto them, Except ye be converted, and become as this child; but
indefinitely, and become as children [or, little ones] lest they should
conceive that there was something singular in this child, more then in others,
which they were to imitate Non dicit, sicut puer iste; sed, sicut parvuli; ne
putarent isti puero singular quid ab aliis pueris inesse, quod imitandum esset.
. Nor does any thing that has been said upon this last account, suppose
children to be begotten, or born, without Original Sin: only that indeed has
been said, which supposes, that that sin which is in children, is taken away
by the Death of Christ, so that they are generally, whilst children, in the
favor of God through Christ, notwithstanding that sin which is in them. Neither
is this any thing more, then what Musculus Himself upon the place clearly
avoucheth in respect of all Children (without exception) that have been
Baptized Quod vero per baptismum dicit tolli peccatum originis, verum est: ita
tamen, ut concupiscentia illa prava non ideo extinguatur, sed opus sit ut
crucifigatur per omnem vitam. Ita tollitur peccatum per gratiam Christi, ut non
condemnet amplius, juxta illud: Nihil est condemnationis illis, qui sunt in
Christo Jesus. Vt autem nullum sit peccatum in carne nostra, non sequitur.
. But this only by the way.

Nor does that of the Apostle any ways oppose, either the possiblity, or. 30.
convenience, of a second Regeneration: For though you have ten thousand
Instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel 1 Cor. 4 15.
: Because He speaks here, not of what they were incapable of having
afterward, but of what their state and condition was at present by His means,
and Ministry. That which He remindeth the Corinthians of, in the Metaphorical
Notion of His being a Father unto them, and the only Father they had, is
nothing else, but that He was the only Person that had laid the Cornerstone,
or first foundations, of that spiritual building* which was now amongst them;
He was the only Person that had, by the Preaching of the Gospel, formed them
into a Church of Christ; and that all those Teachers that came amongst them
afterward, however magnified by them above Him, yet were they but as Tutors,
or Schoolmasters unto them, in comparison of Him, building upon His
foundations; and consequently, could not in Reason be so truly and naturally
affected toward them, as He: as it is no ways probable but that the love and
care of a Father toward His Children, should be greater and more genuine, then
of a Schoolmaster. This is agreeable to what He elsewhere writes to the same
Persons: I have planted, Apollos watered 1 Cor. 3. 6.
, etc. and a little after: According to the Grace of God given to me, as a
skilful Master Builder, I have laid the Foundation, and another builds
thereon Verse. 10.
, etc. And elsewhere: not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of
other men's labors: and presently after: to preach the Gospel in the regions
beyond you, and not to boast of another man's line, of things made ready to our
hand 2 Cor. 10. 15, 16.
. In these expressions, of his not boasting of things without His measure, of
other men's labors, of things prepared to His Hand, etc. He obliquely taxes the
ambitious vanity of those vain glorious Teachers, whom these Corinthians so
much applauded with an undervaluing of Him, in assuming unto themselves the
Honor and Repute of all that knowledge of Christ, and those other worthy things
of the Gospel, that were found in them, as if they had been the Authors, and
prime, or sole, Instruments of God, in the raising and working of them; whereas
this was His line, and measure, and that which of right, and according to
truth, appertained to Him. But His being a Father unto them, in this sense,
neither implies, but that there might be many particular Persons amongst them
begotten to the Faith through the Gospel, by other Ministers and Teachers,
besides Him: nor but that, in case any of those, who had been begotten by Him,
should apostatize from the Faith, they might be again recovered, and so be
again begotten, by others. The substance of this Interpretation is delivered by
Calvin Himself upon the place. If any objecteth (says He) how can Paul deny
those to be Fathers, who succeeded Him, when as there are new Children begotten
unto God daily in the Church? The Answer is easy, viz. that here He speaks
of the first beginnings of a Church. For though never so many should have been
begotten by the Ministry of other Men, yet this honor remained int^re unto
Paul, that he was the [first] founder of the Corinthian Church Si quis
objiciat, quum gignantur quotidie novi D^o filij in Ecclesia, cur Patres esse
negat Paulus, qui sibi successorant? Facilis est solutio: nempe quod hic d^
primordio Ecclesiae loquatur. Vt enim plaerique aliorum Ministerio geniti
fuissent, man^bat tamen uni Paulo hic honor illibatus, quod Ecclesiam
Corinthiacam fundasset.
. So that evident it is, that there is nothing at all in the place alleged
against a Reiteration of Regeneration.

Nor is that, which I have sometimes heard alleged in opposition to the. 31.
Doctrine maintained in the Digression yet in hand, any whit more considerable;
as viz. that it teaches, or supposes, a blotting, and a blurring, a putting
in, and a putting out, of Names, in Gods Book of Life; which some (it seems)
conceive to be unseemly, and some ways disparaging the said Book. But,

1. The Scripture it self frequently speaks of that, which the Objectors call
a blotting in the said Book of God, and that without the least intimation of
any disparagement hereby unto it. When Moses prayed God to blot him out of the
Book, which he had written, in case he would not forgive the Sin of the People
Ex(...). 32. 32
, questionless he did not conceive that he desired any thing that would deface,
or disgrace His Book. So when God returned this answer to that His demand:
Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my Book, He did not
intend any blemish to His Book. When Christ from Heaven expresses Himself thus
to the Church of Sardis; He that overcommeth, the same shall be clothed in
white raiment, and I will not blot out His Name out of the Book of Life Revel.
3. 5.
, etc. He clearly supposes, that there were, or at least, might be, some,
whose Names he would blot out of this Book: otherwise it would be no matter of
honor, or specialty of privilege, which He promises herein. As in case all
Men were to be clothed in white, and no possibility of any Man's falling short
of this honor, it had been very impertinent and unproper for our Savior to
promise with so much solemnity, as the words import, a Clothing in white, by
way of reward, unto him that overcommeth. See also Psalm. 69. 28.

2. To conceive, that what the Scripture means by blotting out of the Book of
Life, should be any matter of defacement to this Book, or any thing unseemly
for God otherwise, savours of Carnality of Notion about this Book: and of a
mis-apprehension of what is seemly, and unseemly, for God to do. For Gods Book
of Life, is nothing else, but His general purpose or decree concerning persons
to be saved, not by their Names, but their capacities or qualifications. So
that when He is said to blot out any Man's Name out of this Book, (which He
never does, or is said to do, but upon their devesting themselves of that
capacity, in respect whereof they are said to have been written in this Book,
according to what we lately heard from himself, whosoever has sinned against
me, Him will I blot out of My Book) it imports only this, that whereas
before, whilst he remained faithful, and upright with God* God, according to
his Purpose, and Promise made to such Men, intended Life and Salvation unto
him, now, by reason of his backsliding unto Sin and Wickedness, he purposes
to destroy him, and that according to his general and unpartiall decree of
destroying sinners and wicked Men, if they repent not. So that if it be not
unseemly for God to destroy backsliding sinners, who remain hardened and
impenitent to the end, neither is it unseemly for him to blot out the Names of
Men, upon the occasion specified, out of His Book of Life. Cameron expounding
those words (lately mentioned) I will not blot out His Name out of the Book of
Life, To be blotted out of the Book of Life (says he) is nothing else but to
be condemned. It is a form of speech, where the antecedent is put for the
consequent, borrowed from that which is frequently done amongst Men, as viz.
when any Man [or any Man's Name] is, by command from the Magistrate, struck out
of the Catalogue or Roll of Citizens, that all may know that he is a condemned
Man Deleri a libro vitae, nihil aliud est, quam damnari. Est autem antecedens
pro consequenti, sumpta formula loquedi abeo, quod fieri solet in vita communi:
verbi gratia, cum deletur aliquis e catalogo civium jussu magistratus, ut eum
damnatum sciant omnes. Cameron. Myroth. p. 354.
. There is nothing in the Allegation in hand worthy any further consideration:
it is all Face, and nothing Heart, against the cause, which it pretends to
fight.

Another Argument, demonstrative of the Doctrine pre-asserted, is this.. 32.
Argum. 6.
That Doctrins which is according unto godliness, i. e. whose natural and
proper tendency is to promote godliness in the hearts, and lives of Men, is
Evangelicall, and of unquestionable comportance with the Truth. Such is the
Doctrine, which teaches a Possibility of the Saints declining, both totally,
and finally. Ergo.

The Reason of the Major Proposition (though the truth of it needs no light,
but its own, to be seen by) is, because the Gospel it self is a Doctrine,
which is according unto godliness 1 Timothy 6. 3.
, a Truth according unto godliness* Tit. 1. 1.
, a mystery of godliness 1 Timothy 3. 16
, etc. i. e. a Doctrine, Truth, and Mystery calculated, contrived, and framed
by God with a singular aptness, and choycenesse of ingredients, for the
advancement of godliness in the World. Therefore what particular Doctrine
soever is of the same spirit, tendency and import, must needs be a natural
branch thereof, and of perfect accord with it. This proposition then is
unquestionable.

Nor can the Minor lightly be less unquestionable to him, that shall duly and
unpartially examine and weigh the frame, and import of it. For what Doctrine
can be more proper, or powerful, to promote godliness in the hearts and lives
of Men, then that, which on the one hand promises a Crown of blessedness, and
eternal glory, to those that live godlily without declining, and on the other*
hand threateneth the vengeance of eternal Fire against those, that shall turn
aside unto prophainnesse, and not ret^rne by Repentance? Whereas that Doctrine,
which promises, and that with all possible certainty and assureance, all
fullness of blessedness and glory, to those that shall at any time, be godly,
though they shall the very next day, or hour, degenerate, and turn loose and
profane, and continue never so long in such a course, is most manifestly
destructive unto godliness, and encouraging above measure to prophainnesse.

If it be objected and said; yea but the assureance of the unchangeablenesse.
33.
of Gods Love toward him that is godly, is both a more effectual and
persuading motive unto godliness, and more encouraging unto a persevering in
godliness, then a doubtfulnesse or uncertainty, whether God will be constant
in His affection to such a Man, or no. Certainty of reward is more encouraging
unto action, then uncertainty. I answer,

1. The Doctrine which teaches a possibility of the Saints final defection,
teaches an assurance of the unchangeablenesse of Gods Love, toward him that
is godly, as well as the Doctrine contrary to it; only with this difference
this latter Doctrine teaches the said unchangeablenesse, absolutely, and
against all possible change by sin and wickedness, in the person supposed (at
present) to be godly; whereas the former teaches and asserteth the same
unchangeablenesse, but conditionally, and upon the Perseverance o^ him that is
godly, in his course. So that this Doctrine teaches as much c^r^ainty of the
love of God toward him that is godly, as such, and as continuing such, as the
other does. And the truth is, that the other Doctrine, rightly interpreted,
does not so much promise absolutely the certainty of Gods love, to him that is
godly, as it promises conditionally the certainty of this love, to him that is
profane, viz. in case, and upon condition that he has been once godly.

2. Neither is certainty of reward, in every sense, or kind, more encouraging
unto action, then uncertainty, in some kind. To promise withal possible
assureance, the same reward, or prize, to him that shall not run in the race,
which is promised upon these terms to him that shall run, is not more
encouraging unto Men thus to run, then to promise it conditionally, viz. upon
their running: which is a promising of it with uncertainty, in this respect,
viz. because it is uncertain whether Men will run in the said race, or no; and
consequently whether they shall receive the said prize, or no, upon such a
promise. Certainty of reward is then, and in such cases, more encouraging unto
action, then uncertainty, when the certainty of obtaining, or receiving it, is
suspended upon the action, no^ when it is assured unto Men, whether they act,
or no.

3. (And lastly) though an assureance of the unchangeablenesse of the love of
God toward him that is godly, upon any, and against any, terms whatsoever,
suppose such an assureance could be effectually, and upon good grounds, given
unto Men, be, or would be, a more eff^ctuall and prevailing motive unto
godliness, i. e. to an entrance into godliness, then an uncertainty whether
this love of God would be continued to such a Man, unto the Sea before Sect. 17
of this Chapter.
end, or no; yet would it not be any thing comparably so eff^ctuall or
prevailing upon Men that are godly, to persevere in godliness, as such an
uncertainty, which has been asserted. Nay, the truth is, that such an
assureance effectually given to him that is godly, without any condition of his
remaining godly, is no encouragement at all unto him to persevere in
godliness, but rather to turn aside unto prophainness. The reason is plain:
No reward which is promised unto Men simply and absolutely, is encouraging to
any action, or engagement whatsoever. It is true, a simple and absolute promise
of a reward may be, and commonly is oblieging unto action by way of duty or
thankfulness unto him, who makes the promise: but is never so oblieging unto
action simply, as such a promise, which assures the reward only upon the
performance of the action. Hence it is that the Apostle, encouraging and
persuading Men unto holiness, holds forth, not absolute, but conditional
promises unto them, in order hereunto. The tenor of the promises we mean* is
this: wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, And will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty ^
Cor. 6. 17, 18.
; meaning that upon condition you will come out, etc. and touch no unclean
thing, I will receive you, and be a Father unto you, etc. Upon the account of
these promises, he immediately subjoyns: Having therefore THESE promises
(dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God ^ Cor. 7. 1.
. q. d. Such Promises at these, viz. which hold forth such great and blessed
Rewards, and withal, require and enjoin Holiness, by way of condition, for the
receiving and enjoyment of them, are of the most sovereign efficacy and import,
that can be imagined, to persuade you unto Holiness. Nor can any instance (I
believe) be given from the Scriptures, where the Holy Ghost presses, or
persuades unto action, or ways of Righteousness, by any other kind of
Promise, then that, which is, either in form, or in matter, [ i. e. in sense
and meaning] conditional.

Besides, whether any such assureance of the unchangeableness of the Love of
God toward Him that is godly, as the Objection speaks of, can be effectually,
and upon sufficient grounds, given unto men, is very questionable; yea, I
conceive there is more Reason to judge otherwise, then so. Yea, (that which is
yet more) I verily believe, that in case any such assureance of the
unchangeableness of Gods Love, were to be found in, or could regularly be
deduced from, the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any intelligent and
considering man to question their Authority, and whether they were from God, or
no. For that a God, infinitely righteous and holy, should irreversibly assure
the immortal and undefiled inheritance of His Grace and Favor, unto any
Creature whatsoever, so that though this Creature should prove never so
abominable in His sight, never so outragiously and desperately wicked and
profane, He should not be at liberty to withhold this inheritance from Him, is
a saying (doubtless) too hard for any man, who rightly understands and
considers the Nature of God, to hear. For what can it be conceived that he
should promise more to such a Person, who should remain loyal in his
affections, and constant in his obedience unto him, without turning aside
either to the right hand, or to the left, all his days? And where now would be
the God of Judgment? Ye have wearied the Lord with your words (says Malachi in
Gods Name unto the People;) Yet ye say, wherein have we wearied Him? When ye
say, every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and He
delights in them: and where is the God of Judgment Mal. 2. 17.
? Clearly implying, 1. That to say, that God delights in them that do evil,
is highly displeasing and dishonorable to him, amounting to no less, being
interpreted, then a denial of his being a God of Judgment, i. e. of his Wisdom
and Righteousness, or that he puts any difference in his affections, between
the best and worst of men. 2. That, notwithstanding the great offensiveness
unto God of such a saying, yet they that utter it, are backward to consider any
such unworthiness in it.

It is possible that yet some will further object (against the Argument in. 34.
hand) unless the Saints be assured of the Perpetuity of their standing in the
Grace and Favor of God, they must needs be under fears of falling away, and so
of perishing: and fear (we know) is of a discouraging and enfeebling nature, an
enemy unto such actions, which men of confidence and courage, are apt and ready
to undertake. I answer;

1. That the strength of this Objection has been already trodden down, and that
more then once. See Sect. 15. and 16. of this Chapter: and more upon the same
account, Cap. 9. I here add,

2. That the Saints, notwithstanding the possibility of their final falling
away, have, or may have, such an assureance of the Perpetuity of their standing
in the Grace and Favor of God, which may exclude all fear, at least, that is of
a discouraging, or enfeebling nature. The Apostle (as we have formerly showed
Sect. 16. of this Chapt.
) lived at a very excellent rate both of courage and confidence,
notwithstanding he knew that it was possible for him to become a Reprobate. The
assureance he had, that upon a diligent use of those means, which he knew
assuredly God would vouchsafe unto him, he should prevent his being a
Reprobate, was a golden foundation unto him of that confidence and courage,
wherein he equaliz'd the holy Angels themselves. Suppose a Man has a deep
well, or pit of water, in his Yeard or grounds near adjoining to his House, he
is no more afraid of being drowned either in the one, or in the other, then he
that lives, a thousand miles distance from them. The reason is, because he
knows he need not be in any danger of such a miscarriage, by them, unless he
please. The evil, which a Man knows he may prevent, if he will, and that which
simply is not, or, not possible to be, is of the same consideration to a sober
and intelligent Man; especially if he knows that he may prevent it, if he will,
without any damage, or inconvenience to him. And for courage and confidence,
the truth is, that there is no place for them, but under a possibility at
least, of danger, and miscarrying by an enemy.

3. (And lastly) an assureance of a perpetual enjoyment of, or abiding in, the
love and favor of God, otherwise then upon condition of love and loyalty in
the Creature toward him, is neither honorable for God to make, or grant, nor
meet for a Creature to expect, or desire. Who can judge it much short of
blasphemy to put such a saying as this into the mouth of the most holy God,
unto any of his Creatures: though thou addest drunkenness to thirst, and
pollutest thy self with all the abominations of wicked and ungodly Men, though
thou committest Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, Murder. Theft, though thou hate
to be reformed, and castest all my Commandments behind thy back, etc. yet
shall thou be precious in mine Eyes, and mine Heart shall be toward thee in
the greatest love, and dearest affection for ever: and thou shall inherit my
everlasting Kingdom, thy desperate Rebellions against me notwithstanding. I
know my opposers are not wont to deliver themselves, or express their
Doctrine, in such terms as these, nor will they (happily) well bear such a
Representation of it, as this: but I appeal to their Consciences, and to the
unpartiall Reasons of all unprejudiced Men, whether their Doctrine of
Perseverance, does not, without any wresting, strayning, or perverting in the
least, directly lead to such an horrid thought, or conceit of God, as that
presented in the said saying. Certain I am, that the Lord Christ Himself,
resolves his abiding in his Fathers love, into his keeping of His
Commandments* and informs His Disciples withal, that he loves them upon the
same terms. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in
my love. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I
have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love Joh. 15. 9, 10.
. By the way, had there been an unavoideable necessity lying upon the Disciples
to continue in Christ's love, there had been no necessity of his exhortation
unto them, in order thereunto. Who persuades a Man to do that, which is not in
his power to neglect, or not to do? In like manner, had there been a like
unavoydeable necessity upon the Disciples, to keep Christ's Commandments,
doubtless he would not have prescribed it unto them in the nature of a
conditional means, for their abiding in his love. No Man in his right mind
makes conditions of things, or actions, that are unavoydable, or which cannot
but be performed by them, of whom they are required.

To pretend, that the weakness of the flesh, even in the best of the Saints.
35.
considered, and their aptness to go astray, they must needs lie under many
troublesome and tormenting fears of perishing, unless they have some promise
or assureance from God to support them, that, notwithstanding any declinings or
goings astray incident unto them, yet they shall not lose his favor, or
perish; is to pretend nothing, but what has been thoroughly answered already,
especially in the ninth Chapter. I only add here,

1. That the weakness of the flesh, or the aptness of miscarrying through
this, is no reasonable ground of fear unto any true Believer, of his perishing;
considering, that no Man loses, or forfeiteth the Grace and Favor of God,
through Sins of weakness or infirmity. It is only the strength of Sin, and
corruption in Men, that exposes them to the danger of losing the love of God.

2. If the Saints be willing to strengthen the Spirit in them, and make him
willing, proportionably to the means vouchsafed unto them by God for such a
purpose, this will fully balance the weakness of the flesh, and prevent the
miscarriage and breakings out hereof. This I say then (says the Apostle) walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh. And again: If
ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law Gal. 5. 16. 18
; and consequently, are in no danger of losing the favor of God, or of
perishing for such sins, which, under the conduct of the spirit, you are
subject unto.

3. (And lastly,) There is no such aptness or pronenesse unto sin (Sins I
mean of a dis-inheriting import) in Saints, or true Believers, as is
pretended: but on the contrary, a strong propension or inclination unto
righteousness, reigns in them. We heard formerly from the Apostle John, that
whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him:
and he CANNOT sin, because he is born of God 1 John 3. 9
. Which passage of Scripture the Reader may find unfolded at large, Cap. 10.
Sect. 25, 26, 27, etc. The same Apostle, to the same purpose, had said a little
before: He that commits sin, is of the Devil: and consequently, no Saint,
or true Believer. And again (a little after) he says: In this the Children of
God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, etc. Afterward, thus: For this is the love of
God, that we keep His Commandments: and His Commandments [i. e. the keeping of
his Commandments] is not grievous 1 John 5. 3.
; viz. to him that loves God, i. e. to a Saint, or true Believer: It
follows: For whosoever is borne of God, overcommeth the World: and this is
the victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Who is he that
overcomes the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? From
these passages (with many others of like import, which might have been added
from the same Apostle) it is fully evident, that there is a pregnant, strong,
triumphing propension in all true Believers, to walk holily, and to live
righteously: so that to refrain sinning (sinning I mean, as before,
customarily, and against conscience, which kind of Sin only is exclusive from
the love, and Kingdom of God) is no such great mastery, no such matter of
difficulty, unto such Men: and that when they are overcome, and fall into such
Sins, it is through a mere voluntary neglect of stiring up the Grace of God
that is in them, and of maintaining that holy Principle we speak of in strength
and vigor, by such means, as God most graciously and indulgently vouchsafes
unto them in abundance, for such a purpose. And thus we see, all things
unpartially weighed and debated to and fro, that the Doctrine, which supposes
a possibility of the Saints final declining, is the Doctrine which is
according to godliness, and the corrivall of it, an enemy thereunto.

That Doctrine, whose genuine and proper tendency is to advance the peace and.
36. Argum. 7.
joy of the Saints in believing, is of a natural sympathy with the Gospel,
and upon this account, a truth. Such is the Doctrine, which informs the
Saints of a possibility of their total and final falling away. Ergo. Our
adversaries themselves in the cause depending, will not (I presume) regret the
granting of the former proposition; the truth of it being a truth so near at
hand. The Minor has received confirmation in abundance, from what was argued
and evinced in the 9th. Chapter: where we demonstratively proved, that the
Doctrine we now assert, is of the most healthful, and sound constitution to
make a Nurse for the peace and joy, and comforts of the Saints: whereas that
which is opposite to it, is but of a melancholique and sad complexion, in
comparison. The ground we built our Demonstration upon, was this: That Doctrine
which is of the most encouraging, quickening, and strengthening import to the
Spirit and Grace of God in Men, on the one hand, and most crucifying and
destructive to the flesh on the other hand, must needs be a Doctrine of the
best and choycest accommodation for the Peace and Comfort of Believers. The
reason hereof, is, because the Peace, Joy, and Comfort of Believers, do, if
not wholly, yet in a very great measure, depend upon the fruits of the Spirit,
and the testimony of their Consciences concerning their loyalty and
faithfulness unto God, in doing His will, keeping His Commandments, refraining
all false ways (as David speaks) abstaining from the works of the flesh,
etc. As on the contrary, that Root of bitterness in the Saints, from which
fears and doubtings, perplexities, agonies, and consternations of soul
spring, is the flesh, when, for want of a sharp bridle still kept in the jaws
or lips of it, it breaks out, becomes unruly, and magnifies it self against
God, and His Laws. These things we prosecuted more at large in the fore named
Chapter: where likewise we proved, above all reasonable contradiction, that the
sense of those, who assert a possibility of the Saints drawing back even to
perdition, is a Doctrine of a very rich sympathy with the Spirit, or regenerate
part in Men, of an excellent and high animation unto it, and on the contrary, a
Doctrine morrally inspired against the flesh, with all the lusts and ways
hereof. Here also we gave an answer in full unto those, who are wont to object
and pretend, that the best and holiest persons more generally cleave in their
judgments to the Doctrine of absolute Perseverance* as on the other hand, that
persons more carnally and loosely disposed, more generally take up that, which
is contrary unto it. So that we shall not need to add in this place any thing
further to give weight, or strength, to the Argument in hand, unless it be to
certify the Reader, that since the publishing and clearing the Doctrine now
asserted, some very godly and seriously Religious persons, have with their
whole Hearts blessed God for it. We proceed to another Argument.

That Doctrine which evacuates, and turns into weakness and folly all that.
37. Argum. 8.
gracious counsel of the Holy Ghost, which consists, partly in that diligent
information, which he gives unto the Saints from place to place, concerning the
hostile, cruel and bloody mind and intentions of Satan against them, partly
in detecting, and making known all his subtle stratagems, his Plots, Methods,
and dangerous machinations against them, partly also in furnishing them with
spiritual weapons of all sorts, whereby they may be able to grapple with him
notwithstanding, and gloriously to triumph over him; partly again in those
frequent Admonitions, Exhortations, Encouragements to quit themselves like Men
in resisting him, and making good their ground against him, which are found in
the Scriptures; and lastly, in professing his fear lest Satan should
circumvent and deceive them; that Doctrine (I say) which reflects disparagement
and vanity upon all these most serious and gracious applications of the Holy
Ghost unto the Saints, must needs be a Doctrine of vanity and error: and
consequently, that which opposes it, by like necessity, a truth. But such is
the common Doctrine of absolute and infallible Perseverance. Ergo.

The Major in this Argument is greater then exception. For doubtless no
Doctrine, which is of an undervaluing import, either to the Grace, or Wisdom,
of the Holy Ghost in any Scripture transaction, can be Evangelicall, or
consistent with truth. The Minor likewise is evident upon this account. All
those actions, or transactions, ascribed to the Holy Ghost in the Major
Proposition, as viz. his discovering and detecting unto the Saints the hostile
Spirit and machinations of Satan against them, his furnishing them with
spiritual weapons to conflict with him, and fight against him, etc. are in
several places of Scripture plainly reported, and attributed unto him,
particularly in these: Jam. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Ephesians. 6. 11. 12, etc. 2. Cor.
11. 3. 14. and 2. 11. Mat. 12. 43, 44, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 7. 5.
(not to mention many others.) Now if the Saints be in no possibility of being
finally overcome by Satan, or of miscarrying in the great and most important
business of their Salvation, by his snares and subtilties, all that
operousnesse and diligence of the Holy Ghost in those late-mentioned
addressements of his unto them, in order to their final conquest over Satan,
will be found of very light consequence, of little concernment to them. Yea, if
the said addressements of the Holy Ghost, be compared with the state and
condition of the Saints, as the said Doctrine of Perseverance represents and
affirms it to be, and be digested or formed into an hypotyposis accordingly,
the utter uselessenesse and impertinency of them, will yet much more evidently
appear. Suppose we then the Holy Ghost should speak thus unto the Saints: O
you that truly believe, who, by virtue of the Promise of that God that cannot
lie, are fully persuaded and possessed, that you shall be kept by God by His
irresistible Grace, in true faith until death, so that though Satan shall set
all his wits on work, and by all his stratagems, snares, and cunning devices,
seek to destroy you; yea though he should entice you away from God by the
allurements of the World, and entangle you with them again, yea and should
cause you to run, and rush headlong, against the light of your own judgments
and consciences, into all manner of horrid sins, and abominations, yet shall
all his attempts and assaults upon you in every kind, be in vain; you shall
be in never the more danger, or possibility of perishing; unto you, I say,
attend and consider, how sore and dangerous a combat you are like to sustain:
for you are to wrast^e not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities
and Powers, the Governors of this World, and spiritual wickednesses; against
that old Serpent, the Devil, that great red Dragon, who was a murderer from
the beginning, and who still goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour, who will set himself with all his might to thrust you headlong
into all manner of sins, and so to separate between God and you for ever: and
truly I am afraid, lest, as the Serpent by his sub^ilty deceived Eve, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in Christ Jesus, lest
the Tempter should any ways tempt you, and my labor about you be in vain.
Therefore watch, pray, and resist him steadfast in the Faith: take unto you the
whole Armor of God, that you may be able to resist in an evil day, and having
done all things, stand fast: stand, having your loins girt with the girdle of
truth, and the Breast Plate of Righteousness upon you, etc. Would such an
Oration or speech as this, be any ways worthy the infinite Wisdom of the Holy
Ghost? Or is it not the part of a very weak and simple person, to admonish a
Man, and that in a most serious and solemn manner, of a danger threatening him,
or hanging over his head, and withal to instruct and teach him with a great
variety of Rules, Precepts, and Cautions, how to escape this danger, when as
both himself knows, and the person admonished likewise knows (and this with
the knowledge also of the Admonisher) that it is a thing altogether unpossible
that ever the danger should befall him, or the evil, against which he is so
solemnly cautioned, come upon him? Therefore they who make the Holy Ghost to
have part and fellowship in such weakness as this, are most insufferably
injurious unto him.

And whereas they still plead (or pretend rather) that such admonitions,. 38.
as those lately specified, may well stand with an unconditioned promise of
Perseverance, we have formerly showed See from Sect 4. of this Chapter, to the
end of Sect. 16.
, that they are not able to make good this Plea, nor to give any reasonable
account of it. Whereas they add, that their Sense or Opinion is not, that it
is a thing absolutely, or every ways impossible for true Believers to fall
away totally, or finally, from their Faith; but that they willingly grant, that
even true Believers, what through their own weakness, and what through the
subtle baits and temptations of Satan, may so fall away, etc. I answer, that
this is but a Fig-leafe sought out to cover the nakedness of their Opinion,
which has no strength at all, nor wear, in it. For what though it were in a
thousand other respects never so possible for true Believers to perish; yet if
it be altogether unpossible in such a respect, which over rules all those
other, and which will, and of necessity must, hinder the coming of it to pass,
all those other notwithstanding, it is to be judged simply and absolutely,
impossible: and all those respects, wherein it is pretended possible, are not
to be brought into account, in such a case. The Rule in the Civil Law (and in
Reason) is: Omnia invalida nihilo sunt aequiparanda: i. e. All things, which
[together] are invalid, are to be judged as none at all. Yea, the Scripture it
self, when it speaks of any thing, which God has promised, or engaged
Himself to bring to pass, though there be never so many second causes, and
these never so potent in their kind, to oppose it, it nullifies the validity
of all these, and asserts the certain futurity of the effect, upon such
terms, as if in no respect whatsoever it were impossible, or obnoxious to a
non being, or non-comming to pass. If God BE FOR US (says Paul) who can be
against us a? clearly b Romans 8. 31.
implying, that no enmity, no opposition, or interposition of things, or
persons, whatsoever, against our Comfort and Peace, are of any consideration at
all, when we have the Power of God engaged for our security. And is there not
altogether the same reason of the Perseverance of the Saints, in case God has
made an absolute Promise hereof unto them? Or is it reasonable, or any ways
considerable, to say, that in this respect, or in that respect, or in a third
respect, they may possibly not Persevere, in case it be supposed that God has
absolutely, peremptorily, and irreversibly, against all possible Interveniences
whatsoever, Decreed their Perseverance?

Whereas some pretend, that Christ Himself was tempted, who yet. 39.
was in no danger of sinning, or of perishing; the answer is, that this indeed
is a truth, but palpably irrelative to the cause in hand. It would have
paralleled, in case the Holy Ghost should have applied Himself unto Christ in
such admonitions, detections of Satan's malice and methods against him,
exhortations to be watchful, to pray, to stand fast, and resist him, with
professing himself afraid lest Satan should circumvent him, etc. as those,
wherein we heard he addresseth himself unto Believers; but there being no such
applications as these made unto him by the Holy Ghost, the case is altogether
different. It is true, Christ, as Man, was subject to the whole Law of God, and
to every branch and particular Precept thereof, so far as it concerned him, i.
e. so far as it concerned Men, considered simply as Men, or as righteous and
good Men: but as it relates unto Men, considered as subject to moral
weaknesses and infirmities, or as in a capacity of being overgrown and
overcome with sinful corruptions, and so liable unto perishing, he was not in
subjection to it. Nevertheless it is not to be denied, but that even Christ
Himself considered simply as Man, had upon him the image and superscription of
a Creature or finite Being, I mean, mutability; yet so, that all potentiality
in him in this kind was abundantly balanced, over-balanced, by the
hypostaticall union, and the unmeasureablenesse of that Grace, which flowed
from this Spring, upon, and into his humanity; by means whereof, there is an
impossibility, though neither merely Logical or Natural, nor yet merely
Moral, but compounded, and (as it were) mixed of both (such as has no place
in the condition of any mere Creature, whatsoever) that he should be actually
changed to the days of eternity. So that in respect of the personal union
with the Godhead, even Christ-man, is to be looked upon as simply and
absolutely unchangeable (a Prerogative Royal, wherein neither Saints, no^
Angels, have part with him.) And because of such an unchangeablenesse in him,
though otherwise he was a subject capable enough of being tempted, yet was he
not a person meet to be entreated, or dealt with, by the Holy Ghost, upon those
terms of Admonitions, Cautions, Exhortations unto Watchfulness, Constancy, or
standing fast, Informations of danger threatening him, in case he should not
quit himself worthily, etc. wherein he frequently turns himself unto the
Saints and true Believers (as we heard.)

Nor is that necessity of doing Righteousness, and Obeying God, which. 40.
rested upon the Will of Christ by the means aforesaid, any whit prejudicial
to the merit, or rewardableness, of what he did and suffered in the flesh;
though it be most true, that any such necessity, which should cause the wills
of Men (other Men) necessitatingly, or unavoydably to act righteously, would be
destructive to the rewardableness of what they should act upon such terms. The
reason of the difference, is, because, in case any such necessity of well
doing, should come upon, or be found in the wills of mere Men, they must
necessarily be passive herein, in as much as they have no Native or inward
Principle of their own, whereby to contract, or induce any such necessity upon
themselves: and what Men are necessitated to do in a Passive way, wants the
ratio formalis, the essential property of what is rewardable, either by the
rules of Wisdom, or Justice. See more upon this account, Sect. 19. of this
Chapter. But that necessity, which rested in, or upon the Will of Christ, of
doing righteously, (though it was not a mere logical or irresistible
necessity neither, as was lately intimated) but such as it was, it was
contracted by himself, and that voluntarily and freely, the Godhead or the
Divine Nature, personally united with the humane, (which was as much, as
properly, as essentially Christ, as the humane Nature it self, in this union)
voluntarily and freely deriving unto the humane, so united unto it, such a
fullness of Grace, Holiness, and Goodness, from which that necessity we spoke
of, of well-doing, in a way of a genuine and kindly result, arose upon him, and
abides with him for ever. No mere Creature having the like opportunity, or
means; of vesting the like necessity of well doing in it self, it follows
upon a very fair account, that in case it were, or could be, supposed that
they (mere Creatures I mean) were unavoydably necessitated to do well, such
doings of theirs should be incapable of reward; although it be otherwise in the
case of Jesus Christ, and of that unparallelable necessity of well doing, which
was found in him. I shall only add one Argument more: and therewith conclude
this Chapter.

That Doctrine, which naturally and directly tends to beget, and foment. 41.
Argum. 9.
jealousies, and evil surmises between Brethren in Christ, or such as ought
cordially to Love, Reverence, and Honor, one another, is not confederate with
the Gospel, nor from God: and consequently, that which contradicts it, must
needs be a Truth. The common Doctrine of unquestionable and unconditioned
Perseverance is a Doctrine of this tendency; apt to beget and foment
jealousies, suspicions, and evil surmises between Brethren, or such as ought
to love and respect one the other, as Brethren in Christ, etc. Ergo. The Major
in this Argument, will (I suppose) meet with no adversary: and therefore needs
no second. The Minor stands firm and strong upon this foundation. That
Doctrine which teaches and persuades me to judge the Faith and love of those,
whom I ought cordially to love and honor as Saints, and Brethren in Christ, to
be no better, then the Faith and love of Hypocrites, Dissemblers, formal
Professors, etc. directly tends to beget jealousies, and evil surmises in me
against them, and is of the same tendency to occasion them to measure back
again the same measure toward me. The common Doctrine of peremptory
Perseverance thus teaches, and persuades, both me and them. Ergo. The Major
here also fears no contradiction, and so craves no assistance. The reason of
the Minor is; because I cannot reasonably judge either the Faith, or love of
those, whom I stand most bound by the Law of Christ, to Love, Reverence, and
Honor, as Saints, and Brethren, to be better, greater, or more sincere, then
sometimes I judged, or at least ought to have judged, that Faith and Love of
those, to have been, whom the Doctrine we speak of, teaches me to judge to
have been Hypocrites and false-hearted, even then, when their Faith and love
were at the best. For the very truth is, that amongst all the Professors of
Christian Religion, that are at present any ways known unto me (and I make no
question but that every other Christian of any considerable standing in the
World, may with a good conscience profess the like of himself) there is not
any one, who I can reasonably judge to be either more sound in Faith, or
sincere in love, both toward God, and Men, then I sometimes judged, and that
upon competent grounds, yea the best that either I then was, or yet am, capable
of, some others to have been, whom now I know to be wretched Apostates, and to
have given up themselves to work all filthiness, and that with greediness.
Therefore if upon, or because of, their Apostasy, I stand bound to judge them
to have been in the best of their spiritual standings, no better then
Hypocrites; it is unpossible but that I should be jealous and suspicious at
least, lest the best and greatest Professors of Christ that are known to me in
all the World, should be no better then Hypocrites also, notwithstanding any
account or satisfaction they give, or possibly can give unto me, of their
sincerity.

If it be replied, that even that Doctrine which I teach, in opposition to that
other, has a like tendency to create and nourish amongst the Saints
reciprocally, if not the same jealousies and evil surmises, which have been
charged upon the other, yet others every whit as bad, or however, not much
better then they; in as much as this Doctrine it self, teaches Saints to
look one upon another, as those that may Apostatize, and turn enemies unto
Christ and the Gospel. And is not such a jealousy as this concerning any
person, every whit as Unchristian, hard, or uncharitable, as to look upon him
as a possible Hypocrite? To this I answer;

That a jealousy or suspicion of a present vileness, or unworthiness in a
Man, especially when he that is suspicious, has all the best grounds that can
be given why he should not be suspicious in this kind, is a far worse and more
Unchristian jealousy and suspicion, then that which is conceived against a Man
touching any future unworthiness, that only possibly may be found in him. The
Doctrine which teaches a possibility only of a total and final defection in
the Saints, does not invite, or occasion any Man, to judge concerning any Saint
or true Believer; that he will, or that he is likely so to fall, but only that
it is possible for him so to fall. Nor is such a judgment, or thought as this,
concerning any Man, yea or Creature whatsoever, any jealousy or suspicion at
all concerning him, nor has it any thing reflective, or disparaging in it, to
the Worth, Honor, or Repute of that Creature, how great and worthy soever he
be, concerning whom it is conceived; it being no disparagement at all, no not
to the first borne of Creatures, I mean to the Angels themselves, not to
partake, or not to be thought to partake, in any incommunicable property of
God, such as his unchangeablenesse is. To look upon a Saint, or a true
Believer, as one who may possibly Apostatize, is but to look upon him as being
a Creature, and not God: nor would such an eye as this offend the greatest
Angel in Heaven, considering that he never gave, nor is capable of giving, any
competent ground or reason unto any Man to look upon him with any other. But to
look upon a Saint, or true Believer, especially when he has given all the
Christian satisfaction that reasonably can be desired, or expected, of his
uprightness and sincerity, as one, that for ought we can tell, or have any
sufficient ground to judge the contrary, may be an Hypocrite, and rotten at the
core, is an high strain of Unchristian unworthiness, and what reason it
self, competently informed, cannot lightly but abhor.

The Premises concerning the subject yet in hand (the Doctrine of
Perseverance) duly considered, it fully appears, that that Doctrine, which for
these many years last past has magnified it self in the Tongues and Pens of
Men, not only or simply for a Truth, but with many great Elogiums, and titles
of Sovereign dignity, as that it is a fundamental Article of the Reformed
Religion, one of the principal Points or Heads of Christian Religion, wherein
the Reformed Churches have purged themselves from the Errors of Popery, that it
is the foundation of all true assurance of Salvation, without which true Faith
it self cannot stand; that it contains that Promise of God, which all Ministers
of the Gospel stand bound to commend, and inculcate with all diligence into all
true Believers for their comfort, with many such like studied and strained-for
commendations; this Doctrine (I say) in whose praises the Friends of it have
risen up so early, and lifted it up so near unto the Heavens; as has been
showed, upon a strict and unpartial enquiry and examination, has been found a
mere Impostor, an appearance of Satan in the likeness of an Angel of Light, a
Tenent which cannot stand in Judgment with the sound and wholesome Doctrines of
the Gospel. We shall further (God willing) show unto you, in how little request
the said Doctrine of Perseverance was with those, who are to this day counted
Pillars of the Christian Faith in the Primitive and most exemplary times; and
likewise how unstable and uncertain, if not unsatisfied also, the greatest
Friends, and learned Abettors of it in latter times, (or at least those, who
are commonly taken for such,) have been in their Judgments about it. In the
interim we shall only, in order to the further clearing up of the truth
against the mist of the said Doctrine, give you a brief account from the
Scriptures themselves of some Examples, who with their own Declinings sealed
the truth of that Doctrine, which has been maintained hitherto, concerning the
possibility of a total Declining in the Saints.

CHAP. XIV.
Exhibiting from the Scriptures some Instances, of a Total Declining, or
Falling away, from the Grace and Favor of God, in true Believers.

THe Contents and undertaking of this Chapter, is a surplussage, or
overmeasure. 1.
to the Demonstration of the Doctrine under defense. For to prove a possibility
that true Believers may totally fall away, it is not necessary to prove, either
that any such will so fall away: this would be a very pr^sumptuous engagement:
nor that any such are wont to fall away, though this be extremely probable, and
a borderer to that which is evident and unquestionable: nor yet that any have
actually and de facto so fallen away, which is our present engagement; but
only to evince the truth of such Grounds and Reasons, whether from the
Scriptures, or from the nature and consideration of the things themselves, from
which* being granted, the said Possibility perfectly appears, and becomes
visible to the eyes of the judgments and understandings of men. Nevertheless,
since the eviction of this assertion, that some, formerly Saints and true
Believers, have de facto totally fallen away, is so pregnant a Proof of the
Possibility that such may so fall away, I judged it both worth my labor, and
the Readers consideration, to present what the Scriptures hold forth upon that
account.

Let us first insist upon the Example of David; concerning whom no man (I
presume) questioneth, but that He was as true and real a Saint and Believer,
before the Perpetration of those two horrid sins, one upon the neck of another,
Murder, and Adultery, as He was after His Repentance of, or for, those
Perpetrations. For, 1. that signal testimony of being a man according to Gods
own Heart, was given unto Him by God Himself, before He committed these sins,
as appears from Acts 13. 22. compared with Psalm. 89. 20. 1 King. 14. 8. In the
first of these places it is said: And after He had taken Him away, He raised up
David to be their King, of whom He witnessed, saying, I have sound David the
son of Jesse, a man after mine own Heart, which will do all things that I will.
This, with the other places mentioned, clearly speak of the frame and temper of
David's Heart, and of the acceptableness of His Person unto God, at the time of
His anointing, and investiture into the Kingdom: whereas it is evident that the
two great sins specified were committed by Him many years after he had been
King. Besides, there are many pregnant Arguments in the Scripture, of David's
integrity and uprightness before God, before that great eclipse of the glory of
them, whereof we spoke. But we shall not need to insist upon any thing in this
kind: our Adversaries themselves, in the cause depending, generally acknowledge
him to have bin a man truly godly and regenerate, before the guilt of the two
enormous sins mentioned clav^ unto Him. The Question is, Whether He continued
such, truly Godly, under the guilt of the said sins, viz. from the time of the
Perpetration of them, until the time of His Repentance: They affirm, I deny;
and give this account of my Denial in opposition to their Affirmation.

He that commits Murder and Adultery, not only against the clear light of
His. 2.
Conscience, but with del^beration and premeditated contrivance, and remains
under the pollution and guilt of these sins without Repentance, is not a man
truly godly, or accepted with God. But this was David's case: He committed
Murder and Adultery, not only against the light of His Conscience, but etc.
Ergo. The Minor Proposition is in all points evident from the Tenor of the
story laid down Chap. 11, and 12, of the second of Samuel: where the Holy Ghost
very particularly and at large reports the manner and method of David's
actings and behaviors, in order to the committing of the said sins. But this
Proposition (I conceive) has so much light of truth shining upon it from the
Scriptures, that they who deny the Conclusion, will not deny it.

For the Major; this has been sufficiently argued and proved in the former
Chapter, in our traverse of the fifth Argument, there propounded to prove a
Possibility of a total defection in the Saints, Sect. 20* 21, etc. where
likewise all the Pleas of exception, commonly made against it, were largely
debated, and answered to the full. I shall here only add this brief Argument
for the further confirmation of it. Whosoever is truly godly, has by Grace and
Promise from God, a Right and Title to the Kingdom of God. This Proposition is
current Doctrine amongst our Adversaries. Therefore I assume: But whosoever
commits Murder and Adultery, and this against the light of Conscience, with
deliberation and premeditated contrivance, and remains impenitent under the
guilt of such commissions, during such His impenitency, has no Right or Title
to the Kingdom of God. Ergo. This is proved ex abundanti* from Gal. 5. 21. 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. (places formerly argued.) Touching the former, the Apostle,
after a large enumeration of the works of the flesh, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, -- Envyings, Murders, etc. subjoyns: of the which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that THAT WHICH DO SVCH THINGS,
SHALL NOT INHERIT THE KINGDOM O^ GOD. The other place is of the same import. So
likewise are the Passages Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. It seems this was a Doctrine
frequently incultated by the Apostle into the minds and consciences of such as
were Saints, (at least so judged and reputed by Him,) and therefore such, as we
ought to judge to have been none other. Now if those, who formerly had been
Saints, and in this capacity, Heirs of the Kingdom of God, should have retained
the same capacity, under the doing of the things mentioned, and before any
remorse of Soul, or Repentance for them, the Apostle could not, either with
reason, or truth, have pronounced this heavy doom against them, that they
should not inherit the Kingdom of God. So that David having done two of the
most notorious, and vile works of the flesh, in the Practice or Perpetration of
Murder, and Adultery, and that (as has been said) with circumstances of
greatest aggravation, doubtless for the time whilst He remained impenitent,
in, or under, the defilement of them, was obnoxious to that Law of Death, by
which the workers of iniquity, or of the works of the flesh, are sentenced with
the deprivation, or loss, of their Right and Title to the Kingdom of Heaven*
and consequently was not a godly person, or accepted with God. We have already
profaned all those lawless Sanctuaries, at which, Men, being pursued by the
Scriptures lately mentioned, are wont to take shelter, as, viz. 1. That the
said places are not to be understood as applicable unto the Saints, (they mean,
such as at any time have been Saints,) but unto natural or unregenerate men
only. 2. That Saints have an absolute Promise from God, that they shall never
totally lose their Faith. 3. That the Saints sin only out of infirmity, and
not premeditatedly, or with full consent: These Alledgments, with their
fellows, we have once and again in several places, upon occasion, clearly
detected to be of the spurious and ignoble race of shifts and evasions, fought
out by men for the gratification and relief of Error, and to obstruct the Truth
in the course of it, that it might not run, and be glorified.

But some object, that David prayed unto God, during his impenitency. 3.
under the said sins; and that this is a sufficient proof, that He was all the
while a Person truly Godly, and endued with Justifying Faith. I answer;

1. It no where appears that David did pray unto God, during the term of His
impenitency, or until Nathan the Prophet came unto Him, to awaken His
Conscience unto a consideration of them. The 51 Psalm, which is indeed
Precatory and Penitentiary, is, in the Title, said to have been made by David,
when Nathan the Prophet came unto Him, (i. e. upon his coming unto Him,) after
He had gone in to Bathsheba. Which implies, that David was now in a Posture of
Repentance, when He conceived the Prayer expressed in this Psalm.

2. Neither from one act of Prayer, nor from many, can the truth or soundness
of any man's Faith be concluded. Our Savior Himself supposes that Hypocrites
pray, and that often Matthew. 6. 5
: Yea, and that the Scribes and Pharisees were wont to make long Prayers Mat.
23. 14
; and affirms, that they were liable to the greater damnation, upon the
account of these Prayers, in respect of the wicked ends intended in them. Yea,
men may pray unto God with some degree, or kind, of acceptance with Him,
whilst they are yet but unregenerate men, as some of our Adversaries
themselves, more considering then their fellows, do acknowledge. Nor does that
of the Apostle, Without Faith it is unpossible to please God Heb. 11. 6
, any ways contradict it: of which place, we shall (I conceive) have occasion
to speak more at large hereafter.

3. It it yet further the Doctrine and sense of our Adversaries, That
Reprobates themselves may have, and many times have, some excellent gifts of
the Spirit conferred upon them; and, among others, the gift of Prayer it self.
So that were it granted, or could it be proved, that David, under His
impenitency for His crying sins, did pray, or was wont to pray, unto God, it
cannot be inferred from hence, that therefore He was not in an estate of
Reprobation, or destitute of the saving Grace, or Favor of God. It is not
necessary, that He that totally falls away from saving Faith, should be,
especially on the sudden, divested or dispossessed of any, much less of all, such
gifts of the Holy Ghost, which are consistent with an estate of Reprobation or
Unregeneracy.

4. If David was a true Believer during the time of His wallowing in the mire
of those two foul crimes (often* mentioned) then was not His washing by
Repentance, necessary to His Salvation. The reason is, because true Faith
gives a sufficient Right and Title to Salvation* and it is the main stream and
current of the Gospel, that Whosoever believes, shall be saved. But if David's
washing by Repentance, was not necessary to His Salvation, how can the Holy
Ghost be justified in ranging Murderers and Whoremongers amongst those, who
shall have their part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death Rev. 21. 8.
? or in saying, that no unclean thing shall enter into it [the new Jerusalem,]
neither WHATSOEVER works abomination Verse 27.
? or, that without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers
Verse 15.
? etc. Certainly blood desileth a Person, as well as a Nation, or Land Number. 35.
33
, when it is unrighteously spilt in it, and makes as well the one, as the
other, unclean, until it be attoned. And for the sin of Adultery, it is
sufficiently known that the Holy Ghost presents it (almost) every where, as
polluting and defiling. So that David, during His impenitency aforesaid, was
cut off from all right of entering into the new Jerusalem, both by the general
irregularity of uncleanness, as also by the particular incapacities of Murder,
and Adultery.

5. If David were a true Believer, during the time of His departure, and. 4.
absence, from God, then may the testimony of former and bypast works of
righteousness be accepted by way of proof, for the truth and soundness of any
man's Faith, against the testimony of later, and more-present fruits of
unrighteousness, against it. If so, then, 1. No man, that has approved himself
a good Christian formerly, ought upon any change whatsoever, upon the most
Unchristian miscarriages that can be imagined, to be judged an Apostate from
Christ, or consequently, be, upon any justifiable grounds, cast out, by the
sentence of Excommunication, from any Church of Christ whatsoever. Which
supposed, No Church, duly and regularly deporting it self in the admission of
Members, are in any capacity of using the said spiritual Sword, in any case, or
upon any occasion whatsoever. For certain it is, that no person, who either is,
or ought to be judged by the Church, a true Member of Christ, ought, by this
Church, to be cut off from his Body, or to be delivered unto Satan: and as
certain it is, that no person ought to receive admission into any Church, which
is not looked upon by this Church as a true Member of Christ. 2. The said
Position admitted for truth, whereas the Apostle James demands, What does it
profit, my Brethren, though a man say He has Faith, and HAVE not Works James
2. 14.
, He might as well (or rather) have said, and has not had works? For, by the
Tenor of the said Doctrine, though a man wants present works, or works of a
later edition or performance, whereby to show or manifest the truth of his
Faith unto men, yea, though his later works give never so pregnant or loud a
testimony against the truth of his Faith, yet if he can but say, and make
proof, that formerly* though never so long before, he has been fruitful in
well doing, this must be looked upon as sufficiently demonstrative of his
Faith. Which is notoriously contrary to the manifest bent and scope of the
Apostles discourse in that place. 3. If the case were so, that men's former
works, if good, must be heard against their later works, though never so bad,
there is no place or possibility left, either for Hypocrisy, or Apostasy,
amongst men, especially not for this latter. For no man is to be judged an
Apostate, but He that declines from the Faith of Jesus Christ, which sometimes
He professed, and gave sufficient ground unto men by his works, to conceive and
judge that He really was possessed of, and held. So then if such a man's former
good works, be still to be judged valid in their testimony concerning the
goodness of his Faith, how evil and vile soever his after-works shall be,
evident it is that such a man ought not to be esteemed an Apostate, but a
Perseverer in the Faith, though his ways and actions should degenerate into the
highest strain of wickedness, or ungodliness, that can be imagined. 4. (And
lastly, for this) that Passage from God Himself by His Prophet Ezekiel,
(formerly opened,) But when the righteous turns away from His righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall He live? All His righteousness that He has done shall
not be mentioned: in His TRESPASS that He has trespassed, and in His SIN that
He has sinned, in them shall He dye Ezekiel. 18. 24
; this passage (I say) plainly evinceth, that the estimate, which is to be made
of men in point of righteousness, and unrighteousness, and consequently, of
Faith, and Unbelief, is not to be made by the import, or rule, of their former
works, but of their latter; no not though the former have been many, and the
latter, but few. For the Text says, In His Trespass (in the singular number)
that He has trespassed, -- shall He dye; implying, that any one sin, of that
kind of sins, which the Scripture calls, abominations, whilst unrepented of,
translateth him from life unto death, casts Him into the state and condition
of an Unbeleever.

6. (And lastly) If David's Repentance, after the Perpetration of the foul and
horrid sins mentioned, was not simply necessary to His Salvation, (and
consequently, Himself, during His impenitency, a man of death,) Gods sending
His Prophet Nathan unto Him to awaken Him, and raise Him up by Repentance, will
be found to have little Grace, Love, or Mercy in it, or at least far less, then
such a necessity of His Repentance supposed, would derive upon it. Evident it
is from the Tenor of the Message, which the Prophet brought from God unto Him,
that His Repentance did not exempt Him from Temporal Judgments. Wherefore have
thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in His sight? Thou have
killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy
wife, and have slain Him with the sword of the children of Ammon. Now therefore
the Sword shall never depart from thine House. -- Thus says the Lord, Behold,
I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own House, and I will take thy
Wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbor, and He shall lie with
thy Wives in the sight of this Sun. For thou did it secretly: but I will do
this thing before Israel, and before the Sun 2 Samuel 12 9, 10, etc.
. From whence, together with the event every ways answering (as the process of
David's History makes manifest) it is clear, that David's Repentance did not
sanctuary Him from troubles in the flesh, and outer man; no not from such,
which were very sore, and grievous to be suffered. Nor can it be said that it
did deliver Him from the wrath which is to come, in case it be supposed that He
was a true Believer immediately before, and at, the time of His Repentance:
because, this supposed, He was not liable unto this wrath, nor in danger of
suffering it: in which case, His Deliverance from it, is to be ascribed, not to
His present Repentance, but to His precedent Faith.

Nor can it be said, that Gods sending Nathan unto David upon such. 5.
terms of Grace, as have been mentioned, argues any Election from Eternity of
David, personally or particularly considered, though it be true, that He does
not vouchsafe the like terms of Grace, or means of Repentance, unto all other
sinners. Because, 1. If David was a true Believer, and so in an estate of
Grace, when Nathan came unto Him, He was under the wing of Election, and in the
way of Life and Salvation: and consequently His sending to Him by God, did
neither argue pro, or con, such His Election. 2. There might be some equitable
consideration on David's behalf, though not known unto us, on which God might
ground a Dispensation of more Grace and Mercy toward Him, then toward other
sinners, in whom the like consideration is not to be found. For though we
affirm and hold, that Reasons in the general may be given, even by men, to
evince an equitableness, or reasonableness, in all the ways of God, yet we do
not say but that there are many special and particular Reasons of His actions
and ways, which are known only to Himself, and are not assignable by men. That
God dealt equitably by David in vouchsafing unto Him those signal means of
Repentance, which He did; and that He deals as equitably by such sinners, to
whom He denies the like means, may be clearly proved from the nature and
import of that Great Attribute of His, which the Scripture calls (...) 1 Pet.
1. 17
, or a non-acceptation of Persons, as likewise from that equality in all His
ways, which the Scripture with no less evidence asserteth Ezekiel. 18. 25 29.
. But why, or how, it should be equitable in Him, to make such a difference
between David, and many other sinners, between whom notwithstanding He makes
it, may very possibly be indemonstrable by men: because all the qualifying
circumstances on David's side, or of David's sins, are not known unto men, as
they are unto God: neither are all the aggravating circumstances of the sins of
other sinners known unto them, as they are also unto Him. Which considered,
evident it is, that God may have, yea and questionless has, equitable and
reasonable grounds, and these in, or from, the Persons themselves, and their
ways, between whom He makes any such difference, as that now in discourse,
though these be investigable, or past finding out by men. And why God should
not give a reason, or account, [ i. e. a special or particular account] of any
of His matters (as Elihu speaks Job 33. 13
,) the reason is so near at hand, that I shall not need to bring it any whit
nearer by naming it, or by insisting upon it.

3. (And lastly) in case there should be found any other sinner whatsoever,
like unto David in all circumstances relating unto sin, and righteousness, it
is little questionable, but that, in like case of guilt and present
impenitency, means of like grace and efficacy (though not literally, or
formally the same) in order to his Repentance, would be vouchsafed unto him,
which were granted unto David.

A second Old Testament instance of a total recidivation from Grace, or. 6.
true Faith, we find in Solomon. That Solomon before His fall by Idolatry, and
other sinful miscarriages (of which more presently) was a true Believer, a
regenerate man, a son of God, is the constant Opinion of those that teach an
impossibility of a total falling away from Grace: I do not know any one of them
otherwise-minded. However, His Writings being so full of Heavenly Wisdom and
Knowledge, as they are on all hands confessed to be, give a liberal testimony
unto their Author, that He was a man truly fearing God, and held communion with
Him. And Nehemiah, speaking of Solomon, says, that among many Nations there
was no King like unto Him: for He was BELOVED OF HIS GOD Neh. 13. 26
, etc. Other Proofs and Arguments there are demonstrative enough of the truth
and soundness of Solomon's Faith, before those sad and high misdemeanors of His
reported in the Scriptures: but seeing we have confitentes Reos, the Confession
of our Adversaries themselves in the Point, we shall make no further labor of
the proof of it.

Again, that Solomon sinned at a very high rate of wickedness and provocation,
is nothing but what the same Persons freely enough acknowledge. And in the Synod
of Dort it self a Prime Member thereof publicly said, that Solomon practiced
in sin and wickedness, whatsoever the lust and licentiousness of a King could
stretch themselves unto Solomo, quicquid per regiam libidinem and licentiam
perpetrari potuit, commisit. ^. Deodat of Geneva.
. The sad History of His wickedness, is drawn up by the Holy Ghost Himself, 1
King. 11. 1, 2, 3, etc. where, having reported His disobedience to the Law of
God, by which the Israelites were prohibited to marry with the Daughters of a
strange God, in taking unto him no fewer then seven Hundred Wives, and three
Hundred Concubines, of the women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, etc. and
withal, the several abominable Idolatries, wherewith he came to be polluted
hereby, he adds, that His Heart was not perfect with the Lord His God, as was
the Heart of David His Father: that He did that which was evil in the sight of
the Lord: that He went not fully after the Lord, as did David His Father: that
the Lord was angry with Him, because His Heart was turned from the Lord God of
Israel, etc. I am no enemy to their Opinion, who affirm that Solomon returned
back again to the Lord God of Israel by way of Repentance: but assuredly during
all that wallowing in the mire mentioned, under the pollution and guilt of all
those abominations charged by the Holy Ghost upon him, his back was toward
him, and his person under the dint of that heavy doom, which is denounced
against Idolaters, and all that work abomination, viz. exclusion from the
Kingdom of God, (as has been largely showed already.) The nakedness of such
allegations and washy pretenses, which are commonly laid hold on to make
Solomon a true Believer, and son of God, during his most dreadful Apostasy from
him (lately described) has been detected, both in the last preceding Chapter,
as likewise in the late examination of David's case. So that we may without fear
of the least breach of charity, or of judging any unrighteous judgment,
conclude, that Solomon, whilst His Heart was turned away from the Lord God of
Israel to walk after other Gods, as after Chemosh, the abomination of Moab,
after Molech and Milcom, the abominations of the children of Ammon, after
Ashtoreh, the Goddess of the Zidonians, etc. and during his obduration and
impenitency, in these horrid ways and practices, was an enemy unto God, and God
unto him, and the former relation between them of Father and Son* wholly
dissolved. They that hold, or teach otherwise, both represent God altogether
unlike unto himself, rendering him a most unworthy Accepter of Persons, and
besides cut the sinews of the credit and Authority of the Scriptures, which
still number Idolaters and workers of Iniquity amongst those who shall have no
inheritance in the Kingdom of God. But of these things enough formerly. Yet let
us hear what the Patrons of the Common Doctrine of Perseverance have to plead
for the life of Solomon's Faith, even whilst he walked in those ways of death,
whereof we heard so lately.

Solomon (say they) could not fall away totally from his Faith, nor from. 7.
the saving Love of God, because God had promised unto David his Father, that
he would be a Father unto Him [his Son Solomon,] and that he should be a Son
unto Him: and that His Mercy should not depart from Him; as He took it from
Saul 2 Samuel 7. 14 15.
. I answer:

1. Evident it is, that the Mercy, or kindness of God, here mentioned, was
vouchsafed by him, as well unto Saul, as unto Solomon. For his Promise is, that
he would not take away his mercy, or kindness, (as some translate) from the
latter, as he took it [ i. e. the same mercy] from the former, Saul. If then
the Mercy here spoken of, was the saving Mercy of God, out of which he
purposes to give Eternal Life, then Saul was Elect, and a child of God, and
yet fell totally and finally away, and had this Grace, or Mercy, of Election,
taken from Him. If it be a mercy, or kindness, of any other kind, the
infisting upon it is altogether irrelative to the business in hand.

2. When God faith, that His Mercy should not depart from Solomon, the meaning
clearly is, that God would not translate the Kingdom into another Family, or
Line, as he had transferred it from Saul and his house, but would continue it
in David's Line by Solomon. The words immediately following, make the face of
this interpretation to shine. And thine HOUSE, and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee: thy Throne shall be established for ever
Verse 16
.

3. And lastly, it appears from words spoken by David unto his Son Solomon a
little before his death, that he understood the mercy, or kindness, promised
unto Solomon, not of the saving Mercy of God, which, according to the sense of
our Opposers, is unremovable where ever it be once pitched, but of such a
Mercy, as has been declared. And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the God of
thy Father, and serve Him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing mind. For
the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek Him, He will be found of thee: but if thou forsake Him.
HE WILL CAST THEE OFF FOR EVER 1 Chro. 28. 9
. Therefore David himself did not apprehend any such Mercy to be entailed or
settled upon his Son Solomon by God, in the Promise mentioned, as our
Adversaries imagine.

Nor is that, which was thought upon by a great man in the Synod of Dort,. 8.
of any whit more value, to prove the standing of Solomon^ Faith, whilst
himself fell so foully (as we have heard.) It is the testimony, which Solomon
himself gives concerning himself, in these words: Also my wisdom remained with
me Eccles. 2, 9
. From hence this Author judged it a legitimate inference, that Solomon
remained sound in his Faith, whilst he halted right down, yea, and fell
desperately (as we have heard) before God. But (as the Proverb is) Similes
habent labra lactucas, like lips, like lattuces: such as this man's Cause is,
such is his Argument, or Plea for it. For what is there in the words cited, any
ways to justify Solomon's Faith, whilst himself fell into that fearful
Condemnation, which has often been declared? It is true, Wisdom sometimes in
Scripture signifies, the true, sound, and saving Knowledge of God, sometimes a
Religious frame of heart, inclining a man to a conscientious observation of all
the Laws and Precepts of God. But unless it could be proved, that it always is
found in one of these two significations, and never in any other, (which is a
task that would prove a reproach to any man's parts and learning, that should
undertake it,) it is no ways reasonable to put either of these upon it in the
place in hand. For there is nothing more clear, then that Solomon speaks here
of that wisdom, which (as he faith in the former Chapter, Verse. 13.) he gave
his heart to know, and which confisteth in the observation, experience, and
knowledge of the things that are done under Heaven; in which also ^he affirms
that there is much grief, and vexation of spirit, etc. Verse. 17, 18. which,
when he had attained, he declares, Chap. 2. that he fell to the practique part
of it, and gave himself to the procurement and enjoyment of the pleasures, and
all the contentments, that the world is able to afford unto men, and which men
generally seek after, according to the best of their understandings, and
opportunities otherwise. And having particularized several of his principal
enjoyments in this kind, Verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. he concludes from the said
Inventory, or Survey, Verse. 9. thus: So I was great, and increased more then
all that were before me in Jerusalem; adding, also my wisdom remained with me,
[in the Original, stood by me, or to me,] meaning, that he was very circumspect
and careful, not to destroy, maim, or prejudice, that Principle of Wisdom,
which he had traveled so long for, and by which he had raised himself to a far
greater estate, in honors, riches, pleasures and contentments in the World,
then any other man; careful (I say) he professes himself to have been, not to
endamage or prejudice this his wisdom, by those abundant pleasures and
delights, whereof he stood possessed, and which he freely enjoyed, as many are
apt to do upon such occasions, and by such means. Afterward, though he prefers
that wisdom, which he had spoken o^ hitherto, above folly, [i. e. above a
brutish and sottish ignorance of such things, which concern a man's interest of
Peace and Comfort in the World,] Cap. 2. 13. yet he acknowledges a Vanity in
this also, in as much as after a short and inconsiderable space of time, the
case and conditiof such a fool, will be every whit as good, as of a wise man.
Then I said in my heart, as it happens to the fool, so it happens even to
me: and why was I then mo^e wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also is
vanity. -- and how dies the wise man, as the fool! etc. So that by the wisdom,
which Solomon says remained with him, in the fullest enjoyment of the delights
and contentments of the world, is clearly meant, not a sacred, but a politic
or civil wisdom, which first he gave his heart to seek, and afterward, having
obtained it, improved, to the rendering of his condition in the world every
ways as desirable, as the materials of the world, under the best improvement,
would make it. And besides, evident it is from what has been said, and from
the carriage of the Context, both before, and after, (and indeed from the scope
and purport of the whole Book) that Solomon, in the place in hand, does not
speak* of his latter times, wherein he turned aside after Idols, and said to
the stock, or graven image, Deliver me: for thou art my God Isai. 44. 17
; wherein he heaped up strange women, Wives and Concubines, as before he had
done Wisdom, like the sand upon the sea sh^re innumerable; as if his meaning
were, that all the while he dishonored himself by serving the Devil in these
gross, brutish, and unmanlike courses, his Religious Wisdom, his sound and
saving Knowledge of the true God, remained with him: but of his middle, most
prosperous, and flourishing times, when he was to be seen in all his glory,
when (as himself said) the Lord had given him rest, or peace, on every side, so
that he had neither Adversary, nor evil occurrent 1 Kings 5. 4*
. And his meaning (as has been said) clearly is, that the great hear of all
this outward Prosperity did not dissolve the spirit or strength of that Wisdom,
which made his face to shine in eyes of all the Nations and Princes of the
World round about him: which Wisdom, did not so much, if at all, stand in the
devoutness of his Heart or Soul toward God, as in the knowledge of natural and
civil things; as it is described, 1 King. 4. from Verse. 29. to the end of the
Chapter. Concerning Idols, and Idolaters, the Father had said before, They that
make them, are like unto them, [i. e. as Mr J. Deodat himself, who is the man
that pretended to find Solomon's Faith alive in the words in hand, whilst
Solomon himself was dead in Baal, or in some of Baals Companions, interprets
it, stupid and blind, as the Idols themselves are,] and so is every one that
trusts in them Psalm. 115, 8
. Therefore (questionless) the Son, after his return from that folly, would not
have pleaded the standing of his wisdom by him, whilst He was an Idolater, and
Patron of Idols. But the truth is, that the words insisted upon are every ways
so inconsiderable in point of Proof, for the continuance of Solomon's Faith
during his continuance in his Idolatries, that the recourse made to them for
proof hereof, is an Argument to me very considerable, that the Patrons of that
Opinion are extremely straitened and put to it, through want of so much as any
tolerable Argument or Proof, for the maintaining of it. It is a sign that the
Soul is hungry indeed, when every bitter thing becomes sweet unto it.

Thus then we clearly find, that there is no special or particular ground, or
Argument at all, of any value, to prove, that either David the Father, during
his impenitency after the horrid crimes of Murder and Adultery perpetrated by
him, or that Solomon the Son, during the like impenitency in him upon his
Idolatrous backslidings, did retain any saving Principle of grace, or Faith, in
them; but that, during their respective impenitencies, they were children of
wrath, liable to the same sentence of Condemnation with the promiscuous
multitude, or generality of Murderers and Idolaters, for the Proof whereof
several pregnant Arguments have been levied from the Scriptures. As for such
Arguments and grounds, by which the certain Perseverance of the Saints (in
general) in the truth and soundness of their Faith, is commonly pleaded and
maintained, they have been formerly weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
and found too light. So that we may very safely conclude, that both David and
Solomon, were not only under a possibility of a total falling away from that
grace of God, wherein they sometimes stood, (which is common to all the
Saints,) but that they taught the World the truth and certainty of such a
Possibility, by reducing it into act, I mean by falling away totally from it.

Neither are Examples of the like sad Miscarriages wanting in the
New Testament.. 9.
The Apostle speaks of some in his days, who having put away a good Conscience,
concerning Faith, made shipwreck 1 Timothy 1, 19
thereby: and in another place, speaking of the dangerous Doctrine of Hymeneus
and Philetus, who taught that the Resurrection was already past, he says, that
they overthrew, or destroyed, the Faith of some 2 Timothy 2* 17
. Elsewhere, he speaks of some, who were then turned aside after Satan 1 Timothy
5, 15
. They who by putting away a good Conscience, make shipwreck of Faith, must
needs be supposed, 1. To have had true Faith. 2. To suffer an absolute or total
loss of it. For the first: If we shall suppose, that they, who put away a good
Conscience from them, had it, or were possessed of it, before such their
putting it away, we must suppose withal, that they had true saving Faith:
because goodness of Conscience cannot take place, but only where such a Faith
gives Being unto it: which in that respect is said to purify the heart Acts
15, 9
: as on the contrary, the very minds and consciences of Unbeleevers are said
to be defiled Tit. 1, 15
. Nor does the Scripture any where, to my best remembrance, speak of a good, or
pure, Conscience, but where the goodness of it is supposed to slow from a sound
knowledge of the Will of God, in conjunction with an upright desire of doing all
things according to the Tenor of the Truth known. The end of the Commandment
(says the Apostle, in this very Chapter) is Charity, out of a pure heart, and
of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned 1 Timothy 1, 5
. So again: Pray for us: for we trust we have a GOOD CONSCIENCE, in all things
willing to live honestly Heb. 13, 18
. Another Apostle, exhorts Christians, to sanctify the Lord in their hearts,
and ^o be ready always* to give an answer unto every man that asks them a
reason of the hope* that ^is in them, with meekness and fear, Having a GOOD
CONSCIENCE 1 Pet. 3. 15, 16
, etc. A little after, be places the sum and substance of true Christianity in
a good Conscience. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save
^s; not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the Answer [or, demand]
of a GOOD CONSCIENCE toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ Verse 21
: meaning (to add this by the way) that Baptism, typified or presignified by
the Ark, wherein Noah and his Family were pr^served from perishing with the
rest of the world, by water, does contribute toward our Salvation from the
condemnation of the world round about us for sin, not so much by the letter, or
material effect of it, but by typifying, holding forth, and assuring us, that a
good* Conscience, raised or built upon the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, and the sound knowledge hereof, does require, or demand, this
Salvation of God, and that according to the Promise and Encouragement given
unto it by Himself in that behalf, and therefore so, as that it shall not,
cannot, be denied, of what it demands of Him in this kind. But that a pure
(which only is the good) Conscience, still springs from a found Faith in
Jesus Christ, and is found in conjunction with it, these places, 1 Timothy 3. 9.
Heb. 9. 14. and ^0* 22. compared together, and added to the former, are
sufficient to persuade. And concerning the place in hand, some of our best and
most Orthodox Expositors, understand the good Conscience mentioned to be none
other. Musculus upon the words, Which [good Conscience] some having put away,
concerning Faith, etc. commenteth thus: Here he speaks the same, which before
he had expressed thus: Now the end of the Commandment [or, charge, which I give
thee] is Charity out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience, and Faith
unfeigned: from which some going astray, have turned aside to vain-jangling
Idem dicit, quod supra ad hunc modum expressit: Finis vero denunciationis hujus
est Charitas ex puro cord, et conscientia bona, and fide non simulata: a
quibus quod aberrarunt quidam, deflexerunt ad vaniloquium, etc.
, etc. His words immediately following (to which I refer the Reader)* are every
whit as plain and pregnant to the same point; showing, that by a good
conscience* he does not understand a conscience only Morally good, and such as
may be found in mere natural men, ignorant of Christ, and the Gospel, but a
Conscience Spiritually or Christi^nly good. Nor is Bullinger (his Compeer) of
any other mind. The safest ship (says he, upon the place) in this vast sea of
a world of Errors and Wickednesses, is Canonical [or Scriptural] Truth* pure
Faith, and sincere Charity Tutissima enim navis in vasto hoc mundi errorum and
scelerum pelago, est veritas canonica, fides pura, and charitas si^c^ra, etc.
. In which words he explains the Apostles good Conscience, by sincereness of
Love* or Charity. Nor could Calvin himself finish, what he had to say upon the
place, until he had given testimony to the same Truth. The Metaphor (says he)
taken from shipwreck, answers most aptly. For it implies, that the course of
our navigation* [in the world] must be steered by a good Conscience, that so
our Faith may come safe into the Haven: otherwise we shall be in danger of
shipwreck Metaphora a naufragio sumpta aptissime quadrat. Nam innuit, ut salva
fides ad portum usque perveniat, navigationis nostrae oursum bona conscientia
regendum esse: alia^ naufragii esse periculum; hoc est, ne fides mala
conscientia, tanquam gurgite, in mari procelloso mergatur.
* etc. Doubtless he does not mean, that the course of our navigation* through
the world, that so our Faith may come safe into the Harbor, should be steered,
or guided, by a mere Moral Conscience, how good soever in this kind, or by
such a Conscience, as Cato, Socrates, or Seneca had, or might have had: such a
Conscience as this, is no fit steers-man, or guide to such a Faith, with which,
or by which, they must make the Port of Heaven, whoever arrive there. Therefore
certainly He conceives, that it is such a good Conscience, the putting away of
which the Apostle renders as the ground, reason, or cause, why some make
shipwreck of Faith, the goodness whereof arises from such a Faith, which
accompanyeth Salvation, and which being carefully preserved and kept,
preserves and keeps that Faith, from whence it sprang, from corruption or
declining.

Concerning the two places, which are commonly insisted upon, to prove. 10.
that a good Conscience in Scripture, does not always signify a Conscience,
Christianly, Spiritually, or Savingly good, but sometimes Morally good only,
i. e. which is not defiled, or disturbed in the peace of it, with sins against
knowledge, (which goodness of Conscience is sometimes found in mere Civil, or
Natural men) though destitute of Evangelical illumination; the truth is, that
neither the one, nor the other, of them, proves any such thing. In the former
of these places, the Apostle Paul speaks thus: Men and Brethren, I have lived
in all good Conscience before God until this day Acts 23. 1
. In the latter, thus: I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
Conscience 2 Timothy 1. 3
, etc. For neither of these places do necessarily, nor so much as probably,
relate to the time of Paul's Pharisaism, as if his meaning were, that all that
time he had kept a good Conscience toward God, (for how could He then with
truth, or singleness of heart, have made this Confession; Of sinners I am the
chief 1 Timothy 1. 15
?) but to the time of his Apostleship, or Profession of Christianity, as
appears clearly from the former place, upon this account. Paul was accused by
the Jews, as an Apostate from the Religion of his Forefathers, and the true
Worship of God (as they supposed) and that He was fallen from Judaism to the
Sect of Christians, yea, and was become a Ringleader of them. This they
conceived to have been an high misdemeanor in Him, and accused Him as a very
wicked and ungodly Person, for so doing. To this Accusation and Crime objected
the Apostle answers to this effect, Men and Brethren, whereas I have forsaken
the Religion and Worship of the Jews, and have embraced, and do yet embrace,
the Christian Religion in stead of it, I have done nothing, I do nothing
herein, but upon very justifiable grounds, and with a good Conscience, in as
much as I have obeyed God in so doing; of which I am ready to give you a
perfect Account, if you please to hear me. This to be the true purport and
drift of the Apostles words, the sequel of the Context makes yet more apparent.
For upon the hearing of the words in debate, uttered by Him, Ananias the High*
Priest was sorely offended, and commanded the standers by to smite Him on the
mouth, for so speaking. Now it is no ways reasonable to conceive, that He would
have taken it so heinously that Paul should say, that He had always lived in
all good Conscience before God, whilst he professed Judaism, and before He
became a Christian. Such a saying as this would rather have gratified and
pleased, then offended Him. But that He should say, that He lived with all good
Conscience in the Profession of Christianity, this was a sword that passed
through Ananias Soul.

For the other place, where the Apostle says that He served God from His. 11.
Forefathers with a pure Conscience, His meaning only is, that he serves none
other God, but Him, whom His Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob worshipped,
and that Him he served with a pure Conscience, as they also did. To qualify
the Jews, who took great offense at Him for changing His Religion, and withal
to make this Practice of His more passable with others, He often recourseth to
this Apology, viz. that in the Profession of Christianity, he serves no other
God, but the God of his Forefathers. See Acts 22. 14. and 24. 14. and 26. 7.
and 28. 20. etc. In this sense Calvin himself interprets the place in hand, on
which he has these words (amongst others, of like import,) Certain it is, that
Paul's Conscience was not always pure, in as much as himself confesses, that
through hypocrisy he was deceived, when he indulged himself a liberty of
lusting. For whereas Chrysostom excuses his Pharisaism, in that he opposed the
Gospel out of ignorance, and not out of malice, it no ways satisfies. For the
elogy [or, commendation] of a pure Conscience, is not vulgar, or common;
neither can it be separated from the sincere and serious fear of God. Therefore
I restrain his words to the present time, thus: that he worshipped one and the
same God with his Forefathers: but now, since he was enlightened by the Gospel,
he worshipeth Him with a sincere affection of heart Certum est, non semper
puram fuisse Pauli co^scientiam, utpote qui fatetur se per hypocrisin fuisse
deceptu^, quum sibi concupiscendi licentiam indulgeret. Nam quod excusat
Chrysostomus ejus Pharisaismum, eo quod non malicia, sed ignoratione Evangelium
oppugnabat, id non satisfacit. Neque enim vulgar elogium est purae
conscientiae, n^c potest a sincero and serio Dei timore separari. Itaque ad
praesens tempus restringo, hoc modo, quod unum cum Proavis suis, and eundem
Deum colat: sed nunc colat sincero cordis affectu, ex quo per Evangelium erat
illuminatus.
and Soul. It were easy to second Calvin with several others of his own band,
in the interpretation mentioned: but when little is to be done, much help is
but a burden. Thus then we see, that by a good Conscience, which some putting
away, make shipwreck of Faith (as the Apostle says) must needs be meant such a
Conscience, which has its goodness from true Faith, and cannot be separated
from it: and consequently, that the persons here spoken of, were, or had been
true Believers.

Besides, that Faith, of which some are said to have made shipwreck, cannot
reasonably be supposed to have been a feigned, counterfeit, or pretended Faith
only, nor any thing accompanying destruction; because it is such a Faith,
which the Apostle exhorts and encourages Timothy to hold fast, holding Faith,
and a good Conscience, which some having put away, concerning Faith, (which I
advise thee to hold and keep) have made shipwreck. Doubtless the Apostle would
not have persuaded Timothy to hold, or keep, such a Faith, with which he might
perish: Nor had the making shipwreck of no better a commodity then so, been any
such great loss unto Him. 3. That Faith, which He exhorts Timothy to hold,
must needs be supposed to be that Faith, which He was possessed of at present,
and which was now in Him. And that this was a true Faith, appears from several
Passages in the two Epistles written by this Apostle unto Him, especially from
those words, When I call to remembrance THE UNFEIGNED FAITH that is in thee,
which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois 2 Timothy 1, 5
, etc. 4. The Faith, which He exhorts Timothy to hold, and consequently, the
Faith whereof he admonishes him that some made shipwreck (by the means
specified) must in reason be such a Faith, of which he had discoursed before in
the Chapter. Now this was a Faith unfeigned, out of which that Charity, or
Love, flows, which he says is the end of the Commandment 1 Timothy 1, 5
; such a Faith, of which he speaks (a few Verses before the place in hand) in
reference to himself, thus: And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant,
with Faith, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus Verse 14.
: such a Faith, by which men were to believe on Christ to life everlasting
Verse. 16.
. 5. (And lastly) the Faith here spoken of, is such a Faith, in the retention,
or holding whereof, the warring of a good warfare consists. This is evident
from the Context, and connection between this, and the next preceding Verse.
This charge I commit unto thee, Son Timothy, according to the Prophecies which
went before on thee, [i. e. according to the sense and judgments of the
Prophets, or Interpreters of the Scriptures, who unanimously agreed in this,
that thou were a Person fit for the work of the Ministry, and by all means
ought to be called thereunto,] that thou by them (i. e. being encouraged by
them) might war a good warfare, Holding Faith, and a good Conscience, etc.
Now if by Faith, should be meant nothing but only an outward Profession of the
Gospel, or the Doctrine thereof, Timothy might have held these, and yet not
have warred a good warfare. For who will say that Judas warred a good warfare,
who yet held an outward Profession of the Gospel, and preached the Doctrine
thereof truly? And it is generally granted by those, who by Faith, in the place
in hand, will needs understand the Doctrine of the Gospel, that men, who are no
good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, who are destitute of sound and saving Faith,
may yet hold, yea hold fast, the Doctrine of the Gospel, yea, and this to the
suffering of death it self for it. Therefore (questionless) the Faith of which
the Apostle speaks in the place before us, is a true, sound, and saving Faith.

Nor is this any thing but the sense and judgment of very learned and orthodox.
12.
Expositors upon the place. Musculus affirms, that the Apostle speaks here
the same thing, which before He had expressed in these words: But the end of
this Commandment [or Charge] is love, out of a pure Heart, and good Conscience,
and Faith unfeigned: from which whilst some went astray, they turned aside to
vain-jangling Idem dicit, quod supra ad hunc m^dum expressit, Finis vero
denunciationis hujus est Charitas, ex puro cord, and Conscientia bona, and
fide non simulata: a quibus quod aberrarunt quidam, deflexerunt ad vaniloquium.
, etc. Presently after, the Apostle (he says) admonishes us, that they cannot
have a good Conscience, who are strangers unto Charity, a pure Heart, and Faith
unfeigned: and moreover, that upon the putting away of a good Conscience, we
are in imminent danger of making shipwreck of THE TRVE FAITH and Religion of
Christ Monet nos bonam eos conscientiam habere non posse, qui alieni sunt a
charitate, cord puro, and fide non simulata: deinde, repulsa bona
conscientientia, in proximo esse ut incidamus in naufragium circa veram Christi
Fidem and Religionem, etc.
. Therefore (doubtless) it came not near the thoughts of this Author to
conceive, that any other Faith should be meant in the place in hand, but only
that which was true and unfeigned. Calvin also recovered Himself before the end
of his Commentary on the Scripture in hand, and asserteth the same
interpretation. His words upon this account (to save transcription) are to be
seen toward the end of the 9. Sect. of this Chapter. J. Deodat, in his pious
Annotations upon the Bible, interprets the word Faith, (in the Passage in
hand) as his words are Englished, thus: Faith; viz. sufficient Knowledge, full
Assurance, and SINCERE Profession of the Truth of the Gospel. So that there is
not only ground upon ground, reason upon reason, to demonstrate, that by
Faith, in the Scripture under consideration, must needs be meant a true, solid,
and sincere Faith, and not the bare Doctrine of Faith only; but Author upon
Author also, and Expositor upon Expositor, and these Orthodox, to avouch the
same Interpretation. Therefore the first of the two Particulars mentioned, is
unquestionable: viz. that that Faith, whereof the Apostle says some made
shipwreck, was a true justifying Faith, and such, wherein had they persevered
unto the end, would have been accompanied with Salvation.

The latter, we shall not need to insist upon, it being generally granted by
our Adversaries, that by making shipwreck of the Faith here spoken of, what
Faith soever it be, is meant the utter, absolute, and total loss of it. All
Expositors without exception, that I have seen, are unanimous in this.

The line of the same interpretation is to be stretched over the other
Scripture. 13.
also (mentioned as parallel with the former,) wherein Hymeneus and Philetus
are said to have overthrown the Faith of some, by teaching, that the 2 Timothy 2*
18.
Resurrection was past already. That by overthrowing, is meant, an utter and
total subversion, or destruction, of the Faith mentioned, is every man's sense
upon the place. So that the Proof hereof would be but an impertinency. That the
Faith here said to have been overthrown by the Doctrine mentioned, was a true
justifying Faith, appears clearly from the Context. In the Verse next before,
the Apostle had said, And their word will eat [or fret] as does a canker, of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus. Now it is the nature and property of this
ulcerous disease, not to prey, feed upon, or consume, only the corrupt humors,
or putrified members of the body, which would tend rather to its preservation,
then destruction, but those especially that are most vital and sound, yea, and
this to the extinguishing life it self. Calvin upon the place affirms this, as
the judgment of all Physicians. All Physicians (says He) affirm this to be the
nature of a [cancer, or] gangrene, that without very present help [against it]
it spreads to the parts adjoining, and eats into the bones themselves, and
gives not over its prevailing progress, until the man dies. For in as much as
upon a gangrene, a mortification, or syderation presently follows, which very
suddenly with their contagion infect the other parts, to the universal
destruction of the body, Paul elegantly compares adulterate [or erroneous]
Doctrines to such a pernicious contagion. For if you shall once give way unto
them, they will proceed and prevail to the destruction of the whole Church Sed
omnes medici talem ejus naturam esse affirmant, ut nisi quam ocyssime
succurras, ad contiguus parts serpat, adeoque in ossa penetret, nec grassandi
finem faciat, nisi homine extincto. Quum enim gangraenam protinus sequatur
(...) vel syderatio, quae mox suo contagio inficit reliqua Membra usque ad
universalem corporis interitum, eleganter cum tam exitiali contagione Paulus
adulterinas Doctrinas comparat. Nam si aditum illis semel dederis, pervadunt
usque ad totius Ecclesiae interitum.
. If erroneous Doctrines may possibly prevail to the destruction of the whole
Church, doubtless they may as possibly, yea much more possibly, destroy the
Faith of some true Believers; considering that the whole Church is not made up
of Hypocrites, or Formal Professors only, but has many sound and sincere
Believers in it. Therefore Calvin in the interpretation asserted, is, either
with us, or against himself. His Successor also (though after some descents) Mr
J. Deodati, in His said Annotations, commenteth the words, and their word will
eat, etc. thus: Being once admitted into the Soul, it will penetrate to the
total extinguishing of the SPIRITVAL LIFE thereof. Therefore He likewise by the
Faith said to be overthrown by Hymeneus and Philetus their Doctrine, clearly
understands such a Faith, by which men live spiritually.

In the Verse immediately following, the Apostle subjoyneth, by way of. 14.
antithesis: Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, 2 Timothy 2. 19
The Lord knows them that are His: and, Let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity. The words in the Original are these: (...), etc.
i. e. the stable, or sure, foundation of God, stands, or, has stood, etc. In
these words the Apostle preventeth a scruple, or Objection, which might
(possibly) arise in the minds of some, upon occasion of what He had said
concerning Hymeneus and Philetus their forsaking of the Truth, and the
overthrow of the Faith of some others by means of their Error. The Scruple, or
Objection, is this: If such men of note professing the Christian Religion, as
Hymeneus and Philetus were, grew out of liking of that Faith, which sometimes
they professed, and forsook it, and besides, prevailed with some others also,
to relinquish their Faith, are not we in danger of falling away likewise, and
so of losing all that we have either done, or suffered, hitherto, in a
Christian Profession? To this Objection, or Scruple, the Apostle, in the words
now in Hand, answers to this effect. That notwithstanding the falling away of
men, who ever, or how many soever they be, yet the Glorious Gospel, and Truth
of God therein, stands, and always has stood, firm, steadfast, and inviolable:
which Gospel has the matter and substance of this saying in it, as a Seal, for
the establishment and security of those that are upright in the sight of God,
viz. that God knows, [i. e. takes special notice of, approves, and
delights in] those that are His, [i. e. who truly believe in Him, love, and
serve Him;] yea and further, has this Item, or Heavenly Admonition in it,
tending to the same end (the firm establishing of those that are Gods, in the
way of their Faith) Let every one that calls upon the Name of Christ [i. e.
makes Profession of His Name] depart from iniquity. So that in this Answer to
the Scruple or Demand mentioned, the Apostle intimates (by way of
satisfaction) that the reason why men fall away from the Faith of the Gospel,
is, partly, because they do not seriously consider what gracious and worthy
respects God bears to those that are His, (i. e. who cleave to Him in Faith
and Love;) partly also, because they degenerate into loose and sinful courses,
contrary to the Law imposed by the Gospel, upon all those in especial manner
that profess Christianity: and consequently that there is no such danger of
their falling away, who shall duly and thoroughly consider the one, and
conscienciously observe the other. In asserting the stability of the Truth of
God in the Gospel, by way of Antidote against the fears of those, that may
possibly suspect it, because of the defection of others from it, He does but
tread in His own footsteps elsewhere; as, viz. where He says (as He does a few
Verses before, in this very Chapter,) If we believe not, [i. e. though we men
believe not, what He has promised,] yet He abides faithful; He cannot deny
Himself 2 Timothy 2. 13
; as if He should say, the Unbelief of men, whether of those who never so much
as pretended to Believe in Him, or of those who have revolted from their Faith,
ought not in reason to be so construed, or looked upon, as if they were any
Argument or Proof, that therefore God should be unfaithful, or untrue,
considering that it is altogether incompossible with His Nature and Being, to
deny Himself, [i. e. either to say in words, or to import by action, that He is
not a God; the latter whereof He should do, in case He should promise, and not
perform accordingly, though it be too too well consistent with the nature of
men thus to deny Him.] So likewise where He says (to the same Point,) What if
some did not believe? shall their Unbelief make the Faith of God without effect
Romans 3. 3
? i. e. shall the Unbelief of men be interpreted as any tolerable Argument or
ground to prove, that God is unfaithful; or (which is the same) that He has no
other, no better Faith in Him, then that which sometimes miscarrieth, and
produces not that, for which it stands engaged? implying, that such an
interpretation as this, is unreasonable in the highest. But to give a little
further light to the Scripture opened, Nevertheless the foundation of God
stands, and to the interpretation lately given, it is to be considered, that
the word, (...), translated, foundation, does not only See Sam. Petit Var.
Lectionum lib. 1. c. 11
signify the foundation of an House, Building, or the like, but a band, or
instrument in writing, whereby He that lends money, or intrusteth goods, unto
another, is wont to be secured by him who borrows, or is entrusted, that he
shall duly receive, what he has contracted for with him. Such a writing or
instrument as this, is a kind of politic or civil foundation, on which the
Creditor builds a rational Hope, or expectation, of receiving from His Debtor
what is equitably, and upon Promise, due unto Him. Now that the Apostle in the
words in Hand, rather alludeth to such a foundation as this (if it must be so
called) then unto that other, is very probable (at least) from hence; viz.
because to this latter kind of foundation (which I call Politic, or Civil)
sealing is most proper; whereas it cannot be ascribed unto the other, but by a
very unproper, strained, uncouth, and unheard of attribution. For who has
heard of the sealing of a foundation of an House, or Building? or to what end
or purpose should such a foundation as this be sealed? But Writings for the
security of Contracts, or Engagements, between man and man, are by the custom
of (almost) all Nations, wont to be sealed, yea and are not authentic, or
valid in Law, unless they be sealed. So that by the sure, or firm, foundation
of God, which is said to stand (how fast soever men fall from the Belief of it)
questionless is meant that gracious Contract, or Covenant, made by God with the
World, to give Life and Salvation to all those that shall believe in Jesus
Christ; which Covenant is now exhibited in writing unto those concerned in it,
Men, as a foundation for all men to build an Hope and expectation of Life and
Salvation upon, according to the Tenor and terms of it. This Foundation is said
to be (...), firm, or stable; because it is such in the nature of it, as being
nothing else but the Word, or Promise of a God, who cannot lie, or deceive: it
is said to stand [or, to have stood, (...)) because it never failed any Person
that built upon it. It is said to have this Seal, The Lord knows who are His,
because the firmness, or stability of it, is further confirmed unto men, by
that perfect knowledge, declared and asserted in it, which God takes, and has,
of all those who truly believe, whereby they become appropriately His; by means
of which Knowledge and Approbation, He is in a perfect capacity, to make this
signal difference between them, and others who believe not, or revolt from
their Faith, viz. to save the one, and to destroy the other, when time comes.
Again, it is said to have this Seal also, Let every one that names the Name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, because the said Truth, and stedfastness of it,
is yet further commended and ratified unto men by the Holiness of the
Commandments given in it unto those, that profess the Name and Faith of Christ.
A Promise, or Covenant, of Life and Salvation, is therefore likely to be from
God, and consequently, to be stable and firm, because it requires such an
excellency of life and conversation, of all those, who expect benefit by it.
However, that by the Foundation of God (in the place in Hand) should be meant,
the Election of some particular Persons by God, has neither the good-w^ll of
the Metaphor or Phrase, nor yet of the Context, for it: of which more hereafter
in due place.

We have formerly observed it as Chrysostoms Judgment concerning Judas,. 15.
Cap. 10. Sect. 24
that at that time, when Christ made this Promise unto the twelve, Verily I say
unto you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of
man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Matt. 19, 28
, Judas was, as well in respect of the inward frame of His heart, as of his
outward conversation, in the same capacity, with the rest of the Apostles, of
sitting upon a Throne to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, i. e. of being
saved. This opinion of his concerning Judas, he argues and proves from the said
Promise; which (he judges) cannot be verified, unless it be supposed, that
Judas, one of the twelve, was at this time under the grace of it, and in such a
relation and condition Godward, wherein had he persevered, he should actually
have been a partaker of the glory promised, with his fellows. We took knowledge
likewise (in the place related unto) that P. Martyr approved the said Judgment
of this Father, together with the ground and reason of it; delivering unto us,
upon occasion thereof, this most true and necessary Rule, viz. That those
Promises of God are to be understood with reference to the present state and
condition of things Promissiones itaque illae Dei, pro statu praesenti rerum
intelligendae sunt.
[with those, to whom they were made.] And Lorinus writing upon Acts 1. 16.
reports it as the probable opinion of Cyrill, Jerome, Tertullian, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Basil, Ammonius, Leontius, Olympiodorus, Anastasius, Leo,
Euthymius, etc. that Judas, when he was chosen by Christ to be an Apostle, was
a good man, and so continued for some time afterward: and withal mentions
the grounds, upon which some of the said Authors so conceived of him. We shall
not need to argue the case of Demas, Alexander, Hymeneus, and several others,
whose revoltings from the Faith, are recorded in Scriptures. Concerning the two
latter of the three now mentioned, Hymeneus and Alexander, it is expressly said,
that they were delivered up unto Satan by the Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 1. 20
. Which plainly shows, 1. That they were judged meet by the Saints to be
received as Church Members by them. For otherwise the Apostle demands, What
have I to do to judge them that are without 1 Cor. 5. 12
? meaning, to inflict any Ecclesiastical or Church-censure upon those, who were
not Members of some Christian Church, or other. And if they were judged meet by
the Saints of that Church, who admitted them into Christian communion with
them, they were judged true Believers by them: and their judgment of them as
being true Believers, is a far better ground for us to judge them to have been
such also, then their Apostasy is, to judge them to have been Hypocrites, at
that time, when they judged them true Believers. 2. Their delivering up unto
Satan by the Apostle shows, that he judged them totally fallen from their
faith, and so dismembered from Christ: for otherwise he shou^^ have delivered
up unto Satan such persons, whom he judged true Members of Christ. There is the
like consideration of the Incestuous Person in the Church of Corinth. His
receiving into this Church, is more then a probable argument that he was at
this time a true Believer. Nor is there the least intimation given of any
difference between him, and the rest of the Members of this Church, whom the
Apostle terms Saints by calling, and, sanctified by Christ Jesus. And if he
were not a true Member of Christ, before the committing of the sin, for which
he was delivered up unto Satan by the Apostle, He sustained no great loss in
his spiritual condition, either by committing the said sin, or by being so
delivered up for it. For upon this supposition, he was no better then an
Hypocrite before, and worse he could not lightly be afterward. And besides,
the tenor and import of the sentence of Excommunication, is not declarative,
that the person sentenced never was a sound Believer, or true Member of Christ,
but that now by his sinful misdemeanor, whereby he incurreth that sentence, he
has dismembered himself from Him. Nor can the said sentence be duly styled a
delivering up unto Satan, if it must be still supposed, that the persons justly
sentenced herewith, had been always before the said sentence, as much under his
power, as they are, or can be, afterward. So that all circumstances
considered, it cannot reasonably be judged, but that the person now in
instance, had sometimes been a true Member of Christ, and Believer. But that he
sinned away this his blessed Relation, by that sin, for which he was delivered
up unto Satan, needs no other proof, but the Apostles express order for this
sentence to pass upon him. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5. For I verily as absent in body,
but present in spirit, have determined already, as though I were present, that
he that has done this thing, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that such an one, I say, by the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, be delivered unto Satan, etc. Doubtless this Apostle, who
professes that he could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, never
consented, much less commanded, that any true Member of Christ should be
delivered unto Satan. But (as has been said) the cause in hand stands in no
need of confirmation from these examples; the serviceableness whereof for such
a purpose, may possibly be evaded with more plausibleness of pretense, then the
former. Any one instance of a total declining in him, who has at any time been
a true Believer, is sufficient to prove the truth of the Doctrine under
maintenance: yea (as was said in the beginning of this Chapter) though no such
instance could be produced, yet may the said Doctrine receive demonstrative
evidence, and this in abundance, otherwise: and (I trust) has received it from
the Premises in this Discourse. Yet give me leave to add one instance more.

Concerning the Galatians, unto whom the Apostle Paul writes, any man. 16.
that shall diligently peruse the Epistle written unto them, cannot lightly but
conclude, that certainly these men, (I mean the generality of them, and more
particularly those, for whose sake especially the Epistle was written) were
sometimes ( viz. when Paul left them, after he had preached the Gospel for a
while unto them) true Believers, and persons justified in the sight of God; and
afterward ( viz. when he wrote the Epistle unto them) had suffered a total
loss of their Faith, and of Justification by it. That they were sometimes true
Believers, these passages compared, and laid together, are sufficiently
pregnant (I conceive) to give satisfaction unto any duly considering man. I
marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of
Christ, unto another Gospel Gal. 1. 6.
. Their removal from him that called them, etc. plainly supposes, that
sometimes they had cleaved unto him, [ viz. in the cordial imbracement of that
Gospel, which he had sent amongst them, and by which he had called them.] So
again: Received ye the Spirit, by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith Chap. 3. 2, 5
? The receiving of the Spirit, is still appropriated unto true Believers. This
he spoke of the Spirit, which they that BELIEVED in Him, should receive John 7.
39.
. And elsewhere: And God which knows the Heart, gave them witness, (viz. that
they believed, as appears from the former verse) in giving unto them the Holy
Ghost, even as he did unto us: (to omit other places.) Again: And my trial,
which was in my flesh, ye despised not, neither abhorred: but ye received me as
an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus. What was then your felicity? For I bear
you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked ou^ your own
eyes, and have given them unto me Gal. 4. 14, 15
. If our Saviors words be true, He that receives a Prophet, in the Name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward: and He that receives a righteous
man, in the Name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward Mat.
10. 41.
; doubtless he that receives an Apostle, not only in the Name of an Apostle,
but as an Angel of God, yea as Christ Jesus Himself, shall receive a righteous
man's reward, (i. e. Salvation;) [meaning, if he shall continue in the same
mind, and frame of heart, unto the end: (as we have formerly interpreted such
Promises of God, by express warrant from the Scriptures themselves.) When he
tells them, that he is afraid of them, lest he should have bestowed on them
labor in vain, Chap. 4. 11. His meaning (doubtless) is not, that he was afraid
they would lose, or make shipwreck of an unsound, light, or Hypocritical Faith,
(such losses, whether of our own, or of our Friends, are no matter of fear unto
us,) but of such a Faith, which, persevered in, would have saved them. And (to
forbear other passages, which might readily be produced upon the same account)
when he speaks thus unto them, Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are
justified by the Law, [i. e. depend upon the works of the Law for your
Justification:] ye are fallen from Grace: And again; Ye did run well, who
hindered you, that you should not obey the Truth Gal. 5. 4, 7.
? He clearly supposes, that they had been true Believers. If they were now
fallen from Grace, which the Apostle clearly affirms they were, by depending
upon the works of the Law, for their Justification, it must needs follow, that
sometimes they were possessed of it, and were the children of Grace; which also
their running well undeniably imports. Whereas therefore (says Musculus upon
the place) He says that the Galathians ran well, He commends their zeal and
studiousness in the TRVE FAITH and Religion of Christ; signifying withal, that
they might have attained [or reached] the mark of true blessedness, had they
persevered in that, which they had well begun Cum itaque Galatas been
cucurrisse dicit, laudat illorum zelum ac studium in vera fide ac Religione
Christi: significatque potuisse eos ad verae felicitatis ac salutis metam
pertingere, si in eo, quod been coeperant, perseverassent. Qui a principiis
Fidei, ac spiritus boni ad per fidiam degenerant, omnem suam vitam, quae veniae
particeps erat, mortalem constituunt: quales illi sunt, qui cum Galatis spirit^
quidem incipiunt, tandem vero carne desinunt. Idem Loc. de Peccato. Sect. 5.
: (with more of like import.) Let other Orthodox Expositors be consulted upon
these latter, together with the former, passages mentioned by way of proof,
that these Galathians were sometimes true and sound Believers; and they will be
found to carry the sense of them to the same point. On the other hand, several
of the said passages, with some others, do as plainly and pregnantly suppose,
that at the writing of the said Epistle unto them, they were wholly alienated
from Christ, and had neither part nor fellowship in the great business of
Justification by him. They were removed from him that had called them into the
grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. They were abolished from Christ: they
were fallen from Grace: they did not obey the Truth. Calvin, upon the first of
these expressions, I marvel that ye are so soon removed, etc. writes thus: He
convinces them of a defection, not only from his Doctrine, but from Christ
Himself. For men cannot hold Christ upon any other terms, then by
acknowledging, that by His benefit they are freed from the bondage of the Law
Arguit autem eos defectionis, non a sua Doctrina tantum, sed a Christo. Nam
Christum tenere aliter non poterant, quam si agnoscerent ejus beneficio nos
manumissos esse a servitate legis.
. Upon the second, Ye are abolished from Christ, etc. thus: The meaning is, if
you seek for any part, or piece, of righteousness in the works of the Law,
Christ becomes nothing to you, and you are aliens from Grace. For their opinion
was not so gross, as that they thought they should be justified by the alone
observation of the Law: but they mingled CHRIST and the Law together: otherwise
PAVL should have had no ground to terrify them with such threatenings as
these. What do you mean? you take a course to make Christ unprofitable to you,
you bring His Grace to nothing. Thus then we see, that we cannot place, no not
the least part of our righteousness, in the Law, but we renounce CHRIST, and
His Grace Sensus est, si quam justiciae partem quaeritis in operibus legis,
Christus nihil ad vos, and a gratia estis alienati. Neque enim tam crassa erat
opinio, ut sola legis observatione justificari se crederent: sed Christum
miscebant cum Lege: alioque frustra his minis territaret ipsos Paulus: Quid
facitis? redditis vobis Christum in^tilem, in nihilum redigitis ejus gratiam.
Videmus ergo non posse minimam justiciae partem constitui in Lege, quin Christo
and ejus gratiae renuntietur.
. Amongst several other passages looking the same way, Musculus upon the former
of the last-recited places, commenteth in these words: He had planted the
Galatians, and watered them diligently, by preaching the Gospel of God unto
them: and hoped, that it would so have come to pass, that they would have
increased in the Knowledge, and GRACE OF CHRIST. But whilst He thus hops, and
wishes, they are transplanted [or removed] from Him, in whom they had been
planted Plantaverat Galatas, and rigaverat diligenter, per Evangelij Dei
praedicationem, sperabatque fore, ut crescere^t in cognitione and gratia
Christi. Dum hoc sperat and optat, illi, ab eo, in quo plantati fucrant,
transponuntur, etc.
. The truth is, that several expressions and carriages in the Epistle are so
pregnant on the one Hand, to evince and prove, that when time was, they were
true and found Believers; and several others, as pregnant as they on the other
Hand, to prove them, at the writing hereof, to have been mere nullifidians, or
persons void of all true justifying Faith, that Expositors could not lightly
but speak them sometimes true Believers, whilst they had the former places
before them, and afterward, Persons wholly lapsed from such Faith, when they
had the latter. The case concerning these Galatians being so evident, we shall
argue it no further, but conclude with a brief report of M. Luthers Judgment
upon it. At first (says He) the Galatians heard, and obey^d the Truth.
Therefore when Paul faith, Who has bewitched you? He signifies, that now,
being bewitched by the false Apostles, they had FALLEN AWAY from, and
forsaken, that Truth, which formerly they had obeyed Primo Galat^ audierant,
and obedierant* veritati. Ideo cum dicit, quis vos fascinavit? significat eos
per Pseudapostolos fascinatos, nunc a veritate, cui antea obedierant,
defecisse, ac eam deseruisse: in Gal. 3. 1.
. Not long after; He had said before, that seeking Justification by the Law,
they cast away the Grace of God: and, that Christ dyed for them in vain. Here
He adds, that such Persons crucify Christ, who had formerly lived and reigned
in them. As if He should say, you have not only CAST AWAY THE GRACE OF GOD,
it is not only true, that Christ dyed for you in vain, but that He is most
unworthily crucified [by you, or amongst] you Supra dixit, Quaerentes Justiciam
ex Lege, abjicere gratiam Dei: item, illis Christum gratis mortuum fuisse. Hic
v^^o addit, quod tales crucifigant Christum, qui antea vixit and regnavit in
ipsis. Quasi dicat, jam non solum abjecistis gratiam Dei, non solum Christus
frustra vobis mortuus est, sed turpissime in vobis crucifixus. Ibid.
. Afterward: The Righteousness of the Law, which Paul here calls the Flesh, is
so far from justifying men, that they, who after they have received the Spirit,
by the hearing of Faith, make a defection unto it, are consummated by it, i. e.
are ^ade an end of, and destroyed utterly Adeo ergo Justicia Legis, quam Paulus
hic carne^^ vocat, non justificat, ut hi qui post acceptum Spiritum per Fidei
auditum, ad eam deficiunt, ea cansummentur, hoc est, f^niantur, and prorsus
perdantur. Ad Galat. 3. 3.
. To conclude, upon those words, Cap. 5. 4. Ye are fallen from Grace, i. e.
(says He) ye are no longer in the Kingdom of Grace. He that falls from
Grace, simply [and absolutely] loses expiation [or atonement,] remission of
sins, righteousness, liberty, and that life, which Christ by His Death and
Resurrection has merited for us A gratia excidistis, i. e. non amplius estis
in Regno Gratiae. -- Qui excidit a gratia, ami^ti^ simpliciter expiationem,
remissionem peccatorum, Iusticiam, libertatem, vitam, etc. quam Christus sua
Mort^ and Resurrectione nobis emeruit.
. Many other Passages of like import with these, might readily be cited from
this Author in His Commentaries upon this Epistle. So that there is little
question to be made, but that Luther abounded in this sense; viz. that Persons
truly justified, and in present Possession of that Righteousness,
Justification, Life, which Christ merited for them, may yet fall away totally
from this Grace, and to destruction; and that He looked upon the Galatians, as
Paul describes them in their different Postures, first of Faith, then of
falling away, as perfect instances to evince the truth of such a Doctrine.

I shall conclude the Chapter in Hand with a brief Survey of that place. 17.
(formerly mentioned,) For some are already turned aside after Satan 1 Timothy 5.
15
. These words, Calvin in His Commentaries upon them, dilareth thus; This
expression, after Satan, is observable* because ^o man can turn aside from
Christ, though it be never so little, but He follows Satan. For He reigns
over all, who are not Christ's. Hence we are admonished, how destructive a thing
it is, to turn aside from a str^ight course, which OF THE SONS OF GOD MAKES US
SLAVES OF THE DEVIL Post Satanam; Notanda loquutio, quia nemo potest v^l
tantillum a Christo deflectere, quin Satanam sequatur. Nam regnum in omnes
habet, qui Christi non sunt. Hinc admonemur quam exitialis sit deflexio a recto
cursu, quae ex Dei filiis nos facit Satanae mancipia.
. So that His sense upon the place clearly is, that the Persons here said to
have turned aside after Satan* were before this their turning aside, the
children of God, and therefore true Believers; and that by means of their
turning aside, and after it, they were the Slaves of the Devil: which implies ^
total defection (at least) from Christ, and their Faith. I desire the Reader to
take knowledge once more, upon occasion of the passage now transcribed from
Calvin, that He was not so absolute, or entire, in His Judgment, for an
impossibility of a total Declining in the Saints, as the Friends of this Notion
commonly presume, or as if He never expressed His Judgment to the contrary. In
the words lately cited, He expressly grants, and supposes, that of the Children
of God, men may be made, or become, the Slaves of Satan. And that the Persons
spoken of in the Scripture in hand, were (as He supposes) true Believers, is
evident from hence, viz. that they are said to have turned aside, or to have
been turned aside, after Satan. If they had been unsound, or Hypocritical
Christians before, they could not, by falling into any other course of impiety,
be said to have turned aside, or, out of the way (...)
, after Satan; because men and women follow Satan as much, as directly, as
close, by walking in ways of Hypocrisy, and rottenness of Profession, as in
ways of uncleanness, or of any other unrighteousness whatsoever. Therefore
certainly the way, out of which they turned aside to walk after Satan, was the
way of a true Faith, and of a life answerable thereunto. And that a turning
aside after Satan, imports a total deserting of Christ, or a total deprivation
and loss of that interest, which a Person had in Christ before, is richer in
evidence, then to need Proof. Nor do I find any one Expositor, who, casting up
the expression, finds it to amount to any whit less.

CHAP. XV.
Declaring the Sense and Judgment, as well of the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, as of Modern Reformed Divines* touching the Point of Perseverance: and
so concluding the Digression concerning this Subject.

IT is a Vanity whereunto the Tongues and Pens of Learned Men, being. 1.
once engaged, and declared, for an Opinion (especially in matters of Religion)
are much subject unto, to cast undue aspersions upon, and so to create
undeserved prejudice unto, all such Doctrines, or Opinions, which are
inconsistent with that Opinion, which themselves are known to hold, and to have
maintained. Amongst other weapons of this warfare, the Arrow of this reproach
is most frequently unquiver'd, and let fly: if men can find that any Opinion,
which has the least semblance, or sympathy, though but in sound of words
only, with that, which opposes theirs, has either been held by any former
Heretic, or Person voted Erroneous, or else opposed by those, unto whose lot
it is fallen to be surnamed Orthodox, they make an importune outcry against
this Opinion (I mean, which opposes theirs) as if it were nothing but an old
infamous Error, held only by Heretics and Erroneous Men, but stigmatized and
cast out of the Church by the Orthodox, long ago. The truth is, that neither
the one consideration, nor the other, no not when they are real, and not in
pretense or presumption only, (I mean, neither the asserting of an Opinion by
men in many things erroneous, nor the dis-owning of it by men in most things,
and in the main, orthodox,) are any demonstrative grounds of the unsoundness of
this Opinion, or that it is not from God. How much less, when that Opinion
indeed, which suffers rebuke from men upon such terms, was neither taught, nor
held, by the one, nor rejected, or opposed, by the other, but only an Opinion
in some outward lineaments somewhat like unto it, but in heart, and substance
of matter, altogether differing from it? The Doctrine of Election, or
Predestination unto Life, from foreseen Faith, or Works, is commonly decryed,
and made odious unto men upon this pretense, that it was a Doctrine held by
Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, and condemned and cast out of the Church for an
Error, by all the Orthodox Fathers, long since. Whereas it is evident from the
Records of Antiquity, that the Opinion concerning Predestination from foreseen
Faith, or Works, which was held by the Pelagians, and rejected by the Orthodox
Fathers, was not simply this, that God Predestined those unto Life, whom He
foresaw would believe, or live holily, but, whom He foresaw would believe, or
live holily, out of the strength or abilities of Nature. The Orthodox Fathers
themselves held, and taught, Predestination from foreseen Faith, and Holiness,
as well as the Pelagians, but with this difference: The Fathers taught it, from
the foresight of such a Faith and Holiness, which men should be enabled unto by
Grace: the Pelagians, from such, whether Faith, or Holiness, which men should
raise or exhibit by the strength of Nature. This is evident from what Gerardus
Vossius, a diligent and faithful Surveyor of Antiquity, demonstrateth in the
sixth Book of his Pelagian History. The Greek Fathers (says He) always, and
all the Latin Fathers, who lived before Austine, are wont to say, that they
are Predestined unto Life, whom God foresaw would live godlily, and well; or,
as some others speak, whom He foresaw would believe, and persevere, who should
believe on Him to Eternal Life, (1 Timothy 1. 16.) Which they so interpret, as to
say, that Predestination unto Glory is made [by God] according to His
foreknowledg of Faith and Perseverance. But they did not mean the foresight, or
foreknowledg of such things, which a man was to do by the abilities of Nature,
but by the strength and assistance of Grace, as well preventing, as subsequent.
So that this consent of Antiquity, no ways helps, either the Pelagians, or
Semi-Pelagians [in their cause.] For both these held, that the cause of
Predestination is assignable on man's part, according to all the effects of it:
whereas the Orthodox Fathers acknowledge, that the first [or, preventing] Grace,
is conferred, not of merit, but freely. So that their Opinion was, that there
was no cause assignable on man's part, of Predestination unto preventing Grace
Graeci Patres semper, Patrum Latinorum vero illi, qui ante Augustinum vixerunt,
dicere solent, eos esse praedestinatos ad vita^, quos Deus pie recteque
victuros praevidit: sive, ut alij loquu^tur, quos praevidit credituros, and
perseveraturos, (...), (ut est 1 Timothy 1.) Quod ita in terpreta^tur, ut
Praedestinatio ad Gloriam ^acta dicatur, secundum praescientiam fidei and
perseverantiae. Verum non intellexerunt praescientiam eorum, quae homo acturus
erat ex viribus naturae, sed quae esset facturus ex viribus gratiae, tum
praevenientis, tum subsequentis: eoque antiquitatis ille consensus nihil, vel
Pelagianos, vel Semi-Pelagianos juvat. Nam utrique illi crediderunt
Praedestinationis causam dari ex part hominis secundum omnes effectus. At
Catholici agnoverunt, gratiam prima^, non ex merito, sed gratis conferri. Quare
nec putarunt, ex part hominis, causam dari Pr^destinationis ad gratiam
praevenientem, etc. Gerard. Johan. Vossius, Hist. Pelag. lib. 6. These. 8.
, etc. This to have been the true and clear difference, between the Ancient
Orthodox Fathers, and the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians touching the Point of
Predestination, He shows with an high Hand of Evidence and Proof, from
several Passages cited out of the Authors themselves, in the Prosecution and
Proof of His said Thesis.

As the Doctrine of Predestination from foreseen Faith and Perseverance,. 2.
as it is at this day held and taught by some, (which yet is none of my Sense,
or Opinion, as I may have occasion, I conceive, more particularly to declare,
in the Progress of the Work in Hand,) is unjustly traduced, as if it savored of
Pelagianism, and had been long since thrown out of the Church by all Orthodox
Antiquity, whereas it was the express Doctrine (as we have heard) generally
held and taught by them; so is the Doctrine of Conditional Perseverance, and
which asserteth an amissibility of Grace, and true Faith, both total and final,
most unduly and unworthily branded with this reproach, that it is a rotten
Popish Error, and was never he^d by Orthodox Men. We shall therefore in the
former part of this Chapter wipe off this aspersion, and prove by express
Testimonies, and these not a few, that this Doctrine was a branch of the Faith
of the Primitive Christians, and of those, who were, and are at this day,
esteemed to have been the most Orthodox and sound in their generation. Some
Testimonies of this import, we have already, as I remember, cited upon other
occasions, in the preceding part of this Discourse: and to save transcriptions,
as much as with convenience may be, we shall not repeat the words of any
Author, which have been already expressed, but only give the sense of the said
words in English, and for the words themselves, send you to those quarters of
the Discourse, where they are lodged, and easy to be found. We shall do the
like in the latter part of this Chapter, in respect of such Testimonies from
Modern Writers, which have been already presented in the express words of their
respective Authors upon another account.

In the first place I shall account unto the Reader, what the forementioned. 3.
Author, Gerard Vossius, delivers (in His said Pelagian History) for the sense
and judgment of Orthodox Antiquity in the present Question about Perseverance.
From this additament of Austin's Opinion (says He, speaking Ex altero hoc
Augustinianae sente^tiae additamento, satis clare liquet, tam* Augustinum and
Prosperum, quam Pelagium andejus reliquias, super eo convenisse, quod Fides
justifican^, et gratia regeneran^, amitti possit, and a plerisque amittatur.
of what this Father had added to the common Doctrine of those, who had gone
before Him, touching Perseverance, which He had expressed in His former
Thesis,) it is manifest enough, that both Austin and Prosper, and Pelagius with
His Followers, agreed in this, That Justifying Faith, and Regenerating Grace,
may be lost, and that they are lost by very many. A little after: Therefore
they understand not the Doctrine or Judgment of Antiquity, who, when they read
in Augustine, and others, that the Elect of God, either never fall away, or else
that they return to God before they dye, from hence infer, that their Opinion
was, that true Believers, either always persevere in Faith, or at least never
fall away utterly from the Grace of God. Whose Arguing leans upon this
supposition, that true Believers, and the Elect, are terms convertible;
whereas, according to Augustin's Doctrine, not true Believers, but true
Believers persevering, and Elect, are reciprocable. Yea* the whole Dispute,
which Augustine had with Pelagius, and the Massilienses, about the Perseverance
of the Saints, stands upon a contrary Hypothesis. For unless it be granted,
that some true Believers, and godly ones, do depart [from God,] and not return,
do fall, and no^ rise again, this Question, why some of these persevere, others
not, is at an end before it begin: and yet this was the Question so hotly
disputed between Augustine, and his Adversaries. Yea the truth is, that all
Antiquity jointly opposes that Et paulo post: Neutiquam igitur Antiquitatis
mentem assequuntur, qui cum apud Augustinum et alios legunt, Electos Dei, vel
deficere nunquam, vel ad Deu^ ante obitum redire, inde colligunt, ex eorum
sententia fideles semper in fide perseverare, aut saltem nunqua^ penitus divina
gratia excidere. Quorum argumentum hac nititur hypothesi, quod fideles and
Electi (...), cum juxta Augustinum non reciprocentur Electi and Fideles, sed
Fideles perseverantes. Imo omnis disputatio illa, quae Augustino cum Pelagio
and Massiliensibus de Perseverantia Sanctorum fuit, hypothesin plane contrariam
habet. Nam nisi concedatur quosdam fidelium and piorum deficere, nec redire;
cadere, nec surgere, cessabit penitus haec question, cur aliqui eorum
perseverant, aliqui non item; de quo inter Augustinum and Adversarios tantopere
disceptatum fuit. Quid quod Antiquitas tota indeficibilitati adversatur,
necquenquanc, quantum meminisse valemus, veterum invenire est, qui Fideles
omnes omnimodam de perseverantia sua certitudinem habere arbitraretur. Fatentur
quidem, animos filiorum Dei dubitationis anxietate cruciari non debere, cum
spei fiduciam habeant, quae sufficienti consolatione and lapsuros sustentet,
and lapsos levet: at nihilominus negant, posse, quemvis, ex inde quod
impraesentiarum Fidelium se in numero esse sciat, tantum sibi de reliquo vitae
tempore favorem Dei pro certo polliceri, ut tanquam div^na revelatione de se
edoctus spondere ausit, nunquam se adulterii, homicidii, idolatriae reum fore,
quanquam, David, Solomon, alii tantopere a viis Domini declinarant: vel, si cum
illis in tantum scelus prolabatur, tum, uti Davidi, ita sibi quoque prorogatum
iri vitae tempus, usque dum serio penitentiam egerit, and reconcilietur Deo.
Cujusmodi omnimodam certitudinem negant expedire in hac vita tot tentationibus
obnoxia, ubi tanta est infirmitas, ut, nisi perpetua adsit sollicitudo
custodiendi gratiam, quam semel acceperimus, facillime obrepat carnis
securitas; per quam velut bipatentibus portis, undique vitiorum se insinuent
catervae. Gerard. Johan. Vossius. Hist. Pelag. lib. 6. These. 12.
indefectibility [of the Saints, which some defend.] Nor is there any of the
Ancients to be found, who, as far as I am able to call to mind, conceives that
Believers have any absolute certainty of their Perseverance. They indeed
acknowledge, that the minds of the children of God ought not to be tortured with
any anxiety of doubting, in as much as they have a confidence of hope, which
may sustain and keep up with sufficient comfort, those that may fall, and
relieve those that are already fallen. But yet they deny, that any man, because
he certainly knows that he is at present, in the number of true Believers, can
therefore promise unto himself upon any certainty, such, or so much, favor
from God for the remaining part of his life, that he may be as bold, as if he
had it by revelation from God, that he shall never incur the guilt of Adultery,
Murder, Idolatry, though David, Solomon, and others, declined so fearfully
from the ways of God, as they did: or, in case he shall fall into such horrible
sins with them, that be also shall have the time of his life prolonged, as
David had, until, upon his serious repentan(...) he be reconciled unto God.
Such an absolute certainty as this, they affirm to be inexpedient in this life,
being obnoxious to so many temptations, and where the weakness of men is such,
that unless there be a continual sollicitousness and care to keep that grace
which we have once received, a carnal security will most easily steal upon us;
through which, as by a broad gate wide opened, whole Troops of Vices are like
to convey themselves into us.

Thus far Vossius: who in the words mentioned comprehends the clear. 4.
and unquestionable sense of the Primitive Faith, and of the most Orthodox
Fathers, for several Hundreds of years next after Christ and the Apostles,
concerning the Point of Perseverance: and therefore subjoyneth in the entrance
of his Demonstration of the said Thesis, words to this effect: That the sense
and opinion expressed [touching the perseverance of Beleevers] was the common
Opinion of Antiquity, they only at this day can deny, who, though in other
matters they may possibly be men learned enough, yet are altogether strangers
in Antiquity: or else have their minds and judgments so emancipated [or
inslaved] to the opinions of this man, or that, that they choose rather to see
with their eyes, then their own, and prefer a going astray with them, before
walking in ways of Truth with other men Communem fuisse Antiquitatis sententiam
quam diximus, soli body negare possunt, qui caetera fortasse viri sunt non
ineruditi, sed in Antiquitate tamen plane sunt hospites; vel animum habent
unius and alterius sententiis ita mancipatum, ut eorum oculis videre malint
quam suis, cunque iis errare praeoptent, quam cum aliis been sentire.
. And whereas some pretend, that when the Fathers say that Grace or Faith may
be lost, they speak not of true Grace, or of true Faith, but of that which is
feigned, the said Author in the process of his Discourse, resolves this
pretense into smoke, and evidently proves, the Doctrine of the Fathers to have
been, that even true Faith, and that which justifies, and makes men at present
true children of God, and which in the nature of it is saving, may be utterly,
and for ever, lost. And whereas some passages are found in their Writings,
wherein they say, that true Faith may indeed be lost, but is always recovered
again before death; and in some others, that Faith cannot be lost; to this he
clearly answers by that distinction of three several degrees of Faith, which
they still suppose, affirming, that in passages of the former import, they
speak only of Faith of the second degree, [ i. e. of such Faith, which is not
only justifying, and saving, in respect of the nature of it, but which actually
saves;] and in places of the latter import, that they speak only of Faith of
the third and highest degree, [ i. e. of a perfect, solid, rooted, and ground^^
Faith.] For the Readers better satisfaction, I shall exhib(...) (...) (...)horse
own words at large. This nevertheless is to be taken into ^pecial
consideration, that when the Illud interim maximopere in considerationem venit,
quod cum Patres fidem posse amitti, eoque ex Fide haut recte aeterna^
electionem colligi posse contendunt, non omnes de quacunque Fidei mensur
aloquuntur: cum plurimi eoru^ distinguant tres Fidei gradus. Quorum primus dat
Fidei essentiam, secundum quam justificat, and dicitur Fides viva, atque
oppositam habet Fidem mortuam ac putatitiam, qualis hypocritarum. Alter gradus
addit durationem, qua ratione salvificat; sibique oppositam habet Fidem (ut
vulgo loquimur, quod de hominibus dicit Scriptura, Fidei eorum per (...)
tribuentes) (...), sive temporariam, qualis est Apostatarum. Tertius gradus
superaddit soliditatem, and dicitur perfecta, solida, radicata, quae quocunque
vitae tempore certificat: hoc est, ut Gregorii Magni verbis utar, sic
confirmat, ut quis ulterius caedere non possit, and hoc de sese certissime
sciat. Cui gradui opponitur Fides debilis, qualis etiam multorum est Electorum.
Patrum loca, quibus dicunt, Fidem veram quidem amitti posse, sed nunquam non
reparari, semper loquuntur de secundo Fidei gradu. At illa, quibus ajunt,
neutiquam posse amitti, omnino intelligi debent de gradu tertio. Cum quibus
minine pugnat, quod universi alias dicunt, multos per defectionem a Fide
aeternum perire. Nam intelligunt Fidem primi gradus; hoc est, formaliter sive
essentialiter veram; sive, quod idem est, justificam, etsi non salvificam, sed
justificam (...), per quam quis in praesentia est justus, non justificam (...),
quaendo si veritatem finis spectemus, vere justifica non est, quae aliquando
desinit justificare: quia non alia habet promissionem vitae aeternae, quam quae
perseverat. Gerard. Joh. Voss. Hist. Pelag. lib. 6. These. 13.
Fathers affirm that Faith may be lost, and (...)fore that eternal Election
cannot rightly be inferred from Faith, they do not all speak of any measure, or
degree of Faith whatsoever, since many of them distinguish three several
degrees of Faith. The first of which gives Essence, or Truth of Being unto
Faith, in respect whereof it justifies, and is called a lively Faith: opposite
hereunto is a dead and putatitious [i. e. an imaginary] Faith, which is proper
to Hypocrites. The next degree adds Duration, [or Perseverance,] in respect
whereof it saves, [i. e. becomes actually saving:] Opposite to this Faith, is
that which we commonly call, Temporary, (attributing that unproperly unto men's
Faith, which the Scripture attributes to men themselves,) which is the Faith of
Apostates. The third [and last] degree, superaddeth Solidity: this Faith is
termed perfect, solid, rooted, which at any time of a man's life gives him
assurance; i. e. ( to use the words of Gregory the Great) does so confirm [or
strengthen] that a man cannot fall afterward, and knows this most certainly
of himself. To this degree of Faith, a weak Faith is opposed, which is the
Faith of many of the Elect. Those passages of the Fathers, wherein they say,
That true Faith may be lost, but is always recovered again, always speak of the
second degree of Faith. But those, where they say, That such Faith cannot be
lost, must necessarily be understood of the third and highest degree of Faith.
Between which expressions, and what they generally teach otherwise, viz. That
many perish eternally through a falling away from their Faith, there is no
repugnance. For in such assertions as this, they understand Faith of the first
degree, i. e. such a Faith, which is formally and essentially true, or (which
is the same) which is justifying, though not [actually, or in the event]
saving, but justifying in the essence or substance of it, in respect whereof a
man is at present, righteous or just; not justifying, in respect of
continuance, since if we consider the Truth of the end, that Faith is not truly
justifying, which at any time cease to justify: because no other Faith has
the promise of eternal life, but only that, which persevereth.

By the express tenor of these things, it fully appears, that the uniform and.
5.
constant opinion of all Orthodox Antiquity, was, that true Faith, true Grace,
true Justification, and forgiveness of sins, may, by security, carelessness,
ungodliness, and profaneness of life and conversation, be totally and finally
lost, and the persons, in whom they were sometimes found, eternally perish. As
for that which some of them teach, concerning the inamissibility, or infallible
Perseverance of such a Faith, which is perfected and radicated in the Soul so
thoroughly, and to such a degree, as we have heard expressed, were it granted
that they speak of a simple and absolute inamissibility in this kind, and that
their meaning is, that there is an utter impossibility, and not a great
difficulty, or improbability only, that such a Faith should miscarry, or, no
instance producible to prove, that such a Faith ever did miscarry, it no ways
rebukes the confidence of that Assertion, which we have in this present
Chapter, and elsewhere in the Discourse formerly, avouched; viz. That a
possibility of the falling away of true Saints, and true Believers, and that
both totally, and finally, was the general and joint Doctrine of the Primitive
Christians for several ages together after Christ. The consideration whereof is
abundantly sufficient to stop the mouth of that undue pretext, which presumes
to say, and that with confidence, That the best and most conscientious men were
always of this Judgment, that true Grace is imperishable, and true Believers
under no possibility of miscarrying finally. But of this we spoke more at large
in the nineth Chapter. I here only add: That when any of the ancient Fathers,
or Councils, express themselves in words of any such import as this, that there
is, or may be, a Faith so raised, rooted, or strongly built, that it cannot,
either totally, or finally miscarry, it is no ways probable that their meaning
should be, that there is an utter, simple, or logical impossibility, that such
a Faith should be wholly lost, but that they rather speak rhetorically, and
would be understood of a kind of moral impossibility only, which imports a
great difficulty, improbability or rareness of an event: in which sense, or
notion, the Scriptures themselves (as knowledge has been given elsewhere Cap.
10.. 28. and Cap. 12 Sect. 29.
, are wont to term things, unpossible, or such, which cannot be.

Lest any man should be jealous, either of the sufficiency of the Author, from.
6.
whom we have taken the survey of the Judgment of Antiquity in the Question in
hand, to make a true and perfect account of such a business, or of his
sincerity in giving it in, let Antiquity her self speak, and plead her own
cause with her own lips. And first we shall give you a brief taste of the sense
of some of the best Authors, who lived and wrote before Pelagius was heard a
Sed quoniam omnes ejusde^ sunt naturae, et pote^tes retinere and operari bonum,
and potentes rursum amittere id, and non facere just, apud homines sensatos,
quaento magis apud Deum, alij quidem laudantur, and dignum percipiunt
testimonium Electionis bonae, and Perseverantis, alij vero accusantur, and
dignum percipiunt damnum, eo quod justum and bonum reprobaverunt. Iren.
adversus Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 74. circa initium.
of in the world: and then of such, who lived with him, and after him. But
because (says Ireneus, who lived about the 172 year after Christ) all men are
of the same nature, [or kind,] having power, as well to hold [or keep] as to
work [or do] that which is good, and power again TO LOSE IT, and NOT TO DO IT,
some are justly, even with understanding men, how much more with God,
commended, and receive a worthy Testimony of a good Election [or choice,] and
of a continuance therein: others again are accused [or condemned.] and receive
a just [retribution in] damage, because they REJECTED [or put away from them]
that which is just and good a. This Author clearly supposes, that all men have
power by nature (he means, as is easily collected from other places in his
writings, by nature, as it is generally recruited, or relieved and
strengthened, by the Grace of God in Christ) both to retain, and work that
which is good, perseveringly, and again to throw it off, and recede from it,
yea so, as finally to perish in such their declinings.

Tertullian, who wrote about the year 195. declares his judgment in the point,
to this effect. What ever it be, that my mean abilities have attempted in
reference to an entering upon, and holding out in, a course of Repentance, does
indeed concern all those, that have addicted themselves unto the Lord, as
persons, who all seek after safety [or, Salvation] by pleasing God; but it
concerns those more nearly, who are yet Novices, and beginning very diligently
to water their ears with the Words of God, like young Whelps, whose sight is
not yet perfectly come to them, move up and down at uncertainty: and profess
[or, learn] indeed to renounce their old ways, and take up repentance, but
neglect to enclose it Quicquid ergo mediocritas nostra ad penitentiam semel
capessendam and perpetuo continendam suggerere onata est, omnes quidem deditos
Domino spectat, ut omnis [omnes] salutis in promerendo Deo petitores; sed
praecipue novitiis istis imminet, qui cum maxim incip^un divinis sermonibus
aures rigare quique catuli infantiae ad huc recentis, nec perfectis luminibus,
incerta reptant: et dicunt [discunt] pristinis quidem renunciare, and
poenitentiam assumunt, sed includere came negligunt. Tertul. De Poen. cap. 6.
, [ i. e. to guard, or fence it with such resolution and care, that it may not
be laid waste, by the return and breaking in of the lusts of their former
ignorance upon them.] Not long after, thus: Some are of opinion, as if God must
of necessity give, that which he has promised, even to those that are
unworthy: and thus make his bounty, a servitude, or bondage [unto him.] But if
he gratifieth us [with, or by] the symbol of death [meaning, if he confers upon
us forgiveness of sins, in, or upon, our being Baptized, wherein w^ typically
dye with Christ] out of necessity, he does it against his Will. And who will
suffer that to continue, or remain firm, which he gives unwillingly? For DO
NOT MANY afterward FALL AWAY? Is NOT THIS GIFT TAKEN AWAY FROM MANY Quidam
autem sic opinantur, quasi Deus necesse habeat praestaere etiam indignis, quod
spospondit, and liberalitatem ejus faciunt servitutem. Quod si necessitate
nobis symbolum mortis indulget, ergo in vitus facit. Quis enim permittit
permansurum id, quod tribuerit invitus? Non enim multi postea excidunt? Nonne a
multis donum illud aufertur? etc. Ibid.
? He clearly speaks of the Gift of Justification, or remission of sins, which
the ancient Fathers more generally held and taught, was conferred in Baptism,
at least where there was any meetness in the person baptized. But whether this
be Orthodox, or no, evident it is from the words recited, that Tertullians
judgment was, that many may, yea and do, fall away, and suffer the deprivation
and loss of the Grace of Justification, (according to what we reasoned at large
Chap. 8. Sect. 54, 55, etc.) and consequently of Regeneration also.

Gregory Nazianzen, famous in the Christian Church about the year 375,. 7.
expresses the received Doctrine in His times, concerning the subject in
debate, in such Passages as these. Take heed thou keep thy cleanness, lest
otherwise thou be sick again of thy flux of blood, and shall not be able to
take hold on Christ, so as to steal [or secretly obtain] a cure from Him. A
little after: Take heed, lest by committing sin, thou lie again in thy bed, I
mean, in the evil and pestilential ease [or quiet] of a body broken and
dissolved with pleasures. But go thy ways, as thou art, and remember this
saying: Behold, thou art made whole: now sin no more, lest a worse thing befall
thee, in case thou shall be found wicked after [such] a benefit received. Thou
have heard this Great voice, Lazarus come forth, whilst yet thou layst in the
grave (for what is more vocal, or audible, then the Word) and art come forth,
after thou had been dead, not four days only, but many more, returning unto
life with Him, that lay three days in the grave, and having thy grave-clothes
[or, death-bands] loosed. Take heed last thou dyest again, and be gathered unto
those, who dwell in the graves, and be the second time bound with the cords
of thy sins. For it is uncertain, whether thou shall be raised up again unto
life, or no. And yet again (some few Passages interjected,) Only be careful,
and look to this, that having with the purity [of thy heart and ways] kindled a
fire of envy in the Devils breast [against thee] thou make not thy self
miserable again by sinning Fac purgationem serves, ne alioqui sanguinis
defluvio rursus labores, Christumque jam surripiendae salutis causa, prehendere
nequeas. -- Cave ne amisso peccato rursus in grabbato jaceas, hoc est, in
corporis voluptatibus fracti ac dissoluti mala and pestifera quiet. Verum ut
es, proficiscere, praecepti hujus memor; Ecce sanus factus es; jam noli
peccare, ne deterius aliquid tibi accidat, si post acceptum beneficium malus
inveniaris. Magnam hanc vocem, Lazare, veni for as, in sepulchro jacens audisti
(quid enim verbo vocalius and exaudibilius) ac prod^isti, non quatriduo, sed
multis diebus mortuus, cum triduano illo simul ad vitam rediens, atque
funebribus vinculis solutus es: Cave ne rursus emoriaris, iisque, qui in
sepulchris habitant, aggregeris, ac peccatorum tuorum funibus constringaris.
Incertum enim est, an rursus e sepulchro ad vitam excitaberis, etc. Illud modo
provide as, ne, cum puritate tua Diabolum invidiae facibus inflammaris, teipsum
rursus per peccatum miserabilem reddas. Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. 40.
. The comport of these passages with the Doctrine of a Possibility, both of a
total, and final declining, in the Saints, is so express and full, that it
needs no light of Argument to become visible.

Chrysostom, a principal Pillar (amongst those made of flesh and blood) of. 8.
the Christian Church, about the year 382, speaks plainly, and without
Parable, the same things with the former, and that frequently. We formerly
cited words from Him, which made this English sound. Although the Graces and
Gifts of God, are without Repentance, yet malice [or wickedness] prevailed so
far, as to dissolve this Law. What then is there of more grievous consequence,
then to remember injuries, which appears to be a subverter [and destroyer] of
so great a Gift of God, [meaning, Justification, or remission of sins See the
Authors words, Cap. 8. Sect. 59. (...).
?] This Father, in His seventh and eighth Sermons, or Orations, inscribed, Unto
Theodorus fallen from a virtuous life, supposes this, as the Basis or
groundwork of the greatest part of these Buildings: viz. that He that is, or
has been, a worthy Saint and true Believer, may apostatize, and that to
Perdition: therefore both totally, and finally. Yea, the manner of the carriage
of these Orations, clearly import this to have been an unquestionable Doctrine
amongst Christians in those times. I shall only transcribe a passage or two,
toward the beginning of the latter of them; where the Author apologizing for
the redundancy of His most passionate sorrow over His late Christian Friend,
Theodorus, who had grievously fallen, and was not yet risen again, and pleading
that He had more cause to wish Jeremy's wish, Jer. 9. 1. then the Prophet
Himself had, He expresses Himself thus. For if one man who does the Will of
the Lord, be better then a thousand wicked ones, verily thou also were better
then myriads [or millions] of Jews. So that no man has any reason to complain
of me, if I have written more Lamentations then that Prophet, or have expressed
more grievous pangs of sorrow, then he. For I do not bewail the overthrow of a
City, or the captivity of ungodly men, but the desolation of a sacred Soul, the
destruction, utter defacement and demolition of a Temple, wherein Christ dwelt.
For He that had thoroughly known that furniture [or, world] of thy mind, which
now the Devil has burnt [and consumed] whilst it yet shined [in its glory,]
He would not have sorrowed, reading the Prophets Lamentations, and hearing that
barbarous Hands had defiled the Holy of Holies, and burnt all with fire,
Cherubims, Ark, Mercy seat, Tables of stone, golden Candlestick, Manna: for the
calamity which is fallen upon thee, is so much more bitter and grievous, then
that, by how much more precious the sacred things are, which were reponed in
thy Soul. This was a more Holy Temple, then that. For this did not shine with
gold and silver, but with the Grace of the Holy Ghost: and in stead of
Cherubims and Ark, had Christ, and His Father, and the Paraclete [or Comforter]
placed therein. But now it has them not, but is desolate, and despoiled of all
that beauty and comeliness, dismantled of those Divine and unexpressible
ornaments, and is become destitute of all means of safety, or keeping. There is
neither door, nor bar to it, but it stands open to all vile and
Soul-destroying thoughts (...).
.

We need no Commentary upon this Text to discover the Authors mind in it, in
reference to what is claimed from it. For He does not only clearly hold forth
herein His Judgment in Thesi, touching the possibility of such a defection in
the best of Saints, which is accompanied with destruction, but avoucheth an
Hypothesis or particular Instance also, which proves somewhat more then such a
Possibility, I mean, the act it self.

He that will please to read and consider what the same Father likewise
Homilied. 9.
upon Joh. 1. 12. may have yet a further sight of His Judgment in the case.
Here He demands, why the Evangelist does not say, that He made them the Sons of
God, but that He gave them power to be made the Sons of God; giving this
Answer, that by this expression He shows that it requires much diligence and
labor, to keep that image [or character] of Adoption [or, Sonship] which is
formed in us in Baptism, unspotted and incorrupted unto the end; signifying
withal, that none shall be able to deprive us of this Power, unless we our
selves first shall deprive our selves of it (...).
. Which last words clearly suppose, that men may deprive themselves of such a
Power, which God has invested them with, for the making of themselves his
Sons, i. e. for the maintaining of themselves in this blessed Relation, unto
the end. Concerning Judas, His Opinion was (as is evident from several Passages
in His Works) that He sometimes was a Child of Grace, an holy and good man. In
the very beginning of his 52 Oration, extant in the fifth Tome of His Works,
and entitled, That He that stands ought not to be confident to the end, nor He
that is fallen, to cast away Hope (...).
, He has these words: Judas, my Beloved, was at first a Child of the Kingdom,
when He heard it [said to Him] with the Disciples, you shall sit upon twelve
Thrones: but at last He became a Child of Hell O (...).
. You shall find Him self-consistent in this Opinion, in His 64 Homily upon
Matthew: writing upon Cap. 19. Verse. 28. as also in His 67. Oration, or Sermon,
concerning Repentance, in the sixth Tome of His Works.

A few lines after the pre-recited words concerning Judas, He subjoyneth these.
For many, who having ascended the Top [or, Height] of Heaven, [i. e. of
Heavenly Perfection,] and showed all manner of abstinence, and chosen
wildernesses [to live in,] and never so much as dreamed of a woman, by yielding
a little unto slothfulness [or ease] they were supplanted [and overthrown] and
came to the very gulf, or bottom, of all wickedness (...).
. It were easy to weary the Reader (if it be not done already) with citations
from this most renowned Writer, wherein He declares with an high hand for that
Doctrine, which teaches a Possibility of the Saints declining, and that unto
death, both first, and second; yea, and that upon such terms, that no man, that
shall unpartially consider the manner how He expresses Himself in Passages of
this nature, but will conceive, that this was the general Doctrine of the
Christian Churches, and of the soundest Teachers, in those days.

Origin, who lived long before Chrysostom, viz. a little after the year 200,.
10.
plainly enough delivers the said Doctrine. But if (says He) a satiety [or
wearisomness] overtaketh any of those, who have stood in an eminent and perfect
degree [of Christianity,] I do not conceive, that such an one becomes a
bankrupt [in Grace,] or falls to nothing, on the sudden, but that He must needs
waste [or consume] by little and little, and by steps, and degrees: So that it
may sometimes come to pass, that if some short relapse [or, fall] happens,
and He speedily repents, and comes again to Himself, that He does not
utterly ruin Himself, but recovereth His foot, and returns to His [former]
state, and may repair that, which through negligence is fallen down Si aeute^
aliquando satietas cepit aliquem ex bis, qui in summo perfectoque constiterint
gradu, non arbitror quod ad subitum quis evacuetur, ac decidat, sed paulatim,
and per parts ^um defluere necesse est: ita ut fieri possit interdum, ut si
brevis aliquis lapsus acciderit, and cito recipi(...)at, atque in se
revertatur, non penitus ruere, sed revocare pedem, and redire ad statuum suum,
and rursum statuere passit id, quod per negligentiam fuerat lapsum. Orig.
(...). lib. 1. cap. 3. in fine.
. He that speaks such things as these, clearly supposes, that Christians and
Saints of the best and highest standing, may very possibly so fall, as to ruin
themselves utterly. Yea, the Passage imports, that when such do begin to
decline, or fall, it is somewhat a rare case if ever they do recover, or rise
again. It is only the Possibility, not Probability, of this, that is here
asserted.

That Ambrose, who was Contemporary with Augustine, though somewhat his Senior
in years, was of the same Judgment with the forementioned Authors in the
Doctrine of Perseverance, may be sufficiently gathered from that Interpretation
of His (formerly cited from Musculus) of those words of Paul, Shall I take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlo^? The Reader may
please to satisfy Himself herein, only by looking back to Cap. 13. Sect. 28.
of this present Discourse. This Father elsewhere says; God therefore
foreknowing that they would be persons [evilly disposed, or] of bad wills, did
not account them in the number of good men, although our Savior says to those
seventy two Disciples, whom He chose in the second rank, who afterward went
back from Him, Your Names are written in Heaven. But this was for [their]
Righteousness sake: for it is meet, that every man should have as He deserves.
For because they were good, they were chosen to the Ministry, and their Names
were written in Heaven for [their] Righteousness sake (as I said,) but
according to the Prescience [of God] they were in the number of evil men. --
There is no acceptance of Persons in the Prescience of God: for Prescience is
that, wherein it is definitively known unto Him of what kind every man's Will,
wherein He will persevere, will be, by, or for, which, He will either be
damned, or crowned. To conclude, they who God knows will persevere in good, are
oft-times before, evil: and they, whom He knows will continue evil [unto their
end] are sometimes good before. So that there is no cause for any man to
complain, in as much as God is no Accepter of Persons. For both Saul, and Judas
Iscariot, were [at first, or] before, good, the Scripture saying of Saul, that
He was a good man, and that there was not a better amongst the sons of Israel,
[so the vulgar Latin reads, 1 Samuel 9. 2.] And the Apostle Peter says of
Iscariot, He obtained fellowship in this Ministration, with signs and wonders
Praescius itaque Deus malae illos voluntatis futuros, non illos habuit in
numero bonorum, quamvis dicat Salvator illis septuaginta duobus Discipulis,
quos elegerat secundae class, qui ab illo postea recesserunt, Nominae vestra
scriptae sunt in coelo. Sed hoc propter justicia^, quia hoc est justum, vt
unicu^que pro merito respondeatur. Quia enim boni erant, electi erant ad
Ministerium, and erant scripta nomina illorum in coelo propter Justiciam, sicut
dixi: secundum Praescientiam vero erant in numero Malorum -- Non est Personarum
acceptio in Praescientia Dei: Praescientia enim est, qua definitum habet qualis
uniuscujusque voluntas erit, in qua mansurus est, per quam aut damnetur, aut
coronetur. Denique quos scit in bono mansuros, frequenter ante sunt Mali: and
quos Mal^s scit permansuros, aliquoties prius sunt boni. Vnde cessat querela,
quia Deus acceptor Personarum non est. Nam and Saul and Judas Scarioth ante
fuerunt boni, dicente Sc^iptura de Saul, Erat vir bonus, and non erat illo
melior in filiis Israel. Et de Scarioth dicit Petrus Apostolus, Qui sortitus
est sortem Ministerij hujus, in signis and prodigiis faciendis, etc. Ambr. in
Romans 9 13.
. In another place He says: Sometimes they are at first, good, who afterward
become and continue evil; in which respect they are both said to be written in
the Book of Life, and again to be blotted out of it Aliquoties prius sunt boni,
qui futuri sunt, and permansuri, Mali: propter quod etiam dicuntur scribi in
libro vitae, and deleri.
. Therefore neither was this Father any Patron of the Doctrine of Perseverance,
as it is Patronized by many at this day.

Cyprian, who lived about the year 250, writing upon the Lords Prayer,. 11.
has words to this effect. And the servant, who having His whole debt forgiven
Him by His Lord, would not forgive His Fellow servant, is cast into prison.
Because He would not show Favor to His Fellow servant, He LOST THAT FAVOR,
which His Lord had showed unto Him Et qui servo [servus] post dimissu^ sibi a
domino omne debitum, conservo suo noluit ipse dimittere, in carcerem relegatur.
Quia indulgere conservo suo noluit, quod sibi a domino indultum fuit, amisit.
Cypr. de Orat. Domin. c. 17.
. By the Favor which this Servant lost, after it had been vouchsafed unto Him
by His Lord, He clearly means, the Pardon of His Sins. Therefore Justification,
or Pardon of Sin, may (according to the Doctrine of this Father) be lost, yea
so lost, as never to be found again. The same Author elsewhere says, That
Solomon, and Saul, and many others, [had power] were able to retain the Grace
that had been given them, whilst they walked in the ways of the Lord: but when
the [Instruction, or] Discipline of God departed [from them,] His Grace
departed also. Therefore it stands us in hand to hold out in the strait and
narrow way of praise and glory Solomon denique and Saul, etcaeteri multi,
quamdtu viis Domini ambulaverunt, datam sibi gratiam tenere potuerunt:
recedente ab ipsis disciplina divina* recessit and gratia. Perseverandum nobis
est in arcto and in angusto itinere laudis and gloriae. Idem. Ep. 7. ad Rogat.
and caeteros confess. etc.
, etc. Yet again: The very same spiritual Grace, which in Baptism is equally
received by those that believe, is afterward, in our conversation and acting,
either diminished, or increased: as in the Gospel, the seed whereof our Savior
speaks, is equally sown, but according to the diversity of the ground, part
of it is consumed [or, comes to nothing,] another part of it brings forth
fruit in abundance, yet in a different proportion, some thirty, some sixty,
some an hundred fold Plane eadem gratia spiritalis, quae aequaliter a
credentibus in Baptismo sumitur, in conversatione atque actu nostro postmodum
vel minuitur, vel augetur: ut in Evangelio dominicum semen equaliter seminatur,
sed pro varietate terrae, aliud absumitur, aliud in multiformem copiam, vel
tricesimi, vel sexagesimi, vel centesimi numeri fructu exuberante cumulatur.
Idem. Epist. 76. ad Magnum.
. A little after: Ofttimes it comes to pass, that some of those, who are
[spiritually] sound, when baptized, if afterward they fall to sin, are shaken
with the unclean spirit returning unto them: so that manifest it is, that the
Devil is, by the Faith of the Believer, excluded in Baptism, and that in case
this Faith of his afterward fails, that he returns Et contra, saepe nonnulli
de illi^ qui sani baptizantur, si postmodum peccare coeperint, spiritu immundo
redeunte quatiuntur; ut manifestum sit Diabolum in Baptismo Fide credentis
excludi; si Fides postmodum defecerit, regredi. Ibid.
.

Chromatius, who (according to some Writers) had his time of mortality. 12.
allotted unto him about the year 350. (though others bring it down much
lower,) having upon those words, Mat. 6. 12. And forgive our debts, as we
forgive our debtors, affirmed, That unless we forgive our debtors, we make our
selves guilty [of eternal death] before God with our own words, subjoyneth, a
little after, thus: This the Lord Himself elsewhere does most plainly make
manifest, producing the example of the Servant, who had been a Debtor, to whom,
though he ought much, yet upon his entreaty, his Lord forgave him the whole.
This servant, after his debt had been freely remitted unto him, denying the
like favor [in a smaller matter] to his fellow servants, was cast into prison,
and condem^ed to punishment Hoc autem alio in loco ipse dominus apertissime
manifestat, proferens servi illius debitoris exemplum, cui plurimum debenti
rogatus Dominus debitum omne concesserat: qui cum post indultum debitum
conservo suo debenti sibi nollet ipse dimittere, in carcer^m traditus, and
damnatus in poena est. Chromatius in Mat. 5. and6.
.

Macarius, who lived about the year 370. is a diligent and frequent Assertor of
the Doctrine maintained in our present Digression, in his Writings. After the
same manner (says he) the Spirit admonishes the Soul, which by grace knows
God, and is purified from her former sins, and is endowed with the ornaments of
the Holy Ghost, and has tasted the divine and heavenly meat [or nourishment:]
yet because she does not walk in this knowledge, with that diligence which is
mee^, nor preserves that good affection and love, which she owes to her
heavenly Husband, Christ, as becomes her, she IS CAST OFF, AND DRIVEN AWAY
FROM THAT LIFE, OF WHICH SHE DID PARTAKE. Not long after: Wherefore we must
strive, and take heed with the greatest wisdom, that we work out our Salvation
with fear, as it is written. Whosoever therefore of you are made partakers of
the Spirit of Christ, see that in nothing, neither small, nor great, you behave
your selves carelessly, nor reproach the Spirit of Grace, LEST YOU BE BANISHED
FROM THAT LIFE, WHICH YOU HAVE NOW OBTAINED Eodem modo etiam Spiritus adm^net
animam* quae per gratiam cognoscit Deu^, and purificata est a pristinis
peccatis, ac ornamentis spiritus sancti dotata, et pr^gustavit divinu^ ac
coeloste^ cibu^: ob id tamen quod non, sicuti decebat, deligenter in ea noticia
versata est* nec decenter been volentia^ ac dilectione^ Christo Sponso coelesti
debita^ conservavit, projicitur, and expellitur a vita, cujus erat facta
particeps. Macar. Hom. 15. Et paulo post: Quapropter certandu^ est and su^ma
prudentia nobi^ cavendu^, ut cu^ timore salute^ nostra^ operemini [operemur]
sicut scriptu^ est. Quicunque ergo participe^ facti estis Spiritus Christi, in
nullo pusillo, vel magno, contemptim vos geratis, neque gratiam spiritus
contumelia assiciatis, ne exuletis a vita, quam jam adepti estis, etc.
. Yet again a little after: But when the Soul has obtained Grace, now is there
need of much understanding, and perspicacity [in discerning,] which things
themselves God also gives unto the Soul, asking them of Him, that so this Soul
may serve Him in that Spirit, which she has received with all acceptance, and
in nothing be overcome of evil, or deceived through ignorance, turning aside
through rashness and sloth, and falling to do all things besides [or, contrary
unto] the comely [Order] of the Divine Will. For PUNISHMENT, DEATH, AND
MOVRNING ABIDE SVCH A SOUL: which [in effect] the divine Apostle Himself also
says; lest when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a castaway.
You see after what manner [or, at how great a rate] He feared, notwithstanding
He was an Apostle of God. The same Father, in the same place speaks words to
this effect: For man is of that nature [or frame] that though He be fallen into
a deep gulf of vice, and is become the Servant of Sin, yet He may be converted
[or turned] to that which is good: and on the contrary, being the bondman of
the Holy Ghost, and overcome with the drunkenness of [spiritual, and] Heavenly
things, He may be turned back to that which is evil Et paulo post* Caeterum ubi
anima gratiam est adepta, tu^ intellectu multo atque perspicatia opus est, quae
etia^ ipsa largitur Deus animae ab eo postulanti, ut gratissime illi possit
inservire in eo spiritu, quem accepit, and in nullo vincatur a malitia, aut
fallatur per ignorantiam, temeritate^, ac ignaviam aversa, peragens omnia
praeter decorum divinae voluntatis. Talem enim animam manet supplicium, mors
and luctus: quod Divinus etiam Apostolus dixit, ne cum aliis praedicaverim,
ipse reprobus efficiar. Vides cum Dei Apostolus esset, quo pacto timebat. Ejus
enim est homo naturae, ut etiamsi in profundum vitiorum lapsus sit, ac peccato
deserviat, ad id quod bonum est converti possit: Et contra, Spiritui Sancto
devinctus, and rerum coelestium ebrietate correptus, ad id quod malum est,
converti potest. Ibid.
. No man considering these things, can lightly imagine but that this devout and
learned Father, who carries Blessedness in his name, held dogmatically, and
upon mature consultation had with the best of His understanding in the Mystery
of Christ, a Possibility that even the best and highest-raised Saints may
through sloth and negligence lose this standing, fall away, and perish.

Basil, surnamed the Great, who lived much about the same time with the
lastmentioned. 13.
Author, assigning the differences between the condition of the Saints in this
present world, and that which is to come, asserteth this for one, That in this
life the danger of falling is great, upon which account Paul said, Let him that
stands take heed lest he fall: but there [meaning, in the future estate of
glory] their steps are firm [or fixed,] life is unchangeable; there is no more
danger of being carried away unto sin. For neither is here any rebellion [or
insurrection] of the flesh, etc. Not long after: Therefore we men dye often,
before the body comes by death to be unyoked [or loosed] from the Soul. -- So
that the life of men is made [or, naturally apt] to be accomplished [or,
fulfilled] not only with a change, in respect of one age succeeding another,
but with falls [or, ruines] of their Souls through sin (...), etc. Basil. in
Psalm. 114. non long a fine. Paulo post: (...).
.

The same Father in another place speaks yet more plainly to the business in
hand. Many (says he) who had gathered much together from their youth, when
they come to the middle of their years, Temptations from evil spirits rising up
against them, and assaulting them, have not been able to bear the [stress, or]
burden of the Winter, for want of a good Pilot-ship, and so HAVE LOST ALL. And
hence it comes to pass, that SOME HAVE MADE SHIPVVRACK OF FAITH; others, by
means of a violent tempest (as it were) of pleasure rushing upon them, have
utterly lost that Chastity, which they had preserved together from their youth.
A most sad spectacle! for a man after fasting, after austereness of living,
after much praying, after much weeping, after a continent life, it may be for
twenty or thirty years together, through negligence and carelessness of Soul,
to be found naked [or destitute] of all: and that such a person, who has
greatly pr^spered [and thriven] by the [trade, or] work of the Commandments [of
God] should become like unto a Merchant of a great Estate, who whilst His ship
sailed on Her course with a fair and prosperous wind, judged Himself a brave
man for the abundance of Goods in Her, but having passed through Tempestuous
Seas, His Vessel comes to be wracked in the very Haven, and He pointed at, or
showed, by men, as one that on the sudden, and at once, has lost all [that
abundance, which He lately had (...). Ide^. Ho^. 12. in Princip. Proverb.
(prope sine^.)
.] The same Father in another of His Sermons expresses His sense in the matter
yet before us, in words of this import. But Sin is the Destroyer of that Grace,
which is given us by the Laver of Regeneration. And soon after (allegorizing
our Saviors Parabolical History* of the man, who going from Jerusalem toward
Jericho, fell among Thieves,) thus: But now stripes go before stripping [or
taking off his rayment] that thou may learn [and know] that Sin goes before
the laying aside [or, loss] of that Grace [or, gracious benefit] which is given
unto thee by that Love* [or, kindness] which the Lord bears unto men (...).
Et paulo post: (...). Idem. Hom. 21. circa finem.
. Once more: in another Homily, this Great Doctor of the Christian Church in
his days, owneth the Doctrine we now contend for, in words to this purpose.
Thou see them (speaking of the Galatians) having the Spirit: thou have [also]
heard, Ye are abolished from Christ, and again, Ye are fallen from Grace. What
does He subjoyn after all this, making room [or, granting place] for their
renewing? My little children, of whom I travel in birth again: He had once
begotten them [before;] but He, that had once begotten them, refuses not to
beget them the second time unto Salvation (...). Idem. Hom. 28. De Poenitentia.
prope finem.
.

All the Authors hitherto consulted about the sense of Antiquity, and of. 14.
the Primitive Christians, concerning the possibility, or non-possibility, of
the Saints relapsing unto death, had served their generations respectively, and
were gone off the Stage of Mortality, before Pelagius was entered to act His
part hereon, or at least had not much to do with Him. We now come to enquire
what their judgment and sense in the same Points were, who either synchroniz'd
with Pelagius, and skirmished Him, or else took their turns of Mortality after
Him. Concerning the former of these, that Star of the first magnitude in the
Christian Firmament. Augustine I mean, is (I suppose) in every man's estimate,
instar omnium, a man that will perform the service alone as sufficiently, as if
He had twenty more with Him, to assist Him. Questionless no man was better
versed in the affairs of Christianity, or that better understood what Doctrines
or Opinions ruled in the Christian World, or that dissented less from the
common and generally-received Tenets of he Church, then He. Now to how great a
degree He abounded in that Faith, which believes a Possibility of the Saints
declining, and that unto death, cannot lightly be unknown to those, that are,
though but competently, acquainted with His Writings. I shall present the
Reader with a first fruits only: and leave the Harvest for his own gathering.
It is (says He) much to be admired, and admired again, that God, to some of
His Children, whom He has regenerated in Christ, and to whom He has given
Faith, Hope, and Love, should NOT GIVE PERSEVERANCE; when as He forgives such
great sins unto strange children, and by imparting His Grace unto them* makes
them children of His own Mirandu^ est quidem, multu^que mirandu^, quod Filiis
suis deus quibusda^, quos regeneravit in Christ^ quibus Fidem* spem,
dilectione^ d^dit, non dat Perseverantia^, cum Filiis alienis scelera tanta
dimittat, atque impertita gratia sua, faciat Filios suos. A^g. de Corrept. and
Great. cap. 8.
. A little after: For of such we dispute, who want Perseverance in goodness,
and go out of the world by death, with the GOODNESS OF THEIR WILLS FALLEN FROM
GOOD TO EVIL. Let th^se men answer, if they can, why God did not take away such
men from the dangers of life* whilst they yet LIVED FAITHFVLLY AND
RELIGIOVSLY, that so Sin and WICKEDNESS might not have CHANGED THEIR [MINDS, or]
understandings Paulo post: De his enim disserimus, qui Perseve^antia^ bonitatis
non habent, sed ex bo^^i^ m^lu^ defic^^te bona voluntate mortuntur.
Respo^deant, si possu^t, cur illos Deus, cum fideliter and pie viverent, non
tunc de vitae hujus pericul^ rapuit, ne malitia mutaret intellectu^ illoru^,
etc.
. That God does not give Perseverance, in such a sense as this Father means,
viz. actual Perseverance, and such which is accompanied with Salvation, unto
some His Children, whom He has regenerated in Christ, etc. I readily and fully
consent: but that He does not give Perseverance unto some, as much as He gives
unto any others of them, whose deportment is but the same, I cannot believe,
without believing Him to be a respecter, or accepter of Persons, which I must
at no hand believe. Therefore to me it is no more, scarce so much, a wonder,
why God should give Perseverance unto some of his children, and not unto
others, then it is, why He should save those that believe, and not others.
However, from both the Testimonies cited, it is as evident as words could well
make it, that the Authors sense was, that truly regenerate men and Believers
may very possibly fall away, both totally, and finally. Elsewhere He expresses
the same sense thus: But if He, that is now REGENERATE, and JVSTIFIED,
voluntarily relapseth into an evil course of life, surely He cannot say, I have
not received it, because He has now LOST THE GRACE OF GOD RECEIVED, in [or,
by] His Will being free unto evil Si aute^ jam regeneratus and justificatus in
mala^ vita^ sua volu^tate relabitur certe iste no^ potest dicere, non accepi,
quia accepta^ gratia^ Dei suo in malu^ libero amisit arbitrio. Aug. de Corr.
and Great. c. 6.
. A little after: Nor let it trouble us, THAT GOD DOES NOT GIVE THIS
PERSEVERANCE UNTO SOME OF HIS CHILDREN. -- For these, whilst they live
religiously, are called the sons of God: but in as much as they will live
wickedly afterward, and dye in this wickedness, the Foreknowledg of God calls
them not the sons of God Nec nos moveat quod Filiis suis quibusda^ Deus no^ dat
ista^ persevera^tia^. -- Nam isti, cu^ pie vivunt dicuntur Filij Dei: sed
quonia^ victuri sunt impie, and in eadem imp^etate morituri, non eos dicit
Filios Dei praescientia Dei.
. So again (speaking of those, who, as John says, went out from them, but were
not of them,) They were in a good way, but because they continued not herein,
i. e. persevered not unto the end, they were not (says John) of us, when they
were with us; that is, they were not in the number of Children, whilst THEY
WERE IN THE FAITH OF CHILDREN: because they, who are truly, and indeed,
Children, are Foreknown and Predestined Erant itaque in bono, sed quia in eo
non perma^^erunt, i. e. non usque in fine^ perseveraru^t, non erant, inquit, ex
nobis and qua^do erant nobiscu^: hoc est, non erant ex numero Filioru^, and
qua^do erant in Fide Filioru^: quonia^ qui vere Filij sunt, praesciti and
praedestinati sunt, etc.
, etc. From this Passage it is evident, that, however Augustine might seem to
hold a Personal Election of some, somewhat after the same manner, wherein it is
commonly held and taught amongst us at this day (though elsewhere He seems as
much to contradict it, as we shall, God willing, show in due time) yet He did
not judge Faith to be a fruit of such Election, nor Elect, and true Believers,
to be voces convertibiles, but that there were many such Believers, who did not
appertain to the number of such Elect ones, and consequently who might, and
should, fall away finally. Again not long after: For this cause, the Apostle,
when He had said, We know that all things work together for good to those that
love God, knowing that some LOVE GOD, WHO DO NOT PERSEVERE in this good,
presently adds, To those who are called according to His Purpose Propter hoc,
Apostolus cu^ ^xisset, Scimus quonia^ dilige^tibus Deu^ omnia coopera^tur in
bonum; sciens no^nullo^ diligere D^u^, and in eo bono usque in finem no^
permanere, m^x addidit, His qui secundu^ prop^si^u^ vocati sunt.
. From these three last Passages compared together, it clearly appears in what
sense such other Passages in this Author, wherein He asserts the certain
Perseverance of the Saints, or Children of God (which Mr Prynn Perpetuity of a
regenerate man's estate. p. 243, 244.
, with others, cite from him, to persuade men that he was of their Judgment in
the Point of Perseverance,) are to be understood: viz. as importing, not the
Perseverance, much less the certainty of the Perseverance, of all that are true
Saints, or true Believers, (such a sense as this would make him the greatest
Self contradictionist in the world,) but only of all those, whom in the said
Passages now cited, he calls, vere filii, Sons indeed, or, truly Sons, (and so,
truly Saints,) i. e. (by his own Interpretation) such as are elected, or
predestined by God to be conformable to the image of His Son. And besides,
that by that Perseverance, whereunto this Author entitles even such Elect
Children as these, he does not mean, any such continuance of the Grace, or
Faith, once, or at any time, received by them, which admits not of a total
in erruption, or intercision, by the way, but only a residence or presence
hereof in them at the time of their death, might be abundantly proved from
several Explications which He makes of his mind in this behalf Horum
[Electoru^] fides qua per dilectione^ operatur, profecto aut omnino non
deficit: aut si qui sunt quorum deficit, reparatur antequa^ ista vita finiatur,
et deleta, quae intercurrerat iniquitate, usque in finem Perseverantia
deputatur. Aug. de Cor. and Great. c. 7. vid: and de Bono Persev. c. 13 no^
long ab initio
, if I judged it, either of any great concernment to the cause, or satisfaction
unto the Reader. So that his Judgment clearly was, that even those, who he
supposed could not fall away finally, might yet fall away totally. But
concerning his Judgment, touching such an Election of Men, as has been
mentioned, as held by him, which was the occasion, or ground of his Opinion,
that such could not fall away finally, or to perdition, we shall have
opportunity in the latter part of this Discourse to enquire, God sparing life,
health, and liberty, for the composure of it. In the mean time we have yet a
further account of the Judgment of this Father touching the possibility of the
total and final defection of many true Believers, in the Citation following.
Many are called, and yet are not of those, of whom it is said that few are
chosen. Yet who can deny them to be elect [or chosen] when as THEY BELIEVE, and
are baptized, AND LIVE ACCORDING UNTO GOD? They are plainly termed, Elect, by
those who are ignorant what they will prove afterward, but not by Him, who
knows that they have not Perseverance, which brings the Elect to Life
eternal, and that they so stand, that He foreknoweth they will fall. In this
case if the question be put to me, why God does not give Perseverance unto
those, to whom he has given the Grace of Love, by which they live Christianly,
I must answer, that I am ignorant Multi vocati, and non in eis, de quibus
dictu^ est; Pauci vero electi. Et tame^ quis nege^ eos Electos, cu^ credunt,
andbaptiza^tur, and secundum Deum vivunt? Plane dicuntur Electi a nescie^tibus
quid futuri sint, non ab illo qui eos novit non habere Perseverantia^, quae ad
beatam vitam perducit Electos, scitque illos ita stare, vt praesciat esse
casuros. Hic si a me quaeratur, cur eis Deus Perseverantia^ no^ dederit, quia
ea^ qua Christian viverent, dilectione^ dedit, me ignorare respo^deo. Aug. de
Corr. and Great. c. 7. and 8.
. If all this be not sufficient to satisfy the Reader, that this great and
learned Defender of the Christian Faith, whose sense in the Point in hand we
are now enquiring after, was of the same Judgment with us herein, let him feed
further upon what yet remains.

Having asserted a beneficial necessity, even to the Elect or Predestinate ones
themselves, to be kept in ignorance by God of their Predestination, or
Election, in this life, He subjoyns words of this import: So then for the
beneficialness of this secret, it is to be believed, that some of the Children
of Perdition, who receive not the gift of Persevering unto the end, yet begin
to live in such a FAITH, WHICH WORKS BY LOVE, yea, and live for a time
faithfully and justly, and afterward fall away, nor are they taken away by
death, before this happens to them Propter utilitatem ergo hujus secreti
credendum est, quosdam d^ Filiis Perditionis, non accepto dono Perseverandi
usque in Finem, in Fide, quae per Dilectionem operatur, incipere vivere, and
aliquamdiu fideliter ac just vivere, and postea cadere, neque de hac vita
priusquam hoc eis contingat, auferri. Ibidem. Cap. 13.
. Doubtless there is no Faith at all either justifying or saying, but that
which works by Love: and yet we clearly see that Augustin's Opinion was, that
the Children of Perdition, i. e. such who perish eternally, are very capable of
such a Faith, and consequently, may (yea and sometimes do) fall away both
totally and finally from it.

The same Father in another Tract discovers his sense in the point queried,
in these words: That of two, both being GODLY, Perseverance unto the end should
be given unto the one, and NOT GIVEN UNTO THE OTHER, belongs to the
unsearchable Judgments of God Ex duobus autem piis, cur huic donetur
Perseverantia usque in Fine^, illi autem no^ donetur, inscrutabilia sunt
Judicia Dei. Aug. de Bono Persev. c. 8.
. That in this sentence He speaks of persons truly godly, and not seemingly
only, besides the exigency of the Passage it self to make the sense of it
regular, as well that which goes a little before, as what follows after,
makes manifest. The words a little before, are these: For of Him they receive
this [power, viz. of being made the sons of God,] who gives pious cogitations
to the heart of man, by which He comes to have Faith, which works by Love Ab
eo quipp^ accipiunt eam, qui dat cordi humano cogitationes pias, per quas
habeat Fide^, quae operetur per dilectionem.
. The words a little after, these: To conclude, Were they not both called, and
BOTH FOLLOVVED HIM THAT CALLED THEM? Were they not BOTH of Sinners, made
righteous, or JVSTIFYED, and both RENEWED BY the Laver of REGENERATION Nonne
postremo utrique vocati fuerant, and vocant^m se^ cuti, utrique ex impiis
justificati, and per Lavacrum Regenerationis, utrique renovati.
? Afterward in the same Treatise, He cites with approbation, the Judgment of
an Orthodox man, of good repute in his days, to whom also He gives the
testimony of learning and much acuteness, concerning the Reason, which moved
Christ, not to work those mighty works among the men of Tire and Sidon, which
He wrought in Capernaum, although He knew that they would have believed, and
repented upon the sight of them. The Lord Christ (says this Author, as the
Father records His gloss) foresaw that the men of Tire and Sidon would
afterward have apostatized from their Faith, in case they had been brought
over to believe, by such Miracles wrought amongst them; in which respect it was
out of mercy, that He forbear the working of them there: because they had been
liable to a much greater punishment, in case they should have turned their
backs upon the Faith which they had once received, then if they had never
received it Quidam Disputator catholicus non ignobilis hunc Evangelij locum sic
exposuit, vt diceret, praescisse Dominum Tyrios and Sidonios a Fide fuisse
postea recessuros, cum factis apud se Miraculis credidissent, and misericordia
potius non eum illic ista fecisse: quoniam graviori poenae obnoxii fierent, si
Fidem, quam tenuerant, reliquissent, quam si eam nullo tempore tenuissent.
Ibid. c. 10.
.

In process of the same Discourse, He has words to this effect: That of
Regenerate men, some dye persevering unto the end; others are detained in life,
until they fall away, who certainly had not fallen away, in case they had dyed,
before they so fell: and again, that some, who thus fall, pass not out of this
life, until they return [or rise again,] who certainly should have perished,
had they dyed before their return Ipsos quoque regeneratos, alios perseverantes
usque in Fine^, hinc abire: alios quibusque decidant, hic teneri, qui utique
non decidissent, si antequam laberentur, hinc issent: and rursus, quosda^
lapsos, quousque redeant non exire de hac vita: qui utique perire^t, si
antequam redirent, exirent. Ibid. cap. 13.
. The possibility of a total falling away, without a final, and again, of both
a total and final, cannot lightly be asserted in words more significant and
express, then these. The same Father in another part of His Works, professes
His Judgment to the same Point, thus. For who dares deny, but that those first
men were happy [or blessed] in Paradise, before they sinned, although they were
uncertain how long this their blessedness should continue, or whether it would
be eternal? But eternal it had been, had they not sinned. And now upon good
grounds we call those blessed, whom we discern to live righteously and
religiously, with an hope of future immortality, without the perpetration of
any such crime, which wastes the Conscience: who easily obtain a merciful
Pardon from God for those sins of infirmity, whereunto at present they are
obnoxious. Who, though they be certain of the reward of their Perseverance, yet
are found to be uncertain of their Perseverance it self. For what man can
certainly know, that He shall persevere in the practice and proficiency of
Righteousness unto the end, unless by some Revelation He be assured hereof by
Him, who in His just and secret Judgment, is not wont to inform all of such a
thing, though He deceives none Quis enim primos illos homines in Paradiso
negare audeat beatos fuisse ante peccatu^: quamvis de sua beatitudine, quam
diuturna, vel utrum aeterna esset, incertos? Esset autem aeterna, nisi
peccassent, cum hodie no^ imprude^ter beatos vocemus, quosvidemus just ac pie
cum spe futurae immortalitatis hanc vitam ducere, sine crimine vastante
conscientia^, facile impetrantes peccatis hujus infirmitatis divinam
miserecordiam. Qui licet de suae Perseverantiae praemio certi sunt, de ipsa
tamen Perseverantia sua reperiuntur incerti. Quis enim hominum se in action
profectuque Justiciae perseveraturum usque in Finem sciat, nisi Revelatione
aliqua ab illo fiat certus* qui de hac re justo latentique Judicio, non omnes
instruit, sed neminem fallit. Aug. de Civi^. lib. 11. cap. 12.
. That Opinion of this Father, which lies large in these words (as in some
other of the late-recited Passages, and in twenty places besides of His
Writings,) viz. that they who at present are true Saints and Believers, yea and
know this certainly, yet know not certainly whether they shall persevere, or
no, unto the end, draws along with it, by a pregnant and undeniable
consequence, that Opinion, which all this while we avouch for His also, viz.
that there is no impossibility at all but that true Believers may miscarry in
point of Perseverance, and draw back (as the Apostle speaks) to perdition. We
shall upon this account, at present, add only one Testimony more from His Pen,
unto which we are debtors for words to this effect, in His 107. Epistle. Now
Believers pray even for themselves also, that they may persevere to be that,
which they have begun to be. For it is beneficial unto all, or well nigh unto
all, that for the sake of that most wholesome Grace of Humility, they should not
be able to know how, or what manner of persons they may prove hereafter: to
which Point it is said, Let Him that stands, take heed lest He fall. For the
beneficialness of this Fear, lest when we begin to walk regenerately and
piously, we should through security become high-minded, some who will not
persevere, are, either by the permission, or provision and disposition of GOD,
mixed with those who will persevere; that we by their falling away being
terrified, may with Fear and Trembling hold on the way of Righteousness, until
from this life, which is a Tentation [or Trial, of us] on the Earth, we shall
pass unto another, where Pride shall not need to be repressed, nor we have
occasion to wrestle against the suggestions and motions of it Jam vero vt
perseverent in eo, quod esse coeperunt, etiam pro seipsis orant fideles. Vtile
est quippe omnibus, vel pane omnibus, propter humilitatem saluberrimam, vt
quales futuri sint, scire non possint. Ad hoc dicitur: Qui videtur stare,
videat ne cadat. Propter hujus timoris utilitatem, ne regenerate and pie vivere
incipientes, tanqu^ securi alta sapiamus, quida^ non perseveraturi
perseveraturis Dei permissione, vel provisione ac dispositione misce^tur;
quibus cadentibus territi, cum timore and tremore gradiamur via^ justa^, donec
ex hac vita, quae tentatio est supra terram, transeamus ad aliam, ubi jam non
sit elatio comprimenda, nec contra ejus suggestiones tentationesque luctandum.
Aug. Epist. 107. ad Vitalem.
. If there be place yet* left for any man to doubt or question, whether
Augustine taught the Perseverance of true Believers at any such a rate of
absolute necessity, as it has been of late commonly* taught, and received,
amongst us, I shall only desire such a man, in order to his through
satisfaction in the Point, to peruse what the forenamed Vossius has written in
the eleventh Thesis, or Chapter, of the sixth Book of his Pelagian History,
where he shall find, besides several of the Testimonies now cited, several
others from this Father of like consideration and* import; together with some
Explications of, and Observations from them* which, as far as the line of my
understanding is able to stretch it self, make it a truth, parallel in evidence
with the light of the noonday, that that learned and judicious Father we speak
of, was a through and professed Enemy to that Doctrine; (I mean, the Doctrine
of Perseverance hitherto opposed in the Digression in hand.) All which
considered, that saying of Mr Prynne, viz. That Augustine is so copious and*
full in the Point (he means, in asserting the Doctrine of absolute and
ascertained Perseverance,) that He wonders how any can be so impudent,
shameless, and audacious, as to cite Him to the contrary Perpetuity of a
Regenerate man's estate. page 242
; is, I will not say* (in his language) an impudent, shameless, and audacious
saying, but such a saying, which as much ingenuity as a grain of mustardseed*
would abhor. As for those Quotations from this Father, by which he seeks to
persuade the world into a conceit, that he was as far out of the way of Truth
about the Doctrine of Perseverance, as himself, there is not any one of them
that gives any distinct sound that way. We have formerly, in this very Chap.
showed you upon a clear account under the Authors own hand, how those, and all
like passages found in his Writings, are to be understood, if we desire to
understand them in his sense, and with a consistence to his Judgment in other
places.

He that desires information, whether Prosper, Salvian, Gregory the great,
Isidor Hispalensis, and other the best Writers after Augustine, that had
occasion to declare their Judgments in the Point, together with Councels and
Synods, were not of the same Judgment with Augustine, may be gratified to
satisfaction, by recourse had to the oft-mentioned Author Gerard. Joh. Vossius,
in his Historia Pelagiana, lib. 6. These. 12. The transcribing of more passages
in this kind, being already drawn together, and directed unto, by another, and
that in a Book of no difficult procurement, will not (I suppose) be judged
necessary, or much expedient, to the business in hand, by a considerate Reader.

How a Doctrine of that sovereign import in Christian Religion, of that. 15.
pregnant assertion in the Scriptures themselves, so generally and constantly
held forth and maintained by Orthodox Antiquity, as the Doctrine of a
Conditional Perseverance has in all these respects been clearly proved* to be,
should be, especially with so much heat, and confident zeal, denied and opposed
by a great party of the Reformers of Religion in these latter days, is of
somewhat a strange, ^ut of a much more sad, consideration. But as it often
happens in sweeping of Houses, especially* when they are full of dust or
soil, that pieces of silver, or gold, and other* things of value, are, either
through negligence, or too much haste made in the work, by those that do it, or
through a badness of their sight, swept up among the soil, and cast together
with it upon the dunghill; so may it very possibly fall out in great
Reformations of Religion, when corruptions, and matters requiring Reformation,
whether in Doctrine, or Manners, are very numerous, and of a long gathering,
that together with the corruptions, Errors, and things necessary to be removed,
and abandoned, some things also of worth, and good import, and which appertain
to the purity and soundness of Religion, are renounced, and cast out likewise,
partly through too much zeal of an overhasty dispatch in the work, partly
through an injudiciousness in some things, in the principal Reformers; partly
through that infirmity of incogitancy, which is so importune an attendant upon
flesh and blood, how vigilant soever. Or as it constantly falls out in
purgings and lettings of blood, that together with the bad humors, and corrupt
blood, somewhat of that which is good, and serviceable for the health and
strength of the body, is parted with, and lost: so is it hardly to be expected,
but that when an attempt shall be made to purge the body of Christian Religion,
being now encumbered and overgrown with Errors, unsound Notions and Opinions
having insinuated into the veins, and incorporated themselves (as it were) with
the pure substance of it, (which was the condition of it, by falling into the
hands of, and remaining so long amongst, those Daemoniolatrical Apostates,
whose want of love to the Truth, God avenged by sending them strong delusions,
which caused them to believe lies,) somewhat of the soundness and native
substance of it also should be divided from it, and cast into the draught
together with that excrementitious and noisome matter, which is wrought out of
it by the purge.

Notwithstanding, if we shall limit our Discourse to the Point in hand,. 16.
and only speak of the Doctrine of Perseverance, the truth is, that a very
considerable part of those, who were interessed in the Reformation of Religion
about Luthers times, and who since maintain and carry on that Reformation, have
not departed therein from the Faith of Primitive Antiquity, as it has been
presented in the preceding part of this Chapter; but clearly teach and assert
with them a possibility of the Saints declining even unto death. Concerning
those of the Reformed Religion, commonly distinguished by the name of
Lutherans, who (I suppose) are equal in numbers, and not inferior in parts of
learning, or in zeal toward the Religion, which they profess, unto those, who
are contra-distinguished by the name of Calvinists, it is sufficiently known,
that they more generally, if not universally, hold and teach (with Luther
Himself, whose Judgment in the Point was briefly touched Cap. 14. Sect. 16.) no
other Perseverance of the Saints, or true Believers, then that, which possibly
may miscarry, both totally and finally. I shall not multiply Quotations from
their Writings; but only lay before you some passages of Melancthon, (who was
Luthers Companion, and Allay,) together with two or three sayings from
Chemnitius: and for the general sense of the Lutheran party of Reformers, in
the Controversy in hand, refer you to the Testimony and Confession of a great
Defender of the common Faith in the Point of Perseverance, who (I believe) was
better acquainted with their writings, then any man that shall rise up to
oppose Him in His Testimony.

There are two Errors (says Melancthon) of fanatique men, which must briefly
be confuted, who conceit that men regenerate cannot lapse [or, fall,] and that
though they do fall, and this against the light of their Conscience, that yet
they are righteous [or, in an estate of Justification.] This madness is to be
condemned, and both instances, and sayings, from the Scriptures of the Prophets
and Apostles, opposed to it. Saul and David pleased God, were righteous, had
the Holy Ghost given unto them, yet afterward fell, so that one of them
perished utterly, the other returned again unto God. There are many sayings [to
the same Point.] And having cited (upon the said account) Mat. 12. 43, 44. 2
Pet. 2. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Apoc. 2. 5. He subjoyneth: These and the like
sayings, being spoken of Regenerate men, testify that they may fall: and that,
in case they fall against their consciences, they please not God, unless they
be converted Sed ante explicatione^ partium breviter refutandi sunt duo errores
fanaticorum hominum, qui finxeru^t renatos non posse labi: and quanvis labuntur
co^tra conscientiam, tamen justos esse. Haec amentia dam^anda est, and
opponenda ex empla and dicta Scripturae Propheticae and Apostolicae, vt Saul
and David placuerunt Deo, fuerunt justi, and donati Spiritu Sancto, tamen
postea lapsi sunt, ita vt alter prorsus perierit, alter rursus ad Deum
co^versus sit. Dicta multa sunt, etc. Melancthon Loc. de Poenitentia. Et paulo
post: Haec and similia dicta de renatis, testantur posse eos labi, and lapsos
contra conscientiam, non placere Deo, nisi rursus convertuntur.
. Elsewhere, thus: Whereas it has been said, that sins remain in the
Regenerate, it is necessary that a difference be made. For certain it is, that
they who rush into sinful practices against Conscience, do not continue in
Grace, nor retain Faith, Righteousness, or the Holy Ghost: neither can Faith
stand with an evil purpose of heart against Conscience Cum dictum sit, in
renatis manner peccata, necesse est tradi discrimen. Nam hos qui ruunt in
delicta contra Conscientiam, certum est non manner in gratia, nec retinere
Fidem, Justiciam, Spiritum Sanctum: nec potest stare cum malo proposito contra
Conscientiam Fides, etc. Idem in Loc. de bonis Oper. Qu. 5. Quod autem excidant
ex gratia, and effundant Fidem and Spiritum Sanctum, and fiant rei Irae Dei and
aeter narum poenarum, qui admittunt delicta contra Conscientiam, id multae
sententiae clare testantur. Ibid.
, etc. A little after: But that they fall from Grace, and shed Faith and the
Holy Ghost, and become guilty of the Wrath of God, and of eternal punishment,
who commit sin against Conscience, many sayings [in the Scriptures] clearly
testify; to which purpose He cites, Gal. 5. 19. and 1 Cor. 6. 9, etc. Yet
again; Let us (says (...) mind the Examples of Saul and David, who before
their Fall retained thos^ benefits [or blessings] which I rehearsed, (amongst
which, the Discovery of God, the sending of His Son, the Donation of His Word
and Gospel, the Donation of the Holy Ghost, the Promise of Life eternal, were
reckoned,) and after their Fall, were not only divested of these good things,
but felt also the [evils, or] punishments, which I mentioned, (whereof these
were some, the Wrath of God, Eternal Punishments, the loss of their Gifts
Exempla cogitemus Saulis and Davidis, qui and beneficia quae recensui (inter
quae erant, Patefactio Dei. Missio Filij, Donatio Verbi and Evangelij, Donatio
Spiritus Sancti, Promissio Vitae Aeternae, etc.) tenuerunt ante lapsum, and
post lapsum exuti tantis bonis, poenas senserunt, quas recitavi; (inter quas
erant, Ira Dei, Poenae Aeternae, amissio Donorum, etc.) Idem in Loc. de Fide.
, etc.) No more from this Author (at present, from whom notwithstanding much
more of the same import might readily be cited) but only that short saying of
His, (writing upon those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. Let Him that thinks
He stands, take heed lest He fall,) But that in some, who had the beginnings
of Faith, and afterward FALLING, RETVRN NOT, that FAITH of theirs was TRVE,
BEFORE it was LOST [or, shaken out,] the saying of Peter, 2 Pet. 2. testifies
Quod autem in aliquibus, qui initia Fidei habuerunt, and postea lapsi non
redeunt, Fides illa, prinsquam excutitur, vera sit, dictum illud Petri
testatur, 2. Pet. 2. Idem in 1 Cor. 10.
. So that there is little, or no, question to be made, but that Melancthon was
full of enmity in His Judgment against the Tenent of those, who affirm an
impossibility of the Saints declining unto Death.

Nor did Chemnitius, another learned and famous Assertor of the Lutheran. 17.
Cause, dissent from him herein. I answer (says he, having mentioned a
Tridentine Argument against assurance of Salvation, pretended from the
Scriptures) that as well the Scripture, as Experience, teach, that many do not
persevere, but fall from Grace. But this comes not to pass from hence, or
because God is not willing to preserve [or, keep] those to the end, whom He
has once received into His Grace [or, Favor,] but from hence, viz. because
many shed [or spill] the Holy Ghost, and shake [or, dash] Faith out [of their
hearts] by security, diffidence, and the works of the flesh Respondeo: multos,
non perseverare sed gratia excidere, et Scriptura, and experientia docet. Sed
hoc fit, non inde and ideo, quasi nolit Deus crede^tes, quos semel in gratiam
recepit, ad Fine^ usque conservare: sed ideo fit, quia multi, securitate,
diffidentia, et operibus carnis, Spiritu^ Sanctum effundu^t and Fidem
excutiunt. Chemn. Exam. de Fide Justif. p. 172. b.
. Not long after (speaking of such Scripture-passages as these, Let Him that
stands, take heed that He fall not; Work out your Salvation with Bear and
Trembling, etc.) He says; There is a general Answer to these Sayings. For they
are monitory unto men, lest through a persuasion of the certainty of Salvation,
they degenerate into a carnal security, whereby Faith it self is choked, and
quite put out: and that we should not indulge any corrupt affections, because
by this means Faith is extinguished: and that, unless we abide in the goodness
of God, we shall be cut off: Romans 11. But concerning Faith, it abides not in
those, who without Repentance indulge vicious [or, depraved] affections Et
paulo post: Ad has sententius respo^sio generalis est. Monent enim, ne
persuasione certitudinis de salute, degeneremus in carnale^ securitate^, qua
ipsa Fides suffoc^tur and extinguitur. Nec indulgeamus vitiosis affectibus: ita
enim Fides extinguitur. Et nisi permanserimus in bonitate Dei, excindemur, Romans
11. Non manet aute^ Fides in illis, qui sine poenitentia indulgent pravis
affectibus.
. The same Author elsewhere (having recited very many Texts of Scripture, which
speak of making shipwreck of Faith, of denying the Faith, of turning aside from
the Faith, etc. as 1 Timothy 1. 19. and cap. 4. 1. and cap. 5. 8. with several
others) speaks thus: All these sentences speak of a true, living, and
justifying Faith, which they teach may be shaken out, cast away, and lost, two
several ways: as either by sins against Conscience, (for Faith does not remain
in those, who give way unto, and indulge, evil desires against Conscience: 1 Timothy 1. 2. and cap. 5. 6.) or else by admiting an Error in the Foundation, or
by overthrowing the Foundation of Religion Quae sententiae omnes loquuntur de
vera, viva and justificante Fide, qua^ docent excuti abjici, and amitti, du^bus
modis* vel per peccata contra conscientia^, (Fides enim non manet in illis, qui
indulgent pravis cupiditatibus contra conscientia^: 1 Timothy 1. 2. and c. 5. 6.)
vel admisso errore in fundamento, aut fundamento Religionis subverso: 1 Timothy 4.
6. 2 Timothy 2. 3. Chemnit. Exam. part. 3. de Coelibat. and Virgin. p. 33. a.
: 1 Timothy 4. 6. and 2 Timothy 2. 3.

It were easy to make the pile of Testimonies from these Authors, yet far
greater, for the eviction of their sense in the Question depending: but these
produced are enough to satisfy Ingenuity; and as for Prejudice and Partiality,
the greatest abundance is not like to prove competent, or sufficient.

That the main stream of Lutheran Judgments run in the same channel with. 18.
the Opinions of those two great Masters of this way, already specified, is
once and again acknowledged by Doctor Prideaux Himself (a man of opposite
Judgment in the present Controversy;) who, as well in the Doctrine of
Perseverance, as in those other Points of Election, Reprobation, the Death of
Christ, etc. coupleth the Lutherans with the Remonstrants, or Arminians, from
place to place. See upon this account His Lectures De Absoluto Decreto, de
Gratia Universali, de Perseverantia Sanctorum, etc. Therefore certainly the
Protestant party of the Lutheran denomination, are generally so far from
magnifying the necessity, or worth, of that Doctrine, which asserteth that
fatal Perseverance of the Saints, hitherto opposed, so far from elogizing and
calling it, either the Fundamental Article of the Reformed Religion, or one of
the principal Heads, or Points of Doctrine, wherein the Protestant or Reformed
Churches have purged themselves from Popish Errors, or the foundation of that
assurance of Salvation, without which that affiance, which is requisite unto
true Faith, cannot stand, or a Doctrine, which contains that Promise of God in
it, which all Ministers are bound seriously to inculcate into their people, for
their comfort; the Lutherans (I say) are generally so far from deifying the
said Doctrine with such importune and senceless acclamations unto it as these,
wherewith notwithstanding the superstitious ignorance and weakness of some do
their devotion to it, that they rather defy and abhor it, as a dangerous and
pernicious Error, as a pillow of Satan's making, for the Flesh to repose Her
self securely, even in Her greatest licentiousness and unruliness, upon, as a
Doctrine unworthy altogether the Purity, Holiness, Wisdom, and unpartial
Integrity of God.

Concerning those of the Reformed Religion, who make one shoulder with. 19.
Calvin, to lift up the same body or frame of Doctrine with Him, though they
ordinarily, or at least, frequently (I mean, the greater part of them) declare
themselves against the Lutheran sense in the point of Perseverance, yet is this
Doctrine, which they so frequently oppose, either of that sovereign Authority
over their Judgments and Consciences other while, or of that signal and
indispensible necessity for the managing of several Points in Christian
Religion, that ever and anon, they assert it, and are necessitated to speak
things of a perfect and clear consonancy with it. I neither have leisure, nor
opportunity of Books, to make any full Collection from their Writings, of such
passages, which, by the number of those sayings that I have observed upon this
account, within a very small compass of reading, I presume are to be found
therein; but shall give a brief account unto the Reader, of what I have met
with of this import, and observed, by some occasional inspections into their
Writings, now and then. I begin with the Standard Bearer Himself of this
Brigade, Mr Calvin. He commends them (says He, speaking of the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, in respect of those, to whom he writes) that they had
begun well. But lest under a pretense of that GRACE, which THEY HAD OBTAINED,
they should indulge a carnal security, He tells them they have need of
Perseverance. For many, having only tasted lightly of the Gospel, do not so
much as think of any proficiency, as if they were come to the highest pitch
already. Thus it comes to pass, that they do not only sit down in the midst
of the race, yea sometimes near to the very entrance of the race, but TVRN
their course QVITE ANOTHER WAY. This indeed is a very specious Objection, When
we have gotten Christ, what should we desire more? But if Christ be possessed
by Faith, we must persist in Faith, that our possession in this kind may be
perpetual. Therefore Christ has given Himself to be enjoyed by us, [upon these
terms, or] by this Law, that as we are admitted by Faith to a participation of
Him, so we should by the same Faith preserve and keep so great a good, until
death Laudat, quod been coeperint. Sed ne praetexta gratiae, quam consequuti
sunt, carnis indulgeant securitate, dicit opus esse Perseverantia. Nam plerique
delibato tantum Evangelio, quasi ad summ^^ pervenerint, de profectu non
cogitant. Ita fit, vt non modo in medio stadio, adeoque prope ipsos carceres,
defideant, sed alio vertunt cursum suum. Speciosa quidem est ista Objectio,
Quid ultra volumus, postquam adepti sumus Christum? Verum si Fide possidetur,
in ea perstandum est, vt nobis perpetua maneat possessio. Ergo hac lege se
nobis frnendum dedit Christus, vt eadem, qua in ejus participationem admissi
sumus Fide, tantum bonum conservemus usque ad Mortem. Calv. in Heb. 3. 14.
. The conditionality of Perseverance in the Saints, yea the non-perseverance of
some of them, cannot lightly be asserted in terms more significant and express.
To tell men that they must persist in Faith, to make the possession of Christ
perpetual unto them; and to inform them withal, that God will by an
irresistible hand of Power make, or constrain them to persist in Faith, is to
tie Plummets of Lead to a man's heels to make Him run the faster. The same
Author elsewhere: Now (says He) we see, who they are, whom the Apostle
excludes from Hope of Pardon, namely APOSTATES, WHO HAVE ALIENATED THEMSELVES
FROM THE GOSPEL, WHICH THEY ONCE EMBRACED, AND FROM THE GRACE OF GOD; which
befalls no man, but such an one, who sins against the Holy Ghost. -- Nor
indeed does GOD DESPOYL any man OF HIS GRACE so [or, to such a degree] as to
leave Him nothing, but Reprobates only. If any man asks me, why does the
Apostle here make mention of such an Apostasy, when as He speaks unto
Believers, who were far from so wicked a perfidiousness: I answer, He timously
admonishes them of the danger, that so they may take heed in time. Which is
well worth the taking notice of: because when we turn aside out of the right
way, we do not only excuse our selves unto others, but even delude our own
selves also Nunc vide^us quosnam a speveniae excludat, nempe Apostatas qui se a
Christi Evangelio, quod prius amplexi erant, and a Dei gratia aliena^unt: quod
nemini contingit, nisi qui peccet in Spiritum Sanctu^. -- Nec certe Deus alios
ita gratia sua spoliat, nisi reprobos, vt illis nihil faciat residuum. Si quis
roget, cur talis Apostasiae, me^tionem hic faciat Apostolus quum fideles
compellet qui procul aberant a tam scelerata perfidia; respondeo, mature ab eo
indicari periculum, vt sibi pr^caveant. Quod notatu operae-pretium est: nam cum
a recta vita deflectimus, non tantum excusamus apud alios nostra vitia, sed
nobis quoque ipsis imponimus, etc. Calvin. in Heb. 6. 4.
. The same Author, writing upon Mat. 24. 13. has these words: Although the
LOVE of many, being surcharged with the weight of iniquities, shall FAIL, yet
Christ admonishes that this obstacle also must be overcome, lest those that
are FAITHFVL, being tired out by evil Examples, should START BACK, therefore He
repeats that saying, that none shall be saved, but He that shall strive
lawfully, so as to persevere unto the end See the Authors words cited, Cap. 13.
Sect. 19.
. This Author in His Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Galatians is once and
again led by the Spirit of Truth to bid defiance to His own Doctrine concerning
the impossibility of the Saints final falling away. Once in these words: He
convinces them of a defection [or, falling away,] not from His Doctrine only,
but from Christ Himself. For they could not keep their hold on Christ upon any
other terms, then by acknowledging, that by His Benefit they were freed from
the bondage of the Law Arguit autem eos defectioni^, non a sua Doctrina tantum,
sed a Christo. Nam Christum tenere aliter non poterant, quam si agnoscerent
ejus beneficio nos manumissos esse a servitute Legis. Calv. in Galat. 1. 6.
. This Testimony cannot be eluded by this accustomed put off, viz. that He
speaks, not of their falling away from true Faith, but from the Doctrine of
Faith, or from the Profession of Faith; because He says expressly, that the
Apostle convinces them of [or, reproves them, for] falling away from Christ
Himself; which is every whit as much, if not somewhat more, then falling away
from true Faith. Nor can it be supposed that Himself, holding that the Apostle
charged them with falling away from Christ, should hold, that they had not thus
fallen away, this being no less then to charge the Apostle with charging the
Galatians untruly. And besides, saying that they could not, tenere Christum, i.
e. retain, or keep their hold, or possession, of Christ, but upon such and such
terms, He plainly supposes, that a present hold, or possession of Christ may
be lost. Elsewhere in the same Epistle, the same Doctrine goes to wrack by the
Pen of the Great Patron, or Founder rather, of it, in these words. The meaning
is, if you seek for any part, or piece of righteousness in the Works of the
Law, CHRIST BECOMES NOTHING TO YOU, AND YOU ALIENS FROM GRACE. For their
Opinion was no^ so gross, as that they thought they should be justified by the
alone observation of the Law, but they mingled [or, joyned] Christ with the
Law. Otherwise Paul should have had no ground to have terrified them with such
threatenings, as these: What do you mean? You take A COURSE TO MAKE CHRIST
UNPROFITABLE TO YOU, YOU BRING HIS GRACE TO NOTHING. Thus then we see that we
cannot place, no not the least part of our righteousness, in the Law, but we
RENOVNCE [or, bid farewell unto] CHRIST, AND HIS GRACE Sensus est, si quam
Justiciae partem quaeritis in operibus Legis, Christus nihil ad v^s, and a
gratia alienati estis. Neque enim tam crassa erat Opinio, vt sola Legis
observatione justificari se crederent, sed Christum miscebant cum Lege. Alioqui
frustra his minis territaret ipsos Paulus: Quid facitis? redditis vobis
Christum inu^^lem, in nihilum redigitis ejus gratiam. Videmus ergo non posse
minimam Justiciae partem constitui in Lege, quin Christo and ejus gratiae
renuncietur. Calv. in Galat. 5. 4.
. Renunciation has no place, but in such things, which were formerly, either
held, practiced, or possessed: Nor can the Grace of Christ be said to be
brought to nothing in reference unto any man, unto whom it was never any thing.
He that never had, or enjoyed, the Grace, Favor, or good will of Christ, cannot
by any course, or practice whatsoever, be said to bring it to nothing, i. e.
wholly to deprive himself of the benefit of it. The Readers patience (I
suppose) would hardly bear a particular recitation of all the passages and
sayings, which with a little search might be drawn together out of the Writings
of this one Author, who is generally looked upon as the main Pillar of the
Common Doctrine of Perseverance, which yet strike at the very face of it. Yea I
verily believe, that, notwithstanding the great vote that is gotten up on the
wing amongst us, of Calvin's Judgment standing for the received Opinion of
Perseverance, yea notwithstanding his own sometimes dis-owning, or disclaiming
the contrary, yet there is every whit as much (or rather much more) to be found
in his Writings, of a fair and full comportance with the contrary Doctrine, as
with the said Doctrine of Perseverance. From whence I would infer, not so much
the uncertainty or instability of Judgment in so worthy a man, as the signal
usefulness, or necessity of such a Principle, or Position in Christianity,
without the help and interposure whereof, those that are enemies unto it, know
not how to manage many their Christian occasions, or affairs, otherwise. The
like observation we shall have occasion to take up in reference to all the
other main points held forth and argued in this Treatise, in opposition to
vulgar Tenants, presuming themselves Orthodox, because vulgar. At present, I
shall add only one Testimony more from Calvin, wherein he does not only, or
simply, assert a possibility both of the total, and final, falling away of true
Believers, but even a frequent reduction into act of such a possibility. The
place is in his Commentaries upon 2 Pet. 2. For scarce every tenth man of
those, who have given up their names unto Christ, retain the purity of Faith
unto the end. All (in a manner) degenerate [and turn aside] unto corruptions,
and being deluded by Masters [or Teachers] of licentiousness, grow profane Vix
enim decimus quisque eorum, qui Christo nomen dederunt, Fidei puritatem ad
extremu^ usque retinent: omnes fere ad corruptelas degenerant, atque a
Magistris licentiae delusi, profanescunt. Calvin. in 2 Pet. 2. 2.
. By men giving up their names to Christ, He cannot mean ba^e, formal, or loose
Professors, (I mean such, who never were other, or better, then these,) because
such as these cannot be charged with a non-retainment of the purity of Faith
unto the end, but rather with a non-receiving of the purity of Faith. Therefore
He must of necessity mean sound Professors, or true Believers: and consequently
affirm, that there is not one of ten among these, but degenerate into
Principles and Practices of looseness, and turn Profanelings before the end. So
that what Augustine said long since concerning Tertullian, that being acute, or
sharp-witted, He was sometimes overcome with a sight of the Truth, contrary to
His Opinion; may be truly said of Calvin also. His apprehensiveness was such,
that now and then a sight of the Truth, even contrary to the standing purport
of His Judgment, or Opinion, glanced in upon Him, and overcame Him, subjecting
His Pen and Conscience at once, for a season, unto Her service, however the
Vision ceasing, anticipated thoughts soon (it is like) recovered their former
possession.

Nor was the Truth, whose cause we plead, too hard only for Him who was the
Antesignanus, or Leader on of those, who have since declared themselves
Adversaries to Her, so as to gain from Him frequent and large Testimonies (as
we have heard,) but has been victorious also in the same kind, over those who
followed Him in the same unhappy undertaking against Her.

Musculus is in several places as direct and through for a possibility of a. 20.
total and final Defection in true Believers, as ever was Arminius Himself: If
any man (says He) who has obtained the Forgiveness of His sins past through
the Grace of the Clemency of God, shall become so notoriously ungrateful and
neglective of His own Salvation, as, like unto a Dog returning to His vomit, to
break off the course of His Repentance, and shall plainly show, that He more
despises, then fears, God; He declares Himself absolutely worthy to bear
[or suffer] the punishment due to those former sins, from which He had been
absolved. And to this sense speak the two places, which I lately cited from
Ezekiel. Besides, if He, who through Mercy has obtained the Forgiveness of a
thousand Talents, shall refuse to forgive His Brother an Hundred pence; that
is, if He who has obtained the Remission of all His sins from God, shall
refuse to forgive His Brother, upon His request made unto Him in that behalf, a
Trespass or Offense committed against Him, is there any ground or cause, why we
should ask, why such a man should be deprived of all that Remission of sins,
which He had obtained, and be called to suffer the punishment, which He had
deserved? It being most equal, that what we desire should be done unto our
selves, we also should do unto others: or if we shall deny, or refuse to do
this, that we should be deprived of that Favor, which we deny unto others. In
this case then it may come to pass, and justly happens, that Grace once
received should be made vain, or frustrate. But this is not to be imputed to
any instability of the Divine Clemency, which in God has no place, but unto
our wickedness. In which respect the Apostle, not without good ground, entreats
and warns us, 2 Cor. 6. that we receive not the Grace of God in vain Si quis
igitur pr^teritorum peccatorum co^donationem per gratiam Dei clementiae
co^sequutus, usque adeo ingratus ac salutis suae negligens evaserit, vt instar
canis ad vomitum reversus coeptam resipiscentiam rumpat, palamque ostendat Deum
se contemnere magis, quam timere; plane dignum se esse declarat, a quo
praeteritorum peccatorum, a quibus fuerat absolutus, poenae exigantur. Et huc
pertinent duo loci Ezekielis, quos supra citavimus. Adhuc, si quis mill
Talentorum condonationem miserecorditer adeptus, centum denarios fratri suo
remittere detrectaverit; hoc est, si quis omniu^ peccatoru^ suoru^ remissione^
a Deo consequutus, fratri in se peccanti, ac venia^ postea oranti, offensam
remittere noluerit, debemusne quarere, qu^re omni peccatorum suoru^ remissione,
qua^ nactus fuerat, privetur, and ad meritas poenas luend^^ revocetur?
Aequissimu^ prorsus est, vt quod nobis ipsis contingere cupimus, faciamus ipsi
and aliis: vel si id detrectemus, e^ privemur gratia, qua^ aliis negamus.
Hactenus igitur fieri potest, and merito accidit, vt semel accepta gratia
reddatur irrita. Veru^ non debetur hoc divinae clementiae instabilitati, quae
locu^ in Deo non habet, sed nostrae pravitati. Quare praeter ratione^ non est
quod Apostolus, 2 Cor. 6. obsecrat and monet, ne gratia^ Dei in vacuu^
recipiamus. Musc. in Loc. de Remiss. Peccat. Sect. 6.
.

The same Author elsewhere, does not only declare His Judgment simply and
positively for the Doctrine asserted by us, but with a plain intimation also of
his dissent herein from others. Some dispute (says he) whether it may not so
come to pass, that such a sin, which was venial, may not by circumstances,
become mortal, as in case Drunkenness should be much frequented, and become
customary, and Anger by being long retained, become strengthened. My sense is,
that even here also the quality of the Offender ought to be considered. But if
He, who was made Partaker of the Divine Grace [or Favor] shall FALL FROM THIS
GRACE, AND, OF A PERSON JUST, Religious, Faithful, and fearing God, SHALL
BECOME UNIVST, impious, unbeleeving, and a contemner of God, as this man's
Conscience by losing the purity of Faith, becomes liable unto death, so
likewise all those Sins of His, which, whilst* He was in Grace, were venial,
are now turned into mortal. Thus we read, Ezekiel. 18. When the righteous shall
forsake his righteousness, and shall commit iniquities, He shall dye in them.
And again, all his righteousness shall not be remembered. Now what else can
follow, but that if a good tree be corrupted, the fruits, which were good, must
become evil? They, who from the Principles [or, beginnings] of Faith, and of
the good Spirit, degenerate into perfidiousness [or Unbelief] render the whole
course of their lives, which was partaker of Grace, culpable of death. Such as
these, are they, who, with the Galatians, begin indeed in the spirit, but end
in the flesh. They are liable unto condemnation, and their Sins are no longer
venial, but mortal, unless they repent, and return to the Grace of the Blood of
Christ, from which they are fallen; if yet they be fallen upon no worse terms,
then that they are in a capacity of returning unto Grace. Some (I know) are
otherwise-minded in this point: but I freely declare mine own judgment without
any injury done to them Disputant de eo, fierine possit, vt quod veniale
peccatu^ erat, propter quasdam circu^stantias fiat mortale: vtsi ebrietas
freque^tetur, and in consuetudine^ ducatur, and ira diutiu^ rete^ta
corroboretur. Nos sentimus and hic quoque qualitatem delinquentis esse
consideranda^. Quodsi is, qui coelestis Gratiae fuerat particeps factus, ab ea
gratia exciderit, and ex homine justo, pio, fideli, ac Dei timente, factus
fuerit injustus, impius, infidelis, ac conte^ptor Dei, que^admodo^ hujus
conscientia puritate Fidei amissa, Morti facta est obnoxia: ita and omnia
illius peccata, quae du^ in gratia erat, venialia fuerant, in mortalia
convertuntur. Sic Ezekiel. 18. legimus, Quu^ recesseri^ Justus a Justicia sua,
f^ceritque iniquitates, morietur in ^is. Ite^, omnes Justiciae ejus oblivioni
tradentur. Quid aute^ aliud consequi poterit, si arbor bona pervertatur in
mala^* quam vt and ipsi fructus e bonis fiant mali? Qui a principiis Fidei ac
spiritus boni ad perfidia^ degenerant, omne^ sua^ vita^, quae veniae particeps
erat, mortale^ constituunt: quale^ illi sunt, qui cu^ Galatis, spiritu quide^
incipiunt, tande^ vero carne desinunt. Illi condemnationi sunt obnoxij, and
eoru^ peccata non amplius venialia sunt, sed mortalia, nisi resipiscant, and ad
gratia^ sanguinis Christi, unde prolapsi sunt, revertantur* si tamen ita
prolapsi sunt, vt resipiscentiae, ac redeundi ad gratia^ locus esse possit.
Scio hic a nonnullis aliter sentiri: verum quid mihi videatur, absque illoru^
injuria libere dico. Musc. Loc. de Peccat. Sect. 5.
. These last words, Some I know are otherwise-minded, etc. plainly show, 1.
That the deliberate and resolved Judgment of this Author stood for the
possibility of a declining in true Believers even unto death, because He
asserteth it (...), and as having weighed the contrary Opinion in the balance,
and found* it light. 2. That in his days, though there were Some of a contrary
Judgment to Him in the Point, yet the greater part of Protestant Divines (for
of these He clearly speaks) or at least many of them, were consenting to Him.
For otherwise He would not have expressed Himself thus, Scio hic a nonnullis,
etc. I know SOME are otherwise-minded, but rather have acknowledged His dissent
herein from the generality of such men, or from the common, or received
Opinion, or the like.

But for the clearness and throughness of His Judgment on that side of the
Controversy, on which we stand, several other passages in His Writings speak
home. To this contristation (says He, writing upon Romans 14. 15.) He aptly
subjoyneth the destruction of those, who are offended at the unadvised liberty
of the strong. For their mind, being weak, through such an offense as this,
easily falls to this point; begins by little and little, being [further]
weakened by a sinister suspicion, TO FALL AWAY FROM CHRISTIANITY, AND TRVE
FAITH Commode subjicit huic contristationi perditionem eorum* qui temeraria
sortium liberate offenduntur. Animus enim ad hunc modum contristatus, tanquam
infirmus, facile eo labitur, vt incipiat sen^^m per sinistram suspicionem
labefactus defi^are a Christianismo, and vera Fide. Musc. in Romans 14. 15.
. Upon Gal. 5. 7. he commenteth these words: When therefore He says, that the
Galatians did run well, He commends their zeal and studiousness in true
Faith, and the Religion of Christ: and withal signifies, that they might have
attained the mark of true Felicity, and Salvation, had they persevered in that,
which they had well begun Cum itaque Galatas been cucurrisse dicit, laudat
illoru^ zelum ac studiu^ in vera Fide ac Religione Christi: significatque
potuisse eos ad verae felicitatis ac salutis meta^ pertingere, si in eo, quod
been coeperant, persever assent. Musc. in Gal. 5. 7.
. Upon Cap. 1. 6. of the same Epistle, His Pen was ordered by Him into words of
like import, as viz. these. He had planted the Galatians, and watered them
diligently, by the preaching of the Gospel of God: hoping that it would have so
come to pass, that they would have increased in the Knowledge and Grace of
Christ. But whilst He thus hops, and wishes, they are transplanted [or
removed] from Him, in whom they had been planted Plantaverat Galatas and
rigaverat diligenter per Evangelij Dei praedicatione^: sperabatque fore, vt
crescerent in cognitione and gratia Christi. Du^ hoc sperat, and optat, illi,
ab eo, in quo plantati fuerant, transponuntur, etc. Musc. in Galat. 1. 6.
. Once more: upon Mat. 18. 35. he observes, That those sins, which are through
the Grace of God pardoned at present, shall not be remitted [or pardoned,]
unless we shall forgive our Brother. For it is an unjust thing that He should
enjoy the remitment [or forgiveness] of a debt of Ten Thousand Talents, who
refuses to forgive His Brother a debt of an Hundred pence Tertia observatio
est, etiam ea delicta, quae jam condonata sunt per gratia^ Dei, non fore
remissa, si nos nolimus remittere fratri. Est enim injustu^ gaudere de remissis
sibi Talentis mill, qui nolit centum denarios fratri remittere. Musc. in Mat.
18. 35.
. So that Musculus is no man for absolute Perseverance.

Nor does P. Martyr seem to be a man of any such engagement, by what. 21.
he writes upon 1 Cor. 13. 2. They who truly believe (says he) when they fall
into heinous sins, and nevertheless believe the same things, which they
believed before, cannot be said to be without Faith, when as notwithstanding
they are despoyled of Love [or Charity.] But we do not [grant, or] admit that
such men have Faith, whilst they live in their sins. For of such the Apostle
witnesses, that they profess to know God, but in works deny Him. Therefore
these men may be said to retain rather a show, or shadow of Faith, then true
Faith indeed, of which we speak Qui vere credunt, cum labuntur in gravia
peccata, and nihilominus eadem credunt quae prius, absque Fide dici non
poterunt, quum tamen charitate sint expoliati. Caeterum non admittimus, dum in
suis peccatis versantur eos Fidem habere. Illis Apostolus testimoniu^ defert,
quod fateantur se nosse Deum, sed illu^ factis negent. Ideo illi simulachru^
potius and spectru^ Fidei, non autem vera^ fidem, de qua agimus, retinere
dicuntur. P. Mart. in 1 Cor. 13. 2.
.

B. Aretius, in his Commentary upon 2 Pet. 2. 20. plainly enough discovers
himself to be of the same Judgment, where by those, who through the
acknowledgment of Jesus Christ had truly escaped the pollutions of the world,
etc. he understands persons that had been once converted Ostendit autem se
loqui DE CONVERSIS semel, qui mox Doctorum maloru^ opera relabuntur in prius
vitae genus etiam sub Christianismo. Vid. Mat. 12. andad Hebr. 6.
. As also upon 1 Cor. 8. 11. where he supposes a weak Brother in the Faith
liable to perishing.

Nor can he that shall unpartially consider what Bullinger writes upon 1 Pet.
1. 5. conceive him to have been otherwise judgmented in the case. In the mean
time (says he) let this suffice us, that eternal Happiness is in safety for
us, which neither Men nor Devils can intercept [or deprive us of] UNLESS FAITH
FAIL US, wherewith we should depend wholly upon Heaven, with the neglect of
things minded by mortal men Nobis interim sit satis, quod aeterna felicitas
nobis est in tuto, quam nullus hominum aut d^monu^ possit intercipere, modo ne
nos deficiat Fides, qua, neglectis rebus mortalium, toti pendeamus a Coelo.
. He that supposes, or affirms, a man to be out of all danger, or
possibility of perishing, but only in case of a failing of His Faith,
necessarily supposes, 1. That such a man is at present invested with such a
Faith, which is of the saving kind: And, 2. that there is a possibility that
this Faith may fail him before his end. To make an exception to a Rule of an
impossibility, is to sacrifice either to laughter, or folly.

Piscator himself likewise entertained this Truth at unawares, when in his
Scholia upon Romans 14. 15. he makes the Apostle to say, That a Believer, for
whom Christ dyed, may, through an offense taken, forsake the Profession of the
Gospel, and so perish out of [or, without] the Faith of Christ Perdito] id est,
offendito, vt Eva^gelij Professionem deserat, atque ita extra Christi Fidem
pereat. Metonymia effecti. Pro quo mortuus est:] Quippe qui mortuus est pro
omnibus credentibus.
. For what is is this, being interpreted, but to affirm, that true Believers,
even such for whom Christ dyed, may fall away, so as to perish?

Nor does the gloss of Mr J. Deodat (as his Englisher presents it) upon. 22.
1 Cor. 8. 11. look any other way. PERISH] i. e. (says he) shall be in danger
of wounding His Conscience mortally: and whereas before through tenderness of
Conscience He abhorred any thing, that drew near to Idolatry, He may
peradventure use Himself to it, to THE SHIPVVRACK OF HIS SALVATION. He that is
dead, is in no danger of being wounded mortally: but He, who being alive, is in
this danger, is in a possibility at least of suffering accordingly. Nor can any
Person be said to make shipwreck of that, of which He never was possessed, nor
yet to be in danger hereof.

Nor (doubtless) was learned Junius otherwise minded, when He delivered Himself
in these words: If there were no possibility that a righteous man, or Believer,
might fall away, neither would the Apostle have made this Hypothesis [or
supposition,] nor would He have inferred so grave [or weighty] a saying upon
the Supposition; nor would He have applied this saying to the Hebrews, to whom
He wrote, in the cause which was now in hand Si non posset furi vt justus, vel
credens aliquis deficeret, neque Hypothesin hanc facturus esset Apostolus,
neque ex Hypothesi tam grave pronunciatu^ allaturus, neque ad hanc causam quae
agitur, hoc dictum Hebraeis, quibus scribebat, accommodaturus. Junius in
Parallel. ad Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
.

These Passages also from the same Author, are no slender evidences of the
Propension of His Judgment the same way. Nothing at all shall he wanting [to
us] on the Lords part, if we be not wanting unto our selves A Domino nihil
plane defuturu^ est, modo ne nobis deficiamus ipsi. Idem in Parall. ad Heb. 3.
6.
. And again: Christ requires only one condition from us, viz. That we abide in
Him, and be circumspect, and attent to keep our selves from all sin and
unbelief, even as He promises that He will abide in us Christus postulat a
nobis unica^ conditionem, nempe vt maneamus in ipso, and circumspiciamus,
attendamusque nobis ab omni peccato and infidelitate, quemadmodum ipse in nobis
spondet se mansurum esse. Ibid. ad Verse. 12.
. In the former of these sayings He clearly suspends the Perseverance of the
Saints, and the continued collation of the Grace of God, which is absolutely
necessary hereunto, upon the care and faithful endevors of men for the
obtaining of it. In the latter, with like clearness He makes their
Perseverance, Conditional, and requires circumspection and watchfulness in the
Saints, in order to their abiding in Christ, notwithstanding His Promise of
abiding in them; hereby plainly declaring, that He understands this Promise of
Christ in a sense Conditional, and not Absolute.

Mollerus upon Psalm. 51. 12. commenteth that David l^st the Holy Ghost by His
sin, and was deprived of His Gifts. So that, He departing from, or not
governing David, His Heart became polluted with Wickednesses of all sorts.
Therefore He prays that a clean Heart might be again created in Him, which the
Apostle Acts 15. calls [an Heart] purified by Faith, viz. from sin and the
guilt thereof, that so He might have right thoughts of God, might truly
acknowledge God, without Hypocrisy or Simulation, but might come unto Him, call
upon Him, believe on Him, fear, obey Him David amiserat Spiritum Sanctum per
peccatu^, and privatus erat Donis. Itaque ipso discedente aut non regente
Davidem, cor statim pollutum est omnis generis sceleribus. Ideo petit rur^um in
se creari cor mundum, id quod Apostolus dicit Act. 15. purificatum Fide, a
peccatis scilicet and reatu, vt recte sentiat de Deo, vere agnoscat Deum, sine
hypocrisi aut simulatione, sed accedat ad eum, invocet eum, credat in eum,
timeat eum, obediat ei, etc.
, etc. This Text needs no Commentary.

I might here add the Testimony and Consent, both of former Councils. 23.
and Synods, as likewise of the Confessions of many late Reformed Churches. But
because others have prevented me in both, as, viz. the forementioned Gerard.
Joh. Vossius in the former Hist. Pelag. l. 6. Thesi 12.
, and P. Bertius in the latter Hymenaeus Desertor. page 105, 106, etc.
, I choose rather to desire the Reader desirous of satisfaction in either, to
consult these Authors respectively, then to imbulk our present Discourse with
transcriptions, which are of so ready an inspection elsewhere.

Only for a taste, I shall here present the Reader with a few lines out of the
Confession of the Reformed Churches of Saxony, wherein they professedly give
the right Hand of fellowship to us in the Doctrine held forth in our present
Digression. When it is said (says this Confession) that sins remain in the
regenerate, it is necessary that a difference he made. For from that saying,
Luke 11. He goes and takes unto Him seven other spirits worse then Himself, and
they entering in dwell there, etc. and such like sayings, it is manifest, that
some REGENERATE PERSONS grieve and shake [or dash] the Holy Spirit out of them,
ARE AGAIN CAST OFF BY GOD, AND BECOME GVILTY OF THE WRATH OF GOD, AND OF
ETERNAL PUNISHMENT. And Ezekiel. 18. it is written: When a righteous man shall
forsake His righteousness, and shall commit iniquity, He shall dye therein. And
when the unrighteous shall forsake His unrighteousness, and do righteousness,
He shall live therein. Therefore there is a necessity of putting a difference
between such sins, which remain in holy men during this mortal life, but do not
expel [or drive] the Holy Ghost out of them, from such other sins, for which a
man becomes AGAIN LIABLE TO THE WRATH OF GOD, and to Eternal Punishment. And
PAVL Romans 5. distinguishes between sin reigning, and not reigning. And
elsewhere He says: If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if by the
Spirit ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live Quum dictum sit
in rena it is manner peccata, necesse est trad^ discrimen. Nam ex dicto Lucae 11.
Vadit and assumit septem alios spiritus nequieres se, and ingressi babitant
ibi, etc. and similibus dictis manifestum est, aliquos renatos contristare and
excutere Spiritum sanctum, ru^sus abjici a Deo, ac fieri reos i^ae Dei, and
aeternarum poenarum. Et Ezekiel. 18. scriptum est; Quum recesse^it justus a
justicia sua, and fecerit iniquitatem, ^^ri^tur in ea; and cum recesseris
impius ab impietate sua, and fecerit justiciam, vivet in ca. Necesse est i^^tur
discerni peccata, quae in sanctis in hac mortali vita manent, ^ec excutiunt
Spiritum Sanctum, ab aliis peccatis, prop^er quae homo rursus fit reus irae
Dei, and aeternarum poenarum. Et Paulus Romans 5. discernit peccatum regnans, and
non ^egnans. Et alibi inquit, Si secundum carnem vixeritis, moriemini; si
actiones carnis spiritu mortificabitis, vivetis, etc. Vide quae sequuntur in
Confess. Saxon. Art. 10. De discrim. peccatorum.
: (with much more to the same point and purpose.)

From the Premises (exhibited in this Chapter) these five things are
concludable above all contradiction. First, That the Doctrine of absolute and
unconditioned Perseverance, as it is commonly taught, and believed, amongst
Professors at this day, and as it is stated and maintained in the Writings of
many Reformed Divines, over-honored (many of them) with the style of Orthodox,
was not known, or heard of by the Name of Orthodox, in the Primitive and purer
Times of Christian Religion; nor owned, or taught by any of the learned
Fathers, or Writers, for several Centuries of years after Christ. Secondly,
That neither since the Reformation of Religion by Luther, and his Compeers,
has it found entertainment with the generality (at least) of that numerous
party of Protestants, which, for distinction sake, are termed Lutherans, or
with the learned amongst them, but that these (very few, if any, excepted)
generally teach, and believe, with the Primitive Christians and Fathers, that
persons truly regenerate and believing, may possibly fall from their present
standing, and that so, as never to rise again. Thirdly, That this Doctrine (I
mean, the possibility of such a declining in true Believers, which ends in
death and condemnation) is by some, who otherwise are generally looked upon as
followers of Calvin, yea and are (not undeservedly) numbered amongst the most
judicious and learned of this party, pregnantly, and with particularity of
profession and acknowledgment, avouched. Fourthly, That Calvin himself, who is
supposed to be the first Founder, or Father, of the said common Doctrine of
Perseverance, or however, is the Grand Patron and Protector of it, together
with the generality of his learned followers, are constrained ever and anon in
their Writings, to give Testimony unto, and to assert the contrary, whether it
be by the forcible evidence of the Truth prevailing at times over them, or
whether it be out of a necessity that ever and anon recur'd upon them, to use
the Principle of the contrary Doctrine, for the due managing and carrying on
other subjects and discourses. Fifthly and lastly, That the Doctrine of falling
away, maintained in the Digression yet in hand, has been held, maintained, and
professed, not only by particular persons, both ancient, and modern, of
greatest name and note for true worth in every kind, as for sanctity,
learning, largeness of parts, soundness of Judgment, etc. but by Councils,
Synods, and whole Protestant Churches also in their Confessions. All which
considered, we shall need no other demonstration of the importune
unreasonableness and vanity of those ecstatical and wild encomiums, or
exorbitant depredications of the Doctrine of inevitable and unfrustrable
Perseverance, which are found in the writings, and heard from the mouths, of
some of the over-zealous Admirers of it, as if (for example) it were the
fundamental Article of the Reformed Religion; One of the principal Points of
Christian Religion, wherein the Protestant Churches are purged from Popish
Errors, and which has always been maintained by the Reformed Churches against
Papists; the Foundation of all true certainty of Salvation, without which that
fiducial and firm Assurance, which is requisite in, and unto, true Believing,
cannot stand; Such a Doctrine, which all true Ministers of the Gospel ought to
inculcate into, and whet upon, all true Believers for their Comfort, with other
like swelling words of vanity. Doubtless if it be an Error, and confederate
against the Holiness and Truth of the Gospel, (a Crime, which has been by many
competent and sufficient witnesses proved against it) it is so far from
meriting any of those impotent acclamations, lately specified, that it really
deserves to have its portion with those Merchants and Money Changers, whom our
Savior with a scourge drove out of the Temple John 2. 15.
, as Profaners of the Holy Design and Counsel of God therein.

But because the Learning and Authority of the late Synod of Dort is laid. 24.
hold on by many, as Shield and Buckler to defend the said Doctrine, I shall,
for a close of this Chapter, and of the whole Digression, briefly account unto
the Reader for such particulars, as I judge worthy his cognizance and
observation, servation, in, and about what this Synod attempted, in order to
the defense, maintenance, and safety of the said Doctrine. Far be it from me to
subscribe the Report, or information of those, who charge the respective
Members of this Synod with suffering themselves to be bound with an Oath, at,
or before their admission hereunto, to vote down the Remonstrants and their
Doctrines (how soever,) yet when I read and consider, 1. How learnedly,
solidly, and substantially they quit themselves and argue, whilst they go
along with the Remonstrants, and declare wherein they agree with them, in the
Points controverted between them; 2. How feebly and unlike themselves they
reason, when they come to the quick of the difference; 3. (And lastly) how near
at very many turns, even in those things, wherein they pretend to differ, they
come unto them, as if they had a very good mind to be no more two, but one
with them; When (I say) I consider all these things, methinks I see the
Interest and Obligation of an Oath working much after the same manner, as
sometimes it did in Herod, when for His Oath's sake, contrary to his mind and
desire otherwise, He caused John the Baptists Head to be given unto Herodias in
a Platter Mat. 14. 9.
. To show how pregnant (or, if you will, how masculine) they are, in avouching
their Judgments, whilst they keep company with their Adversaries, is (I
conceive) needless, as well themselves (I mean such of them as are yet living)
as their friends, being perswasible enough hereof, without Argument or Proof.
To show how far they fall beneath themselves, when they come to contest, and
plead the Points in difference, would be (in effect, and in reference to the
business in hand) but to re-do that, which is done already. In which respect
neither is this necessary. I shall therefore, with as much brevity, as the
Reader can well desire, and in a regular prosecution of the design of the
Chapter in hand, only show how near they came, in sense and substance of
matter, to their Adversaries, in the present Question concerning Perseverance;
and leave it to Christian Consideration, whether the difference between the two
combating Parties was of that latitude, or weight, that the one should deserve
the beautiful Crown of Orthodoxism and Honor, for their dissent from their
Adversaries; and the other, the punishment, shame, and reproach of persons so
deeply and desperately erroneous, for their non-agreement with theirs.

This Synod of Dort expressly grants, that not only they who are under. 25.
a possibility of falling away, both totally and finally, but who de facto,
will thus fall away, (for their Non-Electi signify such men as these] may be
supernaturally enlightened, by virtue whereof they may understand, that those
things, which are reported [or laid down] in the Word of God, are true, and do
give an UNFEIGNED ASSENT unto them Quibusdam Non-Electis conceditur quaedam
illumi natio supernaturalis, cujus virtute intelligant ea, quae in Verbo Dei
annu^cia^tur, esse vera, iisdemque assensum praebent minime simulatum. Act.
Synod. Dordrect. part. 2. page 188.
. And again: That such as these are enlightened with the supernatural knowledge
of the Truth of the Gospel; which enlightening proceeding from the Holy Ghost,
begets true knowledge in their minds, from whence as often as is needful, they
may act, or work, conformably to it Hi omnes illuminati sunt cognitione
supernaturali veritatis Evangelij: quae illuminatio a Spiritu Sancto profecta,
vera^ noticia^ in horu^ mentibus genui^, ex qua actus eliciebant, quoties opus
erant, eidem conformes. Ibid.
. And yet further; That the seed which fell upon the stony ground, signifies
[or points out] such Hearers, who for a time believe, i. e. who assent unto the
things revealed by God, and more especially to the Covenant of the Gospel. And
that their assent in this kind was no ways counterfeit, or feigned, appears
from hence, that they received the Word with joy Semen quod cecidit super
petrosam, eos denotat auditores, qui ad tempus credunt, i. e. qui divinitus
revelatis assentiuntur, and imprimis pacto Evangelico. Assensum autem hunc
minime simulatum fuisse inde constat, quod sermone^ cum guadio exciperent.
Ibid. p. 189.
. By the express Tenor of all this discourse, most evident it is, that this
Synod grants a possibility of falling away, both totally and finally, in
those (at least in many of them) who by means of a supernatural illumination,
and this wrought by the Holy Ghost, come truly and unfeignedly to believe the
Gospel, yea and to live and to walk conformably unto it. So then if it be made
to appear by clear evidence of Scripture, that such as these, ( viz. who truly
and unfeignedly believe the Gospel, live conformably to it, etc.) are true and
sound Believers, in an estate of justification, acceptance with God, etc. it
undenyably follows, that this Synod, which with the weight of their sentence
ground to powder their Brethren termed Remonstrants, for their Opinions, as
being of most dangerous and desperate consequence, (especially this, concerning
the possibility of a non-perseverance in true Believers) were in the very same
condemnation themselves; held and asserted the same Errors (if yet Errors they
were) with them. I speak now only concerning their dogmatizing with them in the
Point of Perseverance (the fifth and last Head of the Controversies between
them.) But the truth is, and an intelligent Reader may readily find it, that
in other Points also, wherein they sentenced the persons mentioned, as men so
extremely and dangerously erroneous, as in the question about the extent of
Christ's Death, the extent of saving Grace, etc. they deliver and maintain the
same things with the persons sentenced by them, if not formally in plainness
and expressness of terms (though sometimes they want very little even of this)
yet arguitively, in grounds and principles, manifestly bearing, and issuing
forth the same conclusions; as we shall have occasion to show (God willing) in
the progress of our present Discourse.

Or though it could not be proved from the Scriptures, that the persons
subjected to a possibility of a total and final Apostasy, by the Synod, are
true and real Believers, yet if they were, or be, such, in the sense and
judgment of the Remonstrants (which is apparent enough that they were, and are)
the Synod had no cause to fall foul upon them, as erroneously dissenting from
them in the Point of Perseverance, but only as dissenters, or erroneous, in
judging, or discerning the difference between sound, and unsound Believers, or
between Persons justified, and not justified. But this only by the way.

But that the persons liabled by the Synod to a defection from Faith, both. 26.
total and final, as viz. such, who being supernaturally enlightened, have the
true knowledge of God, unfeignedly believe the Gospel, act conformably, have
their affections in part changed, their lives in part reformed, their persons
in part renewed In iisdem ex hac cognitione and side oritur affectuumquaedam
mutatio, and morum ali qualis emendatio -- and Verse. 6. innuitur ^osdem aliquo
modo fuisse renovatos, etc. Ibid.
, etc. are by the Scriptures adjudged for true and sound Believers, for persons
truly justified, etc. is so apparent, that to me there seems no place left for
doubting, unless (happily) prejudice, or anticipation of Judgment, makes room for
any man in this kind. Yea, the Scripture makes, not only the collection, or
joint concurrence of the particulars specified, a distinguishing character of
true and sound Believers from those who are not such, but some of them even
singly and apart from others. As, 1. A true and unfeigned Belief of, or Assent
unto, the things revealed by God in the Gospel. But these things are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through His Name Joh. 20. 31.
. First, there is nothing more evident, then that the Word of God does report,
and declare, That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. 2. It is here plainly
asserted, that to believe this (at least with a true and unfeigned Faith, or
Belief) is available unto Life, or Salvation. Otherwise we must say, that that
Faith, for the effecting and working whereof in the hearts of men, the Gospel
was written, is unavailable to save them. Which to affirm, what is it but to
bring an evil and hard Report upon the gracious Counsel and Intendment of God,
in causing the Gospel to be written? But the same truth is most manifestly
asserted in very many places besides. Who is he that overcomes the world, but
he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God 1 John 5. 5.
? To overcome the world, is an unquestionable character of a person justified,
and in favor with God. And whosoever (says John) believes that Jesus is the
Son of God, partakes in this glory, is victorious over the world. So again, the
Lord Christ, having a little before his Ascension, commissioned his Apostles
thus; Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature; He
immediately subjoyneth, He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved: but
he that believes not, shall be damned Mark 16. 15 16.
. That believing, which our Savior here requires, and unto which he promises
Salvation, is (doubtless) no other Faith, or believing, but a true and
unfeigned belief of that Gospel of his, which his Apostles (in the words
immediately preceding) were enjoined to preach unto the world. And if it shall
be said, That men might, or may, believe, and that truly and unfeignedly, all
that the Apostles preach to them, and yet perish; that vast and signal
difference which our Savior here makes between Believing, and not believing,
vanishes into nothing, is made none at all. See further upon the same account,
Joh. 8. 24. and 11. 27. Acts 8. 37, with 38. Romans 4. 3. and 10. 9. with very
many other Texts of like pregnant and unquestionable import. From all which it
fully appears, that a true and unfeigned admission, or Reception of the
Gospel, as it comes from God, and is declared by him in the Writings of the
Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, into the heart, and Soul of a man, (which
is done by a true and unfeigned belief of, or consent unto, it,) translates him
from death to life, makes him a Child of Light, a Son of God, an Heir of
Salvation, etc. And what Faith* or Belief, can it reasonably be imagined,
should have this mighty and blessed influence upon the creature, Man, to turn
him from darkness unto light, from death unto life, from Satan unto God, but
only the true and unfeigned Belief of those glorious Mysteries, which were
brought out of the Breast and Bosom of God by his Son Jesus Christ, at his
coming into the World?

That a true, cordial, unfeigned Belief of the Gospel, and things of God, is.
27.
true justifying Faith, has been the Sense and Doctrine of the best and most
judicious Authors, as well ancient, as modern, I could instance and prove at
large, if it were not somewhat too eccentrical to the business in hand. It is
(says Calvin) the Righteousness (i. e. the Justification) of Faith, if we
believe that Christ dyed, and was raised up again from the dead Fidei Justicia
est, si credamus Christu^ esse mortuu^, atque a mortuis excitatum. Calvin in
Gal. 3. 1^.
. Elsewhere he says, that the Apostle Paul defines those to be faithful [or
true Beleevers] who have the KNOWLEDGE of sound Doctrine Posteriori membro
definit quos vocet Fideles, nempe qui notitiam habent sana Doctrinae. Idem in 1
ad Tim. 4. 3.
: and pronounces the Faith of Sarah, whom he calls the Mother of all
Believers, to consist in this, That she judged God faithful, or true, and that
in his Promises Hanc enim fuisse Sarae fidem praedicat, quod verace^ judicavit
Deum, idque in suis promissionibus. Ibid. in Heb. 11. 11.
. Luther, speaking of Abraham, says, That He was justified only upon this,
that he gave credence to the Word of God; interpreting that of Moses, Genesis 15.
6. Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness: as if
he had said, Abraham believed God to be true in his Words and Promises, and was
therefore counted a worthy and righteous man by God Abrahami exemplu^ adducit,
quippe quod ille ex hoc tanta^ justificatus fuerit, quod verbo Dei Fide^
habuerit, quemadmodu^ Scriptura inquit, Credidit Abraham Deo, and imputatu^ est
ei ad justiciam, Genesis 15. Ac si diceret, Abraham Deum in su^ verbis and
promissionibus verace^ credidit, and idcirco a Deo pro spectato et justo viro
habitns fuerit. Luth. Po^hil. p. 782.
. And learned Chamier, defines Abraham's Faith, whereby he was justified,
Ingentem confidentiam super promissione divina, quam ille credidit omnino
implendam Chamier. Tom. 3. p. 428.
* i. e. a mighty confidence of the Promise of God, which he believed would
absolutely be fulfilled. Peter Martyr, most frequently (and I think I might
say, constantly) in his Writings, places justifying Faith in a firm Belief, or
assent, unto the Gospel or Word of God. Our Faith (says he) is nothing else,
but AN ASSENT, OR FIRM PERSVVASION OF THE WORDS OF GOD. From whence it appears,
that our Faith proceeds from the Faith [or, faithfulness] of God. For when our
experience teaches us that He is faithful, we readily believe him: and that
belief, which we give to his words, is presently attended with Hope Nostra
Fide; non aliud est qua^ asse^su^, and persuasio firma de verbis Dei. Vnde
liquet Fidem nostram ex Dei Fide nasci. Quia cum illum Fidelem esse experiamur,
facile credimus, and Fidem, quam verbis ejus adhibemus, illico spes
consequitur. P. Mart. in 1 Cor. 1. 9.
. By which last words it is evident, that he speaks of true justifying Faith in
the former. Again: Faith may be defined to be a firm and constant assent of the
mind to the Words of God, inspired by the Holy Ghost, for the Salvation of
those that believe. In this Definition there is none of the four Causes
wanting: The Word of God, is the matter [or, material Cause] THE ACT OF
CONSENTING, THE FORMAL: the Holy Ghost, the Efficient: our Salvation, the Final
Fides definiri potest, quod sit firmus ac consta^s animi assensus virb^ Dei,
Spiritu Sancto aff^atus, ad salutem credentium. Nullum causarum genus in hac
finitione desideratur. Materia, est verbum Dei. Forma, consentiendi actio.
Efficiens Spiritus Dei, quo suademur. Finis, est nostra salus. Ibid. in verse.
31.
. In which words it is observable, that he expressly makes the formal Cause of
Justifying Faith, to consist in the act of assenting, or consenting [to the
Word of God.] Yet again: To believe, (as to our purpose) is by means of the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost to exhibit [or, give] A FIRM ASSENT unto the Word
of God, and this for the Authority of God Himself. And not long after: Let us
now infer, that Faith is a gift, or faculty, inspired into us by the Spirit of
God, whereby we yield A FIRM AND SETTLED ASSENT unto the Word of the Lord, by
means of his Authority Quamobrem credere, prout ad rem nostram facit, est
afflatu Spiritus Sancti verbo divino assensum firmum praebere, idque ipsius Dei
Authoritate. Idem in 1 ^or. 13. 2. Paulo post: Jam colligamus, Fidem esse donum
sive facultatem, nobis divino Spiritu afflatam, qua verbum Domini, ejus
Authoritate firmu^ constantemque praebemus assensum.
. Once more: In this Dispute [of justifying Faith] by Faith we understand, that
FIRM ASSENT, which is of so great strength and efficacy, that it d^^weth along
with it the effect of Affiance, Hope, and Charity, together with all good
works, as the infirmity of this present life will bear Omnibus igitur
significationibus his abjectis, in hac disceptatione Fide^ intelligimus, firmum
illum assensum, qui tantaru^ sit viriu^ ac efficaciae, vt secum trahat effectum
fiduciae, spei, charitatis, and omnia tandem bona opera, vt pr^sentis vit^
infirmitas patitur. Idem. in Loc. Com. Class. 3. c. 4. Sect. 5.
. From the latter words of this Testimony, it plainly appears, that the sense
of this Author is, that that trust, recumbency, or reliance upon God, or
Christ, wherein the said Synod (with some others) places (as it seems) the
essence of justifying Faith, is no part of this Faith, but only a necessary
effect or consequent of that firm assent unto the Gospel, or Word of God,
wherein he places the entire essence of this Faith, (as we have heard.) Of
which unquestionable Truth I could join many Co-assertors unto him, of approved
learning and worth, as Chamier, Dr George Downham, and others, if I conceived
it any ways necessary, or commodious, to the business in hand.

But I have still a considerable Reserve of Resolute Doctors to make good. 28.
against the Synod of Dort, that they themselves assert and teach a possibility
of a final Apostasy in persons truly justified, as well as their Opposers, the
Remonstrants (notwithstanding their heavy censure passed upon them for this
Doctrine) such I mean, who place true justifying Faith in a certain knowledge
of, or firm assent unto, the Word of God; and consequently, conclude those to
be persons truly justified, against some of which, the said Synod does not
only avouch and teach, a possibility of their total and final defection, but
even a necessity also: which is a strain of contest against the necessity of
the Saints Perseverance, higher then ever any Arminian, or Remonstrant, woun'd
up his pen unto. We therefore (says Gualter) say, that Faith is a certain firm
assent of mind, arising from the Word of God, whereby we acknowledge Christ for
such, as the Scriptures exhibit Him unto us, [or hold Him forth, to be Dicimus
ergo Fidem esse, certum and firmum animi assensum, ex verbo Dei enatu^, quo
Christu^ tale^ agnoscimus, quale^ illum nobis Scripturae proponunt. Gualt. in
Ioh. Hom.
.] That Faith (says Melancthon) which justifyeth, is not only a notice of the
History, but it is TO ASSENT to the Promise of God, wherein Remission of Sins
and Justification are freely offered for Christ's sake Sed illa Fides, quae
justificat, no^ est tantu^ noticia Historiae, sed est adse^tiri promissioni
Dei, in qua gratis propter Christu^ offertur remissio peccatoru^ and
justificatio. Melanct. in loc. de Justificat.
. And elsewhere, he affirms this Faith to be AN ASSENT to every Word of God
delivered to us Fides est assensus omni verbo Dei nobis tradito.
. Chemnitius delivers this definition of justifying Faith, as more generally
approved of by Protestant Divines, and by himself also. Faith is TO ASSENT unto
the wh^le Word of God delivered unto us, and herein to the free Promise of
Reconciliation granted [unto us] for Christ [our] Mediator Fides est assentiri
universo Dei verbo nobis tradito, and in hoc promissioni gratuitae
reconciliationis donatae propter Christum Mediatore^. Chemn. Exam. page 159.
. Musculus observes, That in the Example of Abraham in the Scriptures, this is
not only commended [or taken knowledge of] that He believed there was only one
God, but that He believed the Promises of God In exemplo Abrahae, non hoc
tantu^ praedicatur, quod crediderit ille hoc tantu^, unu^ esse Deu^, sed quod
Fide^ habuerit promissionibus Dei. Musc. loc. de Justif. Sect. 5.
; clearly implying, that his belief of these Promises, was that Faith which
justified him. Zanchius reports this to be a definition of justifying Faith,
which Bucer, and other Orthodox Divines, gave: Faith is the gift of God, and
work of the Holy Ghost in the mind of the Elect, whereby they BELIEVE THE
GOSPEL of Christ Non Bucerus solu^, sed etia^ alij multi definiunt saepe Fide^
ita, vt dicant ea^ esse donu^ Dei, and opus Spiritus Sancti in Mente Electorum,
quo Christi Evangelio credunt. Zanch. Tom. 7. page 352.
. Himself elsewhere frames us this definition: Faith is a virtue given unto us
by God, by which we ARE PERSUADED, that whatsoever was heretofore propounded
by the Prophets and Apostles in the Name of God, and is now preached unto us
out of their Writings, is the Word of God, and believe and profess this whole
Word, as well the Law, as the Gospel, as the certain Word of God Fides est
virtus a Deo nobis donata, qua quicquid olim propositum fuit nomine Dei, a
Prophetis and Apostolis, nunc aute^ nobis ex ipsorum Scriptis praedicatur,
persuasi sumus esse verbum Dei, illudque totum, tam lege^, quam Evangelium, vt
certum Dei verbum credimus ac prositemur. Zanch. Tom. 4. page 241.
. Beza affirms, that the state of the Epistle to the Romans, is to be ordered
[or disposed of, in our Judgments] thus; That we are saved by God, through one
Christ, IF WE SHALL BELIEVE THE GOSPEL Sic disponendus est status hujus
Epistolae: nos a Deo per unum Christum servari, si Evangelium crediderimus.
Beza in Romans 1. 17.
. Polanus describes justifying Faith, A KNOWLEDGE AND ASSENT, whereby a man
believes all that to be true, which God has commanded to be believed Fides
est notitia and assensus, quo creditur verum esse, quicquid Deus credendum
praecepit. Polan. Partit. Theolog. l. 2. p. 368.
. Vrsine thus: Faith is a true persuasion, whereby we ASSENT to every Word of
God delivered unto us Fides est vera persuasio, qua assentimur omni verbo Dei
nobis tradito. Ursin. de Primo Praecept.
. If thou (says Mr Tyndal, the Martyr) BELEEVEST THE PROMISES of God, the
Truth of God justifies thee, i. e. He forgiveth thee thy sins, and takes thee
into Favor Si promissionibus Dei credas, veritas Dei te justificat, i. e.
ignoscit tibi, teque in gratia^ recipit. Tyndal. de Christian. Obed. ad Hen. 8.
.

Give me leave to instance one Author more. Dr Jo: Davenant, a member of those
convened in the Synod at Dort, and quorum pars magna fuit, arguing against
Bellarmine, the non-abolition of Faith, even in the glorified condition it self
of the Saints, in respect of the nature, habit, or essence of it, uses this
demonstration; viz. that those, who are in an estate of perfect blessedness,
are so [affected, or] disposed, that they are willing to assent unto God, not
only because of the evidence of the matter, but also for the Authority of the
Assertor, although the thing affirmed were in it self inevident. Yea and
further says, that there is none of the Blessed [or glorified] ones, but will
much more readily believe God for the Authority of the Speaker, then He that is
endued with the greatest Faith, amongst Travelers, [i. e. amongst the Saints
that are yet in the course of their pilgrimage upon the Earth Dicimus igitur
Fide^, quoad habitu^ manner, and perfici in futura vita, licet evacuetur quoad
accidentale^ aliqua^ conditione^ pro statu viae illam concomitante^. Ipsi enim
beati sic dispositi sunt, quod non solum Deo assentire velint ex evidentia rei,
sed etiam propter Authoritatem asserentis, qua^vis res affirmata esset in se
inevidens. Imo multo promptius propter Authoritate^ dicentis crederet Deo
quivis ex numero Beatoru^, qua^ ille qui maxima Fide praeditus est inter
viatores. Hoc aute^ arguit habitu^ Fidei esse in beatis perfectissimu^, qua^vis
obscuritas ejus ratione status glorio^i evacuetur. Dr Jo: Daven. Praelect. de
duob. in Theolog. contr. capitibus, etc. page 326.
.] Therefore (questionless) his sense also was (at least when he wrote these
things) that a true, firm, and unfeigned assent unto God, speaking, asserting,
or revealing, is true Faith, and justifying: for about this was the Contest
between him, and his Adversary. And besides, the whole Tenor of the Discourse
there managed makes this manifest.

Fearing least I have overcharged the Readers patience already, I supersede
the citation of the ancient Fathers (besides others more of our later
Protestant Authors) who (generally) look upon it, as no injury to Truth, to
hold and teach, that a true, real, and unfeigned assent unto the Gospel, and
Promises of Salvation, herein, is nothing less then a true justifying, and
saving Faith, a Faith enstating a person in the Grace and Favor of God. So that
by the express Testimony, 1. Of the Scriptures themselves; 2, By the conviction
of sound Reason; And lastly, by a verdict of the most judicious and learned of
their own friends (at least claimed and owned for such by themselves) the Synod
of Dort, who levied an hard and most severe sentence against the possibility of
the Saints perishing by Apostasy, have stumbled at that stone of
inexcusableness, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art, that judge: for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that judge, do the same things.
Yea it has been proved, that this Synod it self flew an higher pitch of
opposition against the Perseverance of the Saints, then those, who upon this
account were made such grant offenders by them.

This Indictment we have hitherto managed, and made good against them. 29.
by the consideration of one character or expression only from their own pen,
whereby they describe those, whom they expose to a possibility of apostatizing
to perdition, viz. a true and unfeigned belief of, or consent unto, the
Evangelical Compact, and whatsoever is revealed by God in the Gospel. This we
have proved by a cloud of witnesses, some speaking from Heaven, others from the
Earth, to be an inseparable and essentially distinguishing Character of true
Saints, and justified men. But,

2. If we judged, or could think that the Reader would judge, that which has
been done already, insufficient to evince the Synod, though not of Error or
Heresy, yet of Autoc^tacrisie, or self-condemnation, we should insist upon and
urge other expressions from them, whereby it might be made yet further to
appear, that their foot is in very deed in that snare we speak of. For do they
not say, and confess in words plain enough (which have been cited) that the
persons put by them under a possibility, yea some of them ( horrendum dictu)
UNDER a NECESSITY, of that doomful Apostasy, which is always accompanied with
eternal perdition, may have, and that many of them de facto have, the true
knowledge [of God, and of Christ, or of God in Christ] in their mind, (for what
other knowledge they should here mean, is not imaginable,) and that out of this
knowledge, they may, as often as is needful [is not this, constantly, and without
turning aside?] act conformably? And what is this but to bring forth fruits
worthy Repentance, yea and to equalize the best and worthiest of the Saints in
doing Righteousness, which the Holy Ghost makes the most emphatical and
unerring property, or character, of such men. Little children, let no man
deceive you, (says John;) He that does Righteousness, is righteous, even as He
is righteous 1 John 3. 7.
: (of which passage formerly Cap. 9. Sect. 11. and cap. 11. sect. 55.
.) And again: In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the
Devil. Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God 1 Ioh. 3 10.
: and consequently, whosoever does righteousness, is of God. For otherwise the
not-doing of righteousness, were no manifestation of the one sort of these
children, from the other.

3. (And lastly) whereas the Synod pleads, that the seed falling upon the stony
ground, Luke 8. 13. imports such Hearers, which for a time believe, (i. e. give
an unfeigned assent unto the things revealed by God in the Gospel Act a. Synod.
Dordrec. part. 2. page 189.
,) and afterward fall away, whereby they would insinuate, that these Hearers,
notwithstanding their unfeigned assent unto the things of God, and the Gospel,
were never true Saints, nor persons justified before God; we have formerly by
an unpartial enquiry into the Parable, and by many pregnant Arguments drawn
from the carriage of it, evinced, that the persons emparabled by the seed
falling upon the stony ground, were true Saints, and their Faith of the same
kind, and during the continuance of it, equally justifying, with theirs, who
were represented by the good ground Cap. 12. sect. 32, 33* etc.
.

Leaving therefore the Synod at present, let us recollect and draw up into. 30.
a brief account, the sum of all that has been argued in the present
digression, and so conclude this Chapter.

First, It has been clearly proved, that the Doctrine which maintains an
absolute necessity, or infallibility of the Saints Perseverance in Grace, or
Faith, unto the end, has nothing more in it (or rather, nothing so much) for
the true and real consolation of the Saints, then that which is contrary unto
it. Secondly, Diligent and unpartial search has been made into those passages
of Scripture, which the greatest Advocates of the said Doctrine of Perseverance
mainly insist upon, for the defense of it: none of which, it has been made
fully to appear, holds any true or real correspondency with it. Thirdly, The
best and most substantial Arguments and Grounds, upon which the said Doctrine
is wont, by the skilfullest workmen of Her Party, to be built, have been
weighed in the balance, and found too light. Fourthly, The Doctrine contrary
hereunto, and which avoucheth the possibility of the Saints declining, and this
unto death, has been asserted by the express Testimony and consent of many
Scriptures. Fifthly, This Doctrine also has received further credit and
confirmation from several Principles and grounds, as well of Reason, as
Religion, and these pregnant and strong. Sixthly, The truth of this latter
Doctrine has been further ascertained by several instances and examples of
persons, who by their fallings, have caused the said Doctrine to stand
impregnable. Seventhly, This Doctrine has been countenanced also by the
concurrent sense of all Orthodox and Christianly-learned Antiquity. Eighthly, It
has likewise received Testimony from the generality of that Learning and
Religion, since the times of Reformation, which have commended themselves unto
the World in the Works and Writings of that Party of men in the Protestant
Churches, which is commonly known by the Name of Lutheran. Ninethly,
Substantial proof has been made, that the professed Adversaries of the
Doctrine we now speak of, even the most steady, grave, and best advised of
them, have at unawares, given large and clear Testimony unto it, being not
able, without the help of the spirit which speaks in it, to manage (like
themselves) their discursive affairs in other cases. Yea, Tenthly (and lastly)
that the Synod of Dort it self, convening with a conscientious, if not with a
concupiscentious prejudice also (for this is the strong suspicion of many)
against it (with its fellows) and intending, and provoking one another, to lay
the honor of it in the dust for ever, has at several turns, and in diverse
expressions, according to the interpretation and sense of their own most
orthodox and learned Friends, yea and some of themselves, fully comported with
it, asserting that in clearness and evidence of Principle, which they deny with
solemnity of protest, and with a Religious abhorrency, in conclusion.

We now return to the further prosecution of the business principally intended
in this Discourse, (from which we have made somewhat a large digression, upon
the occasion formerly specified,) and to complete our Demonstration of this
great and most important Truth, viz. That the ever-blessed Son of God, and
Savior of the World, the Lord Jesus Christ, gave Himself a Ransom in His Death
for all, and every man, without exception of any.

CHAP. XVI.
Several other Texts of Scripture (besides those formerly produced in ranks and
companies) argued to the clear eviction of Truth, in the same Doctrine, viz.
That the Redemption purchased by Christ in his Death, was intended for all, and
every man, without exception of any.

HAving in our late Digression largely vindicated some material proofs. 1.
from the Scripture, formerly levied for the defense of that Great and most
important cause, both of God, and men, the Universality of Redemption by
Christ, we now proceed to a further levy upon the same account, and shall raise
up more Scriptures to plead the same cause.

Let us begin with the Parable of the marriage feast, as it is reported by
Matthew, and Luke. We shall not need (I suppose) to transcribe the whole
Protasis of the Parable, which is very large: but only insist upon some few
known passages of it, such as I conceive will jointly, if not severally, give a
light of demonstration to the Truth of that Doctrine, the proof and
confirmation whereof is the prize contended for in this Discourse. However, if
the Reader desires an entire enter-view of the Parable, He may repair Matt. 22.
2, 3, etc. Luke 14. 16, 17, etc.
without much trouble, to the Evangelists themselves.

First, Expositors generally agree, that by those who were the first, and
second time called or invited, to the wedding [ He sent forth His servants to
call them, that had been called (...).
, to the wedding: Mat. 22. 3.] are typified, or meant, the Jews; whom God had
anciently invited, and called, by the Ministry of His Prophets, and several
other ways, to partake of that great Blessedness, which He intended to confer
upon the sons and daughters of men, by means of His only begotten Son Jesus
Christ, and who were the second, yea and the third time also, invited hereunto;
first by John the Baptist, and the Lord Christ Himself, and afterward by His
Apostles.

Secondly, The Tenor or form of the invitation, which the servants sent forth
to call those, that had been formerly invited, were enjoined by the King to use
in calling them, is this: Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my Oxen and my
Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: Come unto the marriage Matthew.
22. 4
. When he says to those that are invited, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen,
etc. doubtless His meaning is not, that He had prepared His dinner for others,
or that His Oxen and Fatlings were killed for the entertainment of others, and
not for those who were invited by Him. Such an intendment as this in His
invitation, had been merely delusory, and altogether unmeet to represent the
intentions of God in calling men to communion and fellowship with His Son Jesus
Christ, by His Ministers of the Gospel. He that should invite a man to a feast,
and use such an Argument or motive as this, to persuade Him to accept of this
His invitation, and to come accordingly, viz. that He had made very liberal
preparations for such and such other men, but had provided nothing for Him,
should He not render Himself ridiculous by such a strain of Oratory?

Thirdly, Evident it is, that very many of those, who were invited to this
Marriage Feast by the King, and consequently, for whom the feast was prepared,
and for whose sake the Oxen and Fatlings were killed, never came to partake of
the said Feast, but were rejected, and excluded from it with great indignation,
by Him that had so graciously invited them. But when the King heard thereof,
(viz. how they had mis-used, and murdered His Servants) He was wroth, and sent
forth His Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City Verse
7:
. Concerning whom likewise, the King said to His Servants, that had been sent
forth to invite them: I say unto you, that none of those men that were bidden,
[and refused to come,] shall taste of my Supper Luke 14. 24
.

Fourthly, It is no less evident, that the true ground or reason why those,
that were thus excluded from the Feast, or suffered this exclusion, was not any
precedent purpose or intendment in the King to exclude them, (for had any such
intention harbored in Him, questionless He would never have invited them,) no
nor yet that subsequent intendment in Him, to exclude them, when He saw their
great unworthiness; but this unworthiness of theirs it self. Then says He to
His Servants, the wedding is ready; but they which were bidden, were NOT
WORTHY. Go ye therefore into the high ways Mat. 22. 8.
, etc. Clearly implying, that it was the UNVVORTHINESS of the persons invited,
which was the true and proper cause of their exclusion. Neither the import, nor
sentence of the Law, nor yet the Judge, or His just severity in giving sentence
according to the Law, are so properly the cause of the punishment, or death, of
the Malefactor, as the crime committed against the Law by himself. It is merely
accidental to the Law, and to the Judge, and so to their intentions
(respectively) that such, or such a person, becomes a Malefactor, and
consequently, that he suffers death. But the suffering punishment, or death,
are the natural and proper fruits of the violation of the Law, justly
inflicting them, in whomsoever it be found. And if the matters of Fact deserve
punishment, or death, it would argue a defect in the Law, and in the Judge, if
they should not, according to their different capacities, give sentence
accordingly. We have (as I remember) elsewhere showed, that neither God, nor
any Decree, or Law of his, are any cause, intentionally, or directly, of any
man's, either sin, or punishment, but occasionally, or accidentally only: and
that so, that whosoever sins, or comes to be punished for sin, might have
avoided both, any Purpose, Law, or Decree of God notwithstanding. And to this
purpose, pertinent is the Observation made by Musculus, upon our Saviors
expression, Mat. 22. 2. (...), etc. i. e. the Kingdom of Heaven is made like,
or become like, not, is like, unto a certain King, etc. For (says he) the
Kingdom of Heaven is not such a thing, that all the particulars here [in this
Parable] reported of it, should belong to the nature of it: but several of them
are accidental to it, through the wickedness of men. Otherwise, this Kingdom,
does not of it self, or in its proper nature, tend to the destruction of any
man Observa^du^ est quam notanter si^ dictu^* (...), Simil^ factum est. Non
enim in seipso tale quid est regnum coelorum, vt quae hic de illo
co^memorantur, ad illius pertineant natural, sed accidunt illi improbitate
mortalium. Alioqui non facit natura sua ad cujusda^ P^rdition^, etc. Proinde
recte non dicit; Simile est regnum coelorum, (...)* sed simile factum est,
(...).
, etc.

Fifthly (and lastly,) The pregnant Result of the premised Particulars, is
this, That the marriage Feast in the Parable, was provided by the King, and the
Oxen and Fatlings, here spoken of, killed, not only for those, who upon their
invitation, were persuaded to come and partake of them, but as well, and with
equal (if not with more especial) intentions on the Kings part, for those also,
who never came to taste of them; and consequently, that the Death of Christ
(signified by the Oxen and Fatlings slain) and the blessedness accruing unto
the children of men hereby, signified by the Feast it self, were equally meant,
and intended by God, for those who perish, and for those who are saved; and
consequently, for all men, without exception of any. And indeed this purport of
the Parable lies so large and full in the carriage of it, that Calvin himself
could not but subscribe unto it, as he that shall please to peruse his
Commentaries upon Mat. 22. 2. and withal acknowledge what is evident, must
needs confess. Amongst several other passages facing this way, having specified
some points of difference between Matthew, and Luke, in recording the Parable,
he says, That yet in the sum and substance of the matter they very well agree,
viz. that whereas God vouchsafed this peculiar Honor to the Jews, to provide
and FVRNISH A TABLE OF ENTERTAINMENT FOR THEM, they rejected this Honor
pr^ffered to them. And says moreover, That Whereas many Expositors refer the
Marriage of the Kings Son [in the Parable] to this Point, That Christ is the
end of the Law, and that God had NO OTHER INTENT IN HIS COVENANT with this
people, then to set him [as a King, or Ruler] over them, and by the sacred band
of a spiritual Marriage to join a Church unto him, I freely accord with them
herein In summa quide^ optime convenient, quod cum Deus Judaeos peculiari
honor dignatus fuerit, quasi mensam hospitalem illis instruens, illi oblatum
sibi honore^ contempserint. Quod nuptias filii Regii huc refereunt multi
Interpretes, quia Christus finis est Legis, neque alio spectavit Deus in suo
foedere, quam ut eum populo suo praeficeret, sacroque spiritualis conjugii
vinculo Ecclesia^ ei conjungeret, libenter amplector.
. Afterward, upon verse. 9. of the same Chapter, But (says he) if God then
spared not the natural Branches, the same Vengeance hangs over us at this
day, unless we answer when he calls. Yet shall not the Supper PROVIDED [or,
prepared] FOR US, be lost, but God will furnish himself with other guests Quod
si tunc non pepercit naturalibus ramis, eadem nobis body impendit ultio, nisi
vocanti respondeamus. Nec vero peribit coena, qu^ nobis parata erat, sed alios
sibi convivas Deus accerset. Calvin. Harm. p. 188.
. In these passages, this Great supposed Enemy to the Universality of
Redemption by Christ, clearly supposes (or affirms rather) the same to be a
truth. For he expressly affirms, that God provided a Table of Entertainment,
for those, who rejected it, and never came unto it* and supposes, that the
Supper provided [by God] for us, may, through our neglect of our invitation
hereunto, be withheld from us, and that others may be admitted unto it in our
stead. If the Death of Christ, and Salvation by him, were provided and prepared
by God, as well for those who reject them, as for those who embrace them,
doubtless they were intended for all men without exception. Which truth (as was
lately observed) is so necessary for the due managing of the Scriptures, and
many other the most important affairs in Christian Religion, that the Professed
Enemies thereof are ever and anon constrained and forced to make use of it,
both in opening the Scriptures, as likewise in their other Theological
Discussions and Debates, and so consequently, to give testimony unto it. And
the very truth is, that it is one of the main Pillars, that supports and bears
up the weighty Fabric of that Divinity and Religion, which the Scriptures hold
forth unto the World.

Another piece of Scripture rising up in assertion of the same Doctrine, is. 2.
that which speaks in these words; (...), etc. i. e. (word for word,) For there
has appeared the Grace of God, which is saving unto all men Tit. 2. 11.
, [or, being saving unto all men,] that is, which is of a saving nature,
property, or tendency, unto all men. The Syriac Translation reads, Servatrix
omnium, the savioress of all men. Our last English Translators, rendering the
place thus, For the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared unto
all men, show themselves more indulgent to their own sense and opinion, then
will well stand with the ingenuity and faithfulness required in Translators,
(an infirmity too too apparent in them at several other turns,) though the
truth is, that this Translation of the words damnifies their Opinion one way,
as much, or more, then it gratifies it in another. For in making the Apostle to
say, that the saving Grace of God has appeared unto all men, they suppose him
to be of their Judgment, who conceive the Gospel, and the saving Grace thereof,
to be discovered and preached by God unto men, not only by the Ministry of Men,
or by the Letter of the Gospel it self, but by the Works of Creation also, and
the gracious Government of the World. For certain it is, that the saving Grace
of God, of which the Apostle here speaks, had not at this time appeared unto
all men, upon any other terms. But this by the way. Our former Translators
dealt much more fairly with the Holy Ghost at this place, rendering and
pointing the words thus: For that Grace of God, that brings Salvation unto
all men, has appeared. The Grace of God [in Christ] is here said to be (...),
salvifical unto all men, not because it is such to all sorts, or ranks of men
only, or, to some men of all sorts and degrees, (as some, not fearing to
destroy the clear sense of the Holy Ghost, to salve their own, interpret,) but
because it is such to all men simply, and without exception of any. This
Exposition is confirmed,

1. From the Context, in the words immediately following, wherein the proper
end, or ducture, of this saving Grace of God now discovered, is declared, thus:
Teaching us that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godlily in this present world. If then this saving
Grace of God, teaches, i. e. be apt to teach, persuade, and lead all men,
without exception, as well one, as another, to a denial of all ungodliness --
and to live soberly, -- then must it needs be alike saving unto all. For if
this teaching property in it, flows from the savingness of it, (which the
Apostle here clearly supposes,) then must the savingness of it necessarily be
of equal extent with that property. An Act of Grace, Love, or Bounty, inviteth,
obliges no more unto thankfulness, then those to whom it is meant and
intended. Now certain it is, that the saving Grace of God, held forth, and
proffered unto all men in the Gospel, teaches, inviteth, persuades, obliges
all m^n without exception, as well one, as another, to deny ungodliness, etc.
to live soberly, etc. Otherwise we must say, that there are some men, who ought
not, who are no ways bound, to learn any of these things from the Gospel, nor
to practice them upon any account of Grace, or love ^endered herein from God
unto them: which (I suppose) is a saying too hard for any considering man to
digest.

2. The words themselves in their Grammatical, native, and proper
signification, give out the sense and Exposition specified. The Grace of God
here spoken of, is expressly said to be (...), i. e. saving, or salvisical unto,
or apt to save, all men. And of what dangerous consequence it is, to turn the
words of the Holy Ghost out of their proper and best* known significations,
into any by, devious, and qualified sense, when there is no necessity of doing
it, has been once and again admonished, and declared, in the Premises Cap. 5.
Sect. 35. Cap. 6.. 2, 3, 4, etc.
.

3. The Exposition given fairly accords the passage in hand with many other
its fellow-Scriptures; as where God is said to have prepared His Salvation
[(...)] before the face of ALL People Luke 2. 30.
, to be willing to have ALL Men saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth
1 Timothy 2. 4.
: So again, to have NONE perish, but to have ALL MEN come to Repentance 2 Pet.
3. 9.
: And again, where Christ is said, through the Grace of God, to have tasted
death for EVERY MAN Heb. 2. 9.
: to omit several others, which we have demonstratively proved to be of one
mind, and one heart, with the said passage, so understood, as now interpreted.

4. And lastly, The Exposition given is attested by Orthodox Interpreters, (so
owned, and acknowledged by our Adversaries.) By name (says Pelican) he
testifies [the Grace of God] to be COMMON TO THE UNIVERSE OF MEN, [or, to men
universally,] because of Servants, of whom he had spoken. And presently after:
But we are ALL one in Christ, we are ALL UNIVERSALLY called to the Kingdom of
God, we were ALL, after the offense given, to be reconciled unto our Father
Nominatim universiis communem esse [gratiam Dei] testatur, propter servos, de
quibus locutus erat -- sed cuncti in Christo unum sumus, universi ad regnum Dei
vocamur, omnes post offensam Patri nostro re^onciliandi suimus.
. Aretius upon the place, affirms, That the Gospel offers the Grace of God
unto ALL MEN: and hereupon infers, that therefore it concerns ALL MEN to adorn
the Doctrine hereof with their lives and manners Prima ratio est, Evangelium
omnibus hominibus offert gratiam D^i; Ergo omnium interest hanc Doctrinam
ornare vita and moribus.
. If the Gospel offers the saving Grace of God unto all men, and all men upon
this account stand bound to adorn the Doctrine thereof, then must this Grace,
in the offer of it, and so in the intention of him, who offers it in the
Gospel, be saving, i. e. of a saving tendency and import unto all men. Yea if
all men stand alike bound, in respect of the alike offer of it respectively
unto them, (neither of which alikeness can reasonably be denied, or indeed
questioned,) it is a plain case, that the savingness of it, and Salvation by
it, is by God alike intended unto all men. But from the Universal Offer of
Grace unto men in the Gospel, we have formerly argued, and evicted, real
intentions in God, of Salvation by Christ unto all men, without exception Cap.
7. Sect. 2. 3. etc.
.

As for those trivial evasions from this and suchlike Scriptures, as viz. that
by all men, may be meant either great numbers of men, or all sorts, or some of
all sorts and ranks of men, or Jews and Gentiles; and so again, that the Grace
of God may be said to be saving unto all men, because there is a sufficiency of
merit in Christ to save all men, though the Salvation of all men by him be not
intended by God, etc. These (I say) with the like put-offs, we have already
upon like occasions frequently occurring, detected of vanity, and showed their
clear inconsistency with the principles, as well of that Wisdom, which is
revealed from Heaven in the Scriptures, as of that reason and understanding
which are naturally ingrafted in men. If any man's judgment be yet tempted with
a face of any seeming beauty, or strength in any of them, he may (I presume) be
delivered from further inconvenience in this kind, by a second review of the
sixth Chapter of this Discourse, at least if he shall diligently consider what
is to be seen there.

In the next Chapter of the same Epistle, the Apostle adds light unto. 3.
light in the business in hand, expressing himself thus: But after that the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward men appeared Tit. 3. 4.
, etc. (...) the goodness and the love of God toward man. I here demand, How,
or whether, God can in any tolerable construction of Reason, or common sense,
be said to be (...), a lover of men, or to bear an affection of love to men, in
case he should hate incomparably the far greatest part of men, and that with
the hatred of a Reprobation from eternity, leaving them without all possibility
of escaping eternal misery and torment, and this, when as at the same cost and
charge, which he has been at for the saving of a few, he might have provided
for the Salvation of them all. For this they affirm, who grant, that Christ
dyed sufficiently for all, but intentionally only for a few. Can we say that a
King, or Prince, is a Lover of his Kingdom, or of his Subjects, only because he
loves two or three Favorites about his Court, especially when the generality
and great Body of his Subjects, are in imminent danger of perishing, or being
undone, unless he provides for their relief, and he in the midst of the
greatest abundance of means to relieve them, and this without the least
prejudice, or hinderance to himself, shall altogether neglect them in their
danger and misery? Doubtless there was never Prince or King since the World
began, that ever obtained the Name, or Honor, of a Lover of his Subjects, upon
such terms as these. And yet they make God a Lover of men, in no other sense,
upon no whit better terms, who affirm and teach, that he loved only that small
number of men, which they call, His Elect, (which the Scripture very frequently
affirms to be few, in comparison of those who perish,) when as that great
generality, and vast Body of men, were from the greatest to the least of them,
in most imminent danger of being undone (and that in the most dreadful manner
that can be imagined) to the days of eternity; teaching withal, that the Death
of Christ, which was bestowed upon these few only, was sufficient for the
saving of the rest also; and that God upon mere will and pleasure, not to ease
his Son Jesus Christ in the least, nor to accommodate himself at all otherwise,
implacably resolved from eternity to exclude all these from part and fellowship
in that Salvation. With a great desire my Soul desires, that men, whose
consciences serve them to oppose in the present Controversy, would seriously
and calmly confider, whether that (...), that love to mankind, which the
Scripture reports to be in God, be at all compossible, or consistent, with
such a dismal design in reference unto men, as that now represented.

Again, If God loves only such a small number of men, as the Opinion, which we
oppose, supposes, why is not (...), the love of Angels, as well as (...), the
love of Men, ascribed unto him? For doubtless if God loves no more men, then
those, who come to be actually saved, he might more properly and truly be said
to be (...), a Lover of Angels, rather then a Lover of Men. Because if we shall
restrain his love toward men, only to those comparative few, who will be
actually and eventually saved, he will be found to love a far greater
proportion of Angels, then of men: it being no ways probable, but that the
number of Angels, who keep their standing, and are Elect, is far greater, being
compared with those that fell, then the number of men, who according to the
Scriptures are like to be actually saved, is, being compared with those that
perish.

To say, that Gods Love, though but to a few men, expressed in the gift of. 4.
his Son Jesus Christ to dye for them, is more considerable, and so a more
reasonable ground of giving the denomination of (...) unto him, then the love
which he bears to Angels, though more in number, or in proportion, is to say
that, which no way eases the matter, or salveth the difficulty. First, Because
the Angels, the Elect Angels (as the Scripture calls them) are partakers with
men in the gift of Jesus Christ given unto men, though not in that Redemption
from sin and misery, which accrues unto men by him (unless happily it be by
sympathy with their fellow creatures, in their joy and blessedness) yet
otherwise, as appears from Col. 2. 10. and other places: and besides is
generally acknowledged by Divines. Secondly, One of the highest expressions I
remember, whereby the happiness procured for men by the gift of Christ is set
forth in the Scripture, is but (...), an equality with the Angels, or likeness
of condition with them, Luke 20. 36. Therefore Gods Love to the Angels that
stand, does not fall short, at least to any such considerable degree, of the
Love which he bears unto men, that are saved. Therefore the Reason why he is
styled (...), a Lover of Men, not (...), a Lover of Angels, is not because he
loves some men more then he does any Angels: but because he loved all men, and
not all Angels.

Besides, if God should love only such a small parcel of men as some imagine,
with the hatred of all the rest, he might much more properly be termed (...),
an Hater of men, then (...), a Lover of men. Whereas the Scripture frequently
extols and magnifies the Love of God toward all men, yea toward his Enemies,
on whom he makes his Sun to arise, and sends rain, as well as on his Friends
Mat. 5 45.
, and strictly injoyneth all those that would be accounted his children, to
resemble and imitate him in this his goodness: but no where suggesteth the
least degree of any hatred in him against any person of man, personally
considered, nor any other, then what does redundare in personam, (as the
Schoolmen speak,) i. e. which redoundeth, and (as it were) runs over, from the
sin, which he hates, unto the person, in whom that sin is found.

Again, if God should not love the generality of mankind in order to their
Salvation by Christ, then all the good which he does unto them in outward
things, as in making his Son to arise, and his Rain to fall upon them, (as our
Savior says he does, as well upon the unjust, as the just,) and so his
filling of their heart with food and gladness, with the like, must be conceived
to be done by him upon such terms, and with such intentions, as men use to lay
scraps for birds, or bait hooks for fishes; which they do for none other end,
but to take and destroy them. For if God has no intent in these Dispensations
of his toward them to do them any good in a saving way; he must needs be
conceived to intend their ruin and destruction, at least the increase of their
ruin and destruction, by them: it being no ways reasonable to conceive, but
that he has higher and more considerable ends propounded to himself in his
Providential Administrations about men, in reference unto men, then about
beasts, in relation unto them: though it is true, he has the same general and
ultimate End, his Glory, in all his Works and Administrations, one or other.
But if the generality, or far greatest part of men, are bound to believe (and
bound they are to believe it, if it be a revealed Truth) that God, in giving
them health, and peace, and prosperity in the world, intends nothing but evil
to them, a fuller cup of the wrath and vengeance which is to come, how can the
bountifulness and long-sufferance of God be said to lead men to Repentance?
which yet is the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 2. 4. Neither the goodness, nor
patience of God toward evil men, can be said to lead them to Repentance, but
by the mediation, or supposal, of these three Principles. 1. That these
Dispensations of God (I mean, of goodness, and patience) toward such men, are
proper and sufficient [I mean by the help of that operation of the Spirit of
God, which always accompanies them] to bring men to Repentance. And 2. That
Gods intent is, that they should bring them actually to Repentance; or at
least, that he has no intention otherwise, or to the contrary. 3. (And lastly)
That he truly and really intends their Salvation, upon their Repentance. Wicked
men can at no hand of reason, no nor yet of common sense, be said to be led to
Repentance, by the goodness or long-sufferance of God toward them, unless 1.
It be supposed, that there is a genuine, natural, or proper Rhetorique, or
moving tendency in them to persuade and encourage such men to Repent; nothing
can be said to lead a man, to such or such an action, or course, but that which
is proper to invite, or persuade him unto either. Nor unless it be supposed, 2.
That God has an intent, that such men should be actually persuaded, and made
willing to repent by such Dispensations, at least that he should have no
intentions to the contrary. For how can any man be actually persuaded or made
willing by any means, motive, or encouragement whatsoever, to attempt, or do,
any such thing, which he has cause to judge, or believe, that Gods intentions
stand against his doing, or performance? There is no motive or encouragement,
against the determinate Counsel of God made known. Nor 3. (and lastly) Can the
said Dispensations of goodness or patience in God, be said to lead any man to
Repentance, unless it be yet further supposed, that his real intent and purpose
is to save him, upon his Repentance, or in case he shall Repent, or at least,
that they may be such. For what encouragement can any man have to repent, in
case he has sufficient ground to judge, that God has absolutely rejected him,
and will not save him, no not upon his Repentance? Therefore certainly God has
no intentions of evil, or of condemnation, or of increase of condemnation,
against the generality of men, no nor yet against the worst or wickedest of
men, in those gracious vouchsafements of life, health, liberty, peace, food,
raiment, and other the like temporal mercies and accommodations unto them.

Again, How can men look upon themselves as any ways debtors, or obliged. 5.
unto God in thankfulness, for good things administered unto them with hard
intentions, or with a purpose not to bless them, but to make their condemnation
so much the greater, and more heavy upon them? If birds and fishes had
understanding, and should know for what end, or with what intentions, men lay
scraps and baits, though made of such things as they love, and stand in need
of, in their way, would they thank them for it, or should they have any reason
so to do? Or had Amasa any cause to think the better of Joab for taking Him by
the Beard with His right Hand, to kiss Him 2 Samuel 20. 9
? Or our Savior, to think the better of Judas, for the kiss wherewith He
greeted Him Matthew. 26. 49
?

Besides, it being the duty of the Saints to imitate or resemble their Heavenly
Father, not only in His outward Expressions, but much more in His Intentions,
and frame of spirit toward men, when He does good unto them, causing His Sun
to arise, and His Rain to fall upon them, in case His Intentions toward them
in such applications of Himself unto them, were bent, not upon their Salvation,
but Destruction, would it not follow, that when they should perform those
Christian services unto them, enjoined by our Savior Himself, But I say unto
you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them that
despitefully use you Mat. 5. 44.
, etc. they were bound to do all these in order unto, and with an intent to
procure, their greater and deeper condemnation, and not with any intent to gain
them in to the Gospel? And if wicked men, enemies to the Saints, should know,
or have reasonable ground to judge, that when they express themselves outwardly
in terms of love, and good will, toward them, they mean them ruin, or
increase of Punishment and Torment hereby, had they not cause to judge them the
vilest Hypocrites and Dissemblers under Heaven? Nor do they represent the
glorious God Himself any whit better, unto the World, who affirm and teach,
that in, and under, His most pathetical, and moving invitations,
encouragements, and promissory offers of Grace, Mercy, Salvation, unto the
generality of men, (whereof the Scriptures are full,) He intends not the
Donation, or gift of Grace, Mercy, or Salvation unto them, upon any condition
or terms whatsoever, but Wrath, and Judgment, and an opportunity to render them
sevenfold more the children of death and condemnation, then otherwise they
would, or could, have been.

Lastly, If God intends the increase of guilt and punishment unto wicked men,
or the generality of men, in the comforts and good things of this world
providentially disposed and dispensed unto them, He must needs desire the
bringing or coming of these accordingly upon them. No man intends any thing in
order to the accomplishment of such, or such, an end, but this end is desired
by Him. Again, certain it is that the increase of guilt and punishment cannot
come upon men, by means, or by occasion, of the good things given by God unto
them, but only by the intervening of their unthankfulness, and abuse of these
good things, in one kind, or other. Further, as there is no man but wishes,
and desires the coming to pass of such things, which are simply and absolutely
necessary for the bringing to pass such things as He desires, so has no man
cause to be offended with any man for the doing of such things, which are
simply and absolutely necessary to the effecting of any such end, which He
desires; especially when His desire in this kind is raised and built upon
foundations of Righteousness and sound Wisdom; which is not questionable in, or
about, any the desires of God. Now then if God intends, He must needs also
desire, the increase of guilt and punishment upon wicked men, or the generality
of men; if He desires this, He has no cause to be offended with these men, for
their unthankfulness, or for any such abuse of His Mercies or good things
conferred upon them, without which it was unpossible for Him to attain His
desired end, viz. an increase of guilt and condemnation upon them, (as was
asserted.) The Reason is, because (according to our late* asserted principle)
no man has cause to be offended with another, for doing that, which is
directly and absolutely necessary for the bringing to pass of any such end,
which is maturely, and according to sound Principles of Wisdom and
Righteousness, projected and desired by Him. Nor is there the least question to
be made, but that, if God intends, and consequently desires, the increase of
guilt and condemnation upon the generality of men, both His Intentions and
Desires in this kind, are most regular, in respect of all regularity, that
either Wisdom, or Righteousness, can give unto them.

Not will it much, if any thing at all, here help, to say, that though God. 6.
does not intend the Salvation of the generality of men in giving unto them the
good things of this life to enjoy so abundantly, as for the most part he does,
but the increase of their guilt and condemnation, yet in as much as no
particular man knows but that God may intend His spiritual good, and
Salvation, in such Dispensations, all a^e bound to conceive this Hope of
themselves, and consequently every man stand^ bound to be thankful unto God for
what He receives from Him in this kind, and to seek more after Him. And if
any man shall be found neglective of what is His duty herein, or shall turn the
Grace of God toward Him, even in these outward things, into wantonness, and
not into thankfulness, He deserve^ to be punished so much the more severely for
it. For to this.

I answer: No man stands bound to believe that, or to conceive Hope of that,
which He has no sufficient ground of bel^eving, or why He should believe it:
much less to believe that, which He has much more Reason to question, or doubt
of, then to believe. Solomon informs us, that it is the property of a fool*
to believe every thing [or, every word Prove. 14. 15.
,] viz. as well that, which He has no ground or reason to believe, as that
which He has. And it is commonly said and taught amongst us, that in matters
of Religion, and of Salvation, nothing ought to be believed by any man, but
what He has a sufficient ground, in, or from, the Word of God, to believe. If
so, if no man ought* to believe, in matters appertaining to Salvation, but what
He has a ground, or warrant in the Word of God to believe; much less ought He
to believe any such thing, the truth whereof the Word of God administers much
more ground to doubt, question, and suspect, then to believe. So that if this
be a Truth revealed in the Wo^d of God, That God does not intend the spiritual
good of the generality* or of far the greatest part of men, in their outward
mercies and good things, but the contrary; certain it is that every particular
man (at least, that has no sufficient proof of His Regeneration) has ten,
twenty, if not an hundred times more reason to doubt and question, whether His
spiritual good be intended by God, or no, in the things we speak of, then to
believe that it is intended. As in the business of a lottery, where there are
forty, it may be an hundred blanks for one prize, no man has so much reason
or ground to hope, that He shall draw a prize, in case He should adventure his
money this way, as that He shall draw a blank. And upon this account, lotteries
have still been accounted little better then cheats, or unworthy devices
contrived gin* wise, to catch the money of simple and inconsiderate people, men
of understanding easily discerning the fraud, and so keeping their foot out of
the snare. And whether that Doctrine, which teaches, that God intends only
the Salvation of a few, but the condemnation of many, and yet commands all to
believe that they may be saved, does not make the glorious Gospel of God like
unto one of such lotteries, I leave to all understanding and unprejudiced men
to consider.

In the mean time evident it is, that this Opinion, that Christ dyed not for
all men, but for some few only, is (as it were) calculated, and the face of it
bent and set, to make the distance between Heaven and Earth, between God, and
His creature, Man, greater and wider, then yet it is; to multiply jealousies
and hard thoughts in the hearts and minds of men and women concerning God,
where they are more then apt enough to engender and multiply, without the
irritation of such a Doctrine. Yea whereas God has put Himself into His Christ
(God was in Christ, says the Apostle, as we heard formerly Cap. 5. sect. 28.
, reconciling the World unto Himself,) that by the means of Him, and by the
Tender and Promise of Forgiveness of sins unto men, through Him, upon the
gracious terms of believing, He might prevail with the World to love Him, to
think well and honorably of Him; this Doctrine seeks to put Him out of His
Christ again, at least in reference to any such glorious design as that of
reconciling the World unto Him: yea and says (in effect) unto the World it
self, Believe Him not, though He speaks never so graciously unto you: when He
promises you Life and Salvation upon the fairest and freest terms, He has War
in His Heart against you, and intends to destroy you.

If it be yet objected, that upon the same ground, no particular Person. 7.
should have any sufficient ground, or Reason, to believe, that He is one of
those that shall be saved, in as much as the number of those that shall be
saved, is affirmed to be but small; I answer,

True it is, no man is bound to believe simply and absolutely, that He is one
of those that shall be saved; but conditionally only, viz. in case He shall
believe, and persevere believing unto the end. All that a man is bound to
believe in this kind positively, is, that He is one of those that may be
saved: and the Doctrine asserted by us, viz. that Christ dyed for all men
without exception, administreth a fair ground, and full footing for such a
Faith, as this, unto every man. Whereas the Doctrine opposite hereunto, which
affirms, that Christ dyed for the Elect only, leaves no foundation or
ground at all of this Faith, unto any man whatsoever, at least being yet in His
Natural condition, and unconverted. For, 1. if only those men be in a
possibility of being saved, for whom Christ dyed: And, 2. if Christ dyed for
the Elect only; And, 3. if no unregenerate or unconverted Person, has any
ground to believe that He is one of Gods Elect; It roundly follows, and with
pregnancy of consequence, that no such Person [I mean, who is yet unconverted]
has any sufficient ground to believe that He Is one of those, that may be, or
that is in a possibility of being, saved. All the said Hypotheses, or
Premises, [as, viz. 1. That no man is in a possibility of being saved, but
only those for whom Christ dyed. 2. That Christ dyed only for the Elect: And,
3. that no unregenerate Person has any sufficient ground to believe, that He
Is one of the Elect;] are authentic and unquestionable, according to the
known Principles of our Adversaries: therefore the conclusion specified must be
admitted, and owned, by them. If they will admit the said conclusion, and judge
it no ways prejudicial, either to themselves, or their cause, so to do; I would
demand of them, what foundation of encouragement they can lay, to persuade
unregenerate men, either to strive to enter in at the strait gate, to labor for
the me^^ that endures to everlasting life, or to apply them selves seriously
and effectually, in one kind or other, to the means of believing. We know that
without Hope, or an apprehended possibility of obtaining, what is endeavored and
sought after, all motives or grounds of persuasion unto action, amount to no
more, then to the beating of the Air: the Hearts of men are not at all taken,
or wrought, by them. Despair of Salvation, quenches all thoughts, all
endevors, all desires of believing. Therefore if an unregenerate Person has no
sufficient ground of Hope that He is one of those, who are so much as in a
possibility of being saved, He is not capable of any impressions from any
ground or motive whatsoever to believing.

If it be here said; though an unregenerate Person has no sufficient ground. 8.
of Hope that He Is one of Gods Elect, and consequently, that Christ dyed for
Him, yet He has sufficient ground of Hope that He MAY BE one of these, and so,
that there is a possibility that Christ MAY have dyed for Him: and upon the
account of such an Hope as this, He has encouragement sufficient to apply
Himself to the means of believing; I answer,

1. That such an Hope, which amounts only, or very little more then, to a bare
apprehended possibility of obtaining, has but a very feeble and faint
influence upon the Heart of a considering man, by way of encouragement unto
action, especially unto such action, which is of a laborious and difficult
import, and wherein He must deny Himself, in matters of ease, pleasure, profit,
etc. and this to an eminent degree. Now it is generally known, that that
action, or course of engagement, wherein they must labor and exercise
themselves, who desire to believe unto Salvation, is of such an import as we
speak of: it is a course of action, wherein men must put forth, or give out
themselves, with all their Heart, and with all their Soul, with all their
mind, and with all their strength, wherein they must labor, strive, watch and
pray continually, deny themselves, crucify the old man, etc. or otherwise, not
expect Salvation.

2. Neither is it so clear a Truth (especially according to the Principles of
those against whom we now argue) that an unregenerate man has a sufficient
ground of Hope, that He may be one of the Elect. For if He be not at present
one of these, there is no possibility (according to the said Principles) that
ever He should be such. If it be replied; that the meaning of this assertion, a
regenerate man has a sufficient ground of Hope that He may be one of the
Elect, is not, that He may be one of these, hereafter, whether He be one of
them at present, or no; but, that He may be one of them, at the present; I
answer, that Hope, in propriety of import, respects not what is, or may be,
at present, but what may be, or is like to be, in the future. Nor do I remember
any instance throughout the Scriptures, where they make, or suppose, any other
object of Hope, but only that which is, or may be, future: nor that any
definition of Hope given by learned Divines, assigns any other. So that it is
very improper (at least) to say, that an unregenerate man has ground of Hope
that He may be at present, one of Gods Elect. But,

3. (A little to indulge impropriety of terms) I demand, whether the Scriptures
do not constantly represent and make unregeneracy, or an unbeleeving condition,
especially joined with an habitual practice of known sins, a ground of fear,
that a man is not at present one of the Elect of God; or rather, whether they
do not make such a condition a ground of certain knowledge, that a man is not at
present, one of the Elect of God? According to the Principles of the adverse
Party in the Question in hand, all the Elect shall certainly be saved, and
inherit the Kingdom of God: but the Scriptures constantly teach and affirm,
That unbeleevers and unregenerate men, especially living in known sins, shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God; as we have in the two next preceding Chapters
showed at large. Therefore unless we shall say, that the Scriptures are divided
in themselves, it is unpossible to show or prove, that they any where exhibit
or afford any ground of hope to such unregenerate and unbeleeving persons, as
we now speak of, that they may be at present the Elect of God. The Scripture no
where excludes the Elect of God from Salvation, but every where asserts them as
Heirs hereof. Therefore those whom it excludes from part and fellowship in this
business, are not, at least in Scripture sense (nor indeed in any sense
consistent with Reason) the Elect of God.

4. If such unregenerate persons as we speak of, have any sufficient ground to
hope, that they MAY be, at present, the Elect of God, then have they the like
ground of hope, that they ARE at present, of this number, and the Elect of God.
The Reason of this sequel is plain: because what a man is, and what he may be
at present, are one and the same; it being unpossible that he should be at
present any thing besides, or any other, then what he is at present, no subject
whatsoever being capable of any otherness, or alteration, in an instant;
according to that known Maxim in natural Philosophy, M^tus non fit in instanti,
No motion can be in an instant of time; as also that other, Quicquid est,
quando est, necesse est esse; i. e. Whatsoever is, whilst it is, must of
necessity be [that which it is.] Therefore he that has ground to hope that he
MAY BE one of Gods Elect at present, has ground, yea the same ground, to hope
that he Is such an one at present. Now if such an unregenerate man, as has
been often mentioned, has a sufficient ground of hope, that he is at present,
one of Gods Elect, then have the generality of wicked and unregenerate men
(respectively) a sufficient ground of hope, that they are all, and every person
of them, the Elect of God. For if any one of this sort of persons has a
sufficient ground of hope in this kind, then have they all, and every one, the
same: for no ground of difference between them in this case, is imaginable. But
how ill it accords with sundry the grounds and principles of our Adversaries,
to affirm, That all the world, which (as John says) lies in wickedness,
should have sufficient ground of hope that they are the Elect of God, I leave
to themselves to consider. Therefore certainly no unregenerate person (such
especially as we lately described) has any sufficient ground of hope that he
is at present one of the Elect of God; and consequently, the Doctrine we oppose
for denying that Christ dyed for all men without exception, leaves no place or
ground of any such hope unto unregenerate persons, which is likely to engage or
provoke them unto any Gospel enquiry, or addressment of themselves to the means
of believing; no nor yet which leaves them in any capacity of being wrought or
persuaded hereunto, by any other motives or inducements whatsoever.

5. (And lastly) In case unregenerate men, should, by the leave and sufferance
of the said Doctrine, be under any such hope, as it asserts unto them, [I mean,
that they may be the Elect of God, in that sense of the word, Elect, which the
Patrons of this Doctrine commonly put upon it,] yet would not this hope be apt
or likely to animate or encourage them to such applications of themselves, as
those specified, no nor yet suffer them to be much affected with, or wrought
upon, in this kind, by any other motives or means of excitement whatsoever. The
Reason hereof has been formerly given, where we showed, and proved, that such
an hope, which has certainty of success, or attainment, absolutely and
unconditionally insured unto it, is not of that kind of hope, which is likely
to engage much unto action Cap. 10. Sec. 15. and Cap. 13. Sect. 7.
: I here add, and have added, That the very genius or import of it, is rather
to render the Subject of it uningageable unto action by other motives. And thus
we clearly see, by a through examination and debate of the whole business, that
the Doctrine of our present contest, and which denies that Christ dyed for all
men, leaves no ground of hope for any person whatsoever in his natural
condition, that he either is, or may be one of those, who are in any
possibility of being saved by Christ: and consequently, must needs be a
Doctrine Anti-evangelical in the highest. This for the opening and asserting of
the Philanthropy of God, avouched in the Scriptures.

When the Apostle writes thus to the Hebrews, For if we sin willingly after. 9.
we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains NO MORE SACRIFICE
for sins Heb. 10. 26.
, he clearly supposes, that they, for whose sins there was an expiatory
Sacrifice offered by Christ, may by Apostasy, and a rejection of the grace of
this Sacrifice, reduce themselves to such a condition, wherein they shall be
incapable of any atonement for sin by any Sacrifice whatsoever. For this
clause, there remains NO MORE Sacrifice for sin, evidently implies, 1. That
before the horrid sin of Apostasy, here spoken of, the persons that fall into
it, have, or had, a Sacrifice for their sins, [viz. for the expiation and
atonement of them,] which can be no other, but the Sacrifice of the Death of
Christ. In saying, there remains no more, [or, (...), not still, or, not
further] a Sacrifice for sins, he must of necessity suppose, that till that sad
alteration in their spiritual estate here described by their sinning wilfully
after, etc. should befall them, they were partakers of a Sacrifice for the
expiation of their sins, which (as has been said) must needs be the Death of
Christ; otherwise they should have been in no worse case, as to matter of
receiving benefit by the Death, or Sacrifice of Christ, after their Apostasy,
then before. 2. That upon, and after this alteration, they are, either
absolutely and altogether excluded from a readmission into their former grace,
whereby they were partakers of the Sacrifice of Christ, or at least that they
stand upon terms of extreme difficulty ever to obtain such a readmission. So
that this passage of Scripture, befriendeth both the main Doctrines avouched in
this first part of our Discourse, with pregnancy of confirmation, respectively.
For, 1. It supposes, that Christ offered the Sacrifice of Himself for the sins
of those, who very possibly may never be saved by him, and consequently, for
all men without exception, (for concerning those, that come to be saved by him,
there is no question.) And 2. That they who have sometimes been partakers of
the Sacrifice of Christ, and hereby of the Grace and Favor of God in the
pardon of their sins, may afterward apostatize into such a condition, wherein
there remains no more Sacrifice for their sins, but a certain looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, etc. Calvin himself knew not (it seems) how to
manage the place, but in full comport with the sense given. There is a great
difference (says he, upon the place) between particular fallings, and such an
Universal defection, whereby it comes to pass that we WHOLLY FALL AWAY from
the Grace of Christ. But because this cannot befall any man, but him, who is
enlightened, therefore he says, If we sin willingly after we have received the
knowledge of the Truth: as if he should say, who shall willingly CAST AWAY THAT
GRACE, WHICH HE HAD OBTAINED. A little after: He [the Apostle] denies that any
Sacrifice remains for those, who DEPART FROM THE DEATH OF CHRIST: which is not
done by any particular Delinquency, but by a CASTING AWAY OF FAITH TOTALLY
Porro multum interest inter particulares lapsus, and universalem ejusmodi
defectionem, qua fit vt a Christi gratia in totum excidamus. Quia autem nemini
hoc contingere potest nisi qui jam illuminatus fuit, ideo dixit, Voluntary
post acceptam veritatis noticiam peccantibus: acsi diceret, Qui sciens ac
volens, grantiam, quam adeptus erat, abjecerit. Et paulo post: Hostiam ergo iis
residuam esse negat, qui a Christi morte discedunt: quod fit non particulari
aliquo delicto, sed abjecta in totum Fide.
. Doubtless they who depart from the Death of Christ, were sometimes at it, [
i. e. partakers of it,] and they who cast away Faith totally, sometimes had it.
And long before Calvin, Chrysostom had declared for the substance of the
Interpretation given. That which the Apostle says (says he upon the place) is
some such thing as this: Thou have been cleansed, thou have been discharged
from matter of crime, [or accusation against thee,] thou have been made a Son:
if now thou shall return to thy former vomit, dis-inheritance, fire, and all
such like [terrible] things abide thee: for there is not a second Sacrifice
[for thee (...).
.]

We shall, upon the account of this Chapter, produce only one brief passage. 10.
of Scripture more; wherein the Gracious Intentions of God toward all men, in
point of Salvation by the Death of Christ, are like Solomon's King upon his
Throne, against whom there is no rising up. The entire Verse, wherein the words
we mind, are ext^nt, runs thus: The Lord is not slack concerning his
Promise, (as some men count slackness,) but is long-suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance 2 Pet.
3. 9.
. Evident it is, (and Expositors generally consent,) that the Apostle in these
words, propounds a further Reason or consideration, to satisfy those, that
being weak, were apt to stumble, and take offense, that the Lord Christ delayed
his coming to judge the World, and to deliver his Saints, so long. No man (says
the Apostle in effect, upon this account) has any reason to be offended, or
take it amiss at the hand of Christ, that he makes no more haste in coming to
judge the World, seeing that his delay in this kind proceeds not at all from any
neglect, or backwardness in him, to perform his Promise in that behalf, (though
some men count all delay, which is contrary to their minds, and desires, to be
no better, then neglect, or slackness unto action,) but from his great
patience, and long-sufferance toward men; His will and desire being, that no
person whatsoever of mankind, either in present being in the world, or that
shall be born hereafter, should perish everlastingly, but that every man of
them should come to Repentance, whereunto his patience and long-sufferance
inviteth, yea and leads them Romans 2. 4.
, and by which many are actually led and brought unto it, that so they may be
saved. From the passage thus understood, I argue thus: If Christ be not
willing, that any man should perish, but that all should come to Repentance,
then questionless he intends the Salvation of all, and consequently dyed
intentionally for all: [for unless he intended to dye for them, yea and did dye
for them, it is not possible that he should either will or intend their
Salvation, in as much as no man can will, or intend, that which he knows to be
unpossible.] But certain it is, that Christ is not willing that any man should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, the Holy Ghost in the Scripture
in hand expressly affirming it. Ergo.

Against the sense and Interpretation of the words given, and so to the
invaliditating. 11.
of the Argument built thereon, it is pretended by some, that the Apostle does
not here assert an unwillingness in Christ, that any person whatsoever of
mankind should perish, but only that any person of the Elect should perish. To
give color to this Exposition, they circumscribe the particle, or pronoune,
(...), us, with the limit, or line, of their Election, so carrying the sense
thus: The Lord is not slack, etc. -- but is long-suffering to usward, [viz.
who are his Elect, and consequently to all others, that are partakers of the
same Election with us,] not willing that any [viz. of these, the Elect of his
Father] should perish, but that all [these] should come to Repentance, [not any
others.] This sense of the place is commended by Estius, a Popish Expositor;
but we shall find Calvin leaning with the Truth, another way. So then Peter
(says Estius upon the place) says that the Lord deals patiently, i. e.
delayeth his promised Coming and Judgment for the Elects sake, that they might
not perish, but being converted to Repentance, be saved Sic ergo Petrus dicit
Dominum patienter ag^^e, i. e. adventum promissum and judicium suum differ,
propter Electos, ut ne per(...), ^ed ad poenitentiam conversi salventur, etc.
Estius in 2 Pet. 3. 9.
. This Exposition he labors in the very fire to make to stand: but (as one said
in another case) oportet aliquid intus esse: an Exposition that has not truth
in it, cannot be made to stand.

1. I would demand of this Expositor, and of those who sense with him in the
Interpretation specified, why, or by what authority, they expound, (...),
toward us [the Elect,] rather then, toward us [Beleevers.] For if they will
needs have the persons here spoken unto, to be considered by the Apostle, not
in their Natures, or general capacities, viz. as they were men, but in some
particular or special capacity, wherein other men, or all men, did not partake
with them, the capacity of Saintship, or of Faith, was as near at hand, as that
of Election. For that the persons we speak of were Saints and Believers, is far
less questionable, then that they were Elect, in their sense of the word,
Election, who thus interpret. It is true what Estius alleges to credit his
Exposition, that this Epistle was written to the same persons with the former,
who are styled, Elect, 1 Pet. 1. 2. But 1. Whether his Elect, and the Apostles
Elect, be the same, is very questionable; unless (happily) the Apostle puts it
out of question that they are not the same, by setting forth his Elect (in the
place cited) by such a description, which will not agree with Estius his Elect:
Estius (with the Generality of Divines amongst us) by his Elect, understands as
well those, that shall repent and believe hereafter, though they be at present
sons of Belial, and to every good work Reprobate, (as the Apostle speaks,) as
those, who actually do believe; whereas Peter (in the place now mentioned)
estimateth his ELECT by the Sanctification [i. e. the actual Sanctification] of
the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ,
according to the fore-knowledg [or pre-approbation] of God, [i. e. as God
approved and judged it meet, and consequently decreed, from eternity, to
regulate his Election of men, in time.] But this only by the way: for as to
this Scripture, with others which treat of Election, we shall (God favoring)
speak more fully in due time. 2. Though the Epistle was (as this Author
alleges) written to the same persons with the former, who in the beginning of
the said former Epistle, are termed, Elect; yet are these persons, in this very
Epistle, and much nearer to the place in hand, described, or considered, in
their capacity of Believing. Simon Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them
that have obtained like precious FAITH with us 2 Pet. 1. 1.
, etc. So that in this respect, there is much more reason, why in the place in
question, he should speak unto them, or consider them, as Believers (with
Himself) then, as Elect with Himself, in such a notion of Election, wherein
Elect are distinguished from Believers, as was lately declared. But now to make
the Apostle to say, that God is patient toward us [BELEEVERS,] not willing
that any of us [who BELEEVE] should perish, but that all [WE] should come to
Repentance, is to make him speak beneath the line of common sense. For, 1. the
Patience of God toward Believers, who are in a present capacity of Salvation,
and (according to the Principles of our Adversaries) out of all Possibility of
perishing, is no means of their non-perishing; neither need He be patient
toward them in reference to any such end. 2. Neither have these need to come
to Repentance, in order to their non-perishing, unless we shall suppose them in
a Possibility of a total loss of that Faith, that is in them, yea and that they
will defacto totally lose it.

2. That the Apostle does not, in the place in hand, speak of the Christians,
to whom He writes, as they were Elect (in the common sense of the word) appears
from hence, viz. because, in case there were any Elect in this sense, the
Patience of God toward them, would be no argument or sign of His non-willing
their perishing, or of His willing that they should come to Repentance: because
He shows the same, or greater, Patience toward such Persons, who are not Elect
(in that sense) and who never come to Believe, or Repent.

3. The Lord is not here said to be, not willing that any [of the Elect] should
perish, or, but that all [these] should come to Repentance, but simply and
indefinitely, that any should perish, (...); and universally, but that all,
(...), should come to Repentance. Now, these indefinite Particles, (...), as
likewise these universals, (...), do frequently in Scripture (we shall not need
to cite places, being so numerous, and obvious) signify, men, simply and
absolutely considered, the former, partitively, distributively, and sometimes
interrogatively; the latter, universally: but no instance (I presume) can be
found, where either the one, or the other, signify men in any special
capacity, or under any particular consideration, unless (happily) it be, where
such capacity, or consideration, is either in the same period, or else in the
same contexture of speech, and near at hand, particularly mentioned and
expressed. Now concerning the place in debate, certain it is, that the
capacity, or consideration, of Election, is, not only not at all mentioned or
specified in the same period, nor yet in the same Passage or Contexture of
Scripture, or any where near at hand, but not so much as in all the Epistle
from first to last. Therefore (doubtless) (...), any, and (...), all, do not
here signify any of the Elect, and, all the Elect, but any men, and, all men.

4. Neither can God, in any tolerable construction or propriety of speech, or
sense, be said to be patient, or long-suffering toward those, whom He loves
with the greatest love that is, and this unchangeable, (for such is the love of
Election supposed by those, against whom we argue, to be,) especially if it be
supposed withal (which these men suppose likewise) that though they be wicked,
yet they cannot Repent, cannot cease to be wicked, until God comes with a
strong and irresistible Hand to cause them to Repent. For when we ardently and
affectionately love a Person, one, or more, we cannot reasonably be said to be
patient toward them, though we do not punish them for such miscarriages, or
actions, wherein they are prejudicial unto us, in case we know it to have been
impossible for them to forbear such actions, unless we our selves had
effectually restrained them from them. It would not argue any patience in a
Parent toward His young Infant, which He tenderly loves, to forbear correcting
it, in case it should let fall, and break a Venice glass, or some like brittle
commodity, which were put into the hand of it. Patience (we know) is a Grace,
or Virtue, whereby a man is enabled, and disposed, to moderate the Natural
Passion of Anger, and to prevent the exorbitant and undue motions of it. So
that Patience has no place, or opportunity, to express it self, but only in
such cases, wherein this Passion is apt to be stirred, and provoked. Now the
Passion we speak of, Anger, is not apt to be raised or provoked, but only by
such actions, wherein, or whereby we apprehend, either our selves, or some
nearly relating to us, to be neglected or despised, according to the
Philosophers discourse and description of it, wherein He mentions (...), the
neglect, or contempt of a Person, or of some related to Him, as always the
cause of it (...). Arist. Rhet. 2. cap. 2.
: which description, if need were, we might show to be very agreeable to what
the Scriptures themselves deliver concerning the same Passion. So then, in case
there be no ground, or reason, upon which God can judge himself, or any of his,
neglected, or despised, by the impenitency of his Elect in their sinful ways,
whilst they continue in them, He cannot be said to be patient, or
long-suffering toward them, though he forbears to punish them with death for
it. Now when that only is done by a man, which he is, either in one kind, or
other, necessitated to do, and cannot possibly refrain the doing it, no Person
whatsoever, what damage soever he may receive by what is done upon such terms,
has any sufficient ground to judge himself, or any of his, neglected, or
despised, in such an action: nor consequently to be provoked unto anger by it.

5. Neither can the Elect (in such a sense, as many call Elect) truly, or
reasonably, account the long-suffering of the Lord Salvation unto them (which
yet the Persons here spoken of, and to, are in the sequel of this Chapter
enjoined to do:) [ And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is
Salvation, Verse. 15.] For they that have Salvation, infallibly, and
infrustrably, against, and above, Death, Life, Angels, Principalities, Powers,
things present, things to come, height, depth, every creature whatsoever,
ascertained, assigned, or designed, by the irrevocable Decree of God unto them,
stand in no need of any respite, or reprievement from death through the
long-sufferance of God, in order to the obtainment of Salvation. Because in
case they should dye, either the first moment that they are born into the
world, or after never so much sin committed, yet the Decree of God concerning
their Salvation, being peremptory, absolute, and irresistible, must needs take
place, and produce their Salvation, against all obstructions, and impediments
whatsoever. Therefore as a man has no reason to set any such high prize upon a
Receipt prescribed unto him by a Physician, in order to his health, as to call
it His LIFE, or the emphatical means of his preservation, in case his life
would certainly have been preserved without it: So neither have the Elect any
competent reason or ground, to call, or count the long-suffering of the Lord
toward them, SALVATION, [ i. e. a signal means, or opportunity, of Salvation
to them,] in case this their Salvation, might, and certainly should, have been
obtained by them, or conferred on them, whether any such long-suffering had
been vouchsafed unto them, or no. If it be said, That as the Salvation of the
Saints is infallibly decreed, so is it with the like infallibility decreed to
be effected by the long-sufferance of God toward them, as the means and
opportunity thereof, and in this respect, they may properly enough be required
to count, or esteem, the long-suffering of God toward them, Salvation: I
answer; If the Decree of God concerning the Salvation of the Saints, be
absolute and infallible, (in the sense asserted, and contended for by our
Opposers,) then cannot the execution of this Decree, the actual saving of the
Saints, be suspended upon any fallible or contingent condition, such as is the
Saints accounting the long-sufferance of God to be Salvation to them, or their
managing this long-suffering of his in due order to their Salvation; no more
then the standing or continuance of an house, that is well and strongly built
upon a rock, depends upon those weak or rotten shores or props, which are
applied unto it to support it. Nor can God be said absolutely and infallibly to
decree the coming to pass of such things, which are essentially, in themselves,
and in their own Natures, contingent, it being a Maxim generally granted by our
Adversaries themselves, That the Decrees of God have no real influence upon
their objects, or things decreed, at least no such, which alters their
Natures, or essential properties of their Beings. It is a common saying amongst
them, that Praedestinatio nihil ponit in praedestinato, i. e. Predestination
puts nothing in, or into, either the thing, or person, predestined. And if
Predestination puts nothing in, or into, the things or persons
predestined, there is no reason to judge that any other of his Decrees does
any whit more. And if the Decrees of God relating unto contingent events,
should have any such influx upon them, which alters their Natures, and changes
the fundamental Laws of their Beings, transforming them into things absolutely
necessary, or necessary with any such necessity, which is unavoydable,
contingency would be only a name, or matter of mere speculation, God having
with the same infallibility and absoluteness of Decree (as say our Adversaries)
decreed things contingent, and things necessary, and consequently made all
things, as to matter of event and coming to pass, necessary. So that the
Salvation of the Saints is not absolutely decreed by God to be effected by His
long-suffering toward them: Nor could this long-suffering be reasonably by
them accounted Salvation, in case their Salvation were so absolutely decreed
unto them, as our contrary-minded Brethren suppose. Therefore,

6. (And lastly) when the Apostle says, that the Lord is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all etc. his meaning must
needs be, that he is long-suffering toward men, simply and indefinitely
considered, or, toward mankind; and that this long-suffering of his toward
them, proceeds out of a gracious and merciful disposition in him, which
inclines him, not to will, or desire, the destruction of any Person, or Soul,
of them, but that they may generally, one and other, by the advantage and
opportunity of his goodness and long-sufferance toward them, be so overcome,
as to repent unfeignedly of their sins, and turn unto him, that they may be
saved. This Interpretation,

1. Perfectly accords with the words, in their genuine, proper, and best-known.
12.
significations: whereas the other (as we lately proved) requires such a sense
and signification, of the two Particles, (...), and (...), any, and all,
wherein they are not to be found throughout the Scriptures.

2. The series and story of the Context, falls in much more genuinely and
fairly with this, then with that other, interpretation; the scope of the words,
being (as we formerly likewise showed) to vindicate the delay, which the Lord
Christ makes, in not performing His Promise of coming to Judgment with so much
celerity and expedition, as some conceive it meet that He should perform it,
from any Pretense, or Plea, that can in a way of Reason, render it offensive
unto any man. Now look out of how much the greater, richer, and larger mercy
and goodness toward the poor children of men, this Delay of His shall be found
to proceed, and by how much greater the number of those are, whose benefit and
blessedness shall appea^ to be intended by it, and concerned in it, it must
needs be conceived to be proportionably so much the further off from being any
just matter of offense unto any man, then it would be, in case it should be
occasioned by any straitness of bowels, or the good intended by it be conceived
to relate only to a few.

3. The sense of the words and place, which this Interpretation exhibiteth, is
more clearly parallel, and consistent with the mind of the Holy Ghost in other
Scriptures, then that which is issued by the other. The Scripture no where, at
least no where so much, commends the Patience or long-sufferance of God
determinately toward his Elect, or toward Believers, in reference to their
Repentance or Salvation, as toward the generality of men, and more especially
toward those that are wicked and ungodly. But we are sure (says the Apostle
Paul) that the Judgment of God is according to Truth, against them which commit
such things. And think thou this, O man, that judg^st them which do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads THEE to Repentance. But THOU Romans
2. 2, 3, 4.
, etc. And God Himself by His Prophet Ezekiel speaks thus to the wicked and
stiff-necked Jews in general: Turn your selves from all your transgressions: so
iniquity shall not be your ruin. And further: For why will ye dye, O House of
Israel. For I have no pleasure in the death of Him that dies, says the Lord
God: wherefore turn your selves, and live ye Ezekiel. 18. 30, 32.
. And elsewhere by the same Prophet: Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord
God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his ways and live. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways: for why will ye
dye, O House of Israel Ezekiel. 33. 11
? Our Apostle himself, speaking of the wicked generation of the old world, and
of Gods Patience toward them, says thus: Which sometimes were disobedient,
when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah 1 Pet. 3. 20
, etc. Not to multiply Places, that of the Apostle Paul (formerly opened Cap.
6. Sect. 10. and cap. 12. 20.
) is of much affinity with the words in hand: Who will have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth 1 Timothy 2 4.
. In all these Passages (unto which many more of like import might readily have
been added) the gracious intendments of God in his Patience, toward the
generality of men, and more especially toward the wicked, are very
emphatically asserted, and this by way of encouragement and invitation unto
them to Repent, that so they might be saved. But concerning any such intentions
of God in His Patience, determinately toward Believers, or His Elect, I find
the Scriptures silent altogether.

4. (And lastly) The sense of the Scripture in hand contended for, is attested
by Mr Calvin Himself, over and over. The Apostle (says He) checketh the
too-much and preposterous haste [that some made] by another Reason, viz.
because the Lord does therefore defer His Coming, that [hereby] He may invite
all mankind [or, the whole of Mankinde] unto Repentance. A little after, thus:
And indeed there is the same consideration to be had, of the duration of the
whole World, which there is of every man's life in particular. For God by
affording [or enlarging] time to every PARTICVLAR MAN, forbeareth them till
they may [or that they may] repent. So likewise He makes no haste of putting an
end unto the World, that He may give unto ALL MEN a space to repent Alia
ratione nimiam ac prapo(...)am festinationem compescit, nempe quod Dominus
adventum suum ideo differat, ut totum humanum genus ad poenitentiam invitet. Et
paulo post; Atque omnino de totius mundi duratione idem quod de cujusque
hominis vita sentiendum est. Deus enim tempus singulis pror^gando, sustinet cos
qu^^d res^piscant. Similiter finem mundi ideo non accelerat, ut det omnibus
resipiscendi spatium. Calv. in 2 Pet. 3. 9.
. Aretius in his brief Commentary upon the Place, compares it, for sense, and
import, with three of those four Texts lately cited, viz. Romans 2. Ezekiel. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 4. in all which (as we observed) the Patience of God toward the
generality of men, or toward sinful men, in order to their Repentance and
Salvation hereupon, is clearly avouched; but not the least mention or
intimation of any confinement or appropriation of this His Patience, or
intendments either of Repentance, or Salvation, therein, unto righteous men, or
His Elect. Therefore (questionless) this Orthodox Author also correspondeth
with us in the Interpretation given. Dr Ames upon the place acknowledges, That
the Patience of God, in it is own nature has this use and end, viz. to allure
[or, invite] sinners unto Repentance: Romans 2. 4. And in this sense He grants,
that their Exposition may be admitted, who understand these words, and the
like, of all, and every particular man Patientia Dei ex sua natura illum usum
and finem habet, ut allic^at Peccatores ad resipiscentiam; Romans 2. 4. Atque eo
sensu posset admitti eorum explicatio, qui ista verba and similia, intelligunt
de omnibus and singulis.
. But whereas He adds, that the Apostle in this place particularly respected
the Elect, and for proof, says, that He speaks of the Elect, Verse. 8. and
numbereth Himself with those of whom He speaks: We answer briefly, 1. That He
does not speak Verse. 8. of the Elect, as such, or in their capacity of
Election, but only styles those, to whom He there speaks, Bel^ved; which only
imports His affection toward them, as they were Saints, or Believers, or
rather as they were so judged by Him. 2. Whereas He numbers Himself with those,
to whom, and of whom, He speaks, it no ways proves, or supposes, that He
numbereth Himself in respect of His Election, with them, or of His Saintship,
especially considering that He speaks not, either to them, or of them, as
they were Elect, as we have proved at large in the traverse of the words. And
whereas He grants, That the Patience of God, has in its own nature this use
and end, that it allures (or draws) Sinners to Repentance; does He conceive,
that this nature of it is altered or changed for the worse, by any Intentions
of God, in respect of what sinners soever? Or does He think that God dissolveth
or destroys the proper operativeness, or tendency, of any of His
Dispensations, in order, either to procure the perpetration of more sin in the
world, or to the extenuation of the demerit, or punishment, of men, who live
and dye impenitent and obdurate in their sins? Or is there any other end
imaginable, but only one, or both of these, why the Patience of God, which in
its own nature, has this use and end, to draw sinners to Repentance, should be
divested of them by God?

But against the Exposition given, and maintained, some things are objected..
13.
First: If the Lord Christ should defer His Coming, or be patient toward all
men without exception, in order to their Repentance, that so they may not
perish, He must defer it for ever, and so never come: in as much as that day
will never come, wherein all men will Repent.

To this I answer, That it is neither the sense of the Text, nor yet of the
Interpretation given, that Christ should be patient unto all men, or defer His
Coming, until all men without exception should actually Repent: but that His
intent, and desire, in His Patience toward all men, is, that they should
repent, and be saved, and that He does by His Patience and long-suffering
toward all men, afford unto them means and opportunities sufficient to bring
them all to Repentance. How such Intentions, and Desires, in God and in Christ,
which are real and cordial, may yet very possibly never take place, or be
fulfilled, has been showed (in part) formerly Cap. 2. Sect. 14 cap. 3. sect.
7, 11, etc. cap. 10. sect. 43.
, and remains to be further opened in convenient place.

Another Objection levied by some against the Interpretation avouched (which
yet in part falls in with the former, and is already fallen with it) is this:
If Christ certainly knows, knows beforehand, that all men without exception
will not repent, or, will not be saved, how can it be thought, that He should
will, intend, or desire, that they should repent, or, that they should be
saved? Does any sober man, will, or intend such a thing, which he certainly
knows beforehand, will never be effected?

To this sufficient Answer has been given in the Premises Cap. 3. Sect. 7,
11, etc.
, where we delivered this for a general Rule, to direct to a right
understanding of Scripture Anthropopathies, and attributions of humane things
unto God; viz. That it is not necessary that all things accompanying, or
relating unto these affections, or impressions in men, which are attributed
unto God, should be paralleled in Him, or have something in His Nature
corresponding to them: but that it is a sufficient Ground or Reason for the
Attribution, in case the humane affection, or impression, attributed to Him,
he, in respect of any one Particular, appertaining to it in men, paralleled, or
analogized, in the Nature of God. Which Rule I explain in the place referred
unto, by several instances. From hence it follows, though sober men never
intend, or will, what they certainly know beforehand will never come to pass,
that yet God may (and so Christ) without any reflection of disparagement unto
Him in the least, intend and will, what He certainly foreknoweth (in such a
sense as foreknowledg is appropriable unto Him, of which formerly Cap. 3. Sect.
2, 3, etc.
) will never come to pass. The Reason is, because Intentions, and acts of
willing, which are properly and formally in men, and not in God, are not
attributed unto God, in all, or every respect, or in respect of all
circumstances, which relate unto them in men, but in respect only of such
productions or effects, as they ordinarily produce in men. As for example, when
men will, or intend such, or such, a thing, if the act of their will in this
case be raised to any considerable strength, or height of willing, they engage
themselves in the use of such means, for the effecting of what they intend, or
will, in this kind, which they judge competent and sufficient hereunto. In like
manner God in propriety of Scripture language, is said to intend, and will, the
Repentance and Salvation of men, because He vouchsafes a sufficiency of means
unto them to effect their Repentance, and Salvation hereupon; and charge them
from Heaven to use these means accordingly. And in as much as He vouchsafes
this sufficiency of means unto, and imposes the charge we speak of, upon, all
men without exception, He may upon good grounds be said to intend, or will, the
Repentance and Salvation of all, without exception. It is a common saying
amongst all Expositors of Scripture, as well Protestant, as Popish, that Humana
transferuntur in Deum, non affective, sed effective: i. e. Humane Passions, or
affections, are ascribed unto God, not by way of affect, but effect; i. e. not
because the affections themselves are in Him, but because there proceed such
effects from Him, which are like unto the effects that flow from such
affections in men.

If it be here demanded; but if God certainly foreseeth, or foreknoweth,. 14.
that the means and opportunities which He vouchsafes unto men, to bring them
to Repentance, and so to Salvation, will miscarry, and never take effect, but
turn to so much the greater condemnation of those, to whom they are vouchsafed,
can any vouchsafement of such means and opportunities as these, unto men, be
interpreted, or looked upon, as proceeding from any love or grace in Him
toward such Persons, who He certainly knows beforehand will reject them? or as
any ways obliging such Persons unto thankfulness?

If I certainly knew that the gift of an hundred Pound unto my Son, or friend,
would turn to some sad inconvenience unto them, as to the destruction of their
lives, to the bereaving of them of their wits, or the like, would it be matter
of love, kindness, or respect in me toward them, to give it unto them? Or
should I not deal more kindly by them, not to give it in such a case? To this I
answer;

1. When God vouchsafes unto men things which are in themselves, and in their
natures, good, beneficial, and of worthy concernment unto men, and they who
receive them, very capable of employing them accordingly, He no ways hindering
them from making an answerable use of them, but many ways encouraging,
persuading, and pressing them hereunto, is there any Reason, or color of a
Reason, why He should be thought less gracious, or loving, to such men, only
because He knows beforehand, that they will make no such use of them? Or would
the same, or the like vouchsafements from Him, savor of any whit the more
grace, love, or goodness, in case it could, or should, be supposed that He were
ignorant, what use such men would make of them, or whether they would convert
them to their destruction, or no? Or is there any Reason that the Knowledge of
God, should be turned to the prejudice or disparagement of His goodness?

2. As He certainly foresees that some men WILL turn His Grace into wantonness,
and render themselves liable to the greater condemnation by the abuse of those
means, which He vouchsafes unto them for their Salvation; so He as certainly
knows, and foreseeth likewise, that they MAY do otherwise, if they please, (I
mean, improve these means to the obtaining of Salvation) that His foresight of
what they WILL do, notwithstanding. For the foreknowledg which is in God of
what men WILL do, neither imposes, nor supposes, any absolute necessity of
their doing it Futura contingentia, etiam ut subsunt divinae scientiae, non
sunt simpliciter necessaria. Rada. Contro. 30. Art. 5. See cap* 2. sec. 21, 22,
etc. of this Discourse.
: neither have they ever a whit the less liberty or power to refrain from doing
it, because of Gods foreknowledg that they WILL do it. Nor would they have ever
a whit the more liberty, or Power, to refrain an action, or course, in case it
should be supposed, that God does not certainly foresee what they will do on
either hand, refrain, or act and practice. So that God is never the less
gracious unto men in His vouchsafement of sufficient means of Salvation unto
them, because He foresees they will abuse them. But,

3. (And lastly) I answer further, that there is not the same consideration, of
God, and of men, in respect of such actions, or gifts, the issue or consequence
whereof, the one, and the other, are, or may be, said to foresee, that they
will prove evil to those that receive them. In case a man should foresee such,
or such an event, in one kind or other, that would certainly follow upon any
act or gift of His, His foresight would be such literally and properly, i. e.
He should have knowledge of the event, before He had done the action, or given
the gift, the event whereof He is said to foresee, or foreknow. But now God,
though He be said to foresee the issue or event of any action, or gift, of His,
yet He is not said, properly, or as the word sounds in ordinary acception with
men, to foresee it: i. e. He does not first, or antecedaneously, in respect of
time, foresee it, or see it, before the action be performed by Him, or the gift
given, the event whereof He is said to foresee. For as God Himself is not
measured by time, so neither are any of His Actions: and it is a generally
received Maxim in Theology, admitted by all Divines, That God wills nothing
in time Deus potest nihil velle in tempore; Deus non potest non habere
volitionem, quam habet. Non potest habere volitionem, quam non habet. Daven
Animadversions, etc. p. 484
, but all things, in, or from, Eternity. Now there is the same reason, or
consideration, of His Foreknowledg, which there is of His Will. As He wills
nothing in time, so neither does He foreknow, or foresee, any thing in time:
His foreseeing of things being nothing really but Himself (as all His Actions
are) it must needs be as ancient as Himself, and coeternal with Himself. So
likewise that Act of His, whereby He gives, or imparts, any thing unto men,
though the gift it self given by it, does not come to the hands of men, or to
be received by men, until such or such a time, yet this Act it self of His, was
from Eternity See this argued at large, and fully cleared, Cap. 4. Sec. 14, 15,
etc.
; and consequently is not capable of being foreseen by God, because it was as
ancient as any foresight, or foreknowledg in God, yea, as God Himself. And for
the sad event or consequent of this action, or gift of His, unto men, though He
may (in a sense, formerly declared Cap. 2. Sect. 2. 6.
) be said to foresee it, because it happens in time: yet in as much as that act
passed from Him from Eternity, and so was from Eternity irreversible, by which
the gift, or gifts, sorting to so sad an event in the Receiver, were conferred
upon Him in time, there is no Reason, nor color of Reason, why He should be
thought to give such gifts, being in themselves good, and worthy His infinite
goodness, out of any whit the less love, grace, or mercy toward Him, who
receives them, because He foresaw (after His manner of foreseeing) that they
would be abused by Him to His harm; especially considering that it was not in
his Power (I mean, in the Power of God) to have done more toward the
preventing of such an abuse of them by such a man, then He did. It cannot be
thought, but that God did foresee that the Jews of old would mock His
Messengers, and despise His Words, and mis-use His Prophets, until His Wrath
arose against them, and till there was no remedy; yet the vouchsafement of
these means of Grace and of Repentance (the sending of his Messengers, Words,
and Prophets unto them) is expressly attributed unto his Compassion [i. e. his
love of pity, or benevolousness of affection] toward them. And the Lord God of
their Fathers sent to them by His Messengers, rising up betimes and sending;
BECAUSE HE HAD COMPASSION ON HIS PEOPLE, and on His dwelling place: 2 Chronicles.
36. 15, 16. In like manner our Savior certainly foresaw that Jerusalem
afterward would not understand, or accept of, the things of Her peace, the
means of her safety and preservation; yet he ascribes the vouchsafement of them
unto her, unto a genuine tenderness of love and care in him toward her, and
her children. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, as an Hen gathers Her Chickens under Her wing, and ye
would not: Mat. 23. 37.

But is it not (it is like you will demand) in the Power of God, absolutely. 15.
to prevent the abuse of those good gifts of his we speak of, by the Receivers,
and consequently to do more toward the preventing of this abuse, then he does?

I answer, No: both Reason, and Religion (which yet is nothing but Reason in
her exaltation) teach us to judge and say, that it is not in the Power of God to
prevent the abuse of those good gifts we speak of, in the Receivers, otherwise
then now he does prevent it, ( viz. by affording sufficient means unto them for
the prevention of it,) this (I say) neither was, nor is, according to the sound
Principles both of Reason, and Religion, any whit more in the Power of God to
do, then it is in his Power, to lie, deceive, oppress, or do any other thing
most unworthy of him. For he that is Omnipotent, must needs be Omniprudent
also: and he that is Omniprudent, cannot do any thing in the least degree
repugnant to the most rigid and district Principles of the most perfect Wisdom,
and Prudence, that is. We see it amongst men, that the wiser any man is in
reality and truth, so much the less liberty, or Power, he has to do any thing
contrary to the Laws and Dictates of true Wisdom: and the weaker and more
defective any man is in this Wisdom, the more liberty and Power he has to do
foolishly, or uncomely. What was it that made Joseph unable to commit that
great wickedness, whereunto he was solicited by his Mistress? How CAN I do
this great wickedness (says he Genesis 39. 9.
?) meaning, that he COVLD not do it: whereas (doubtless) there were men enough
in the World, that both could, and would have done, such a thing as that,
though he COVLD not. So what was it, that made Paul unable to do any thing
against the Truth, and able only to act for the Truth? [ For we, says he, can
do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth 2 Cor. 13. 8
.] Whereas there were, and are at this day, thousands in the World, able i. e.
at liberty in their Wills and Consciences to act ten times more against the
Truth, then for the Truth. The true Reason why neither of these men had any
Power, were not able to do those unworthy things, which a thousand other men
had Power enough to do, was, because they had so much true Wisdom in them above
other men, which would not suffer them to do such unseemly and unworthy things.
And generally we find it, that the more knowingly and prudently conscientious
men, or women, are, the more they are bound up in themselves, and have so much
the less liberty or Power to do things that are uncomely, then other men. So
then God, being infinitely more wise, and that with the truest and best Wisdom
that can be imagined, then the wisest of men, must needs in a way of Reason be
conceived to be more bound up in Himself, to have less liberty or Power to do
any thing contrary to any Rule, Dictate, or Principle of the most exquisite
Wisdom that is, then any creature whatsoever, whether Men, or Angels. The
Apostle (as is well known) breaks forth in an holy kind of astonishment, upon
his Contemplation of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God: O the depths of the riches
both of the Wisdom, and Knowledge, of God! How unsearchable are His Judgments,
[meaning, that for matter of Wisdom, and Knowledge, by which they are ordered,
managed, and administered, they are unsearchable; viz. to the bottom, or in
respect of all the strains, or variety of Wisdom that are in them,] and his
ways [in respect of the numberless ingredients of Wisdom, which He puts into
them] past finding out Romans 11. 33
. So then it being contrary to the Laws and Rules of true Wisdom, or of that
infinite Wisdom which rules in God, for him to act his Creatures (at least
ordinarily) in opposition to those natural and essential Properties and
Principles, which himself has planted in them, it may easily be conceived,
how, and in what respect, he has no Power, i. e. no liberty in himself, to
prevent the ruin of his Creature (Man) further, or otherwise, then by such an
interposure of Himself, or of his Grace, in order hereunto, which will, in
respect of any forcibleness or efficacy in working, well consist with the
natural and essential freedom and liberty of his Will. In respect whereof the
utmost line or extent of the liberty or Power of God, is to proceed no further
with men, nor with any man at any time, in the vouchsafement of Grace, or means
of Grace, in order to the preventing of their ruin and destruction, then to
leave them a Power at least, or Possibility, of rejecting the Grace offered
unto them, and so to ruin and destroy themselves. Nor (doubtless) did God ever
go further, or rise higher, then this, no not in the most signal or miraculous
Conversions, which either we read of ^in the Scriptures, or otherwise have
heard of (according to Truth.) I suppose there is not a greater or more notable
instance in this kind, then that of the Conversion of Paul, which (we know)
was effected in a very extraordinary way, and with as high an hand of means, as
ever was lifted up by God for the conversion of a man, as viz. by a Vision of
the Lord Christ himself from Heaven, in splendour and great glory, speaking with
an audible voice unto him; although I know not whether it be necessary to
suppose, that the work of Paul's Conversion was perfected (I mean, specifically
perfected, for gradually I presume it was not) by this Vision only, or until
Ananias, to whom the Vision directed him, had made known unto him those things,
concerning the Gospel, which he did. But whether his Conversion was
specifically perfected by the Vision, without Ananias his Ministry, or no,
doubtless there was a liberty, or possibility, left in Paul himself, to the
very last moment, or minute of time, before this his Conversion was actually
wrought, to have, not only resisted, but even frustrated all the means that
were used for the effecting of it; frustrated I mean, not simply, or
universally, as if Christ should have been disappointed, and lost all he had
done in order to his Conversion, in case he had not been converted; but
frustrated, in respect of that particular end, his Conversion. For God has
always more ends, then one (though but one primary, and antecedent) in
vouchsafing means of Grace and Salvation unto men: and whether he obtains the
one, or the other, it is of much alike concernment unto him; according to that
of the Apostle; For we [Apostles, or Ministers of the Gospel] are unto God [in
our Ministry] a sweet [or, the sweet] savor of Christ, [i. e. we render Christ,
or the Mystery of Christ, by a diligent and faithful spreading abroad the
knowledge of them in the world, as full of satisfaction and contentment unto
God, as they are capable of being improved unto,] in them that are saved, and
in those that perish, [meaning, that the destruction of those, who perish,
through a 2 Cor. 2. 15.
rejection of his rich Grace in Christ offered to them, is matter of good
satisfaction unto him, even as the Salvation of those is, who accept of this
Grace from him.] So that let men, who have Christ, and means of Salvation
offered unto them, take either the right hand, or the left, God will be no
loser by them: his counsels and ends, of one kind or other, will be advanced
howsoever. How that most serious and solemn Profession and Oath of God, that he
delights not in the death of the wicked, or of him that dy^th, (Ezekiel. 18. 32.
and 33. 11.) is of good consistence, with the Apostles being the sweet savor of
Christ unto Him in them that perish, as also with that Profession which himself
makes by Solomon unto wicked men, I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when
your fear comes, -- and your destruction comes as a whirlewind Prove. 1. 26,
27.
, etc. we shall (I conceive) have opportunity to unfold in the latter Part of
our present Discourse. But this by the way, in this place.

Yet give me leave to add one thing further here, of necessary consideration.
16.
for the full clearing of the business in hand. Though it be well consistent
with the Wisdom of God, and the Principles thereof, to rise sometimes, and in
some cases, in the vouchsafement of the means of Grace, and of Salvation unto
men, to the highest pin or degree, in point of efficacy and Power, which the
native and essential freedom and liberty of the Will, will bear; yet is it not
consistent with this Wisdom of his to do it often, much less ordinarily, or of
course. The Wisdom of a Man leads and teaches him, sometimes, upon occasion,
and in order to some more then ordinary design, to vary from his customary and
constant course of acting; yea though this customary and constant course of his
be simply the best, and most agreeable to the Rules of Wisdom, for him
ordinarily to follow. Upon this account the wise man informs us, That there
is a time to kill, and a time to heal, a time t^ build up, and a time to pull
down, -- a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together
Eccles. 3. 2. 3, etc.
, (with several other instances of like import.) When he says, there is a time
to do this, and a time to do that which is contrary unto it, his meaning
clearly is, that it is prudential, and agreeable to Rules of Wisdom, for a man,
according to time, place, and other circumstances, to vary the manner and kind
of his ordinary actions, yea to act at one time with a kind of contrariety to
himself at another. In like manner it is perfectly consistent with the infinite
Wisdom of God upon some special occasion, and in order to some gracious design,
to open the hand of his bounty in the vouchsafement of means of Salvation unto
Men, much wider, then will stand with the same Wisdom to do ordinarily, or at
another time. And as it may be truly said of a truly wise man, that he cannot
cast away stones, when the time is for him to gather stones together; and so on
the contrary, that he cannot gather stones together, when the time and season
is to cast them away; such a man cannot mis-time his actions, because his
Wisdom, which frames and fashions both the consents, and dissents of his Will,
cannot frame or raise a consent of Will in him, to do any thing contrary to it
self, or to its own Nature and Principles, i. e. to do any thing uncomely, or
imprudently: so may it truly be said of God in the matter of granting means of
Faith, and of Salvation, unto men, that he cannot in the ordinary and standing
course of his Providence, or Dispensation of such Means, rise so high, give
Means of that transcendent Nature, Efficacy, and Power, which he can, and does,
give now and then, in some special cases, and in order to some great and
special end. As for example: God was able, no Principle of his Wisdom opposing,
to vouchsafe unto Paul that extraordinary means of believing, or for his
Conversion, which we spoke of, a glorious Vision from Heaven. But it does not
follow from hence, that therefore he is able (we still speak of his Moral
ability, or of the ability of his Will) to afford the like Vision, or any other
means like unto that for efficacy, and converting Power, ordinarily, or unto
all other men. When he demands thus concerning his ancient Church and People of
the Jews, What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done
in it* Isai. 5. 4.
? He had not done any such thing in it, or for it, as he did afterward for
Paul: nor had he multiplied those Miracles, and great works of wonder, some
Particulars whereof he did work for them, and amongst them, to such a number,
or with such frequency, as by his Power simply considered, and without relation
unto his Wisdom, he was able to have done: and yet he might truly say and
profess unto them (as his demand mentioned imports) that he could do no more
for them [to make them fruitful, to bring them to Repentance, and so to make
them a prosperous and happy People] then He had done; i. e. He had done the
uttermost which his Wisdom, in such a case as theirs was, permitted him to do.
So when he vouchsafes a greater sufficiency of means to one City, then he does
to another, (as he did to Capernaum above Tire and Sidon,) to one Nation, then
to another, to one age, or generation of men, then to another, the Reason of
this difference is to be resolved into the same infinite uniform, though
manifold, Wisdom of God (as the Apostle calls it,) or (which is the same)
into the Counsel of his Will Ephesians. 1* 11
; not simply into his Will, but into the Counsel of His Will, [i. e. that
infinite Wisdom, or Prudence, by which his Will is, as it were steered and
directed in all the motions and actings thereof,] according unto which counsel,
he is said to work all things Ephesians. 1. 11.
. And it may be as truly, and as properly, said of him, when he vouchsafes the
least and lowest sufficiency of means, unto some men, as when he affords the
greatest and richest of all, unto others, that he did, or does, what he could,
or what he is able to do, as well for the one, as for the other. And in such
cases of difference as these, that admiration of the Apostle (lately mentioned)
is most seasonable and proper: O the depths of the riches both of the Wisdom,
and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His Judgments, and His ways past
finding out Romans 11. 33.
! By his Judgments (in this place) we are not (I conceive) to understand only
his penal inflictions upon men in one kind, or other, but his dispensatory
Administrations, as he is the Judge, and great Ruler of the World, indefinitely
considered, as well such as are Munificent, as those which are Penal: and so
the word, Ways, in the latter part of the Verse, added (it is like) for
explication, indifferently implies as well the one, as the other. But how, or
in what respect, are his Judgments, or Ways of Administration in the World,
said to be unsearchable, or past finding out? The former part of the Verse
clearly informs us of this; as viz. that they are unsearchable in respect of
that abundance of Wisdom and Knowledge, by which, and according unto which, they
are first ordered and contrived, and then executed, by him. First, they are
unsearchable [viz. unto Men, yea and to Angels too] in respect of that most
absolute and perfect Knowledge, which God has of every particular circumstance,
from the least to the greatest, of all the actions and ways of all the Men in
the World, and so of all Cities, and of all Nations, in all succeeding
generations, from the Morning of the World, until the present hour thereof:
upon which actions, with all and every their respective circumstances, compared
and laid together by God, as by Reason of his perfect Knowledge of them they
readily may be, he builds and forms, by means of his Wisdom (of which
presently) that entire series, or Tenor of his Administrations, as well
Munificent, as Penal, which from day to day, and from age to age, take place in
the World amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men. Now because neither Men, nor
Angels, are capable of knowing, or considering, all that infinite and endless
multitude and variety of actions, with all their circumstances respectively,
which are done in the World, upon which, and according to the exigency of which
(not any one of them, from the greatest to the least, omitted, or left out) the
Providential Administrations of God in the World, as well of Justice, as of
Mercy and Goodness, are founded and framed, hence it is that the Apostle
concludes (in a posture of admiration) that the Judgments of God are
unsearchable, and His Ways past finding* out, in respect of the depths of the
riches of that Knowledge, which he makes use of in forming them; meaning, that
no Creature who knows not as much as God himself knows, concerning the
Grounds and Reasons, why he orders the Affairs of the World, of Persons, of
Cities, of Countries, of Ages, as he does, and not otherwise, can possibly
understand, or comprehend the absolute exactness and accurateness of them; how
ever he may apprehend somewhat, yea much, of them, I mean chiefly, concerning
the Equity and Righteousness of them.

Again, 2. These Judgments and Ways of God are unsearchable and past. 17.
finding out, in respect of the depths of the riches of that Wisdom which is in
God, according unto which also, they are all calculated and formed by him. For
look as in a Judge, who is to administer Justice, and to give sentence in the
Causes of Men that are brought before him, there ought to be these two things,
1. A perfect Knowledge of the respective Cases, wherein he is to give sentence,
in all circumstances relating to them, before he does give sentence. 2. A
Principle of Wisdom, to weigh and ponder aright every of these cases in all
their circumstances respectively, that so he may be able to form such a
sentence, wherein every circumstance, great and small, relating to every case,
may have its due consideration and weight. So there are, and of necessity must
be in God, to make him an absolute Judge (as he is) of all the World, 1. Such a
perfect Knowledge as we speak of, of all cases that are before him in all the
World, with all and every particular circumstance relating to every of them: 2.
An absoluteness* and perfection of Wisdom also, 1. To interpret every
particular circumstance relating to every particular action, and case, in the
World, according to true Principles of Justice and Equity, so as to be able to
say, how much better, or how much worse, such, or such an action is by reason
of such, or such, a circumstance, one, or more; 2. To raise or frame such a
sentence (and to administer and execute it accordingly) which shall be made up
(as it were) of the equitable results of all, and every of those circumstances,
which are to be taken into consideration in every award. Now the Wisdom which
God makes use of in both these ways, in, and about the Government of the
World, has so many unfathomable depths in it, is so rich above measure, so
unconceivable, incomprehensible, in the discerning abilities, and estimative
worth of it, that those judiciary acts and ways which proceed from it, and are
molded and formed by the spirit and strength of it, are greater then all
created understanding, above all comprehension, either by Men, or Angels.

By the light of what has been now argued, it fully appears, 1. That all
such men, who turn the Grace of God in those worthy means of Salvation, which
he vouchsafes unto them, into wantonness, and are not in conclusion saved by
them, but perish so much the more grievously, are notwithstanding as much
obliged in point of thankfulness unto him for them, as they could have been, in
case they should be saved by them. 2. That the vouchsafement and bestowing of
such means upon them by God, notwithstanding the certainty of his foreknowledg
(as foreknowledg is attributable unto him) that they will not prove saving unto
them in the end, are yet Arguments and Pledges of as much Grace, Love, and
Mercy unto them, as they would, or could, be, in case he had as certainly
foreknown that they would be of a saving consequence unto them. 3. That God,
his infinite Wisdom considered, and the obligements thereof upon him, goes as
far, does as much, to render the means of Grace exhibited unto those who
perish, effectual to their Salvation, as is possible for him to do. 4. (And
lastly) That that foreknowledg, which is in God, of the future abuse and
miscarrying of the means of Salvation, in those to whom they are exhibited or
vouchsafed by him, does not precede that act of his, by which they are
exhibited unto them, this being eternal, or from Eternity, as well as that.

CHAP. XVII.
Declaring in what sense, the former Passages of Scripture asserting the
Universality of Redemption by Christ, are (as to this Point) to be understood:
and consequently, in what sense the said Doctrine of Universal Redemption, is
maintained in the present Discourse.

ALthough an intelligent and observant Reader, may from several Passages. 1.
occasionally inserted here and there in the Precedure of this Discourse,
clearly enough perceive and understand, in what sense, and with what
Explications and Proviso's, the said Doctrine of Universal Redemption by
Christ, is asserted and maintained herein, and consequently in what sense the
Author understands all those Texts of Scripture, which hold forth the said
Doctrine unto the World (many of which have been formerly produced upon the
account,) yet that the Reader may readily, without either burthening His
Memory, or spending time in turning over Leaves, know where to find his mind
and sense concerning both, fully explained, I judged it not amiss to devote one
entire Chapter unto his service herein. Therefore,

1. (To express our Meaning in the said Doctrine, negatively, or rather our
non-meaning) When, with the Scriptures, we affirm and teach, that Christ dyed
for all Men, [i. e. for the Redemption, and Salvation, of all men, without
exception of any: for we do not find in Scripture that He dyed for any, for
whose Salvation He dyed not,] we do not mean, or suppose, either, 1. That He
dyed sufficiently only for all Men, [ i. e. only that there was price, or
merit, enough in his Death for the Redemption of all Men:] Or, 2. That God, or
Himself, did every ways, or in every respect, as viz. both antecedently, and
consequently, intend the Redemption, or Salvation, of all Men, in, or by His
Death. Nor, 3. do we mean, or suppose, in the said Doctrine, that Christ dyed,
so, or upon such terms, for all Men, that all Men shall in time, or at last, be
actually redeemed [from sin and misery] or eternally saved, by His Death. Nor,
4. do we suppose, that God (or Christ, as God) intends the Salvation of all
Men, or of any Man, or Men, by Christ's Death, with Intentions, formally, or
properly, so called, or such as are found in Men. Nor, 5. do we mean, or
suppose, in the Doctrine avouched, that Christ by His Death, purchased, or
procured the infusion, or gift, either of Faith, or Repentance, for all Men, or
(indeed) for any Man, or numbers of Men, personally considered. Nor, 6. (and
lastly, for our Negative) that by His said Death He purchased, or procured
Pardon, or Forgiveness of sins, for all Men, or for any Man, or number of Men,
simply considered, or as such, and such Men, by Name. But,

1. (For our sense and Meaning, in the Affirmative) We hold, and mean (in the
Doctrine specified) that there was a reality of Intention on Gods part (in such
a sense as reality of Intention is appropriable unto Him, which sense we opened
at large formerly Cap. 3. Sect. 17.
, and shall briefly again declare in this Chapter,) that, as there was a
valuable consideration, or worth of merit in the Death of Christ, fully
competent and sufficient for the Ransom, or Redemption, of all Men, so it
should be equally, and upon the same terms, erogable, or appliable unto all
Men, in order to their Redemption, without any difference, or special
contraction or limitation of it unto some, more then others.

2. We hold and mean, in, and about the Premises, that God did only
antecedently intend the actual Redemption and Salvation of all Men, in, and by,
the Death of Christ: but consequently, the Redemption and Salvation only of
some, viz. those who shall believe. What it is to will, or intend, a thing
antecedently, and what, consequently, has been showed formerly Cap. 6. Sect.
16.
: and shall (God willing) be somewhat further opened in this Chapter.

3. When we teach, that Christ dyed for all Men, we intend and mean, that there
is a possibility, yea a fair and gracious possibility, for all Men without
exception, considered as Men, without, and before, their voluntary obduration
by actual sinning, to obtain actual Salvation by his Death: so that in case any
Man perishes, his destruction is altogether from himself, there being as much,
and as much intended, in the Death of Christ, for, and toward, the procuring
of his Salvation, as there is for procuring the Salvation of any of those, who
come to be actually saved.

4. When (with the Scriptures) we deliver this, for a Doctrine of Truth, that
Christ dyed for all Men, we suppose and mean, that God intends the Salvation of
all Men by this Death, only so, after such a manner, or with such a kind of
Intention, which is competible to, and consistent with, His infinite simplicity
and Perfection of Being. Of this kind of Intention we argued in our third
Chapter, where we gave a particular and clear account of it: and shall take it
the second time into some brief consideration in this Chapter. This Particular
is of affinity with the first, but is not altogether the same.

5. When we teach, that Christ dyed for all Men, we mean, not only that He put
all Men without exception, into a capability of being saved (as viz. by
believing,) but also that He wholly dissolved, and took off from all Men, the
guilt and condemnation, which was brought upon all Men by Adams Transgression.
So that now no Man shall perish, or be condemned, but upon his own personal
account, and for such sins only which shall be actually and voluntarily
committed by him, or for such omissions, which was in his power to have
prevented.

6. When with the Scriptures we affirm, that Christ dyed for all Men, our sense
and meaning is, that by His Death, He procured this Grace and Favor with God
for all Men without exception, viz. that they should receive from Him
sufficient strength and means, or be enabled by Him, to Repent, and to believe,
yea and to persevere in both unto the end: and that in this sense, and none
other, He is, or may be, said, to have by His Death purchased the Grace of
Faith, and Repentance for Men; and this upon equal terms, in an antecedent
consideration, for all Men.

7. (And lastly) Our sense and meaning in the said Doctrine further is, that
Christ by His Death purchased this transcendent Grace also, and Favor, in the
sight of God, for all Men without exception, that upon their Repentance, and
Believing in Him, they should be justified, and receive forgiveness of all
their sins; and that upon their Perseverance in both unto the end, they should
be actually and eternally saved: and that in this sense, and in this only, He
is, and may be, said, to have purchased Justification, or Remission of sins,
Redemption, Salvation, etc. for Men, for any Man, or any number of Men; yea and
in this sense, for all Men.

The imputation, from the guilt whereof we desire in special manner to. 2.
wash our hands in innocence, by this Explication, is, that as we hold
Universal Redemption, so we hold likewise Universal Salvation, or, that all Men
shall be saved by Christ. That such an Opinion as this is no consequent of the
Doctrine maintained in this Discourse concerning the Death of Christ for all
Men, sufficiently appears from that ground, which we have laid and built
upon, once and again, in the former part of this Discourse, viz. That such
Intentions and Desires in God, and in Christ, which are real and cordial, may
yet very possibly never take place, or be fulfilled. See what has been
proposed* and debated upon this account, Cap. 2. Sect. 13. And again, Cap. 3.
Sect. 7. 11. etc. And yet again, Cap. 10. Sect. 49. This supposed, it may very
easily be conceived, that God may intend the Salvation of all Men by the Death
of Christ, and yet all Men not be saved. Which Opinion (I mean, that all Men
shall be saved) as it has no communion at all with the Doctrine avouched in
this Discourse, so has it every whit as little with the Authors sense or
Judgment otherwise: who approves the sentence of the Constantinopolitan Synod
assembled under the Emperor Justinian, wherein this Opinion, held (as it seems)
by Origin with a susplussage of Error joined with it Origens Opinion was, not
only that all Men, but that all the Devils also should at last be saved by
Christ.
, was condemned. Yea to me it seems not a little strange, how any man
professing subjection of Judgment unto the Scriptures, should ever come to a
confederacy with such an Opinion. For with what frequency, and evidence of
expression, do these rise up against it, ever and anon intimating and asserting
on the one hand, the Paucity of those that will, or shall, be saved, in
comparison of those that will perish, and on the other hand, the Perpetuity or
everlastingness of the Perdition and misery, of those who do perish? Nor do
they give the least intimation, or hope of release from misery, unto those, who
dye in their sins, and perish in their unbelief. Enter in at the strait gate,
(says Christ unto the children of men in His Doctrine upon the Mount,) for
wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and MANY
there be that go in thereat: [but we read of none that return, or come out,
thereat.] Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and FEVV there be that find it Matt. 7. 13; 14.
: [ i. e. that find it, either first, or last, or ever.] For that this is His
Meaning, appears from these, and such like sayings. Wherefore if thine Hand
cause thee to offend, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, then having two hands, to go into Hell, into the fire that never shall
be quenched: [He does not say, into the fire that is hard to be quenched, or,
which will be long in quenching; but (...), i. e. into that fire, which differs
from all other kinds of fire, in this, that whereas they are quenchable, no
Decree of God interposing to the contrary, this by the unchangeable Law of
Heaven, is made unquenchable: for the redoubling of the Article, (...), has
this import, which is likewise further confirmed by that which follows,]
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched Mark 9. 43, 44.
. These expressions, dies not, is not quenched, though according to their
precise Grammatical import, they only deny the act, the one of dying, the
other of quenching, yet according to Scripture-dialect, they deny also the very
power, or possibility of these acts Negatio actus saepe connotat etia^
negationem potentia.
. For there is nothing more frequent here, then by the denial of the act, to
deny the power, or possibility of a thing. Thus Genesis 13. 6. where our
Translation reads, And the Land was not ABLE to bear them, the Original only
says, And the Land DID not bear them, (as Mr Ainsworth also translateth the
place.) So Prove. 24. 7. where our last Translation, respecting the Original,
has it, He OPENS NOT His mouth in the gate, our former Translators, rather
minding the sense and import of the place, read it thus; He CANNOT OPEN His
mouth in the gate; to omit many the like. So that when our Savior says,
concerning the estate of those that go, or, are cast, into Hell, that their
worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched, His Meaning is, that their worm
cannot dye, nor their fire be quenched, [i. e. their punishment, or torment,
can never have an end, or interruption, viz. because the Counsel of the Will of
the Almighty has resolved against both, and judged it meet to make them
easless and endless.] Upon this account also John the Baptist, says concerning
Christ, That He has His Fan in His Hand, and will thoroughly purge His floor,
and gather His Wheat into His Garner: but will burn up the Chaff with
UNQUENCHABLE FIRE Mat. 3. 12.
. So likewise the Apostle Paul clearly teaches, That the Lord Jesus shall show
Himself from Heaven with His mighty Angels, In flaming fire, rendering
vengeance unto them, that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; who (says He) shall be punished with EVERLASTING
DESTRVCTION from the presence of the Lord 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.
, etc. To this purpose, the Evangelist John reports it for the saying of an
Angel unto him in his Vision, that If any man worship the Beast and His image,
and receive His mark in his forehead, or hand, The same shall d^ink of the wine
of the Wrath of God, which is poured out WITHOUT MIXTVRE, into the Cup of His
Indignation, and He shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence
of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, And the smoke of their
torment ascends up for EVER AND EVER Rev. 14. 9, 10 11.
, etc. These last words are again used in the description of the vengeance,
that shall be executed upon the whore. And again they [the People that were in
Heaven] said, Alleluja: and Her smoke rose up FOR EVER AND EVER Rev. 19. 3.
. Afterward in the same Book we read, That the Devil that deceived them, was
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet
are, and shall be TORMENTED DAY and NIGHT FOR EVER AND EVER Rev. 20. 10.
. This expression, for ever and ever, so signally expressed in all the three
Testimonies last recited, plainly imports, that the duration or continuance of
the punishment, and torment, of those who who perish in their sins, and are
cast into Hell, is not commensurable with the continuance of the Mosaical Law
(long since expired) which in the Old Testament is frequently signified by a
word signifying, or at least commonly rendered, for ever Exodus 28. 43 29. 28.
Lev. 16 29 etc.
, but usually interpreted, for a long time, or, for the time of a man's life,
etc. but commensurable with the duration of the Kingdom of God, of the Life of
God, and of Jesus Christ; for these, in respect of their continuance, are
(almost) constantly said to be, for ever and ever Psalm. 10. 16. 21. 4. Rev. 4.
9. 5. 14. 10. 6. 15 7, etc.
, i. e. for Eternity, or, without end. The notion and term likewise of the
bottomless pit, frequently used in the Book of the Revelation to signify the
state or condition of the damned, plainly enough imports the endlessness, or
everlastingness, of their misery. If we could suppose a ditch, or pit, without
a bottom, into the midst of which a man should be thrown, we could not, with
congruity of notion, but suppose also, that this Person would be always
falling, and that his motion, or fall, would never be at an end. The like
apprehension (doubtless) concerning the case and state of those who dye in
their sins, in respect of their torment and misery, the Holy Ghost seeks to
form and plant in our Souls and Consciences, by the Metaphor, or borrowed
resemblance of a bottomless pit. It were easy to multiply Texts of Scripture,
to make that voice, which has now spoken unto us in those last cited, far
greater and louder: but those which we have heard speak already in the point,
have spoken so plainly, that the rest may keep silence (at the present) without
loss or disadvantage to the Truth.

Neither do the Scriptures so much as whisper any thing of semblance, or. 3.
comport, with the Opinion now rejected. As for that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.
10. which some well-willers to the said Opinion look upon, as sympathizing with
them in their judgments that way, it will, upon a due enquiry, be found of
another spirit. -- That in the Dispensation of the fullness of times (says this
place) He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in
Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in Him Ephesians. 1; 10
, etc. Whereunto (for affinity sake) we may join that from the same Pen: For it
pleased the Father that in Him all fullness should dwell, And (having made Peace
through the blood of His Cross) by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself, by
Him (I say) whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven Col. 1. 19, 20
. From these Passages laid together, some judge it to be a very legitimate
inference, that in the Dispensation of the fullness of times [i. e. as they
understand, in due time, though it be very long before] all things, [i. e. all
Persons of Men, or Mankinde] whether in Heaven, or in Earth, [i. e. as well
those, who at present are at the greatest distance from the Love and Favor of
God, whether alive or dead, the Earth containing both, as those that are
already in His Favor, and therefore, in Blessedness and Glory] shall be
gathered into one by Christ, [i. e. shall be reconciled unto Him, and so be
invested together in one and the same condition of Happiness and Glory, by
virtue of the Death of Christ, who dyed for them all, and that to procure their
actual reconcilement unto God, sooner or later, however wickedly, and
unbeleevingly, they should either live, or dye.] But that such a gloss as this
is quite besides the Text, and the true import of it, is not hard to
demonstrate. For,

1. Neither of the said Passages speak of the event, issue, or success of that
glorious design of God by Jesus Christ, specified in them, but of the design it
self, or what was projected or intended by Him. Now the Design or Projection of
God by Jesus Christ, here reported, was (as the Apostle expresses it in the
former place) (...), i. e. to recollect, reduce, or gather all things into an
Head, by Christ, or, in Christ, both things in Heaven, and things on Earth. In
the latter place, this Design is said to be, the reconciling of all things to
Himself by Christ, whether things on Earth, or things in Heaven. By, All
things, whether in Heaven, or on Earth, by the joint consent of all
Interpreters, He means, Angels (Holy Angels) and Men. The Neuter gender for the
Masculine is a frequent construction in the Scriptures, and emphatical. (...),
i. e. Every thing [meaning, every Person of Mankinde] which my Father gives
unto me John 6. 37
, etc. So presently after, (...), that every thing which He has given me Verse
39
, etc. So (...), i. e. the foolish things, and the weak things of the world 1
Cor. 1. 27.
, for foolish men, and weak men [so esteemed.] See also 1 John 5. 4. Revel. 21.
27, etc. The note of universality, (...), is better limited to that kind of
subject, which is properly capable of being Headed by Christ, as viz. Men and
Angels, then extended to all things simply, and whatsoever; though such a sense
as this be passable enough, and is embraced by some. When the Apostle says,
that Gods Project or Design was, to recapitulate, or recollect, or gather all
things into, or unto, an Head, by Christ, both Angels, and Men, He supposes,
1. That both stood in need of an Head, i. e. of one set in place of Power and
Authority over them, who should be both able, and willing, to govern, order,
protect, and direct them so, or upon such terms, that they might not, with any
tolerable care over themselves, miscarry in point of greatest Happiness, as the
one of them, Men, had generally done already, and the other, Angels, were
liable to do, as many of their kind, and of the same creation and nature with
them, had done, as Calvin well observes upon the place, affirming, That as Men
were l^st, so were the Angels not out of danger [of losing Quis ergo neget, tam
A^gelos, quam h^mines, in firmum ordinem Christ* ^ratia fuisse red^ct^s?
Homines enim p^rditi erant. Angeli vero non erant extra periculum.
.] 2. He supposes further, that God did not intend the effecting of this his
Design, by mere Power, or Prerogative-wise, I mean, so as to thrust, or force
Christ for an Head, either upon Men, or Angels, nor yet to propound, or offer
Him unto either for an Head, in his mere Naturals (if I may so speak)
unwrought, or uncontrived, but as a Person orderly and duly fitted and prepared
for such a relation, partly by assuming the Humane Nature, or a body of flesh,
partly by suffering Death, the Death of the Cross, in this body, and by his
rising again from the dead. For by suffering Death, especially the Death of the
Cross, in the Humane Nature, 1. He made Peace (as the Apostle expresses it in
the latter of the Passages) i. e. He did that which was proper and effectual to
reconcile Men unto himself, and consequently unto Angels also, who were an
enmity with them, bebecause of their enmity against God, yea and unto, and
amongst, themselves also. The Death of Christ in the Humane Nature, was upon
this account, a proper means to reconcile Men unto God, [ i. e. to cause Men to
think holily and reverently of him, to love him, delight in him, etc. who by
reason of the guilt of sin cleaving to them, were apt before to hate him, as
Malefactors do their Judge,] viz. because God, the sins of Men being perfectly
expiated and attoned thereby, freely offers them, and upon their Repentance,
assures them, the Pardon and Forgiveness of their Sins. See to this purpose, 2
Cor. 5. 19. largely opened by us formerly Cap. 5. Sect. 28, 29, etc.
. So then, the Death of Christ being a proper means (as has been showed) for
the reconciling of Men unto God, it must needs be a means semblably, and by way
of consequence, of reconciling them unto Angels also, who had no other quarrel
against them, but only for their hatred, and enmity against God. Now this
Reconciliation between Men, and Angels, when actually effected, puts them
into a capacity of being fellow members in one and the same body, and so of
uniting mutually under one and the same Head. For as two cannot walk together,
except they be agreed; so neither can a plurality of Persons kindly, and to the
contentment, either of themselves mutually, or of their Head, incorporate into
one and the same community, or walk in subjection under the same Head. In which
respect, the reconcilement of Men also, to, and amongst themselves, as viz. of
Jews unto Gentiles, and Gentiles unto Jews, who through diversity of Religions,
Opinions, and outward Forms of worshipping God, were at enmity the one against
the other (and there is the same reason of other men distanced in affection,
whether upon the like occasions, or otherwile) was as necessary as that of Men
unto Angels, in order to the accomplishment of the said great Design of God.
Now Christ by His Death, and by the general Promulgation of the Gospel
throughout the World, which depended thereon, and was a fruit thereof, both
took away the Ceremonial Observations of the Jews, with their Notions and
Opinions hanging thereon, as also the Idolatrous and Superstitious Rites and
Observations of the Gentiles, with such conceits as they built hereon, which
together made (as it were) a double partition wall between them; thus
endevoring with an high Hand of Grace, to reduce both the one and the other of
them, into one and the same way of worshipping God, viz. that prescribed in the
Gospel; as also both to think, and speak the same things concerning God, and so
to cause the enmity and alienation of mind between them, to cease, that by
this means they might be prepared and fit to make, as fellow members, one body.
See the Apostles Discourse to this point, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The
same or the like course, he has taken also by his Death, and the Publication
of His Gospel thereupon, to reconcile all other Persons of Mankind among
themselves, viz. by calling them into communion in one Spirit, in one Faith, in
one Hope, in one Baptism, in one God, in one Savior, etc. that so there might
be no occasion of any such differences, or distastes between them, but that
they might be every ways meet to associate in one and the same spiritual Body,
and live sweetly together under one and the same Head, Jesus Christ. This then
is one consideration, wherein the Death of Christ was necessary for the
bringing about the glorious Projection of God, I mean, the gathering of all
things, whether in Heaven, or on Earth, under, or into, an Head, the same Head,
Christ.

Secondly, This Death of Christ did accommodate the same Design of God, in
another respect also; viz. as his voluntary subjection hereunto was an
equitable foundation, or consideration, whereon God might, as He did* exalt Him
to the the transcendent Honor of that Glorious Headship, and Principality.
Wherefore (says the Apostle, meaning, because being in the form of God, an
estate wherein He counted it no robbery, as he had no reason to do, to be equal
with God, He made Himself of no reputation, -- but humbled Himself, and became
obedient unto the Death, even the Death of the Cross; in consideration of this
wonderful Humiliation, and Condescension, says he) God has even highly
exalted Him, and given him a Name above every name, etc. Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9,
etc. Hence it is that the Scriptures still mention that glorious investiture of
his which we speak of, Headship over Men and Angels, as conferred upon him, not
till after his rising again from the dead. -- according to the working of His
mighty Power, which He wrought in Christ, when He raised Him from the dead, and
set Him at His right Hand in Heavenly places, Far above all Principality, and
Power, and Might* and Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but in that also which is to come, And has PVT ALL THINGS UNDER HIS
FEET, and GAVE Him to be the HEAD over all things to the Church, etc. Ephesians. 1.
19, 20, 21, 22. From these last words, And has put etc. it is observable, that
though God has by a strong hand subjected all things whatsoever under, and
unto Christ, yet He has GIVEN Him to his Church, and to His Church only,
consisting of Men and Angels, ( Colos. 2. 10.) for an Head. From whence it
follows, 1. That neither Men, nor Angels, are necessitated or compelled by God,
to accept of Christ for their Head, or in the ^^lation of an Head, though they
be necessitated and compelled, with all other Creatures, to subject to his will
and pleasure in the exercise of his Power. For that which is properly given to
a man, he is not forced to accept, or take, but receives it freely. If Men, or
Angels be unwilling, or shall refuse, to be, or to continue, Members of his
Church, as they are at liberty to do (for their Wills in this kind are not
compelled, or necessitated by God) they shall discharge themselves, though to
their infinite loss and misery, from their relation, or subjection unto Christ,
as their Head. 2. That Christ stands in the relation of an Head, and so
performs the Offices of an Head, only unto such, whether Angels, or Men, who
are Members of that Body, which is called his Church. So that though the
nature, and compass of Gods great Projection by Christ, and his Death, was (as
we heard the Apostle expressing it) (...), etc. to head, or rehead, all things
whatsoever ( viz. that are headable, as we interpreted) whether in Heaven, or
on Earth, [i. e. all Men without exception, and all standing Angels,] yet it
does not follow from hence, that all Men without exception, ever will, or
shall, be actually headed by Christ (and so be saved by him,) because many will
not accept of, or submit unto, those terms, upon which only the declared Will
and Purpose of God is, to interess his Creature actually in so great and
blessed a Privilege. For though Gods Purpose and Design was to head All Men
without exception, with, or in, Christ, as well as all his good Angels, [ i. e.
so to give, and contrive his Christ, that all of both sorts of these Creatures
without ^xception, might be put into a capacity, and have opportunity, of being
brought into the relation of Members under so glorious an Head,] yet it was no
part of either, that any one particular, whether of the one kind of creature,
or of the other, should actually come into this relation, otherwise then by a
free and voluntary acceptance of Christ for their Head. So that as the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel, or Projection, of God [intended by
him for good unto them] in Baptism, against themselves [i. e. to their own
great damage and loss] in refusing to be baptized by John Luke 7. 30.
: ^n like manner the greatest part of Men voluntarily reject that great Counsel
of God for the reducing of them under so infinitely* desirable an Head, as the
Lord Christ is, to their own unconceivable misery, by refusing to subject
themselves unto him, in the relation of Members.

Nor does it follow from such a rejection of that Counsel of God we speak of,
by Men, that therefore this Counsel of his, or his Intention in it, should be
frustrated, or made void: because (as has been said) the tenor, frame, or
import of this Counsel was, not that all Men without exception should
absolutely, and without condition, be actually invested with the benefit or
blessing therein intended unto Men; but that all such Men without exception,
and such only, who should believe in Christ, and freely submit unto him as an
Head, were they all without exception, or were they never so few, or never so
many, should actually partake of the said benefit. Therefore from neither of
the two Passages of Scripture cited toward the beginning of this Section, can
any such conclusion be evinced, That all men without exception shall first or
last be saved by Christ; because it cannot be evinced from either of them, that
all Men without exception will believe in him first, or last, without which
there is no Salvation supposed in either of them.

That neither of the places speak of any such Reconcilement of all things unto
God, which was actually to take place in any Person of Man, without the
intervening of Faith; nor yet again that either of them supposes an absolute
necessity, that all Men, or that any Man, should believe, so as to be actually
and completely reconciled unto God, by means of the projected Reconciliation
here spoken of, is evident from this applicatory discourse of the Apostle,
subjoyned to the latter of them; And you that were sometime alienated, and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, In the body
of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and
irreprovable in his sight, If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and
be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel. etc. In this clause, If ye
continue in the Faith grounded, etc. he clearly supposes, 1. That their
present Reconciliation unto God, was obtained by the intervention of their
Faith: And, 2. that the perfecting and completing of it in Glory, did depend
upon their Perseverance in this Faith unto the end. Which latter clearly
implies, that notwithstanding that Reconciliation which God made of all things
to himself by Christ, yet they might very possibly not have been reconciled
unto him, or saved, in the end. We formerly observed from Doctor Prideaux, That
such Conditional sayings, upon which Admonitions, Promises, or Threatenings are
built, do at least suppose something in Possibility, how ever by virtue of
their tenor and form they suppose nothing in Being Cap. 12.. 7.
.

2. For those words (in the former of the said places) that in the Dispensation
of the fullness of times he might gather together all etc. they no ways import
any such time yet to come, wherein all Men should be actually gathered together
in one, or be saved, by Christ; but only that God made choice of the most
convenient time, as viz. when many ages and generations of the World had first
passed, to bring his Son Jesus Christ into the World, to suffer death, and so
to raise him again from the dead, and upon this to anoint him with that
precious oil of joy and gladness, by which he was consecrated into the great
Honor and Dignity of that Glorious Headship we speak of, and whereof he stands
possessed at this day; and that for this end, and with this intent on Gods
part, that all Men without exception, that should for the time to come be born,
and live in the World, should by believing in him, and submitting to him, have
the opportunity to enjoy him in the blessed relation of a Glorious Head, by
whom they might be preserved and kept in peace and blessedness for ever.

If it be yet demanded, how God (in the latter of the said Passages) may. 4.
be said to reconcile all things [i. e. as well Angels, as Men, as we formerly
expounded] unto himself, by Christ, when as between him, and his Elect Angels
there was no enmity, or distance; I answer,

1. It is not necessary, upon the account of any expression here used by the
Apostle, to suppose that the Angels were in particular reconciled unto God by
Christ, but those words, whether they be things on Earth, or things in Heaven,
may be taken emphatically, and import only such a sense as this, that as Gods
Project in Christ was for Reconcilement, so was it so gloriously vast and
comprehensive in this kind, that it compassed and took in, not only the
inferior World, the Earth, and all things therein, but even the superior also,
the Heavens themselves, and all things herein, viz. as far as they were
reconcilable, or stood in need of reconcilement unto him: So that in case there
had been any distance, more or less, between God, and His Angels, the course
which God had taken by his Christ, was abundantly sufficient and proper to have
healed it. When the same Apostle exhorts Timothy in preaching the Gospel, to be
instant, in season, and out of season, he does not suppose, or imply, that
there is any time out of season, or unseasonable, for the work; but the
expression is emphatical, and imports, that he need not be curious or
solicitous to distinguish, between times and times, for the preaching of the
Gospel, as if there were any danger that he might preach it unseasonably, or at
any time, or times, that were not fitting for such a work; meaning, that all
times were seasonable for it. The two expressions (I conceive) do somewhat
parallel one the other. Yet,

2. There is a sense, and this not altogether unproper, wherein the Angels
themselves may be looked upon as reconcilable unto God, yea and as actually
reconciled unto him by Christ. For, 1. (as Calvin upon the place well observes)
The Obedience which the Angels perform unto God, is not in every respect so
complete or absolute, as to satisfy God, without a Pacifier coming between.
And to this Point he cites that of Eliphaz in Job: -- and his Angels he
charged with folly Job 4. 18.
: He reads the words, In his Angels he will find iniquity, [agreeable
whereunto is that other saying of the same Author, Yea the Heavens are not
clean in his sight Job 15. 15.
,] which he is confident cannot be meant of the evil Angels, or Devils. Again,
2. He observes further (and that with more unquestionableness of truth) that
the Angels, being Creatures, are not out of all danger of falling, and so have
need of confirmation by the Grace of Christ. From whence he concludes, that
there is not so much Righteousness in the Angels themselves, which suffices
for their perfect and full conjunction with God: but that they also stand in
need of a Peacemaker, by whose Grace they may thoroughly and entirely cleave
unto God Sed tamen duabus de causis Angelos quoque oportuit cum Deo pacificari.
Nam quum Creaturae sint, extra lap^us periculum non erant, nisi Christi gratia
fuissent confirmati. Hoc aute^ no^ parvum est momentum ad pacis cu^ Deo
perpetuitate^, fixu^ habere statum in justicia, ne casum aut defectionem
amplius timeant. Deinde in hac ipsa obedientia, quam praestant Deo, non est tam
exquisita perfectio, vt Deo omni ex part, and citra veniam satisfaciat. Atque
huc procul dubio spectat sententia ista ex libro Job, In Angelis suis reperiet
iniquitatem. Nam si de diabolo exponitur, quid magnum? Pronunciat autem illic
spiritus summam puritatem sordere, si ad Dei justiciam exigatur. Constituendum
igitur, non esse tantum in Angelis Justiciae, quod ad plenam cum Deo
conjunctionem sufficiat. Itaque Pacificatore opus habent, per cujus gratiam
penitus Deo adh^reant, unde recte Paulus, qui in solis hominibus negat residere
Christi gratiam, sed Angelis etiam communem facit, etc.
. When he ascribes their obnoxiousness to fall, unto their being Creatures, He
plainly supposes that they have no such confirmation by Christ, but that they
are in a possibility (at least) of falling, this notwithstanding, in as much as
they are Creatures still, as well as they were before, or should have been
without this confirmation by Him; though it is true, their condition is
eminently bettered by that benefit of confirmation, which they have by Christ,
being hereby become out of danger, though not out of possibility, of falling.
But this by the way. Whether the present Righteousness or Obedience of Angels
be every ways so absolute, as to satisfy God without any further satisfaction
from another, or no; in case without that confirmation, which now they have
received by Christ, they had been liable to offend God, and make Him their
Enemy, but are by means thereof delivered from this danger, they may properly
enough be said to be reconciled unto God, by Him. For as such a receipt, which
is taken to prevent a disease, may be as properly called Physique, as that
which is used to recover a man out of sickness: in like manner I see no Reason,
but that that gracious and friendly act, by which a breach, likely to happen
between two, is prevented, may be called an act of Reconcilement, as well as
that, whereby actual enmity between them is healed. Or,

3. (And lastly) The best Interpretation of the Place may very probably be this
(which leaves no place for the difficulty, or demand, propounded) viz. to
expound these words, (...), not terminatively, or, to himself, but causally,
for himself; which construction the Preposition, (...), with an Accusative
case, frequently admits. (...)* for THEREFORE came I forth Mark 1 38.
. So again, (...)* i. e. FOR THIS CAUSE came I into the World, that I should
bear witness unto the Truth Ioh. 18. 37. (...), pro (...), propter, ob. Rob.
Constant. Lexic. in verbo (...). Vid. and Lexicon Ioh. Scapulae in eodem verbo.
. (Besides many the like.) The words, (...), thus understood, render the sense
of the place clearly this: that God by the Cross, or Death of Christ,
reconciled Men on Earth, and Angels in Heaven [viz. between themselves, Angels
being enemies unto Men because of their sinning against God, which cause of
enmity being taken away by the Death of Christ, the Angels are become friends
to them, as we lately showed,] not, to Himself, but, FOR HIMSELF, i. e. for the
effecting of his own great and gracious Design, in advancing Christ to be Head
unto both, being incorporated and united in the same Body, which without the
healing of the enmity or disaffection between them, could not have been, as we
lately proved. This Exposition differs not much from that of Augustine, in Cap.
61. and 62. Enchirid. ad Laurentium. By what has been argued upon the two
Passages, it appears (I presume) sufficiently, that there is nothing to be
found in either of them, from which the Salvation of all Men, can with any
color of Reason be concluded.

Much less can any such Conclusion be regularly drawn from that of our Savior,
Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence [meaning, out of
the prison of Hell] till thou have paid the uttermost farthing Matt: 5. 26.
. For threatening men that they shall not come out of Hell, till they have paid
etc. He no ways supposes, that in process of time they will suffer to the
uttermost of what they have deserved in Punishment by sinning against God, and
that then God will deliver them. The emphasis of the expression rather carries
a sense of a contrary import, viz. that they must never expect to come out from
this Prison, in as much as they will never be able to pay in Punishment, what
they owe to the just severity of God for sinning against him, especially after
such a rate, as they have done. For they are only obdurate and finally*
impenitent sinners that are cast into this Prison. A Promise of receiving any
thing, being made, or employed, upon the performance of an unpossible Condition,
is equivalent to a threatening that a man shall never receive it. When God
expresses himself thus to Jerusalem, When thy sister Sodom* and her daughters
shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return
to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former
estate Ezekiel. 16. 55.
, He rather threateneth this City with a non-returning to her former estate,
then promises any such thing to her. So in case our Savior should promise
unto those, that are cast into the Prison of Hell for the debt of their sins,
that when they have paid the full debt, they shall be released, and come forth,
it would rather have the import and force of a threatening, that they should
never be released, then of a Promise of releasement after any time whatsoever.
Yea such Promises as these are more emphatically interminative, or threatening,
them plain and formal Threatenings themselves. The Reason is, because a plain
and bare Threatening, only ^mports the Purpose of Him that threateneth, to
bring the evil mentioned in the Threatening, upon the Person threatened; whereas
such Promises as we speak of, wherein deliverance from evil is promised upon
the performance of an impossible Condition, the reason or cause why the evil
threatened should be executed or inflicted upon the Person threatened, commonly
is employed. As when our Savior promises (for the words in hand have a kind
of Promissory import) that they, who are cast into Hell, shall come forth, when
they have paid the uttermost farthing, [i. e. discharged the full debt,] he
plainly intimates the reason, or cause, why they shall never come forth out of
this Prison, to be, because they will never make such Payment. Now a
Threatening upon an equitable and just ground for the execution of it, is much
more piercing and convincing, then when it is simply, and without any mention,
or intimation, of such a ground, denounced.

If it be demanded, But why should not men, who are cast into Hell for. 5.
sin, be able, in continuance of time, to pay the uttermost farthing, and so be
delivered from thence at the last? Or how can it stand with the Justice or
Equity of Gods Proceedings against Men for sin, to inflict everlasting
Punishments upon them, for sinning only for a short time? I answer,

1. Sin, especially such sin, for which men are sent to Hell, being an injury,
or base affront* offered to an infinite Majesty and Goodness, the demerit of it
must needs be great, and indeed unconceivable. The reviling of a Magistrate, or
the smiting of a Prince in the face, are misdemeanors of an higher nature, and
justly more punishable by men, then the like injuries done to meaner men. Yea
it is the sense of all men, that the greater the Person is in Dignity,
especially when His worth and merit is every ways answerable, to whom an injury
or indignity is offered, the greater proportionably is the offense committed,
and obligatory to the greater Punishment. When the standers by said to Paul,
Revilest thou Gods High Priest Acts 23. 3.
? they clearly intimated, that the sin of reviling a Person invested with so
great a Dignity as the High Priesthood, was signally demeritorious, and
deserving exemplary Punishment. Now then allowing proportionably for the
incomprehensible and endless Dignity, Sovereignty, Majesty of God, all in
conjunction with eminency of worth and goodness every ways commensurable to
them, the injury which men offer unto Him by voluntary sinning against Him, and
His Laws, plainly appears to be of infinite demerit, and so binding over the
sinner to an infinite Punishment; infinite I mean, either intensively, in
respect of the nature, or quality; or extensively, in respect of the duration
of it. Now the Creature not being capable of suffering Punishment infinite in
the former consideration, the just severity of God imposes upon Him that,
which is infinite in the latter. To speak, or think, slightly or lightly of the
guilt or demerit of sin, or to look upon the Punishment of Hell fire as
exceeding the proportion thereof, proceeds either from a profound ignorance
of the Nature, Majesty, infinite Goodness and Sweetness of God, or else from a
profane neglect of an intense and due consideration of them.

2. The infinite Purity of the Divine Nature, and most perfect Hatred of sin
ruling and reigning therein, may well be conceived little less then to
necessitate Him, 1. To the denunciation and threatening of that most severe
Punishment we speak of, for the restraint and prevention of it; and
consequently to the execution hereof, when the sinner shall despise His
Atonement, and neglect to wash himself in that Fountain, which He has most
graciously opened for sin and uncleanness [i. e. for men to purify and wash
themselves in, from the defilement of sin, and whatsoever polluteth] unto the
World. In what degree the Nature of a Man abhors any thing, and apprehends
a contrariety in it, either to its Being, or well-being, He rises
proportionably in His care, and use of means, for the prevention of it. The
Devil (it seems) had made observation of this Principle in Men, when He said,
Skin for skin [or rather, skin, after skin] yea all that a man has will he
give for his life Job 2. 4.
. Death being (as Bildad styles him) the King of Terrors Job 18. 14.
, [ i. e. a thing which men generally are more afraid of, then any thing, then
all things in the World besides] engages the generality of men proportionably
to withstand His approaches, and to do the uttermost they are able to deliver
themselves out of His Hand. Now that which Death is to Men [in Point of
abhorrency] Sin is unto God: and therefore it ought not to seem strange unto,
or offend any man, that He should make the strongest and sharpest bridle He
could, for the restraint of it in the World: or consequently, that He should
impose by Law, a Penalty as deep and dreadful as the vengeance of Eternal fire
it self, upon the Perpetrators of it. Any thing beneath this does not answer
the degree, or rather the degreeless Infinity of His Hatred and Abhorrency of
Sin.

3. The severity of that Punishment of sin, which is now under consideration,
will be found the more equitable and just, if we consider on the one hand, how
graciously and bountifully above measure God deals with men, in order to
their escape and deliverance from it* and on the other hand, how wilfully, how
desperately, and with what senceless irrationality, men must go to work, and
act, to bring themselves into the suffering of it.

1. God has discovered unto men, as by a Vision of the Noon day, the. 6.
great deformity, foulness, filthiness, and most detestable abominableness of
Sin. The Devil was never presented to any man's sight, mind, or imagination, in
any such monstrous, uncouth, horrid, affrighting form or shape, as Sin is
exhibited to the Judgments and Consciences of men in the Scriptures.

2. He has discovered likewise upon the same terms, that most viperous,
violent, that most pernicious and keen antipathy which Sin carries in it
against the Peace, Comfort, well-being, and sovereign Blessedness of men.
Poverty, Shame, Sickness, Pains, Tortures and Torments in the flesh, Death, the
Grave, Putrefaction, Rottenness, etc. are but as the hummings of a gnat, or
bitings of a flea, of light and inconsiderable enmity to the Comfort and
Happiness of men, in respect of that most enormous, execrable, devouring, and
confounding contrariety thereunto, which the Word of God informs the World to
be in Sin.

3. As concerning those accommodations to the Nature of Man, as in Pleasures,
Profits, or Contentments otherwise, by the Promise whereof Sin is wont to
commend Her self and Her service to the Children of Men, and to draw them aside
into folly, God has undertaken and engaged Himself, partly by Promise, partly
by Oath, to confer the same, either formally, or eminently, upon them, in ways
of Righteousness and of Honor, if they will be persuaded to walk in them.

4. In case Men, either through ignorance (in any degree hard to be overcome
and expelled by coming to the knowledge of the Truth) or through humane frailty,
or incogitancy, shall be prevented with sin, or entangled in any sinful course,
God has (as it were) at the cost and charge of his Son Jesus Christ, in most
bitter Sorrows and Sufferings, reared up a golden Altar (I mean that of
Repentance) for them to flee unto, and to take hold of: from whence He has
most magnificently promised never to take, or pluck, any man to destroy him;
how unrighteous, wicked, or unworthy soever His ways have been.

5. That Law, by the observation and keeping whereof, Men may, and shall, be
free from sinning, and so from guilt contracted hereby, is, in all the
respective branches and parts of it, holy, and just, and good: Holy, i. e.
Honorable to those that keep it: it requires nothing, no act of obedience from
men, which is any ways ignoble, servile, base, or reflecting disparagement upon
them. Just, i. e. tempered, framed, and fitted to such Principles, which God
has planted in the Natures of Men: so that there is nothing commanded in it,
which either crosses or thwarteth any impression, disposition, or inclination,
which is natural to them, or which God has planted in them; or which requires
any other, any further strength, to perform it, then what God either has
actually conferred upon them, or is ready to confer, upon such an application
of themselves unto Him for the obtaining hereof, of which they are very
capable. Lastly, The said Law, is (in all parts of it) good also, i. e.
commodious and beneficial to the Observers, according to that of David, In
keeping of them there is great reward Psalm. 19. 11.
. So that Sin, especially such sin, or sins, which in the end bring the
vengeance of Hell fire upon them, if men be not extremely careless, negligent
and slothful, may very well be prevented.

6. God has plainly forewarned men of that eternal Wrath and Vengeance which
He is determined to bring and execute upon all Persons, that shall be found
finally impenitent: whereby He has taken a very gracious and effectual course,
not only to bring sin, especially continuance in sin, out of credit and
request with the hearts of men, but to make it as the shadow of death unto
them, the dread, and firstborn of abhorrings to their Consciences and Souls.

7. Unto all those, who shall be found obedient unto His Laws, refraining ways
of sin and of unrighteousness, He has promised, and that upon such terms, that
men may very well come to be fully satisfied upon clear and evident grounds, of
the reality and truth of these Promises, the most magnificent, bountiful, and
glorious reward, of life and immortality, and all the desirable and great
things of the world to come. By this He has taken a like gracious and
effectual course to exalt righteousness, and sinlessness of life and
conversation, in the Hearts and Souls and Consciences of Men.

8. To put Himself into a capacity of making such Promises as these, as also of
performing and making them good, unto Men, and so generally of treating with
them so graciously, as now He does, about the great things of their Peace, He
has delivered up unto Death, the most bitter and ignominious Death of the
Cross, His only begotten Son, in whom His Soul greatly delighted. Hereby He
has given all possible evidence and assurance unto men, with what height and
ardency of affection and desire He seeks their Salvation and eternal
Happiness, how transcendently great his Love, how tender above measure his
Compassions are toward them.

9. (And lastly) Over and besides all these gracious Administrations and
expressions of himself toward them, he vouchsafes unto them the monitory,
assisting, and strengthening presence of his Infinite Spirit with them, and
that upon such terms, that if they regard and comport with him in his first and
lower motions, they shall have an advance and increase of such his presence,
and be stirred up and strengthened by him mightily to oppose tentations unto
sin, to walk in paths of righteousness, and generally to act in due and regular
order, as to the escaping of the Wrath and Vengeance which is to come, so to
the obtaining of that life and glory, which God has promised to those that
love him. Now the consideration of these Particulars (with some others of like
import, that may be added) makes it fully evident, That Men have, 1. All the
real engagements upon them, and 2. All the most efficacious means vouchsafed
unto them, that they are capable of, to refrain from Sin, and to love and
practice Righteousness: in which regard, the most severe Punishment that can be
inflicted upon them for a wilful obdurateness in ways of Sin, is but equitable
and just.

4. (And lastly) Concerning the pretended disproportion between the. 7.
Practice of Sin, as being but for a short time, and the Punishment of Hell
fire, continuing for ever, it has been sufficiently attoned, and the seeming
hardness thereof taken off, by the pr^mised considerations. The demerit of a
sin, which may be suddenly, and in the twinkling of an eye, committed, may be
such, and so enormous, as to deserve Punishment of a long continuance. The act
of Murder, is, or may be committed (almost) in an instant* yet all men judge it
but equitable that the Murderer should have his life taken from him; which, in
truth and strictness of consideration, is a perpetual Punishment, being a
perpetual deprivation of that, which is, or was, most dear to the Offender. And
generally the Law of retaliation, which requires an eye for an eye, a tooth
f^r a tooth, etc. is (I suppose) judged by all men most reasonable and equal.
And yet this Law, in the ordinary process and execution of it, inflicteth
Punishments very disproportionable, in respect of continuance, to the time
wherein, or whilst, the transgression was in acting. A man may in an instant
of time (well-nigh) strike out the eye of another; and yet the loss of one of
his own eyes, which according to the exigency of the Law we speak of, he must
suffer for such a misdemeanor, would be a Punishment to him, whilst he live^.
When a Laborer receives his hire, or wages, for his days work, there is no
proportion between the time of his labor, and the time wherein, or whilst, he
receives his wages: the proportion which in this case, is, in equity, to be
considered, is not between the time, or continuance, of the one, and the other,
but between the value, or worth, of the one and the other. A man may receive in
the fourtieth part of an hour, the full value of his twelve hours labor. In
like manner, the proportion, which Reason and Equity requires to be observed
between sins and Punishments, consists not in an equality of time between the
committing of the one, and the inflicting, or suffering of the other, but in an
equality between the degrees of demerit, in the one, and of suffering, in the
other. Now it has been clearly proved, that such an equality as this is to be
found between sin, which is practiced, or committed, but within a short space
of time (comparatively) and between the Punishment of Hell fire, though
continuing for ever. And let me here add this; that the shortness of the time,
wherein men are, and know themselves to be, in a capacity, or possibility of
sinning, knowing withal that their Punishment for sinning, will be sore and
endless, is, in justness of account, rather an aggravation, then extenuation,
of the demerit of their sinning. For of the two, it is much more irrational and
unworthy of men, knowingly, and voluntarily, to bring an Eternity of most
grievous Punishment upon their own heads, by sinning for a short space only,
then it would be to incur the same misery, upon the account of a larger time of
sining: as it is a point of greater folly and indiscretion, for a man to waste
a fair Estate, and to bring Poverty, or Beggary, like an armed man upon him, by
the vain luxury and excess of one day, or one hour, only, then it would be to
continue in a spending posture for ten, or twenty years together, and to come
to Beggary at the last. The Holy Ghost in Scripture, frequently insinuates the
irrationality of sinning, by the consideration of the short and inconsiderable
continuance of the accommodations accruing unto men thereby. Will thou (says
Solomon) set thine eyes upon that which is not? [i. e. the Being whereof is
inconsiderable, and next to that which is not, or which has no Being at all,
for the short continuance of it;] for Riches certainly make themselves wings,
they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven Prove. 23. 5.
. Now every whit as certain it is, that the fruits or contentments which accrue
unto men by other ways and means of sinning, are every whit as perishable, of
as short and uncertain a continuance, as riches, which are the birth, that
Covetousness travelleth with, and is pained to bring forth. So that all
Particulars relating to the business in hand, being put to account, and truly
summed up together, amount to this, that there is no unrighteousness, or
hardness in it at all, that God, for the sins, which men impenitently, and with
wilful obdurateness of heart, commit within the short compass or space of
mortality, should inflict a Punishment of an everlasting continuance. Nor is
this his severity against sin any whit the more obnoxious, or disparageable,
because He Himself suffers no inconvenience thereby in the least, His estate in
Blessedness and Glory being liable to no breach, or disaccommodation. This
rather commends the equity of such His Proceedings against sin and sinners, and
clearly evinceth, that what He does in punishing the one and the other with
that severity of Punishment, which has been often mentioned, He does not out of
any spirit of revenge (properly so called, or as it is frequently found in men)
nor out of any desire of self-reparations, but out of the most absolute and
perfect Righteousness, Holiness, and Purity of His Nature, in conjunction with
that most exquisite, sedate, and dispassionate knowledge which he has of the
just demerit of sin.

Whereas, in the Explication of our Doctrine concerning Christ's dying. 8.
for all Men (Sect. 1. of this Chapter) we signified, that Intentions, and so
reality of intention, are not competible unto God, in all and every respect,
wherein they are ascribed unto men; though we have sufficiently accounted for
our sense and meaning herein formerly Cap. 3.
, yet we shall here, for the Readers satisfaction, briefly review that account,
that so it may clearly appear, how, and in what sense, we affirm and hold, that
God intended, or intends, the Salvation of all Men, in, or by the Death of
Christ. The actions of men (and so of Angels, and of any Creature whatsoever)
as well immanent, as transient, inward, as outward, not being really the same
things, with their respective Natures, Essences, or Beings, have their peculiar
and appropriate forms really distinct from their said Natures and Beings, so
that they may be actually separated from these, and yet these continue and
remain. As for example, David once had a Purpose or Intention, to build God an
House, or Temple: but upon a discovery made unto Him by God, that His Will was
otherwise, and that, not He, but his Son Solomon, should do it, His Purpose and
Intentions that way expired, and had no longer a Being: yet David, after this
Purpose and Intention of his were fallen, continued the same Person, for Nature
and Essence, which He was before. Now because that which we call an Intent, or
Intention, in created subjects, as Men, has a peculiar Nature, or form, really
distinct (as has been said) from the subject and Nature thereof; and Names and
words were at first imposed upon things, according to what men generally knew,
or apprehended to be in them, hence it is that these words, Intent, Intention,
etc. properly, and in ordinary discourse between men, signify such an act of
the Mind, or Will, of the reasonable Creature, which is in his Power as well
to let fall and lay aside, as to conceive, or raise up within him; yea and
which falls and cease constantly and of course, when the thing intended is
effected. Therefore in this strict and formal signification of the word,
Intentions are altogether inattributable unto God, in as much as all His Acts,
and Actings, in one kind or other, are divisim, and conjunctim, jointly and
severally, one and the same thing with His Nature, Essence, and Being (as we
have heretofore demonstratively proved, and that from the express Principles
and constant assertions of our Adversaries themselves, as likewise from the
Doctrine concerning the Nature of God, generally received amongst us Cap. 3.
Sect. 7, 8, etc. Cap. 4. Sect. 5. 12, etc.
,) and consequently are not perishable, or liable to any expiration, fall, or
change, upon any events, accomplishments, or effectings of things whatsoever,
more then Himself, or His simple Essence and Being. So that when with the
Scriptures we ascribe Intentions unto God, our meaning (with theirs also) is,
that God, in, and by, that one great indesinent, unintermittable, unconceivable
Act of his, which is Himself, and wherein He put forth Himself from Eternity,
and by which He gave, and gives, Being, to all Creatures, Motions, and Actings
of Creatures whatsoever successively See Cap. 4. Sect. 12, 13, 14, etc. 22, etc.
, acts and expresses Himself in order to the effecting, or obtaining, of
such ends, or things, as He is said to intend, after some such manner, as men
do, when they intend the effecting, or procuring of what they project, or
desire. Therefore as men, when they intend such and such ends, are wont to
levy, and use means proper and likely (at least in their Judgments) to effect
and bring them to pass: in like manner God is said to intend such and such
things, when He providentially acts in due order toward, and with a
sufficient proportion of strength in acting for, the effecting and procurement
of them. And thus, and in this sense, we desire to be understood, when we
affirm and hold, that God intends the Salvation of all Men without exception,
in, and by, the Death of Christ; viz. that upon the account of Christ's Death,
He vouchsafes a sufficiency of means unto all Men [considered as men, and
before their wilful sinning that most heinous and unpardonable sin] whereby to
be saved: so that if any particular Person, man, or woman, perish, or be not
saved, the cause, or Reason hereof is not any want of sufficient means from God
for their Salvation, but their own voluntary neglect, or non-improvement of the
means vouchsafed unto them in order thereunto; yea such a neglect, which they
were no ways necessitated unto, neither by any Decree of God, nor by any
strength, or subtilty, of temptation from the Devil, or from the World, nor yet
by any weakness, or strength of corruption in themselves, but which they might,
all these notwithstanding, very well have prevented, and not have incurred the
guilt, or danger of it.

When in the premised Explication of our Doctrine, we say that God did. 9.
only antecedently intend the actual Redemption and Salvation of all Men, in,
and by, the Death of Christ, and not consequently; our meaning is, that He so
far, and upon such terms, intended the Salvation of all Men without exception,
as to vouchsafe unto them all, sufficient grace and means for their Salvation,
not purposing, or intending to interpose by any Providence of His, either
positive, or privative, but that every man without exception, may, or might, so
improve or use, the grace and means vouchsafed unto them, as to obtain
Salvation thereby; This (with the ancient Fathers Chrysostom and Damascene) I
call, His willing, or intending the Salvation of all Men, antecedently. Of this
Intention, or Will of God, the Apostle speaks plainly, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will
have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. But this
antecedent Intention of His notwithstanding, He may, and does, intend and will
likewise, that whosoever shall not use the said grace and means so graciously
vouchsafed unto them, so as by them truly to repent, and believe, yea and
persevere thus repenting, and believing, unto the end, should perish
everlastingly. So that according to this latter, this consequent Intention of
His, He intends the Salvation, only of those who shall believe, and
persevere believing unto the end, and the condemnation of all others: (we speak
now of Persons actually capable of Faith, and Unbelief, not of Infants, who
admit of a peculiar consideration by themselves.) This with the forementioned
Authors) I call His consequent Will, or Intention. The former of these is not
called His Antecedent Will, or Intention, either because it precedes the other
in time, or in eternity, or in worth or dignity, or the like: no precedence in
any of these kinds, has place amongst the Decrees, Wills, or Intentions of
God, which are all equally eternal, equally honorable and worthy of him. But
the reason of this denomination, is because it is so ordered, and comes to
pass by divine Dispensation, that Grace and Means for the obtaining of
Salvation, are always in the first place vouchsafed unto Men, before either
Salvation be actually conferred upon any man, that believes, or any thing
Penal (I mean, spiritually Penal) or any ways tending, either to obduration, or
condemnation, be inflicted upon Unbeleevers, and much more before actual
destruction is brought upon them. So that the latter of the said two Wills, or
Intentions in God, is therefore termed, consequent, because He never acts in
order to, or with any tendency toward, the condemnation, or destruction of
men, but consequently to, and after, such gracious actings of his, which were
of a saving tendency and import unto them, these being resisted, or rejected,
by them. This Distinction of the Intention, or will of God, into Antecedent,
and Consequent, as it has been now opened, is founded upon clearness and
expressness of Scripture, in sundry places. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, etc. how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as an Hen gathers Her Chickens under Her wings, and ye would
not! Behold your House is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, ye shall
not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is He that comes in the Name
of the Lord Mat. 23, 37, 38, etc.
. The Lord Christ, by His Prophets, Word, Spirit, Providence and
Administrations of sundry kinds, first endeavored and sought with much
tenderness, and greatness of compassion, to put the Jews into an estate and
condition of peace and safety, as well temporal, as spiritual, [ viz. by
attempting to bring them to Repentance, and to an holy and humble walking with
their God.] So that His Intention, Will, or Desire, of their Peace and Safety,
were antecedent [i. e. antecedently expressed, or put in execution] to His
Intention, or Will, concerning their destruction; which were not expressed, or
executed, but upon, and after those gracious applications of God unto them in
order to their Peace, and their rejection, and contempt of them, in those
words, and ye would not: in which respect these may properly be termed,
Consequent. The Scriptures abound with Passages of this kind, I mean, which
mention the gracious addressments of God unto men for their wealth, and safety,
as exhibited unto them in the first place; and his penal inflictions upon them,
afterward, and not till their abuse, or neglect, of the said addressments of
Grace. See upon this account, Revel. 2. 21, 22. 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16, 17. Isai.
5. 2, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7, 8, etc. compared with Verse. 35, 36, etc. (not to
mention other places, of like consideration, without number,) all which are
clear and pregnant for the justification of the said Distinction of the Will of
God into Antecedent, and Consequent, according to the premised Explication. The
Antecedent Will, or Intention, of God, is frequently in Authors (and with good
propriety) termed His Primary, or Principal Intention, or Will: the other, His
Secondary, or less Principal. That Antecedent Intention of His we speak of, is,
in respect of the subject matter of it, or things intended, the exhibition of
sufficient means for Salvation, absolute, and unsuspended upon the actings and
movings of the Creature: my meaning is, that a sufficiency of Grace, and Means,
for the obtaining Salvation, is always, and, without any respect or
consideration had, either of the merit, or demerit, worthiness, or unworthiness
of men, vouchsafed unto them all by God. That which I call His Consequent Will,
or Intention, in this kind, is, in respect of the subject matter thereof, or
the things intended, as viz. the collation of actual Salvation, and so the
infliction of actual Condemnation, or of spiritual Judgments in order hereunto,
suspended upon the behavior of men: so that (for example) this Intention, or
Will, of His notwithstanding, Salvation is never conferred upon any man, but
upon his believing, and continuance in believing unto the end; nor should be
conferred upon any man, in case no man should be found so to believe. Nor is
Condemnation, or Destruction, or any thing tending hereunto, inflicted upon any
man, but upon his neglect, or abuse of the means of Salvation exhibited unto
him: nor should they ever be inflicted upon any man, in case no man were found
neglective, or abusive of the Grace of God in the Means of Salvation vouchsafed
unto them. So that the Consequent Intention or Will of God, is of like Nature
and consideration, with the Politic Laws of men, which either assign rewards
to those that shall deserve well of the State where they live, in such or such
a way, or decree the infliction of Punishment upon Malefactors in several
kinds. For as neither of these Laws, suppose any absolute or posi^ive
necessity, that there will be any either so deserving, as to have right of
claim to the rewards promised; or so wicked, as to incur the Punishments
ordained by the said Laws: so neither do the Consequent Intentions of God
suppose, a determinate necessity, either that there will be any, who shall have
right to the great Reward of Salvation, intended by Him hereby unto those that
shall believe perseveringly; or any, that will incur Damnation, by final
Impenitency and Unbelief, although (it is true) the Scriptures otherwise
suppose, and declare, 1. That there will be some saved, by believing unto the
end. 2. That there will be many condemned for their final Impenitency and
Unbelief. 3. (And lastly) That all Persons of Mankind without exception, will
either believe unto Salvation, or remain impenitent to Condemnation. But as the
said Politic Laws of Men, are not therefore useless, or impolitique, because
they suppose no absolute necessity, either that there will be men found, to
deserve the Rewards proposed in the one, or to incur the Penalties imposed by
the other, in a^ much as the former serve to excite and strengthen men to do
worthily, and it is very probable that some will accordingly be provoked, to do
worthily, by the Rewards promised therein; and the latter are useful and proper
to prevent the Being of such Persons in the State, who are wont to practice
such Misdemeanors, as are therein threatened: In like manner, though that
Consequent Will, or Intention of God we speak of, supposes no necessity,
either that some will believe to Salvation, or that any will remain unbeleeving
and impenitent to Condemnation, yet is it, through the manifestation of it unto
men, of singular benefit and blessing unto the World, because in the former
part of it, by means of the great recompense of Reward, Salvation, promised
therein, it is of marvelous efficacy and force to quicken men to believe, yea
and to continue believing, unto the end; in the latter part of it, by means of
the dreadful Punishment threatened therein, it is of like efficacy to awaken
men out of the deep sleep of impenitency and Unbelief.

Nor do we all this while, in discoursing the Antecedent and Consequent. 10.
Intention, or Will of God, suppose that there are two Wills, or Intentions, in
God, properly so called (no, nor yet so much as one,) much less that there are
two contrary Wills in him, the one unto the other: but Intention, and Will, are
(as has been already said) ascribed unto God in respect of His Administrations
or Efficiencies, which have some kind of likeness with those actings, which
proceed from men, when they intend, or will any thing, by virtue of such their
Intendments. So that to say that God wills, or inrendeth, one thing, with one
kind of Will, or Intention, and another, either contrary to it, or differing
from it, with another kind of Will, or Intention, amounts to no more (truly
interpreted) then to this, that some of His Dispensations have a tendency
toward the producing of such and such ends; and others, toward the producing
of such and such other ends, either differing from them, or contrary to them.
Nor does it follow from Gods acting in order to differing, yea or contrary
ends, that he is therefore divided in himself, or inconsistent with himself; no
more then it follows, that he that mourns at one time, and upon one occasion,
and rejoices at another time, and upon another occasion suitable to such a
Passion, or expression, is inconstant, or any ways contradictious to himself.

For a close of this Chapter, I shall endevor the assoyling of a special
difficulty (at least as it seems to some) concerning the Intentions of God. It
has been said, that God in Scripture is said to purpose, or intend a thing,
when He affords means that are proper and sufficient to bring it to pass
(especially if He commands them to be used accordingly) this being a
Dispensation of like consideration with the deportment of men, who are wont to
provide a sufficiency of means (at least so apprehended by them) for the
effecting of what they purpose, or intend Cap. 3. Sec. ^
. Upon this Explication of Intentions in God, this Question is moved, Whether,
according to the purport hereof, it may not be said that He intended the
offering up of Isaac by death; because, 1. By His Providence He furnished
Abraham with all things sufficient and necessary hereunto: And 2. gave an
express Command unto him, that he should offer him accordingly. Now if he did
not intend the oblation we speak of, which by his Prohibition of it by an
Angel, before it was performed, and by means whereof it never came to be
performed, he seemed not to have done, then cannot the said Explication stand;
nor are the Intentions of God to be judged of by his vouchsafement of means
proper for the production of an effect, no not though he commands them to be
used in order thereunto. To this I answer;

1. That the Intention of God, in commanding Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac,
having otherwise furnished him with means sufficient hereunto, was a through
Trial of Abraham's Love and Faith, not the actual offering up of Isaac by death.
This is evident from Genes. 22. 1. and Hebr. 11. 17, etc. compared.

2. In order to the accomplishment of this his Intention, He commands Abraham
to take His Son, His only Son Isaac, whom He loved, and to offer Him for a
burnt offering Genesis 22. 2.
, etc. Therefore,

3. This Command of God unto Abraham concerning the offering of his Son, is
none otherwise, nor in any other sense, to be understood, as directed by God
unto him, then as Abraham's obedience, or disobedience to it, was, or might be,
a sufficient Trial, either of the soundness, or unsoundness, of his Faith and
Love toward God. So then,

4. The soundness and sincerity of Abraham's Faith and Love, being sufficiently
tried and discovered by a discovery of his readiness and willingness to obey
the said Command of God, and to offer up his Son, and this discovery being
sufficiently made by that which Abraham did, toward the offering up of his Son
by death (though he was not actually thus offered by him) it roundly follows,
that the meaning of the Command given unto Abraham in the case in hand, was not
that He should actually offer up his Son by death, but that he should proceed
so far toward the offering him up in that manner, until his willingness
thereunto were sufficiently manifested, and himself (God, I mean) take him off,
and stay his hand, from acting further herein. Such constructions, structions,
or forms of speech, wherein the Consequent is put for the Antecedent, and so
again, where the end, or effect is named, to signify the means proper for the
procurement of either, are familiar and frequent with the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures. An instance of the former we have Psalm. 22. 26. in this clause,
They that seek the Lord, shall praise Him; i. e. they shall be graciously
entreated by him, and receive good from him* and hereby be occasioned or
provoked to praise him. So Deuteronomy. 10. 17. taking rewards, is put for doing
unjustly, which commonly follows upon taking rewards. So again, to make the
firstborn, signifies the conferring of the inheritance, or a double portion,
upon a Person, this being an usual consequent of Primogeniture, to carry the
inheritance, or a double portion: Deuteronomy. 21. 16. So to be wicked, or vile,
signifies to be, guilty, or liable to Punishment: 1 King. 1. 21. guilt, or
obnoxiousness unto Punishment, being a consequent of wickedness. (To pass by
many other places of like construction.) Instances of the latter, are frequent
also. Thus, Salvation, is put for the Scriptures, or knowledge of God, as being
the means of Salvation: Joh. 4. 22. For Salvation is of the Jews. Upon a like
account, Peter exhorts men to count the long-suffering of the Lord toward
them, Salvation; i. e. a means of Salvation: 2 Pet. 3. 15. See more places of
like character: Romans 14. 20. 1 Timothy 4. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. (according to the
Original, etc.) According to either of these constructions, the Command of God
unto Abraham to offer up His Son Isaac for a burnt offering, may import only a
doing of such things, which were precedaneously necessary to an offering Him up
after such a manner, as viz. to provide wood and fire for the burning of him, a
knife, for the slaying of him, a coard, or the like, wherewith to bind him, an
Altar, on which to lay him; and so again, actually to lay the wood provided
upon the Altar, for the burning of him, actually to bind him, to take the
knife into his hand, to stretch forth his hand with the knife in it with an
intent to slay him. All these things with the like, being requisite to the
actual offering up of Isaac by death, might well be signified, and doubtless
were signified, yea and were all that was signified, or meant, by that Command
of God (so often mentioned) unto Abraham, concerning the offering up his Son.
Therefore,

5. Look what God commanded Abraham to do, about the offering up of his Son,
that he really intended he should do, yea and Abraham did it accordingly. He
commanded Abraham to offer up his Son: and in such a sense as he commanded,
Abraham obeyed, the Scripture testifying thus of him, in these words: By Faith
Abraham when He was tried, offered up Isaac: and He that had received the
Promises, offered up His only begotten Son Hebr. 11. 17.
. Therefore certainly God commanded Abraham no other kind of offering up
Isaac* then that which Abraham performed, and what himself really intended that
he should perform. Whether Abraham at first understood the Command of God in
such a sense as that, wherein we have now interpreted it, is not material. By
that inhibition which was served upon him by the Angel, to surcease all further
Proceedings in, and about the offering up of his Son by death, before he was
thus offered, he clearly enough understood that to have been the sense and
mind of God in the said Command, which we have asserted. So that,

6. (And lastly) It is a clear case, that the Explication and account, given
formerly in this Treatise, concerning the Intentions of God, or rather
concerning the Ground and Reason, why Intentions are attributed unto Him, is no
ways encumbered or disabled by the Instance of Gods Command given unto Abraham
concerning the offering up of Isaac, notwithstanding Isaac's non-oblation by
death. There is nothing in this Example, to prove, that God does at any time
vouchsafe means competent and proper for the bringing of any thing to pass,
especially when he commands that these means be used accordingly, but that he
truly and really intends (as he is capable of intending any thing) the coming
to pass thereof.

Nor can it here (with any face of Reason) be replied, that, by such a
construction, as we have put upon the words of God in His Command unto Abraham
concerning the offering up of his Son, when He vouchsafes means of Salvation
unto Men, and commands them to use them accordingly, it cannot be concluded
from thence, that therefore He really intends the Salvation of Men, but only
that they should use the said Means to obtain Salvation. Because, though God,
in Abraham's case, did in His Intentions, separate the Means of offering up
Isaac, from the actual Oblation of Him, this not being the end of His Command
given unto Him (as was said,) yet He did not separate between the said Means,
and that which was His true end in the Command, which was the Trial of Abraham's
Faith, and for the effecting whereof the said Command, and all that which was
meant thereby, was as natural and proper a means, as it was for the actual
oblation of Isaac by death. In like manner when He vouchsafes Means of
Salvation unto Men, and commands the use of them accordingly, He cannot be
supposed to divide or separate, in His Intentions, between the use of these
Means, and their proper end, Salvation; there being no other end proper to be
effected by the use of the Means of Salvation, but Salvation it self, or at
least none, but in conjunction with Salvation. And certain it is, that there is
no man of wisdom, who intends the use of such Means, which are determinately
appropriate to the production of one end, and no more, or however, of no more,
but only by, and through, the production of that one, but that He intends the
production of this end peculiarly. How God may intend the Salvation of Men, and
yet Men never come to be saved, has been already explained Cap. 3. Sect. 7, 17.
, and that (as I remember) more then once; and may be yet further opened, upon
occasion.

CHAP. XVIII.
Exhibiteth several Grounds and Reasons, whereby the Universality of Redemption
by Christ, or Christ's dying for All Men, without Exception, is Demonstratively
evicted.

ALthough Scripture-Authority be greater then all Demonstration otherwise,. 1.
for the Eviction and Confirmation of any Doctrine or Tenet in matter of
Religion, as simply and in it self, so also with those, whose Faith mainly or
solely bears upon the foundations of the Scriptures, yet have Arguments and
Grounds of Reason, if they be pregnant and clear, a very acceptable influence
upon the Judgments and Consciences of Men, when they are levied and drawn up in
the nature of Seconds, or Assistants, to the Scriptures, and plead the same
cause with them. For when a Doctrine, or Opinion, is held forth as the Mind of
God in the Scriptures, and Scripture-Authority produced and insisted upon,
either singly, or in consort, for the proof thereof; in case this Doctrine
shall be found to have a fair and clear consistence with the unquestionable
Principles of sound Reason, there remains no place in the Consciences of Men
for fear or jealousy, concerning the Truth thereof. God Himself being the
Author of those noble endowments in Men, Reason and Understanding, must needs
be conceived the Author also of whatsoever truly consorteth with them. But in
case the Authority of the Scriptures shall be urged and pressed upon the
Consciences of Men in defense of such a Doctrine, which grates, or bears hard
upon the common and clear Dictates of that Light, which God has planted in the
Souls of Men, it is unpossible but that a considering Man should much question
such a sense or interpretation, which is put upon the Scriptures in such a
case. The Reason hereof has been given elsewhere Epist. to the Reader.
. The Premises considered, I judge it a matter of signal consequence in order
to the securing the Judgments and Consciences of Men about the truth of the
main Doctrine maintained in this Discourse, to demonstrate the perfect and
clear consistency of it with Grounds of Reason, though substantially proved
already from the Scriptures, yea and satisfactorily also (I trust) unto those,
who so understand the Scriptures, as not to make either the Wisdom, or Justice
of God Sufferers by them. My Reasons then for the Universality of Redemption by
Jesus Christ, in reference unto Men, are these following.

If Christ dyed not for all Men without exception (in the sense formerly
declared). 2. Argum. 1.
then is that Great Covenant of Grace, which God has made with the World, and
ratified in His Blood, made with unknown Persons, and such who are no ways
expressed in this Covenant, neither by Name, nor by any other Character, or
qualification, by which they may, at least, for a long time, be known, or
distinguished. But this Great Covenant we speak of is not struck, or made with
unknown Persons, I mean with such, who for a long time, if ever, neither can
tell themselves whether they be the Covenanted ones, or no, nor are capable of
any reasonable information hereof by others. Therefore Christ dyed for all men,
without exception.

The Reason of the former Proposition, and the Consequence therein, is this:
because the Elect (so called in the common Notion of Election) with whom only
this Covenant of Grace is pretended to be made, and for whom only Christ is
supposed to have dyed, are Persons no ways distinguishable from others, neither
before, at all, and very hardly (if at all) after their Regeneration and
Conversion unto God. That they are not at all discernable from others, before
Conversion, is evident from several places. For we our selves (says the
Apostle to Titus, meaning, who are now so much altered and changed by a work of
Grace and Regeneration in us) were sometimes [viz. before our Conversion]
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in
malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another Tit. 3. 3.
. Certainly these are no appropriate, or distinguishing characters of the
Elect, but such, which do evidently prove the Elect (in the common
signification of the word) before Conversion, and the Non-Elect, to be
indiscernable the one from the other, as well by themselves, as by others. We
shall not need to cite any more places for the proof of this. You may peruse
the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians at your leisure, which
speaks, almost throughout, to this Point. Again,

2. That after Regeneration it self, the Elect (so called) are very hardly, if
at all, discernable, either to themselves, or others, from Hypocrites, and
those that shall perish, is no less evident neither. First, That they are not
at ^ll discernable from Hypocrites, in respect of others, at least for a time,
and many times for a long time, will (I suppose) readily be acknowledged. The
Apostles did not know Judas to be an Hypocrite or a Traitor, no not after long
acquaintance and converse with him. For then they would not have suspected
every man himself, when Christ told them, that there was one of them that would
betray Him. Nor did Philip know Simon Magus to be in the gall of bitterness,
and bands of iniquity, when he Baptized him: nor Paul, Demas, whilst he made
him his Companion. And how should others infallibly know who are Elect, and
shall be saved, when as the Lord Christ says, that many that are first, shall
be last; i. e. many that for a time march in the Head of Profession, and make a
show of more zeal and forwardness in the ways of Religion, then other men, yet
wheel off again to the World, and become like Salt which has lost the savor,
and is good for nothing, but to be thrown upon the dunghill, and trodden under
foot by men. Again, 2. That such Persons as we speak of, the Elect, I mean
such, who shall actually be saved, (at least a great part of them) are not able
always, no nor ordinarily, after the work of Regeneration in them, to
distinguish, or discern themselves, from those who shall perish, is abundantly
confirmed, partly by the continual fears, jealousies, and doubtings of their
spiritual Condition, wherewith many of them are exercised even to their dying
day; partly also by those great and good Opinions which they have of others, as
being worthy and sound Christians, who yet afterward, turn back with the dog
unto their vomit, and with the swine that has been washed, to her wallowing in
the mire. So that the Truth of the Major Proposition is unquestionable: viz.
That if Christ dyed not for all Men, without exception, but for the Elect
only, then is the Covenant of Grace in His Blood, made with unknown Persons,
such who neither can certainly say of themselves, nor any for them, that they
are the Covenanted ones.

As to the Minor Proposition, the truth hereof is evident also. The Tenor of
it, was this; That the Covenant of Grace is not struck, or made, with unknown
Persons, or such, concerning whom it is either impossible, or next to an
impossibility, to know plainly, and certainly, who they are. It is contrary to
the nature, and intent of a Covenant, especially of a Covenant of Grace, that
the parties interessed in it, and whom the Covenant concerns and relates unto,
should not be discernable or known from all other Persons whatsoever; or that
it should minister any occasion of controversy, or debate, who these Persons
should be. Look into all Covenants that are drawn up, and made, between man,
and man, and you shall find, for the most part, the Names of the Covenanted,
as well as of the Covenanters, expressed in them; or howsoever, if all their
Names be not expressed, yet are they sufficiently declared otherwise, as viz.
by such and such characters, relations, or the like, whereby they may be as
plainly known, as if their Names themselves were mentioned. As for example,
When one man Covenanteth with another, who is named in the Covenant, and with
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns; these words of relation do as
plainly and clearly point out the Persons intended and meant, as if they had
been expressed by their Names. Yea (doubtless) the Reason why these Persons are
usually expressed by such terms of Relation, and not by their Names, in
Covenants between men, is, because neither of the Covenanting Parties, at the
time of the making of the Covenant, knew, or were able to call them by, their
Names; which cannot be said of God, in His Covenant of Grace, in as much as all
Men's Names were known unto Him, when He made this Covenant with the World. Look
into the Scriptures; in all the Covenants specified and recorded here, you will
find the Persons Covenanted with, either named, or else so described, that
there is no place left for any doubt who they be. When Caleb made this
Covenant, proffered these terms: He that smites Kiriath-Sepher, and takes it,
to Him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife; it is, and Josh. 15. 16.
was, easy enough to conceive, who they were, with whom this Covenant was
made, viz. all the People, or Men, that were with Him, expressed in that
Pronoun, He; which in the dialect of the Scripture, has the signification and
force, of the universal Particle, Whosoever; As, He that believes, i. e.
whosoever believes, shall be saved: Mark 16. So in that of our Savior, Joh.
6. Him that comes unto me, i. e. whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out: with many the like. A like Covenant, or offer of Grace, it seems that
Saul also made, upon occasion of the affront which the Gyant-like Philistim,
Goliath, put upon Him, and His whole Army. And it shall be, that the Man who
kills Him, the King will enrich Him with great riches, and will give Him His
Daughter, and make His Fathers House free in Israel 1 Samuel 17. 15
. It is evident likewise in this Covenant, who the Persons were, that were
Covenanted with upon the terms mentioned; viz. all the Persons without
exception in Saul's Army. I choose rather to give instance in such Covenants as
these, because they are of the same form, and tenor, mutatis mutandis (as
Lawyers use to say) with the Covenant of Grace it self, which is founded in the
Blood of Jesus Christ. But the like is every whit as apparent in other
Covenants also; as you may please to consider at your leisure.

Again, 2. If we weigh the end, or intent of a Covenant, we shall clearly
find, that this requires a determinate and clear knowledge, or a distinct
designation of the Parties Covenanting, or Covenanted with. The principal and
main end, or intent, of a Covenant, is, to insure unto the Party, or Parties,
Covenanted with, such and such terms, or things, as are specified in the
Covenant, according to the Tenor and Conditions thereof. Mark; The end of a
Covenant, is not the simple collation, or donation of any thing, to a Person,
one or more; but the securing, or insuring Persons, that such and such things
shall be given unto them, or conferred upon them, upon the performance of such
and such Conditions, as the Covenant specifies. And this clearly, and without
controversy, is the end (I mean, the proper and immediate end; for there are
several ends besides this,) of the Covenant of Grace, established in the Blood
of Jesus Christ; viz. to give Assurance unto the Sons and Daughters of Men,
that upon their Faith and Repentance, and their Perseverance in both unto the
end, they shall have Salvation and Eternal Life conferred upon them. If so be a
man has an absolute, unlimited, and right-out Purpose or Intent to confer
such, or such things upon men, a Covenant is but an unsavory and superfluous
thing: because a man may confer or give what he pleases to another, without
it. So if God had a simple and absolute Intention to confer the Great things of
Heaven upon Men (I mean, without the performance of such and such Articles, or
Conditions as we speak of) the making of a Covenant with them had been in vain.
Therefore the proper end of a Covenant, is to assure, or to secure those, that
are Covenanted with, that upon the performance of the Articles of the Covenant,
the good things mentioned therein (if it be a Covenant of Good things) shall be
exhibited and given unto them. Now then this being the end of a Covenant, if
the Persons interessed and concerned in it, or Covenanted with, should not be
known who they are, they cannot partake of this end, nor be any whit the
better, or more secure in their minds touching the enjoyment of the good
things mentioned in the Covenant, upon any performance whatsoever: because the
good things mentioned in a Covenant, cannot be claimed, or expected by any, but
only by the Persons Covenanted with; though they should perform the terms, or
conditions specified in the Covenant, ten times over. If the Trumpet (says the
Apostle) give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare 1 Cor. 14. 8.
Himself to the Battle? In like manner if the Covenant of Grace speaks unto
Persons unknown, both to themselves and others, and holds forth Life and
Salvation only unto such, both men, and women, as no man can say, or tell who
they be, how shall any man, or woman, be excited, provoked, or engaged, either
by the tender of the Covenant unto them, or by the great and excellent things
therein promised (conditionally) to take hold of the Covenant (as the Scripture
speaks,) i. e. to perform the Conditions therein required?

If it be said, Yes, the Covenant is to be preached, and tendered unto all,. 3.
without exception of any: and assurance is therein given unto all, that upon
performance of what is there required, the good things there promised shall be
given unto them. So that there is ground and encouragement enough howsoever,
for every man and woman, without exception, to believe. To this I answer,

It is true, the Covenant is to be preached and tendered unto all, without
exception; and there is ground and encouragement enough for every man without
exception, to believe: but both these clearly suppose, that the Covenant is
made with all Men, without exception of any; and consequently that the Death or
Blood of Christ, which is the ground work and foundation of this Covenant,
extends unto all. No Covenant offers any thing, insureth any thing, upon
what terms soever, but only unto those that are Covenanted with, and
comprehended in the Covenant. When a man covenanteth with such or such a
workman, to give him so much, or so much, as suppose five or ten shillings by
the day, this Covenant does not bind him to give the like wages to another.
What is the reason why the Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel, does not offer, or
insure Grace and Salvation to the Devils, as well as to all manner of men
whatsoever, upon their believing? Doubtless because the Devils are not within
the number of the Covenanted ones, nor of those, unto whom Grace and Mercy were
intended upon the terms of the Gospel: and this because the Death of Christ,
which is the ground of the Covenant, does not in the attoning virtue of it
reach unto them; the sphere of whose activity (in this kind) is limited and
bounded by the Will and Pleasure of God. And certainly, if Reprobates (so
called, amongst men) I mean such who in fine perish everlastingly, had no more
interest then the Devils have, in the Death of Christ, there were no more
ground or reason, why the Covenant, or the Grace thereof should be more
preached unto them, then to the Devils: nay there were less reason, of the two,
why it should be preached unto them, then why it should be preached to the
Devils (at least according to the Principles of that Opinion, which we oppose)
because, if preached to the Devils, though it did them no good, it would do
them no harm, it would not increase their condemnation; whereas the preaching
it to such men as we speak of, can only increase their misery and torment.
This for our first Argument. If Christ dyed not for all, then is the Covenant
in his Blood made but with some men, and these altogether unknown even to
themselves; which (as has been showed) is contrary to the nature, end, and
scope of a Covenant.

I shall not trouble the Reader with that impertinent Objection, and uncouth
Notion, of Christ being the only Person, with whom the Covenant is made. What
other Covenant soever may be found to have been made by God with Christ,
certainly that Covenant we speak of, viz. wherein Remission of Sins, and
Deliverance from the Wrath to come, are promised upon Repentance and believing
in Christ, was not made with Christ himself. God never said unto Christ,
Repent, and believe, and thou shall have thy sins forgiven, and be saved.
Therefore the Covenant made with Christ, if any such thing be, or were, is
altogether irrelative to our present Argument. Nor does that of the Apostle
Galat. 3. 16. prove that Christ, in a personal consideration, is the only
Person, or (indeed) any person at all, with whom the Evangelical Covenant is
made. The Tenor of the place is this. Now to Abraham and his seed were the
Promises made. He says not, and to seeds, as of many: but as of one, And to
thy seed, which is Christ. First, It is evident from this place, that Christ is
not the only Person, to whom the Promises here spoken of, are made; because
they are expressly said to be made to Abraham, as well as to Christ. Now TO
ABRAHAM and His seed were the Promises made, etc. Therefore, 2. The word,
Christ (in the latter clause) is to be taken Metonymically, for those who
spiritually descend from him, and are born of him by Faith; in such a sense as
the words, Jacob, and Israel, frequently signify Jacobs seed, or posterity, i.
e. the whole Nation of the Jews, in the Old Testament. In such a sense the same
word also, Christ, is to be understood, 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the body is one,
and has many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are
one body: so also is Christ: i. e. so also is it with Believers, who in respect
of their spiritual Being, are from Christ; meaning, that though they be many
personally distinct, yet they make one spiritual, or mystical body with Christ
their Head. Now when the Promises are said to be made to Abraham, and his
spiritual seed, Believers; the meaning is not, as if they were so, or upon such
terms made to them, that none but they had any right to receive them, or
believe them: for then it must follow, that men must, or ought to be Believers,
before they receive, or believe the Promises, which is impossible. But the
Promises are made to Abraham and his seed, i. e. the great Inheritance of Life
and Salvation promised by God, is promised, as touching the actual exhibition,
or collation of it, unto Believers only, such as Abraham himself was, and such
as those, who desire to be accounted his seed, must be. But this supposes not
but that the said Promises are, in this sense, made to Adam, and his seed, i.
e. to all Mankind, viz. that all and every Person of Mankind, as well as
Adam, yea or Abraham himself, have a right to believe them, so that in case
they should believe them, they should do no unjust or unrighteous thing. Nay,
they have not only a right, but a grand necessity likewise lying upon them, to
believe them, as well in respect of the Commandment of God, who commands no
unjust or unrighteous thing, as of their own eternal Peace and Safety, whereof
they will certainly make shipwreck, unless they do believe them.

A second Demonstration, whereby Christ dying for all Men, is euinced,. 4.
Argum. 2.
is this: If Christ dyed not for all Men, without exception, then He dyed for
the Elect only. But He dyed not for the Elect only. Therefore for all M^n
without exception. I presume the former Proposition will be granted without
further Proof; because they who deny that Christ dyed for all, generally
suppose and grant, that He dyed for some, and by Name, for the Elect, and
(indeed) for these only. So that if it be proved, either that He dyed not for
the Elect at all, or not for the Elect only, then, according to their own
Principles and grounds, it follows, that He dyed for all. Now then, that He
dyed not for the Elect, and much more not for the Elect only, (which was the
Minor Proposition) appears thus. If the state and condition of the Elect were
such, that Christ needed no more to dye for them, then He needed to dye for the
Holy and Elect Angels, then Christ dyed not for these, much less for these
only. But the state and condition of the Elect was such, that there was no
more need that Christ should dye for them, then for the Elect Angels. Ergo. In
this Argument, I reason (I confess) upon my Adversaries grounds, not mine own,
concerning Election: but howsoever, such a process of arguing, as this, is very
serviceable, for the confirmation of a Truth in opposition to an Error; and the
Apostie Paul himself sometimes 1 Cor. 15. 29
uses it in a like case, as 1 Cor. 15. 29. The Major Proposition in this last
Argument, stands upon this ground: that there was no need that Christ should
dye for the Holy, or Elect Angels. I suppose this will not be denied, or
doubted of, by any: but however, it is clearly enough asserted by the Apostle,
in that saying of his, Gal. 2. 21, I do not frustrate the Grace of God: Gal. 2.
21.
for if Righteousness (i. e. Justification) come by the Law, then Christ is
dead in vain, (i. e. without any necessity, or reasonable cause moving
thereunto.) But now, if there had been a necessity that Christ should have dyed
for the Elect Angels, it would not have followed, that His Death had been in
vain, though men might have been justified by the Law. Therefore if there were
no more reason, no more need, why Christ should dye for the Elect of Men, then
for the Elect Angels, certainly He did not dye for them, much less for them
only. But now that there was no more reason, no more need, why Christ should
dye for the Elect of Men, then for the Elect Angels, (which was the substance
of the Minor Proposition) appears by this double consideration: 1. Because God
loved the Elect (I mean, the Elect of Men, and that as such, as Elect, without
any consideration had of Christ's dying for them) with as great a love, as He
did the Elect Angels, yea with as great, as it was possible for him to bear to
them. 2. Because, Salvation and Eternal Glory were decreed and adjudged to them
(and consequently were made truly and properly theirs) in, and by, Gods Purpose
in Electing them. God in Electing them, without any consideration or respect
had unto Jesus Christ dying, or to dye, for them, or unto their believing in
him, did irreversibly appropriate and consign over unto them Eternal Life. From
these two grounds it follows undeniably, that there was no more need for Christ
to dye for the Elect of Mankind, then for the Elect Angels. For,

1. If God loved the Elect of Men, with as great a love, as He loves the Elect
Angels, or as He is capable of bearing toward them, what occasion, what
necessity was there, that Christ should dye for the one, more then for the
other? The same Love affords the same Favors, the same Privileges, without any
mediation to equalize it in this kind. If God loved the Elect of Men, as much,
as intensely, as the Holy Angels, considered only as Elect, or, before their
Election (for this is the notion and sense of our Adversaries in the Point in
hand) then the offense, and distance, occasioned by sin between him and them,
was wholly ceased, and taken out of the way, before the Blood of the Covenant
was sprinkled on them, before the Atonement came at them; as the Hebrew women
(in the story) were delivered of their Exodus 1. 19.
children, before the midwives came at them. And if so, if the offense and
distance caused between God, and his Elect, by means of sin, was swallowed up
in the Love of Election, so that he loved them now, considered only as Elect,
or to be Elected, as much, as He did, or could do, upon their actual ingraffing
into Christ, and participation of His Death, to what purpose should Christ dye
for them? or what profit is there in the Blood of Christ, as to them? God
thought every whit as well of them, loved them as much, intended to do as much
for them, yea irreversibly decreed, adjudged as great things unto them, before,
and without, all consideration had of the Death of Christ, as He did, or could
do, upon the consideration of it.

2. God out of His Love of Election (as the Doctrine of Election is commonly
taught, and received amongst us) did in the very Act or Decree of His Election,
freely, and of His mere good will and pleasure, irrevocably assign, adjudg,
make over, and give, to His Elect, Justification, Salvation, Glorification, and
what not in this kind? And if so, Christ could not dye to purchase, or procure
these things for them: because they were truly, properly, and by right of free
donation, theirs before. It were ridiculous for* any friend of mine, to go and
lay down a great sum of money to purchase or procure that on my behalf, which I
have already assured unto me by the free, and stable, and irrevocable gift and
donation of him* that has a full right and power to give it unto me. Therefore
whereas many amongst us cry out of Socinianism, as a most dangerous Heresy,
and the great abomination of their Souls; the truth is, that themselves teach
and hold as rank and rightdown Socinianism in their Opinion about Election, as
the greatest Socinians themselves can do. For what is the master-veyn in the
body of this Heresy, but to deny that Christ truly satisfied, or made any
atonement for sin, and that upon this ground, because God freely, and of His
mere grace, gives forgiveness of sins unto men, without any satisfaction? And
how little does this differ from that Doctrine of Election, which passes for
current amongst us; teaching, that forgiveness of sins, and all the great
things depending hereon, are assigned and decreed unto men in their Election,
without any consideration had of Christ's dying for them, or their believing in
him?

If it be here said; that they who hold Election* in the most absolute and. 5.
peremptory way, do not say or hold, that God intends actually to confer
Remission of sins, or eternal Life, upon the Elect, otherwise then for, and
through the satisfaction made by Christ for them in His* Death; though they
hold, that He intends, without any respect had to the consideration of Christ's
Death, actually to confer them upon them. They exclude the satisfaction of
Christ, from having any thing to do in Gods* Purpose of Election; not from
having any thing to do in the execution of this His Purpose: here they
acknowledge it to have much to do, to be upon the matter, all in all. To this we
answer,

That this Distinction, or Explication of the Opinion, does no ways relieve it,
but rather burdens it more and more. For,

1. Certain it is, that God does not purpose, or project one way* and act, or
execute, in another: but His executions do exactly answer the tenor, purport
and form of His Purposes or Intentions. Men who are subject to oversights, and
consequently to repentance, may, and many times do, vary from their model or
platform, when they come to action, because some better thing (it may be) has
come in their way, then they thought upon in the first projection of their
work: But nothing* can come in Gods way either more satisfactory, or better
pleasing unto Him, then what was present with Him in the first contrivance or
projection of His affairs. Therefore if in point of execution, He actually
confers Remission of sin^, and Salvation upon men* because of, and with respect
unto, the Death and Satisfaction of Christ, it is a certain sign, that He
purposed this collation of them in His Purpose of Election* upon no other
terms: and consequently that in Gods very Purpose of Electing men unto
Salvation, He had respect unto the Death of Christ, yea and to their ingraffing
into Him by believing: and that He never purposed Salvation unto any, without
inter^ssing the Death of Christ in His* Intentions in this kind, as well as in
His Executions of what He thus int^^ds.

2. If God might intend and purpose Salvation unto men, without the
consideration of the Death of Christ, certainly He may as well actually confer
and give this Salvation, without any respect had thereunto. For this is a
general* and plain Rule; that wha^ a man may lawfully will, or intend to do,
without such or such a consideration, he may as lawfully act, or do it, without
this consideration* For there i^ every whit as much required to justify* a man
in his will or purpose of doing a thing, as to justify him in his act, or
deed* according to this will. Certainly that which a man may lawfully will, or
purpose, he may lawfully do* In like manner* i^ God might lawfully* (I mean
with the consistence of His Wisdom and Justice) purpose, will, or decree*
Forgiveness of sins, and Salvation unto men, without considering them as
Believers in Christ* He ^ay as well actually confe^ these things upon them
without any such consideration: and if so, the Death of Christ is no ways
necessary, either to justify o^ comm^nd either the Justice or the Wisdom of
God* in the actual Justification or Salvation of Men. So that evident it is,
that the Doctrine of Election, as it is ordinarily entertained amongst us, does
abrogate the Grace of God in Christ, and makes His Death to be in vain. But the
Scripture teaches this Doctrine upon other terms, and makes Christ [i. e. the
consideration of Christ, and of Faith in Him,] the foundation of Election, and
that upon which God raised (as it were) and built it. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus* Christ (says the Apostle) who has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly p^aces* [or things] in Christ; according
as* He has chosen us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should
be holy Ephesians. 1. 3 4.
, etc. Observe these words: according as He has chosen us in Him. Here are two
things very considerable, as to our purpose, in these words. The first lies in
that word, (...), according as, or, even as. Who has blessed us (i. e.
actually and de facto blessed us) with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
things in Christ, according as, or even as, He has ch^sen us* this clearly
shows, that Gods actings, His actual and present Dispensations, are adequately
and exactly conformable, unto His Purposes, or Projections. God (says the
Apostle to them, in effect) in all that He has done for us by the Gospel, and
by Christ, as in the enlightening of us, in sanctifying of us, in justifying of
us, in comforting of us, etc. has but acted that which He had modeled and
formed out for us in His Purpose, or Counsel of Election, before the World
began. The second thing to be observed in the words, is, that God is here said
to have chosen us in Him, i. e. in Christ* before the foundation of the world.
How, or in what sense, is God here said to have-elected; or chosen* us in
Christ? First, I suppose the Apostle here speak^, not of the Act, bu^ of the
Purpose or Decree of Election, or choosing. So the sense o^ the words, according
as He has chosen us in Him, before the foundation of the world, is this*
according to that Model, Platform, or Purpose of Election, which, upon the
happy advantage or opportunity He had of His Christ, and that most gracious and
wise contrivement of Him in order to such a Purpose, which was before Him, He
framed and made within Himself from the days of Eternity, or before the
foundation of the world. The Purposes or Intentions of God concerning such and
such Acts, or Dispensations, are very usually in Scripture expressed by the
Names of the Acts, or Dispensations themselves, (as likewise the Purposes or
Intentions of Men are after the same manner.) Thus Romans 8. 30. Romans 8. 30.
God is said to have glorified those, whom He intends, or has decreed, to
glorify. Thus also, 2 Timothy 1. 9. and again, Tit. 3. 5. He is said to have 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3. 5.
saved those, who were not actually saved, but only under His Purpose of
saving them, (to omit many the like.) So in the Scripture in hand, He is said
to have chosen us before the foundation of the world: because He purposed or
decreed before the foundation of the World to choose us. Well, but what was the
Nature, or Tenor of this Purpose or Decree of His concerning our Election? or
how, and in what sense it is said, to have been in Christ, (as the Apostle here
asserts it to have been?) According to the most usual and proper signification
of the Preposition, (...), in, (in such a construction) that is said to be done
in Christ, which is done by means of Him, or for His sake, or by the
meritorious influence, or contribution of His Death and Sufferings, by way of
motive, toward the doing of it. In this sense the Preposition is used, a Verse
or two after; a place that will give light to the phrase in hand. (...) i. e.
to Ephesians. 1. 6.
the praise of the glory of His Grace, whereby He has made us accepted in His
Beloved; i. e. has made us dear, and near, and precious to Himself, by means
of the Death, Satisfaction, and Atonement made by His Beloved Son for us. By
the way, if the Grace of God it self (and that in the glory of it, in which
consideration the Apostle here speaks of it) does no other ways, upon no other
terms, render us accepted with Him, but only in, and through His Beloved, viz.
as having made our Peace, by the Atonement of His Death for us, then were we
not so highly accepted with Him through any Purpose of Election, (especially if
we shall conceive this Purpose of Election to have been conceived in God,
before, and without all consideration of the Death of Christ) as the common
Notion of Election suggesteth. So then, God is said to have purposed our
Election, or choosing, in Christ, because His Purpose was to separate, elect and
choose those, who should believe in Christ, for his sake in whom they believe,
to Salvation. This Interpretation might be much cleared and confirmed, by the
opening of these words (which we had not long since in hand,) Romans 9. 11. That
the Purpose of God according to Election, Romans 9. 11.
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls. The Purpose of God
according to Election, i. e. that Purpose, Counsel, or Decree of God, according
unto which, or, in conformity whereunto, He orders and manageth His Election
of Persons in time, is here described, 1. Negatively, not of works. 2.
Affirmatively, in these words, but of him that calls. When the Apostle denies
the Purpose of God according to Election, to be of works, his meaning clearly
is, that God did not purpose to elect, separate, or choose those men to eternal
Life, who should seek their Justification by the works of the Law. Again when
he affirms, this Purpose of God according to Election, to be of him that
calls, (meaning, of God himself, who calls Men to Justification and
Salvation,) his meaning as clearly is, that the Tenor of Gods Purpose,
according unto which he means to elect and choose Men and Women to eternal Life,
is this; viz. to make choice of those for this blessed end and purpose, who
shall believe in his Son Jesus Christ, or seek their Justification by Faith.
This Purpose is said to be of Him that calls, in opposition, to a Being of
Works: because a Purpose according to Election, which should be of Works, is
the Purpose of them that are called, viz. Men; they conceive and think, that
God should purpose and intend to choose those only unto life, who should be
diligent Observers of the Law, and seek their Justification that way: but now
the Purpose of God according to Election, is not formed or shaped according to
the sense, or Notion, of those that are called, who generally pitch upon Works;
but according to the sense and mind of God Himself, who calls; who, as we
know, has declined Works, for such a purpose, and has chosen, Faith. So that
the Apostles meaning in this Antithesis, not of Works, but of Him that calls,
is plainly this, not of Works, but of Faith; Faith, and Works, being famous
Antagonists or Competitors in the writings of this Apostle, for Justification,
the one, as set up by God; the other, by Men. The same Interpretation of the
phrase, who has chosen us in Christ, may be yet further strengthened, by that
in Peter. Elect according to the Foreknowledg of 1 Pet. 1. 2.
God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and the
sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. First, he saluteth them as persons
Elect, or chosen, according to the Foreknowledg [or Pre-approbation, as we have
formerly observed the word frequently to signifie] of God the Father; i. e. as
persons so qualified, or, as having obtained such an estate and condition,
wherein God the Father from Eternity judged it meet to Elect or choose the
persons of men unto Salvation, or to estimate and account men meet, or worthy
eternal Life. In this sense he terms them Elect according to the Foreknowledg,
or Fore-approbation, of God; meaning, that their present condition in
believing, did, according to the Tenor of the eternal Counsel and Purpose of
God in that behalf, separate between them, and the generality of the world, who
in respect of their unbelief, were looked upon by him, and adjudged as the
refuse of Men, in comparison of them, and, in their present posture, unmeet to
have Salvation conferred upon them.

2. He particularly describes, what that qualification, or condition, is,
which God foreknew, or fore-approved, as meet for Him to regulate His Election
of the Persons of Men by, and wherein now they were invested, and consequently,
Elected, in those words; through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience,
and the sprinkling, etc. His meaning is, that they, through the assistance and
gracious cooperation of the Spirit of God, were now brought to yield Obedience
unto the Gospel, to believe in Jesus Christ, as he who by his Death had
purchased Remission of sins for them, etc. implying, that such an estate and
condition, as this, Sanctification by the Spirit, etc. is that very estate,
wherein what person, or persons of men soever, should at any time be found, God
in his eternal Counsel judged it meet to confer the honorable title of Elect,
or chosen, together with the Grace and Privilege of Justification, upon them.
So that to choose us in Christ, does not signify, to choose us personally
considered with Christ, or, in the same act of Election, wherein, or wherewith,
Christ was chosen, or the like; but to intend, purpose, or decree to choose us,
as being, or when we should be in Christ, by believing. Having once obtained
this Being, a Being in Christ by Faith, we may truly, and in good propriety of
speaking, be said to be chosen, by means, or by virtue, of that Purpose, or
Decree of Election, which was in God before the foundations of the world,
whereby he decreed to choose all those unto Salvation, how many, or how few
soever they should prove, who should at any time be found in Christ by Faith.
In such a sense, Othniel, having smitten and taken Kiriath-Sepher, may be said
to have been made Caleb's Son in Law, by virtue of that Declaration, Law, or
Promise, which Caleb had made before, viz. that Whosoever should smite
Kiriath-Sepher, and take it, to Him He would give Achsa His Daughter to Wife:
Judge. 1. 12. In such a sense likewise all those of Aarons Posterity, who came
to be Priests, though many generations after, may be said to have attained this
Office and Dignity, by virtue of the Law concerning Persons admitable into this
Office, which was enacted and made by God long before. The Scripture it self
ascribes a virtue, or power unto the Law to make Priests. For the Law MAKES
MEN HIGH PRIESTS, which have infirmity Heb. 7. 28.
. In like manner, that Law, Purpose, or Decree of Election, wherein, and
whereby, God, before the foundations of the World, determined to choose all
those that should believe in Christ, may be said to make all those Elect, or
chosen, who do thus believe: yea and God himself, by means of this his Purpose,
or Decree, may be said to have Elected, or chosen, all those who do at any time
believe, from before the foundations of the World. Thus we have done with our
second Argument; wherein we have fairly and clearly proved, 1. That Christ
needed not to dye at all for the Elect, in the common Notion of the word,
Elect. 2. That He did not dye for the Elect only, in any sense or Notion of
the said word whatsoever: and consequently, that He dyed for all Men.

A third Demonstration of the Point, is this: If Christ dyed not for all. 6.
Argum. 3.
Men, then are not all Men bound to believe in Him, or on Him, for Salvation,
or, as a Savior: But all Men are bound to believe on Him, for Salvation. Ergo.
The Reason of the Major Proposition is clearly this: No man is bound to lay out
his silver, for that which is not bread; nor to stay himself, with any
confidence or assurance, upon any person whatsoever, for help or succor in any
kind, concerning whom he knows not whether he has wherewith to help him, or
no. Therefore except all Men had a sufficient ground to believe, that there is
Redemption and Salvation for them in Jesus Christ, they were not bound to
believe on Him as a Savior, or to depend upon Him for Salvation. And if Men
have a sufficient ground to believe that there is Redemption and Salvation for
them in Christ, and that if they come unto Him for it, they shall partake of
it, then must it needs be a Truth that He has these things for them indeed;
and consequently that He dyed for them: because no man can have a sufficient
ground to believe that which is not, or that which is false. This Proposition
is so plain, so obvious to every man's capacity and understanding, yea to common
sense it self, that I cannot well suspect the least question or doubt in any
about the Truth of it; If Christ dyed not for all Men, then are not all Men
bound to believe on Him for Salvation.

Notwithstanding if any shall object and say; It is true, if Christ dyed not
sufficiently for all Men, all Men were not bound to believe in Him for
Salvation: but we grant that in this sense, viz. sufficiently, He did dye for
all Men. And this is a sufficient ground to oblige all Men to believe on Him
for Salvation, though He dyed not intentionally for them. To this I answer,

1. By demanding, what men mean in saying, that Christ dyed sufficiently for
all Men, in opposition to His dying intentionally for them? If they say, they
mean, that the Death of Christ, simply and in it self considered, was, or is,
sufficient to redeem and save all Men, as well as those, who are redeemed and
saved by it; but was not intended by God, or by Christ, for any such end or
purpose as the Redemption of all: I answer; If so, then was that redundancy or
overplus of merit or atonement in the Death of Christ, which remains over and
above what is necessary for the Redemption of those, for whom it was intended,
and who are actually redeemed by it, suffered by God to run to waste, and to be
like water spilt upon the ground. And if so, then was there but a very small
quantity or proportion of the worth and value of the Death of Christ intended
by God for use, or to do either Himself, or his Creature, any service, in
comparison of what vanishes into the air, and is thrown behind his back, as
good for nothing. For if there be a sufficiency in it for all those who are not
redeemed by it, these being a far greater number, then those, who are, or are
supposed to be, actually redeemed by it; it must needs follow, that if that
proportion of it, which was sufficient for them, was not designed or intended
by God for them, that far the greater part of it was designed by him unto
vanity, and to no more honor, then that which is not. Thus we see how they that
deny the Death of Christ for all Men intentionally, and yet grant it
sufficiently, count the blood of the Covenant, at least the far greatest part
of it, as an unholy thing, as that which is consecrated to no holy use, end, or
purpose; yea, and that which is yet worse, make God himself, and Jesus Christ,
the drawers, or makers up of this account to their hand.

If they reply and say; that that remainder of the value and price of the Death
of Christ, though it was not intended by God for the Salvation of those, who
are not actually redeemed by him, yet it was intended for their condemnation,
and so not lost; I answer, that this is yet worse, and more unreasonable, then
the other. For, 1. might not men as reasonably say, that God made the Sun, and
put him into the midst of the Firmament of Heaven, to bring night and darkness
upon the world, as that he gave his Son Jesus Christ unto Death for the
Condemnation of the World? For God sent not his Son (says Christ himself) into
the World, to condemn the World; but that the World through him should be saved
John 3. 17.
. And elsewhere; I came not to judge the World, but to save the World John 12. 47
. And John the Baptist clearly expresses the end and intent of Christ's Death:
Joh. 1. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World John 1. 29
. Men may as well say, that the end and intent of the Sacrifices offered up by
the Priests under the Law, was, not to make atonement for men, or to purge
them, but to bring more guilt upon them, as say, that the intent of. Christ in
sacrificing himself was not to save, but condemn men. 2. It is not the manner
of God, nor is it agreeable either with his Wisdom, or his goodness, to make
things proper and fitting for the bringing to pass of good and gracious ends,
and then to consign them over to the effecting of ends of a quite contrary
nature and import: as ( v. g.) to create wholesome and savory meats, which are
apt and proper to nourish, and make the lives of men comfortable to them; and
to design these, being thus created, to the destruction, or discomfort of the
lives of men. Indeed when men abuse their Tables, and are unthankful to him,
that spread them for them, it is agreeable with his Wisdom, and no ways
disagreeing with his goodness, to make them to become snares unto them. And in
this sense only are all those places and expressions in the Scriptures to be
understood, where any thing penal, or that is contrary to the peace and comfort
of men, is presented, as the end of Christ's coming into, or going out of, the
World by Death. As where he says, that he came not to bring peace, but a
sword; and to put fire on Earth; that he came for judgment into the World; that
he was set, as well for the falling, as for the rising, of many in Israel: with
the like. All such sayings as these, import only the event, or secondary
Intentions of God in sending Christ into the World, not those which were
primary and predominant in him: or to speak more properly, they do not import
any Intention at all on Gods part, in, or about the sending of Christ into the
World, but only show, partly how unworthily some men will, or possibly may,
behave themselves toward Christ, being come into the World; partly, what the
Intentions of God are concerning those, who shall behave themselves thus
unworthily toward him. See what has been formerly delivered in upon this
account, and subscribed by Calvin himself, Cap. 5. Sect. 22.

If it be yet further said; yea but if God had had an intent to save, though. 7.
but a smaller number, then now he intends to save, yet he could not have saved
them by a Sacrifice of less value and merit, then that, by which he now
intends to save those, who shall be saved by Christ; and consequently, not by
a Sacrifice of less value, then that, which has in it a great surplussage, or
redundancy of merit, above what was barely necessary or sufficient to save
those, whose Salvation was intended. Therefore this overplus of merit, cannot
be said to be lost, or to be cast aside by God, as unserviceable; in as much as
it is essential unto, and absolutely inseparable from that Sacrifice, which was
simply necessary for the Salvation of those, whom he intended to save. As
suppose two or three men were in such a straight for meat to eat, being ready
to perish through extremity of hunger, and could make no provision for their
lives, but only by slaying of an Ox, or a Sheep, that came in their way, and
when they had slain them, could not tell what to do with nine parts of ten of
them; in this case so much of the flesh of this Ox, or Sheep, as these men knew
not how to dispose of to any serviceable end, cannot properly therefore be said
to be lost, or to be cast aside by them, as good for nothing; because it was a
natural part of that beast, which they were necessitated to slay for the
preservation of their lives. To this Objection also we answer;

1. By way of concession, It is true, if God had intended to save, but the one
half (or had it been a far less proportion then so) of those persons, men and
women, who now shall be saved, he could not have done it, in that way of Wisdom
and Justice, wherein he now intends to save men, by any Sacrifice or Atonement
of less value, then has now been offered for those, who shall be saved: and
consequently, which should not have had an overplus and redundancy of merit in
it, sufficient to save many millions of persons, besides those, who in such a
case, and under such a supposition, should be saved by it. But,

2. I answer further (by way of exception) that notwithstanding this, if God
should have given such a Sacrifice or Atonement for the saving of a few only,
which was sufficient to save more, yea all (without exception) and not intended
the saving of all those, who were capable of Salvation by it, he should
voluntarily, and without any necessity at all, nay contrary to the importunate
cries of the extreme misery of so many thousands in his ears, have made
frustrate and void the far greatest and richest part of that Sacrifice or
Atonement. As suppose in the instance given of the men, that in an exigent
were necessitated to slay the Ox, or Sheep, spoken of, for the preservation of
their lives; it is true, they could not be charged with spoiling or making
waste of that which remained of the flesh of either, besides what was
sufficient for themselves, simply because they slew the Ox for their own
necessity, being in a condition of imminent danger of their lives otherwise;
but suppose there had been many poor Souls hard at hand, in as much danger of
starving as themselves, in case they had refused or neglected to have given
unto them of the remaining flesh we speak of, and would rather have buried it
under ground, where they might not find it, or make it any ways unfit for meat
and nourishment unto them; in this case they might justly be charged with
making spoil and waste of that flesh, which remained unto them, when themselves
had eaten, and that upon terms of the greatest unmercifulness and unworthiness.
In like manner do they, who acknowledge the Death of Christ sufficient for all,
and yet affirm it to be given or intended by God only to some few, charge him,
and that upon terms of much unworthiness, and very dishonorable to him, to
evacuate, or make of no use or effect the far greatest part of this Death,
there being so many Millions of Souls before him in the utmost extremity of
misery, to whom it might, and that with double and treble honor both to his
wisdom and goodness, be disposed. Therefore certainly if the Death of Christ
was sufficient for all, it was intended by God for all. But,

2. Suppose it were granted, that Christ dyed sufficiently for all, yet unless
it be granted withal, that he dyed intentionally for all, the sufficiency of
His Death, is no sufficient ground for all Men (nor indeed for any man) to
believe on Him, or to cast themselves upon Him, for Salvation. Nabal was a rich
man, and had sufficient to have relieved David and his men in their necessity,
and his sheep-shearers too. But yet David and his men had no sufficient ground
to depend upon him for relief in their extremity: nor is it like they would
have repaired to him for relief, if they had known his churlish and inhumane
disposition before. In like manner, that Opinion which represents God as
minding only, and intending the Salvation of a few peculiarly relating to Him
by a Purpose of Election, in the Death of Christ, but altogether averse from so
much as hearing of the saving of all others thereby, what does it else but
dissolve and loose all bonds of engagement, or obligement upon men, to believe
on Christ, or on God through Christ, for Salvation? For who is bound to seek
water from a flint, or to repair to thorns in hope to gather grapes from them?
For they, who deny that God intends the Salvation of all Men by Christ,
represent him to the generality of men upon no better terms of comparison, then
of a flint to him that wants water, and of thorns, to him whose Soul lusts
after grapes.

If it be said, Yes: there is reason and ground sufficient for all Men without.
8.
exception to believe on Christ for Salvation, though it be not supposed that
He dyed for all Men. Because the Promise of God howsoever is general and free
unto all: Whosoever believes on Him, shall be saved. To this I answer;

It is true, the Promise is general and free unto all: and this generality and
freeness of the Promise plainly shows the generality and freeness of the
Salvation promised to all Men, to be commensurable with the Promise, and
extensible to as many, as it. Otherwise the Ministers of the Gospel shall be
found liars, and false witnesses. For if they shall promise Salvation unto all
Men, in case they shall believe, when as there is no Salvation for far the
greatest part of men, whether they believe, or not believe, or in case they
should believe (for their believing, or not believing, do not alter the
Intentions of God in the Death of Christ, nor multiply Salvation) do they not
undertake more in the behalf of God, then God himself, according to their
Notion, is able or willing to perform? But this Point we have debated more
liberally in the seventh Chapter of this Book.

If it be yet said; yea but God who orders and frames their Commission, may
without danger will them to preach and promise Salvation, to all that will
believe, though Salvation be not purchased for all Men: because He knows
beforehand that those only will believe, for whom there is Salvation purchased
in the Death of Christ. To this I answer:

If God had kept His Intentions in this kind to Himself, and had not declared
that He intended Salvation only to a few, there might be some more color or
pretense for such a Plea. If He had not let the World know any thing, but that
He really intended the Salvation of them all, though He should in the mean time
have intended but the Salvation of a very few, He might with far less dishonor
(at least for the present) cause the Heralds of His Grace (His Ministers I
mean) to make such a general Proclamation, as now He has given them in charge
to make, throughout the World, of Grace and Salvation prepared for all flesh,
for all Comers whatsoever. But to imagine and suppose, that first He gives the
World to know and understand, that He intends to save but a very few of them;
and yet this notwithstanding, and (as it were) in the very face of such a
Declaration, to cause the great year of Jubilee to be proclaimed throughout the
World, eternal Liberty and Redemption to be offered unto all flesh, unto all
persons without exception, must needs be most unlike unto Him, and unworthy of
Him, yea and have a direct tendency to make Him (that which a reverential sense
of His Majesty makes hard to be uttered) the hatred and abhorring of all his
Creatures. David to present his hollow-hearted and treacherous friends hateful
both to God and Men, describes them thus; The words of his mouth were smoother
then butter, but war was in his Heart: His words were softer then oil, yet were
they Psalm. 55: 21.
drawn swords. And does not that Opinion turn the Glory of the ever-gracious
God, that great Lover of Mankind, into the image of such a vile and abominable
creature as David here describes, which says of Him, that He comes indeed unto
men, and opens the Bosom of Love unto them, speaks sweet and loving and
gracious words unto them, offers them, yea and that with much importunity of
urging and pressing them to an acceptance, terms of Mercy and great
Compassions, Forgiveness of Sins, Adoption, Life, Salvation, Glory, the great
things of the World to come, and yet all this while, under all these sweet
droppings of His Lips, has in His Heart that most bloody and irreconcilable
War of Reprobation, a Purpose and Resolution taken up and conceived within Him
from the days of Eternity, never to be altered upon any terms whatsoever, of
casting them into Hell, and tormenting them with the vengeance of eternal fire?
Certainly that Opinion, which represents God unto men upon such terms, in
such a shape as this, flatters, or rather befriends the Devil, and makes Him to
have much of God in Him. And if God should conceal for the present that
Intention of His we speak of, viz. of saving only a few, and of destroying the
generality of men, and yet proceed in that method which now He does, in
inviting the whole World to Grace and Favor with Him, except He should conceal
it to the days of Eternity, whenever it should break forth and be discovered,
it would occasion the same reflection of dishonor upon Him; yea and doubtless
would comfort and ease the damned in Hell, if ever the knowledge of it should
come amongst them. But this for the proof of the Major Proposition in the
Argument propounded; If Christ dyed not for all Men, then are not all Men bound
to believe on Him for Salvation.

The Minor (I conceive) needs little proof, being this: But all Men are. 9.
bound to believe on Him, for Salvation. However, the Truth of this Proposition
is as clear as the light at Noon day, partly from the Commandment of God
directed unto all Men, to believe on him: partly from the Threatenings of God
denounced against all Men, that shall refuse to believe in him: partly from the
Promises made unto all Men, who shall believe on him: partly also from the
encouragements which are administered by God unto all Men to believe in him.

First, it is evident, that God commands all Men without exception to believe
on* Christ. And the times of this ignorance (says Paul preaching to the
Idolatrous Gentiles at Athens) God winked at: but now He commands ALL MEN
EVERY WHERE to Repent Acts 17. 30.
: if to repent, then certainly to believe in Christ; without which there is no
true Repentance. The Reader for his further satisfaction in this Point (if he
be in any degree yet unsatisfied) may at leisure peruse and ponder the
Scriptures noted in the Margent 1 John 3. 23. Mat. 16. 5. Romans 10. 16. 3. Luke
14. 23.
.

Secondly, As God commands all Men to believe on Christ (which is indeed
sufficient to prove that they are bound to believe on Him) so does He severely
threaten all those that shall not believe on Him. -- But He that believes not,
shall be damned Mark 16. 16
. The Scriptures likewise abound with Passages of this import: a first fruits
whereof are presented in the Margent John 8. 24 3. 36 Acts 3. 23
.

Thirdly, As God commands all Men to believe on Christ, and threateneth all
with Death, which shall not believe; so He promises Life and Salvation unto
all without exception, who shall believe on Him. This assertion (I conceive) is
no man's question, the Scriptures being so particular and express in the
frequent delivery of it John 3. 16 11. 25, 26 1 Pet. 2, 6
.

Fourthly (and lastly) As God commands all Men to believe on Christ;
threateneth all with Death, who shall not believe: promises Life and
Salvation, unto all who shall believe; so does He encourage all to believe on
Him; my meaning is, He tendereth and suggesteth Reasons and Motives of an
encouraging and sweetly-perswading nature and import unto men, to believe. For
otherwise, the Commands, and Promises of God, made unto those who shall
believe, are grand encouragements (in a large acception of the word) unto Men,
to believe; and his Threatenings are more engaging to the servile tempers and
dispositions of Men, to believe, then any encouragements whatsoever. But my
meaning in the Particular in hand is this; that besides Commands and Promises,
God lays before the Hearts of Men such Considerations, which are apt and proper
in a sweet and encouraging way to induce Men to believe on Christ, or on
Himself through Christ, for Salvation. As for example: Sometime He presents
them with his great Love to them, as Joh. 3. 16. Tit. 3. 4, etc. sometimes with
his Mercy and his Compassions, the greatness and tenderness of these, as Exodus
34. 6. Luke 1. 72, etc. sometimes with his delight, or pleasure-taking in
showing Mercy, as Mica. 7. 18. Ezekiel. 33. 11, etc. sometimes with his
Faithfulness, as Hebr. 10. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 13, etc. sometimes with his Oath for
their greater security in his Promises, as Heb. 6. 17, 18. Luke 1. 72, 73.
otherwhile, with his desire of their Salvation, as 1 Timothy 2. 4. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
otherwhile again, with the grief and trouble of his Soul at their stubborn
courses, and that because they are, and will be, destructive unto them; as
Ezekiel. 18. 31. Jerem. 44. 4. Sometimes with the abundant provision He has made
for their Salvation and Peace, as Mat. 22. 4. Heb. 9. 14. Sometimes likewise
(to omit many other Particulars in this kind) with the consideration of that
special glory which will accrue unto himself, and to his Grace, by their
believing, and Salvation thereupon, Ephesians. 1. 6, 12. and elsewhere. Now to
think or say, that under all these, Commands, Threatenings, Promises, and all
this great variety of encouragements directed unto all Men to believe, yet all
Men are not bound to believe, is to me the thought and saying only of such a
man, who is resolved to stand by his own thoughts and sayings, against any
light or evidence of Truth whatsoever.

A fourth Argument, evincing the Death of Christ for all Men, is this.. 10.
Argum. 4.
If God really and unfeignedly intends, or desires, the Salvation of those who
perish, then He really intended the Death of Christ for all Men. This
Proposition we shall not need to prove, but only by this brief account. All
Men (without exception) are either such, who are saved, or such who perish: and
that God really intended the Death of Christ, for those that are saved, is no
man's doubt, or contest. Therefore if He really intended the Salvation of those
also, who perish, in, or by, the Death of Christ, He intended this Death of
Christ for all. This Proposition then being undeniable, I proceed, and assume
thus: But God really and unfeignedly intends or desires the salvation, of those
who perish. Therefore he intended the Death of Christ for all Men. This latter
Proposition, That God really and unfeignedly desires the Salvation of those
that perish, is clearly proved by this consideration; viz. that God so
frequently, so fervently and pathetically in the Scriptures professes his
desires of the Peace and Salvation of such men, yea and an holy regret of Soul
in Himself, when they will stubbornly run courses destructive to their
Salvation, contrary to his desires and endevors with them in this kind. Let us
give instance in some Passages of such an import, as we speak of. O that there
were such an Heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children
for ever Deuteronomy. 5. 29
, (says the Lord himself concerning the great body of the children of Israel,
whose carcasses soon after fell in the wilderness through unbelief, as the
Apostle speaks.) So again by David, Psalm. 81. O that my people had harkened
unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries Psa. 81. 13, 14
, etc. Thus the Lord speaks concerning those, whom (as he had immediately
before said) He had given up to their own hearts lusts, and who walked in their
own counsels. That expression also of the Lord in Isaiah is of the same
character. Thus says the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, I am the
Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, which leads thee by the way thou
should go; O that thou had harkened unto my Commandments, then had thy
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea Isai. 48.
17
. Whereunto this also in the same Prophet may be joined: I have spread out my
hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walks in a way that is not
good, after their own thoughts, a people that provokes me to anger to my face,
that sacrifices in gardens Isai. 65. 2
, etc. By spreading forth the hands (says Calvin, Englished upon the place) he
signifies a daily summoning of them, and that TO DRAVV AND UNITE THEM UNTO
HIMSELF. A little after; The Lord never speaks unto us, but He there with all
stretches forth His Hand to unite us unto Himself, and causes us to feel that
He is near unto us. Yea He so manifests His FATHERLY LOVE, and so willingly
accepts of us, that if we yield not obedience unto his voice, we ought justly
to impute the same to our own frowardness. So that Calvin's Judgment clearly is,
that in this, and such like places, God professes a reality of Intention and
Desire in Him to draw and unite unto Himself [i. e. to sanctify and save] such
who through their own frowardness, never come to be actually united unto Him,
or saved.

Add hereunto only two places more (for the present) though there be many
others to be found. The former of these shall be that in Jer. 44. 4, 5. Howbeit
I sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising early and sending them,
saying, O do not this abominable thing that I hate. But they harkened not, nor
inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn incense unto other
gods Jer. 44. 4, 5
. The latter place is in the New Testament. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, even as an Hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold your house is left unto you
desolate Mat. 23. 37
, etc. Upon the former of these places, Calvin makes the Prophet to say, that
God was watchful, because HE WAS SOLICITOVS FOR THE PEOPLES SAFETY. Even as a
man that is intent upon his business, will not stay till the Sun shines upon
him, but will prevent the morning it self Nam quisquis erit atte^tus ad
negotium, non expectabit dum Sol illuceat, sed praeveniet ipsam Auroram. Sic
etiam dicit Propheta, Deum fuisse vigilem: quia SOLICITUS ERAT DE SALUTE
POPULI. Et paulo post: Sciamus ergo Doctrinam, quum nobis annu^ciatur, esse
signum paternae erga nos Dei solicitudinis: quia no^ vult nos perire, sed
descendit ad nos, and prospicit quid nobis opus sit, acsi adesset, and tanqua^
pater filios, curaret nos, and res nostras. Haec igitur Summa est.
. Upon the latter place he says, that God attempted in a way of gentleness and
fair speaking TO ALLVRE the Jews* unto Him; that his BENIGNITY, or kindness,
was great toward them; that his invitations of them were more then mother-like
Quum vero comiter ac blande ad se allicere Deus tentaverit Judaeos, ac nihil
profecerit tanta benignitate, long atrocius fuit tam superbae contumeliae
crimen. -- Nunc tenemus cur se Christus in Dei persona gallinae comparet: nempe
quo plus ignominiae huic scelestae genti irroget, quae suaves, and plusquam
maternas ejus invitationes respuerat. Mirum hoc certe and incomparabile amoris
documentum fuit, quod se ad blanditias usque demittere gravatus non est, quo
circuraret in suum obsequium rebels.
, (with much more of like-import.) Now to say that God should profess, and
express himself unto Men, and Women, with so much vehemence and patheticalness
of affection, as these gestures, phrases and expressions (our chiefest
adversaries themselves being Judges) imply, spreading forth his hands all the
day long, endevoring to gather people with as much care and tenderness, as an
Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, crying out, O, do not this
abominable thing, etc. and yet have no desire at all, no intention at all, of
their Salvation, nay on the contrary to have settled and grounded intentions to
destroy them for ever, is to render him like to that generation of men in the
World, whom His Soul most abhors, and who are indeed, and that most justly,
the hatred and abhorring, both of God and Men, Hypocrites I mean, and
Dissemblers. Christ commands us to be merciful, as our Heavenly Father is
merciful Luke 6. 36.
: but if we should be merciful, as those represent the mercifulness of our
Heavenly Father, who deny that Christ dyed for all Men, we should be the
firstborn children of Hypocrisy, and the most notorious dissemblers under
Heaven; many degrees worse, then those, whom James speaks of with reproof; who
say to a Brother or Sister, naked and destitute of daily food, Depart in peace,
be ye warmed, and filled, notwithstanding give them not those things, that are
needful for the body Jam. 2. 15, 16.
. For though such merciful ones as these, do their poor Brethren and Sisters
little good with their merciful words, yet it no ways appears, nor is it
likely, that under such words as these they hide or harbor intentions of evil,
or of a further increase of misery unto them; whereas they that shall be
merciful like unto their Heavenly Father, as the Opinion which we oppose, lays
the pattern before us, shall under the most affectionate protestations of love
and kindness unto men, under the most earnest asseverations of intentions and
desires of their good, conceal settled projects, purposes, desires, and
intentions, of doing them the greatest mischief they can imagine.

That which is wont to be excepted against this Argument, is so empty, except.
11.
it be of contumely and dishonor unto God, that it neither deserves
consideration, nor confutation: and I believe all that can be excepted, against
it, is of very little more weight. Some, as to the Scriptures cited for the
confirmation of the Argument, with their fellows, wherein God (as we heard)
professes with so much earnestness the sincerity of His Desires to the welfare
and Salvation of those who perish, answer somewhat to this purpose (for it is
hard indeed to make any regular or good sense of what they answer at this
Point) That God in such expressions, uses sancta quadam simulatione, a kind
of an holy simulation; others, that He does duplicem personam induere; i. e.
that He takes upon Him a double Person: others, that God is presented in such
Scriptures, as speaking, secundum voluntatem approbativam, non ^fficacem, i. e.
according to his Will of Approbation, not according to his Will of Efficacy, or
Execution: others, that such wishes, or desires, as are expressed in the said
Scriptures, are attributed unto God anthropopathetically, and according to the
rate of humane capacity, etc. But what uncouth and hard* faced allegations are
these? or what salt of interpretation is there, that will make them savory? Or
what do they that use them, but (as it were) beg bread out of desolate places
to support the life of an Opinion that is guilty, and deserves to dye?

First, I would know, of those, who take sanctuary from the pursuit of the
Scriptures mentioned, under the wing of Sancta quaedam Simulatio in Deo, a
kind of Holy Simulation in God, what they mean by this Sancta Simulatio. As
far as my short understanding is able to reach, to talk of an Holy Simulation,
and of a Sun* shine Night, or of a Beast endued with the reasonable Soul of a
man, would make Discourses of a parallel consistence. If Simulation,
counterfeiting, or professing one thing, whilst the contrary is intended, be
holy in God, why, or how, should they not be holy in Men also? But in Men we
know they are abominable. Yet the Tenor of Gods Injunction unto Men, is: AS HE
THAT calls you is Holy, SO BE YE HOLY in all manner of conversation 1 Pet. 1.
15
. Or if some things in God may be Holy, which are abominable in Men, how, or by
what rule shall Men distinguish between such holy things in God, which are holy
also when found in Men; and such other holy things in God, which, when found in
Men, are abominable? Besides, the Holy Ghost attributes the Honorable Title of
(...), one incapable of lying, unto God Titus 1. 2
. If God cannot lie, much less can He counterfeit, or dissemble, simulation,
and dissimulation, always including lying, and adding somewhat besides that is
evil, to boot. And (doubtless) he that so much loves, or desires Truth [i. e.
conformity in reality of purpose and affection, unto words and outward
professions] in the inward parts Psalm. 51. 6
of Men, and commands them to love, not in word, or in tongue, but in deed, and
in Truth 1 John 3. 18
, is himself fully commensurable in Heart and Soul, in the most real Purposes
and Intentions that can be conceived, with all that goes out of his lips. His
mouth is not so wide opened unto the World, but that his Heart is enlarged
accordingly: nor is He at any hand to be judged like unto him, whom David
brandeth with this character of wickedness, The words of his mouth were
smoother then butter, but war was in his Heart: His words were softer then oil,
yet were they drawn swords Psalm. 55. 21
. Such a simulation, or dissembling as we now speak of, and which some (most
unworthily) attribute unto God, is by the very light of Nature execrable and
accursed. Homer puts these words into the mouth of his Achilles;

(...),
(...) Iliad. 1.
. i. e.
To me He is abhorred like Death,
Whose Heart accords not with His Breath.
But this subter-fuge of Simulatio Sancta, is (it seems) so broadly obnoxious,
that the greatest part of those, who wish themselves safe from the prementioned
Scriptures, are afraid, or ashamed, to trust to it. Therefore,

2. Some others of them attempt an escape by the new, but dead, way of this
Distinction. God (say they) wishes the Peace and Salvation of those that
perish, voluntate approbativa, with, or according to His approving Will, i. e.
He approves of the Salvation of such Persons, as good: but He does not wish
it, voluntate efficaci, i. e. with His efficacious Will. Are not men (think we)
sorely afraid of the Truth, who can accept of deliverance from it, by the
unworthy hand of such distinctions, as these? For, 1. Is it a thing of any
reasonable resentment in the least, that God should positively and peremptorily
determine and decree from Eternity, that which is directly contrary to His Will
of Approbation? Or is not the destruction of those, who perish, contrary to
their Salvation? Therefore if God approves of their Salvation, and yet
peremptorily decrees their Condemnation, (whether positively, or permissively
only, as these men count Permission, is not material, as we formerly observed
Cap. 2.. 20
) does He not decree that from Eternity, which His Soul hates, or abhors,
or (which is the same) which is contrary to His Will of Approbation? And who
ever decreed such a thing, which is contrary to what he approves, takes
pleasure, or delights in? No man ever yet, being in possession of his Senses,
though but common and ordinary, decreed his own Sorrow, or any thing contrary
to what he approves. In what sense Christ is said to have been delivered up,
taken, and crucified with wicked hands, by the determinate Counsel of God, has
been formerly opened Cap. 2. Sect. 13
: by the Tenor of which Explication, it plainly appears, that in, or about,
the crucifying of Christ, there was nothing decreed, or determined by God, but
with perfect accord to His Will of Approbation. 2. When the said distinction
teaches us, that God does not will the Salvation of those that perish,
voluntate efficaci, with his efficacious, or effectual, Will, I would gladly
know what it means by this efficacious Will of God. Certainly He wills the
Salvation of these men, with a Will efficacious to a degree, yea to a very
considerable and great degree; with a Will (I mean) exerting it self upon such
terms in order to the promoting, furthering, and procuring their Salvation,
that unless they resisted the Holy Ghost, they should be actually saved; yea
upon such terms, that God himself professes, that He knows not what to do
more, to effect, or procure their Salvation, then what He does. What could have
been done more (says He) to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it Isaiah 5* 4
? To interpret, What could have been done more, by, What would have been done
more, is to dissence the place, and to make Hay and Stubble of good Silver and
Gold. In what sense God is, and properly enough may be, said, not to be able to
do more, then what He actually does, to promote the Salvation even of those,
who perish, has been formerly opened Cap. 16 Sect. 15, 16
. Yea the learned abettors of that Doctrine, which we now oppose, generally
grant, that God vouchsafes means of Salvation, yea sometimes means very rich
and powerful in this kind, unto those, who in the event are not saved.
Doubtless such Dispensations as these argue a Will in God some ways, and in
some measure operative, and efficacious, in order to the Salvation of such men;
which is more then a Will of mere Approbation. If by the efficacious Will of
God, the said Distinction means such a Will, which acts irresistibly, or
necessi^atingly, in order to the saving of men, and that God with such a Will
as this, does not will the Salvation of any of those, who perish; My Answer is;
1. That if this be meant particularly of the initial or first applications made
by God unto such men, that Will of His from which these proceed, may (in a
sense) be said to act irresistibly, and necessitatingly, toward their
Salvation; not indeed as if by these exertions or actings of this Will of His,
the Salvation of these men must necessarily follow, but because such
applications of God unto them, in order to their Salvation, cannot be
prevented, nor God hindered by any means whatsoever, from, or in, the making of
them unto them. God will, will or nill men themselves, or who ever besides, at
first, before they have corrupted themselves with the ways and manners of the
World, graciously apply Himself unto them in the things of their eternal Peace,
by writing the effect of His Law in their Hearts, by enlightening them with the
Knowledge of Himself, to a good degree, as of His Being, His eternal Power, and
Godhead, etc. which we may call the elements, or first rudiments of Salvation.
But, 2. if by the efficacious Will of God, the Distinction means such a Will
in Him, which acts upon such terms in order to the Salvation of a man, that
there is no possibility for him to miscarry, or perish, under these actings, I
grant, that God does not will the Salvation of those that perish, with such a
Will as this; but deny withal, that there is any such Will as this in Him, or
that He wills the Salvation of any man, or men whatsoever, upon any such
terms, but that all the time of their sojourning in the flesh, and till
Salvation be actually vested in them, they are, such actings notwithstanding,
in a possibility of perishing, or of a not being saved: although this
possibility is no ground, nor reasonable occasion, unto those who believe, of
any fear that has torment, but only of care that has conscience, (as has
been showed formerly.) But,

3. Concerning those, who inform us, that the Scriptures specified, wherein God
presents Himself, as affectionately wishing and desiring the Salvation even
of those who perish, are figurative, and to be understood anthropopathetically,
conceiving that by saying thus, they shake off the Argument built upon these
Scriptures against them, the truth is, that their Information in this kind is
steady and good, but their Conceit upon it, weak, and worthless. For what
though a Scripture-passage be figurative, and contains in it an Anthropopathy,
one, or more, is it therefore non significative? or does it hold forth nothing
of a spiri^ual import to the Judgments and Understandings of Men for their
edification? When God says of Himself, If any man draw back, MY SOUL shall
have no pleasure in him Heb. 10. 38
; so again, when He says, All those things has MINE HAND made Isai. 66. 2.
; so when He is said to have given unto Moses two Tables of testimony, Tables
of stone, written with THE FINGER of God Exodus 31. 18
, (with others more of like character, without number) are such sayings as
these Barbarian^ unto us, or like so many Trumpets, giving an uncertain sound?
or are they not as significant and expressive, as full of edification and
instruction in the Knowledge of God, as other sayings in the same Volume with
them? Or could the same subject, or matter of truth, which they hold forth,
have been delivered with more grace, or with better advantage to the
understandings of men, in other terms, or forms of expression, then those
specified? Yea the truth is, that very little, if any thing at all, concerning
God, can be conveyed by words unto the minds and understandings of men, but by
expressions which are figurative, (the Reason whereof, has, I remember, been
formerly observed by us.) And for the Scriptures, questionless there is in them
more of the Knowledge of God, and of his Attributes, taught by Anthropopathies,
and that kind of dialect, which borrows things proper unto men to make known
unto us things proper unto God, then by all other kinds of phrase or
expressions whatsoever. Now then this I would demand of those, who of the
Anthropopathies found in the Scriptures under present consideration, think to
make shields and Bucklers against the dint and force of the Argument drawn from
them, I would, I say, willingly demand of these men, what other sense, or what
other matter of information, instruction, edification, they can make of the
said places, but only this, or that which is equivalent to it, viz. that there
is that eminently, or transcendently, in God, or in the Divine Being, which
relates unto the Salvation of those, who notwithstanding in fine perish, after
the same manner, wherein the earnest wishes, and most serious and cordial
desires in men, relate unto their respective objects, or things so wished and
desired by them.

4. (And lastly) They, who to salve t^eir Opinion of Christ's non-dying for
those, whose Salvation God professes with so much seriousness and solemnity in
the Passages in hand, that He desires, without charging Him with Hypocrisy,
apply this Plaster, viz. that in these places God expresses himself pro captu
humano, i. e. with a condescension to humane capacity; these men (I say) spin
the same thread of vanity with the former. For be it granted, that God in the
said Passages, condescends to the infirm and weak apprehensions of men, and
teaches them mysteries, as they are able to hear and understand, does it
follow from hence, that therefore He teaches them nothing at all, speaks
nothing at all to their understandings in these places? If it be granted that
in them he speaks any thing at all to the understandings of Men, I demand (as
lately) what can it else be, but that He truly, really, cordially,
affectionately, wishes, wills, desires, (in such a sense, as he truly,
really, cordially, affectionately, wishes, wills, desires any other thing)
the Salvation of such men, who yet through their own voluntary negligence and
unworthiness, in conclusion perish, and are not saved? And if so, then does
that Doctrine, either arraign the Most Holy and Blessed God of the foulest
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, that lightly can be imagined, which affirms,
that notwithstanding the solemnity and frequency of such Protestations, yet He
never intended that His Son Christ should dye, and make Atonement for them; or
else that He intends and desires their Salvation otherwise then by Christ's
Death.

A fifth Demonstration of the Doctrine asserted. That Doctrine which directly.
12. Argum. 5.
tends to separate and divide between the Creature, and His Creator blessed for
ever, or to create and raise Jealousies and hard Thoughts in the former against
the latter, cannot be Evangelical, or Truth. But such is the Doctrine, which
denies that Christ dyed for all Men, without exception. Ergo. The Major
Proposition in this Argument, carries a sufficiency of light in it for the
manifestation of its own Truth. The clear and know Project, and Intent of the
Gospel, is to reconcile all things both in Heaven and on Earth into one, (as we
lately heard from the Apostle) to slay and destroy that enmity, which is so apt
to arise and work in the minds and thoughts of men against God, through a
consciousness of their sinful lives and ways, in conjunction with those strong
impressions upon their Conscience of his infinite Holiness and Majesty; and so
to create and plant in their stead worthy and honorable thoughts of God, full
of love, sweetness, and peace, in the inward parts of men, (as we argued and
proved at large from 2 Cor. 5. 19. Cap. 5. Sect. 28, 29, etc.
) Therefore that Doctrine, the face whereof is set a quite contrary way, as
viz. to multiply, soment, and increase those evil and hard thoughts of God,
which the sense of sin and guilt (as has been said) are marvelously apt to
engender in the hearts and spirits of Men, must needs be Anti-Evangelical, and
of another inspiration much differing from that, whereby the Gospel was given
unto the World. So that to cloth this Proposition with light, we shall not
need to labor, or spin.

Nor need we be put to much trouble for proof of the latter Proposition, had
not the adverse Doctrine gotten the advantage of possession against the clear
Truth, in the Judgments of Men. For what can be more apparent, then that such a
Doctrine, which manifestly imports the causless, peremptory, irremediable,
and unremovable hatred of God against far the greatest part of Men, and this
burning to the bottom of Hell; the Persons also against whom this Hatred is
supposed to be lodged in Him, being unknown; What (I say) can be more apparent,
then that such a Doctrine as this, directly and with open face tends to a most
sad, horrid, and desperate alienation of the Heart and Soul of the poor
Creature, Man, from his dear, and ever-blessed Creator, God? Or is it possible
that such a Creature, should truly, cordially, or entirely love, or delight in
Him that made him, in case he either knows, or otherwise has strong grounds of
jealousy and fear, that before he made him, and without any offense taken at,
or respect had unto, any of his future sins, or unworthy carriages in the
least, he so far hated and abominated him, as to resolve, against all mediation
whatsoever, to cast him out of his sight, to devote and doom him to suffer the
vengeance of eternal sire? Or does not that Doctrine, which denies that God
intended the Death of Christ for the Salvation of all Men, manifestly import
and suppose, that God to such a degree hated and abhorred, or however purposed
and decreed to hate and abhor, the far greatest part of Men from Eternity, as
to resolve, against all means possible to be used by them, or purposed to be
used by himself, for prevention, to pour out the fierceness of his Wrath upon
their heads in flames of unquenchable fire? The Holy Ghost teaches us, that
the Love of God [i. e. Love toward God] must, or ought to, be kindled in the
Hearts of Men, by a sense or apprehension of a precedence of this affection in
him toward them. We love Him (says John) because He first loved us; 1 John 4.
19 (...).
or (as the Original will indifferently bear, as Calvin himself observes, and
grants) Let us love Him, because He loved us first. According to either of
these constructions of the words, the intimation is pregnant, that the Love of
God toward Men apprehended and believed, is, and ought to be, the proper seed
of a reciprocal affection in Men toward Him. And the Scripture most frequently
conjures Men to love God, upon the account of his great Love toward them
manifested by the gift of his Son Jesus Christ unto them. Now if Love declared
and resented be the natural and proper seed of the same affection in another,
then Hatred discovered and apprehended, must needs be a seed of a contrary
import, and of like aptness to beget in its own likeness also. For though God
charge Men to love their enemies, and those that hate them, yet he does it
upon the account of that great and signal Love, which he has first showed unto
them in the gift of his only begotten and dear Son. And we see,
notwithstanding this great Commandment imposed by God upon Men, and that upon
the advantage of such a rational and equitable ground, or motive, for the
performance of it, yet with what difficulty and renitency of the flesh, even in
Men truly sanctified, yea and with what rareness of example, it is effectually,
if at all, performed. How unpossible then must it needs be, that Men should
truly love God, whilst they apprehend him as an Enemy, bent in an unplacable
and unappeasable manner, to destroy them, and that with the most formidable
destruction they are capable of enduring, and this to the days of Eternity?
Especially considering, that they have no advantage, or motive, of any love
showed unto them by another, any ways considerable, whereby to be strengthened,
or enabled to love him, against so sore a stumbling block and obstruction, in
the way of this affection, as a Reprobating of them from Eternity. This
Demonstration is so pregnant of Proof and Conviction, that (certain I am)
nothing can with any strength, scarce with any face, of Reason, be alleged
against it. But meet it is that the Poor should be hear^ in his cause, as well
as the rich. Therefore,

1. To the Argument now urged, it may be replied; That the Doctrine. 13. Object.
which affirms, that Christ dyed only for the Elect, and not for all Men in
general, has no such tendency or aptness in it, as the said Argument charge
upon it, to separate between God, and any of his Creatures; because it leaves
an hope to every Person of Mankind, distributively considered, that they may
be of the number of the Elect, and consequently of those, for whom Christ dyed.
There is no man, or woman, but may, the said Doctrine notwithstanding, be of a
good and comfortable hope, that Christ dyed for them; and so have no ground to
conceive hardly of God, or to be alienated in their minds or hearts from him.
To this I answer;

Be it granted, that the Doctrine we blame, leaves a degree of hope to every
Christ dyed. Suppose forty, or an hundred men should be arraigned and found
guilty of High Treason against their Prince, and He should declare, without
naming any of their Persons, that he would graciously pardon the Offense of
one, or two of them, but was resolved, against all possible interveniencies
whatsoever, to inflict in the most severe manner, the Penalty of Death upon all
the rest, would such an hope of escape, or of finding favor in the eyes of
their Prince, as should be afforded, or left, unto these men in this case, be
any considerable encouragement, or ground of motive unto them respectively, to
conceive honorably of their Prince, for clemency, goodness, and mercy? Or would
not the severity and peremptoriness of his resolutions to take away the lives
of the generality or far greatest part of them, rather represent him to their
minds as a man of rigor and extremity against those that provoke him? Much
more should these men, and all others, have just ground to judge this Prince to
be a Person of an hard spirit, addicted unto cruelties and blood, in case they
should know, especially from himself, and by his own profession, that long
before any of the said Persons were touched with the least guilt, yea or
thought, of Treason, he was peremptorily resolved to have the blood and lives
of them all, one or two only excepted? And as for his granting Pardon unto
this one, or two, there being no ground in Reason, or Equity, why he should
respect these, more then the other, may it not seem rather the working of a
mere humor, or a conceited and groundless action, then any fruit of an habitual
goodness or clemency of disposition, or of any mature or considerate
deliberation? And does not the Doctrine which we condemn for that capital crime
of denying that Christ dyed for all Men, draw the portraicture of God
resembling in all the lineaments of his face the hard favor'dness of such a
Prince? First, It represents him as engaged, and this against all possibility
of relenting, yea and this to the days of Eternity, in Counsels and Purposes of
Blood, yea of the Blood of the precious Souls of Men. Secondly, It presents
him, as thus engaged against millions of millions of these Souls; yea against
the whole mass or element of Mankind, a small remnant (comparatively) only
excepted, and these for a long time, if not during the whole term of their
Mortality, undiscernable from the rest; within the compass of which term
notwithstanding they must be prevailed with to love God, or else they are lost
for Eternity. Thirdly, The said Doctrine portraitureth him, engaged as
aforesaid, before, and without, any consideration or respect had, to any the
future sins, impenitency, unbelief, or any other, of those* against whom it
supposes him so implacably and unmercifully engaged. Fourthly (and lastly) It
holds Him forth unto the World, as purposing and intending, without any
reasonable or equitable cause, only upon his peremptory and mere Will, to make
that vast difference, between that small remnant of men mentioned, and the
numberless multitudes of them besides, which consists in the unmeasurable
blessedness of the former, and the unconceivable misery and torment of the
latter. Now whether this be to form the most Blessed God in the Minds,
Judgments, Souls and Consciences of Men, as amiable and lovely, as attractive
of their hearts and affections, as worthy to be delighted in, to be depended
on, by all Persons of Mankind, without exception of any, for all, and all
manner of good, temporal, spiritual, eternal, I am not much afraid to make it
the arbitrament of those, that dare so much as pretend to ingenuity, fairness,
and freedom of spirit, amongst our Adversaries themselves.

If it be here replied, and said, that our Doctrine also represents God, as.
14. Object. 1.
irreversibly engaged, and this from Eternity, upon the same destruction or
punishment, and this of the same numbers of men, with the other; in as much as
it grants, or supposes, that God from Eternity unchangeably purposed the
eternal Destruction of all those without exception, that shall remain finally
impenitent and unbeleeving, which are the same men, both for numbers, and
personality, which the other Doctrine (so much opposed by us) presents as the
Objects of those unalterable reprobating Purposes or Intendments of His from
Eternity: and consequently, that the one Doctrine represents God as little
lovely, or desirable unto his Creature, as the other; To this I answer,

1. Though the Doctrine asserted by us, supposes such a Decree in God eternal
fire, yet does it not adjudg to this account, any such, who either through
defect of years, as Children dying Infants, or defectiveness in discretion
otherwise, are not capable of Faith, or Repentance: (of which we have already,
in part, given an account Cap. 6. Sect. 18, 19, etc.
, and shall, God willing, account more fully in the latter part of this
Discourse.) Whereas the Doctrine impugned by us, includes as well Infants of
days, as Defectives of years (especially the former) in that Decree of
Reprobation, which it notioneth in God. So that this Doctrine does at no hand
engage God so deep in the Blood of Mankind, as the other: and consequently in
this respect rendereth Him unto His Creature far more gracious, lovely, and
desirable, then the other.

2. The Doctrine we plead, though it sets the face of Gods Reprobating Decree
against all finally impenitent and unbeleeving, and so materially, and in a
consequential way, against the same Persons (capable of impenitency) which the
other Doctrine subjecteth unto it; Yet, 1. It subjecteth no Person of Mankind,
as such, or by Name, unto it, but supposes all Men, as Men, in a capacity, and
under a fair possibility, of being Elected, this Decree of Reprobation
notwithstanding; though it concludes from many Prophetical Scriptures
otherwise, that a very great number of Men will in time be Reprobated for their
Wickedness and Unbelief: whereas the Doctrine opposed bends this Decree against
the Persons of Men personally considered, and so leaves such and such Men,
from first to last, irrecoverably doomed to destruction. 2. The Doctrine
asserted by us, presents God in His Decree of Reprobation, as truly and
really intending the Salvation of Men, as in His Decree of Election it self.
Yea and questioneth not, but that His Decree of Reprobation, according to His
gracious Purpose and Intendment therein, has occasioned, and does occasion
daily, the Salvation of many. The principal Intent of the Law, threatening such
and such Malefactors, as Traitors, Murderers, etc. with Death, is not to take
away the lives of such Persons, who shall commit these foul crimes and
misdemeanors, by Death, (this is but the subordinate intention, or end, of it,)
but to prevent the perpetration of these crimes in all that live under this
Law, and consequently, their suffering of Death for them. Much less is it any
part of the Intent of such a Law, to make any Person, or Persons by Name,
Traitors, Murderers, or the like, that so they may be cut off by Death. In
like manner, we judge and teach, that the sovereign and primary Intent of this
Decree of God, He (i. e. whosoever) believes not, shall be damned Mark 16. 16
, besides which, in respect of the substance and import of it (which may be
expressed in other terms) we find no Decree of Reprobation in God mentioned,
no nor yet so much as intimated, in the Scriptures, is not to bring Damnation
upon those who shall not believe, much less to expose any man, or numbers of
men, to an unavoydable necessity of a non-beleeving, that so they may be
damned, but to prevent the sin of Unbelief in all Men, in order to their
Non-damnation, and that they may be saved. 3. (And lastly) The Doctrine which
avoucheth, that Christ dyed for all Men, clearly resolves the Reprobation of
all that are, or ever come to be, Reprobated, into themselves, or their own
voluntary and deliberate course of sinning, or persisting in Unbelief, as the
cause thereof; and so fairly discharges God, and His Decree, as no ways
accessory unto it: Whereas the adverse Opinion, resolves it into the mere
Pleasure or peremptory Will of God in His Decree of Reprobation, affirming this
to be the principal, if not the sole and adequate, cause of it. So that there
is a very vast difference between the one Opinion and the other, in their
respective representations of God unto his Creature, in point of Grace,
Goodness, and Loveliness on the one hand, as of Rigor, Hardness, and
Unloveliness on the other hand. It is true, God is very severe, terrible, and
unrelenting, in the Execution of His Penal Decrees, upon those, who voluntarily
expose themselves to the doom and dint of them; in which respect the Scripture
speaks often of His Severity: but in the framing of them, His Primary
Intentions were (as has been said) gracious, no ways inconsistent with, or
repugnant to, the Peace and Comfort of any of His Creatures; but calculated
with dueness of proportion and respects, for the advancement of them. Yet,

2. Against the main Argument last insisted upon, it may be further objected;.
15. Object. 2.
They who deny that Christ dyed for any, but for the Elect only, represent God
altogether as gracious and lovely unto His Creature, as they, who affirm that
He dyed for all. Because the former hold and teach withal, that God really
intends that all those, for whom Christ dyed, shall be actually saved hereby:
Whereas the latter hold, that though Christ dyed for all, yet He dyed only so,
or upon such terms for them, that notwithstanding His dying for them, they may
all perish. Now does it not argue as much, or more, grace and goodness in God,
to provide certainly, and above all possibility of miscarrying, for the
Salvation of a few, then to provide a bare possibility only of Salvation for
all; or for the Salvation of all after such a manner, and upon such terms
only, that all, notwithstanding this Provision made for them, may very
possibly perish? To this also I answer;

1. That they who teach that Christ dyed for all Men, do not teach, that Christ
for the Salvation of all, is so redundantly plentiful, that there is no place,
or possibility left for the miscarrying of any man, but by a neglect of it
only. -- How shall we escape (says the Apostle) if we NEGLECT so great a
Salvation Hebr. 2. 3
? etc. clearly implying, that if they did not neglect it, but seriously and
diligently mind and look after it, they should escape [viz. the Wrath of God,
and the vengeance of Hell fire,] and consequently, be saved. Otherwise, in case
their regarding or esteeming of this Salvation, should be accompanied with the
same danger, or destruction, which their neglect would bring upon them, the
Apostle might as well, or (indeed) rather, have said, How shall we escape,
whether we neglect this great Salvation, or no?

2. There is no comparison, for matter of grace, goodness, or bounty, between
such a Provision for the Salvation of all Men without exception, whereby all,
and every Person, may, if they be not wilfully bent upon their own destruction,
be saved; and between such, whereby there is no possibility, save only for a
few, a number inconsiderable, compared with the whole, to be saved. Nor is that
certainty, or necessity, of the Salvation of a few, which is pretended to be
consulted, or intended, in this latter Provision, being accompanied with the
exposure of so many millions of millions of precious Souls to inevitable
Damnation, any ways considerable, in point of Grace, with that great and
Blessed Opportunity which by the former Provision is put into the hand of the
World, and of every Person of Mankind without exception, to escape the
vengeance which ^s to come, if they please, and withal to be crowned with an
incorruptible Crown of Glory; especially if it be considered withal, that He
that makes such a Provision for a few, had wherewithal in abundance, and this
disposable, contrivable, to no other use or purpose, to have provided upon the
same terms for all; and that all the reason He had for His non-disposing of it
this way, I mean for the benefit and blessing of all,* was only His mere Will
and Pleasure. Suppose a man had a thousand quarters of Wheat, or the like,
which he knows not what to do with, or to what use to convert it, but only to
the relief of a company of poor indigent creatures ready to be affamished and
perish through hunger: in case this man should actually relieve only two or
three Persons in this distress with part of this abundance, there being a
thousand before him in the same extremity, and in no possibility of being
relieved from any other hand; but should rather choose to cast the residue of
his grain into the Sea, or bury it under ground, or some ways or other destroy
the serviceableness of it unto man, then dispose of it toward the relief of
any of the rest, would not such an act as this, by reason of the unnaturalness,
and affectate unmercifulness of it, quite drown the grace and loveliness of his
Charity in relieving those few? In like manner they who pretend the exaltation
of the Grace and Love of God toward Men in giving Christ to dye for them,
whose Death they grant to be sufficient in point of merit to save all Men
without exception, and yet teach, that God intended only the Salvation of a
few, the whole lump or body of Mankind standing in the same need of Salvation
with these few, and that He chose to suffer the merit of this Death of Christ
rather to vanish into the air, or to be like water spilt upon the ground
(excepting only the Salvation of those few by it) then to accommodate and
relieve thereby the residue of Mankind in their saddest and utmost extremity,
what do they less then bury all that which is lovely in that Act of Grace, or
Mercy toward a few, under the imputation of so great an unmercifulness, or
hardness of bowels toward many?

At this turn it is commonly pleaded, that God is no Debtor to any of His. 16.
Object.
Creatures; and consequently that He is, and was, at perfect liberty, whether
He would show Mercy unto any, or make Provision for the Salvation of the
smallest number of all. Upon which account, it could not have been termed an
Act of unmercifulness in Him* in case no Provision had been made by him for the
Salvation of any, much less, that He should not make Provision for all. As it
argues no unmercifulness at all in Him, that He has made no Provision at all
for the Salvation of the Devils, because He was no ways bound to it. Whereas
upon Men, in case they have means and opportunity to relieve the necessities of
those that are in misery, and neglect to do it, the imputation and charge of
unmercifulness justly lies, because they are under a Law in this behalf. So
that the Grace of God in his merciful Provision for the Salvation of a few, is
no ways obscured, or disparaged by his non-providing for all. To all this I
answer,

1. That neither the Argument yet in hand, nor the Answer given to the viz.
that they who ascribe unto God reality of Intentions to make Provision for the
Salvation of all Men (without exception) in, and by the Death of Christ, upon
those gracious terms for the enjoyment of it, which have been specified, render
Him far more gracious, lovely, and attractive to the Hearts of Men, then they,
who present Him with Intentions of providing only for a few thereby, upon what
terms soever, with the hardening of Himself against, and neglect of all the
rest, being incomparably far the greater number, in their greatest extremity.
And this* (I suppose) we have made good against all rational contradiction. But,

2. Whereas we reflected upon such an Act, which our Adversaries imagine to be
in God, whereby they say, notwithstanding a sufficiency of merit before Him in
the Death of Christ for the Salvation of all, as well as of a few, yet He
rather suffered this precious sufficiency (in respect of the redundancy of it
over and above the Provision made by it for a few) to vanish, or be spilt, then
to intend any help or healing by it unto the generality of Men; whereas (I say)
we censured such an Act as this, as ill* consisting with, or obscuring the
beauty and loveliness of that gracious Act of God in providing for the
Salvation of a few, we did not herein reflect prejudice in the least upon any
liberty, or rightfulness of Power, truly competent unto, or vested in, God, but
only showed and asserted the deformity, or moral contradictiousness, between
two Acts, which notwithstanding our Adversaries ascribe, as well the one, as
the other, unto God.

3. Concerning that liberty of showing, and denying, Mercy, where, and to whom
He pleases, which the Objection in hand asserteth unto God, we answer; that
how absolute soever this liberty in Him may be conceived to be, simply, or in
respect of any engagement from Men, or any Creature, Yet 1. it is confined and
subjected unto such Declarations, and Promises, which Himself has freely made:
so that (for example) He is no more at liberty, nor has He any more right of
Power to withhold, or deny, Mercy from, and unto, any of those, to whom He has
promised Mercy, or to whom He has Declared that He will show Mercy, however
otherwise they may seem unworthy or unmeet Objects of Mercy; He has no more
liberty (I say) to do either of these, then He has to lie, deal unfaithfully,
unjustly, and the like. Upon this account the Prophet David acknowledges it
unto God, as a signal engagement upon him, to praise and worship Him, that He
had [still] magnified His Word above all His Name Psalm. 138. 2
; meaning, that what ever Attribute of His (which is, either in whole, or in
^art, His Name) at any time seemed to oppose or stand up against the
performance of any Promise, or Declaration of Mercy made by Him, yet he always
magnified his Promise, by giving real, full, and seasonable performance
thereunto: He passes not for the vailing or obscuring any other part of his
Name, so that his Truth and Faithfulness in his Word may be advanced. 2. As he
has no liberty (as some men count liberty) of showing, or denying Mercy,
contrary to his Word, so neither has he any liberty of acting in one kind or
other, [and consequently neither of showing, or denying, Mercy] in opposition
to his Wisdom, which is (as it were) the steerage of all his Dispensations in
one kind or other, according to that of the Apostle formerly considered Cap.
4. Sect. 36
, Who works all things ACCORDING TO THE COUNSEL of His Will Ephesians. 1. 11
: i. e. according to the exigency or requirement of that most absolute,
infinite Wisdom of his, by which his Will [and consequently his Power, which is
always exerted, and moved into action, by, and according to his Will] is
directed and led forth in all the movings and actings of it. In so much that
(as we lately argued, and proved Cap. 16 Sect. 15
) God is at far less liberty to decline, in any his ways and actions, the most
district Rules and Principles of the most accurate Wisdom that is, then any
Creature whatsoever, Man, or Angel. Therefore to conceit or plead for such a
liberty in God of showing, and denying, Mercy, to whom he pleases, which is
inconsistent with that determination of himself in either kind, which He has
declared in his Word, is to conceive, and speak unworthily of him; yea and to
shake the foundations of that Hope, upon which the Saints and sound Believers
are built by the Gospel. For if God be at liberty to deny Mercy, contrary to
his Word, or Will revealed therein, what assurance can the best Believers have
that they either are, or shall be justified, or saved, by Him? So that until
our Adversaries have first proved, that God has made no such Declaration in
the Gospel, as that He has made, and is still willing to make, Provision for
the Salvation of all Men without exception, by the Death of Christ, (which
hitherto they have not done) it is in vain for them to pretend a liberty in Him
of denying Mercy to whom He pleases, by way of proof or confirmation of their
Opinion.

4. Though it would have been no Act of unmercifulness in God, but of. 17.
districtness of Justice only, in case no Provision had been made by Him,
either by the Death of Christ, or otherwise, for the Salvation of any, yet such
an Act as this would not have rendered Him so gracious and lovely in the eyes
of his Creature, or so attractive of their Hearts and Souls, and consequently
not so Evangelical, as that Act of Grace has now done, and does, whereby He
has made that blessed Provision for them. And if a Providing for the Salvation
of some, does (in the Judgment of our Adversaries) render Him more Gracious and
Evangelical, then such an Act, or course, would have done, whereby He had
refused to make this Provision for any at all; certainly the greater the number
shall be supposed, for whom this gracious Provision is made by Him, so much the
greater, and more Evangelical must that Act of Grace necessarily be, by which
such Provision is made. And in case God had provided (whether by the Death of
Christ, or in any other way) but for the Salvation of one Man only, and had
left the whole Posterity of Adam (this one man excepted) to have perished
everlastingly, it could be looked upon but only as such an Act of Grace, which
is next to none at all, and wherein little of that Evangelical Spirit, which
abounds and reigns in God, could have been discovered, yea and would
(doubtless) commend it self unto the intelligent Creature, less for Wisdom,
then for Grace. Proportionably, the fewer or smaller number they are supposed
to be, for whom Provision of Salvation is now made by God, the lesser, and more
contracted, and so the less Evangelical, must that Grace needs be concluded to
be, by which this Provision is supposed to be made. For what proportion, one,
or a single person, bears unto those few, whose Salvation is (in the sense of
our Adversaries) now provided for by God; the same do these few bear unto all,
or unto the whole body of Mankind. Therefore if they judge that God shows
more Grace in providing for the Salvation of that number of men, which they
call the Elect, then He should have done in providing for one person of this
number only; they have Reason to judge also, in case God makes this Provision,
not only for their small number of Elect, but for them, and all others with
them, that He shows far more Grace in such a Provision, as this, then in
that, which their Doctrine confineth Him unto.

Nor does it from these debates any ways follow, that in case God had made. 18.
Provision for the Salvation of the Devils, He should have manifested more
Grace, or Evangelicalness of Spirit, then now (according to our Principles) he
has done, in providing Salvation for Men only (though for all Men,) although
(it is true) the number of those, for whom Provision of Salvation should have
been made in this case, had been greater, then now we suppose it to be. The
Reason is, because Grace, especially divine Grace, is not to be measured or
judged of simply or merely by any beneficialness accruing unto the Creature of
one kind, or other, but by a beneficialness accruing in an honorable and
prudential way, in respect of him, from whom, or by whom, this beneficialness
is supposed to accrue. Acts of Prodigality are, or may be, beneficial to the
Receivers of what is thereby given, yet are they no Acts of Grace: nor would it
be any Act of Grace in a Judge, to spare the life of a Murderer, or Traitor,
though this Act of his, in the nature of it, is beneficial to him, whose life
is spared, and may possibly turn to a further benefit unto him. The Reason why
these, and such like Acts as these, though they may be very beneficial to their
Objects respectively, are notwithstanding not to be reputed Acts of Grace,
because Grace imports such a Principle which is every ways regular, and savory;
and as comely and honorable in the fruits and actings of it, unto him in whom
it resides, as beneficial, helpful, or refreshing unto others: whereas
Prodigality, and so Injustice, or Inconsiderateness in a Judge, though
beneficial unto many, are yet unworthy Principles, and justly dishonorable unto
their Subjects. So then, in case it were not, or be not, well consisting with
the Principles of true, and divine Wisdom, and so would not have been truly
honorable unto God to make Provision for the Salvation of the Devils, the
making of this Provision for them would not have been any matter of Grace in
him: and consequently, upon such a supposition, he should have been never the
more gracious, though in making Provision for Salvation, he should have taken
the Devils into part and fellowship with Men. And that it is no ways consistent
with his Wisdom, or Honor, to spread a Table of Salvation before the Devils, as
he has done for Men, may by this clear Argument ( a posteriori) be evinced,
viz. that he has not done it; it being reasonable in the highest to conceive,
that God never was, never will be, wanting to himself in point of honor, or
glory. Besides, that of the Apostle, (...) Heb, 2. 16
, i. e. for in no wise, or, at no hand, does He help, or relieve, the Angels,
[meaning, the lapsed Angels] carries this import pregnantly and distinctly in
it, that to reach forth an helping hand unto them, was, not simply a thing
which God was not pleased, or willing to do, but such a thing, which lay at a
great distance from his Thoughts, or Intentions to do. Which distance imports a
signal inconsistency with, or repugnancy unto, his Wisdom, Honor, and glory.
How, or in what consideration, or respect, the providing for the Salvation of
the fallen Angels, or Devils, is, or would have been, repugnant to the Wisdom,
and so no ways consistent with the honor, of God, is (happily) not unworthy a
sober enquiry. But because it is somewhat eccentrical to the main business in
hand, and the body of our Discourse begins to swell to an unacceptable bulk
already, we shall decline the pertractation of it, at present; only offering
to consideration, whether their prodigious unnaturalness, or height of
misdemeanor in sinning, above what is to be found in the sin of Men, either as
sinning in Adam, or by actual and personal perpetrations (ordinarily) may not
upon a very reasonable account be deemed the Cause or Reason, why it was not
honorable for God, or of any good consistence with his Holiness, or Wisdom, to
stretch forth an hand of Grace, or of Salvation, unto them. We see in the case
of men themselves, that, if they sin with an high hand, especially after any
considerable means of Grace vouchsafed, and turn head upon the light which has
shone clearly to them, or upon the ways of Holiness, wherein they have
sometimes walked, that God takes no pleasure in them, i. e. that they are an
abhorring to his Soul: and that against all such men, who shall commit that
most hideous and enormous sin against the Holy Ghost, He has as good as sworn
in His Wrath that they shall never enter into His eternal Rest. Now if God
judges it a matter unbecoming His Grace, Holiness, or Wisdom, and no ways
consistent with his Honor, to impart of that Salvation, which He has provided
in Christ for Men, unto those for whom it was provided, in case their
misdemeanor in sinning shall rise to such an height, as has been mentioned,
and as a total and persevering Apostasy imports; can it seem any ways
improbable, the Devils having desperately apostatized from a far greater light,
from a richer and more sensible experience of the Grace, Love, and Bounty of
God, then Apostates amongst Men lightly can do, that his Soul should so far
abominate them, together with such their stupendous Apostasy, as to judge it
altogether unmeet for him, unworthy that inaccessible Light of Wisdom, Grace,
Holiness, and Glory wherein He dwells, to conceive so much as a thought
within him in order to their Salvation? The Schoolmen resolve the
irremediableness (as they term it) of the Sin and Misery of the Devils, into
several causes, or grounds; most of which, and these the most material, respect
the greatness of their sin; the rest, the quality, or condition of their
Natures. Yet if that be true, which they assign among other Reasons, why no
course should be taken, or thought upon by God, for, or about their Salvation,
viz. that their Wills or Appetites, are naturally, and by the Principles of
their Creation, unflexible, or unremovable from that Object, whether it be
good, or evil, which they have once chosen Differt aute^ apprehensio Angeli ab
apprehensione hominis, quod Angelus apprehe^dit immobiliter per intellectum,
sicut and nos immobiliter apprehendimus prima principia, quorum est
intellectus: homo vero per rationem apprehendit mobiliter, discurrendo de uno
ad aliud, habens viam procedendi ad utrunque oppositorum. Vnde and voluntas
hominis adhaeret alicui mobiliter, quasi potens etiam ab eo discedere, and
contrario adhaerere: voluntas autem Angeli adhaeret fix and immobiliter. Et
ideo, si consideretur ante adhaesionem, potest libere adhaerere, and huic, and
opposito, in his scilicet, quae non naturaliter vult: sed postquam jam
adhaesit, immobiliter adhaeret. Et ideo consuevit dici, quod liberum arbitrium
hominis, flexile est ad oppositum, and ante Electionem, and post: liberum autem
arbitrium Angeli est flexibile ad utrunque oppositum ante Electionem, sed non
post. Sic igitur and boni Angeli semel adhaerentes. Justiciae, sunt in illa
confirmati: mali vero peccantes sunt in peccato obstinati. Th. Aquin. Sum.
Part. 1. qu. 64. Art. 2.
, it is a consideration of strength enough alone to carry the business under
enquiry clear before it. For if this be an essential property of their Natures,
not to be in any capacity of changing, when once they have chosen, it follows
at once, that having now chosen Apostasy and Defection from God, they are by
their own Act irrecoverably, and against all possibility of Redemption,
concluded under Sin and Misery for ever. And if this were the frame, and
condition of their Natures, and themselves conscious and privy to it, (and
conscious doubtless they were to the Law and terms of their own Creation) it
renders their sin unmeasurably sinful and inexcusable, above the sinfulness of
the Sin, or sins, of Men. For though Adam (and so all Men in him) knew not, in
case he did or should sin, whether he should obtain from God the Grace of a
Redeemer, or no, yet neither did he know the contrary, but knew that he was
capable of Redemption; so that though his sin was exceeding great in many
considerations otherwise, yet in this behalf it was the more rational, and so
the more pardonable and excuseable, viz. that he knew himself in a capacity of
being restored. Whereas the Angels, in case they understood the inflexibility
of their Wills after an Election, and consequently that they were simply and
absolutely unredeemable after sinning, and yet presumed to sin, must needs be
the more irrational, and so the more insufferable and inexcusable in their sin.
But whether this Doctrine of the School, concerning the unchangeableness of the
Wills of Angels, after their first determination, be square and stable, or no,
I am (at present) in a fitter posture to query, then determine. Only herein my
thoughts are all made, that the Wills, of both sorts of Angels, as well of
those who at first chose Righteousness, as of those who made a choice contrary
hereunto, remain to this day unchanged; the one, in their adherency to the
good, the other, to the evil, which they chose respectively in the beginning.
But this unchangedness, does not necessarily flow from any unchangeableness in
either of them; but may, in the former, arise from the native liberty of their
Wills, which as they had Power at first to choose that which was good; so have
they Power, and this with enlargement by means of the sensible experience they
gain continually of the sweetness of the good chosen by them, to persevere in
this their choice: and in the latter, partly from the just Judgment of God
denounced against them, and made fully known to them, viz. that He will upon no
terms whatsoever be reconciled unto them, to the days of Eternity; partly also
from his absolute and total withdrawing of his Spirit of Grace from them. Nor
do I apprehend any thing considerable to oppose my Belief, but that they will,
both the one, and the other of them, remain upon the same terms unchanged to
the days of Eternity. Yet were I to build, I had rather choose the former of
these for my foundation: because I conceive Scripture-evidence more pregnant
and clear for it. To say, that the Will of a Creature should, and will, remain
unchanged in that which is good, is no elevation of it above that sphere of
excellency, which is made for it to move in: but to affirm that at any time it
is, or ever will be, thus UNCHANGEABLE, is to make it a Companion of his, who
in the height of his Pride said, Ero similis Altissimo, I will be like unto the
Most High.

But concerning the unredeemableness of the Devils, I much rather approve. 19.
another Reason, which the forementioned Authors (the Schoolmen) give of it.
Diabolus (say they) peccavit in termino: Homo, in via: i. e. The Devil sinned,
being at his journeys end: Man sinned [onely] by the way. The meaning is, that
the Devil sinned in an estate of perfect Blessedness, under a full fruition of
God; in which respect, his Sin was provoking in the highest. Whereas Man, when
he sinned, was but in his progress toward such a condition, and was not as yet
possessed of it: and in this respect, sinned, though at a very high rate of
provocation, his sin simply considered, yet at a far lower rate then the Devil,
because against a far lower Light, and less Grace Received. But of this enough,
if not more then enough, our main business being no more interessed in it, then
we formerly intimated it to be. Nor did the difficulty laid in our way, exact
of us any thing more, then only to prove, that it had been no Act of Grace in
God to provide for the Salvation of the Devil; which (I suppose) has been done
with measure heaped up. Therefore,

5. (And lastly) To the Plea made for a liberty in God, to show, and to deny
Mercy, as, and to whom, he pleases, I answer yet further; that in case it be
found a thing utterly and clearly inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, or with
the goodness and graciousness of his Nature, having provided means of
Salvation, as sufficient and proper for the Salvation of all, as of a few,
(which our Adversaries, neither do, nor with any face of Reason, can, deny) to
limit himself in the consignment, or designment, of them, to the Salvation of a
few, with a disserviceabling of them as to all the rest, then has he no
liberty to confine or limit himself after any such manner, nor to evacuate the
usefulness or beneficialness of these means in respect of the generality of
Men. This consequence has been sufficiently argued and proved already: and
however, is of it self lightsom enough to make every denyer, yea or questioner
of it, ashamed. Therefore I assume: For God to limit himself in the consignment
of those means of Salvation, unto a few, which He has provided with a
sufficiency and aptness for the Salvation of all, or to dis-intend the
Salvation of the greatest part of Men by them, is a thing clearly and utterly
inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, and graciousness of His Nature. Therefore
He has no liberty in the case specified, to straiten himself within the narrow
bounds of such a consignment, as that mentioned. In this Argument we suppose,
and take for granted, that the Death of Christ is a means as sufficient for the
Salvation of all Men, and as proper and meet for the Salvation of all, as of a
few. And in this (I presume) we have no Adversary; or however, the generality
of those, who are Adversaries in the main of the Controversy depending, accord
with us therein. The Reason of the assumption (in the Argument now propounded)
is (as to the former part of it) because it is notoriously repugnant to the
Principles of sound Wisdom, to make waste of any thing, which is serviceable or
useful for any honorable or worthy end and purpose: And the more precious and
difficult of procurement a Means is, the more honorable and excellent, the end
or purpose is, for which it is appropriately and peculiarly serviceable, the
more repugnant it is to all Principles of Wisdom, to sacrifice it upon the
service of vanity, and to do nothing with it at all. Now (questionless) the
Death of Jesus Christ is a means most choice and precious; not another of like
preciousness, efficacy, or worth to be procured, or levied by God himself: the
end for which this Death of Christ is most appropriately serviceable, is the
Salvation of the whole World, which is an end most honorable and worthy.
Therefore it must needs be notoriously inconsistent with the Wisdom of God to
dispose of this means only in order to the procurement and effecting of an end
far less honorable, as namely the Salvation of a few: the obtaining whereof the
excellent worth and weight of the said means does incomparably over-ponderate
and transcend. So that a non-disposal of it to wards the obtaining of the just
and adequate end, for which it is appropriately useful and serviceable, is to
evacuate and make useless, though not in whole, yet in part, the
super-transcendent excellency, worth, and virtue thereof. But of this lately.

The Reason of the latter part of the said Assumption, is, because it is. 20.
every whit as repugnant to the Nature of Grace, Goodness and Bountifulness of
Disposition, not to relieve the miserable, who are every ways capable of
relief, and this with Honor to Him that shall relieve them, when a man has
abundantly in his hand wherewith to relieve them, especially when withal he
has no other end or use, whereunto to dispose what he has in this kind, but
only toward the relief of such Persons. And as the Apostle John argues, and
demands, concerning men; Whosoever has this Worlds 1 John 3. 17
good, and sees His Brother has need, and shuts up His Compassion from
Him, how dwells the Love of God in Him? in like manner we may well reason,
and demand concerning God; If God, having the good of the World to come, means
of Salvation for his poor lost Creature, Man, and yet shuts up his
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of Man in him? And yet the Scripture
(as we formerly heard) speaks very excellent and glorious things of His Love
unto Men, no where confining it within the narrow circle, or sphere of the
Elect, or some few Particulars. Nor (indeed) can He, with any congruity of
expression, be called (...), a Lover of Men, [or, of Mankinde] in case He
loves some few particular men only: as He is no where in Scripture called
(...), a Lover of Angels, although He loves a very considerble number of this
kind of Creature, (as viz. all His Elect, or Holy Angels) because He loves
not all Particulars. But of this more largely in the Premises Cap. 16. 3, 4,
etc.
. To the point in hand; Certain it is, 1. That God has no other use, or
occasion of contrivement, of the Death of Christ, save only for, and in order
toward, the glorifying of himself, in, and by, the Salvation of Men; or at
least none other, but what would be as effectually promoted, and attained by
it, though it should be intended by Him for the Salvation of the generality of
Men. 2. That this Death of Christ is every whit as proper, and as sufficient, a
means to bless the whole generation of Mankind with Salvation, as those few,
whom our Adversaries suppose to be only blessed by it in this kind. 3. That
it would be no ways dishonorable unto God, nor of any harder consistence, with
his Justice, Wisdom, Hatred of Sin, or with any other of his Attributes
whatsoever, to intend the Salvation of any others, or of all Men, by the Death
of Christ, then it is to intend the Salvation of those few, whom our
Adversaries grant to be the Objects of his Intentions in this kind. 4. That
the generality of Men, or those, whose Salvation our Adversaries suppose, not
to be intended by God, in, or by the Death of Christ, are every whit as
miserable, and stand altogether in as much need of Salvation, as those, whose
Salvation they suppose to have been intended thereby. By the light of these
grounds laid together, it plainly appears, that it is a thing signally
inconsistent with the Grace, Goodness, Mercy, Bounty of the Divine Nature, or
Being, to consign the Death of Christ to the Salvation only of a few, and to
suffer the far greatest part of Men, being in every respect as salvable, and
this by the same means, and with the same proportion to any end whatsoever, as
they, to remain miserable, and perish everlastingly, for want of a like
consignment unto them for the same end.

To reply and say, that God gains the manifestation of his Sovereignty, or
Prerogative of showing Mercy, and denying Mercy, to whom He pleases, by
intending the Salvation only of a few, which He could not have gained by
intending the Salvation of all; is to flee to a polluted Sanctuary, and which
has been in this very Chapter (and formerly Cap. 4. Sect. 36, 37, etc.
) razed to the ground, and not so much as one stone thereof left upon another,
that has not been thrown down.

Sixthly, That Christ dyed for all Men without exception of any, I demonstrate.
21. Argum. 6.
further, by the light of this Argument. That Doctrine, whose tenor, frame, and
import, are of a direct and clear tendency to promote, and advance Godliness
amongst Men, is (questionless) Evangelical, and the Truth. But such is the
tenor, frame, and import of that Doctrine, which teaches, that Christ dyed for
all Men without exception. Therefore (questionless) this Doctrine is
Evangelical, and none other but the Truth. The Major Proposition in this
Argument, needs no more proof, then the Sun needs a Candle whereby to be
seen, when he shines in his might. Yet if a proof be required, the Premises
in this Discourse will afford it liberally Cap. 12. sect. 1. 20. and Cap. 11.
Sect. 26
, where we opened that signal character, or description of the Gospel,
delivered by the Apostle, Tit. 1. 1. where he calls it, (...), the Truth
according to Godliness; meaning, a body, or systeme of Truth, calculated and
framed with the most exquisite proportion, efficacy, and aptness that can be
imagined, for the promotion, propagation, ^^d advancement of Godliness in the
World (as we formerly interpreted.) So that what particular Doctrine soever is
found to be of the same tendency, must of necessity be a member of the same
body, a branch of the same Truth; or however, clearly and fairly comporting
with it, and so a Truth. For there is nothing accordable with Truth, but Truth.

The truth of the Minor Proposition also has been set before the Reader in a
clear and perfect light, in the precedure of this Discourse Cap. 16. 7, 8, etc.
, where we evinced above contradiction, that the Doctrine of our Adversaries,
asserting only a limited Redemption by Christ, leaves no Hope at all, or at
most but a very cold, feeble, and faint Hope, to any ungodly, or unregenerate
man, of being saved by Christ: and consequently has nothing in it much
quickening or provoking unto Godliness (at least in respect of such Persons,
who are, at present, ungodly, who are the far greatest part of the World) but
is full of a spirit of antipathy, and opposition hereunto; in as much as
whatsoever is of a destructive, or discouraging import to any man's Hope of
obtaining, upon endevors, is obstructive and quenching to these endevors
themselves. Whereas the spirit and genius of the Doctrine maintained by us, is
to fill all Men whatsoever with the richest and greatest assurance of Hope they
can desire, that upon their diligent and faithful endevors to Repent and to
Believe, Repentance and Faith shall be given unto them by God: and that upon
the like endevors to persevere in a course of Repenting, and Believing, they
shall have Perseverance also given, and so in the end be unquestionably saved.

What is commonly alleged in defense of the Doctrine of limited Redemption,
against the Argument now propounded, has been fully answered in the place last
referred unto, together with whatsoever (I conceive) can lightly be alleged
further upon the same account. If I were conscious unto, or could suspect any
thing, that with any competent show of probability might be yet objected to the
disabling of the force of the said Argument, I call God for a record upon my
Soul, that I would not conceal or dissemble it, out of any indulgence to mine
own Opinion. This (in brief) for my sixth Argument.

Seventhly, If Christ dyed for the Elect only, and not for all, and every
Man,. 22. Argum. 7.
then will there no man be found culpable of Judgment, or liable unto
Condemnation, or perishing, for, or through, Unbelief, or for not believing on
Christ for Salvation. But there are many that will be found liable to
Condemnation^ yea and will be actually condemned, for their Unbelief. Ergo. The
Reason of the Consequence in the former Proposition, is pregnant and clear.
First, The Elect will not be found liable to Condemnation for Unbelief, because
they (according to the Principles of our Adversaries) shall be all infallibly
drawn, or brought to believe. 2. No Reprobate can be liable to Condemnation for
not believing on Christ for Salvation, because he transgresses no Law or
Precept of God by such his unbelief. For (doubtless) God commands no man to
believe on Christ for Salvation, but only those, for whom there is Salvation
in Him: as He commands no man to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles. Nay His constant manner and method, of teaching, charging,
admonishing, and treating with Men in other like cases, imports, that in case
there were no Salvation for Men in Christ, He would be so far from admonishing
of charging them to believe on Him, that He would take them off, and dissuade
them from believing, or depending on Him in that kind. For if we search the
Scriptures, we shall still find that God upon all occasions counsels and
charge men, to take heed of uncertain, empty, and vain dependencies, and to
seek for Help, Peace, and Safety, where they are to be found. Places of this
import are obvious and frequent. And Samuel said unto the People, Fear not: ye
have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
serve the Lord with all your heart: And turn ye not aside: FOR THEN SHOULD YE
GO AFTER VAIN THINGS, WHICH CANNOT PROFIT, NOR DELIVER, for they are vain. For
the Lord will not forsake His People 1 Samuel 2. 20, 21, etc.
, etc. So again: Trust not in oppression: become not vain in robbery: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them Psalm. 62. 10
. Immediately before (speaking of God) he had said; Trust Him at all times: ye
People, pour out your Heart before Him: God is a Refuge for us. S^lah. Surely
men of low degree are vanity: and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in
the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. Elsewhere: Will thou set
thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings
Prove. 23. 5
. So also: Thus says the Lord, cursed be the man, that trusts in man, and
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. For he shall be
like the heath in the desert Jer. 17. 5, 6
, etc. (To omit other passages of like consideration without end.) It being
then the constant manner of God in His Addressments unto men, to dissuade them
from begging their bread in desolate places, from laying out their silver for
that which is not bread, from leaning upon broken reeds, from expecting Rain
from Clouds without water, from putting their trust in things that cannot help,
or profit, etc. it is at no hand to be believed, that He will counsel or
command any man to buy gold, or white raiment of Jesus Christ, unless He knew
that He had both the one and the other for them; to depend upon Him for
Salvation, unless this great and blessed commodity were in his Hand ready for
them. Yea it is the manner of God (and so of the Lord Christ also) to take men
off, and turn their expectations and dependencies aside even from himself, in
respect of a receiving such things from Him, which He finds them inclined to
expect from him, and himself in no posture of mind or will to give them. Upon
this account He speaks unto Jeremy thus: Therefore pray not thou for this
people, neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me: for I will not hear thee Jer. 7. 16
. The emphasis of all this variety of express^on, pray not, lift not up cry,
nor prayer, make no intercession, etc. stands (I conceive) in this; viz. to
declare, that when He is fully purposed and resolved not to do a thing, He
would not have any thing at all, little or much in one kind or other, done by
the Creature for the obtaining of it at His hand. He expresses himself once
and again to the same Prophet in words of like effect, and (almost) of the same
tenor Jer. 11. 14 14, 11
. So when He perceived that Amaziah and the men of Judah expected and depended
upon his presence with those hundred thousand men of valor, which they had
hired with a great sum of money out of Israel to assist them against the
Edomites, and He was fully purposed not to be present with them, or to prosper
them in Battle, He gave knowledge unto Amaziah and those with him accordingly,
and by an express from himself by the hand of a Prophet, advised him to
discharge this Army, which accordingly he did, and prospered 2 Chronicles. 25 6, 7,
etc.
. In like manner, our Savior in the Gospel, knowing that the Scribe, who came
unto him with this profession, Master, I will follow thee whither soever thou
go Mat. 8. 19
, expected some great accommodations by him in the World, quenched his
expectations in this kind, with this water cast upon them; The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds of the air have nests: but the Son of man has not where
to lay His Head Mat. 8. 20
. That passage also of his to his Disciples savors much of the same spirit: In
my Fathers House are many Mansions: IF IT WERE NOT SO, I WOULD HAVE TOLD YOU
John 14. 2
, etc. Clearly implying, that his disposition and spirit stood to deal clearly
and plainly with them about such things, which they might, and might not,
expect from him: and that he would not suffer them to look for more from him,
then what he was fully able and provided of, and withal ready and willing, to
confer upon them. And it being (as we all know) the determinate Counsel, and
most fixed Will and Purpose of God, not to give Salvation unto final
Impenitents and Unbeleevers, he has openly and aloud proclaimed the thing
accordingly in the hearing of all the World, that Men might not be deceived,
frustrated, or undone, by any their expectations from him in this kind. So
that we may without the least regret of mind or thought conclude, that God
enjoyneth no man, requires no man to believe on Jesus Christ for Salvation, or
to expect Salvation by him, but only those, for whom he has purchased, or
provided Salvation, and is accordingly ready and willing to give it unto them.
Therefore if the Doctrine of our Adversaries be Orthodox, which teaches, that
Christ dyed not for all Men, but for the Elect only; certain it is, that none
but the Elect are enjoined by God to believe on him for Salvation: and
consequently, no other Person, who believes not on him, transgresses any
Commandment of God in this his non-beleeving, and so cannot be liable unto any
Condemnation at all thereby, much less to the Condemnation of Hell. This for
Proof of the Major Proposition in the Argument last proposed.

The Tenor of the Minor was this; But there are many that will be found. 23.
liable to Condemnation, yea that will be actually condemned, for Unbelief.
This Proposition has (I conceive) such pregnant affinity with the express and
unavoydable letter of the Scripture, that the mention of a place or two,
speaking to the point, will be proof in abundance. He that believes on Him, is
not condemned: but He that believes not, [viz. in case this Son of God has
been declared, or preached unto him: for it is a non-beleeving in this case
only of which he here speaks,] is condemned already, because He has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God John 3. 18
. Is condemned already; i. e. his Sin in not believing, is so notorious, and so
provoking in the sight of God, that it carries Condemnation (as it were) in the
very face of it, and renders the Person guilty, as good as condemned, before
the sentence of Condemnation passes from the mouth of the Judge upon him;
according to the ancient saying,

Illo nocens se damnat, quo peccat, die. i. e. The self same day wherein He
sins,
The Person guilty, Himself condemns.
Yea the Scripture it self, the better to set forth the greatness and great
danger of the sin of Unbelief, speaks of it much after the same manner. It
was necessary (say Paul and Barnabas with great boldness unto the Jews) that
the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you: but seeing ye put it
from you, (...), i. e. and judge, [or, adjudg, decernitis] your selves unworthy
of eternal life, [i. e. says Beza, by this your own fact, pass sentence, as it
were, and give Judgment against your selves Hoc vestro facto que si sentent^a
in vos lata st^tuitis and deccraitis.
lo, we turn to the Gentiles Acts 13. 46
. Their rejecting, or non-beleeving in Christ, revealed by the Ministry of the
Gospel unto them, is interpreted by the Holy Ghost, as a sentence of
Condemnation pronounced against themselves by themselves. So again: He that
believes not, shall be damned Mark 16. 16
; meaning, not only (if so much) for his other sins, as for his non-beleeving;
as is fully evident from other places, where the high-provokingness of the sin
of Unbelief in the sight of God, is very plainly and significantly asserted.
For if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward, How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation, Which at first began to be spoken by the Lord Heb.
2. 2, 3
, etc. When he says, if we neglect so great a Salvation, he expresses, or
points at Unbelief, in the ordinary, and most proper cause of it, viz.
negligence, or contempt of the Gospel, and of the Grace therein offered by God
unto the World; which neglect, or contempt, are sins highly-offensive and
displeasing unto Him. This appears yet more plainly in the Parable of the
marriage* feast, or great Supper, where, upon the report of the servant (sent
forth to invite the guests) of their slight pretenses for their not coming, the
Master of the Feast is said to have been angry; and in the heat of His Anger,
to have said, that none of those men that were bidden should taste of His
Supper Luke 14. 21, 24
. Besides, the sin of Unbelief, is interpreted by the Holy Ghost Himself, as a
giving of the lie to God, or (which is the same) the making of Him a liar: and
in this respect it must be a sin highly exasperating and provoking Him; and
consequently must needs be a sin exposing the sinner unto Condemnation. He that
believes not God, has made Him a liar, because He believes not the record
that God gave of His Son 1 John 5. 10
. This Proposition then being unquestionable, viz. that Unbelief, and that by
way of demerit, as well (if not rather) as any other sin, and not by the mere
pleasure, or appointment of God only, rendereth men justly obnoxious unto
Condemnation, the Argument of the last Proposal stands impregnable against all
assaults: and therefore Christ dyed for all Men without exception, and not for
the Elect only.

The Truth of this Conclusion I evince by this Demonstration also. If. 24.
Argum. 8.
Christ d^ed not for all Men, but for the Elect only, then did God put the
World (I mean, the generality of Mankind) into a far better and more desirable
estate and condition, in the first Adam, and under the Law of Works, then He
has done in the second Adam, or under the Law of Grace: But this is not so:
the World was not at first put by God into a better condition in the first
Adam, or under the Law of Works, then it is in the second Adam, and under the
Law of Grace. Ergo.

In this Argument, I do not apprehend, what, according to the Principles of our
Adversaries themselves, can reasonably be denied. The Consequence in the
Proposition opposes none of these Principles. For (doubtless) none of them
gainsayeth any of these Positions; Either, 1. That it is a better and more
desirable condition, to be in a capacity, or under a possibility of being
saved, then to be in an utter incapacity, or under an absolute impossibility of
obtaining this Blessedness. Or, 2. That in the first Adam, all Men were alike
salvable, being all furnished with gracious abilities for the doing of the Will
of God, and for the observing of that Law, upon the observation whereof their
Life and Peace depended, even as Adam himself was furnished in this kind, with
whom all Men stood in one and the same condition. Or, 3. (and lastly) That the
generality, or far greatest part of Mankind, are not brought into a capacity
of Salvation by the second Adam, no satisfaction or atonement being made for
their Sins by Him. They who grant these three Conclusions, if they be willing
to be led by their own light, cannot stumble at the Consequence in the Major
Proposition.

Nor can I conceive wherein the Minor should offend them. For it is the
uncontroverted sense of all Divines (as far as yet I understand) that the
second Adam is far a greater Benefactor to Mankind, then the first Adam was,
even whilst his innocence remained with him: and that the condition of men in
general, is much better under the second Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, then
it was under the first, the Law or Covenant of Works. Nor is it at any hand
worthy belief, that God should put the World into a better estate, or posture
of well-being in the first Man, who was from the Earth, earthy, then in the
second Man, who is the Lord from Heaven: especially considering, that it is the
constant method of the Almighty in His Works and Dispensations, to begin with
that which is less perfect, to proceed unto that which is more, and to conclude
with that which is most perfect of all. -- First the blade (says our Savior)
and then the ear, and after that (in the last place) the full corn in the ear
Mark 4. 28
. And the Apostle tells us (in another case) that when that which is perfect is
come, that which is in part [or, unperfect] shall be done away 1 Cor. 13. 10
. So that (it seems) that which is perfect, is still hindmost, in the retinue
of Gods Proceedings, as Rachel and her children were in Jacobs march, when He
went to meet his Brother Esau Gen, 33; 2
. Thus God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto
the Fathers by Prophets, in these last days has spoken unto us by His Son Heb.
1. 1, 2
. But the path we now speak of has been so much occupied, and beaten with the
feet of the Providence of the most wise God, that it is visible enough to all
the World. As to the Particular in hand, viz. that the Grace of God abounds to
the World much more in the latter, the new Covenant which He has struck with
it in Jesus Christ, then it did in the former Covenant made with it in Adam,
appears, as in general by those glorious things that are every where spoken of
the latter Covenant, above any thing so much as intimated concerning the
former; so more particularly from that Consideration which the Apostle suggests
unto us in this Passage. And not as it was by one that sined, so is the gift*
for the Judgment was by one unto Condemnation: but the free gift is of many
offenses unto Justification Romans 5. 16
. Whereas he says, that the Judgment was by one [i. e. by reason of, or, upon
the commission of, one sin only, as appears from the antithesis in the latter
clause, but the free gift is of many offenses,] unto Condemnation. He plainly
informs us, that the first Covenant made with the World in the first Adam,
was so narrow, peremptory, and strict, that in case any Person of Mankind,
should at any time, and though but once, have tript, or stepped aside from any
thing commanded therein, He became presently a dead man hereby, wholly bereft
of all hope or possibility of being ever recovered, or restored to the Favor of
God, by means of this Covenant, according to that cited by the same Apostle:
Cursed is every one THAT CONTINVETH not IN ALL things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them Gal. 3. 10
* Whereas, the Covenant of Grace made with the World in Jesus Christ, is [as we
are taught in the words, but the free Gift is of many offenses unto
Justification] so above measure gracious, that though a man sins often, yea
and this very grievously, yet he is not hereby cut off from an Hope of
re-enjoying the Love of God; nay by the express Tenor of this Covenant, he has
assurance from God, that upon his Repentance, his Sins, how many soever, of
what nature soever, shall be forgiven him; yea and this sealed unto him by
Baptism, according to that of the Evangelists: John preached the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of sins Mark 1. 4 Luke 3. 3
; i. e. preached this Doctrine, that by that Baptism which he was commanded to
administer, God did confirm, or seal unto Men the Remission of their sins upon
their Repentance; in such a sense and manner, as Abraham is said to have
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the Righteousness of his Faith
Romans 4. 11
, etc. i. e. of that Justification, or Forgiveness of Sins, which God, upon,
and by means of His Believing, had conferred upon Him. This by the way.

At what door of evasion an escape can be made from the hand of this Argument,.
25.
I cannot readily imagine. If the Cause* we oppose be any ways defensible
against it, it is by some such Plea as this. The World, or Mankind, may be
said to be put into a better condition by Christ, or by the Covenant of Grace,
then it was by Adam, and by the Covenant of Works, in as much as a considerable
part hereof is by Christ put into such a capacity of Salvation, which shall
certainly be actuated, and so a great number of men certainly saved; whereas in
Adam, though all Men were in a capacity, or under a possibility of Salvation,
yet this capacity was so narrow, weak, or remote, that there was little Hope,
or probability, that any man would be saved by the means or advantage thereof,
which accordingly (as we know) came to pass. Now is it not better for a Family,
or other Community of men, to have good assurance, that some of their members
shall have great matters of Honor and Estate bestowed upon them, though all the
rest were made incapable of such Privileges, then to be at an uncertainty
whether any one of them shall be preferred in this kind, or no? To this I
answer,

1. It is at no hand to be granted, that the whole species, or generality of
Mankind, were in Adam invested only with a narrow, faint, remote capacity of
Salvation, or of Happiness. For, 1. They were created in an actual possession
of happiness, and with the light of Gods countenance shining brightly upon
them. They were all made upright, or righteous Eccles. 7. 29
, and in the Image of God Genesis 1. 27
: and so could not be miserable; and consequently, in no danger, or likelihood,
of becoming miserable; for such a condition as this, had (it self) been Misery.
As for the possibility of becoming miserable, with, and under which they were
created, it imported neither danger, nor likelihood, of their becoming
miserable, being nothing else but an essential distinguishing badg of their
Creature* ship, without which they could no more be made, then water without
moisture, or the Earth without a shadow projectible from it. 2. Concerning the
matter of event, nothing can be inferred from hence touching any slipperiness
of the place, or ground, on which they stood in Adam. The greatest
unlikelyhoods sometimes take place, when probabilities vanish, and turn to
nothing, as in the fulfilling of that pair of Predictions by our Savior, Many
that are first, shall be last; and the last, shall be first Matt. 19. 30
. The Kings of the Earth (says Jeremy in his Lamentations) and all the
inhabitants of the world would not have believed, that the adversary and the
enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem Lam. 4 12
: and yet we know they did enter. Who would have said that David, a man
attested by God Himself for a man after His own Heart, and one that would
fulfill all His Pleasure, a man taught by God from his youth Psalm. 71. 17
, to whom the Statutes and Judgments of God, were sweeter ^hen the Honey, and
the Honey comb Psalm. 19. 10
, more to be desired then gold, then much fine gold Ibid.
, a man that had as great delight in the way of Gods Testimonies, as in all
manner of riches Psalm. 119. 14
, who was afflicted and ready to dye from his youth up Psalm. 88. 15
, ( i. e. sorely, deeply, and constantly exercised with afflictions from first
to last,) Who (I say) would have said that such a man as this, would, together
with Adultery, have committed Murder, and this upon the vilest and most
execrable terms, that such a sin (I suppose) was ever known to be committed by
any man? And yet we know that such a thing was done even by this man. So again,
who would have said (but only He, to whom the Darkness and the Light are both
alike Psalm. 139; 12
) that Peter, a Disciple so zealously devoted unto his Lord and Master, whose
Heart a little before was set to stand by Him, though all m^n besides should
forsake Him, yea rather to dye with Him, then deny Him Mat. 26. 35
, should, all this notwithstanding, soon after, no^ only deny Him, and that
upon no great account of danger, but forswear Him also once and again, and this
with a curse Mat. 26, 70, 72, 74
? By these, and many like experiments that might be added, it sufficiently (I
presume) appears, that the miscarrying of all Men in Adam is no sufficient
Argument of any deficiency in the foundation of their standing, and remaining
happy, in Him. Yea, 3. (and lastly, for this) They stood upon as good terms in
Adam for the continuance of that Happiness, in the fruition whereof they were
created, and consequently for escaping Death and Misery, as men ordinarily wish
or desire for the security of their lives, their estates, and what otherwise is
dear unto them. For who desires any better terms of assurance for his life, or
estate, then to be able to defend and make good the one and the other against
all assailants, that can possibly invade, or endanger them; and withal to be
in a sufficient capacity of knowing or discovering, when any attempt or assault
shall be made upon them? Such a Security as this had all Mankind in Adam for
the perpetuation of that good and happy condition, which was their Portion from
the gracious and bountiful Hand of their Creator, in the day wherein He created
them. They were endued with strength every ways sufficient to withstand all
Tempters, and Temptations unto Sin, yea and were in a regular capacity to have
discovered the approach of any temptation, and of whatsoever might endanger
them; and so to have preserved the unspont^dness of their native integrity; and
consequently to have maintained themselves in an uninterrupted Possession of
that rich and happy inheritance, which was vested in them by the Law of their
Creation. Therefore*

2. The comparison of the Family, or Community specified in the Objection, is
altogether irrelative to the case in hand: and besides it demands that, as
reasonable to be granted, which is nothing less. For it is not better for the
generality of a Family, or greater Community of men, that some few of the
members either of the one, or the other, should have the greatest assurance
that can be given, of the greatest things that can be enjoyed, all the rest of
their members being left to unavoydable beggary, torment, and misery, then that
all Particulars of either should be put into such a capacity, and way of being
all honorable and happy, that by a regular, prudent, and careful behavior of
themselves, and managing the opportunities which are before them, there should
none of them miscarry, nor fail of such enjoyments. For thus the Comparison
ought to be stated, to make it truly representative of the great business,
whereof we are in travel. Now it is not better for the generality of a State,
or great Commonwealth, that some two or three, or some small and inconsiderable
number of the members or inhabitants thereof, should be great Favorites of the
Prince, or of those in chief place, and have Riches, Honors, Offices and places
of Power heaped upon them without end, all the rest being made slaves, and
divested of all capacity, so much as of any tolerable subsisting in the State,
then it would be, that all and every of the said members, or inhabitants,
should be put into an hopeful and ready way, by their regular industry and
honest demeanor of themselves, to thrive, and lift up their heads, and live
like men; although in the mean time they might, either through voluntary and
supine carelessness and sloth, or through some vile practices otherwise,
deprive themselves of such Happiness. That cannot be better for the generality
of any Community of men, which induces an absolute necessity of extreme Misery
upon the far greater part of them, though attended with all imaginable
advantages to some few, then that which is as an effectual door opened unto
them all, unto all Happiness, although it be not so opened, but that they may,
through a supine negligence, and unfaithfulness to their own interest, shut it
against themselves. That which is worse for the greater part, cannot be better
for the whole. So then our Argument last propounded remains still in full
force: Christ certainly dyed for all Men; because otherwise the World, or
generality of Mankind, should have been better, and more graciously dealt with,
and provided for by God, in the first Adam, then in the second.

The same Doctrine I confirm yet further by the seal and warrant of this. 26.
Argum. 9.
Argument. If Christ dyed not for all Men without exception, then no man
whatsoever, in his unregenerate estate, stands bound to believe in Him, or to
depend on Him, at least with any certainty of Faith, or Hope, for Salvation.
But there are many Men who in their unregenerate estates, stand bound thus to
believe in Him, and depend upon Him; yea all Men without exception (at least
all, that have not yet sinned the sin unpardonable) stand bound thus to
believe, and thus to depend. Ergo.

The Reason of the sequel in the former Proposition, is, because no man stands
bound to do that, which he has not a sufficient ground, or reason to do; or
(to speak somewhat more warily) for the doing of which there is no sufficient
ground or reason. Yea the doing of any thing upon such terms (I mean, without a
sufficient ground in Reason for the doing it) is an act irregular, sinful, and
displeasing unto God. That the Soul be without Knowledge (says Solomon) it is
not good: and he that hastes with his feet, sins Prove. 19. 2
. The former clause was rendered somewhat more plainly in our former
Translation, thus: Without Knowledge, the mind is not good; i. e. though a man
in what he does, means, or intends never so well, yet unless he knows, or
apprehends, a sufficient Reason or ground for what he does, his good meaning
will not justify him, or make him sinless in his action: according to what
follows in the latter clause* But he that hastes with his feet, i. e. that
is forwarder in his affections, then in his Judgment, that falls upon action,
before he knows a good cause why and wherefore he so acts, sins. Upon this
account our Savior reproves the man, that saluted Him by that honorable and
divine Title of, Good: Why call thou me, Good? there is none good, but one,
which is God Mat. 19, 17
. Doubtless the meaning of the man, in stiling Him, Good, was good, and
proceeded from a reverend Opinion of Him: yea in stiling Him, Good, he spoke
nothing but Truth (and that according to our Saviors own Principles) in as
much as He was (indeed) God. Yet because the man had not this knowledge of him,
and so no sufficient Reason for what he did, or said, in calling Him, Good,
therefore He reproves him for so doing, or speaking. To this Point also lies
that of the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin Romans 14, 23
: i. e. whatsoever a man does, not having a sufficient ground in Reason, one,
or more, on which to ground a Belief, or Persuasion, of the lawfulness of it,
is sinful; viz. quoad hominem, in respect of the doer, not always, or
necessarily, quoad rem, or in the nature of the thing it self. Yea to believe
any thing, without a sufficient ground in Reason to satisfy or convince a man
of the truth of it, the Holy Ghost terms the Belief of the simple, or
foolish, according to that of Solomon, The simple believes every word Prove.
14. 15
; or (as our former Translation read it) The foolish will believe every thing,
[i. e. as well that, for which there is good Reason why it should be true, as
that for which there is none,] which is a lash, loose, and unsavory kind of
Faith, and such as God relisheth not, regards not, no not when the object of
it, or the thing believed, is a Truth. For God (as the wise man informs us)
delights not in fools Eccles. 5. 4
. So that if there be no sufficient ground in Reason, why any unregenerate
Person should believe or depend on Christ for Salvation with certainty of
Faith, most certain it is that he stands not bound in duty hereunto. Now if
Christ dyed only for the Elect, and no unregenerate person certainly knows,
or can know, that he is one of the Elect, it is a clear case that he can have
no sufficient ground in Reason to believe or depend upon Him upon such terms.
That no unregenerate man certainly knows, or can know, that he is one of the
Elect, has been proved formerly, and that ex abundanti; viz. where it was
fully evinced, that no unregenerate Person has so much as any probable ground,
whereon to judge that he is Elected.

If it be objected; Yes, an unregenerate Person has the Command of God to
believe, or depend, on Christ for Salvation: and this is a sufficient ground in
Reason for him to do accordingly; To this I answer, by granting the whole
Argument; but retrench, that if unregenerate Persons have the Command of God to
depend on him for Salvation, it is upon the ground lately evinced Sect. 22. of
this Chap.
, above all contradiction, viz. that there is Salvation in Him for them; and
consequently, purchased by him for them by his Death. For He has Salvation for
no man upon any other account* Joh. 12. 24. So that this Objection rather
strengthens, then weakeneth, the Doctrine we maintain.

The Minor Proposition, in the Argument last advanced by us, which only
affirms (as to the exigency of our cause) that many unregenerate Persons
stand bound in duty to believe on Christ for Salvation, is too rich in evidence
to stand in need of Proof. For, 1. The Scripture says expressly, that God now
commands all men every where (and therefore unregenerate men, as well as
others) to repent Acts 17. 30
: if to repent, then to believe also; in as much as there can be no sound
Repentance, such as God commands, without Faith. And if so be men yet
unregenerate stand not bound in duty, or conscience, to believe on Christ, then
is it no matter of sin in them, to make God a liar. For He that believes not
God, makes Him a liar, because he believes not the record God gave of His Son
1 John 5. 10
; meaning, that whosoever justifies, or believes God in the record he has
given of his Son, must needs believe on him; viz. because the Tenor of this
Record is, that whosoever believes on Him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Now he that believes this, can no more refuse, or forbear,
to believe on Christ, then he can be content eternally to perish, or refuse
everlasting life, as not worthy his believing for the obtaining of it. But
(doubtless) it is sinful in any man to make God a liar, [i. e. either to do, or
to neglect to do, any act, by the doing, or neglect whereof, God is any ways
represented as untrue of his Word, as he is by any man's nonbeleeving on
Christ,] and consequently every man (except the before excepted) stands bound
in duty and conscience to believe on Christ. Again, secondly, If no
unregenerate men had any band of Duty or Precept from God lying upon them, to
believe on Christ, whosoever of this sort of men should at any time believe on
Him, should super-erogate, and do more then what he is by God commanded to do:
and consequently, all Believers, without exception, should be Super-erogators,
in their first act of Believing, because until now they were unregenerate
Persons. But the Proof of this Proposition is (I suppose) super-erogatory, and
more then any darkness or doubtfulness in it, yea and (happily) more then our
Adversaries themselves, require. Therefore we pass on to another Argument.

If God intended not the Death of Christ for all Men, and that in order to
their. 27. Argum. 10.
Salvation, then have not all Men a sufficiency of means vouchsafed unto them,
whereby to be saved: But all Men have a sufficiency of means in this kind
vouchsafed unto them. Ergo. The Consequence in the former Proposition, is
pregnant, without Proof. For it is greater then contradiction, that they, who
have no Propitiatory Sacrifice offered up for them, nor Atonement made for
their Sins, have no sufficiency of means for Salvation. So that if God intended
no such Oblation, no such Atonement for any man, or number of men, most
certain it is that such men are in no capacity of Salvation: and consequently
can have no sufficiency of means whereby to be saved.

The truth of the Minor Proposition, which avoucheth a sufficiency of means
vouchsafed by God unto all Men whereby to be saved, might be evidenced by
sundry Demonstrations. But because the complete and full Demonstration of this
Proposition, is one of the most considerable achievements to be undertaken and
managed in the second Part of the Work in hand, I shall (for the present) only
propose some few Considerations for the proof of it, respiting the
through-arguing of them until that opportunity.

First then, If all Men have not a sufficiency of Means vouchsafed unto them
whereby to be saved, then God deals with men far more districtly, and with
greater severity in the new Covenant, the Covenant of Grace, then He did in the
first Covenant, which was a Covenant of Works. The Reason hereof, is, because
in, or under, the Covenant of Works, Men were invested by God with sufficient
Means for the performance of that Covenant, and so for the obtaining of the
great Reward promised, or covenanted therein, which was no less then eternal
Life, though (possibly) not a life so rich in Blessedness, as that Covenanted
with men in the Covenant of Grace. That all Men without exception, had a
sufficiency of Means in Adam, to have persisted in Innocence, and to perform
all the Articles and Terms required of them in that Covenant, which was made
with them in Him, is the sense of all men learned in the Scriptures, as well
Modern, as Ancient, that yet I have heard of: nor will it (I suppose) be denied
by our Adversaries themselves. If it should, there is proof upon proof at hand
to make it good: but what needs a levy of men to gain that by force, which is
voluntarily offered? Now then, it being far greater rigor, and severity, to
impose such terms or conditions upon a man, in order to the saving of his life,
or for the obtaining of any desirable good, which are of an impossible
performance unto him, then to impose only such, which he has competent
abilities to perform; evident it is, that God must needs be more ^igorous and
hard unto men in the Covenant of Grace, made with them, in, and by Christ, then
He was in the Covenant of Works made with them in Adam, in case it be supposed,
that He required unpossible Conditions of them in the former, and only such
which were possible, in the latter.

But that God deals more graciously and bountifully with Men in the second
Covenant, made with them in Christ, then He did in the first, which was made
with them in Adam, is the pregnant result of all things (in a manner) that God
has spoken unto the World by His Son in the Gospel. Nor can our Adversaries
themselves deny it without the loud reclamation of Evidence and Truth. To
pretend, that God deals more graciously and bountifully with His Elect, in
the Covenant of Grace, then He did in the Covenant of Works, but not with the
generality of Men, is but a slim evasion, and supposes, either that the
Covenant of Grace is not made with the generality of Men (which is a notorious
untruth, and has been detected accordingly once and again already) or that
this Covenant is not made upon the same terms, and conditions, with all those
interessed, or included in it; which is a conceit of no whit better an accord,
either with Reason, or Truth.

Secondly: If all Men have not a sufficiency of Means granted unto them. 28.
by God, then God deals with the generality, or far greatest part of Men,
more rigorously, and with less mercy, and this under the Covenant of Grace,
then He does with the Devils themselves. The Reason is plain: because, in case
Men have not a sufficiency of Means whereby to be saved, they have only Means
given them whereby to increase their Condemnation; yea such means, and so and
upon such terms given them, that they cannot but use them to their greater* and
more heavy Condemnation, then that whereunto they should, or could have been
liable, had no such Covenant of Grace been made with them, or tendered unto
them. For if they be not enabled by God to Repent, and to believe the Gospel,
they must needs be subjected to an absolute necessity of despising, or
neglecting it, there being no medium between accepting the great Salvation
brought unto them therein, which is done by Faith, and the neglecting of it,
which is always accompanied with Unbelief. Now a neglect of the Gospel, and of
the great Salvation tendered therein by God unto men, is the firstborn of
Provocations in the sight of God, and makes men sevenfold more the Children of
Wrath, and of Death, then otherwise they would have been. How shall we escape
(says the Apostle) if we NEGLECT so great a Salvation Heb. 2. 3
? etc. implying, that this sin, is unquestionably more exasperating, incensing,
enraging the Almighty against His Creature, Man, then any other sin, or sins,
whatsoever. Yea, if a man by means of the Gospel, and the Grace offered unto
him therein, be not brought to Repentance, and to a forsaking of ways and
practices of sin, the sins themselves, which he shall commit under the Gospel,
will turn to a far deeper and more dreadful account in condemnation unto him,
then the like sins without the Gospel would have done. So that it is clear on
every side, that in case men be not enabled by God to Repent, and believe the
Gospel, the exhibition and tender of the Gospel unto them must needs be an
heaping of coals of fire upon their heads by God, a project and design ^o
render them twofold, or rather an hundredfold more the Children of Hell,
Misery, and Torment, then otherwise they had been. Whereas most certain it is,
that God has designed nothing, acted nothing, in one kind or other, to
increase the Punishment or Condemnation of the Devils, especially in any way of
an unavoydable Necessity, above the demerit of their first sin.

Thirdly, If God does not vouchsafe sufficient means unto all Men, whereby. 29.
to repent, believe, and so to be saved, then will He condemn, and destroy (or
at least increase the Condemnation and Destruction, of) far the greatest part
of Men, for that which is no sin, (I mean, Impenitency and Unbelief.) For, 1. I
suppose that it is no sin at all in the Creature, not to perform or do any such
act, which is proper only for God Himself to do, or which requires the
lighting down of His Omnipotent Arm to effect it. 2. I suppose (that which has
been both lately, and formerly proved) that God does and will condemn and
destroy men for Impenitency and Unbelief. So then if to Repent, and to Believe,
be such acts or works in the Soul, which cannot be produced, raised, or
performed by men, by means of that strength, or those abilities which are
vouchsafed unto them, but absolutely require the Omnipotent Power of God to
effect them, it is no ways more sinful in the Creature not to exert or perform
them, then it is, not to be God: and consequently, if God should punish men for
the nonperformance of them, He should punish them for that* which in such a
case, and upon such a supposition, would be no sin. Yea if God should punish
men for not endevoring, or not doing that which is in their power to do, in
order to Repenting and Believing, He should punish them for not attempting to
make themselves equal in Power unto God.

Fourthly, If God has not vouchsafed a sufficiency of Power to believe. 30.
unto those, who notwithstanding do not believe, then did our Savior without
any ground or cause in the least, wonder at the Unbelief of many in the Gospel:
yea, and at the Faith of others. And He could there do no mighty work, save
that He laid His Hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. And He MARVFLLED
BECAUSE OF THEIR UNBELIEF Mark 6. 6
. On the other hand; When Jesus heard it (i. e. the Answer of the Centurion) He
MARVELLED, and said unto them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not
found so GREAT FAITH, no not in Israel Mat. 8. 10
. First, there is not the least cause, or occasion, why any man should marvel,
that Creatures, or second Causes, should not act above their sphere; yea though
there be the greatest conjunction of such means, which are proper and helpful
unto them in order to such actings, which lie within their sphere. As for
example: though the year be never so seasonable and fruitful, yet there is not
the least occasion to marvel, or think it strange, that the Thorn should not
bring forth grapes, or the Thistle, figs. So in case there be twenty great
lights shining in a room, it is no matter of wonder at all that a blind man
sees nothing at all that is before him. In like manner, in case it be
supposed, that men are utterly destitute of a Power of Believing, there is not
the least air, or color of an occasion, why any man should think it strange
that they should not believe, what helps, or advantages soever* for, o^
toward, believing, they have otherwise. So again: when causes, or means, which
are known ^o act necessarily, uniformly, and constantly in their way, do move
and act accordingly, there is not the least occasion given why any man should
marvel or wonder at it. When the Sun shines, or fire burns, when birds fly,
or fishes swim, no man is tempted, or provoked to the least degree of
admiration. Nor is there any whit more reason, or cause, of marvel, that any
Person at any time should believe, though under the greatest disadvantages for
believing, in case it be supposed and known, that that Cause, which works, or
produces Faith in Men (as viz. the Power of God, by which Faith is always
produced in Men, when they do believe) should always work, or act,
necessitatingly, or irresistibly, in the production of it. Possibly the Grace
of God, by which men under signal disadvantages are (according to our
Adversaries Principles) necessitated to believe, may be just matter of
admiration unto men: but the vouchsafement of such grace supposed, the act of
believing in men, is no ground of admiration at all; no more, then it was under
the Law, to see a man making haste to his City of Refuge, being hotly and
closely pursued by the Avenger of Blood; or then now it would be to fee a young
Infant a mile from Home, being carried along in the Parents arms. However (to
add this by the way) I incline to think, that the reason of our Saviors
marv^lling upon the Centurions Answer, was not simply and absolutely the
excellency or greatness of his Faith discovering it self thereby, but in part,
the strangeness of the stupidity and unmanlikeness of spirit in those of
Israel, which He was occasioned to reminde and consider, by the notableness of
that Faith, which shined in a man who was (and had been, in all likelihood) a
Pagan, and a Soldier, and an Officer of rank amongst Soldiers; all which, in
their respective Natures, and according to common experience (which still
follows the Natures of things, and discovers them) are disadvantages to
Believing. The words mentioned have a breathing of such an import: When Jesus
heard it, He marvelled, and said, I have not found so great Faith, NO, NOT IN
ISRAEL. If Believing depends upon the Omnipotent Exertions of God, after any
such manner, as our Adversaries imagine, our Savior could have no competent
reason to marvel, either that it should be found, where it was; or not found,
where it was not; unless this should be a ground of marvelling unto Him, that
God by His Omnipotency should be able to work Faith, in whom He pleases; or
that Man should not act and do more, then He has Power to do, yea or then all
the Creatures in Heaven, or in Earth, can enable Him to do, I mean, believe.

Fifthly: If they who believe not, have no sufficiency of Power vouchsafed. 31.
by God to believe, then is the Faith of those, who do believe, no reasonable
or just matter of reproof, or shame, unto those, who believe not. But the
Scripture often puts those, who believe not, to rebuke and shame, by mentioning
unto them the examples of those, who do believe. Ergo. This latter Proposition
needs no other Proof, but only the sight and consideration of these and such
like Passages. For John came unto you in the way of Righteousness, and ye
believed Him not: but the Publicans and Harlots believed him. And ye, when ye
had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him Mat. 21. 32
. The men of Niniveh shall rise up in Judgment with this generation, and shall
condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas: and behold a
greater then Jonas is here Mat. 12. 14
. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark to the saving of his House, by which He condemned the World
Heb. 11. 7
, etc. From such places as these it is evident, that the Faith, Repentance, and
Obedience of the Saints, or of such persons who do believe, repent, and obey,
are just matter of Condemnation unto those, who believe not, repent not, obey
not, and represent them as inexcusable. But now (to make good the sequel in the
Major Proposition) these worthy actings and deportments of those, in whom they
are sound, would be no ways considerable for any such end or purpose, as the
shaming or condemning of unbeleeving, impenitent and disobedient Persons,
unless it be supposed that these have, or had, or at least might have had, and
this upon the same terms with those other, the like power and abilities,
whereby to Believe, Repent, and Obey, as they did, or do. The casting great
matters into the Treasury by rich men, was no disparagement, or matter of shame
to the poor widow, that cast in two mites only, because these two mites were
her whole substance, she was not able to cast in more: in which respect our
Savior Himself gives her this testimony, that she had cast in more then they
all. Their casting in great matters, would have been matter of just
disparagement unto her, in case she had been as wealthy as they, and should
have cast in her two mites only. Nor is the flying of a fowl in the air, any
disparagement to a man, in that he does not the like: nor is the speaking of
Greek and Hebrew by him, who has been seven years at School to learn these
Tongues, and has had the help of men expert and skilful in them to direct him,
any matter of disparagement to an Infant of days, who is not as yet capable of
such education, though he speaks them not. And generally where there is not
an equality of strength, means, and abilities for the performance of an action
that is commendable, the performance of it by him, or them, who have the
advantage of strength and means in this kind, does no ways reflect
disparagement upon the others, though they perform it not. If those who do
believe, have the Omnipotency of Heaven to assist them in believing, nay to
necessitate them to believe, certainly their believing is no matter of
disrepute or disgrace unto those who believe not, especially if it be supposed
that they have no Power at all to believe.

Sixthly; If Gods Purpose and Intent be to stop the mouths of all such. 32.
Persons, and to leave them without excuse, who shall prove, wicked, ungodly,
unbeleeving, etc. then does He vouchsafe sufficiency of Power, and of Means to
Repent, and Believe, and so to be saved. But the Consequent is true, and most
unquestionably evident from the Scriptures. Therefore the Antecedent is true
also; viz. that God does vouchsafe a sufficiency of Power, or Means, unto all
Men, whereby to believe, etc. That Gods Purpose is, and that He makes
Provision accordingly, to stop the mouths of all wicked and ungodly men, so
that they shall have nothing with any color of Reason or Equity to plead for
themselves, why the Sentence of Eternal Death should not pass upon them, when
they come to appear before His Tribunal, is (for truth) as clear as the Light
at Noonday, from these and such like places. For the invisible things of Him
from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even His eternal Power and Godhead, (...), i. e. to the intent
they should be without excuse Romans 1. 20
: (as our former Translators rendered,) [meaning, in case they should neglect
the glorifying of God by depending upon Him, serving, and obeying Him.] Our
last Translation makes no difference, as to our purpose, rendering the words
thus: so that they are without excuse. For if they [the Heathen] be without
excuse [by the means vouchsafed unto them by God, whereby to glorify Him,]
certainly it was His Intent to render or make them so, by the said means. So
again: Now we know that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are
under the Law, THAT EVERY MOUTH MAY BE STOPPED, and all the World [viz. of
ungodly Persons] may become guilty before God Romans 3. 19
; or, subject to the Judgment of God, (as our former Translation rendered the
Original (...),) i. e. found guilty upon such terms, that the Judgment of God
in their Condemnation may appear every ways equitable, and justifiable. I omit
other places. Light enough shines from these cited, to discover this for a
certain Truth, that God intends the inexcusableness of all Impenitent and
Unbeleeving Persons.

Upon this foundation of Truth, I build this inference (in the Major
Proposition) that therefore it must needs be, that He vouchsafes a sufficiency
of Power, or Means, unto all Men, to Repent, and Believe. The Reason of this
Consequence is plain; viz. because the Plea of insufficiency, or want of
strength, for the doing of what is commanded, is the firstborn of apologies or
excuses, in the case of nonperformance: yea it is an excuse passable, not
only with all ingenuous and well-composed men, but even with those that are of
rough, stern, and severe Principles, if they be not absolutely bewitched or
besotted with the sencelessness of express Tyranny. The Person, whom the King
found amongst his guests without a wedding garment, being demanded by Him, how
he came in thither not having this garment, was (says the Parable) speechless
Mat. 22. 12
. Doubtless if he could with Truth, or with the consent of his Conscience, have
made such an Answer as this, that he had not wherewithal, or that he wanted
means, to procure a wedding garment, he would have pleaded it; yea and would
have been excused by the King, upon such a Plea: whereas now he must be bound
hand and foot, and cast into outer darkness. So in the Parable of the Talents,
if the unprofitable servant could have given this account unto his Master (with
truth, or with the verdict of his own Conscience) that he had not a sufficiency
of Power granted unto him to improve his Talent, as the rest of his
fellow servants had, or, that it was not possible for him to have given his
Master content, in the improvement of it, or the like; it had been another
manner of excuse, or plea, then that which he insisted upon, to his further
entanglement, (as the purport of the Parable in that behalf, declares Mat. 25.
24, 26, 27
.)

To pretend, that Men are sufficiently inexcusable before God, for neglecting,
or not-doing many other things, which they have Power to do, though it be not
supposed that they have sufficient Power to believe, is to serve the glory of
God with an inexcusableness of their own devising, and which falls short many
degrees in reaching the Counsel and Purpose of God for the advancement of His
glory in that behalf. For His Purpose is not to bring an inexcusableness upon
the heads of wicked and impenitent men, only in respect of some lesser, or
lighter, whether omissions, or commissions, but in respect of that great and
capital sin also, Unbelief, yea mainly and chiefly in respect of this. Now men
cannot appear before God inexcusable upon the account of their Infidelity, or
Unbelief, unless it be supposed that they had been sufficiently furnished by
Him with means, abilities, and opportunities, for believing.

^t this turn, our Adversaries are wont to take Sanctuary under Adams. 33.
wing: but this is too narrow to cover them. All Men (they say) received
sufficient Power in Adam to believe: and upon this account God may justly hold
them inexcusable, if they do not believe. This Plea is like a commodity fetched
from a far Country, which turns to no account when it is brought Home. For,

1. There has nothing yet been brought upon any Stage, where I have been
Spectator, that acted the part of a rational or probable Proof, that all Men
were in Adam invested with a Power of believing. There is this Reason pregnant
and strong against it. If Adam yet innocent (for in this consideration only we
now speak of him) had a Power of believing, then might he actually have
believed, if he had pleased. But it was not possible that Adam, during his
innocence, should actually believe: because all this while there was no word of
Revelation from God concerning Jesus Christ, without which there is no
possibility of actual believing. To pretend, that Adam (and so all Men in Adam)
had a Power, or Principle vested in Him, whereby He was able to believe
whatsoever God should at any time reveal unto Him, and consequently to believe
the Gospel, in case it had been discovered unto Him, as now it is unto Men, is
to speak with no good accord to their own Principles, and with less
accommodation to their Cause. For,

1. If there was a sufficiency of Power given unto Adam whereby to believe,
then it is a plain case that believing requires not the interposal of the
Omnipotency of God in any extraordinary way, to procure, raise, or effect it.
For (doubtless) this Omnipotency was not given unto Adam. And that which in one
case, or at one time, cannot be effected without a concurtence of Omnipotency,
neither can it be effected without the same at another.

2. Neither is a Power to believe whatsoever God shall reveal, a Power of
believing savingly, or to Justification, according to the Principles of our
Adversaries, who generally term such a Believing, (I mean, a Believing of what
God has revealed in the Gospel) an Historical Faith, and make it specifically
distinct from that Faith which justifies, defining this to be a recumbency,
resting, or relying upon Christ for Justification. Therefore however, Men did
not receive any Power in Adam to believe upon such terms, or with such a kind
of Faith, which now God requires of them to their Justification. And to say,
or prove, that Adam, or all Men in Adam, received Power to believe with any
other kind of Faith, then that, which now, in the lapsed estate of man,
justifies, is but to say or prove (...), that which is broadly eccentrical,
and irrelative to the business in hand.

3. Suppose that to believe the Gospel, were justifying Faith (which my Faith
believes it to be) and that Adam had Power to have believed it (and so all Men
in him) in case it had been revealed unto him, ( i. e. so revealed, that He had
certainly known, that the Revelation came from God: and that He should have
Power to believe it upon any other account of Revelation, then this, is an
improbability of the first magnitude,) doubtless all Men now are invested with
a Power of believing it upon such terms, viz. in case it shall be revealed unto
them so, that they shall certainly know that the Revelation comes from God.
For though the Apostle John speaks of Unbeleevers under the Gospel, as men
that make God a liar, in that they believe not the Record, that He has given
of His Son 1 John 5. 10
, yet his meaning is not to charge them with offering this indignity unto God,
knowingly, wittingly, and (as it were) to His face, or as if they knew well
enough this Record to have been given by Him, and yet would not trust, or
believe Him therein: but by their Unbelief at this great Point, they are said
to make Him a liar, in this sense, viz. because they reject that as a fable, or
untruth, which yet has been spoken, and asserted by God Himself for Truth, yea
and that upon such terms, that by a diligent and strict enquiry they might come
to a certain knowledge that it was spoken and asserted by Him. For otherwise the
light of Nature, and force of Conscience, are scarcely in any man (much less in
the generality of Unbeleevers) so far wasted, or spent, with sinning, as that
they can, immediately and directly, or any otherwise then constructively, or in
a consequential, indirect, and remote way, call God, a liar. Therefore
(doubtless) if Men received no other Power in Adam to believe, then only in
case of such a Revelation of the Gospel made unto him, or them in him, by God,
which he, or they, must needs know came from God, they received no other power
of Believing, in him, whilst he stood, then what they generally receive by, or
from Christ, since Adams Fall. So that to fetch the inexcusableness of Men in
the sin of their Unbelief, from Adam, is to travel to the Indies with extreme
hazard and expense, to bring the same commodity from thence, which a man has,
and this every ways as well conditioned, and in sufficient quantity for his
purpose, at his own Home.

4. If all Men received power in Adam to believe savingly, or to Justification,
then must Adam himself needs be supposed to have received this power. If so,
then must it be supposed withal to have been some ways useful; beneficial, and
serviceable for some end and purpose of concernment, unto him. For to conceive
that it was a mere impertinency, or superfluity, is an unsavory Notion. If the
power we speak of were any ways useful unto Adam, then was it useful, either
for the enabling him to believe unto Justification, whilst he remained yet
innocent: or, in case he should fall, to carry along with him into his lapsed
condition, that in this he might be enabled by it to believe accordingly. But
that it was not useful to Him in the former consideration, is evident; because
during His estate of Innocence, He remained under a Covenant of Works; in which
case, He neither had any necessity of Believing, in order to His Justification,
having not yet sined; or if any Necessity in this kind had been upon Him, His
Believing could not have justified Him, in as much as the Law of Justification
by Faith, was not yet given or published by God. Nor was it, or could it be
useful unto Him in the latter consideration: for (doubtless) He carried nothing
saving, or justifying with Him out of His estate of Innocence, into His lapsed
condition, which was a condition of Sin, Misery, and Condemnation, especially
until the Promise of a Savior was given, and that Trumpet of the great Jubilee
had sounded; that the Seed of the Woman should bruise, or break, the Serpents
Head Genesis 3. 15
.

5. (And lastly, for this) It is no ways probable that Men received power in
Adam to believe, or at least that any such power, though received in him, is of
any account with God to render Men inexcusable under the sin of Unbelief, in
the days of the Gospel (which is of equal conducement unto our purpose) because
the Holy Ghost assigns other grounds and reasons (as we lately heard) to assert
this inexcusableness, but no where gives the least intimation, either of any
such power to believe (as we now oppose) received by Men in Adam; much less, of
any relation, which this Power should have to that inexcusableness of
unbeleevers under the Gospel, which God has projected, or provided for, upon
other terms. Therefore,

2. Suppose it should be granted, that Men generally did receive in Adam such a
power of Believing, which is so much contended for, yet God having made a
second, a new Covenant, a Covenant of much more Grace, Love, and Mercy with
them (whereof substantial and large proof has been made, in the Premises) it
is no ways consonant either to the Wisdom of God, or to the unsearchable riches
of His Grace in this new Covenant, that He should proceed in Judgment against
them upon any advantage taken from their condition under the first Covenant. If
men will here be peremptory, and say, that such proceedings in Judgment against
men are consonant enough both to His Wisdom, and to His Grace (in the new
Covenant) let them either, 1. produce some Scripture to evince such a
consonancy: or else, 2. let them confess, and profess, that they are in a
sufficient capacity, by means of that light of Reason, Judgment, and
understanding that shines in them, to judge and conclude what is agreeable to
the Wisdom, or Grace, of God, without warrant and direction from the
Scriptures. To decline both these, is (being interpreted) to profess Will and
Obstinacy under the Name of Judgment. The former (I am certain) they cannot do:
if they do the latter, they sin against the firstborn of those Principles,
which they chiefly employ in the defense and maintenance of their Cause. But,

3. (And lastly, for this also) The Scriptures themselves, as they are
altogether silent of any purpose or intent in God, to judge or condemn men upon
any thing, for which they may seem accountable from the first Covenant made
with them in Adam; so do they frequently mention, and assert, the Counsel and
Purpose of God to proceed in the Judgment and Condemnation of Men, by the
Gospel, and upon such Articles relating to the Covenant of Grace, of the
neglect or breach whereof Men shall be found guilty. He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him: the WORD THAT I HAVE SPOKEN,
THE SAME SHALL JVDG Him in the last day John 12: 48
. He does not say, the Word that I have spoken shall judge Him, etc. but, THE
SAME shall judge Him, etc. which (doubtless) has this emphatical import, that
the Word, which He has spoken [since His coming in the flesh, or, in the
Gospel] and no other word whatsoever but this, shall judge Him, [i. e. be
insisted upon to evict Him guilty, or worthy of Condemnation.] As for all that
the Apostles spoke in their preaching the Gospel, and what other Ministers
thereof speak in theirs, so far as they preach the Truth of the Gospel, or
that, which being neglected will render men liable unto Judgment, is
constructively, and in effect, but the same Word with that which Christ taught
and spoke in the flesh. In like manner the Apostle Paul, speaking of himself,
and his fellow-Apostles, and all Ministers of the Gospel, expresses himself
thus: For we are unto God a sweet [or, the sweet] savor of Christ, in them that
are saved, and in them that perish 2 Cor. 2. 15
. How was the Apostle, or how are the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, the
sweet savor of Christ unto God, in those who perish? viz. as the effectual
tender of Christ unto Men, in the Name of God, for their Salvation, rendereth
them utterly inexcusable, and every ways, and most justly, liable to the
Judgment of God, if they accept Him not by believing on Him. So elsewhere He
asserts disobedience to the Gospel, as the great Article of Indictment against
those, that shall be destroyed by Jesus Christ, when He shall be revealed from
Heaven with His mighty Angels, in flaming fire 2 These. 1. 7, 8
, etc. And most frequently the sentence of Condemnation is bent against the sin
of non believing, and neglect of the Gospel: Mark 16. 16. Heb. 2. 2, 3. Joh. 8.
24, etc. So that there is no color, but that which is very washy, for any
power of Believing received in Adam by the generality of Men: and yet less
color is there for such a conceit as this, that God should bring the vengeance
of eternal fire upon their heads, for not believing with that Power, which they
received in Adam: for other power to believe, besides this, our Adversaries
allow them none. Questionless the Holy Ghost, who is so sollicitous from place
to place to vindicate the Righteousness and Equity of Gods Proceedings in the
Condemnation of wicked and unbeleeving men, would have insisted more or less
upon that ground, which our Adversaries make the prora and puppis, the first
and last of His vindication in this kind (I mean, their investitute in Adam
with power to believe) had there 1. been any such investiture; and, 2. had the
consideration thereof been of any value for such a purpose.

Seventhly: If all Men have power to believe, 1. That God is: 2. That. 34.
He is a Rewarder of those that feek Him, then have they power to believe
justifyingly, or to acceptance with God. But all Men have this power. Ergo.
The Consequence in the Major Proposition the Apostle makes unquestionable,
where He says: He that comes unto God, must believe that He is: and that He
is a Rewarder of those that seek Him Hebr. 11. 6
. By coming unto God, it is clear by the whole carriage of the Context round
about, that he means a coming unto Him with acceptance, and so as (...), to
please Him. And Calvin himself all along his Commentaries upon the place,
takes it for granted, that the Apostle speaks of such a Faith, or Believing,
quae gratiam apud Deum conciliet, which procures grace and favor with God.

The Minor Proposition, is the sense of learned men generally, especially of
such, who have acquainted themselves with the Writings of Philosophers, and
other studious and learned men amongst the Heathen. In these Writings they
find many sayings, wherein the Authors do not only avouch the certainty and
unquestionableness of the Being of God, but that very property also, the Belief
whereof the Apostle here principally requires to give a man access with
acceptance unto God, viz. His being a Rewarder of those, who seek Him. And
besides the Apostle himself expressly affirms, that (...), i. e. that which is
knowable of God, (or as Calvin interprets it, Quod de Deo cognosci
operae-pretium est, i. e. that which is worth a while to be known of God Calv.
Instit. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 1
,) was (...), manifest in them, or, to them: yea and further, that God Himself
made it thus manifest Romans 1. 19
. A little after, He charge them thus, that when they knew God, they
glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations Romans 1. 21
, etc. assigning this for the ground and cause of that most severe and dreadful
proceeding of God in Judgment against them, in delivering them up to a
reprobate mind, to vile affections, to uncleanness, etc. Now (questionless) 1.
This glorifying of God, as God, imports (amongst other things) a believing,
trusting, depending on Him, as a Rewarder of those who seek Him. For they who
do not thus believe, or depend upon Him, cannot be said, whatsoever they shall
measure unto Him besides, to glorify Him as God. 2. As certain it is, that had
they not had a sufficiency of power thus to have glorified Him (I mean, as God,
and as a Rewarder of those who seek Him) the neglect, or nonperformance of it,
would have been no provocation in the sight of God so signally exasperating, or
provoking, as to have kindled a fire of such high indignation in His Breast
against them, which should burn so near to the bottom of Hell, as that
specified. The servant (says our Savior) that knew not his Lords Will, and
did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes Luke 12.
48
. Yea (doubtless) had not this servant been in a capacity of knowing his Lords
will, in case he had been duly inquisitive after it, he had not been beaten
with any stripes at all, though he had committed such things, which had been
worthy stripes in other men. This is evident from that great Principle of
Equity, attested by our Savior in the words immediately following: For unto
whom soever much is given, of him shall be much required, [of him, i. e. of him
only,] and consequently, not of others, to whom little has been given. And if
we shall go along with the said Principle, whither it will directly lead us, we
shall be brought by it to this Conclusion, that unto whom soever nothing is
given, of him nothing will be required: as in the Parable of the Talents, we
hear of no servant called to account, but only such, who had received Talents,
one, or more. Therefore without controversy the Heathen generally had, and
have, power, means, and opportunities sufficient to come to the knowledge of
this gracious Property in God, that He is a Rewarder of those who seek Him; and
consequently of coming to Him with acceptance. And let me add this by the way:
That He that has a sufficiency of power and means, to come to the Knowledge or
Belief, 1. That God is: 2. That He is a Rewarder of those, who seek Him, is not
by this sufficiency simply necessitated, either to believe the one, or the
other. It is with the generality of men in this respect, as it is with God
himself: as well the one, as the other, have power to do many things, which yet
they do not; and therefore are not by a power of acting, necessitated unto
action. Yea it is a Principle owned by our Adversaries themselves, that men
generally have power to do, more then they do: and it is an unquestionable rule
in the art of Reason, that a negatione actus, ad negationem potentiae, non
valet argumentum. So that in case it should, or could, be proved (which I
believe ^ever yet was, nor ever will be proved) that no Heathen wanting the
letter of the Gospel, and the Oral Ministry of it, ever yet believed on God to
Justification, or was accepted with Him, yet would it be no sufficient proof,
that therefore they had ^o power thus to believe on Him, or to do that, upon
the doing whereof they should have been accepted with Him. But that the Heathen
had, and have, power vouchsafed unto them by God, whereby to repent, and to
believe, if their Will were answerable to their Power in this kind, might be
yet further evidenced by a far greater Vote from the Scriptures; but that in
levying this here, we should anticipate a considerable part of our Intentions
relating to the second part of this Work. And besides, three of the most
considerable Passages Romans 10. 18 Acts 14. 16, 17 Romans 2. 4
, pregnant with the Truth we now contend for, have (I remember) been largely
opened and argued by us upon the same account elsewhere Divine Author. of the
Scriptures asserted; p. 183, 184, 185, etc.
. I shall (at the present) conclude the Point in hand with a parcel of
Discourse from the Writings of Mr Calvin: who in an Epistle showing how Christ
is the end of the Law, prefixed before the French New Testament, discourses to
this effect. After that Adam was left in such confusion, he was fruitful in his
cursed seed, to bring forth a generation like unto him: that is to say, Adam
apres avoir este deiette en tell confusion, il a este second en sa maudite
semence, pour enger dier generation semblable a luy: cest a dire, vicieuse,
perverse, corrompue, vuide and despourveue de tout bien, rich and abondante en
mal. Toutesfois, le Seigneur de misericorde (qui n'a^me pas seulement, mais luy
mesme est amor and charity) voulant encores par sa bonte infinie aimer ce qui
n'est digne d'aimer, n'a pas du tout dissipe, perdu, and abysme les hommes,
comme leur iniquite le requeroit: mais les a soustenus and supportes en douceur
and patience, leur donnant term and loisir de se retourner a lui, and se
r'adresser a l'obeissance, de laquelle ils s'estoyent destournes, Et combien
que dissimulast and se teust (comme s'il se'ust voulu cacher d'eux) les
laissant aller apres les desirs and souhaits de leur concupiscence, sans loix,
sans regime, sans correction queleonque de sa Parole: neantmoins il leur a
baille assez d'advertissements qui les devoyent inciter a le cercher, taster,
and trouuer, pour le cognoistre and honnorer comme il appartenoit. Car il a
esleve par tour, en tous lieux, and en toutes chooses, ses enseignes and
armoiries: voire sous blasons de si claire intelligence, que ni avoit celui qui
peust pretendre ignorance de ne cognoistre un si souverain Seigneur, qui avoit
si amplement exalte sa magnificence: Ce'st, quand en toutes les parties du
monde, au ciel ^^ en la terre il a eserit, and quasi engrave la gloire de sa
puissance, bonte, sapience, and eternite, Saint Paul donc a dic bien vray, Que
le Seigneur ne s'estoit iamais laisse sans tesmoignage: mesme envers ceux
ausquels il n'a envoye aucune cognoissance de la Parole. Veu que toutes les
creatures, depuis le firmament iusqu'au center de la terre, pouvoyent estre
tesmoigns, and messagers de sa gloire a tous hommes, pour les attirer a le
cercher, and apres l'avoir trouue, lui fair recueil and hommage, selon la
dignite dun Seigneur si bon, si puissant, si sage, and eternel: and mesmes
aidoyent chacune en son endr^it, a ceste queste. Car les oiselets chantans,
chantoyent Dieu, les bestes le reclamoyent, les* eslemens le redoutoyent, les
montagnes le raisonnoyent, les fleuues and fontaines lui ^ettoyent ceillad^s,
les herbs and sleurs luy riovent. Combien que veritablement il ne feust pas
mestier de le cercher fort loin: Veu que chacun le pouvo^t trouuer en soi
mesme, entant que nous somm^s tous substantes and conserves de sa virtue
hab^tante en nous. Cependant, encore pour plus amplement manifester sa bonte
and clemence infinie enter les hommes, il na pas este content de les instruite,
tous par tells enseignements, qua'vons declaire: mais il a specialement fait
entendre sa voix a un certain Peuple, etc.
vicious, perverse, corrupted, void and destitute of all good, rich and
abounding in evil. Nevertheless, the Lord of his Mercy (who does not only
love, but is Himself Love and Charity) being yet willing by his infinite
goodness to love that which is not worthy of love, has not altogether
dissipated, lost, and overwhelmed men, as their sin did require; but has
sustained and supported them in sweetness and patience, giving them time and
leisure to return unto Him, and set themselves to that Obedience from which
they had strayed. And though He did dissemble and was silent (as if He would
hide himself from them) suffering them to go after the desires and wishes of
their lust, without Laws, without Government, without any correction by his
Word: yet he has given them warnings enough, which might have incited them to
seek, taste, and find him, for to know and honor him as it behoved them. For
he has lifted up every where, and in all places, and things, his Ensigns and
Arms, yea so clearly and intelligibly imblazoned, that there was no one could
pretend ignorance of the Knowledge of so sovereign a Lord, who had in so ample a
manner exalted his magnificence: viz. That in all parts of the World, in Heaven
and in Earth, he has written, and even engraven the Glory of his Might,
Goodness, Wisdom, and Eternity. Saint Paul therefore says very true, That the
Lord never left himself without witness; even toward them, unto whom he has
not sent any knowledge of his Word. For as much as all the Creatures, from the
Firmament to the center of the Earth, might be witnesses, and messengers of his
glory unto all Men, to draw them to seek him, and after having found him, to
welcome him; and do him homage, according to the dignity of a Lord so good, so
powerful, so wise, and eternal: And also did help each one in its place to this
quest. For the Birds singing, sung God; Beasts cried aloud unto him, the
Elements stood in fear of him, Mountains reasoned with him, Rivers and
Fountains cast their eyes upon him, Herbs and Flowers smiled on him. Although
that indeed there was no necessity to seek him very far: by reason that each
one might find him in his own self, being that we are all kept up and
preserved by his virtue dwelling in us. In the mean while, for to manifest more
amply his goodness and infinite clemency among Men, he has not contented
himself to instruct them all by such documents, as we have expressed: but has
specially given to understand his voice to a certain People, etc.

To this so large and lightsom an acknowledgment of sufficient means vouchsafed
by God unto the Heathen, whereby to come to the Knowledge of Him, of His
Goodness, Power, etc. and consequently to Repent, and believe in Him, I shall
not need to subjoyn such sayings as these, That the Knowledge of God is
naturally imbred [or, implanted] in the minds of Men Dei noticiam hominu^
me^tibus naturaliter esse inditam: Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 3. in titulo.
. That this Knowledge is stifled, or corrupted, partly by their foolishness,
partly by their malice Eandem noticiam, partim inscitia, partim malitia, vel
suffo. cari vel corrumpi. Idem. Instit. l. 1. c. 4. in titulo.
: with other passages of like import extant without number in this Author.

Eighthly (and lastly) If wicked men, and such who perish in their sins. 35.
through Impenitency and Unbelief, have not a sufficient Power and Means to
Repent and Believe, then when God, most graciously, most affectionately, most
earnestly invites them to Repent, and to Believe, and this in order to their
Peace and Salvation, He rather insults over them in their extremity of weakness
and misery, then really intends any thing gracious, or of a saving import to
them. But to conceive thus of God is most unworthy of Him, and dishonorable to
Him, and not far from Blasphemy. Ergo. The Reason of the Connection in the Major
Proposition, is, because to profess love to a man that is in imminent danger of
his life, and upon this account to persuade, press, and be earnest with him, to
do that for the safety of his life, which the Perswader in this case absolutely
knows to be unpossible for the persuaded to do, (as suppose it were, to make
him wings, and fly in the air beyond the Seas, or to turn himself into a fish,
and live in the Seas, or the like) such an addressment as this to such a poor
wretch, would be basely illusory, and insulting, nor could it admit of any
better interpretation. In like manner, if God, knowing that a natural and
ungodly man is in the utmost danger of perishing for ever, and withal, that he
has no power to repent, or believe, shall yet vehemently and affectionately
urge, press, and persuade such a man to Repent and Believe, that he may not
perish, can such an application as this bear any other construction, then as
derisory, and proceeding from one, who does not simply delight in the death of
a Sinner, but to make the death of such a miserable Creature, as full of gall,
and bitterness, and misery, as He well knows how to do? Therefore certainly,
when God stretches out his hand all the day long to wicked men; when he says,
turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways: why will ye dye, etc. when He says,
Repent, and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall
not be your ruin: and again, turn at my reproof, (with the like,) He knows
that what He thus earnestly and affectionately requires of them, and presses
them unto, they have power to perform: otherwise in such expressions as these,
He should be like unto a Judge, or King, that having sentenced a lame man to
death for Treason, or some other crime, should promise him his life, in case he
would run twenty miles within an hours space, and accordingly press him with
much seriousness unto it. I have met with nothing (to my best remembrance) from
the Pen of any Defender of the contrary Faith, to obstruct or check this
Argument in the course of it: nor am I able to imagine what can with any face
of Reason, or of Truth, contest with it.

To say, that when God with the greatest earnestness of expression, calls upon
wicked men to Repent, He only signifies unto them, what would prevent their
destruction, were it found in them, but supposes not any Principle or power in
them to exhibit or perform it; such an allegation (I say) as this has neither
salt nor savor in it. For to what account can it be brought, that God should
inform wicked men, how, or which way they may escape destruction, if it be
supposed withal that they are in no capacity, no not so much as under a
possibility, of receiving any benefit by such an information? Besides, God
cannot truly and cordially profess that He desires not the death of a sinner,
or, of him that dies, upon the account only of an information directed to
such a man, concerning the way, or means of his escape, unless it be supposed
withal that he is made capable by Him of benefit by such an information, and
in a condition to make use of it in order to an escape. And (to conclude) mere
informations are not wont to be given in exhortatory or preceptive language,
as, turn ye, turn ye, etc. nor in such pathetique strains, as, Why will ye dye,
O house of Israel? nor with such Promises annexed, as, so shall not iniquity be
your ruin: nor (lastly) where they are of no use, neither to those to whom
they are given, nor to Him that gives them, nor to any others: which upon
consideration of particulars would plainly appear to be the case before us.

To say that in such affectionate Exhortations and Expressions as those. 36.
under present consideration, God only expresses His Will of Approbation,
signifying that Righteousness, and Repentance after sin, and so the Peace and
Salvation of His Creature, upon, and by means of these, are things simply
agreeable to His Nature, Mind, and Goodness: but ^oth not intend to signify
any Will or Purpose in Himself to work Repentance in the persons to whom He
thus speaks, nor yet that they have power to repent without Him; is an
allegation as inconsiderable, and inconsistent with Reason, as the former. For,

1. If Righteousness, and Repentance after sin, and the Salvation of the
Creature hereupon, be simply agreeable to His Nature, Mind, and Goodness, then
why should not the Repentance (and upon this, the Salvation) of those persons,
to whom He particularly addresseth Himself in those gracious and earnest
Compellations and Exhortations of which we now speak, be every whit as
agreeable to His Nature, Mind, and Goodness, as the Repentance, or Salvation,
of any other persons in their case? He no where signifies any difference in
this kind. Or if the Repentance and Salvation of some Sinners be agreeable to
His Nature, Mind, and Goodness, and not of others, it is a plain case, that
the Repentance and Salvation of the Creature, simply considered, are not the
things that are so agreeable to Him, but the Repentance and Salvation of such
and such particular subjects. For Repentance and Salvation are the same things,
and of the same Nature, in what persons, or subjects soever: no personal
consideration whatsoever alters their Natures, or essential Properties. Again,

2. If the intent of God were to express or signify, His Approbative Will of
the Repentance and Salvation of his Creature, or the agreeableness of these to
His Nature, Mind, and Goodness, He would rather have expressed it in
applications of himself unto such persons, or subjects, whose Repentance and
Salvation he really intends and desires, then in addressments made to those,
whose Repentance and Salvation he desires not; nay, whom he was resolved from
Eternity (for this is the voice of the Oracle consulted by our Adversaries) to
destroy for ever. It were very unproper and hard for a Judge, or Prince, to make
a feeling and affectionate Discourse of their clemency, goodness and sweetness
of Nature, their great averseness to acts of severity, etc. unto such persons,
whom they had been of a long time resolved, and before any cause administered by
these persons of such a resolution against them, to put to a terrible,
torturing, and ignominlous death, especially at; or near the time, when this
most severe execution is intended to be done upon them.

3. (And lastly) The Argument propounded by us, and with whose vindication we
are yet in labor, does neither suppose, that God will work Repentance (as our
Adversaries call, working Repentance) in the persons there spoken of, i. e.
that he will work it upon any such terms, that it shall necessarily, or
infallibly be effected, nor yet that the persons themselves can repent without
God. That which it supposes, is this, that God is so far moving and assisting
the Hearts, Wills, and Consciences of these men, in order to their Repentance,
that if they were but willing to do, what he enableth them to do, in reference
and order to the same, their Repentance would be effected, and they saved upon
it. In which case (I mean, if they should repent) this Repentance were most
justly ascribable unto God, not to themselves, in as much as it is he, that 1.
Gives them power and abilities to repent. 2. That secretly forms and fashions
their Wills, so as to make them willing actually to repent: 3. That supports
their Wills thus framed, to, and in, the production of the act it self of
Repentance. Whereas that which men themselves do, in, toward, or about their
Repentance, is so inconsiderable, in comparison of what God does, that the
greatness of his Grace and interposure herein, deserves (in a manner) all the
praise and honor that belongs unto the action: although it be true also, that
the person himself, who repents, or in whom Repentance is wrought, must of
necessity be so far* or to such a degree interessed, and active in the work,
that the work it self may be as truly and properly ascribed unto him, or
called, His, as it is ascribed unto God, and termed, his. For it is man that
repents, not God, though what he does in repenting, he does by the operating
and assisting Grace of God: in which respect it is said to be his gift. But
concerning the conjuncture and respective interests of the first and second
Causes in the production or raising of one and the same act, we shall (God
willing) discourse more particularly in the second part of this Work, where
also we shall clear and discharge all those Passages and Texts of Scripture
from their hard service, which are compelled by some to serve against this
great Truth (of that high importance for the glory, as well of the Grace, as
Justice, of God) That all Men without exception have a sufficiency of power
vouchsafed unto them by God, whereby to Repent, and to believe, unto Salvation:
and that it is through want of Will, (or rather, willingness) not of Power,
that any man perishes. At present, to the further confirmation of the main
Doctrine commended in this Discourse, we argue thus,

In the eleventh place: If God intended not the Death of Christ, as a Ransom.
37. Argum. 11.
or Satisfaction for all Men, then are there some Men, whom He never intended
to save, but to leave irrecoverably to everlasting destruction and perdition.
This Proposition (I suppose) stands firm and strong upon its own basis: and
needs no Prop of Proof or Argument to support it. For God intending to save no
man but by the Death of Christ, evident it is, that if there be any man, or
number of men, for whose Salvation he did not intend this Death, that he never
intended their Salvation. Therefore I assume: But there are no such Men, or
number of Men, whose Salvation God never intended, or whom He intended to leave
irrecoverably to everlasting perdition. Ergo. The Reason of this Proposition
is, partly because whatsoever God at any time intends, he intended always, yea
from Eternity; partly also because there was a time, when all Men were
righteous and holy, viz. during the whole time of Adams integrity, in whose
loins all Men then were, and so must needs be Partakers of the same Holiness
and Integrity with him. So that unless we shall say and hold, that God never
intended the Salvation of just and holy men, but to leave them irrecoverably to
everlasting perdition, we cannot say that there are, or were any men, or any
number of men, whose Salvation he never intended, or whom he intended to leave
irrecoverably to everlasting destruction. Yea all Men had a Being in God
himself, before they received or had a Being in Adam: in which respect Adam
himself is called, the Son of God Luke 4. 38
, viz. because he received his Being from him, as (though not after the manner
that) children receive their Beings from their Parents, or Fathers. Now
wheresoever, or in what estate and condition soever, Adam was, there were all
Men in the same estate and condition with him. So then all Men considered as
being in God, were nothing but God himself, according to the common, and most
true Maxim of Divines; Quicquid in Deo est, est Deus: whatsoever is in God, is
God. The truth of this Maxim was clearly evinced by us Cap. 4. of this
Discourse, where we argued the absolute simplicity of the Divine Essence, or
God. Therefore if God purposed from Eternity to leave any man, or number of
men, irrecoverably to eternal destruction, this Purpose was conceived, or taken
up by Him against these men, whilst they were yet only in His Will and Power,
and consequently, whilst they were nothing but Himself. But that God should
peremptorily resolve and decree, never to save, nor to intend to save, but to
design, and consign over irrevocably, irreversibly, irrecoverably to eternal
misery and destruction, millions of men, whilst they were yet perfectly
righteous and holy, yea whilst they were yet nothing but Himself, is
(doubtless) a Notion hardly incident to the judgment or thoughts of any man,
who trembles to think irreverently, or unworthily of God.

It is like it will be here pleaded, that God in His Purpose or Decree to. 38.
leave the men we speak of, to everlasting perdition, does not look upon them,
or consider them, as being in himself, nor yet as being righteous and holy in
Adam, but as men that would in time prove corrupt, sinful, and abominable. And
for God, to decree to leave men, thus considered, to irrecoverable destruction,
is no ways unworthy of him. I answer,

1. If God in his Decree of Reprobation, considered men as sinful and wicked,
then He passed over, and took no knowledge or notice of them, whilst they were
yet righteous and innocent: or if he did take knowledge of their righteousness,
yet, this notwithstanding, and (as it were) with the neglect and contempt of
it, He passed that most dreadful Doom, or Decree of an eternal Reprobation
against them. Whereas the Scriptures every where commend and highly magnify,
the constant love, care, and respects of God, toward the righteous. The
righteous Lord (says David) loves righteousness: and His countenance does
behold the upright Psa. 11. 7
. And again: For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous: with favor will thou
compass him, as with a shield Psa. 5. 12
. So again: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous Psa* 34, 15
. (To omit many other places of like assertion.) From whence it evidently
appears, 1. That God beholds and sees, and cannot but behold and see, those
that are righteous: 2. That seeing and beholding them such, He always loves
them, and delights in them. Therefore it is unpossible, that God at any time
should not see and behold the persons we speak of, being righteous, and whilst
righteous: And 2. that seeing and beholding them such, that He should not love
them, and intend graciously to them: and consequently, that all this while, He
should intend or decree the extremity of all evil and misery against them.

2. It is altogether inconsistent with the Righteousness and Equity of Gods
Proceedings, to neglect or pass by the present condition or ways of men, either
of righteousness, or unrighteousness, and to respect them, or measure out unto
them, either Grace, or Displeasure, either Reward, or Punishment, according to
their future condition, or according to what He foresees their ways will be
afterward. All Gods Purposes and Decrees relate unto men according to the
nature and exigency of their present conditions, not of their future. If a man
be at present in a condition of Righteousness, he is under the gracious
influence and benediction of that Decree of God, whereby He has decreed Life
and Peace and Blessedness to righteous men. And suppose it be known unto God,
that this man, righteous at present, will afterward forsake his righteousness,
and turn aside into ways of unrighteousness, yet whilst he remains
righteous, he is not under the dint or danger of that Decree of God, which
respects unrighteous men, and whereby Wrath and Judgment are decreed against
them. That Disposition or Principle, which we now ascribe unto God, is most
clearly asserted in the Scriptures by Himself* and that by way of vindication
of his Righteousness, from the unworthy conceits of those, who judged otherwise
of Him. If a man BE JUST, and DO that which is lawful and right, And has not
eaten upon the Mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the Idols of the
house of Israel, etc. He IS just: He shall surely live, says the Lord God
Ezekiel. 18. 5, 6, 9
. q. d. During this posture, or course of righteous walking, he is under the
blessing of that gracious and unchangeable Decree of mine, wherein Life and
Peace are decreed unto righteous men. But when the righteous TVRNETH away from
his righteousness, and COMMITS iniquity, and DOES according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done, shall not be mentioned: in his Trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in them shall he dye Verse 24
: i. e. perish for ever, viz. unless he repents, and turns back again to his
former course of righteousness. So again: Therefore thou Son of man, say unto
the children of thy people; the righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his Transgression. As for the wickedness of the
wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his
wickedness: neither shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness
in the day that he sins. When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall
surely live: if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity [as many
being in an estate of grace, upon a presumption that they cannot possibly fall
away, too frequently do] all his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for
his iniquity that he has committed, he shall dye for it. Again when I say unto
the wicked, Thou shall surely dye; if he turn from his sin, and do that which
is lawful and right, If he restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed,
walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity* he shall surely live:
he shall not dye Ezekiel. 33. 12. 13, 14, 15, etc.
. By these, and very many more places of like consideration (in reference to
the business in hand) which might be added, it is fully evident, that
particular men* or the persons of men, from time to time, come under the
eternal Decrees of God, either of Life, or Death, of Salvation, or
Condemnation, not according to the nature, exigency or import of their
potential or future, but of their actual and present conditions respectively:
and consequently, that if the generality of men were, either from Eternity
righteous (and righteous they must needs be, whilst they were in God, and in
him only, and were nothing but God) or at any time after their Creation, as
they were in Adam, during the time of his innocence, they must needs, whilst
they were in these capac^ties or conditions, be under that eternal Decree of
God, by which, or wherein, Life and Peace and Happiness are decreed unto
righteous men; and so could not be from Eternity under a Decree of Reprobation.

3. (And lastly) If God from Eternity looked upon the far greater part of men
(all those I mean, who are Reprobates, so called) as Persons that would in time
prove sinful, or as Persons in time proved sinful, and under this prospect of
them* passed a Decree of Reprobation upon, or against them, then was this
sinfulness wherein He beheld them, the ground or cause of this Decree of
Reprobation, or not. If not, to what purpose is it pleaded or stood upon, in
reference to the said Decree? And why is it not plainly and right-down
affirmed, that God reprobated them out of his mere Will and Pleasure, without
the interveniency of any consideration of sin, to incline or move him
thereunto? And if this be so, He need not in his Decree of Reprobation, look
upon them as sinful, but simply as men. If He looked upon them simply as men,
then he looked upon them as the pure and perfect workmanship of his own hands:
if so, then the perfect workmanship of his own hands must be the object of his
Reprobation, and consequently, that which is good: For God saw every thing that
He had made, and behold, it was very good Genesis 1. 31
. But unpossible it is that that which is good, especially very good, should be
the object of Gods Reprobation. Again, if that sinfulness, wherein it is
pretended that God looked upon men, when He Reprobated them, was any ground or
cause of such his Reprobation, then was it a ground, or cause, morally moving
him hereunto: for other influence or efficiency upon him it could have none. If
so, then 1. The Will of God may have a Cause superior to it, and productive of
it; which is generally taken for an impossibility. 2. If the sinfulness of men
foreseen moved God morally to conceive or make a Decree of Reprobation against
them, then was this Decree made by him in a way of Justice, and Equity; yea
upon such terms, that had He not made, or passed such a Decree, upon the
grounds and reasons that were before him, He had been unjust. If so, there
being the same Reason, why He should pass a like Decree against those men also,
who are now called his Elect, in as much as a like sinfulness in them was
foreseen likewise by him from Eternity, He must be unjust, because He has not
passed a like Decree against these. The truth is, that such a Decree of
Reprobation, as men commonly notion in God, involves so many inextricable
difficulties, palpable absurdities (that I say not, intolerable Blasphemies
also) that my hope is, it will shortly mole mali sui ruere, fall and sink with
the insupportable weight of its own evil, in the minds and judgments of men.
As for those places of Scripture, with the Arguments commonly drawn from them,
which are counted the Pillars of such a Reprobation, we shall in due time, the
inflexible hand of Death, or some other grand diversion, not preventing us, by
the gracious assistance of the Spirit of Truth, clearly answer, and disengage
from that service. In the mean time, we shall further countenance the Doctrine
in hand, with this Demonstration.

If Christ dyed not for all Men without exception, then is the Sin of Adam. 39.
Argum. 12.
more extensive, or extensive unto more, in a way of Condemnation and Death,
then the Death of Christ, and the Grace given by Him unto the World, is in a
way of Justification, and of Life. The Reason of this Consequence is apparent:
viz. because the Sin of Adam extended unto all Men without exception, in a way
of Condemnation. Therefore I assume: But the Sin of Adam is not extensive unto
more in a way of Condemnation* then the Grace given by Christ is in a way of
Justification. Ergo.

This latter Proposition is clearly enough asserted by the Apostle, and this
over and over. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift, [i. e. the
free gift of Grace by Christ unto the World:] meaning, that the offense, or sin
of Adam did not operate so forcibly, or with so high an hand toward, or to,
the Condemnation of Men, as the Grace given by Christ operateth toward, or to,
the Justification, or Salvation of Men. For thus he explains himself in the
words following. For if through the offense of one many be dead [i. e.
obnoxious, or liable unto death] much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many Romans 5. 15
. As if he should have said; there is great Reason to conceive and judge, that
the grace of God, and the gift of Jesus Christ thereby, should be much more
effectual to procure the Justification and Salvation of many, then the offense
of one, the Condemnation of many; partly because the offense of one, wrought
only in its own strength and native tendency in bringing Condemnation and
Death upon many, having only the permissive Will of God, not his operative or
designing Will, for, or toward, the Production of such an effect; whereas the
operative and projecting, or designing, Will of God, interposed, went along
with, yea and magnified it self in the gracious gift by Jesus Christ, in order
to the bringing of the Justification of Life upon, or unto, many; partly also,
because Jesus Christ, being the eternal Son of God, consecrated and given by
the Father for this end and purpose, viz. to bring the Justification of Life
unto, or upon many, [i. e. to put many into such an estate of Justification,
wherein continuing, they should live, or be saved] was a far more likely Person
to carry on, and make good his engagement for the Justification of many, then
Adam, being a weak Creature, and of an earthy frame, was to bring the
Condemnation of Death upon many. Now to say, that by the offense of one, a far
greater number of men, incomparably more, are made dead, [brought into an
estate of Condemnation, and Death] then by the Grace of God, and by the gift of
Jesus Christ through this Grace, are brought into an estate of Justification,
is quite to alter the Property of the Apostles arguing in this place, and to
invert the express tendency of it. For whereas his intent clearly is, to assert
a far more emphatical likelihood, or rationality, that the Grace of God in the
gift of Jesus Christ, should operate and prevail to the Justification of many,
and that accordingly it does thus operate and prevail, then the Sin of Adam to
the Condemnation of many, such an assertion as that mentioned, makes him to say
(or at least it self says) that, whether there be more likelihood, or
rationality, or no, that the Grace of God by Christ should justify many, then
that the Sin of Adam should condemn many, yet for matter of fact it is
otherwise: and that the grace of God by Christ justifies a few only, in
comparison, whereas the sin of Adam condemns all, without exception. To affirm,
for the strengthening of the Faith of Believers (upon which account,
questionless, the Apostle here speaks it) that there is a far greater
probability that many should be justified by Christ, then that many should be
condemned by Adam, and yet to affirm withal, that, this probability
notwithstanding, many, yea all without exception, are condemned by Adam, and
but a very few (comparatively) justified by Christ, is to blow hot and cold
with the same breath, and to pull down with the one hand, what a man builds up
with the other.

The commensurableness, or coextensiveness, of the Grace of God in Christ, in
order to the Justification of Men, with the Sin of Adam in respect of the
Condemnation of Men, is very pregnantly avouched, the second, and third time
also, by the same Apostle, in these subsequent Passages of the same contexture.
Therefore as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation:
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto
Justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners:
so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous Romans 5* 18, 19
. In these two Verses, the condemned ones of Adam, and the justified ones of
Christ, are (as we formerly observed Cap 6, 23
) computed by one and the same numerical expression. In the former, we hear of
the Condemnation of no more then ALL MEN by the offense of Adam; and of no
fewer then All Men justified by Christ. In the latter, of no more, then MANY
made Sinners by Adam; nor of any fewer then MANY made Righteous by Christ. Now
as Peter was admonished by a voice from Heaven not to call that common, which
God had cleansed Acts 10, 15
; so neither is it safe for any man to make that number lesser, which God has
made greater; nor to assert a signal disproportion between two numbers, which
God has computed and drawn up to a perfect equality.

How uncouth, and broadly incongruous and irrational their Interp^etations are,
who carry the sense of these Passages another way, and make the ALL MEN of
Christ, no Men at all, in comparison of the ALL MEN of Adam, and the MANY of
Christ, few, in comparison of the MANY of Adam, has been demonstratively
argued in the sixth Chapter of this Discourse: where likewise the Expositions
of Mr Calvin, Bucer, and other Orthodox Expositors upon the said places, were
produced in full accord with the sense and interpretations now awarded by us.

Only one thing we shall briefly add in this place. Whereas the Apostle. 40.
(in the latter of the two last recited Passages) expresses the guilt
contractect by men from Adam, in a Verb signifying the time past, (...), HAVE
BEEN made Sinners, and the Righteousness, or Justification, brought unto Men by
Christ, in a Verb of the future tense, (...), SHALL BE made Righteous, which to
some may seem to import, that the Apostle intends to make the justified ones of
Christ in this place, no more, then those who SHALL be actually justified and
saved in the end, the number of which cannot be equal to those made Sinners by
Adam; I answer, 1. That the Justification accruing unto the World by Christ, is
a little before, expressed in a Verb signifying the time past also, viz. where
he says (as we lately heard) that the Grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is by one man, Jesus Christ, (...), HAS abounded unto many Romans 5, 15
. Therefore the collection specified, as issuing from the latter expression
mentioned, is illegitimate and groundless. 2. Tremellius from the Syriac
translates the said latter expression in the Present-tense; Multi justi fiunt,
Many ARE made righteous; which notes only the nature of the gracious
transaction of Christ, which is, to make many righteous, not the event. 3.
There is scarce any thing of a more common and known observation about the
Scriptures, then the mutual enallage, or change of Tenses, the Present being
sometimes put for the Preter, and sometimes for the Future; and so these
reciprocally. So that unless either the scope of the Place, or exigency of the
sentence, will enforce it otherwise, there is no building any Observation of
weight, upon the Particularity of a Tense. Now the scope of the Place in hand
is so far from enforcing any such supposition as this, that the justified ones
of Christ, spoken of in this Chapter, are only those, who shall be saved at
last, that it enforces the quite contrary, as has been showed. And for the
sentence, it requires no such supposal upon any account whatsoever. But 4.
(and lastly) The Reason (I conceive) why the Apostle varyeth his expression
about the Justification brought unto the World by Christ, mentioning it (in the
latter place) in a Verb of the Future tense, whereas he had (in the same
Period) expressed the guilt brought upon the World by Adam, in a Verb of the
Preter-tense; the Reason (I say) hereof I conceive to be, because, it is more
easily, and more generally believed, that guilt is come upon the World by Adam,
then that Justification is come unto it by Christ. In which respect, he
mentions the former, as a thing done, and generally so known and confessed to
be: the latter, because more questioned, and less believed, he asserteth more
vigorously and commandingly; the Future-tense being frequently in Scripture (as
in other Writings also) employed to carry strong assertions, and strict
Commands. So that this Period of the Apostle, As by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many he made righteous,
may be paraphrased thus: As you easily believe, and take it for granted, that
by the disobedience of one, many have been made sinners, and so guilty of, and
liable unto, Death, [ i. e. that all Men, as they come respectively to be
conceived and born, were made liable unto death, by the disobedience of one
long since acted, and should have perished for ever, should not Grace have
prevented it,] so certainly will it appear, and be found true, in due time,
that many, even as many, yea the self same, both number and Persons, in their
successive conceptions also, and comings into the World, those already born,
and those that hereafter shall be born, have been, and shall be, made righteous
[i. e. have been, and shall be, delivered from the guilt of sin, and liableness
unto death] by the obedience of one, i. e. by the obedient and submissive
deportment of Jesus Christ toward His Father, in yielding of Himself up unto
Death. In what sense men may be, and are by the Apostle, said to be, by nature
children of wrath Ephesians. 2, 3
, and yet not liable unto condemnation, either in their respective conceptions,
or births, shall (God assisting) be argued and cleared in more convenient
place. Only at present (to stay stomachs) we say, 1. That the word, Nature,
does no where signify, either the natural conception, or the natural birth;
nor always, if any where, partnership, or communion, in the humane Nature, or a
descent from Adam in the ordinary way of Propagation; but sometimes an innate,
or inbred Principle in a man, one or more; as 1 Cor. 11. 14. Romans 2. 14, etc.
sometimes also, a course, or series of actions, whereunto a man falls and
addicteth himself of his own accord, without any compulsion, or necessitation,
either from within or from without, through inconsiderateness, or the like; and
so likewise the habit, or evil propension voluntarily contracted by such
actions; And in this sense it may well be taken by the Apostle in the clause
specified, the carriage of the former part of the Verse inviting unto it. So
that men may be said to be by nature children of wrath, when they voluntarily
follow, or suffer themselves to be led by, such sinful inclinations, which are
apt to breed or be ingendered in flesh and blood, or in the Natures of Men. 2.
By Nature, cannot signify, by natural Birth, nor, by communion in the humane
Nature, nor, by descent from Adam, or the like; because then it would follow,
that all Children whatsoever, dying Infants, or Children, should perish
everlastingly; at least if by children of wrath, be meant, in an estate of
Condemnation, or under the actual displeasure of God: because all partake alike
of the natural Birth, of the Nature of Man, are of a like descent from Adam,
etc. 3. Some ancient Expositors interpreted the word, (...), by Nature,
prorsus, i. e. utterly, or altogether. Theophylact and Oecumenius (...), vere,
seu germane, i. e. truly, or indeed. 4. Chrysostoms Interpretation of the Place
is of much affinity with that first mentioned. The Apostle (says he) says, we
have provoked God, and made Him wroth, that is, we were wrath, and nothing
else. For as he that is the child of a man, is by nature a man: even so we
also were children of wrath, even as others: that is, none was free, but we all
did things deserving wrath (...).
. 5. (And lastly) By, children of wrath, the Apostle may very probably mean,
Persons that had been lost, and were worthy wrath, or deserving death. And thus
Calvin interprets. By children of wrath (says he) understand simply, such as
were lost, and worthy of eternal death Per filios irae, simpliciter intellige
perditos, ac morte aeterna dignos.
. According to the import of this Interpretation of the phrase, children of
wrath, all Men may truly be said to be by nature [i. e. by natural Propagation,
or by their descent from Adam] children of wrath, and yet be born in an estate
of Justification, or in an actual and immediate capacity of Salvation, by
Christ. As it is with those, who having arrived at years of discretion, and
actually believe: they carry original defilement still about with them; they
were, in respect of what was derived unto them from Adam in their natural
conception, and birth, wholly lost, and are still, notwithstanding their Faith,
in the rigor and strictness of Justice, worthy of eternal death; and yet by
means of their Faith, and the gracious Compact and Covenant, which God has
made with those that believe, they are not in an estate of Condemnation, or
liable to eternal Death. In like manner Children may possibly be conceived, and
so born into the world, with original sin, and yet not with, or under, the
guilt of it: this may be dissolved and taken away by the superabounding Grace
of God vouchsafed unto the World by Jesus Christ, though the sin it self
remains. So again: Children as soon as conceived or born, may be, and are, in
strictness of account, worthy of eternal Death by Reason of that communion they
had in Adams sin, being in his loins when he sinned: and yet this worthiness
may not be imputed unto them, or charged upon them, being (as we suppose it
clear from the Scriptures) expiated, or attoned by the great Sacrifice of
Christ in His Death. This Interpretation of the Apostles saying* We were by
nature children of wrath, even as others, is (I conceive) of all the rest,
least liable to any material exception. But we have gone beyond the line of our
late intentions, in following this chase. We retire, with a purpose to conclude
this Chapter, with the addition only of one Argument more for the confirmation
of our main Doctrine. Therefore,

In the thirteenth (and last place) The Universality of Redemption purchased.
41. Argum. 13.
by Christ I further argue and demonstrate from the consideration of some of
the Principal Types under the Law, by which the compass and unlimited extent of
it, was prefigured. I shall insist only upon two: the Brazen Serpent; and the
Feast of Jubilee.

First, Concerning the Brazen Serpent; our Savior himself owneth and asserteth
a typical correspondency in the erection and usefulness hereof, with himself,
in respect of that great and gracious Design and Purpose of God in sending* Him
unto the World. And as Moses (says He) lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, That whosoever believes
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life Ioh. 3 14, 15
. A Type being a kind of Similitude, and the property or condition of this not
being (in the Proverbial expression) to run on all four, i. e. to answer or
hold proportion in all Particulars, indeed many times not in more, then one
only, therefore our Savior, to prevent all misunderstanding, in the
interpretation, or application of the Type mentioned, particularizeth that very
respect or consideration in himself, and his sending into the World, which was
prefigured and expressed in the Type alleged by him, in these words, That
whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, etc. To understand clearly what
there was in the Type answering (in a way of pre-signification) that
consideration in Christ's coming or sending into the World, which himself here
insists upon, as presignified hereby, we must have recourse to the History
concerning the erection of the Brazen Serpent, unto which also himself sends
us, in that Particle of comparison, or resemblance, As, As Moses lifted up,
etc. The original of this Brazen Serpent, together with the Counsel and
Intention of God in his Erection, Moses records thus. Make thee (says He to
Moses) a fiery Serpent [viz. in similitude or form] and set it upon a pole: and
it shall come to pass, that EVERY ONE THAT IS BITTEN, when He looks upon it,
shall live Numb. 21 8
. From which words it is most evident, that this fiery Serpent [in form, as
Christ came in the similitude of that sinful flesh, whose sting is so mortal to
the World] was not intended by God as a means of healing, or preservation, to a
certain, definite, or determinate number of Persons, or that such and such by
Name, and no other, should look upon it, in order to their healing, or that
whosoever in the event did look upon it, and no other but these, should be
healed by it; but that whosoever would, might look upon it, (for which end also
Moses was commanded to set it up on high upon a pole, where it might be readily
visible unto all,) and that whosoever should, or did, look upon it, being
bitten, or stung, with any fiery Serpent, might be healed thereby. Now all Men
without exception, being (as we all know, and confess) stung, and that
mortally, with the fiery Serpent, Sin, unless Christ should be lifted up [upon
the Cross, i. e. suffer Death] with an Intent on Gods part, 1. That every man,
if he pleased, might believe in Him: And 2. That every man that should believe
in Him, should be saved by Him, He should altogether dis-answer that famous
Type we speak of, and that in that very consideration and respect, wherein He
pleads a special conformity to it.

If it be replied; The correspondency between Christ, and the Brazen Serpent,
is sufficiently salved in this; that as the Will and Ordinance of God, in, and
about the Brazen Serpent, was, that whosoever being stung, should look up to
it, should be healed: so is it His good Pleasure, in, and about Christ, that
whosoever believes in Him, should be saved from that Death, which sin exposes
him unto. But this does not imply, or suppose, Christ to be an Universal
Savior, or Redeemer; I answer,

1. That the Brazen Serpent was not ordained by God, to be a condition or means
of healing by a looking up to it, only unto those, or for their sakes, who
actually did look up to it, and were healed by it (unless we shall suppose that
all those, without exception, who were stung of serpents, did look up to it,
and were accordingly healed, which would be a supposition without sufficient
ground,) but unto all those, without exception, and for their sakes, who were,
or any time after should be, thus stung, whether they would, or should look up
to it for healing, or no. Nor do we find, in the words of the Institution of
it (lately specified) the least whisper or intimation of any exception of
Persons in this kind. Therefore unless it be admitted, that Christ dyed as
well for those, or for their sakes, who, being sinners (as all are) do not, or
shall not, believe in Him, as for those who do, or shall, He will not fulfill
the Type we speak of, no not in that consideration, wherein the richness and
fullness of his Grace was in special manner typified (as Himself, in the words
lately transcribed from his own mouth, plainly enough declares.)

2. If it be granted, that this is the Will, or Intent of God, that whosoever
believes, or shall believe, in Him, shall be saved, it amounts to as much, in
expressness of consequence and import, as we contend for; viz. that there is
Salvation purchased and procured by Him for all Men, without exception. For
that which is to be had upon the performance of such a condition, which being
performed, gives no Being to it, must of necessity have a Being there, where,
or from whence it is to be had upon the performance of this condition, whether
this condition be performed, or no. If it be true, that in case I shall go up
into the Chamber, I shall meet my Friend, or Brother, there, it must needs be
true, that my Friend, or Brother, is there, whether I go up to meet him there,
or no. In like manner, if this be a truth, that in case I shall believe on
Christ, I shall find Salvation for my self in Him, it must of necessity be
every whit as true, that there is Salvation in Him for me, whether I believe in
Him, or no: because my believing in Him, would not create any Salvation in Him,
more then what was in Him before. So that if it were not in Him, before my
believing, I could not have it, I should not find it in Him, though I should
believe. But the legitimacy of the consequence we speak of, from the Premises
unto which we relate it, and which are our Adversaries own resolute Doctrine,
we have argued and evicted at large, and this more then once, in our former
Discussions See Cap. 7. Sect. 2, 3, etc. and Cap. 8. 31. 42.
.

Again, The other great Type we mentioned, of the Redemption purchased by
Christ for the World, the Feast of Jubilee, plainly proves this Redemption to
have been, in the purchase and procurement of it, general, or universal,
however in the actual Possession, or enjoyment of it, it proves the benefit, or
blessing only of a few, by means of the non-acceptation of it by the greatest
part of those, for whom it was purchased. That the Feast of Jubilee under the
Law, was a Type, and that of a most clear and significant import, of the
spiritual Liberty and Freedom from Sin and Misery, purchased by Christ, and
proclaimed by God in the Gospel unto the World, is the standing Notion and
sense of all Parties in the present Controversies. The Tenor of the Institution
of this Feast, as far as concerns the business in hand, runs thus. And ye
shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim Liberty throughout all the Land,
unto ALL the Inhabitants thereof: it shall be a Jubilee unto you, and ye shall
return EVERY MAN unto His Possession, and y^ shall return EVERY MAN unto His
Family Lev. 25. 10
. And a little after: In the year of this Iubilee ye shall return EVERY MAN
unto His Possession Verse 13
. This returning of every man to His possession, is (says Mr* Ainsworth) a
figure of our restoring by Christ into Paradise, the Possession whereof Adam
lost by sin. And (by proportion) the returning of every man to His Family [i.
e. to his civil liberty and freedom] is a figure of our restoring by Christ
unto that spiritual liberty, or freedom from under the dominion and power of
sin, with all the hard consequences of such a bondage, whereof we were all
deprived by* Adams sin. Now the Tenor of the Counsel and Intentions of God in
the Erection or Institution of this Feast, we see expressly to be, the ease,
benefit, restitution to possessions, and liberties, of EVERY MAN, without the
exception of any. Yea all servants that had refused their liberty at the end of
the seventh year of their service, which their Masters were expressly enjoined
by the Law Exodus 21. 6
to grant unto them, if they desired it, had the benefit and indulgence of the
Iubilee, and were then to be manumized or set at liberty, if they desired it,
as well as others; which plainly signified the riches of the Grace of God in
the Gospel to be so great, that even wilful sinners, and such as have waxen old
in ways of provocation, are hereby made capable of the love and favor of God in
the Pardon of all their sins. For (to note this by the way) the Intent of this
Feast was not (I suppose) to compel, or necessitate every man, no nor yet any
man, to return either to his Possession, or to his Family, whether they would
or no, but to afford them an opportunity, and to invest them with a liberty, or
right, of returning unto either, if they pleased. Because otherwise, it had
been less matter of gratification, ease, or indulgence unto men, yea possibly
unto some, as viz. unto those, who had been found unwilling to return unto
either, it had been matter of trouble and discon^ent. (...), (as the Greek
Epigram has it,) i. e.

What ^'re Necessity imposes,
The Mind necessitated troubles.
But to the Point in hand. It being the clear and unquestionable intent of God,
in, and by the great and solemn Feast of Jubilee, to lose the two sore yokes,
of Bondage and Poverty, from off all necks whatsoever, without any difference
or distinction of persons, in one kind, or other, He should be far more
gracious and munificent in Type, or Shadow, then in Substance, in case He
should not be every whit as large, free, and comprehensive in His Intentions of
affording means and opportunity unto men for deliverance from sin and death by
Jesus Christ.

If it be objected; It is true, the intent of the Jubilee was to invest every
man [viz. that was a Jew, and of the natural seed of Abraham] with a right of
power to return to his possession, or family: But not to gratify every man
simply, or to indulge the like privilege unto all the World. Therefore this
rather proves the confinement of the Intentions of the Grace of God in Jesus
Christ, unto his Church, or Elect only, then the enlargement of them unto all
the World; especially considering, that the whole body of the People and Nation
of the Jews, were typical, and presignified the Church, or Churches, which were
afterward to be raised up amongst the Gentiles; To this I answer;

1. Be it granted, that the Body or Nation of the Jews, did typifie the Church
or Churches of the Gentiles, yet did not every single person of this Nation
typifie a true member of these Churches. As for example, Achitoph^l did not
typifie a true Saint, or a Believer under the Gospel, nor did Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram typifie so many godly or holy men among the Gentiles; nor had any
unrighteous or wicked Person of this Nation the Honor of typing out any true
Nathaniel, or Elect Person, under the New Testament. If ungodly persons among
the Jews were Types of any thing, it was of such Hypocrites or profane Persons,
that should be found in the Churches under the Gospel. And if so, the intent of
the Jubilee, being (as we have proved from the express letter of the
Institution of it) for the benefit, comfort, and ease of every man amongst
them, as well of the wicked and unholy, as of the holy and righteous, it
follows roundly, that this typified and taught, that the Intentions of God, in,
and about the Salvation afforded and exhibited by Jesus Christ unto the World,
stood equal and indifferent toward all Men without exception, without any
distinction of holy and unholy, righteous and unrighteous, Elect and Reprobate,
or the like.

2. Although the Law of Jubilee (as the whole Ceremonial Law in all the parts
and branches of it) was given particularly UNTO the Jews, yet was it not given
particularly FOR the Jews, i. e. for the sake, or benefit, of the Jews only,
but for the accommodation and benefit of all the World besides. And upon this
account (I suppose) the Apostle Paul calls the Ceremonial Injunctions by
M^ses, the elements, or r^diments, not of the Jews, but of the World Col. 2. 8.
20
; viz. because they were given with an intent on Gods part to nurture and breed
up the World, i. e. all Nations as well as the Jews, in such a measure or
degree of the knowledge of the Messiah then to come, which He judged meet to
impart unto the World until His coming. So that how soever the Jewish Nation
was honored by God above all other Nations, in being made by Him Feoffees in
trust (as it were) for the World, and had the keeping of the Oracles of Life
committed unto them, yet had they no right or lawfulness of power, to deny any
Person under Heaven part or fellowship with them in any of their spiritual
Privileges, who should desire it of them in a due and regular way, and turn
Proselyte. Now there was no Person of any Nation, that was made by God
incapable of the benefit or blessing of Proselytism: and consequently the Joy
and Privileges accruing unto Men by virtue of the Law and Feast of Iubilee,
did, though not in so immediate and direct a way, concern all other Nations,
and Persons, as well as the Jews, or natural seed of Abraham. Even as the
Gospel, and Sacramental Administrations annexed thereunto, in these days, are
only possessed and enjoyed, in, and by the Churches of Christ: but yet they
are so, and upon such terms, possessed and enjoyed by them, that whosoever from
amongst the most Idolatrous and Heathenish Nation under Heaven, shall believe,
may and ought to have communion with them in such their Possessions and
Enjoyments. Either of these Answers is sufficient to loosen the joints of the
loins of the Objection.

The Arguments and Grounds laid down and managed in this Chapter, together with
those Passages and Texts of Scripture, which we have heard speaking so
distinctly and aloud, the same things with them, have turned my thoughts and
Judgment about the Intentions of God in the Death of Christ, upside down, and
have filled me, Mind, Heart, Soul, and Conscience, with this Belief, that
these Intentions of His stand, and always stood, equally, unpartially, and
uniformly bent, for, or toward the Salvation of the World, without any
difference or variation in respect of any man, or numbers of men, considered
simply as men, or as having done neither good, nor evil. Yet are there three
things more that have made my Belief in this kind measure heaped up, pressed
down, and running over. The first is, that Conjunctio magna, that great
conjunction of all, or far the greatest part of the chief Luminaries in the
Firmament of the Christian Church, whilst the constitution of it was yet more
athletique, healthful and sound (I mean, during the Primitive Times) the
multiplied rays or beams of whose light concentred in the same Point of
Doctrine with us. Of this we shall, God assisting, give some competent account
in the forepart of the Chapter following. The second is, the frequent
Testimony given to this Doctrine by those, who are (or at least are so
esteemed) the chief Adversaries and Opposers of it, who (as appears from their
Writings) are often necessitated to assert or own it, as a Principle, without
which, they know not, in many cases, how to make a consistent Discourse, or
manage the Theme they have before them. Somewhat of this also we shall show in
the latter Part of the said Chapter. The third (and last) is the apparent
inconcludency and weakness of those arguings and reasonings, whether from the
Scriptures, or other Principles, by which the cause of the contrary Opinion is
wont by the ablest Patrons it has (as far as men of this engagement are yet
known unto me) to be pleaded and maintained. The Demonstration of this is
designed for the subject matter of the second Part of this Work, if God shall
vouchsafe to make his Sun to shine a birthday for it.

CHAP. XIX.
Wherein the Sense of Antiquity, together with the variableness of Judgment in
modern Writers, touching the Controversy under discussion, is truly and
unpartially represented.

FOr their sakes, who are afraid to believe any thing, what pregnancy of. 1.
ground soever there be to evince the truth of it otherwise, but only what
they know, or at least think, that many other men, and these some ways
honorable in their sight, have believed before them, I have subjoyned this
Chapter to those large debates, which finished their course in the preceding
Chapters of this Book, managed (I trust) to the satisfaction of all such, who
count it more safe to stand upon a rock alone, or with a few, then upon a
quagmire or quicksand, with a greater company. But because all Men have not
this Faith, I shall show unto those that want it, a cloud of as honorable
Persons (I suppose) even in their own eyes, as any that have inhabited
Mortality since the Apostles days, standing upon the Rock of that Doctrine,
which has been asserted, and recommended in our former Discussions. For who
within that compass of time we speak of, have had a spirit of greater glory
resting on them, then those that sat in the Apostles Chairs, next after them,
and were Pillars of light and fire in the Christian Church, in her Primitive
and purest days? And that these in their respective stations, and successive
generations, were not only Partakers, but Defenders and Assertors of the same
Faith with us in the Doctrine of Redemption, hitherto maintained, is legible
enough in the next ensuing Testimonies: after which we shall show how
fluctuating and inconsistent with themselves the Judgments of later Writers
have been about the said Doctrine, and how unpossible it is for any man to be
of an established Conscience therein, that shall build himself upon their
Authority.

We shall begin with Augustine, the first born amongst the Fathers, though not
in time, yet in worth, and Name: and from him, proceed first unto those that
lived before him, by a gradual ascent: and then to those that succeeded him, by
a descent answerable. That Austin's Doctrine concerning the Intentions of God
about the extent of the Death of Christ, was the same with that asserted by us
for orthodox and sound in our present Discourse, needs (I suppose) no greater
proof, then an unpartial and due consideration of these, and such like sayings,
scattered up and down his Writings from place to place upon occasion. In that
Discourse, wherein He makes answer, ad Articulos sibi falso impositos, to
certain Articles falsely fathered upon Him, He insisteth upon this (in the first
place) as laid to his charge, that he should hold, That our Lord Jesus Christ
did not suffer for the Redemption of all Men Quod Dominus nost^^ Jesus Christus
non ^^o omnium hominum redemptione sit passus.
. The second He mentions, is this: That God should not be willing to save all
Men, though all Men were willing to be saved Quod Deus omnes nolit serva^e,
etiamsi omnes salvari v^lint.
. In purging himself upon the former of these, He writes thus: Against the
wound of original sin, wherewith in Adam the Nature of all Men was corrupted
and become dead, and from whence the disease of all manner of concupiscence
grows, the Death of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, is a true, potent,
and the singular Remedy, who being not liable to the debt of Death, and the
only Person without sin, dyed for those that were sinners and debtors [in this
kind.] Therefore as to the greatness and potency of the price, and as far as
concerns one [and the same] cause of Mankind, the Blood of Christ is the
REDEMPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD. But they who pass through this world without the
Faith of Christ, and the Sacrament [or, sacred work] of Regeneration, are
strangers to [or, estranged from] this Redemption. Therefore whereas by reason
of one [and the same] Nature of all Men, and by [one and the same] cause of all
Men truly undertaken by our Lord, all Men may truly be said to be redeemed, yet
all Men are not [actually] brought [or delivered] out of captivity. The
propriety [i. e. the actual possession, and enjoyment] of Redemption, is
(doubtless) with them, out of whom the Prince of this World is cast forth, and
who are now, not Vessels of the Devil, but Members of Christ. Whose Death is
not so bestowed upon Mankind, that they, who never come to be regenerate,
should belong to the Redemption thereof [i. e. should act^ally partake of this
Redemption] but so, that what by one only Example [or exemplary Act] was done
for all Men together [or, at once] might be celebrated in all particular
persons, by a particular Sacrament: [i. e. might by a particular administration
of the Sacrament of this Redemption, meaning, I suppose, Baptism, to each
particular man, be plainly declared to relate unto, or to concern all
particulars.] For that cup [or potion] of immortality, which was tempered and
made of our infirmity, and the Divine Power [or Vertue] has in it wherewith to
profit all Men; but it profits no man, unless He drinks it Contra vulnus
originalis peccati, quo in Adam omnium hominu^ corrupta and mortificata est
Natura, and unde omnium concupiscentiaru^ morbus inolevit, verum and potens and
singular remedium est mors filii Dei Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui liber a
mortis debito, and solus absque peccato, pro peccatoribus and debitoribus
mortuus est. Quod ergo ad magnitudinem and potentiam precij, and quod ad unam
pertinet causam generis humani, sanguis Christi Redemptio est totius Mundi. Sed
qui hoc saecuium sine fide Christi, and sine Regenerationis Sacramento
pertranseunt, Redemptionis alieni sunt. Cum itaque per unam omnium naturam,
omnium causam a Domino nostro in veritate susceptam, Redempti omnes recte
dicantur, non tamen omnes captivitate sunt eruti: Redemptionis proprietas haud
dubium penes illos est, de quibus Princeps hujus Mundi missus est for as, and
jam non vasa Diabolt, sed membra Christi. Cujus Mors non impensa est humano
generi, vt ad Redemptionem ejus, etiam qui regenerandi non erant, pertinerent,
sed ita quod per unicum exemplum gestum est pro universis, per singular
Sacramentum celebraretur in singuilis. Poculum quippe Immortalitatis, quod
confectum est de infirmitate nostra, and virtute divina, habet quidem in se vt
omnibus prosit: sed si non bibitur, non proficit.
. What Testimony from a man concerning his Judgment in any Point, can be
imagined more pregnant, satisfactory, and clear, then such, wherein He expressly
complains of being falsely charged with the contrary, and vindicates and
explains himself accordingly? Beza, because of this Testimony, so full and
particular against his Opinion of limited Redemption, and being loath to have
this his Opinion ^^cumbred with the opposite Authority of this Father,
discharges it of the burden, by pretending, that the Book, or Tract, wherein
it stands, is supposititious, and not Augustins. But, besides the genius,
phrase, and stil^, every ways (...), resembling the Author, whose Name it
bears, Calvin, who of the two was a man of greater discerning abilities,
acknowledges it accordingly De occulta Dei Provid. in Respons. ad Praefat.
Opusc. p. 851.
. Nor is there any piece in all those Writings, which pass under the Name of
Augustins Works at this day, but may, upon a pretense every whit as plausible,
be traduced as illegicimate.

Before I pass from this Testimony, I desire the Reader to take knowledge, that
the worthy Author thereof toward the beginning of the said Tract, and a few
lines before the recited Testimony, professes, that what he should deliver
therein, was his sense and Judgment in the respective Articles, in opposition
to the Pelagians and their Doctrine Propositis ergo.
. From whence it manifestly appears, that in Augustins days, it was no
Orthodox Doctrine, but a Pelagian Error, to hold, that Christ dyed not for all
Men; in as much as the Father complains (as we heard before) that he was
falsely charged by some abettors of the Pelagian Faction, that he held, that
Christ the Lord suffered not for the Redemption of all Men. Therefore they who
traduce the Doctrine maintained in this Discourse, under the odious Name of
Pelagianism, either declare themselves notably ignorant of what Pelagianism
means, or else asperse that Father, who (questionless) knew better then all
his fellows what belonged to Pelagianism, with the blot of this ignorance. By
his Vote and Verdict, the Doctrine which contradicts that asserted by us, is
Pelagianism.

Another Testimony from the same Father, upon the same account may be that
formerly cited. Having rehearsed these words, For God sent not His Son to judge
the World, but that the World by Him should be saved, He infers thus: Therefore
as much as lies in the Physician, He came to heal the sick. That man slays
himself, who will not observe the precepts of the Physician. He came a Savior
unto the World. Why is He called the Savior of the World, but THAT HE SHOULD
SAVE THE WORLD Ergo quantum in Medico est, sanare venit aegrotum. Ipse se
interimit, qui praecepta Medici observare non vult. Venit Salvator ad Mundum.
Quare Salvator dictus est Mundi, nisi ut salvet Mundum? Aug. in Joh. Tract. 12.
. Elsewhere; addressing himself in his private Devotions unto the Lord Christ,
He speaks to Him thus: I know thee to be true God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
the only begotten Son of God, the Creator, Savior, and Redeemer of me, and OF
WHOLE MANKIND Cognovi te veru^ Deum, and Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium
Dei unigenitum, Creatorem, Salvatorem, and Redemptorem meum, and totius humani
generis, etc. Augustine. Soliloqu. c. 32.
. Again: O thou unclean World, He comes that should redeem thee, and thou art
troubled: and Him thou will destroy, when He was MINDED TO DELIVER THEE O Munde
immunde, venit qui te redimat, and turbaris: and hunc tu vis perdere, quando
ille te disposuit liberare. Aug. de Symb. l. 2.
. Concerning Judas He demands, What did the Sin of Judas, who sold Him, by
whom HE SHOULD HAVE BEEN [or, was to have been] REDEEMED Quid egit iniquitas
Judae, qui eum vendidit, a quo redimi debuit? Ibid.
? Afterward He presents Christ, after His Resurrection, speaking to the
unbeleeving Jews, who had crucified Him, thus: Behold the Man whom ye have
crucified: behold that God and Man, in whom you refuse to believe. You see the
wounds which you have inflicted, the side which ye have pierced: because by
you, AND FOR YOU, it has been opened, and yet you will not enter Ecce hominem
quem crucifixistis, ecce Deum and hominem, in quem credere noluistis. Videtis
vulnera quae infixistis, agnoscitis latus, quod pupugistis: quoniam and per
vos, and propter vos, apertum est, nec tamen intrare voluistis. Ibid.
. In another place, thus: Mankind falls sick, not of bodily diseases, but of
sins. This Great Patient [or sick man] lies all along the World, from the East
unto the West. FOR THE HEALING OF THIS GREAT SICK MAN, THE OMNIPOTENT PHYSICIAN
COMES DOWN Aegrotat humanum genus, non morbis corporis sed peccatis. Jacet
toto orb terrarum ab Orient usque ad Occidentem grandis aegrotus: Ad sanandum
grandem aegrotum descendit Omnipotens Medicus, etc. Aug. De verbis Domini.
Sermon. 59.
. The same Father (in another part of his Works, comparing the first and the
second Adam together) discourses to this effect. What therefore was justly due
from Adam, Christ unjustly by suffering Death, paid. He stretched forth His
Hand to the sweetness of the Apple: Christ to the bitterness of the Cross. He
showed the Tree of Death, Christ, the Tree of Life. He lift up Himself against
God, and fell: Christ HVMELED HIMSELF THAT HE MIGHT LIFT UP ALL. Adam brought
Death upon all Men universally; and Christ has repaired [or restord] Life unto
all Men. Every one therefore looked toward the brazen Serpent, and was healed
[of the wounds received] from the poisonous Serpents. The brazen Serpent set
upon a wooden pole, overcame all the venom of the living Serpents. and Christ
being hung upon the Cross, and dying, quenched the old poisons [or venoms] of
the Devil, and DELIVERED [or freed] ALL THAT WERE STRVCK [or stung] BY HIM Ille
arborem necis, icte salutis ostendit. ille se contra Deum erexit, and cecidit.
Christus se humiliavit, ut omnes erigeret. Adam Mortem universis intulit: and
Christus vitam omnibus reparavit. Respiciebat ergo unusquisque ad Serpentem
aeneum, and a venenatis Serpentibus sanabatur. Serpens aeneus in ligno positus
ve^ena v^vorum Serpentum superavit: and Christus in cruce suspensus and
mortuus, antiqua Diaboli venena restinxit, and omnes, qui ab eo percussi
fluerant, liberavit. August. De Temp. Sermon. 101.
. This Father, in his dialect and manner of expression, could not more
significantly declare for General Redemption, then He has done in the
now-recited Testimonies. And the truth is, that Passages and sayings of like
import are very familiar and frequent in his Writings. In one place He says,
that Judas cast away the price of silver, for which He sold the Lord: and
acknowledged not the price, WITH WHICH HIMSELF WAS REDEEMED BY THE LORD Judas
projecit Preciu^ argenti, quo ab illo Dominus venditus erat: nec agnovit
pretiu^, quo ipse a Domino redemptus erat. Aug. in Enar. Psalm. 68.
. In another: Unless He [Christ] had been crucified, the WORLD had not been
REDEEMED Nisi enim crucifigeretur ill^, mundus non redimeretur. Aug. De Symb^l.
3. c. 4.
. In a third; For the Blood of Christ is so [or, upon such terms] shed for
Remission of ALL SINS [or, for Remission of the Sins of all Men,] that it is
able to blot out that very sin, by which it was shed Christi enim sanguis sic
in remissionem peccato^u^ omnium f^sus est, ut ipsum etiam peccatum posset
delere, quo fusus est. Aug. Tract. 92. in Johan.
. In a fourth: We read in the Scriptures, that the safety [or, Salvation] OF
ALL MANKIND is PVRCHASED [or bought] with the Blood of our Savior, as the
Apostle Peter says, etc. In a fifth: If therefore the price of our Life be the
Blood of the Lord, see then how it is not the earthly uncertainty of a Field
that was redeemed therewith, BUT THE ETERNAL SAFETY of the WHOLE WORLD Legimus
in Scripturis quod totius generis humani falus redempta sit sanguine
Salvatoris, sicut dit Apostolus Petrus, etc. Et paulo post: Igitur si pretium
vitae nostrae sanguis est Domini, vide ergo quia illo non tam redempta sit agri
terrena fragilitas, quam totius Mundi in columitas sempiterna. Aug. de Temp.
Ser. 128.
. In a sixth: God in no [other] way provided more beneficially [or bountifully]
for Mankind, then when the very Wisdom of God, that is, His only Son,
consubstantial and coeternal with the Father, attempted to assume whole Man
Deus nullo modo beneficentius consulit generi humano, quam cum ipsa Sapientia
Dei, id est, unicus filius consubstantialis Patri, and coaeternus, totum
hominem suscipere conatus est, etc. Aug. de ver. Relig. c. 16.
. In a seventh: What then is the meaning of, God is in the midst of Her? This
signifies that God is equal [or equally affected] unto all, and accepts no
man's person. For as that which is in the midst, is a like distant from all the
extreme parts: so God is said to be in the midst, [in as much] as He consults
and provides Equally FOR ALL Quid ergo est Deus in medio ejus? Hoc significat,
quod aequus est omnibus Deus, and personas non accipit. Quomodo enim illud quod
in medio est, paria habet spacia ad omnes fines: ita Deus medi^^ esse dicitur
aequaliter omnibus consulens. Aug. in Psalm. 45.
. In an eighth: speaking in a Rhetorical Apostrophe unto Thomas. He expresses
himself thus: Thomas, look well on our Price, diligently consider the Prints of
the Nails, and in His very wounds acknowledge [or take notice of] the Medicine,
or Treasure, of Mankind Intuere Thoma pretium nostrum, signa clavorum
diligenter attend, and in ipsis vulneribus Medicamentum, vel thesaurum humani
generis recognosce. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 138.
. And not long after: Death was given unto one, THAT IT MIGHT BE TAKEN AWAY
FROM ALL Et mox: Vni Mors data est, vt omnibus tolleretur.
.

It were easy to make this Pile of Testimonies far greater, but that we judge
these specified abundantly sufficient to convince any man, that has not
abjured ingenuity, that Austins habitual and standing Judgment was, that Christ
by His Death attoned the Sins of all Men, without exception. Nor can there (I
verily believe) so much as one saying be produced out of all his writing,
wherein the contrary is asserted by him. Many places (I grant) may readily be
found, wherein he denies the possession, and actual enjoyment of the
Redemption, or Salvation, purchased by Christ, unto many, as viz. to all final
Impenitents and Unbeleevers: Of such an import as this, is that saying of his:
The Lord did not by His Resurrection repair [or restore] unto Forgiveness, all
[or any] Unbeleevers, and such who for their heinous sins were adjudged to
eternal punishments Neque enim infideles quosque and pro suis criminibus
aeternis suppliciis deditos, ad veniam Dominus resurgendo reparavit, etc. Aug.
de Tem. Sermon. 137.
. Such sayings as this, are of perfect lord with the Doctrine asserted by us
Cap. 17. of this Discourse, where we acknowledged and proved at large, that,
notwithstanding the Redemption purchased by Christ for all Men, yet no Man
dying in Impenitency and Unbelief shall be saved. Now if Augustine were of this
Judgment, that Christ dyed for all Men, there is little question to be made,
but that this Opinion or Doctrine reigned generally in the Christian Church in
his days [and so had done before him] as Orthodox and Catholic; considering
that He was, as the ablest, so the strictest and closest Defender of that
Faith, which was more generally esteemed Orthodox, and professed, taught, and
held throughout the Christian World. Nevertheless let us hear other learned,
pious and orthodox Writers delivering their Sense about the said Point, in
their own words.

Ambrose, with whose Ministry and Eloquence Augustine was much affected,. 2.
asserteth the same Doctrine without fear. The Sun (says He) is commanded to
arise upon all Men. And this Sun does indeed arise daily upon all Men. But that
mystical Sun of Righteousness is risen unto [or, for] ALL MEN, is come to ALL
MEN, has suffered FOR ALL MEN, and is risen again FOR ALL MEN: and has
therefore suffered, that He might take away the sin of the World. But if any
man believes not in Christ, He depriveth Himself of the GENERAL BENEFIT, as if
a man by shutting the windows, should shut out the beams of the Sun, it does
not prove, that therefore the Sun is not risen upon, or unto all, because such
a man depriveth Himself of His Heat. But as for what concerns the Sun, He
keeps His Prerogative: but this man acts the part of an unwise man in
shutting out [from Himself] the favor of the common light. And a little before
He had said: The Earth is full of the Mercy of the Lord, because Forgiveness of
Sins is granted [or given] unto ALL MEN Mysticus Sol ille justiciae omnibus
ortus est, omnibus venit, omnibus passus est, and omnibus resurrexit: ideo
autem passus est vt tolleret peccatu^ Mundi. Si quis aute^ non credit in
Christu^, generali beneficio ipse se fraudat: vt si quis clausis fenestris
radios Solis excludit, non ideo Sol non ortus est omnibus, quia calore ejus
seipse fraudavit. Sed quod Solis est, prarogativa^ suam servat: quod
imprudentis est, co^munis a se gratia^ Lucis excludit. Ambr, in Psalm. 118. Tom.
2. p. 948. Edit. Paris. Et paulo ante: Plena ergo est terra misericordia
Domini, quia omnibus est data remissio peccatoru^.
, [ i. e. offered as a gift, unto all.] In another place, thus: The brazen
Serpent was (in a figure) as it were fastened to a Cross, because it was
[hereby] declared that the true Serpent was to be crucified for Mankind, who
should frustrate [or, make voyd] the poison of the Serpent the Devil, being
[indeed] cursed in the figure, but yet in truth was He, that should take away
the sins of the whole world In figura aneus Serpens tanqua^ co^fixus cruci,
quia verus Serpens crucifigendus generi annunciabatur humano, qui Serpentis
Diaboli venenu vacuaret, in figura maledictus in veritate autem qui totius
Mundi maledicta deleret. Ambr. Apolog. David. 1. c. 2.
. Once more: So then He [the Apostle Paul] says, that there is a Savior left
to us for a suffrage of Life [meaning, by whom Life is voted in Heaven for us]
which the Law could not provide: which [Saviour] God from the beginning decreed
should be born: who because He was the only person that could be found without
sin, having overcome the Enemy of Mankind, ABOLISHED [or, blotted out] THE
SINS OF ALL MEN Salvatore^ ergo nobis relictu^ dicit, ad suffragiu^ vitae, qua^
Lex providere non potuit, quem ab initio Deus nasci decrevit: qui propterea
quod solus sine peccato inveniretur, devicto generis humani host, omnium
peccata deleret. Ambr. Epist. ad Romans c. 9.
.

Jerome, who also was contemporary with Augustine, (though somewhat his Senior)
gave the right hand of fellowship unto Him in the Doctrine now under inquest.
We shall only taste His Judgment in this behalf, in a few Testimonies from
amongst many. The Lord (says He) being about to suffer FOR ALL THE WORLD, and
TO REDEEM ALL THE NATIONS [on the Earth] with His Blood, makes his abode in
Bethany, the House of Obedience Passur^^ pro omni Mundo Dominus, and universas
nationes s^^ sanguine re dempturus, moratur i^ Bethania, domo Obedi entiae,
etc. Hier^n. in Man. 26.
, etc. Elsewhere, having recited that of our Savior, So God loved the World
that He gave his only begotten Son, etc. (Joh. 3. 16.) He(...)eth on thus: But
if now a considerate Reader, shall in his secret thought answer [or reply,] Why
are there many who are not saved, if He saved them, and loved them, and spared
their children, and redeemed them with his Plood, and assumed them [or, their
Nature] and exalted them, being assumed? There is a plain Reason to be given:
for they believed not, and grieved [or, exasperated] the Holy Spirit Quod si
prudens Leot^r tacita cogitation^ responderit, quare multi non sunt s^lvati, si
ips^ salvavit ^^s and dilex^, and pepercit filiis suis, and redemit eos
sa^^uine suo, suscepitque and exaltavit assumptos? Irfertur causa perspicua:
Ipsi enim no^ credib^runt, and ex^cerbarunt Spiritum Sactvm etc. Hieron. in
Isai. 53
, etc. A little after, speaking of John Baptist, of whom it is said that He
came to be a Witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all Men through him
might believe; He subjoyneth: He is not presently in fault, if many refused to
believe: for the Will of him that came, was that ALL MEN should BELIEVE and be
SAVED Et mox: Nec statim in culpa est, si plures credere noluerunt: sed
voluntas venientis haec fuit, vt omnes crederent, and salvarentur.
. Once more, writing to Oceanus, He challenges some erroneous Person for
suggesting unto him, that there are some sins which Christ cannot purge with
his Blood, and that the scars of men's old sins stick so deep in their Bodies
and Souls, that they cannot be healed [or, made less] by his medicine.
Concerning whom He demands, What els^ does such a person, but make Christ to
have dyed in vain? For he dyed in vain, if there be any whom he cannot quicken
[or, give life unto.] And John, pointing at Christ with his finger and voice,
Behold the Lamb of God! Behold Him that takes away the sins of the World,
should speak an untruth, if there were any such persons in the World, whose
sins Christ had not abolished [or, blotted out.] For they, who are not taken
into consideration by the indulgen^e of Christ, must be proved not to belong to
the World: or if they be of the World, one of the two must take place: if they
be delivered from their sins, they give Testimony to the Power of Christ: if
they be not delivered, they do (in effect) demonstrate the weakness of the
thing: which God forbid that we should believe concerning him, who is
Omnipotent Dicit esse aliqua peccata, quae Christus non possit purgare sanguine
suo, and tam profundas scelerum pristinorum inhaerere coporibus atque animis
cicatrices, vt medicina illius attenuari non queant. Quid aliud agit, nisi vt
Christus frustra mortuus sit? Frustra autem mortuus est, si aliquos vivificare
non potest. Mentitur Johannes digito Christum andvoce demonstrans: Ecce Agnus
Dei: Ecce qui tollit peccata Mundi, si adhuc sunt in seculo, quorum Christus
peccata non deleverit. Aut enim ost^ndendi sunt non esse de Mundo, quos Christi
ignoret indulgentia: aut si de Munde sunt, eligendum e duobus alterum: liberati
a peccatis, Christi Potentiam probant: non liberati, quasi adhuc Rei
imbecillitatem demonstrant. Absit hoc a^ Omnipotente credere. Hieron. Epist.
83. ad Oceanum.
. He that remains yet unsatisfied whether this Father held General Redemption,
or no, may, if he please to seek, find more balast for his thoughts in this
kind, in what He has written upon Cap. 43. and Cap. 45. of the Prophecy of
Ezekiel. I confess that when He speaks of the application, or actual enjoyment
of the Redemption purchased by Christ, He then limiteth it (as all the Fathers
generally do, and as we expressly did Cap. 17. of this Discourse) to the
particular Society of Believers. We shall not need to cite places upon this
account.

Chrysostom, who lived some years before Austin, was not at all behind. 3.
him in avouching the same Doctrine concerning the extent of the Redemption of
Christ. Writing upon those words, Heb. 9. 28. So Christ was offered to bear the
sins of many, He demands thus: Why does he say, of many, and not, of all,
viz. because all have not believed. For He indeed DYED FOR ALL MEN, and TO SAVE
ALL MEN, as much as was in him. For that Death [of His] did counter-balance the
Destruction of all Men. But he did not bear [or, offer up] the sins of all Men,
because they themselves WOULD NOT (...). Chrysostom. in Heb. c. 10. Hom. 17.
. So that He clearly resolves the perishing of Men, not into any want of
Atonement made by Christ for them, but into themseves, and their own
wilfulness in not believing. For He expressly says, That Christ dyed for all
Men, and that to save them. Again, commenting upon Cap. 2. 9. of the same
Epistle, and having rehearsed these words of the Apostle, That he through the
grace of God should taste Death for every Man, not (says He) for Believers
only, BUT FOR THE WHOLE WORLD: for he dyed for all Men. For what though all do
not believe? He has fully done that which was proper for him to do (...).
Idem. in Heb. c. 2. verse. 9.
. Much to the same purpose in another place: Although Christ did not gain all
Men, yet he dyed for all Men, [so] fulfilling that which belonged unto him
(...). Chrysostom. ad Romans 14. 15.
. Elsewhere, comparing the Lamb offered in the Levitical Sacrifices, with
Christ the Lamb of God, concerning the former He says, that it never took away
any one man's sin so much as once; whereas the latter takes away the sin of all
the World; and that when it was in danger of perishing, it presently delivered
it from the wrath of God (...). Idem in Joh. 1. 29.
. To reserve many other Testimonies offered by this Author in the case in hand,
to another occasion (in case it be offered) upon Romans 4. 25. He has these
words: That thou may not say, how can we, being under the guilt of so many,
and such great sins, be justified? he shows thee Him, that has abolished
[or, cancelled] all sins (...). Idem in Romans 4. 25. Hom. 9.
.

Athanasius lived somewhat above an hundred years before Augustine, and yet was
full of the spirit of that Doctrine concerning the Redemption by Christ, which
we contend for. Since (says He) the Debt due from All Men was meet to be paid,
(for All Men ought to have dyed,) for this cause chiefly he came (as it were)
on pilgrimage to us, and after the demonstration of his Godhead by [His] Works,
it remained that he should offer up a Sacrifice FOR ALL, delivering up his
Temple unto Death for all Men, that so he might discharge and free ALL MEN from
that old Transgression (...), etc. Athanas. De Incarn. Verbi.
. Elsewhere: With the Blood of his Passion [or Mactation] he simply redeemed
all Men Mactatus non interiit, sed sanguine suae mactationis omnes simpliciter
redemit. Athan. in Passionem Salvatoris.
. In another place: There was need of Death, and it was requisite that Death
should be endured for all, that what was due from all might be satisfied.
Wherefore the Word, for that it could not dye (for it was immortal) assumed to
it self a Body capable of dying, that he might offer that as his own FOR ALL
MEN, and that suffering FOR ALL by means of his coming thereunto, He might
destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil (...). Athan. De
Incarnat. Verbi Dei.
, etc. In another Tractate the same Author thus: It became the Lord, being
desirous to make a Renovation, to make new the first Adam, that his Sin being
dissolved, he might take away Sin on all hands FROM THE UNIVERSE OF MANKIND
Oport^bat enim Dominum renovare cupientem, primum Adam renovare, ut soluto
illius peccato, peccatum undique tolleret ab universo hominum genere. Athan. in
Passionem Domini Segment. t. 2. p. 626. Edit. Paris.
. In another, thus: For the coming [or presence] of the Savior in the Flesh,
was the Solution of Death, and the Safety [or Salvation] of every Creature
(...). Idem. In Epist. ad Adelphium contra Arianos.
. If the Reader desires to know more of the mind of this Author touching the
Point in question, He may please to peruse his learned Tract, entitled. De
Incarnatione Verbi Dei, wherein He has frequent occasion to declare his
Judgment therein.

Hilarious, another Orthodox Father, who lived not long after the former,
writes upon Matthew to this effect: He ( Christ) admonished them to learn what
this means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; viz. that the Law bound up
[or consisting onely] in the observation of Sacrifices, could afford no help
[unto Men,] but that Safety [or Salvation] was reserved FOR ALL MEN WHATSOEVER
in the Indulgence of Mercy. And presently after (speaking of Christ,) He came
unto [or, for] ALL MEN: how then does he say that he came not to [or, for] the
Righteous Admonuit vt scirent quid esset, miserecordiam volo, non Sacrificium:
Legem scilicet Sacrificiorum observatione devinctam, opem far non posse, sed
salutem universis in miserecordiae indulgentia reservari. -- Omnibus venerat:
quomodo ergo non se justis venisse dicat? etc. Hilar. in Mat. can. 9.
? His Answer is, that there were none such, but all were Sinners. Elsewhere He
discourses thus: The Son of God was born of a Virgin for the sake of Mankind,
and the Holy Ghost himself assisting Him in this operation, and overshadowing
with His Power (being the Power of God) He planted the beginnings of a Body for
Himself, that being made Man of a Virgin, He might receive that Nature of Flesh
in [or, upon] Himself, and that by the fellowship of this Conjunction, the
whole Body of Mankind might be sanctified: that as ALL MEN WERE HID [or,
built] IN HIM, by means of His willingness to assume a Body, so again He might
be related unto ALL MEN [or, carried back into all Men] by that which was
invisible in Him Humani enim generis causa Dei filius natus ex Virgin est, and
Spiritu Sancto ipso sibi in hac operatione famulante, and sua, videlicet Dei,
inumbrante virtute, corporis sibi initia consevit: and exordia carnis
instituit, vt homo factus ex Virgin naturam in se carnis acciperet, perque
cujus admixtionis societatem, sanctificatum in eo universi generis humani
corpus existeret: vt quemadmodum omnes in se, per id quod corporeum esse
voluit, conderentur, ita rursum in omnes ipse, per quod ejus est invisible,
referretur. Hilar. de Trinit. l. 2.
, [meaning, His Divine Nature.] Once more: For He did this once, offering
Himself a Sacrifice unto God, being to redeem [or recover] the WHOLE SALVATION
OF MANKIND by the Oblation of this holy and perfect Sacrifice Hoc enim f^cit
semel scipsum offerens hostiam Deo; omnem humani generis salutem oblatione
sanctae hujus and perfectae hostiae redempturus. Idem. in Psalm. 53.
Lastly (because this Testimony, being somewhat more emphatical then its
fellows, would not be omitted:) For He took the flesh of sin, that in the
assumption of our flesh He might forgive sins, being made a Partaker hereof, by
assumption, not by sinning, by [His] Death blotting out the sentence of Death,
that BY A NEW CREATION OF MANKIND, He might ABOLISH THE CONSTITVTION OF THE
FORMER DECREE, suffering Himself to be crucified, that by the curse of the
Cross He might strike through [dissolve, or make voyd] all the curses of that
terrene [or earthly] Damnation Carnem enim peccati recepit, vt in assumptione
carnis nostrae delicta donaret, dum ejus fit particeps assumptione, non
crimine: delens per Mortem sententiam Mortis, ut nova in se generis nostri
creatione, constitutionem Dec eti anter^oris aboleret, crucifigi se permittens,
vt maledicto crucis obliterata terrenae Damnationis maledicta configeret omnia.
Idem de Trinit. cap. 1.
. Whether He calls that Damnation, whereunto Men became subject by Adams
Transgression, Earthly, because He judged the extent of the penalty of it to
consist only in the dissolution of the Body by Death, as if the Punishment of
Hell fire came in upon the account of the Gospel, in case it should be
rejected, (which is the Judgment of some amongst us) I shall not dispute, nor
undertake to determine; but pass on to hear the sense of other learned,
orthodox, and pious Fathers, much about the same time with the former.

Cyril of Jerusalem (much about the same times) delivers His Sense about the
Redemption of Christ, thus: The Crown of the Cross is this: it led by a light
those that were blind through ignorance, it set at liberty those that were
detained under sin, and REDEEMED THE WHOLE WORLD OF MEN. And wonder not that
the WHOLE WORLD should be redeemed, since He was not a bare man, but the only
begotten Son of God that dyed for it (...). Cyril. Hierosolym. Catech. 13.
. And again: Know thou why [or, for what end] the Kind Lord did not decline
Death? It was, that the whole World might not be destroyed through sin Scisne
quamobrem non fugit mortem benignus Dominus? Vt ne totus peccatis perderetur
Mundus. Ibid.
: i. e. (as appears from the former sentence, and the scope of the place) that
the whole World might be saved by Him. In another place the same Author says;
Heaven and Earth are full of His Glory, the ends of the World are full of His
Goodness, full of His Praise: the WHOLE NATVRE OF MAN is full of His
Condescension, etc. A little after (speaking of Christ,) He (says He) that is
the Offerer, is the same that is offered up FOR THE WORLD: And not long after;
Let Adam rejoice, saying unto Christ by Simeon, Lord, now l^ttest thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy Word. Now dest thou dismiss [or
loose] me from eternal bands, now do thou deliver me from corruption, now
dischargest thou my sorrow (...), etc. Cyril. Hierosolym. De Propheta Simeone,
etc. Paulo post (de Christo loquens) (...), etc. Et postea: (...).
. Evident it is, that in this last Testimony, He brings in Adam speaking, not
only (nor so much) in His own Name, personally considered, but in the Name of
His whole Posterity also.

Eusebius, another Author of note about these times, attesteth the same
Doctrine, by affirming, that the Saints of old, by the Teachings of the Divine
Spirit, came to learn long before, that there was a certain Venerable and Great
Sacrifice, that should be highly accepted with God, which should in time come
unto Men, and which would be the EXPIATION OF THE WHOLE WORLD. And a little
after: This was the Christ of God, concerning whom it was said of old that He
should come unto men, and should be slain, after the manner of a beast [or,
sheep] FOR ALL MANKIND. And again, not long after: According to the Testimonies
of the Prophets, there was found that Great, and greatly to be esteemed Price,
for the redeeming both Jews and Grecians, I mean, that Expiation [or,
Attonement] FOR THE WHOLE WORLD, that Sacrifice for the Souls OF ALL MEN, that
Offering for EVERY SPOT, AND FOR EVERY SIN, that Lamb of God Qui venerabilem
quandam Deoque accepta^, and m^gnam hostiam venturam olim ad homines, Divino
indicante Spiritu, tanto ante didicerant, quae totius Mundi expiatio existeret,
etc. Eusebius. De Demonstrat. Evangel. lib. 1. c. 10. Et m^x: Hic autem fuit
Christus Dei, is de quo antiquitus a primis usque temporibus dictum est, quod
ad homines esset venturus, atque instar pecudis pro toto genere humano
interficiendus. Et mox: Quando secundum Testimonia Prophetarum inventum est
magnum, magnique estimandum pro redimendis and Judaeis pariter and Graecis
pretium, illud videlicet pro toto Mundo Piaculum, illud pro anima cunctorum
hominum Sacrificium, illa pro omni macula and peccato purissima hostia, ille
vtique Agnus Dei, etc.
, etc. Elsewhere He says (speaking of Christ,) that He took care for the
Salvation OF ALL MEN, THAT HAD BEEN BORN FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD, and
to destroy Him by His Death, who had the Power of Death, the Devil Quandoquidem
omnium quicunque a condito aevo fuissent, salutem ipse curabat, nec non vt sua
Morte deleret eum, qui imperium Mortis habebat, etc. Eusebius. De Demonstrat.
Evang. l. 4. c. 12.
. This Author abounds with Sayings of like import.

Arn^bius, another Christian Writer about the same times, of good account,
brings in the Heathen arguing* and demanding of Christians, thus: If the
Savior of Mankind be come [as you Christians affirm] why does He not by the
same bounty deliver all Men? He does not deliver all alike, who calls all
alike: He does not keep back, or reject any person from His sovereign Grace
[or, indulgence] who affords the same power, unto high, l^w, servants, women,
children, of coming unto Him. To this, this Author answers: The Fountain of
Life is open FOR ALL MEN, nor is any man denied the right [or, power] of
drinking, nor driven away [from it*] If your pride [or disdain] be such, that
you reject the benefit of the Gift offered, nay if your wisdom be so great, as
to call those things which are offered by Christ, pastime and toys, how does He
offend who inviteth you [notwithstanding] who has only this to do, viz. to
expose the fruit [or blessing] of his bounty to the arbitrament [or free
choyce] of that right [or, power of chusing] which is giv^ ^ you Si generis
humani, inquitis, conservator advenit, Cur omnino non omnes aequali
munificentia liberat? Non aequaliter liberat, qui aequaliter omnes vocat: haud
ab indulgentia Principali quenquam repellit, aut respuit, qui sublimibus*
infimis, servis, faeminis, pueris, uniformiter potestatem veniendi ad s^ facit.
Patet ( inquit) omnibus Fors vitae, neque ab jure potandi quisquam prohibetur,
aut pellitur. Si tibi fastidium tantum est, vt oblati respu^s beneficium
Muneris, quin imo si sapientia tantum praevales, vt ea quae off^r^ntur a
Christo, ludum atque ^n^ptia^ nomines, quid invitans peccat, cujus solae sunt
hae parts, vt sub tui juris arbitrio fructum suae benignitatis exponat? Arnob.
lib. 2. contra gentes.
?

Did^mus, another Author of note in this Century, and who was Jeroms. 4.
Tutor, in his third Book concerning the Ho^y Ghost, writes to this purpose.
Wherefore the Father, even for their Salvation ^^t sparing His own Son,
delivered Him up unto Death, that by the Death of His Son, He being destroyed,
who had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil, He might REDEEM ALL THOSE that
were held in the bands of captivity by Him. Not long after (speaking of the
Jews,) They (says He) rising to the highest pitch of impiety, betrayed and
crucified the Lord the Savior, who vouchsafed to come down to the Earth FOR
THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN: Afterward He calls Judas the Betrayer of HIS Master
and SAVIOVR Quapropter and pro eorum salute proprio filio non parcens pater,
tradidit eum in Mortem, vt per Mortem filij sui destructo eo qui habebat Mortis
imperium, hoc est Diabolo, redimeret omnes, qui ab eo captivitatis vinculo
teneba^tur. Didym. l. 3. de Spiritu S. Et mox (de Judaeis loquens,) Ad
impietatis culmen egressi, Dominu^ Salvatorem, qui pro cunctorum Salute
descendere dignatus suerat ad terras, prodiderunt and crucifixerunt, etc.
Postea: Judam, proditore^ Magistri and Salvatoris sui vocat.
.

Basil (surnamed the Great) about the same time, or not long after, judged it a
point of faithfulness unto Him, whose Ambassador He was, to concur with his
fellows in the same Doctrine. What (says He) could Man give of so much value
for the Redemption of His Soul? Yet was there found for ALL MEN TOGETHER one
worthy Price of the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which He shed [or, poured
out] FOR US ALL. Soon after: If we consider His Kindness and Love to us, He
calls us Brethren, and descends to the Nature of Man, who gave Himself a
Propitiation FOR THE WHOLE WORLD, and not for Himself (...). Paulo ante: (...).
Basilius M. in Psalm. 48.
. In another place, He says; [ David] Prophetically foreseeing the future
grace of the lovi^g kindness of the Lord toward Men, says, that it is meet to
serve and love Him, who has bestowed such, and so great a benefit upon
Mankind, that He has not spared his own Son, but has delivered Him up FOR
ALL MEN (...). Basilius M. in Psalm. 61.
. More Testimonies from this Author, are at hand, if need be.

Gregory Nyssen, Brother to the last-named Father, stands by his Brother in the
pre-asserted Doctrine, saying, that as the beginning of Death being first
[onely] in one, passed through the whole Nature of Man: in like manner the
beginning of the Resurrection by means of one extends it self unto the WHOLE
NATVRE of Man (...). Greg. Nyss. Orat. Catechet. c. 16. etiam c. 22. 23.
. More plainly in another place: He (speaking of Christ) sanctifies unto God
and the Father, not only the first born of Men, but even the WHOLE TRIBE [or
generation] of Mankind by means of the first fruits of our lump being in Him,
that is, by means of that flesh which He took of us, enlivened with a rational
[or, intellectual Soul,] whereby he did (as it were) leaven the WHOLE MASS [or,
concretion] of the essence [or substance] of Mankind with Holiness (...). Greg.
Nyssen. De occursu Domini, etc. circa medium.
.

Gregory Nazianzen, another great light, burning and shining in the House. 5.
of the living God (the Church) about these times, gave forth the light of the
same Doctrine in his Ministry. Speaking of Christ, He says, To the Jews, He
becomes as a Jew, that He may gain the Jews: To those that are under the Law,
as one under the Law, that He might redeem those that were under the Law: To
the weak [He became] as weak, that He might save those that were weak. He is
made all things unto ALL MEN, tha^ He may win [or, gain to Himself] ALL MEN
(...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. 31. In initio.
. In another place he says: There is no matter of wonder like unto that of my
Salvation: a few drops of blood refashioning the WHOLE WORLD, and, like that
which causes the coagulation of milk, knitting and gathering us together in
one WITH ALL MEN (...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. 42. paulo ante finem.
.

Elsewhere, in His Christian Poems, He speaks to this effect.

From one we all proceed, we all one Breath
Breathe out; to one we all incline:
God unto all alike, His Birth, His Death,
His Resurrection, and Heaven, does consign (...). Idem. Carm. 3. Praecept. ad
Virgin.
.
Epiphanius, a little before the two last named Gregory's, writing against
Heresies, asserteth the Doctrine we contend for, as Orthodox. First (says he,
speaking of Christ) He offered himself that he might discharge the sacrificing
of the Old Testament, presenting [unto God] a more perfect living [Sacrifice]
for all the World. Afterward: How vain [and bootless] is all the understanding
that accompanies Heresy? for they [Heretiques] even deny their own Lord, that
bought THEM with His own Blood (...). Epiph. adversus Haereses. l. 2. t. 1.
Haeresi 55.

Et postea: (...).


.

Tertullian, who lived in the Age next before the last-mentioned Authors,
though in some other Points he declined the Judgment of his Orthodox
Predecessors, yet in the Doctrine under enquiry he was one spirit with them.
What (says he, speaking of the wood, by the casting of which into the water,
the Prophet Elisha caused the iron to swim, which was sunk) is more manifest
then the Sacrament [or, mystical signification] of this wood? [As namely] that
the hardness of this World [meaning, the obdurate World it self] being sunk in
the depth of Error, is by the wood of Christ, that is, of His Passion,
delivered [or, recovered] in Baptism: that so that which long since perished by
wood [or, by a tree] in Adam, might be restored by the wood [or, tree] of
Christ. A little after (applying unto Christ the story of Isaac carrying the
wood, wherewith he was to have been offered, had not God recalled the Command
given to Abraham on this behalf, and of the Ram caught by the horns in a
thicket, which was offered) he does it in words to this effect: Christ in His
own time carried [His] wood upon His shoulders, sticking [or, hanging] upon the
Horns of the Cross, having his Head compassed about with a Crown of Thorns: For
it became Him to be made a SACRIFICE FOR ALL NATIONS: and afterward he says,
that He was made a Sacrifice [or, Offering] in [or, through] all things FOR US
ALL Quid manifestius hujus ligni Sacramento? quod duritia hujus seouli mersa in
profundo erroris, and a ligno Christi, id est, passionis ejus in Baptismo
liberatur, vt quod perierat olim per lignum in Adam, id restitueretur per
lignum Christi. Tertul. Adversus Judaeos. c. 13. Et mox: Et Christus suis
temporibus lignum humeris suis portavit, inhaerens cornibus crucis, corona
spinea in capite ejus circundata. Hunc enim oportebat pro omnibus gentibus
fieri Sacrificium. Et postea: Sed Jesus ille Christus Dei Patris Su^mus
Sacerdos, qui primo adventu suo humana forma, and passibilis venit in
humilitate usque ad Passionem: ipse etiam effectus hostia per omnia PRO OMNIBUS
NOBIS, etc.
.

Origin about the same time held forth the same Doctrine in the World,. 6.
affirming that our Lord and Savior being led as a Lamb unto the slaughter,
and offered up as a Sacrifice of [or, upon] the Altar, procured Remission of
Sins FOR THE UNIVERSAL WORLD, etc. A little after: So then the World is trained
up, first to seek Remission of Sins by diverse Sacrifices, until it should come
to a perfect Sacrifice, a complete and absolute Sacrifice, a Lamb of a year
old, perfect, which should take away the sins of the WHOLE WORLD Vide ergo ne
forte sicut Dominus and Salvator noster, quasi agnus ad occisione^ ductus, and
in Sacrificium Altaris oblatus, peccatorum remissionem universo praestitit
Mundo, ita fortassis and caeteroru^ sanctoru^, etc. Origin. in Number. Hom. 24. Et
mox: Sic ergo imbuitur Mundus, primo per diversas hostias remissionem quaerere
peccatorum, donec veniat ad hostiam perfectam, ad hostiam consummata, agnum
anniculum, perfectum, qui tollat peccata totius Mundi, etc.
, etc. Elsewhere he makes the Apostle Paul to have said, that Christ had given
Himself for the Redemption of WHOLE MANKIND, that He might redeem those that
were kept in bondage by sins, BY TASTING DEATH without deceit, FOR ALL MEN Nam
cum superius dixisset, quod pro omni genere humano Redemptionem semetipsum
dedisset, vt eos qui in peccatoru^ captivitate tenebantur, redimeret, dum sine
dolo pro omnibus Mortem gustat, nunc, etc. Origin. in Romans 3. v. 25.
. I present the Reader only with a little from these Authors respectively, in
comparison of what upon the same account might be transcribed from them.

Cyprian, a worthy Author and Martyr of this Age, counted it no injury to the
Truth to abet the same Doctrine. Having mentioned some Examples (as he terms
them) of a propagation of Creatures otherwise then according to the common
course of Nature, he advances this demand to salve the possibility, or rather
to evince the probability of the Virgins Conception: Shall then (says he) that
seem incredible to be done by the Power of God for the REDINTEGRATION [or,
new-making] of the WHOLE WORLD, Examples whereof are to be seen in the
Propagation of animal Creatures? Afterward: Christ then suffered not in the
flesh with any detriment or injury to His Godhead, but that through the
infirmity of the flesh, He might work Salvation in THE MIDST OF THE EARTH Hoc
ergo incredibile videbitur divina virtute ad totius mundi Redintegrationem
factum, cujus Exempla etiam in animalium nativitate cernuntur? Et postea: Non
ergo damno aliquo aut injuria Divinitatis Christus in carne passus est, sed vt
per infimitate^ carnis salutem operaretur in medio terrae. Cypr. in Exposit.
Symboli.
, [meaning, for all the World round about him.] In another place he says, The
corruption of Nature, even in our first beginnings, deserved to be cast away,
and abandoned [by God.] But because the Will was not in fault, God provided a
Remedy AGAINST THAT GENERAL CONDEMNATION, and tempered [or, qualified] the
sentence of His Justice, removing that Hereditary Burden from the Posterity
[or, Children,] and mercifully purging out the leaven of original corruption by
the washing [of Baptism] and anointing. But Indignation and Wrath deservedly
returns back upon them, who, after the grace of this Indulgence [from God, in
the forgiveness of their sins] voluntarily go astray and wander by sinning,
abusing their own freedom, being led, not by Necessity, but by Will: nor does
there remain for them any benefit [or, any thing gotten] in the Death of
Christ, but the benefits [hereof] being despised by them, do most justly
condemn them In originalibus enim corruption Naturae abjici and exterminari
meruerat: sed quia non erat voluntas in culpa, providit Deus generali
Damnationi Remedium, and suae sententiam Justiciae temperavit, hereditarium
onus a sobole removens, and misericorditer ablutione and unctione medicinali
corruptionis primitivae fermentum expurgans. Sed in eos qui post hujus
indulgentiae gratiam voluntarij per peccata evagats sunt qui proprio abutuntur
arbitrio, and voluntate, non necessitate ducuntur, Indignatio and Ira non
immerito redit: nec in Morte Christi al^ quis ipsis superest quaestus, sed
justissime eos beneficia contempta condemnant. Cypr. De Ablut. Pedum.
, This Passage is pregnant with the Assertion of both the main Doctrines
vindicated in the present Discourse; as viz. 1. That Christ has dyed as well
for those that shall be condemned, and perish, as for those that shall be
saved, (and consequently for all Men:) 2. That those also may be condemned, and
perish, who had sometimes obtained Remission of sins by Christ.

That further may be taken into consideration (by occasion of the former part
of this quotation) that it was the Judgment and Sense of the Ancient Fathers
and Christians generally (I know none to be excepted) that in Baptism there was
always a particular application made to the Person baptized of the general
Redemption purchased by Christ, so that he that was baptized, if an Infant,
received thereby exemption and deliverance from the guilt of original Sin
derived from Adam: if a Person of mature years, not only this, but forgiveness
also of all his actual sins committed formerly. For which Opinion, though I do
not as yet see any demonstrative ground, either in the Scriptures, or in
Reason, and (God sparing me life to finish the second part of this Work) I
shall in one Particular declare my sense in opposition to it; yet the Opinion
(I confess) so far takes with me, partly for the Proofs sake which are
produced (with some probability) for it, partly for the signal learning, gifts,
sharpness of judgment, quickness of apprehension, and above all for the
singular piety and zeal for the Truth found in so many Assertors of it, partly
also for those degrees of inevidence and inconcludency which are found in the
Arguments usually insisted upon to prove the contrary, that my Soul cannot
enter into the secret of those, who upon a confident presumption that the said
Opinion is erroneous, refuse to offer their children unto Baptism; hereby,
according to the sense of all the Fathers (as has been in effect said)
exposing their precious Souls to a certain loss of Salvation by Christ, in case
they dye before they come to years of discretion. Certainly it is no point of
Christianity, to lay such wagers as these, upon the truth of any Opinion, which
has such a cloud of Enemies and Opposers of it, as all the Ancient Fathers
without exception (as far as yet I understand,) and together with these (for we
cannot reasonably imagine the contrary) all the Christian Churches in the
Primitive Times, with all the knowledge, parts, zeal, and faithfulness of Both:
yea and some of our late Protestant Writers themselves, and these of eminent
worth and note (See Cap. 13. Sect. 29.) especially when men have no better or
more satisfactory grounds for their Opinion, then have yet been produced
against the lawfulness of Infant Baptism. But this by the way.

Clemens of Alexandria, another famous Champion of Christianity about. 7.
these times, was of the same Faith in the Point in hand with his Fellows. In
one place He demands, How is He [speaking of Christ] a Savior and Lord, if He
be not the SAVIOVR and Lord OF ALL? In another, He terms Christ, the Disposer
[or, Administrator] of all things according to His Fathers Will, governing [or,
taking order for] the SALVATION OF ALL MEN. Elsewhere he argues thus: Either
the Lord does not take care for all Men, and this, either because He is not
able, which is not right [to suppose] or, because, though able enough, yet He
will not: but this is not incident to Him that is good: nor is He backward [or,
indisposed hereunto] through voluptuousness, in as much as for our sakes He
assumed flesh exposed to sufferings; Or else He does take CARE OF ALL; which
indeed becomes Him that is made the Lord of all. For He is a SAVIOVR, NOT OF
SOME, AND NOT OF OTHERS (...); Et postea, Christum vocat (...), etc. Non long
ante: (...), etc. Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 7.
, etc. In an Oration to the Gentiles, He calls unto them thus: Hear ye that are
afar off, and harken you that are near: the Word is not hid [or, concealed]
from any: the light [thereof] is common, it SHINES UNTO ALL MEN (...). Clem.
Alexandr. in Orat. ^d Gentes.
, etc.

Justin Martyr, whose Writings (amongst those that treat of Christian Religion,
and are judged authentic, and not spurious) are the most ancient that I know,
since the days of the Apostles, gives frequent Testimony to the Truth of the
same Doctrine. In one place He presents the Saints as knowing [or
acknowledging] that He that has wrought that Great Salvation FOR MANKIND, is
praise worthy, greatly to be feared, and the Maker [or Creator] of Heaven and
Earth (...), etc. Just. Martyr. in Dialogo cum Tryph. p. 300 Edit. Morel.
. In another (speaking of Christ) He says, that now through the Will of God,
being made Man for THE SAKE OF MANKIND, He submitted Himself to suffer
whatsoever the inconsiderate Jews were inspired by the Devils to inflict upon
Him (...). Idem. Apol. 2. pro Christianis.
. In a third He says, that Christ neither submitted Himself to be born, nor
yet to be crucified, as if He needed these things [for Himself,] but for that
kind [or generation] of men, which in [or by] Adam was fallen under Death, and
the deceit of the Serpent (...). Idem. in Dial. p. 316.
. By Mankind, or the kind of Men, He cannot mean a few, a circumscribed
number, a small parcel of men, as the Elect (so called) are known to be: these
in no propriety of speech can be called (...), THE generation, or kind of man:
or if in one place He should have meant the Elect by such an expression, it is
no ways like but that in some other He would have expressed himself more
plainly. But what He means by (...), that genus, or general kind of men*
appears evidently enough by this descriptive character, which he gives of it,
(...) i. e. which from Adam [or, through Adam] was fallen under Death. This (we
know) is the adequate and appropriate character, not of some men, but of all
Mankind without exception. But the Sun is visible enough without a Candle.

Ireneus, not long after the former, avouched the Doctrine of our Contest. 8.
over and over. As Eve (says he) becoming disobedient, became [hereby] the
cause of death both to her self, and to the Universe of Mankind: So Mary,
having the Man predestined [by God, meaning Christ,] notwithstanding [Her
being involved in the Death brought upon all Mankind by Eve, yet] becoming an
obedient Virgin, she proved the cause [or means] of Salvation, UNTO THE
UNIVERSE OF MEN Sicut Eva inobaudiens facta, sibi and universo generi humano
causa facta est Mort^: sic and Maria ^abens praedestinatum virum, tamen Virg^
obaudiens, and sibi, and universo generi humano causa facta est salutis. Iren.
lib. 3. adversus Haeres. cap. 33.
. His meaning is, that by submitting unto the Pleasure of God, signified unto
Her by the Angel, concerning the bearing and bringing forth of His Son Jesus
Christ in the flesh, She had the Grace accordingly vouchsafed unto Her to bear
and bring Him forth, who was the Author or cause of Salvation to universal
Mankind: by which submission and service, she (in a sense) became the cause,
or means also of this Salvation. Elsewhere the same Father says, that Christ
recapitulated [or, gathered into one] in Himself ALL NATIONS dispersed [up and
down the World] even from Adam, ALL TONGVES, AND EVERY GENERATION OF MEN
together with the person of Adam Himself Significans, quoniam ipse, qui omnes
gentes exinde ab Adam dispersas, and univers^s linguas, and generationem
hominum cum ipso Adam in semetipso recapitulans, etc. Iren. adversus Hae. es.
l. 3. c. 33.
. In another place, He gives this Reason, why Paul says, that we are
reconciled through the body of His flesh, viz. because His righteous [or just]
flesh reconciled THAT FLESH WHICH WAS DETAINED IN SIN, and brought it into
favor [or friendship] with God in corpore (ait, Paulus) reconciliati carnis
ejus, id est, quia justa caro reconciliavit eam carnem, quae in peccato
detinebatur, andin amicitiam adduxit Deo. Idem. lib. 5. c. 16.
. Now that flesh, which was detained in sin, was not the flesh only of the
Predestinate, or Elect, but of all Mankind without exception.

These are the Principal Fathers and Writers of the Primitive Times, and before
Augustine, that are now extant or known: and all these with one mouth (as we
have heard) and with a Nemine contradicente, give Testimony to the Truth of
that Great Doctrine, which has been avouched in this Discourse, viz. that the
Redemption purchased by the Death of Christ, was for all Men, considered as
men, respectively, and not for the Elect only, or those that shall actually
partake of it, and be saved.

The Writers of best note and repute, since Austin (until these later times. 9.
of Reformation) and from whose Writings the best and stediest Informations are
to be had, what Doctrines or Opinions ruled in the Churches of Christ, and
amongst those Christians that were judged orthodox and sound in the Faith, in
their days, are these: Prosper, Cyril of Alexandria, Theodoret, Leo,
Fulgentius, Primasius, Gregorius, Beda, Theophylact, Anselm, Oecumenius,
Bernard. Let us briefly hear what is resolved by these respectively, upon the
Question concerning the Intentions of God about the extent of Christ's Death.

Prosper, well known for a through Disciple of Augustine, and who served his
generation not long after him, declares his sense in the business in hand,
plainly enough, in words to this effect: All Men ^re truly said to be Redeemed,
yet all Men are not gotten out of captivity. For that cup of immortality, which
is tempered [or compounded] of the infirmity of Men, and power of God, has in
it wherewith to profit all Men: but it helps not, unless it be taken [or,
drank.] And the Lord Jesus expressly says, that His Flesh is Bread from Heaven
[or, an heavenly Bread] which gives Life unto the World. But except it be
eaten, it gives no life: as in the Parable in the Gospel, the Marriage [Feast]
was prepared for all that were called: but they only enjoyed it, who came with
a wedding garment unto it Recte omnes dicu^tur Redempti, and tamen no^ omnes a
captivitate eruti. Poculum quippe immortalitatis, quod confectu^ est ex
infirmitate nostra and virtute divina, habet quidem in se ut omnibus profit:
sed si non bibitur, non medetur: Et ipse Dominus Jesus diserte dicit, carnem
suam esse panem coelestem, qui vitam dat Mundo. At si non comeditur, non
vivificat. Sicut in Parabola Evangelica, Nuptiae omnibus vocatis paratae sunt,
si ij soli iis fruuntur, qui ad eas veniunt cum vest nuptiali. Prosp. ad Capp.
Vincent. c. 1.
. Elsewhere he says: Our Savior is most truly said to have been crucified for
the Redemption of the whole World, both in respect of the Humane Nature truly
assumed by Him, as also because of the common destruction [of Men] in the first
man: And yet [in a sence] He may also be said to have been crucified only for
those, who receive benefit by His Death, [i. e. that His Crucifying was, in the
Consequent Intentions of God, intended only for such.] For the Evangelist
says, that Jesus was to dye for that Nation: and not for that Nation only,
but that He might gather the sons of God dispersed into one, etc. He gave His
Blood for the World: and the World would not be redeemed, because the Darkness
received not the Light Cum rectissime dicatur Salvator pro totius Mundi
redemptione crucifixus, propter verum humanae Naturae susceptionem, and propter
co^munem in primo homine perditionem; potest tamen dici pro his tantum
crucifixus quibus Mors ipsius proficit. Dicit enim Evangelista, quia Jesus
moriturus erat pro gente; nec tantum pro gente, sed etiam ut filios Dei
dispersos congregaret in unum, etc. Dedit pro Mundo sanguinem suum ^ and Mundus
redimi noluit, quia lucem tenebrae non receperunt. Idem. ad Object. Vinc^nt.
cap. 10.
. These last words plainly interpret his meaning in those, wherein he had said,
that Christ may be said to have been crucified for those only, who reap
benefit by His Death: and imply, that His meaning herein was only this, that
God by His Consequent Will or Intention, intended the Death of Christ, or the
benefit of His Death, only for such, who come in time to partake hereof, viz.
by believing. Concerning the Antecedent and Consequent Will, or Intentions, of
God, see before, Cap. 17. Sect. 9. He that yet questions the Judgment of this
Author in the Point, may please to peruse the brief Sentence which He gives
upon the nineth Chapter or Head, Capp. Gallorum: and especially those two Books
De Vocatione Gentium, (which though some ascribe unto Ambrose, yet are they
discernable enough by some characters, to be the Writings of Prosper, and are
cited under his name by the Synod of Dort.) In these He shall find General
Redemption by Christ, asserted ten times over, the main scope of these Books
being to prove, that there is no person of Mankind simply excluded from
participating in the saving Grace of Redemption purchased by Christ.

Cyril of Alexandria (about the same time with Prosper) fills his Writings.
10.
with the same Truth. They (says He, speaking of the Jews) unjustly desire His
Death, wickedly lie in wait for Him; unmercifully slay Him, thrust Him out of
their Land, and City, who is the Life, the Light, the Salvation OF ALL MEN
(...), etc. Cyril. Alexandr. lib. 2. in Ioh. cap. 5.
. Elsewhere: Since it became [Him] to suffer, that Corruption, Sin, and Death,
which was brought in [to the World] being by this means to be turned back [or,
destroyed] He gave Himself a Counter-ransom for the Life OF ALL MEN (...).
Idem. in Ioh. l. 5. c. 3.
. Once more: It is without controversy that the WHOLE WORLD is saved, Emanuel
having dyed for it (...). Idem.
. See more in this Author upon the same account, De Recta Fide ad Reginas, etc.
c. 22. circa initium. In Joh. lib. 2. c. 1. andin 3. cap. Joh. verse. 17. etc.

Theodoret, somewhat before the two last-named Authors, conceived that He found
the Universality of Redemption by Christ in the Scriptures. For commenting the
fifth Chapter to the Romans, He makes the words of the Apostle equipollent to
these: The Munificence of Grace over comes the Decree of Justice. For when man
sinned, the whole kind [or race] is punished. But now when ALL MEN behave
themselves impiously and unjustly, He does not inflict punishment [upon them,]
but grants life Superat inquit, Grati^e Munificentia Justiciae Decretu^. Tunc
enim cum Homo peccasset, totum genus ^oenus luit. Nunc autem cum omnes homines
se impie and inique gerant, non supplicium irrogavit, sed vitam donavit.
Theodoret. ad Romans 5. Et postea: Ne dubitate, inquit, quae a me dicuntur ad
Adam respicientes. Si enim illa vera sunt, vt sunt, and cum ille transgressus
esset, universum genus Mortis Decretum suscepit, clarum est, quod Servatoris
Justicia vitam omnibus hominibus procurat.
[unto them.] Afterward, in the progress of His Exposition upon the same
Chapter, He presents the Apostle speaking thus to His Romans: Doubt not of the
things I speak, with relation unto Adam. For if these things he true, as they
are, and that when He sinned, His whole race received a Decree [or Sentence] of
Death, evident it is, that the Righteousness of [our] Savior, procures LIFE
FOR ALL MEN.

Leo (commonly styled, the Great) very frequently bewrays His Judgment to
stand to the same Point. Comparing the Death of the Lord Christ, with the
deaths of other holy men, He says, that there were but single [or particular]
deaths, in every of these respectively, nor did any of these persons discharge
the debt of any other by dying, whereas amongst the Sons of Men, our Lord Jesus
alone was found, in whom all Men ^ere crucified, all Men dyed, all Men were
buried, yea and all Men rose again Singulares quippe in singulis mortes
fuerunt, nec alterius quisquam debitum s^o funere s^lvit; cum inter filios
hominu^ solus Dominus nostor Jesus extiterit, in quo omnes crucifixi, omnes
mortui, omnes sepulti, omnes etiam sint suscitati. Leo. Sermon. 12. de Passione
Domini.
. Elsewhere thus: That general and deadly Handwriting of our being sold [under
sin and death] was [cancelled, and] made void, and the bargain of [our]
captivity, passed into a right of Redemption Evacuatum igitur est illud
generale venditionis nostrae and lethale chirographum, and pactum captivitatis
in jus transiit Redemptionis. Idem. Sermon. 10. de Passione Domini.
. Once more: That He [Christ] might repair the life of ALL MEN, He took on Him
the cause of all Men: and that which He of all Men was not bound to do, He made
void the force of the old hand writing, by making payment [of the debt due
thereby] FOR ALL MEN Vt autem repararet omnium vitam, recepit omniu^ causam:
and vim veteris chirographi, quod solus inter omnes non debuit, pro omnibus
solvendo vacuavit. Idem. Epist. 72.
.

Fulgentius about the year 500, succeeded His Predecessors in the inheritance
of their Judgment concerning the Universality of Redemption by Christ. As the
Devil (says He) smote [or, wounded] whole man by deceiving him, so God by
assuming whole man saved him, that so one and the same might be acknowledged,
both the Maker and REDEEMER OF THE WHOLE CREATVRE [or, Creation] who was able
both to make that which was not, and to REPAIR [or restore] THAT WHICH WAS
FALLEN Sicut totum homin^ Diabolus decipiendo percussit, ita Deus totum
suscipiendo salvavit, vt agnosceretur idem creaturae totius Conditor and
Redemptor, qui potuit, and quod non erat facere, and quod dilapsum est,
reparare. Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. l. 1. c. 14.
.

Primasius, who lived somewhat more then an hundred years after Augustine,. 11.
helped to keep the Doctrine we plead, alive in the World. As Christ (says He)
suffered reproach from his own [he means, the Jews] whom He CAME TO REDEEM,
when they said unto Him, Thou have a Devil, and offered Him all other
indignities, even to his Passion it self Sicut enim Christus improperiu^
sustinuit a suis, quos v^nerat re^mere, quad^ ei dixerant Damonium ha^es, and
catera ma^^ ei intuler^nt usque ad Passionem, etc. Primas. ad Heb. c. 11.
; so did Moses likewise, etc. If Christ came to redeem those, who charged Him
with having a Devil, with casting out Devils through Beel-zebub, and who
maliciously prosecuted Him with all manner of injuries and evil entreaties, and
this unto death, doubtless He came not to redeem the Elect only, or such who
in conclusion repent, believe, and are saved: for some of these, and
particularly those that said He had an unclean spirit, were charged by Him with
that sin, which He says shall not be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in
the World to come: Matt. 12. 32. compared with Mark 3. 28, 29, 30. The same
Author elsewhere says, that Christ, as much as lay in Him, DYED FOR ALL MEN,
how ever his Death profits none, but only those, who are willing to believe
in him Ita and Christus: quantum in se fuit, pro omnibus mortuus est, quanquam
non profit ejus Passio, nisi solu^modo iis, qui in eum credere volunt. Idem. ad
Heb. c. 2.
. And yet again: The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is [or, are] the God of all
Men, and therefore desires that ALL THAT HE HAS MADE SHOULD BE SAVED. A
little after: The Blood of Christ has verily been shed FOR ALL MEN, benefiteth
them that believe Pater, Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus omniu^ hominum Deus est,
and ideo cupit omnes salvari, quos fecit. Et paulo post: pro omnibus quidem
effusus est sanguis Christi, sed cred^ntibus prodest, etc. Idem. in 1. ad Tim.
c, 2.
etc.

Gregory (surnamed the Great) about the year 570, counted it neither Heresy,
nor Error, to teach the same Doctrine. The Father then (says he) being just,
and punishing him who was just [meaning, Christ] disposes all things justly:
because upon this account HE JVSTIFYETH ALL [or, all things,] because he
condemns him for Sinners, who was without sin Pater ergo cum justus sit,
justu^ puniens, omnia just disponit: quia per hoc cuncta justificat, quod eum,
qui sine peccato est, pro peccatoribus damnat, etc. Greg. Mag. Moral. l. 3. c.
11.
. Elsewhere he terms Christ THE REDEEMER OF MANKIND Redemptor quippe humani
generis, Mediator Dei and hominis per carnem factus, etc. Idem. Moral. lib. 9.
c. 21. vid. and lib. 33. c. 10.
; and in another place expressly says, that Christ REDEEMED ALL MEN by his
Cross: but yet that it remains, that he that endevors to be redeemed, [i. e.
to enjoy the Redemption purchased for him by Christ] and to reign with God, be
crucified Remansit quidem, quia non omnia nostra Christus explevit. Per crucem
suam quidem omnes redimit: sed remansit, vt qui redimi and regnare cum Deo
nititur, crucifigatur. Idem. in 1. Reg. cap. 9. 24.
.

Bid, somewhat above an hundred years after Gregory, propagated the same
Doctrine in the World for Truth. Joseph (says he) in the Egyptian language
signifies, Savior of the World. This is manifest in Christ, since under the
figure of Joseph, He is declared to be the SAVIOR, not of the one only Land
of Egypt, but also of the WHOLE WORLD. And soon after: But in our Joseph
(meaning Christ) the WHOLE WORLD deserved to receive increase Vocaturque Joseph
lingua Egyptiaca, Salvator Mundi. Manifestum est de Christo, quando sub figura
Joseph, Salvator ostenditur, non tantum unius terrae Egypti, sed and totius
Mundi. Bed. in Genesis c. 41. Et mox: In nostro vero Joseph augmentum habere
Mundus omnis meruit.
.

Theophylact, who lived more then two hundred of years after him, viz. about
the year 930, (as some of our best Chronologers calculate the time of his
mortality) is a sufficient witness that the same Doctrine was alive in the
Church in his time. He verily (says he, speaking of Christ) dyed FOR ALL MEN:
and can not thou endure to pray for them (...); Theophylact. in 1 Timothy c. 2.
6.
? Elsewhere we have words to this effect from his Pen: As by the offense [or,
fall] of one, the curse came upon all Men, (that which before he called
judgment [or condemnation] he now calls, an offense, that is, the sin of
Adam,) even so by the Righteousness of one, Christ, Grace is come unto ALL MEN,
giving UNTO THEM both JUSTIFICATION, in stead of Sin, AND LIFE, in stead of
Death (...). Idem. ad Romans 5. 18.
. In another place he says, that the Apostle showed, how that all Men were
indeed condemned from [or, by] Adam, but were saved from [or, by] Christ (...),
etc. Idem. ibid. in verse. 20.
.

Oecumenius somewhat above an hundred years after him, savored the same. 12.
Doctrine, as Truth. Judgment (says he) i. e. Condemnation, came from [or, by]
one Adam upon all Men: but the free gift and donation of God prevailed so far,
that it even abolished [or blotted out] the sin of Adam: and not this sin
alone, but all others likewise which men sinned after that sin: yea and did not
this only, but also brought them into an estate of Justification, that is,
unto Righteousness (...). Oecum. ad Romans c. 7.
.

Anselm, not long after the last mentioned Author, appeared in defense of the
same Doctrine. He alone (says he, speaking of Christ) as by dying paid [or,
discharged] so did he blot out [cancel, and make voyd] that Handwriting, which
in a kind of Hereditary way passed along from our Protoplast [Adam] through
ALL GENERATIONS Solus Chirographum, quod ex Protoplasto per omnes generationes
haereditario jure veniebat, vt moriendo solvit, sic moriendo delevit. Anselm.
in 1. ad Cor. c. 15.
. Elsewhere he exhibiteth God inviting all Men to come unto Him, and declaring,
that NO PERSON whatsoever NEEDS FEAR A REPVLSE, since he desires not the death
of a sinner, but that he should live Venite ergo OMNES: NVLLVS TIME AT REPELLI:
quia nolo Mortem peccatoris, sed vt convertatur, and vivat. Idem. in Medit. de
Passione Christi.
. In another place he says, that Christ is become a means of safety, and this
not of any inferior kind, but of that which is eternal; and this, not to a
few, but TO ALL Christus factus est causa salutis, non cujuslibet, sed
aeternae; nec paucis, sed omnibus; hoc tamen condition, vt ^b temperent ei.
Idem. ad Heb. 5.
. And again: that God the Mediator, which God has placed between Himself and
Men, underwent Death for all Men, that he might redeem all Men from Death
Mediator Deus, quem Deus inter se, and homines posuit, Mortem pro omnibus
sustinuit, vt omnes a Morte redimeret. Idem. 1. ad Tim. c. 2.
.

Bernard, somewhat after the year 1100, followed the tract of the same
Doctrine. In one place he says, that Christ wept for the Sins of the SONS OF
ADAM, and afterward shed His Blood for them Christus FILIORVM ADAE pec^ata
deplorat: and c^rte pro quibus nunc lachrymas fundit, postea fundet and
Sanguinem.
. In another: having repeated the words of the Apostle, If one dyed for all,
then were all dead, he glosseth thus; That namely the satisfaction of one might
be IMPVTED UNTO ALL, as this one bare the sins OF ALL Nam si unus inquit, pro
omnibus mortuus est, ergo omnes mortui sunt: vt videlicet satisfactio unius
omnibus imputetur, sicut omnium peccata unus ille portavit, etc. Idem. Epist.
90. post medium.
. Once more: And this is the Profession of a Christians Faith, that he which
lives, should not now live unto himself, but unto him, who dyed FOR ALL. Nor
let any man say unto me, I will live unto him, but not unto thee; since he did
not only live unto all Men, but even dyed FOR ALL MEN also Et haec professio
Fidei Christianae, vt qui vivit, jam non sibi vivat, sed ei, qui pro omnibus
mortuus est. Nec mihi dicat quis, Ei vivam, sed tibi non: quando quidem ille,
non solum pro omnibus vixit, sed and pro omnibus mortuus est. Idem. Sermon. in
verba Psalm. 23. Quis ascendit, etc.
.

Nor has the Doctrine asserted by us been thus fully and clearly attested
only by that successive generation of orthodox and learned Antiquity, which we
have heard speaking (as it were) with one mouth the same things with us
therein, in their particular and respective Writings; but has received credit
and countenance also from All Councils and Synods of any ancient date, as far
as my Reading and Memory are able to inform me, which have had occasion to take
cognizance thereof, or of that which is contrary to it.

The first General Council after the Apostles days, was that assembled at. 13.
Nice about the year 325, by the Authority of Constantine the Great in the
twentieth year of his reign; a Council that has always been of sovereign
esteem in all Christian Churches. This Council, in that Symbol of Faith, or
Creed, composed by the Members of it, make this Profession, or Confession of
their Faith (in the Point we speak of,) We believe that the Lord Jesus Christ
the Son of God, for US MEN [not, for us, Elect, or for us, Believers, Saints,
or the like, but for US MEN] and for our Salvation descended, and was incarnate
and made Man, suffered, and rose again (...), etc. Symb. Nicen. vid. Athanas.
in Epist. ad Iovianum de Fide.
, etc. Evident it is that the Council drew up this form, or Confession of
Faith, for the use of the generality of those who professed, or should
afterward profess Christianity, with an intent and desire that every Christian
respectively should make the same Profession with them. Now then if their
meaning in the said Symbol were, that Christ was incarnate, made Man, suffered,
etc. only for such Persons, who were Elect (as some call Election,) such (I
mean) who should be actually saved, and not for the generality of Men; one of
the two must necessarily be supposed; Either, 1. That they judged all
Professors of Christianity, to be Elect (in this sense,) and consequently such
as should be saved: Or else, 2. That they intended, that men should make
Profession of their Faith at peradventure, and profess that they believed that,
which they knew not whether it was true, or no, and so could have no sufficient
ground to believe it. Yea and that many should make such a Profession, wherein
the event would certainly prove them to have lied both unto God and Men when
they made it. For certain it is, and demonstrable from the Scriptures, that all
that profess Christianity in the World, will not at last be saved. When
therefore any of these shall profess and say, I believe that Christ the Son of
God, was made Man, and suffered for me, in case He did not suffer for him,
which (say our Adversaries) the event of his Non-salvation will evince, in that
profession of his, he must needs be found to have been a liar. Therefore
without controversy, the sense of the Nicene Fathers, in the mentioned Passage
of their Creed, was, that Christ became Man, and suffered death, for all Men
without exception. Now this Nicene Creed (as is well known to those that are a
little versed in Ecclesiastical History) was attested and subscribed by the
three Ecumenical Councils next following, the first at Constantinople, the
second at Ephesus, the third at Chalcedon. Nor do I remember that it was ever
censured, or rejected, by any Council or Synod, esteemed Orthodox. I shall not
insist upon that Epistle of Cyril of Alexandria (an Author lately mentioned)
written to Nestorius the Heretic, approved by three General Councils: in
which Epistle Christ is expressly termed the Savior of us all (...).
. Gerardus Johannes Vossius, a late Protestant Writer of good Note, a diligent
Searcher into, and unpartial Relator of, matters of Antiquity, reports, that
by a Synod assembled at Mentz in the year 848, of which Rabanus Maurus was
President, and at which Haymo was present, Goteschalcus the Monk was condemned,
who (amongst other erroneous Opinions) held, That they who perish, although
they sometimes believed, and were baptized, yet were not redeemed by Christ,
but only Sacramentally [or, as far as the sign of Redemption reacheth] nor
ever separated from the mass of perdition Cujus inter dogmata erat, eos qui
pereunt, ^t si prius credi derint, and baptizati suerint, non nisi signo tenus
redemptos fuisse a Christo, nec unquam a perditionis massa fuisse secretos.
Gerar. Joh. Voss. Hist. Pelag. lib. 6. Thesi. 12.
. The same Author adds further, that soon after this Moguntine Synod, there
followed a Council of the Church of Rhemes, and of many other Bishops in
France, whereof Hincmarus (a learned man in these times) was President: this
Council (He says) approved the Judgment of the former, touching their censure
of Goteschalcus. Yea He proceeds, and says yet further, that the Church of
Lions, although in many things it rather inclined to Goteschalcus, then to the
two late mentioned Synods, yet in the Particular in hand it approved the
Sentence of the said Synods. In a large Transcription which he exhibiteth from
the Acts of this last Synod, he cites words to this effect: How then, when
they are baptized in the Death of Christ, and are washed from their sins in HIS
BLOOD, is that true Renovation, and true Purgation wrought, if they yet remain
in the mass of Damnation and Perdition concrete, and not severed Quomodo ergo
in eis perficitur, dum in Morte Christi baptiza^tur, and in ejus Sanguine a
peccatis abluuntur, vera innovatio and vera mu^datio, si adhuc in damnationis
and perditionis massa concr^ti and non discreti, detinentur? Ibid.
. He speaks (as appears all along the Discourse) of such Persons, who finally
apostatize, and perish. Therefore the clear sense of this Council also was,
that those who are washed from their sins in the Blood of Christ, and
consequently who were redeemed by Him, may notwithstanding perish. The same
Doctrine (as the same Author reports) was approved and further established by
another Synod held at Valentia in France, consisting of the Bishops or
Ministers of the forementioned Church of Lions, and of two other Churches; who
professed that they did believe it, as a thing meet to be held with the firmest
belief, that as some of those who are truly regenerate, and truly redeemed, are
eternally saved by means of their continuance, through the Grace of God, in
their Redemption; so that others OF THEM, because they would not abide in the
safety of that Faith, which they once received, and chose rather, whether by
embracing corrupt Doctrine, or by wickedness of life, to reject and MAKE VOID
THE GRACE OF REDEMPTION, then to preserve it, are never able to arrive at the
fullness of Salvation, or to attain eternal Happiness Item firmissime tenendum
credimus, quod omnis multitudo fidelium ex aqua and spiritu regenerata, ac per
hoc veraciter Ecclesia incorporata and juxta Doctrina^ Apostoli in Morte
Christi baptizata, in ejus sanguine a peccatis abluta, quia nec in eis potuit
esse vera regeneratio, nisi fieret and vera Redemptio, cum in Ecclesiae
Sacramentis nihil sit cassum, nihil ludificatorium, sed prorsus totum verum,
and ipsa sui veritate ac sinceritate subnixum. Ex ipsa tamen multitudine
Fidelium and Redemptoru^, alios salvari aeterna salute, quia per gratiam Dei in
sua Rede^ptione fideliter permanent; -- alios quia permanere noluerunt in
salute fidei, quam initio acceperunt, Redemptionisque gratiam potius irritam
facere prava Doctrina, vel vita, quam servare elegerunt, ad plenitudinem
salutis, and ad percaptionem aeterna Beatitudinis nullo modo pervenire, etc.
.

If my Library would hold out, it is like I might be able to produce other. 14.
Councils and Synods, besides these insisted upon, interessed in the same
Doctrine, which these, as we have heard, avouched for Orthodox. But the joint
Testimony of those, which have been produced, is (I suppose) matter enough, and
proper enough, to stop the mouth, of that, whether ignorant, or
worse-conditioned Calumny, which traduceth the Opinion, or Doctrine, of General
Redemption, as if it were an old rotten Popish Opinion that had been from time
to time rejected and thrown out of the Church by all orthodox and sound Men.
The truth is, I have not in all my reading (which I confess is, of no
considerable compass for my years) to my best remembrance, met with the censure
or rejection of the said Doctrine in the Acts or Records, of any one Council or
Synod whatsoever, unless (happily) it be in the Acts of the nuperous Synod of
Dort. For to a man of an erect Judgment, and whose spirit has more of God, and
of a man in it, then to suffer it self to be yoked with prejudice, or base
partiality, reading and weighing some Passages in the Records of this Synod, it
cannot lightly but be a matter of some difficulty, and which will cost him some
of his thoughts, to resolve himself clearly, what the Resolutions of this Synod
were touching the extent of the gracious Intentions of God, in, or about the
Redemption purchased by Christ, at least in case these Resolutions of theirs be
only estimated by their expressions. Do not such Sayings as these distinctly
sound Universal Atonement by Christ? God, commiserating MANKIND being fallen,
sent His Son, who gave Himself a price of Redemption FOR THE SINS OF THE WHOLE
WORLD. And a little after: Since that Price, which was PAID FOR ALL MEN, and
which will certainly benefit all that believe, unto Eternal Life, yet does not
profit all Men, etc. Again: So then CHRIST DYED FOR ALL MEN, THAT ALL AND EVERY
MAN, might, by the mediation of Faith, through the virtue of this Ransom,
obtain Forgiveness of sins and eternal Life. I know no Remonstrant that holds
more, or otherwise, in the Point now under Contest. Yet again they say, that
Christ by His Death, did not only found the Evangelical Covenant [between God,
and Man,] but also obtained of His Father, that wheresoever this Covenant
should be preached, there should ordinarily such a measure of Grace be
administered [or given] with it, which is sufficient to convince all Impenitents
and Unbeleevers, of contempt, or neglect (at least) in their nonperformance of
the condition Deus lapsi generis humani miseratus, misit Filiu^ suum, qui
seipsum dedit Pretiu^ Rede^ptionis, pro peccatis totius Mundi. Act. Syn.
Nation. Dordrect. part. 2. p. 78. Paulo post: Quando illud Pretium quod solutu^
est pro omnibus, andquod omnibus credentibus certo proficiet ad vitam aeterna^,
non proficit tamen omnibus etc. Et mox: Sic ergo Christus pro omnibus mortuus
est, vt omnes and singuli, mediante fide, possint virtute (...) hujus
remissionem peccatorum, and vitam aeternam consequi.

Et mox: Christus sua Morte non tantum Evangelicum Foedus fundavit, sed insuper
impetravit a Patre, vt ubicunque annunciatu^ fuerit illud Foedus, una etiam
ordinary ea mensura gratiae supernaturalis administretur, quae sufficiat ad
convincendos omnes impenitentes and incredulos, contemptus, vel salutem
neglectus, ob non implet^ conditionem.


. Questionless if men be duly and sufficiently convinced, or be in capacity of
this conviction, that negligence is, or was, the only reason, or cause, why
such or such a thing, is not, or was not, performed by them, it must be
supposed that such men have, or had, sufficient strength, or means, to have
performed it. For if men certainly know that they have not, or had not, a
sufficiency of means or strength for the performance of a thing, it is
unpossible that they should ever be convinced that only negligence was the
cause of their nonperformance of it. The Reason is, because a knowledge, or
persuasion, that the performance of a thing is unpossible, in respect of a man's
weakness, or want of strength to perform it, is a certain cause of his
non-attempting it, and consequently of his non-performing it: So that
negligence in this case cannot be the only cause of his nonperformance: nay
the truth is that negligence is no cause hereof at all. Suppose a man does
neglect to try, or to use means that he may fly like a bird in the air, yet
this neglect of his cannot reasonably be looked upon as any cause of his
not-flying: but his inability to fly, in conjunction with a certain knowledge of
such an inability in him, and of the invincibleness hereof, is the adequate and
sole cause of his not-flying.

The same Synod elsewhere by other of its Members, expresses it self thus,. 15.
using the distinction of Antecedent and Consequent: without the knowledge
whereof, the true state of the controversy in hand can hardly be understood.
But when we say (says the Synod) that Christ dyed for Believers and for his
Friends, this is to be understood CONSEQUENTLY, so that the term [i. e. the
event of his Death; for what else they should mean by, terminus, I understand
not] is hereby signified: as on the contrary He is said to have dyed
ANTECEDENTLY for His Enemies and Unbeleevers (the word Unbelief being taken
negatively Caeterum quando dicimus Christum esse mortuum pro credentibus and
pro amicis suis, ho^ intelligendum est consequenter, ita ut denotetur terminus
ad quem; sicut e contrario antecedenter, dicitur mortuus pro hostibus suis and
pro infidelibus (negative accepto infidelitatis vocabulo) Act. Syn. Nation.
Dordr. part. 2. p. 99.
.) What the mystery of their meaning should be in these last words, wherein
they restrain their sense in what they had said to a Negative Unbelief, is
above the reach of my understanding. But when they say that Christ dyed
consequently for Believers, and antecedently for Unbeleevers, they speak the
whole Heart of their Adversaries the Remonstrants touching the Intentions of
God, in and about the Death of Christ, as far as so few words can express it.
For neither do they in any of their Writings, that ever came in my way, any
where affirm or say, that Christ dyed consequently for Unbeleevers, i. e. with
any such Intention, that Unbeleevers continuing such unto the end, should be
saved. And for such, who though Unbeleevers at present, yet shall afterward
Repent and Believe, these Synodians themselves will not deny but that Christ
dyed consequently. Concerning the distinction of Antecedent and Consequent, as
it relates to the present Controversy, we spoke formerly Cap. 6.. 16. and cap.
17 Sect. 8, 9.
. But how that Assertion of the men we speak of, wherein they grant that Christ
dyed antecedently for His Enemies and Unbeleevers, will find quarter at the
hand of their own Thesis (soon after subjoyned) wherein they say, that Christ
dyed ADEQUATELY FOR all and ONLY THE ELECT Sicut Christus pro omnibus and solis
Electis adaequate est mortuus, etc.
, I leave to themselves and their Friends to consider. I speak it with all
simplicity of heart, and without the least touch or tincture either of
prejudice or partiality (impressions to which I am far from being a Debtor for
any part of my contentment) that to the best of my memory and understanding, I
never met with a piece of Discourse from the hand of any judicious or learned
man, fuller of broad and pregnant inconsistencies, then the Decisions of this
Synod in the Points cogniz^nced by them. Only the Writings and Preachings of
men interessed in the same Principles with them, I find deeply baptized into
the same spirit of self-digladiation, whereof we shall (God willing) give
instances by way of proof, to a sufficient proportion, before the close of this
Chapter.

Another Member of the said Synod, whose sentence and award in the
Controversies there agitated, is (I suppose) Synodical, (justified I mean, and
approved by the body of the Synod; otherwise no man can tell by the printed
Acts of this Synod, what the Judgment hereof was, but only what was the
Judgment of the particular Members thereof, in petty Consorts apart by
themselves, and not in conjunction with the entire body) asserteth this
Position: that there is a certain common Philanthropy [or, Love of Men] in God
toward all Mankind being fallen, and He SERIOUSLY WILLS [or, has willed]
THE SALVATION OF ALL MEN Est co^munis quaedam Dei (...), qua dilexit totu^
genus humanum lapsum, and serio omnium salutem voluit. Act. Syn. Dordr. par. 2.
p. 103
. Afterward, speaking of the Condemnation of those who believe not, he says;
This event is not of it self intended by God; but follows by accident upon the
default of man Hic autem eventus per se non intenditur a Deo, sed per accidens
hominus culpa s^quitur.
Afterward, If this Redemption be not supposed as A COMMON BENEFIT BESTOWED ON
MANKIND, that general and promis^uous preaching of the Gospel committed unto
the Apostles to be performed amongst all Nations, will [be found to] have no
true foundation Si haec Redemptio tanqua^ common beneficium omnibus hominibus
impensu^ non supponatur, indifferens and promiscua praedicatio Evangelij
Apostolis commissa apud omnes gentes obeunda, nullu^ veru^ fundamentu^ habebit.
. And again: How shall any necessity lie upon me to believe that such a benefit
belongs unto me, which, though sufficient for me, yet was never truly intended
for me Quomodo enim ex beneficio, sufficient quide^, at mihi non destinato per
vera^ intentione^, deducetur necessit^s credendi quod illud ad me pertineat?
? Soon after he says: This Redemption is the payment of a due [and valuable]
Price for us Captives, not that we should come out of Captivity, after any
manner [i. e. simply, or absolutely] but THAT WE MIGHT, and ought, to come out
of it Haec ipsa Redemptio est solutio precij debiti pro nobis captivis, non ut
captivitate exiremus, quocunque modo, sed ut exire possemus, anddeberemus, etc.
Vid. and page 117.
, ( i. e. that we might come out upon our believing, as Himself immediately
explaineth.)

It were easy to produce many other Assertions and Positions from the. 16.
Acts of this Synod, of like sense and import with these, and which are of a
most notorious comportance with the Sense and Opinions of those men about the
Death of Christ, whose Opinions notwithstanding they stigmatized as Heterodox,
and Erroneous; yea and which stand at utter defiance with their own Doctrine
and Sayings in other places. For if God seriously wills the Salvation of all
Men, if Salvation be a common benefit bestowed by God upon all Men, and be
truly intended for, or unto, all Men, if God gave His Son a Price of Redemption
for the Sins of the whole World, (all which, with much more, we have heard and
seen delivered, and asserted, by this Synod) how can it be true that Christ
dyed ADEQUATELY FOR ALL, and only for, THE ELECT, that Christ was designed and
given by the Father for a Mediator and Head to a CERTAIN NUMBER OF MEN Christus
ex mora (...) Patris, destinatus and datus fuit Mediator and caput certo
homi^um numero, etc. Act. Syn. Dordr. p. 100.
, that the Father loved ONLY THE ELECT, and gave only these unto His Son to
be redeemed by Him Quia ite^ Pater Electos suos, quos solos dilexit, quos solos
redimendos filio dedit, etc. Ibid. p. 94.
, that the application of the benefits of Christ declares for wh^^ the
impetration of them was Imo quid and quibus impetr^veri^ Christus, applicatio
ipsa demum patefacit atque obsignat. Ibid.
, that God the Father ordained His Son Jesus Christ to be a Redeemer and
Propitiator for our sins, out of that Love, wherewith He particularly embraced
his Elect to eternal life Deus Pater Filium suum Jesu Christum ordinavit in
Redemptorem ac Propitiatorem pro peccatis nostris, ex dilectione illa, qua
Electos suos speciatim complexus est ad vitam aeternam. Ibid. p. 84.
? with ten times more alike loudly dissonant for those former Sayings. That
Notion of theirs, which they often repent, is (amongst many others) of very sad
resentment, viz. that though some men be willing, or should be willing, to
believe, or to partake of Redemption by Christ, yet God is not willing they
should Gratiam autem Redemptionis intelligimus, non qua possunt homines redimi,
si velint, etc. Ibid. p. 78. Si vero hac distinctione hoc spectatur and
infertur, Deum per Mortem Christi, erga omnes and singulos esse placatum, v^^e
ipsorum salutem, modo ipsi velint, (...)vt Pelagianum rejicimus. Ibid. p. 103.
; whereas the Scripture says expressly, that If there be first a willing mind,
a man is accepted according to that which he has* not according to that which
he has not, (2 Cor. 8. 12.) that is, when a man is truly willing to do that
which God requires of him, but wants either strength, means, or opportunity
for the doing of it, and upon this account only does it not, God does not
reject him, or punish him for not doing the thing, but regards and rewards him
for the uprightness of his heart, and the preparedness and readiness of his
Will to do it, in case means and opportunity were vouchsafed him. So that
(doubtless) if a man be truly willing to be redeemed, or saved, by Christ, no
want of strength, means, or opportunities, in one kind or other, for his
Salvation, shall hinder him from being saved, because he is in this case,
accepted [i. e. measured, and estimated] by God, according to the ability
vouchsafed unto him, which extended only to the enabling of him to work and
bring his Heart to a true willingness, of being redeemed and saved by Christ,
and which He has with all faithfulness employed and improved accordingly: and
not according to any greater or further abilities, which happily are given unto
others, but have been denied unto him. Now if God measures, judges, and
esteems a man only according to what he has [i. e. according only to what
power, means, or opportunities He has, for the performance of what is
righteous and just] in case any man has gone as far, in, or toward the
performance hereof, as ^uch power, means, and opportunities do enable him to
go, He must needs find grace and favorable acceptance with God; yea the same
grace and acceptance (proportionably) which He should or could have found with
Him, in case with more power, means, and opportunities He had gone further, and
done more. And besides, that God should not be willing that a man should be
redeemed and saved by Christ, when as the man himself is truly willing in this
kind, is a saying of a notorious inconsistency with truth; considering that
the willingness of any man in this kind, must of necessity proceed from a
willingness in God semblable to it. For it is God that works in men, as well
to will, as to do: and doubtless He works not in any man to will that, which
is contrary to His own Will. But this by the way.

How scant and narrow that covering is, which the Synod casts over the
nakedness of the pre-mentioned Contradictions, to hide it from the eyes of men;
and likewise how inconsiderable, and unworthy men professing the knowledge of
God and of the Scriptures, those Reasons and Arguments are, by which they seek
to establish their own Opinion concerning the Death of Christ, in opposition to
the Judgment of those, whom they voted Heterodox and Erroneous, we shall (God
willing) show and prove in the latter part of this Discourse. In the mean time
let us briefly consider what Companions and Friends we have, even amongst those
of the Reformed Religion, and Protestant Party of Men, in that great Article of
our Faith, which we have contended for hitherto, the Gracious Intentions of God
toward all Men without exception, in the Death of Christ, and the Redemption
purchased thereby.

First, concerning those, whose Judgments and Consciences rather consorted. 17.
with Luthers Doctrine, then with Calvin's, being upon this account
distinguished by the Name of Lutherans; these (more generally, and almost
universally, at least as far as my inspection into their Writings informs me)
teach the Doctrine of General Redemption by Christ, as orthodox and found. I
shall only ins^st upon a few Passages from the Writings of two or three known
Authors of the Lutheran Persuasion, leading men in their way.

Melancthon (Luthers great Associate) teaches, that EVERY PERSON of us apart
ought to be firm^^ resolved of this, that we are pardoned, and received by God:
and that with this special [or particular] Faith, EVERY particular MAN ought to
apply the benefit of Christ to himself Sing^li statuere debemus, nobis ipsis
ignosci, nos ipsos a Deo recipi. Hac Fide speciali, vt sic dicam, quisque sibi
applicare beneficium Christi debet. Melancth. Loc. De Fide.
. Elsewhere He says, that the Counsel of God was, that MANKIND should be
redeemed: and presently after asserteth the Love of God in His Son TOWARD
MANKIND Esi autem causas hujus mirandi consilij, cur hoc modo redimendum fuerat
genus humanum, nondum in hac infirmitate cernimus, etc. Conspiciuntur in hac
victima Justicia Dei, and ira advers^s peccatum, and immensa miserecordia erga
nos, and amor in filio erga genus humanum. Idem. De Justificatione.
. In another place He affirms that God poured out His Wrath against the SINS
OF MANKIND [not of a few particular men] upon His Son. A little after (speaking
of Christ) He says, He feels a greater burden, viz. the Wrath of God against
the SINS OF MANKIND, which He knows to be poured out upon Him. He sorrowed
also [and was troubled] that a great part of Mankind would perish through a
contempt of this [great] benefit of God -- in qua iram Dei adversus generis
humani peccata in filium effudit. Idem. De Filio. Et mox: (loquens de Christo)
sentit majus onus, scilicet ira^ Dei adversus peccata generis humani, quam scit
in sese effundi -- Doluit item magnam partem generis humani perituram esse
spreto hoc beneficio Dei. Ibid.
. In another place He says: It is necessary to know that the Gospel is an
UNIVERSAL PROMISE, i. e. that Reconciliation [with God] is offered and promised
unto ALL M^^. This universal [Promise] it is necessary to hold fast against
[any] dangerous conceits about Predestination, lest we fall to reason thus,
that this Promise belongs to some few others, but does not belong unto us.
But let us be resolved of this, that the Promise of the Gospel is universal.
For as the preaching of Repentance is universal, so the preaching of Remission
of Sins is universal also. But that all Men do not obtain the Promises of the
Gospel [i. e. the things here promised] it arises from hence, that all Men do
not believe Necesse est scire Evangelium promissionem universalem esse: hoc
est, offerri and promitti omnibus reconciliationem. Hanc universalem tenere
necesse est adversus periculosas imaginationes de Praedestinatione, ne
disputemus hanc Promissionem ad paucos quosdam alios pertinere, non pertinere
ad nos. -- Nos vero statuamus Evangelij promissione^ universale^ esse. Sicut
enim praedicatio poenitentiae universalis est, ita praedicatio remissionis
peccatorum universalis est. -- Quod ^^te^ non omnes consequuntur Evangelij
promissa, eo sit, quia non omnes credunt. Idem. De Promissione Evangelii.
. The Writings of this Author have in them a large and full eye of that
Doctrine, which has been protected hitherto.

Chemnitius, another learned Champion of the Lutheran Faith, rises up. 18.
in his might from place to place to maintain the same Doctrine. The whole
Transaction (says He) of the Mediator is considerable in this, whether [God]
the Father be willing to accept that satisfaction and obedience for THE WHOLE
WORLD. Now this He declared most signally in this, that He left not His Son,
whom He smote for the Sins of THE PEOPLE, in Death, but raised Him up from the
dead, and placed Him at the right Hand of His Majesty Et tota illa actio
Mediatoris, in eo vertitur, an Pater illa^ satisfactione^ and obedientiam
acceptare velit pro toto Mundo. Illud vero Pater in eo maxim ostendit, quod
Filiu^, quem propter peccata populi percusserat, non dereliquit in morte, sed
resuscitavit ex mortuis, and collocavit ad dextera^ Majestatis suae. Chemn.
Examen. part. 1. De Justificatione.
. Elsewhere He says; Lest therefore all Mankind should perish for ever, that
wonderful Decree of the Counsel of God concerning the Incarnation of the Son of
God, was enacted, that He being our Mediator in our Nature assumed without sin,
should be made subject to the Law for us, and should bear sin, the guilt of
sin, the Wrath of God, and THE PVNISHMENTS OF THE SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD,
being derived [or cast] upon Him Ne igitur totum genus humanu^ in aeternu^
periret, pactu^ est mirabile illud Divini Consilij Decretum de Incarnatione
Filij Dei, vt is Mediator noster, in assumpta sine peccato nostra natura, pro
nobis Legi subderetur, peccatu^, reatu^ peccati, iram Dei, and supplicia
peccatorum totius Mundi, in se derivata portaret, etc. Idem. Ibid. part. 2. De
Satisfactione.
. Again: The Father did not pour out part of his Wrath or of the Curse, but his
WHOLE WRATH with all the dregs of the Curse, into that cup, which He gave unto
his Son the Mediator to ^e drunk by him in his sufferings. And presently after:
Christ upon the Cross, being about to commend his Spirit unto his Father,
says, It is finished: whereby He testifies, that all those things which were
necessary for the Expiation of Sins, and for Redemption from the curse of the
Law, were fully, sufficiently and super-abundantly consummated and discharged,
in [or, by] his obedience and sufferings Non enim partem ir^, vel
maledictionis, sed totam iram suam cum universis faecibus maledictionis Pater
effudit in calice^ illu^, quem Filio Mediatori in passione bibendu^ proposuit.
Idem. Ibid. part. 4. De Indulgentiis. Immediate post: Et Christus in cruce
traditurus Patri spiritu^, dicit, consu^matu^ est: qua voce testatur, omnia ea,
quae ad expiationem peccatoru^, and ad redemptione^ a maledictione Legis
necessaria erant, obedientia and passione sua, plene, sufficient^r, and
abundanter consummata and persoluta esse.
. And that He does not speak this, with particularity of respect to the Sins,
or Redemption, of a few, or of the Elect only, but simply, and with reference
to the Sins, and Redemption, of all Men, appears, 1. From the clear drift and
purport of the Discourse in hand, which was to prove against his Tridentine
Antagonists, that Christ, in, and at his Death, left nothing unperformed that
was necessary, or required [ viz. by way of satisfaction] of any person
whatsoever, for his Redemption, or for the Expiation of his sins; the Sense and
Doctrine of His Adversaries being, that Indulgences, or satisfactory
Performances by those yet living, were available, not only for the Elect being
in Purgatory (for they no where appropriate this Element unto them) but for
any, or all without exception, which (according to the Notion of their Faith)
were sent thither for want of a complete satisfaction made for their sins. 2.
Soon after, in progress of the same Discourse, He cites this from the Apostle,
Unus pro omnibus mortuus est, One dyed for ALL MEN 2 Cor. 5.
: and from another Apostle, this: Si qu^ peccaverit, etc. If any man sin we
have an Advocate, etc. -- And He is the Propitiation for our sins: and not for
ours alone, but for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD 1 John 2. 2.
. 3. There is not the least insinuation in the said Passages of any limitation
or restriction intended by Him, to the Elect, or their sins only. 4. (And
lastly) The general Sense of the latter Passages is fairly and fully comportant
both with the express tenor of the former, and (indeed) with the Judgment of
the Author in other parts of His Writings, where He has occasion to declare
His Sense in the Point.

Luther himself led them into the way of the same Doctrine, though (happily). 19.
He did not walk so uniformly or stedily in it, as they did. Christ (says He)
is slain before [or, in the sight of] the World, is condemned, ones down into
Hell [or, into the grave.] But before God He is the Salvation OF THE WHOLE
WORLD, from the beginning to the end of it Christus occiditur coram Mundo,
damnatur, ^t descendit ad inferos. Sed coram Deo est salus totius Mundi, a
principio usque ad fine^. Luther. in Genesis c. 45. verse. 5.
. In another place: The sins of the WHOLE WORLD, which are committed from the
first man to the last day thereof, lie upon the back of that one man, who was
born of Mary ^o^^s Mun^i pecca^^, quae a primo homine inde ad novissimum diem
fi^^t, jacent in tergo unius hominis, qui ex Maria natus est. Idem. Sermon. 1. De
Passione, etc.
. Elsewhere: We all fell, in [or, by] the Fall of Adam our first Parent; and
THIS FALL must be recovered by Christ, viz. by His Ignominy, Shame, Reproach,
and Death Ada namque primi Parentis casu, omnes lapsi sumus, atque illum lapsum
per Christum instaurari oportuit, ejus nempe ignomini^, dedecore, opprobrio,
and Morte, etc. Idem. Postill. in Domin. Trinitatis.
, etc. If Adams Fall, wherein All Men without exception fell, be recovered, or
restored, by Christ, all that fell thereby must needs be recovered or restored
by Him. If only the Elect (so called) be recovered, this is no recovery of
Adams Fall, but only of a small or less considerable part of it, or rather of
some few persons only, who fell thereby. The same Author in another place
says, that Paul in His Epistle to the Romans writes, That God promised by His
Prophets in the Holy Scripture, the Gospel concerning his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, namely that ALL MEN SHOULD BE SAVED by him, according to that which was
said to Abraham, Genesis 22. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed etc. And afterward: Christ from the beginning of the World to the end
thereof remains the same, by whom ALL MEN are TOGETHER [or, alike] saved Paulus
Romans 1. scrib^^* Deum Evangelion per Prophetas Sancta Scriptura de Filio suo
Jesu Christo Domino nostro promisisse, nempe omnes per ipsum salvos fore, etc.
Et postea: Christus ab initio Mundi usque in finem idem perd^rat, per que^
omnes juxta salvantur. Idem. Ibid. Prima Dominica in Adventu.
. Elsewhere this Author affirms the Grace of God, to be toti orbi communis In
Domin. 3. Adve^.
, common to the whole World: and again He affirms that Christ is Vita and Lux
OMNIUM hominum, i. e. the Life and Light of ALL MEN Ad summam Missam in Na^
tal. Domin.
, (to omit many other Passages of like import, that might readily be drawn
together out of the Writings of this noble Champion of the Protestant Faith.)
So that there is little question but that the Lutheran party of the Reformed
Religion, do more generally, if not wholly and entirely (for I want the
opportunity of Books to inform my self concerning the respective Judgments of
them all) accord with us in the generality of Redemption purchased by Christ.

For the finishing of the Chapter in hand, and (upon the matter) of this. 20.
first Part of our Discourse, it remains only that I desire the unpartial
Reader, seriously, and as in the Presence of God, to consider, whether the
Testimonies and Sayings, which shall be presented unto Him (in the remaining
part of this Chapter) out of the Writings of Calvin, and some other principal
men, that are generally looked upon as Followers of His Doctrine, and
consequently, as Adversaries to the Great Doctrine of Universal Redemption
maintained in this Discourse, whether (I say) these Testimonies and Sayings do
not evince above, and beyond all contradiction, that these men were not so
through, uniform, settled, or consistent with themselves in their Judgments
about the Doctrine of Redemption, as men had need be, whose Authority and
Judgments are commonly taken for the Standard of other Men's Faith, and judged
little less then equal to the Foundations of the Prophets and Apostles
themselves, in matters of Religion. Certain I am that the frequent and
notorious inconsistencies that occur in their Writings about the Great Article
of the Christian Faith, so much argued and debated in our present Discourse,
have ministered an unhappy advantage to some of our Adversaries of the Synagogue
of Rome, to elevate and expose to contempt, the Credit, Worth, Learning,
Authority, of the Principal Supporters and Defenders of the Protestant Religion
Vid. Johan. Paul. Windeck. Controvers. de M^rtis Christi efficacia. p. 47, 48,
49, etc. and p. 25^, 262 267* etc.
. I speak not these things (nor shall I speak any thing, God willing, at any
time) to the undervaluing of the Learning, Parts, labor, faithfulness, signal
serviceableness of these men to the Christian Churches in their generations: I
acknowledge that many of them equalized both in all Intellectual and Moral
Accomplishments and Endowments, the best of the Fathers (so called) of old. The
only prize that we run for in the present race, is so far to reduce and temper
their Esteem and Authority with us, that on the one hand what was worthy, and
of God, in them, may turn to an happy account unto us, and bless us; and on the
other hand, that what was weak, and of men, in them, may not ensnare us, or
balance the spiritual commodity accruing to us from what was honorable and
beneficent in them, with loss and disadvantage.

I begin with Calvin Himself: and humbly desire those, that oppose His. 21.
Judgment and Authority to obstruct the course of the Doctrine avouched in this
Discourse, lest it should run and be glorified as Truth ought to be, to
consider whether these Passages and Sayings next ensuing, be with it, and for
it, or against it. Although (says He) there is nothing to be found in the
World worthy the Favor of God, yet He shows himself PROPITIOVS [or favorable]
UNTO THE WHOLE WORLD, in that He calls ALL MEN WITHOUT EXCEPTION to believe in
Christ, which is nothing else but an entrance into life Tametsi enim in Mundo
nihil reperietur favore Dei dignum, se tamen toti Mundo propotiu^ ostendit. cum
sine exceptione omnes ad Christi Fidem vocat, quae nihil aliud est, quam
ingressus in vitam. Calvin. in Joh. 3. 15, 16.
: (with more to like purpose transcribed Cap. 5. Sect. 25. of this Discourse.)
Certainly if Gods calling of All Men without exception to believe in Christ, be
a sufficient argument, or sign, of His propitious and favorable inclination
toward them, He must needs really intend the grace, or good of Salvation unto
them: otherwise His calling of them to believe, as namely if it should be
accompanied with a Purpose or Intent in Him, either simply to destroy them, or
to increase their destruction, would rather argue His Hatred, then any
propitiousness of affection toward them. And if God intends the Salvation of
all Men without exception, certainly He has provided Salvation in Christ for
them all. Elsewhere the same Author says, that although Christ suffered for
the sins of the WHOLE WORLD, and be through the KINDNESS [or good will] OF GOD
INDIFFERENTLY OFFERED UNTO ALL MEN, yet all Men do not receive [or take hold
on] Him Nam etsi passus est Christus propeccatis totius Mundi, atque omnibus
indifferenter Dei benignitate offertur, non tamen omnes apprehe^dunt. Calvin.
ad Romans 5. 18.
. See this, and much more cited from him of like Notion, Cap. 6. Sect. 25. In
another place He discourses thus: In as much as the utmost end of a blessed
life stands in the knowledge of God, that the entrance [or, access] unto
blessedness might not be shut up against ANY MAN, God has not only implanted
in the minds of men that which we call the seed of Religion, but has also
manifested Himself in the whole Fabrique [or, Workmanship] of the World, after
such a manner* and offers himself daily so plainly [or, openly, unto men] that
they cannot open their eyes, but they must needs behold him quia ultimus beatae
vitae finis in Dei cognitione positut est, ne cui pr^clusus esset ad
felicitatem aditus, non solum hominum mentibus indidit illud, quod dicimus
Religionis semen, sed ita se patefecit in toto mundi opificio, ac se quotidie
palam off^rt, vt aperire oculos nequeant, quin ^um aspicere cogantur. Idem,
Institut. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 1.
. If God provideth that the passage or way unto Happiness may be open for every
man, or (which is the same) obstructed or shut up against no man, doubtless
there is Happiness (and consequently, Salvation) provided in, or procured by,
Christ for every man. For there is no way or access for any man, unto
Happiness, but by Christ; no nor yet by Christ himself, except only for those,
whose sins are attoned by Him. Of like import with the former, is that saying
also: The fuller and more comprehensive sense is this, that God was in Christ:
and then, that by his intercession He reconciled THE WORLD unto himself Sed
plenior erit sensus and uberior, quod D^us in Christo erat: deinde, quod ejus
intercessione reconciliabat sibi Mundum. Idem, 2 ad Co^. 5. 19. Et mox: Quorsum
ergo apparuit Deus hominibus in Christo? In Reconciliation^^s, vt sublatis
inimicitiis, qui alieni erant adoptent^r in filios.
. Questionless if an Expositor of Scripture meets with a figurative term, or
expression (I mean, so apprehended by him) in the Text which is before him, and
which he is about to open, it is very unproper for him to use the same word in
the same figurative or unproper sense, in his Exposition, especially without
giving any notice of the figurativeness of it, or substituting a word of a more
plain and ready signification for the explaining of it. Therefore if Calvin, by
the word, World, 2 Cor. 5. 19. understood, the Elect of God only, dispersed up
and down the World, he would not in his Exposition, have used the same word to
express them, especially without the help of some other, one, or more, of a
more plain and known signification in that kind. So that there is not the
least question, but that he, both in the Text mentioned, as likewise in his
Commentaries upon it, understood the word, World, in the ordinary and best
known signification of it, i. e. for the generality or universality of Men.
Upon the same Scripture afterward he demands, For what purpose did God appear
unto Men in Christ? He answers and says, For Reconciliation, that, Enmities
being taken out of the way, THOSE THAT WERE ESTRANGED [from Him] might be
adopted for Sons. Now they that were estranged from God, were not the Elect
only, but the whole Universe of Mankind with them. Therefore according to the
express import of this piece of Commentary, God designed in Christ the Adoption
of all Men without exception, for Sons. Nor does He any whit less then confirm
the same Doctrine, in saying, that is by the offense of one Adam, Judgment, or
Guilt came upon all Men to Condemnation: so by the Righteousness of one Jesus
Christ, the ^ift or Benefit of God abounded unto ALL MEN TO THE JVS^^FICATION
OF LIFE Sicut per ^nius Adami offensam, Judicium, sive reatus venit in omnes
homines ad condemnatione^: sic ^tiam per unius Jesu Christi justiciam, Donu^
sive Beneficiu^ Dei redundavit in omnes homines ad Iustificationem vitae. Calv.
ad Romans 5. 15.
. He speaks likewise to the Heart of the Cause we plead, when He terms that
saying of the Apostle* 1 Cor. 8. 11. a memorable saying, whereby we are taught,
of how great an account the Salvation of the Brethren ought to be with us; and
not only the Salvation of them altogether, but of every one of them apart, in
as much as the Blood of Christ was shed FOR EVERY ONE of them Dictum
memorabile, quo docemur quanti nobis esse d^beat fratrum salus; n^c omnium
modo, sed singulorum, quando pro unoquoque est fufus Christi sanguis. Idem, in
1 Cor. 8. 11.
. By Brethren, it is evid^nt that He cannot mean, only such who are Elect, or
Predestined unto Salvation; 1. Because He speaks of all that profess
Christianity, or that are Members of any Christian Church, amongst whom it is
the known Judgment of this Author that there still are many Hypocrites, and
such who will not in fine be saved. 2. The Elect (in His sense) I mean, such
who come at last to be actually saved, cannot be certainly known or discerned
from others, beforehand. Therefore this consideration, that Christ has shed
His Blood for a man, can be no argument or motive at all unto me to regard His
Salvation the more, since it is unpossible for me to know, whether Christ has
shed His Blood for Him, or no* His meaning then, when He says that the Blood
of Christ was shed for every particular Person of the Brethren, must needs be,
that it was shed as well for those, who will not be saved by it, as for those
that will. See before upon this account, Cap. 8. Sect. 10. And does He not yet
further plead the Cause of the same Doctrine with us, when He says, that Since
Christ will have the Benefit of His Death COMMON UNTO ALL MEN, they do Him
wrong [or, are injurious unto Him] who by any Opinion of theirs, restrain [or
keep back] ANY MAN from the Hope of Salvation Quum itaque common Morti^ suae
beneficium omnibus esse velit, injuriam illi faciunt, qui opinione sua quempi^
arcent a spe salutis* Idem, in 1 Timothy 2. 5.
? Take this Passage of His also into the account. This is a marvelous Love [of
His] toward Mankind, that H^ is willing to have ALL MEN SAVED, yea and is
ready to gather into Salvation, such as are perishing of their own accord. But
the order here is to be observed, viz. that God is ready [or prepared] to
receive all Men unto [or, upon] Repentance, LEST ANY MAN should perish Mirum
hic erga ge^us humanu^ amo^, quod omnes vult esse salvos, and ultro per^unt^s
in salutem colligere paratus est. Notandus autem hic ordo, quod paratus est
Deus omnes ad poenitentiam recipere, ne qu^^ p^^^at. Idem. in 2 Pet. 3. 9.
. In the Heads of accord between Him and the Ministers of the Tigurine Church,
about the Sacrament, He says (speaking of Christ) that He is to be considered
as a Sacrifice of Expiation, by which God is appeased [or, pacified] toward
THE WORLD Considerandus est tanquam victima expiatrix, qua placatus est Deus
Mundo. I Would* Opusc. p. 872.
. In the Geneva Catechism, He teaches all those that are to be catechized, to
look upon Christ as Salut^m Mundi, the Salvation OF THE WORLD, yea and to own
Him, and believe in Him, as their Surety, who has undergone that Judgment,
which they deserved, that He might render them free from guilt -- Vt palam fiat
judicium quod m^rc^^m^r, tanqu^ v^d^^ nostrum subire, qu^ no^ a reat^ lib^ret.
Calvin. Opusc. p. 19.
: (with much more of like consideratioin.) So that unless it be supposed, that
Christ dyed for all such Persons without exception, who should be persuaded and
brought to learn, and use this Catechism, it will apparently follow, that the
Composer of it, and all Parents, and others, that shall put their Children, or
other Persons, upon the learning and pronouncing the words hereof, shall put
them upon the speaking and professing those things, and that as matters of
their Christian Faith, of the truth whereof they have no sufficient ground or
assurance, yea and which are much more likely to be false, then true. For if
Christ d^ed for the Elect only ( i. e. only for such, who in the event will
be saved) these being but few, in comparison of those, who will perish, evident
it is, that, speaking of particular Persons before they believe savingly, or to
Justification, it is more likely they will perish, then that they will be
saved; or however, there is no sufficient ground to judge of them* or of any
particular Person of them by Name, before they believe, that they are Elected;
or (consequently) that Christ was their Surety, or dyed to free them from the
guilt of sin. And if so, then they that are taught to say, and profess, as an
Article of their Christian Faith, that Christ dyed to save them, are put upon
it, or tempted to profess that, as an Article of their Religion, which they
have no rational or competent ground to believe to be so much as a Truth. Yea
the clear truth is, that the Opinion, which denies the Redemption of all Men
(without exception) by Christ, puts all our ordinary Catechisms to rebuke,
as being snares and temptations upon all, or the greatest part of those, who
use them, to pretend a Belief, or confident Persuasion, of such a thing, which
they have more cause to suspect for an Error, then to embrace as a Truth. This
by the way. If the Reader, to those Passages lately insisted upon from the
undoubted Writings of Mr Calvin, ^ill please to add those other, from the same
Pen (formerly mentioned See Cap. 5 Sect. 25 and cap. 6. sect. 25 cap. 8. sect.
5, 10, 43, 53. cap. 12. sect. 8 etc*
) which, though produced (happily) upon somewhat a more particular occasion
respectively, yet speak (for substance) the same thing, He will (I presume)
acknowledge (that which has in effect been already said) that Calvin was not so
far an Enemy to General Redemption, but that without straining either his
Judgment or Conscience, He did upon all occasions reconcile Himself unto it,
yea and bottomed many carriages and Passages of Discourse upon it.

I was desirous to present the Reader with the more variety, and greater. 22.
number of Testimonies from Calvin, wherein He plainly asserteth the Doctrine
of Universal Atonement, because He is generally notioned as a man clearest and
most resolved in his Judgment against it. I shall be more sparing in citations
of a like import from others, who pass in common Discourse as professed Enemies
also against the same Doctrine: but whether they be so indeed, methinks these
Sayings following (with many more of a like inspiration, that might be added
unto them) should put to a Demurrer. S^ God loved the World, etc. By World
(says Musculus) He understands Universal Mankind Sic Deus dilexit Mu^dum,
etc. Per Mendu^ enim intelligit univer* sum genus humanum, etc. Muscu. Loc. de
Philanthropia.
, etc. In another Place; After the same manner (He says) it is in this
Redemption of Mankind, whereof we speak: that Reprobates and men deplorably
[or, desperately] wicked, do not receive it, neither comes to pass through any
defect of the Grace of God, nor is it meet that for the sons of Perdition sake,
that it should lose the glory and title of an Universal Redemption, in as much
as it is prepared for all, and all are called unto it Ad eum modum habet and
Redemptio ista generis humani, de qua loquimur, quod illam homines reprobi ac
deplorate impij non accipiant, neque defectu fit gratiae Dei, neque justum est
vt illa propter fili^s perditionis, gloriam ac titulum universalis Redemptionis
amittat, cum sit parata cunctis, and omnes ad illam vocentur. Idem. Loc. De
Redemptione Genesis Human.
. Elsewhere He says, Christ dyed, not for His Friends alone, but for His
Enemies also: NOT FOR SOME MEN ONLY, BUT FOR ALL MEN. This is the immense
l^titude [or, compass] of the Love of God Christus vero non pro amicis tantum,
sed and inimicis: non pro quibusdam tantum, sed pro omnibus mortuus est. Haec
est immensa Divinae Dilectionis amplitudo. Idem, in 2 ad Cor. 5. 14, 15.
. I know not how a man can express his sense for Universal Redemption, though
he should abound in it never so much, in word^ more significant and distinct.
These Passages, with many others like unto them, have been formerly cited from
this Author.

Peter Martyr has these Sayings: His Will was (speaking of God) that it should
be well WITH ALL MEN, and that One only should in the mean time suffer Voluit
ille vt omnes been haberent, unus interim pati. P. Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 2.
c. 17.. 19
. Again: It was meet that for our Redemption some good thing should be offered
unto God, which should equally, or rather more, please Him, then all the sins
of the World had displeased Him Oportebat vt ad nos redimendos bonum aliquod
offeretur Deo, quod aut aeque, aut etia^ magis placere posset, qua^ omnia Mu^di
peccata displicuisse^t. Ide^. Ib.
. In another place, He readily grants, that God, with that Will, which is
called His antecedent Will, wills that all Men should be saved Vnde si hanc
Dei voluntate^ respiciamus, illu^ facile dicemus velle omnes salvos. Idem. Loc.
C^ass. 3. c. 1. sect. 45.
: which is the express Notion and Sense, wherein we declared our Judgment in
the Point of Universal Redemption by Christ Cap. 17. Sect. 1, 9.
. Elsewhere He produces this Scripture, God will have all Men to be saved, to
prove, that God is not the Author of Sin in the World, and upon this account
argues thus: If God will have Men saved, then He uses good means, and does
not stir them up to sin: for sin brings men to destruction Loc. Com. Class. 1.
c. 14. sect. 2. Si salvos vult, bonis mediis utitur, non incitat ad peccandum.
Peccata enim ad exitiu^ deducunt.
. If His Sense were, that God wills only that the Elect should be saved,
then, notwithstanding this Argument, God might be the Author of all the sins in
the world that are committed by far the greatest part of Men, viz. by all those
that are not Elected: which (doubtless) was as far from His mind, as it is
from truth. For if Gods Will that Men should be saved, be a Reason to prove,
that He inclines not Men unto sin, the probatory force of it in this kind can
extend no further, then to such Men only, whom He wills should be saved.

Bucer, if there were any agreement between his Judgment, and his words,. 23.
was as full and through for General Redemption as any man. Whereas (says He)
the World was lost [or, undone] by one sin of Adam, the Grace of Christ did not
only abolish this sin, and that Death which it brought [upon the World] but
likewise took away AN INFINITE NVMBER OF OTHER SINS, WHICH WE THE REST OF MEN
HAVE ADDED to that first Sin Cum enim ex uno Adae peccato orbis perditus sit,
gratia Christi non hoc solum peccatum, et mortem, quam intulit, abolevit, sed
simul infinita illa sustulit peccata, quae reliqui homines, primo illi peccato
adjecimus. Bucer. in Romans 5. 16.
. Afterward: If we consider that every particular man by his Transgressions
increases the misery of Mankind, and that whosoever sins, does no less
hurt his Posterity, then Adam did all Men; it is a plain case, that the GRACE
OF CHRIST HAS REMOVED MORE EVILS FROM MEN, THEN THE SIN OF ADAM BROVGHT upon
them* For though there be no sin committed in all the World, which has not its
original from that first sin of Adam, yet all particular men who sin, as they
sin voluntarily and freely, so do they make an addition to their own proper
guilt and misery. ALL WHICH EVILS since the alone BENEFIT OF CHRIST HAS TAKEN
AWAY, it must needs be that it has taken away the sins of many, and not of
one only. Manifest therefore it is, that more evils have been removed by
Christ, then were brought in by Adam Verum si consideramus singulos Mortaliu^,
suis quoque transgressionibus, malu^ generis humani auxisse, and non minus,
quicunque peccant, suis posteris nocere, atque nocuit omnibus Adam; in aeperto
est, gratiam Christi plura depulisse ab hominibus mala, quam Adae no^a
intulerit. Nam licet in Orb nihil peccatu^ sit, quod ex illo primo Adae lapsu
non trahat originem, tamen singuli qui peccant, vt sua quoque libera voluntate
peccant, ita suum quoque adjiciunt reatum, suam adferunt perniciem. Quae omnia
Mala, cum beneficium Christi solum sustulit, certe jam multorum peccata
sustulit, non unius Adae. Manifestum est igitur plura per Christum Mala submo^a
esse, quam Adam intulerat. Idem. ad* ^om. 5. 17.
. And yet further this Author says: As by the Fall of one, Sin prevailed over
all, so as to make all liable unto Condemnation: so likewise the Righteousness
of one so far took place on the behalf of ALL MEN, that ALL MEN may obtain the
Justification of Life hereby Infert hic Apostolus, repetit, and su^mat, quae
tribus praemissis collationibus disseruit: haec scilicet: Sicut ex unius lapsu
peccatum in omnes invaluit, vt reddiderit omnes condemnationi obnoxios, sic
etiam unius Justiciam in omnes homines obtinuisse, vt Justificatio vitae
omnibus contingat. Idem. ad Romans 5. 18.
.

He that converseth much with the Writings of other late Protestant Authors
(such I mean to whom the lot is fallen of being esteemed, orthodox) shall upon
a little observation, ever and anon find them borrowing this Principle of
their Adversaries, that Christ dyed for all Men, to support and strengthen
their buildings; being (indeed) a Principle so necessary, that in many cases
men can make no tolerable work without it. I may (I suppose) without prejudice
or loss in the least to the cause we have undertaken, supersede the
multiplication of Instances from other Authors, of the same persuasion and
repute, with those last named, whereby it would appear as clear as the light at
Noonday, that there are few of them, if any, but that now and then do Homage
with their Pen to that Great and Sovereign Truth of Universal Atonement by
Christ. I shall therefore conclude with some single Testimonies from several
men, leaving the Reader to pursue his satisfaction concerning the rest, by his
own reading.

Pareus, writing upon that of the Apostle, That He through the Grace of God
should taste of Death for every man, says, that whereas He says, for every
Man, it respects the amplification [or, extent] of the Death of Christ. HE
DYED NOT FOR SOME FEVV: THE EFFICACY [or, vertue] OF IT APPERTAINS UNTO ALL.
Therefore there is Life prepared in the Death of Christ for ALL afflicted
Consciences Quod dicit (...), ad fruc^um Mortis Christi amplificandum pertinet.
Non pro paucis aliquibus mortuus est, sed ad omnes efficacia ejus pertinet.
Omnibus igitur afflictis conscientiis in Morte Christi Vita parata est, etc.
Pareus. ad Heb. 2. 9.
.

Gualter, preaching upon Joh. 3. 16. and speaking of Christ, says, that He
being to name those, whom God so loved, does not mention Abraham, Isaac, or
Jacob, Moses, David, the Prophets, the Virgin Mary, the Apostles, or Holy
Martyrs, but THE WORLD, WHICH our Evangelist affirms to LIE WHOLLY IN
WICKEDNESS, and OF WHICH Christ Himself more then once affirms the DEVIL TO
BE PRINCE Et hoc quidem clarius exprimit, quando eos nominaturus, quos ita
dilexerit Deus, non Abrahami, aut Isaaci, aut Jacobi, Mosis, Davidis,
Prophetarum* Mariae Virginis, Apostolorum denique and Sanctorum Martyrum
meminit, sed Mundi, quem totum in Malo jacere Evangelista noster testatur, and
cujus Principem esse Diabolum ipse Christus non uno loco affirmat. Gualter.
Hom. 20. in Johan.
.

Hemmingius in his Book of Christian Institution, has this saying (amongst
many others, of like import,) There is no reason why any man should think that
the Son [of God] was sent into the World that He might [or, should] REDEEM SOME
CERTAIN SELECT PERSONS out of Mankind, but rather that He should take away THE
SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD Neque est quod quisqua^ existimet missum esse Filium in
Mundum vt quosda^ selectos tantu^ de genere humano redimeret, sed potius vt
totius Mundi peccata tolleret. Hemming. De Institut. Christiana.
.

Ursine, in his Catechetical Explications, discourses thus: As then Christ. 24.
dyed for all Men in respect of the sufficiency of His Ransom, in respect of
the efficiency of it only for those that believe, so also He was willing to
dye for ALL MEN IN COMMON, as to the sufficiency of His Merit, that is, HIS
WILL WAS TO MERIT by His Death, [and this] most sufficiently [i. e. abundantly]
GRACE, RIGHTEOUSNESS, LIFE, FOR ALL MEN, because He would have nothing wanting
in Him, or in His Merit, that should render wicked men, who perish, inexcusable
Vt igitur est mortuus pro omnibus sufficientia sui (...), pro solis credentibus
efficacia ejusdem, sic etiam voluit mori pro omnibus communiter quoad
sufficientiam sui Meriti; hoc est, voluit Morte sua mereri Gratiaem, Justiciam,
Vita^, sufficientissime pro omnibus quia nihil voluit in se and suo Merito
desiderari, vt omnes impii pereuntes essent (...). Ursin. Catech. Part. 2.
quest. 11.
. We formerly proved, that if Christ dyed sufficiently for all Men, that He
dyed intentionally also for all Cap. 5. Sect. 39, 40, etc.
: upon which account, amongst all our Opposers we found only Piscator and Beza
true to their Principles, who as well deny that Christ dyed sufficiently, as
efficaciously, or intentionally, for all Men Cap. 5. Sect. 44.
. But if Christ merited [i. e. purchased, or procured] by His Death, Grace,
Righteousness, Life, most sufficiently for all Men, and this so, or with such
an intent, that nothing might be wanting in His Merit to make those that
perish, inexcusable, doubtless He merited as much for those who perish, as for
those that are saved: and consequently dyed as efficaciously for the one, as
for the other. For what did he, or could he, merit more for those who come to
be saved, then Grace, Righteousness, Life, and this most sufficiently? Nor
could He merit less for those who perish, to make them inexcusable, then such a
sufficiency of Grace, by the cooperation and assistance whereof they might
have believed; as was sufficiently proved in the next preceding Chapter.

Aretius upon Verse. 15. of the second Chapter to the Hebrews, wills us to
observe, to whom the fruit [or, benefit] of the Death of Christ belongs, and
in what the Deliverance which the Apostle speaks of consists. This Deliverance
(says he) appertains unto all that were subject unto bondage in this life. Now
we were all thus subject: therefore THE DELIVERANCE APPERTAINS UNTO ALL. The
Deliverance is said to be general, or appertaining unto all Men, because IT
APPERTAINS UNTO ALL [or, whole] MANKIND, although all do not acknowledge the
benefit, nor receive it with a thankful mind. Thus it comes to pass that the
said Deliverance comes to be [eventually] efficacious in Believers only
Observa hic primum ad quos spectet Mortis Christi fructus deinde in quibus
consistat liberatio illa. Spectat ad omnes illa liberatio, quicunque erant
obnoxij servituti i^ hac vita. Eramus autem omnes: igitur ad omnes spectabat
haec liberatio. Generalis aute^ dicitur liberatio, vel ad omnes pertinens, quia
ad totu^ genus humanu^ pertinebat, qua^vis non omnes illud beneficiu^
agnoscant, nec grato animo accipiant. Ita fit vt tantu^ in fidelibus sit
efficax illa liberatio. Aretius, ad Heb. 2.
.

J. Fox (our Countryman) in his Meditations upon the Apocalypse, has this
Passage (amongst many others of a concurrent sense and notion,) The Lord Christ
then came into the World, being sent by His Father. And wherefore was He sen^?
That He might repair the losses which NATURE [he means the Nature of Man] had
sustained. For the Lord seeing the miserable and lost condition of our
infirmity, so prone unto evil by an innate frailty, so loved THE WORLD, that of
His own accord He bestowed His only begotten Son [upon it] who might relieve
the frailty [thereof,] change [or, turn] Death, into Salvation, pacify the
Wrath [conceived against it] in Heaven Venit ergo Christus Dominus in Mundu^ a
patre missus. Et cur missus? Vt damna Naturae resarciret. Vide^s siquide^
Dominus misera^ and perdita^ infirmitatis nostrae conditionem, innata
fragilitate ad vitia proclive^ sic dilexit Mundu^, vt Filiu^ suu^ unigenitu^
ultro imperaret, qui fragilitati succurreret, Mortem in Salutem verteret, in
coelo iram pacificaret, etc. Foxus, in Apoc. c. 14. p. 538.
, etc. The condition of the Elect, or of Believers, was not miserable, or lost,
or how ever not the condition of these only; Therefore this Author in saying
that the Lord so loved the World, that He voluntarily bestowed, etc. could not,
by the World, mean such only, Elect, or Believers, but the generality of
Mankind, the condition of all which was equally lost and miserable, and who
are frequently signified and expressed by the word, World.

Lavater, preaching with his Pen upon the Prophet Ezekiel, teacheh the. 25.
Doctrine asserted by us in words to this effect. Some say, I could willingly
dye, but that the greatness of my sins makes me afraid of Death. The Minds
[or, Consciences, of these men] are to be raised with this Consolation, that we
know that God has laid our sins upon Christ, so that He has made satisfaction
upon the Cross for us all Nonnulli dicant, equidem optare^ mori, sed magnitudo
peccatorum meorum facit, vt Mortem refugiam. Erigendi sunt animi hac
consolatione quod scimus Deum peccata nostrae Christo imposuisse, vt pro nobis
omnibus in cruce satisfaceret. Lavater. in Ezekiel. Homil. 18.
. To a Person troubled or dismayed with the fear of Death through the greatness
of his sins, it is a very faint Consolation, to understand or consider, that
God has laid the sins of some few men upon Christ, or that He has made
satisfaction for the Elect, or for those that believe, one main ground of his
trouble, or fear, being, whether he be of the number either of the one, or the
other. Therefore (doubtless) the Authors Sense in the Passage was, that Christ
has made satisfaction upon the Cross for all Men without exception.

Chamier, as solemnly engaged an Adversary against the Opinion of General
Redemption, as any, yet so far be friendeth the Truth at unawares, as to say
that the Righteousness of Christ is common for the saving of ALL MEN unto
Eternal Life Eadem ratio est Iusticiae Christi, quae communis est omnibus
servandis in vitam aeternam. Chamier. Panstrat. t. 3. lib. 21. cap. 21. Sect.
3. page 914.
.

Mr Perkins is known to have been very deeply also baptized into the same
spirit of opposition to us in the present Controversy, yet I find these words
cited from him, (for I have not, I confess, as yet found them in the Tract it
self, out of which they are cited,) Every person in the Church, by virtue of
this Command of God, Believe the Gospel, is bound to believe that He is
redeemed by Christ, as well Reprobates, as Elect, though in a different
consideration Quisque in Ecclesia mundat^ Dei, Creed Evangelio, tenetur creaer^
se redemptum esse per Christum, etiam Reprobos perinde atque Electos, sed alia
atque alia ratione. Electus tenetur credere, etc.
, etc. These words I so much the rather believe are to be found in this Author
(though, as I now said, I have not yet met with them here) because I find the
same words in effect, and not much differing in form, in other Writers,
Partakers of the same Apprehensions with Him in the subject matter in hand. For,

Zanchius expresses himself to the same Point thus: As EVERY ONE is commanded
[by God] to believe, and this with a proper and singular Faith, that Christ
dyed for Him, and that His sins are expiated by the Death and Blood of Christ,
that His sins are pardoned for Christ's sake, that He is justified in [or, by]
Christ -- so He is bound also to be fully persuaded [in himself] that He was
long before, as viz. before the Foundation of the World, chosen in Christ, and
predestined to the participation of these benefits Ergo vt quisque jubetur
credere, idque propria and singulari fide, Christu^ pro se mortuum esse, and
sua peccata Christi Morte ac sanguine expiata fuisse, se Patri per Christu^
reconciliatu^ esse; sibi peccata propter Christu^ esse condonata, se in Christo
justificatu^ etc. -- ita etiam peculiari fide tenetur persuasu^ habere se ad
horu^ beneficioru^ participatione^, long ante, hoc est, ante Mundi
constitutionem, fuisse in Christo electu^ ac praedestinatu^, etc. Zanch. de
Natara Dei. lib. 5. cap. 2. qu. 1. thesi. 1.
, etc. Such sayings as these from men, who professedly stand declared in their
Judgments for such a Personal and Particular Redemption, which excludes the
far greatest number of men from part or fellowship in it, are unto me (though
no hard Interpreter either of men's words, or actions) of an Interpretation of
no good accord with the Honor of their Authors.

Bullinger, in his Writings frequently rises up in confirmation of what his
fellows sometimes affirm in the behalf of the Doctrine of our present Contest.
Amongst other Passages of this Interest, I read words to this purpose: It
remains then as undubitable Truth, that the Lord Christ is a full Propitiation,
Satisfaction, Offering, and Sacrifice for the Sins, for the Punishment (I say)
and for the fault [or delinquency] OF THE WHOLE WORLD Itaque relinquitur ja^
indubitatum Christu^ Dominu^ plenaria^ esse Propitiatione^, Satisfactione^,
H^stia^que and victima^ pro p^ccatis, pro poena (inqua^) and pro culpa totius
Mundi, etc. Bullinger. De Justify* Fidei. Ser. 6.
.

J. Jacobus Grynaeus numbereth him amongst his Orthodoxographers [i. e. his
orthodox and sound Writers] who reasoned thus against the Pelagian Heretics,
who denied, that Christ dyed for all Men: If it were so, how could the Apostle
say, that as in Adam all dye, so in Christ ALL shall be made alive? yea and
says withal, that the Catholic Church utterly detests that Opinion, which
denies that Christ assumed the Nature of Man for all Men, and that He dyed for
all Men Dominu^ nostru^ Iesum Christu^ aiu^t humana^ carnem non pro omnium
salute sumpsisse* nec pro omnibus mortuu^ esse. Hoc omnimodis catholica
detestatur Ecclesia. Nam si ita esset, quomodo Apostolus diceret, Sicut in Adam
omnes moriuntur, ita and in Christo omnes vivificabuntur. Orthodoxographia.
part. 2. p. 1503.
.

Dr Jo: Davenant (an eminent Member of the Synod of Dort) in stead of an Answer
to this Argument of his Adversaries, against Justification by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, If the Righteousness of Christ, which is the general
Price of the Redemption of all Men, be imputed to us, then we may truly be
called the Redeemers, or Saviors of the World, replyeth thus: The
Righteousness of Christ then is not imputed [for example] unto Peter, as [or,
as it is] the general PRICE OF REDEMPTION FOR ALL MEN, but as the Price
wherewith His Soul is redeemed in particular Non igitur Petro imputatur
[Iusticia Christ*] vt generale pretium Rede^ptionis pro omnibus, sed vt pretium
quo illius anima in particulari redimitur, etc. Joh. Davenantius in Praelect.
De Justicia Habit. p. 331.
. In which words he plainly enough supposes the said Righteousness of Christ
to be a general Price for the Redemption of all Men.

Kimedontius, a great Professor of the way and Doctrine of Calvin in the
present Controversies, yet complains of those, as injurious to him and his
party, and no better then false Witnesses, who clamor against them, as if they
denied that Christ dyed for ALL MEN, and was not the Propitiation for the Sins
of the whole WORLD Injuriam nobis faciu^t, et falsi testes reperiuntur, qui nos
clamitant negare, Christum esse mortuum pro omnibus, and Propitiationem esse
pro peccatis totius Mundi. Kimedont. Synops. De Redempt.
.

Because I would not over-charge the Readers Patience above measure, I. 26.
shall omit the Catechisms and Confessions of many Reformed Churches, as of the
Palatinate, Bern, Basil, Tigurum, Schaffhusen, with diverse others, in which
there are very plain and pregnant Assertions of the Doctrine of Universal
Atonement by Christ: and shall conclude the Demonstration of what we lately
observed ( viz. that the Doctrine of General Redemption is a Principle, or
Notion, of that sovereign use and necessity, that the professed Enemies thereof
cannot forbear it, or make any rational earnings in many their Theological
Discourses without it) with a Passage or Testimony from no fewer then fifty two
Ministers of the City of London (and these, non de Plebe virum) which I find
in a small Pamphlet lately subscribed and published by them, and that for this
very end (as themselves profess) to give Testimony against Errors and Heresies.
In this their Testimony, bewailing the prevailing of Errors and Heresies (so by
them called) they bemoan the case of many of those, whom yet otherwhile they
judge the happiest men in the World, (those I mean, for whom Christ dyed) thus:
Thousands and ten thousands of poor Souls, which Christ has ransomed with His
Blood, shall hereby be betrayed, seduced, and endangered to be undone to all
Eternity A Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, etc. subscribed by 52 London
Ministers, page 32.
. No sense, rationality, or truth can be made of this Saying, but by the
mediation of this Hypothesis or ground; viz. that such Persons, who have been
ransomed with the Blood of Christ, may be undone (i. e. perish) for ever. For
whatsoever men may be brought into danger of suffering, doubtless there is a
possibility (at least) that they may suffer (as we have reasoned the case
further elsewhere Remedy of Unreasonableness, p. 13, 14
,) where also we put to rebuke that Distinction, of a Possibility in respect of
Second Causes, and in respect of the first Cause, or Decree of God; evincing
from express grounds of Scripture, truth in this Assertion, That there is not
the least danger of suffering inconvenience by any such means, or causes, how
likely or threatening soever, in themselves simply considered, to bring the
inconvenience upon us, which we know to be thoroughly mated and overballanced by
means and causes of a contrary tendency and import. I here add, that should the
meaning of the Authors of the said Passage be, that those rans^med with the
Blood of Christ, are endangered, in respect of second Causes, or means, only,
but are in the mean time perfectly secured by God, or His Decree, from
suffering the danger, there had been no such cause of taking up that most
solemn and pathetique Lamentation over them, which they do, but rather of
rejoicing on their behalf, that being so ransomed, they are in no danger, or
possibility, through any betraying, or seduction by any Error, or Heresy,
whatsoever, of losing that grace or blessing of Salvation, which was purchased
by the Blood of Christ for them.

I shall not (I trust) need here to re-inculcate that, which has been, and. 27.
this more then once, so plainly expressed formerly, viz. that my intent in
citing Calvin, with those other late Protestant Writers which we have subjoyned
in the same suffrage of Doctrine unto Him, in favor of the Doctrine of General
Redemption, is not to persuade the Reader, that the habitual or standing
Judgment, either of Him, or of the greater part of the rest, was whole and
entire for the said Doctrine, or stood in any great propension hereunto (though
this I verily believe concerning sundry of them) much less to imply, that they
never, in other places of their Writings, declared themselves against it; but
only to show, 1. That the truth of this Doctrine is so near at hand; and, 2.
That the influence of it is so benign and accommodatious unto many other Truths
and Doctrines in Christian Religion, that it is an hard matter for those that
deal much in these affairs, not to assume and assert it ever and anon, and to
speak and argue many things upon the account of the Authority of it; yea though
extra casum necessitatis on the one hand, and incogitantiae on the other hand,
they are wont to behold it, as God does proud men, afar off.

Let us draw up the Sum total of the Chapter, in a very few words, and so end
it. First we have seen the roots of that Doctrine held forth in our present
Discourse, thoroughly watered with the fairest streams of the Judgment,
Learning, Approbation, and Authority of the Primitive Times. Secondly,
concerning Times of a later date, we have found that the Judgment and Faith of
that party of Protestant Churches and Writers, which is known by the Name of
Lutheran, do more generally, if not universally, accord with the same Doctrine.
Thirdly, and lastly, that the other party of these Churches and Writers, viz.
those, who incline more to the Sense and Judgment of Calvin in matters of
Christian concernment, together with Calvin himself, does very frequently
attest the same Doctrine, yea and cannot well want the service and assistance
of it in the managing and carrying on many of their affairs. The result of all
is, that no considering, or conscientious Person whatsoever, has the least
occasion to decline, or keep aloof off in Judgment from the said Doctrine, for
want of company, so great a number (as we have seen) of the best and most
desirable (for Companions in the way of Faith) of those, that have dwelt with
flesh and blood, since the Apostles days, having given the right hand of
fellowship unto it in their respective generations.

CHAP. XX.
The Conclusion: exhibiting a general Proposal, or Survey, of Matters intended
for Consideration, Explication, and Debate, in the second Part of this Work.

THough Christ the Lord reigns, whilst His Enemies are yet unsubdued,. 1.
and not put under His Feet, yet He reigns not so like unto himself, nor with
that peaceableness, or desirableness of Government, unto His Subjects, as He
shall, and will, reign, (at least in the glorious result of His Mediation) when
all that, which in any degree opposes Him in His Government, shall be wholly
taken out of the way, and no Enemy left with any strength or power to infest,
trouble, or cause the least disquietment or discontent in all His Kingdom. In
like manner, though the Judgment and Conscience of a man may reign with much
contentment and satisfaction, in the holding and Profession of many a Truth, by
the demonstrative evidence and strength of such Arguments and Grounds, upon
which He clearly sees it built, however He may see it also encompassed and
assaulted on every side with such Objections and Difficulties, which are not at
present subdued under him; yet can they not be so well apayd, so full of Peace
and Joy in this their Kingdom, as they may, and will, when these Objections
shall be made to bow down before them, and lick the dust at their fee^, and all
Difficulties be perfectly reconciled with that Truth, which they hold and
profess in this kind. Upon this account, having in the Precedure of our
Discourse, settled this Great Doctrine, That Christ gave Himself a Ransom for
all Men, without exception, upon such Pillars of Scripture, Reason, and
Authority, that no man that shall duly weigh the Premises, can reasonably
question the Truth thereof; I judged it necessary nevertheless (God not laying
my Intentions in the dust by the hand of Death, or otherwise) to subjoyn the
Vindication of the said Doctrine, from all such Objections, Exceptions, or
Encumbrances, wherewith I find it on every side oppugned, and the course of it
much obstructed in the Minds and Judgments of some: that so they who are, or
shall be persuaded of the truth of it, may sit with so much the more ease in
their Judgments, and reign in the happy Contemplation and Enjoyment of so
blessed a Truth, with so much the more Peace and Joy.

In our intended Vindication of the said Doctrine, or second Part of this. 2.
Work, we shall (God graciously continuing His assistance) perform these three
things. First, We shall deliver those Texts, and Contexts of Scripture, which,
contrary to their minds, and native tendencies and imports respectively, are
compelled to serve against the said Doctrine, these (I say) we shall (in the
first place) deliver from this hard service, by loosing the bands of such
Interpretations, wherein they are detained upon that account. Secondly, We
shall show, how the supposed Iron and Steel of such Grounds, Arguments, and
Reasonings, wherewith the said Doctrine commonly is assaulted, are turned into
stubble and rotten wood before it. Thirdly and lastly, We shall give some
general and brief Answer to such Passages and Sayings, which are usually
alleged and cited from the Ancient Writers, in way of opposition to this
Doctrine.

Concerning the Scriptures, which are commonly pressed to serve in that warfare
we speak of, the truth is, that (as notice has been formerly given) there is
none of them can be brought to speak any thing at all (no not in appearance)
against the Doctrine we plead, but only by the mediation of some deduction or
inference raised and drawn from them by the Reasons of Men. There is no
Scripture that has yet been, or indeed can be, produced, wherein it is either
affirmed, that Christ dyed only for the Elect, only for Believers, or the
like; or denied, that He dyed for all Men without exception. The particular
Places which are commonly managed with greatest confidence in the Actors, and
with most applause in the Spectators, against the said Doctrine, are these:

Mat. 20. 28. The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give His Life a Ransom for many. Unto which several others of like
phrase and expression, are wont to be added, as ( viz.) Mat. 26. 28. Romans 5.
15, 19. Heb. 9. 28, etc. From these Scriptures (with their fellows) such an
Argument as this is levied:

He that gave his Life a Ransom for many, shed his Blood for many for the
Remission Vid. Acta Synodi Dordrec. part. 2. p. 97. p. 112, etc.
of sins, made many righteous, etc. did not give his Life a Ransom for all, did
not shed his Blood for all for the Remission of sins, etc. But Christ gave his
Life a Ransom for many, shed his Blood for many, etc. Ergo.

Joh. 10. 11. I am the good Shepherd: The good Shepherd gives his Life for the
Sheep: and Verse. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep. To these also other Vid.
Act. Syn. Dordr. part* 2 p. 101. Et Chamier. tom. 3. l. 9. c. 13. Sect. 9.
Passages of somewhat a like import are frequently joined. As Ephesians. 5. 25. where
Christ is said to have loved his Church, and to have given himself for it, etc.
From such Premises as these, this Inference or Conclusion is much solicited:
Ergo, Christ gave his Life for his sheep [i. e. his Elect] only: gave himself
for his Church only, etc.

Mat. 1. 21. -- Thou shall call his Name Jesus: for He shall save his people
from their sins. This Text likewise is wont to be seconded with some others,
Vid. Acta Synodi Dordrec. part. 2. p. 97
as sembling with it: as Acts 10. 43. -- that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive Remission of sins. So also Romans 3. 25. and 10.
4. Heb. 5. 9, etc. Upon these, and such like foundations, this Inference is
built: Ergo, Christ came to save his People only, Believers only, sanctified
ones only, from their sins.

Joh. 15. 13. Greater Love then this has no man, that a man lay down his life
for his Friend. This I find paralleld and strengthened with these words (from
the same Pen, 1 John 3. 16.) Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because He
Vid. Collat. Hag^ens. adversus secundam the sin Remonstrantium. p. 133
laid down his life for us. This pair of Scriptures afford unto some the Joy of
this Consequence: Ergo, Christ did not lay down his Life for Reprobates, or for
those that are damned in Hell, because then he should love them with the
greatest Love that could be.

Joh. 17. 9. I pray for them: I pray not for the World. Upon this Basis, this
Vid. Acta Synodi Dordrec. part 2. p. 100 and Chamier. Tom. 3. l. 9 c. 13. sect.
2
Enthymeme is raised: Christ refused to pray for the World [i. e. the wicked of
the World:] Ergo, certainly he refused to dye for the World.

Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? From hence the
Doctrine of particular Redemption is countenanced with this Argument. Unto all
those, for whom God spared not, but delivered up his own Son for them, he will
freely give all things. But there are many thousands in the World unto whom God
will not give all things. Ergo, for none of these did God deliver up his Son.

As to these Arguments and Deductions pretending legitimacy of descent. 3.
from the recited Scriptures respectively, we shall clearly demonstrate the
nullity of such their claim, and prove, that they have neither footing nor
foundation in any the Premises. But,

Secondly, Besides the recited Pleas against the Doctrine of General
Redemption, claiming such an immediate interest as has been represented, in
the Scriptures, there are many others seemingly confederate with some
unquestionable Principles and Grounds both of Reason, and Religion, and bearing
themselves upon the Scriptures also, though in somewhat a more remote way. The
most considerable, and those insisted upon with greatest importunity by the
Adversaries of the said Doctrine, are these following. Such of them as I find
in the Writings of men of Worth and Name, I shall set down with their
respective Authors, or Abettors, noted in the Margent.

If Christ by his Death merited for us [i. e. for those, for whom He dyed] 1
Reason against Gen: Redemption.
the Reconciliation it self of our persons with God, and that Grace should
actually and really be communicated unto us (which if he should not have done,
he should not have benefited those that are his to such a degree, as Adam
damnified those Acta Synodi Dordrect. part 2. p. 82
that are his) then did he not dye for all men without exception. But the
Antecedent is true: therefore the Consequent also. The Reason of the
Consequence in the Proposition is, because certain it is, both from the
Scriptures, and by experience, that the persons of all Men are not truly
reconciled with God: nor is Grace actually communicated unto them. The Minor
presumes of it self.

If Salvation, being the thing promised in the New Covenant, be not promised 2
Reason.
but only upon condition of believing, and all men do not, will not, believe,
then Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 82
certain it is that Christ by his Death obtained not Salvation for all men, but
for Believers only. But the former of these is true: therefore the latter
also. The Consequence in the Proposition is presumed to be undeniable.

If the Death of Christ procured Restitution unto Life for all Men, then 3
Reason.
were all Men restored hereunto, either when Christ from Eternity was
destinated unto Death, which must needs be false, because then no man should be
born a child of wrath, nor should original sin hurt any man, in as much as
this, according to such an opinion, should have been pardoned from Eternity:
nor should Infants or others stand in need of the Laver of Regeneration, which
is contrary to the assertion of Christ, Joh. 3. 5. Or else they were restored
in the Person of their first Parent, Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 82, 83
when the Promise concerning the seed of the woman was promised, which also is
false; because our first Parents themselves were not restored to an estate of
Grace, but by Faith in Christ; therefore neither their posterity, and so not
All, whether* Believers, or Unbeleevers: Or else they were restored, when
Christ Himself suffered Death upon the Cross: but this also is false. For so
none should have been restored before this moment of time, which no man
h^ldeth* nor are all Men restored since this time, for without all doubt the
Wrath of God burned at the same instant of time and afterward, against some of
the Accusers, Condemners, Crucifiers, and Mockers of Christ.

If the Impetration, and Application of the Benefits of Christ, be never
separated,. 4.
4 Reason.
or dis-joyned in their subjects, then did He not impetrate these Benefits for
All Men (and consequently, not dye for all Men) because certain it is, that
Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 87. vid. and p. 94, 97, 113, etc.
there is not an Application of them made unto all Men. But the Impetration and
Application of these Benefits are never separated the one from the other, in
their subjects. Ergo.

They for whom Christ by His Death actually procured and obtained
Reconciliation 5 Reason.
with God, Forgiveness of sins, Righteousness, and Eternal Life, are made Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 89, 113, etc.
real Partakers of these Benefits. The Reason is, because nothing can be said
to be procured and obtained by Christ for any man, which at one time or other
he does not partake and enjoy. But Unbeleevers who perish eternally, never come
to be Partakers of these Benefits, Reconciliation with God, Forgiveness of
sins, etc. Ergo.

They who by the Death of Christ are reconciled unto God, are saved by His 6
Reason.
Life. This Proposition bears it self upon the Authority of Romans 5. 10. But
Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 89, 90
not All Men, but only the Elect and Believers are saved by the Life of
Christ. Ergo.

They unto whom Christ was not ordained or given for a Mediator, He 7 Reason.
did not reconcile unto His Father by His Death, nor purchase Remission of Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 90
sins, or Eternal Life for them. But Christ was not ordained or given for a
Mediator unto Reprobates persevering in Unbelief, etc. Ergo. The Assumption
presumes to lean on the breast of Romans 8. 32. (a place already specified upon a
like account.)

If Reconciliation with God, Remission of Sins, and Eternal Life, be 8 Reason.
obtained for all Men without exception by the Suffe^ings and Death of Christ,
then it will follow that all those, who have not by actual Incredulity Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 90
rejected the Merits of Christ, remain truly reconciled unto God, have their
sins remitted, and shall be eternally saved. But this Consequent is absurd:
Therefore the Antecedent also.

If Christ by His Death made Satisfaction for all Men, then might all 9 Reason.
Men, upon the performance of the Condition of the New Covenant, be saved; and
again, upon an universal nonperformance of this Condition, all Acta Synodi
Dordr. part 2 p. 9^. ( ex p^^te.)
Men might be damned. But as well the one, as the other, of these, are, and
were impossible. Ergo. The Reason of the Consequence (as to the first branch of
it) is, because satisfaction being made for any man's sins, there remains
nothing further necessary to his actual discharge, or Salvation, but only the
performance of the Condition, upon which the application of the said
Satisfaction is suspended. The Reason of the latter branch of the Consequence,
is, because if Satisfaction was made by Christ upon none other terms for some,
then it was for all, it clearly follows, that in case there be a possibility of
a non-application of it unto some, there is a like possibility unto all: and
consequently, a possibility of the Non-salvation, or, of the Damnation, of all.
The Minor stands (it seems) upon this bottom; that those, whom God the Father
has given unto Christ to be redeemed and saved by Him, of necessity must, and
shall, be redeemed and saved by Him: and those whom He has not given unto Him
upon such an account (which are far the greater part of men) must by a like
necessity, perish, or be damned, as not being redeemed by Him, nor given unto
Him to be saved.

If the Will and Intention of the Father, the Obedience and Oblation 10 Reason.
of the Son, and the saving Operation of the Holy Ghost, or Effectualness of
Calling, or Sanctification, be of one and the same compass, or extent, then did
not Christ dye for all men: But all the three Particulars Acta Synodi Dordt.
part 2 p. 94
mentioned are of one and the same compass, or commensurable. Ergo. The Reason
of the Consequence is evident: viz. because the saving operation of the Holy
Ghost, or effectualness of calling, are not extended unto all Men. The Minor
builds upon this Sorites: The Father gives only his Elect, whom alone He loves,
to be redeemed by His Son: The Son only redeems those that are thus given unto
Him, as being those whom alone He loves: The Holy Ghost, being the Love of the
Father and the Son, sanctifies only the Elect of the Father, and the Redeemed
of the Son.

If no man wittingly and knowingly pays a price of Redemption for a Captive,.
5.
which he certainly knows this miserable man will never be the better for,
then 11 Reason.
Christ dyed not for all Men. But no man wittingly and knowingly pays Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 94
such a price upon such terms. Ergo. The Reason of the Sequel in the Major
Proposition, is, because Christ knew cer^ainly that the greatest part of men
would never receive any benefit by His De^^h: and upon this account it is
altogether irrational to suppose that He dyed for them.

If Christ dyed for all Men without exception, then now in Heaven He 12 Reason.
intercedeth for all Men without exception. But He intercedeth not for all Men.
Ergo. This latter Proposition fears no contradiction, and therefore Acta Synodi
Dordr. part 2 p. 100. Collat. Hagiens. p. 132
stands by its own strength. The Reason of the Major seems to be, because it is
unreasonable to conceive, that Christ should do the greater and more difficult
thing, as viz. dye, for those, for whom He is unwilling to do the less, viz.
intercede.

If God intends and derees the Salvation of all Men by the Death of 13 Reason.
Christ, then it must needs follow, either that all Men are saved, or that God
Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 119
his Intentions and Decrees become frustrate, and attain not their end. But
neither of these are true: for, 1. Certain it is that all Men are not saved. 2.
As certain it is, that Gods Intentions and Decrees never miscarry, or fall
short of their ends: and to affirm this, is absurd, yea blasphemous. Ergo.

If Christ, by the Counsel, Intention and Decree of the Father dyed 14 Reason.
for all Men, it will follow that there is neither an Election of any certain
Persons, nor a Reprobation of any. But there is both an Election of some Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 119
certain Persons, and a Reprobation of some others. Ergo. The Reason of the
Major (because I find it not expressed) seems to be, because it is contrary to
Reason that God should intend or decree to give His Son to dye for those, whom
He decreed to Reprobate [ i. e. to leave in the hand of everlasting Perdition
without all possibility of being saved] from Eternity. And if there be no
Reprobation, there can be no Election, in as much as these do mutu^ sese
ponere, and auferre. The Minor stands upon the Authority of the common
Interpretations of such Scriptures, which are commonly insisted on to prove
such an Election, and consequently, a Reprobation corresponding with it. All
which Scriptures, at least all such of them which color best with such an
Election, we shall (God willing) fairly examine upon the Point.

If Christ according to the Intention and Counsel of the Father, has 15 Reason.
suffered Death for all Men, then God should stand equally, or indifferently
affected toward all Men, yea and saving Grace should be universal. But Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 119
God does not stand equally affected toward All Men, nor is saving Grace
universal. Ergo. The Consequence is supposed authentic without Proof. The
Minor is argued, 1. From the gratuitous Election of some. 2. From the like
gratuitous Vocation of some, as of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Psalm. 76. 1.
147. 20. 3. From the Covenant made with Abraham, and not with others. 4. From
the Mystery of the Calling of the Gentiles. 5. (And lastly) From that special
Favor, Love, and Grace, wherewith God prosecuteth His Elect.. 6.


If Christ dyed for all Men, and all Men be not saved, then is God not 16
Reason.
Omnipotent. But certain it is, 1. That all Men are not saved, and, 2. That God
is Omnipotent. Ergo. The Minor needs no Proof, as to either part of Acta Synodi
Dordr. part 2 p. 120
it. The Reason of the Consequence (in the Major) is, because if Christ should
dye for all Men, it would follow that God should be willing that such a benefit
should be impetrated or procured for men, which He could not apply unto them.

If Christ dyed for all Men, and all Men come not to be saved, then is the 17
Reason.
Wisdom of God defective or imperfect. But certain it is, 1. That all Men are
not saved; 2. That the Wisdom of God is not at all defective, but absolutely
Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 120
perfect. Ergo* Christ dyed not for all Men. The Minor here also is presumed
(as well it may.) The Consequence stands upon this supposition; That to fall
short in compassing, what a man intends, argues a deficiency in point of wisdom.

If Christ should dye and make Satisfaction for all Men, and yet all Men 18
Reason.
not be saved, God should be unjust, as viz. in receiving a full Satisfaction
Acta Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 120
for men, and yet refusing to receive them into favor, or to forgive them. But
certain it is, 1. That all Men are not saved: and, 2. That God is not unjust.
Ergo, Christ dyed not for all Men.

If Christ dyed for all Men, and all Men not come to be saved, then does 19
Reason.
that great Love, out of which God gave his Son unto Men, vanish into an
unprofitableness, or unusefulness, in respect of men. For to what purpose, or
of what use is the Love of God in the gift of His Son unto men, if He Acta
Synodi Dordr. part 2 p. 120
does not withal give them Faith in His Son? But certain it is, 1. That all
Men come not to be saved; and, 2. That the great Love of God in the gift of his
Son does not vanish in unprofitableness. Ergo. A like Argument is framed upon
the account of the great Love of the Son Himself toward those for whom He
dyed. Christ (says the Argument) so loved us, that whilst we were Enemies He
dyed for us. Is it now credible that He should not apply a benefit merited, or
procured with so much sweat, and with such precious Blood, unto those for whom
He merited it?

These Arguments (with some Texts of Scripture, not here mentioned, cited to
prove some of the Particulars, together with some few Sayings from the Fathers,
both which we intend to take and give knowledge of, upon occasion) were (in a
manner) the whole strength, wherein the Synod of Dort so much magnified
themselves against their Adversaries, the Remonstrants, in the traverse of the
second Head of Matters Controversal between them, which concerned the
Intentions of God in, and about the Death of Christ, as far as I am able to
observe from the Records of this Synod. Concerning which Arguments, I shall say
no more at present, but only these two things: 1. That though they be somewhat
numerous, yet there is none of them but lies very opportune and fair for
Answer: and, 2. That some of them (if not the greater part) stand bent against
such an Opinion, which (I believe) their Antagonists did not hold: certain I
am, they do not oppugn that Doctrine of Redemption, which is maintained in this
Book. Nevertheless because they may possibly be conceived by some (less
considerate) to rise up with much strength against it, we shall take them into
consideration respectively in their places. I will not say that there have been
sufficient grounds laid (yea and sufficiently proved) in the Premises of our
present Discourse, whereon to frame satisfactory Answers even to those that are
counted Pillars amongst them; but shall leave the consideration hereof to the
intelligent and unpartial Reader, and to the Disquisitions about them intended
in the second Part of this Work.

I do not meet with any thing of moment in any other Author to infringe. 7.
the credit of the Doctrine of General Redemption, which does not make one
spirit with one or other of the Arguments levied (as we have heard) by the said
Synod. This which I shall presently recite from the Collocutors of the
Contra-Remonstrancy at the Conference at the Hague, Ann. 1613. is but the same
(in effect) with the first and fifth of those used by the Synod. For whom
soever Christ dyed, and obtained Remission of sins, and Reconciliation with
God, for these also He obtained by his Death Deliverance from the bondage of
sin, and the spirit of Regeneration for Newness of life: But Christ did not
obtain Deliverance from the bondage of sin, or the spirit of Regeneration, for
all Men. Ergo. If any man conceives there is somewhat more in this Argument of
the said Collocutors, which I shall next transcribe, then in any of the former,
I am content that it shall stand, as additional unto them. I find it in this
form:

All they for whom Christ dyed, can freely say, Who is he that condemns? 20
Reason.
It is Christ that dyed for us: Romans 8. 34. But they are only Believers, and
the Elect, that can speak thus: Verse. 33. not Unbeleevers, Mark 16. 16. Ergo.
The Minor is further strengthened by this consideration: The Consolation,
raised from the consideration of the Death of Christ, which the Apostle here [
Romans 8. 32, 33, etc.] administreth unto the Saints, or Believers, would have
little solidity or worth in it, in case Reprobates and Unbeleevers could as
truly say, that Christ dyed for them also.

This Argument likewise from the same Authors, is vertually contained in that
already mentioned in the fifteenth place. Yet let it have the Honor of an
Argument by it self.

If Reconciliation with God and Remission of sins be obtained for all and 21
Reason.
every man, none excepted, then should [or, ought] the Word of this
Reconciliation [ i. e. the Gospel] be preached [or, declared] and this
continually, to all and every man. But the Word of Reconciliation is not thus
preached to all and every man. Ergo. The Reason of the Consequence, is, because
they, for whom Reconciliation is obtained, not being capable of enjoying it but
by Faith, and Faith not being to be obtained but by hearing [the Word of this
their Reconciliation,] it seems contrary to all Reason that they should be
deprived of the means of believing.

The learned Chamier advances this Argument against us (the strength 22
Reason. Chamier. Panstrat. ^om 3. lib. 9. c. 13. Sect. 19
whereof the observant Reader will find lodged in the nineteenth Reason
already propounded.) To all those, for whom Christ truly dyed, the Death of
Christ is profitable. But this Death of his is not profitable unto all Men.
Ergo. The Major he proves, 1. From the proper import of the Particle, for,
which (says he) always notes some benefit accruing to him, for whom any thing
is said to be done. 2. From the state of the Controversy. 3. (And lastly) From
the Scriptures, as where it is said, He gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us, etc. Tit. 2. So again from Matt. 26. 28. Romans 5. 8, 9. The Minor he
proves, 1. From the Concession or his Adversaries themselves (the Papists)
concerning Infants, who dye unbaptized: all which they exclude from Salvation,
and consequently from all benefit by the Death of Christ. 2. From the
Concession (almost) of all, concerning persons of years of Matury; viz. that
very many of these perish everlastingly, and so never come to receive any
benefit by the Death of Christ.

In the same place the same Author subjoyneth this Argument (the same in 23
Reason.
substance with the former;) If Christ dyed for all Men, then all Men are saved
[or, shall be saved.] But this is not so. Ergo. The Minor, which needs no
proof, he proves from Joh. 3. 36. Romans 2. 8. For the Consequence in the Major
Proposition, he cites the Apostles Discourse, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. under the
Notion of an express Probation of it. But God commends his love toward us,
etc.

The Scriptures and Arguments now propounded, are the effect and substance. 8.
of all that I can readily find (or call to mind) pleaded and argued against
the Doctrine of General Redemption, as it has been stated, and asserted in our
present Discourse, excepting only some quotations from the Fathers. If any
thing of moment upon the same account shall further occur, or be offered unto
me, either before, or under my examination of these, I shall not conceal it:
but shall, as in the presence of God, and without the least touch or tincture
of prejudice or partiality, acknowledge strength in any thing, where I apprehend
strength, and show all submissive reverence to that which is above me. Yea God
knows, that one Reason moving me to exhibit beforehand, in the close of this
first part, a Particular of matters to be handled in the second, was, that in
case any Friend of the contrary Doctrine conceives that he has somewhat more
pregnant or convincing, on the behalf of his Opinion, either from the
Scriptures, or otherwise, then any thing that I have yet taken into
consideration, or intend to give satisfaction unto, he might have the
opportunity of representing the same, either privately unto me, if he please,
or otherwise publicly unto the World.

By occasion of the Objection or Argument mentioned in the fourteenth place, we
shall, by way of Digression, lanch forth into the deep of the Great Question
concerning Personal Election and Reprobation: and soberly enquire, whether the
Scriptures do any where hold forth, or teach any such Decree of Reprobation in
God from Eternity, whereby the persons of such and such men, or of such a
determinate number of men, before any actual or voluntary sin perpetrated by
them, and without any respect had to such Perpetrations, be decreed by him, to
be left under an unavoydable necessity of perishing everlastingly. Here also,
we intend tenderly to enquire what the Scripture teaches concerning the Estate
of Infants: and more particularly, whether it can be substantially proved from
them, that any Infant, or Infants whatsoever, dying before the commission of
Actual Sin, are adjudged by God unto Hell fire.

In my Answer to the Argument propounded in the fifteenth place, I shall take
occasion (digression-wise also) to enquire into, and discuss the Great Question
about Universal Grace; viz. whether God vouchsafes not unto all Men without
exception, a sufficiency of power or means, whereby to be saved. Within the
verge of this Debate we shall modestly enquire, whether God does not vouchsafe
unto all Men, the same, or a like sufficiency (at least in a Geometrical
proportion) of means, whereby to be saved.

And because, amongst other Scriptures, the nineth Chapter of the Epistle. 9.
to the Romans is frequently, and this in very many places and passages of it,
brought upon the Stage of these Controversies and Disputes, and more
particularly supposed to deliver impregnable grounds for such a personal
Election and Reprobation, which we apprehend the Scriptures generally, yea and
in this very Chapter, as plainly to oppose, as many men do confidently avouch;
we therefore intend a particular and entire Explication of this Chapter by it
self. Yea I am under some present inclination of thoughts, to engage upon this
in the first place, and to publish it by it self, before I put hand to the
greater Work. But in this, I shall willingly be determined by the advice of
Friends.

Concerning the Testimonies of the Fathers usually produced in way of
discountenance to the avouched Doctrine of this Discourse, I judge the
Transcription of them no ways necessary, until we come to give Answers unto
them: and therefore shall not encumber the Readers Patience with them here.
Unto whom, in stead thereof, I shall address my self in this double Request: 1.
That he will please so far to comport with his own Interest, and mine, as to
strive by fervent and frequent Prayer, to interess God himself in the Composure
of the Work intended, that through much of his presence with me in the framing
and enditing of it, (if yet his good pleasure shall be not to judge a proportion
of life and health for the finishing of it, too high a dignation for me) all my
insufficiency for so great an Undertaking may be drowned, so as not to appear,
in one kind or other, to the loss or disadvantage of any man, that shall
please to bestow his time in the Perusal of it, or of any part of it: and that
I may be enabled from on high to bring forth the Truth in those high Mysteries,
which I shall be occasioned to search into therein, out of that thick Darkness,
which at present is spread by men round about them, into a clear and perfect
Light, that so they may become more savory, more wholesome, and better-prepared
nourishment for the understandings and Consciences of the generality of men
amongst us, then they have proved hitherto. My second Request to the Reader
(with which I shall discharge him at the present) is, that he will make such a
Covenant with his Expectations and Desires as not to look for the publishing of
the second Part of this Work, till after such a time, which may be reasonably
judged competent for a man of a slow genius in writing on the one hand, and of
(almost) continual diversions through by-employments on the other hand, to
raise and finish such a Building, as that in Reason may be presumed to be.

FINIS.
A Table of such Texts of Scripture, unto which some Light (more, or-less) is
given in the foregoing Discourse (besides many others occasionally cited
therein.)
Note. Because from page 153, to page 168, (inclusively) the Folio's are
mis-figured, that the Reader may not suffer hereby in his use of the ensuing
Tables, he is desired to take knowledge, that the Particulars falling within the
compass of those Pages, are directed unto by their respective Chapters and
Sections, and not by the Number of their Pages, as the rest are.

GEnes. 1. 3. And God said, Let there be Light. Page 49 1. 6. -- let there be a
Firmament. Ib. 1. 9. -- let the waters under the Heavens be gathered, etc.
Ibid. 2. 4. In the day that the Lord created Heaven and Earth, etc. 58 6. 6.
And it repented the Lord that he had made man, etc. 152 39. 9. How then can I
do this great wickedness, and sin etc. 261 Lev. 25. 10. And ye shall hallow the
fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the Land to all the
inhabitants thereof, etc. 521 25. 13. In the year of this Jubilee ye shall
return every man unto his possession. Ibid. Number. 21. 8. Make thee a fiery
Serpent, and set it upon a pole, etc. 520 Deuteronomy. 13. 11. And all Israel shall
hear and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is, among you.
20 17. 12, 13. And the man that will do presumptuously -- even that man shall
dye: and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. And all the people shall
hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. 216 1 Samuel 2. 30. -- I said
indeed that thy house, and the house of thy Father should walk before me for
ever: But now the Lord says, Be it far from me, etc. 22, and 209 13. 13. --
For now would the Lord have established thy Kingdom for ever. 209 23. 12, 13.
Then said David, will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul
come down, as thy servant has heard -- And the Lord said, he will come down --
and -- they will deliver thee up. 9 2 King. 20. 6. And I will add unto thy days
fifteen years. 9 1 Chro. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son, know the Lord God of
thy Fathers -- if thou seek him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake
him he will cast thee off for ever. 351 2 Chr. 36. 15, 16. And the Lord God of
their Fathers sent to them, by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending,
because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. B^t they
mocked the messengers of God, and despised -- until the Wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was no remedy. 88, 426 Job 2. 4. -- Skin for
skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life. 443 10. 8, 9. Thy
hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou do destroy
me. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again? 72 14. 1. Man that is born of a woman is of few days
-- 9 14. 5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee: thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. 10 15. 32, 33. His
branch shall be green -- He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and
etc. 8 22. 15, 16. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
who were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood?
Page 8 31. 13, 14, 15. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, or of my
maidservant, when they contended with me, what then shall I do when God rises
up? and when he visits, what shall I answer? Did not he that made me in the
womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb? 72, 73 33. 13. Why do
thou strive against him? for he gives not an account of any of his matters.
349 34. 19. How much less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes, nor
regards the rich, more then the poor? For they are all the work of his hand.
73 Psalm. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree planted -- his leaf shall not wither,
etc. 257 22. 26. They that seek the Lord, shall praise him. 452 34 8. O taste
and see that the Lord is good. 285 51. 6. -- thou desire Truth in the inward
parts. 742 55. 23. -- bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days, etc. 8 91. 7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy
right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. 11 104. 19. Thou hidest thy face,
they are troubled: thou take away their breath, they dye and return to their
dust. 3 115. 3. -- He has done whatsoever he pleased. 50 138. 2. -- For thou
have magnified thy Word above all thy Name. 482 Prove. 14. 15. The simple
believes every word, etc. 412, 497 17. 18. A man void of understanding
strikes hands, and becomes surety, etc. 264 18. 23. The poor uses
entreaties, but the rich answers roughly. Ibid. 19. 2. -- that the Soul be
without knowledge, it is not good: and he that hastes with his feet, sins.
496 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for certainly etc.
446 Eccles. 2. 9. -- also my wisdom remained with me. 351 3. 3. There is a time
to kill, and a time to heal: a time etc. 429 Isai. 5. 4. What could have been
done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore when etc. 429,
473 7. 8. -- Within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it
be not a people. 8 27. 11. -- for it is a people of no understanding: therefore
he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them etc. 71
29. 14. For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of
their prudent men shall be hid. 5 38. 5. -- behold I will add unto thy days
fifteen years. 9 49. 5. -- though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. 215 54. 10.
For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, etc.
226, 227 59. 2. But your iniquities have separated between you, and your God.
248 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit
that is upon thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, etc. 226, 227, etc.
Jer. 7. 16. Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry,
neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear thee. 490 32. 39, 40. And
I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever -- And
I will make an everlasting covenant with them, to do them good: but I will my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, etc. 219, 220, etc.
Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18, 19, etc. Therefore say, thus says the Lord God, I will even
gather you from the people -- And they shall come thither, and take away all
the detestable things thereof -- And I will give them one heart, and I will put
a new Spirit within you -- But as for them, whose heart walks after the heart
of their detestable things, and their abominations, etc. 220, 221, etc. 16. 55.
When thy Sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate,
and Samaria and her daughters -- then thou and thy daughters shall return to
your former estate. 442 18. 5, 6, 9. But if a man be just, and do that which is
lawful and right, and has not eaten upon the mountains -- he is just, he shall
surely live, says the Lord God. 514 18. 24, 25. But when the righteous turns
away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity -- shall he live? -- yet
ye say, the way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel, is not
my way equal? are not your ways unequal? 269, 270, etc. 514 24. 14. -- because
I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, etc. 187, 188 33. 12, 13. etc. -- the righteousness of the
righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the
wickedness of the wicked he shall not fall thereby, in the day that he turns
from his wickedness, etc. Again, when I shall say to the wicked, tho ushalt
surely dye; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right --
none of the sins that he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him, etc. 514
Hos. 2. 19. 20. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever: yea I will betroth
thee in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.
I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, etc. 229 230 Mal. 2. 17. Ye
have wearyed the Lord with your words: yet ye say, wherein have we wearyed him?
When ye say, Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he
delights in them: or, Where is the God of Judgment? 335 3. 6. For I am the
Lord, I change not. 205 Matt. 5. 26. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no
means come out thence, till tho uhast paid the uttermost farthing. Page 442
Matt. 5. 32. -- whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery, etc. 187 7. 13. Enter ye in at the
strait gate: for wide is the gate, etc. 434 7. 23. And then I will profess unto
them, I never knw you: depart, etc. 286 7. 24. -- Whosoever hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man, whobuilt his
house upon a rock, etc. 258 8. 22. -- and let the dead bury their dead. 109 9.
13. -- I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 139 10. 33.
But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I etc. 247 11. 23. -- for if
the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day. 8 13. 20, 21. But he that received the seed
into stony places, the same is he that hears the Word, and anon with joy
receives it. Yet has he not root in himself, etc. 291 16. 18. -- and the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. 177, 178, etc. 18. 3. -- except ye
be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. 330 18. 32, 33, etc. Then his Lord, after he had called him,
said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because
thou desiredst me: Should not thou also -- And his Lord was wroth, and
delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
So likewise shall my Heavenlyh Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his Brother their trespasses. 150, 151 etc. 277 19. 11.
-- all men cannot receive this saying, etc. 195 19. 17. -- why call thou me,
Good? There is none Good but one, that is God. 496 19. 28. -- Ye also shall sit
upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Page 360, 361 19. 30,
But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first. 455 22. 3.
And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the the wedding:
and they would not come. -- Behold I have prepared my dinner, etc. 403, 404,
etc. 23. 37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets -- how
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as an Hen -- and ye
would not. Behold your habitaiton, etc. 449, 471 24. 12. And because iniquity
shall abound the love of many will wax cold. 142 24. 13. But he that shall
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. 319 24. 24. -- in so much that
(if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. 181 27. 3, 5. Then
Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented
himself -- and departed and went and hanged himself. 126 28. 20. -- and lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the world. 233, 234 Mark 1. 4. John --
preached the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. 494 1. 17. Come
ye after me, and I will make you fishers of men. 21 4. 19. And the cares of
this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things
entering in, choke the Word, etc. 191 6. 6. And he marvelled because of their
unbelief. 500 9. 44. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.
434 435 12. 43. -- this poor widow has cast more in, then all they which have
cast into the Treasury. 502 16. 16. He that believes -- shall be be saved: but
he that believes not, etc. 398 Luke 8. 8. And other fell on good ground --
258, 259, etc. 8. 15. But that on the good ground, are they which in an honest
and good heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and etc. Ibid. 12. 4. And I say
unto you my Friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that
have no more that they can do, etc. 313 12. 48. The servant that knew not his
Lords will, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, etc.
507 14. 16, etc. A certain man made a great supper, and bad many, etc. 404 22.
32. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. 245, 246, etc. 23. 34.
Father, forgive them. 245 23. 35. -- if he be Christ the chosen of God. 244
Joh. 1. 4. -- And the life was the light of men. 41 1. 5. And the light shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. 41, 42 1. 9. This was the
true light, which lights every man that comes into the world. 41 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world. 188 3. 16. So
God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten, etc. 76, 77 etc. to 87 3.
18. -- but he that believes not, is condemned already, etc. 491 4. 14. But
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but
-- 232 5. 34. -- but these things I say, that ye might be saved. 221 6. 37. --
and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. 251 6. 39. and this is
the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but etc. 251, 252 8. 31. If ye continue in my Word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed. 260 9. 39. -- For Judgment am I come into the
world. 82, 83 10. 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them -- And I
give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater then all,
and no man is able to pluck them out of his hand. 203, 204 Joh. 11. 9, 10. --
If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because -- But if a man walk in the
night he stumbleth, etc. Page 264 11. 42. And I knew that thou hear me
always. 246 12. 48. -- the words that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in
the last day. 506 13. 1. -- having loved his own, wqhich were in the world, he
loved them unto the end. 204, 205 14. 2. -- if it were not so, I would have
told you, etc. 491 14. 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. 233, 234 15. 9, 10. As
the Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If ye
keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love. 336 17. 2. As thou last given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many, as thou have given
him. 116, 117, etc. 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they know thee the
only true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. 40, 41 17. 12. --
those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son
of perdition -- 252 17. 15. I pray not that -- but that thou should keep them
from the evil. 246 17. 21, 22. That they All may be one, as thou Father art in
me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. 245, 246 20. 31. But these
things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God, and that believing ye might have have life, etc. 397, 398 Acts 4. 27, 28.
For of a truth against thy Holy Child Jesus -- both Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were gathered together, For to do
whatsoever thy hand and counsel determined before to be done, etc. 14, 15, etc.
5. 4. Whilst it remained was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it
not in thine own power? 13 7. 60. -- lay not this sin to their charge. 245 13.
46. -- but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo etc. 491 15. 8. And God which knows the heart, bare them
witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, etc. 362 17. 28. For in him we live, and
move, and have our Being. 2, 3, etc. 23. 1. -- Men and Brethren, I have lived
in all good Conscience before God, until this day. 355 23. 4. Revilest thou
Gods High Priest? 443 27. 24. -- and lo, God has given thee all them that sail
with thee. 307 27. 31. -- except thesE abide in the ship, ye cannot be safe. 9,
307, 184 225 Romans 1. 19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in
them: for God etc. 507 1. 20. -- to the intent they should be without excuse.
502 1. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, etc.
507 2. 4, 5. -- not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee unto
Repentance. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart thou treasurest up etc.
188, 410 2. 6. Who will render to every man according to his work. 244 3. 3.
For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the Faith of God of
none effect? 359 3. 19. -- that every mouth may be stopped. 502 5. 7. -- Yet
peradventure for a good man some will even dare to dye. 287 5. 15. But not as
the offense, so also is the free gift. For if through the offense of one many
be dead, much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is by one man
Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. 110, 111, 515, 516 5. 16. And not as it
was by one that sinned, so is the gift. For the judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. 493,
494, etc. 5. 18. Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life. 108, 109 etc. 516, 517, etc. Romans 5. 19.
For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous. 516, 517, etc. 6. 2. -- How shall we that are
dead to sin, live any longer therein? 261 6. 9, 10, 11. Knowing that Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more -- Likewise also reckon your selves
to be dead indeed unto sin etc. 262, 263 7. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and
the Commandment holy, and just, and good. 287, 444 7. 19. -- but the evil which
I would not, that I do. 61, 326, 327 8. 13, 14. -- but if ye through the spirit
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. 325 8. 24. -- but Hope that is seen,
is not hope. 317 8. 28, 29, 30. And we know that all things work together for
good, to them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose.
For whom he did foreknow, he did also predestinate, etc. Moreover, whom he did
predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, etc. 207, 208, etc. 50
8. 31. -- If God be for us, who can be against us? 340 8. 34. Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again: who also
etc. 248 249, etc. 9. 11. -- that the purpose of God according to Election
might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls. 462 9. 15. -- for I will
have mercy, on whom I will have mercy. 68 9. 21. Has not the Potter power over
the clay -- 68 11. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written,
There shall come out of Sion a Deliverer, that shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob. 227, 228 11. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. 152, 153, etc. 11. 33. O the depths of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out! 427, 43 14. 15. -- Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom
Christ dyed. 121 122 14. 23. -- For whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. 496 1
Cor. 1. 8, 9. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that etc. God is
faithful by whom ye were called, etc. 187, 235 4. 15. For though ye have ten
thousand Instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers: for etc. 266 331
5. 5. -- to deliver such an one unto Satan. 361, 362 6. 15. -- shall I then
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? 328, etc.
7. 32, 33. He that is unmarried, cares for the things of the Lord -- But he
that is married cares for the things of the world, how etc. 264 8. 11. And
through thy knowledge shall the weak Brother perish for whom Christ dyed. 124 9.
27. -- lest by any means when I have preached unto others, I my self should be
a castaway. 62, 279, 280 315, 316, 377 10. 12. Wherefore let him that thinks
he stands, take heed lest he fall. 310 10. 13. -- But God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but etc. 238, 310 12.
12. -- so also is Christ. 458 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and given
us the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. 256, 257 2. 15. For we are unto God
a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. 216
428, 506 5. 14, 15. For the love of Christ constrains us; because we thus
judge that if one dyed for all, then were all dead; And that he dyed for all,
that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him,
which dyed for them, and rose again. 98, 99, 100, etc. 5. 19. To wit that God
was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them. Page 87, 88, etc. 7. 1. Having therefore these Promises -- let us
cleanse our selves, etc. 334 8. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it
is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has
not. 17, 548 10. 15, 16. Not boasting of things without our measure -- and not
to boast in another man's line -- 331 12. 14. -- but Parents for the children.
70 13. 14. -- and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. 286 Gal. 1.
6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that calls you, unto another
Gospel, etc. 362, 363 2. 21. -- For if righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain: 459 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the
Promises made. He says not, And to seeds, as of many: but as of one, And to
thy seed, which is Christ. 458 4. 11. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
upon you labor in vain. 363 6. 1. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault,
etc. 323 Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundations of the world, that we should be holy, etc. 62, 63, 461 1. 6. To the
praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved. 462 1. 10. That in the Dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, etc. 436
1. 11. -- who works all things after the counsel of his ow^ will. 67, 429
430, 482 1. 13, 14. -- In whom also, after ye believed, ye were sealed with the
spirir of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, etc. 255, 256 1.
22. And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over
all things to the Church. 436, 438, etc. 2. 3. -- and were by nature children
of wrath. 518 4. 30. -- whereby ye are sealed to the day of Redemption. 256 5.
5. For this ye know, that no whoremonger -- nor covetous man, who is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, etc. 272 5. 18. -- but
be ye filled with the Spirit. 325 5. 23. -- and he is the Savior of the body.
252, 253 Philip. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has
begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. 241
242 1. 7. Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have
you in my heart, etc. Ibid. 2. 12, 13. -- work out your own Salvation with fear
and trembling. For it is God that works in you, both to will, etc. 176 Colos.
1. 20. And having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, by him I say, whether they be things in
Earth, or things in Heaven. 436, 437, etc. 1. 21. And you that were sometimes
alienated, etc. 439 1. 23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled,
etc. 237 2. 8, 20. -- the rudiments of the world. 522, 523 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And
the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God that your whole
spirit, and Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 238, 239 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and keep you from evil. 235 1 Timothy 1. 18. This charge I commit
unto thee, son Timothy, according to the Prophecies which went before on thee,
that thou by them might war a good warfare, etc. 357 1. 19. -- which some
having put away concerning Faith have made shipwreck. 353, 354, etc. 2. 4. Who
will have all men to be saved, and etc. 103, 104, 284 2. 6. Who gave himself a
ransom for all men. 97, 98 5. 15. For some are turned back already after Satan.
365 6. 3. -- and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness. 333 6. 13,
14. I give thee charge in the sight of God -- that tho ukeep this Commandment
without spot, unrebukable, un^il the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. 239
2. Tim. 1. 3. -- whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience. 355 356
1. 12. -- I am persuaded that he is able to keep that, which I have committed
unto him against that day. 254 2. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful: he cannot deny himself. 359 2. 18. -- and overthrow the faith of
some. 358 2. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, and has it is
seal: The Lord knows who are his, etc. 359, 360, etc. 4. 2. -- preach the
Word: be instant, in season, out of season. 440 Tit. 1. 1. -- according to the
Faith of Gods Elect, and the acknowledging of the Truth which is after
godliness. 243, 244, 269, 283, etc. 1. 4. To Titus mine own Son after the
common Faith. 489 2. 11. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all men. 406, 407 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, etc. 250 3. 4. But after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man appeared, etc. 408, 409, etc. Hebr. 1. 3.
-- upholding all things by the Word of his power. 3 2. 3. How shall we escape,
if we neglect so great a Salvation -- 480, 492 499 2. 9. -- that he by the
Grace of God should taste Death for every man. 102, 103 2. 16. For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels. 484 3. 6. -- whose house are we, if we
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. 260
261 6. 4, 5, 6. For it is unpossible for those who were once enlightened -- if
they fall away, to be renewed again, etc. 282, 283, etc. 329 7. 25. -- seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them. 248 9. 24. -- now to appear in
the presence of God for us. 248, 249, etc. 9. 27. As it is appointed unto men
once to dye. 9 10. 26. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. 416, 417,
etc. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who -- has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, etc. 148 149, etc. 282, 283, etc. 10. 38. Now the
just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. 290 11. 6. -- for he that comes unto God, must believe that
he is, and that he is a Rewarder of those, who diligently seek him. 507 11. 7.
By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an ark -- by which he condemned the world, etc. 314, 315, etc. 11. 17.
By Faith Abraham -- offered up Isaac, etc. 19, 451, 452 12. 2. Looking unto
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Fai^^. 254, 255 1 Pet. 1. 2. -- Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God -- through sanctification of the Spirit
-- 463 1. 5. Who by the power of God are kept through Faith unto Salvation.
185, 186, etc. 1. 23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible -- 199, 200 2. 4. -- elect and precious. 244 3. 21. The like
figure whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us -- 354 4. 19. -- as unto a
faithful Creator. 70, 71, 236 2 Pet. 1. 4. -- partakers of the divine nature.
199, 200 2. 1. -- even denying the Lora that bought them. 129, 130, etc. 2. 20.
For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge
of the Lord -- 144 145, etc. 3. 9. -- not willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. 104, 417, 418 1 John 2. 2. And he is the
propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world. Page 91, 92, etc. 188 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were
not of us: for if they had been of us, they would no dobt have continued with
us. 189, 190 etc. 261 2. 24. If that which you have heard from the beginning,
shall abide in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, etc. 261 3. 7. Little
children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness, is righteous,
even as he is righteous. Cap. 9.. 11. p. 265 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God
does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him: neither can he sin, etc.
192 193, etc. 3. 10. -- whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. 402 4.
4. -- because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. 325
4. 18. -- perfect love casts out fear. 314 -- because fear has torment. 3,
16 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. 476 5. 3. For this is the
love of God, that we keep his Co^mandments, and etc. 337 5. 4. For whosoever is
born of God, overcomes the world, and etc. 263 337 5. 5. Who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 398
5. 10. He that beleeeveth not God, has made him a liar, etc. 497, 504 5. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his Will, he hears us. 250 5. 18. We know that whosoever is born
of God sins not. 263, 264 2 John verse. 8. Look to your selves that we lose
not the things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward. 258
Jude ver. 1. -- and preserved in Jesus Christ. 253 3. -- that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints. 243
Apocal. 2. 11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death. 267
268 3. 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white, and I will
not blot out his name out of the book of life. 332, 333 14. 4. -- these were
redeemed from among men, etc. 143 20. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part
in the first Resurrection, etc. 267
A Table of the particular Heads of Matter in the preceding Discourse.
A
ABraham, in what sense commanded to offer up Isaac. Page 451, 452, 453 Acts,
actings of God, why expressed by Verbs of the Preterperfect-tense. 63 Actions
if men, with their consequences, ascribed to God emphatically, and why, 23 of
Causes merely natural, why not always uniform. p. 24. Actings and motions of
created Principles seldom suspended by the first Cause, and why. p. 6. Such as
proceed from the wills of men frequently in Scriputre attributed to them in
terms of a passive signification. p. 15. How said to be determined. 23 Actions
and Operations in these subl^nary parts, not so attributed to God, but that
they have their second Causes. 7 Actuality of God. 7 Adam, all men righteous in
him, 512, 513 had not justifying Faith. 504, 505, etc. All men, in what sense
they have right to the Promises, p. 451. have sufficient means to believe: page
499, 500. All, all men, what signify in Scripture. 108, 109 Ambrose, for
Universal Redemption, 528 for falling away. 325, 327 Angels, whether changeable
in their Wills after Election, 485. not out of a possibility of falling,
according to Calvin, 441 receive benefit by Christ, 440. need an Head, as well
as men, 438. understand not bytheir mere essence. p. 43. whether, and how,
reconcilable. 441 Anselm for Universal Redemption. 543 Antecedent and
Consequent Intentions in God. 448, 106, 107 Aretius for falling away, 392. for
Universal Redemption. 407 Arnobius for Universal Redemption. 533 Arriba
resolves the certainty of the foreknowledg of God into the perfection of his
Wisdom. 22 Assurance of Salvaiton, whether men live holily or no, not meet for
God to give, or men to enjoy. 282 Athanasius for Universal Redemption. 530 531
Atonement universal, no new Religion, 73 taught by express Scripture, the
contrary only by consequence. 73 Augustine for Falling away, 378, 379, etc. how
to be understood when he seems to speak otherwise, Ibid. for General
Redemption, 525, 526, etc. against them that deny the cooperation of the first
cause with the second. 7 The Authors Intent in citing Authors. 524 561
B
BAptism: All Children baptized, judged by Musculus in favor with God. 331 A
weighty consideration for Infant Baptism. 537 Basil for a possibility of total
falling away, 377 for Universal Redemption. 534 Bid for general Redemption.
542 Simple Beings and existences of things, how determined by God, p. 7. what
manner of Being men had from Eternity. 45, 46 Bernard for general Redemption.
543 Beza defines justifying Faith by assent, 400 Denies that Christ dyed
sufficiently for all men, except in a barbarous sense. 97 Book of Life,
blotting out Names no blemish to it. 332 Bottomless pit, what it signifies.
435 Bucer defines Justifying Faith by assent, 400 For Universal Redemption. 556
Bullinger for Falling away, 392. For Universal Redemption. 560
C
CAlvin sometimes for Falling away 387 416. Defines Justifying Faith by assent
to the Word of God, 398. For General Redemption, 406, 552, 553, etc. For
Desires in God to save the World, 470 His Discourse for universal Grace. 508
509 Can, and cannot, diversely taken in Scripture. 194 Causes natural, how
sometimes suspend their proper actions. 7 Ceremonies, why termed the rudiments
of the World. 522, 523 Chamier defines Justifying Faith by assent. 398, 399
Character of Regeneration. 326, 327 Chemnitius for Falling away, 385, 386.
Defines Justifying Faith by assent. 400 Children in favor with God. 330 Christ
a sufficient Redeemer without being crucified, p. 15. How necessitated to well
doing, 341. How always heard in his Prayers, 245. How the foundation of
Election, 461. Dyed sufficiently for all, and intentionally also. 464, 465
Christ's Death, in what sense necessary, 14 For what end necessary, 436. It
prepared him for an Head. Ibid. Chrysostom for Falling away, 372, 372, etc. For
general Redemption. 529, 530 Clemens of Alexan: for general Redemption. 537
Concurrence, how God concurs in defective actions, p. 6. His concurrence the
same in different, yea contrary actions. 5 Conscience, Testimony of Conscience
when authentic, 159. Good Conscience always from Faith. 353, 354 Consent,
sinning without full consent, not a distinguishing character of Regeneration.
326, 327 Covenant of Grace not made with Christ, 458 Not more district, or
severe, then that of Works; 498. Covenant unproper to be made with unknown
persons, 454, 455 Conditional Assurance, the main or proper end of a Covenant.
Ibid. Promises noting to uncovenanted persons. 457 Councils and Synods for
general Redemption. 544, 545, etc. Create, created, etc. all things created at
once by God. 49, 50, etc. Creator, the relation of a Creator very promising,
71. much endearing. 72 Cyprian for Universal Redemption, 536 For Falling away.
375 Cyril of Alexandria for general Redempt. 540 Cyril of Jerusale^ 532
D
DAvid his condition under his impenitency, 346, 347. His Repentance necessary
to Salvation. Page 348, 349 Dr Davenant makes justifying Faith to stand in
assent, 401. For Universal Redemption. 560 Decrees of God, what, 34, 35. all
(in a sense) absolute, 65. No Decrees of things unapproved. 473 J. Deodat for
Falling away. 393 Desires, how attributed to God. 37 Determine, simple Beings
determined by God three ways, p. 7. Gods conditional Determinations, in what
sense absolute. 15 Devils, why unredeemable, 484, 485, etc. Punished only for
the first sin. 499 Didymus for Universal Redemption. 533 Dis-membering no
dishonor to the Body of Christ. 327, 328 Dort Synod, 84. Self-contradiction,
546 547, etc. Remonstrants in the Doctrine of Perseverance, 395, 396, etc. and
therefore self-condemned, 400, 401, etc. Arguments of this Synod for limited
Redemption, 565, 566, etc. Remonstrantizeth in the point of General Redemption,
546, 547 A sad Notion of this Synod, 548, 549
E
EIs, sometime for (...), and has a causal signification. 441 Elect or chosen,
what it sometimes signifies, 244. Who are Elect in the Scripture notion, 418.
How no need that Christ should dye for them. 459 Election, Decree of Election,
what, 244 In what sense men are said to be Elected from Eternity, Ibid. In what
sense not, 45, 244. Election, of species, not particular persons, 64. The
common Doctrine of Election flat Socinianism, 460. makes Christ to have dyed in
vain. 461 Epiphanius for Universal Redemption. 535 Eternal Life, inchoate,
perfect, 232. Eternal things, in what sense before things in time. 50, 51
Events hurtful not determined by God, 25 are not always signs of probabilities.
494 Eusebius for Universal Redemption. 352 Excuse, i(...)ility for performance,
the best. 503 Exhortations made useless by the common Doctr: of Perseverance.
301, 302, etc.
F
FAith justifying, what (according to the Scripture) 396. according to orthodox
Writers, 398, 399. Faith temporary, the same for kind with that which
justifies, 292, 293. Three degrees of Faith according to the Fathers. 369
Faithfulness of God toward his Saints, what it is, and wherei it consists.
236, 237 Falling away, a Doctrine richly sympathizing with the Spirit, and so
with the joy and peace of the Saints, 338. A Principle of singular and frequent
use in matters of Religion, 394, 395. Owned, and made use of, by the greatest
Saints upon occasion. ib. Fear, occasion of many inconveniences, 154 Not
unworthy the greatest Saints to act out of a Principle of Fear, 312, 313, etc.
As natural a fruit of Faith as Love it self, Ibid. How not servile, 315. has
no torment, 316. Not occasioned bythe Doctrine of Falling away, 336. What Fear
necessary for Saints. 175, 176 Foreknowledg not properly in God, 28, 29 the
Object of it, 39. No disparagement to his goodness, 424, 425, etc. His
foreknowledg of the event does not precede that act of his, upon which the
Event follows. Ibid. Foresight, God foreseeth without determination. 23, 26
G
GIve, what it signifies in Scriputre. 118 God respects only men's present
condition, whether of sin, or righteousness, 514 How at liberty to show Mercy,
482, 483, 487. Takes men off from vain dependencies, 491, 492. Does not insult
over miserable men in his Exhortations. 509, 510 Good, and goodness, what
signify in Scripture. 287 Gospel, a Doctr: according to Godliness. 333 Grace,
what properly is an Act of Grace, 484 The highest pitch of the efficacy
thereof. 427 Gregorius Magnus for general Redempt. 542 Greg: Nyssen for general
Redemption. 534 Gualter defines Justifying Faith by assent. 400
H
HAgue Conference. 181 Heathen, power to believe. 507 Hell Punishment
everlasting. 434 Hilarious for general Redemption, 531. seems to favor the
Opinion of those, who hold, that the punishment against Adams sin consisted
only in a temporal death. Ibid. Hope, what hope or confidence it is that is
the spur unto action. 242
I
Jerome for General Redemption. 529 Illumination proper to the Saints. 283
Impossibility, six several significations. 289 Infants, see Baptism, and
Children. Intentions of God antecedent and consequent; see Consequent: How
ascribed to God, 32 37, 447. How differ from Desires and Decrees, Ibid. How
never defeated, 215 What toward wicked men in outward m^rcies, 411, 412. In
what sense they may be defeated. 22, 35, 215, 434 Intercession of Christ for
the Saints, how. 248, 249 Interchange of Members between Christ and the Devil,
no dishonor to Christ, 328 Ireneus for Falling away, 370, 371. For General
Redemption. 538 Jubilee, a type of General Redemption. 521, 522, etc. Judas,
supposed by many ancient Writers to have been sometimes a good man. 361, 373
374 Junius for Falling away. 393 Justifying Faith, see Faith. Justine Martyr
for Universal Redempt. 538
K
(...), Preposition, what it imports, 243, 244 Knowledge not properly in God,
yet morae properly then Foreknowledg, 29, 30. Why, or how attributed to him,
Ibid. How perfect. 431
L
LEo Magnus for General Redemption. 541 Life, lives of men prorogable, or
abreviable by themselves. 8 Love of God, how unchangeable. 63, 64, 278 Luther
defines Justifying Faith by assent to the Word of God, p. 399. For Falling
away, 384, 386. For Universal Redemption. 551, 552
M
MAcarius for Falling away. 376 P. Martyr for universal Redemption. 556 Means,
how God wills the means as well as the end, 184, 185. God has more ends then
one in his vouchsafement of the means of Grace. 426, 427 Melancthon for Falling
away, 385. defines Justifying Faith by assent, 400. For Universal Redemption.
549 (...), to abide, what it imports. 397 Mollerus for Falling away. 394
Musculus for Falling away, 390. Defines Justifying Faith by assent, 400. For
universal Redemption. 555, etc. Mutability no disparagement to the Creature.
343
N
NAture, what it signifies, 518 Natural actions rather rewardable, then
actions necessitated, 319. Natural Causes why ordinarily left to themselves. 28
Nazianzen for Universal Redemption. 534 Necessity, free Causes not necessitated
by any act of God. 53 Nicene Council for General Redempt. 544 Notions, some of
a lighter, others of a deeper impression in the Soul. 1 Nyssen for Universal
Redemption. 534
O
OBedience natural and spiritual, how differ, 315. Spiritual the more perfect,
by how many the more motives raised. Ibid. Oecumenius for Universal Redemption.
543 Origin for Universal Redemption, 535, 536 For Falling away. 334 Original
sin not necessarily supposes liableness to condemnation. 519
P
PArable of the Sower opened. 291 Patience, Gods Patience respects chiefly
wicked men, generally, not elect, or believing. 422 Pelicanus for Universal
Redemption. 407 Perfection of life not fixed by God. 42, 43 Periods of life not
fixed by God. 8, 9 Permissive, Gods permissive Decrees not illative. 25, 26
Perseverance of Saints not promised absolutely, 317, 318. Such a supposition
dishonoreth God. Ibid. 319. Common Doctrine of Perseverance a most dangerous
snare upon men, 322. Reflects weakness upon the Holy Ghost, 339. Occasioneth
Jealousy amongst Brethren, 342. Has been unduly magnified, 343, etc. Ancient
Doctr: of Perseverance, how come to be lost in the Reformation, 383, 384. Of
signal necessity in matters of Christian Religion, 388 Asserted by Ancient
Fathers, 378, 379, 380, etc. Both by Councils and Synods, 394. (...)fessions of
many Churches. Ibid. Piscator sometimes for Falling away, 393 Denies Christ to
have dyed sufficiently for all men. 97 Possibility of perishing, no ground of
Fear that has torment, 474. God has provided more then a bare possibility of
Salvation for all. 400 Praying no sign of Regeneration. 346 Predestination,
what consistency with Gods Glory, p. 69. Anciently held to be from foreseen
Faith, or Works. 366 Prerogative, wherein Gods Prerogative Will consists. 67,
68 Primasius for General Redemption. 541 Promises made unto Perseverance, made
void by the common Doctrine of Perseverance, 317, etc. Promises conditional
more engaging unto action. 334 Prosper for Universal Redemption. 539, 540
Providence interposeth not out of course for most events. Page 14 Mr Pryn, his
undue report of Austins Judgment in the point of Perseverance. 383 Punishment,
what wonderful means God uses to prevent the eternal Punishment of the
Creature. 444 Purpose, Gods Purposes and Executions still parallel. 460
R
REason, some Reasons in general may be assigned of the equitableness of Gods
ways, not all in particular. 349. Grounds of Reason, how necessary for
confirmation of Doctrines, 453, 454. No man to act without a ground in Reason.
496 Reconciliation, how God may be said to reconcile the World. 88, 89
Redemption, Doctrine of general Redemption so necessary, that the greatest
enemies it has cannot but build upon it at some turns, 405, 523. In what sense
general Redemption is maintained in this Discourse, 433, 434, etc. General
Redemption typified by the brazen Serpent, 520, etc. by the Feast of Jubilee,
521, 522 What places of Scripture are commonly argued in opposition to it, 563,
564. The Arguments ordinarily produced against it, 564, 565, etc. Redemption
limited makes the Gospel a lottery, 412 dishonorable unto God, 413. quenches
hope and endeavor in men, 414. frustrateth Christ's Death in the main, 465.
represents God as hollow-hearted, 468. nourishes Jealousies against God,
476. injurious unto God, 478. Scriptures commonly pleaded for limited
Redemption, 563, 564 Arguments. 564, 565, etc. Regeneration, wherein resembles
the Birth natual, 265, 266. Repeated no inconvenience, 329. It imports a
repetition of a generation, or birth, but not natural. 329, 330 Repentance, why
rather to be ascribed to God, then to men themselves, though it be their act.
511, 512 Reprobation, 47, not from Eternity, 514. not of individuals, but
species, 63. The end of Gods Reprobation is, that men should not be Reprobates,
479. No Reprobation of men whilst righteous, 513. Common Doctr: of Reprobation
miserably encumbred. 514 515 Reward, what actions capable of reward. 319, 341
Mr S. Rutherford, his undue censure of general Atonement, 73. His mistake
about Joh. 17. 2. 116
S
SAints capable of sinning out of malice, 323 Sealing of the Saints with the
Spirit. 255 256 Servile, what Obedience servile, or mercenary. 315 Simplicity
of God. 43, 44 Simulation not in God. 472 Sinners, Pardon for wilful sinners
typified in the Feast of Jubilee. 521 Sins, of infirmity, what, 323. Sin upon
what account eternally punishable, 443. What wonderful means God uses to
prevent the eternal Punishment of the Creature for sin, 444. Shortness of time
to sin, rather an aggravation, then extenuation, of sin. 446 Spirit, to be
quenched, what. 325
T
TAste, what signifies in Scripture. 285 Tertullian for Falling away, 371. For
Universal Redemption. 535 Threatenings against Apostates made void by the
Common Doctrine of Perseverance, 311, 312, 313. Work not, but by the mediation
of Fear. Ibid. Truth, many Truths often asserted in the Scripture, not so much
for knowledge, or belief, as consideration, p. 2. Reigns, when Objections are
answered, 562. Acknowledgment of the Truth proper unto Saints, 283 Reigns not
until Objections be answered. 562 Dr Twiss his Notion about Christ's praying for
his Crucifiers, 245. about Gods permissive Decrees. 25
U
UNbelief, without power to believe, no cause of wonder, or of shame, 500, 501,
etc. Unbelievers, upon what account unexcuseable. 502, 503, etc. Unchangeable,
how God is unchangeable. 208 Unregenerate, no unregenerate person can have any
ground of hope, that he is, or may be (according to our Adversaries) one of the
Elect. 414, 494
W
WIll of God, diversely taken in Scriptture, 38. When, or in what sense,
efficacious, 473 474. How distinguished into Antecedent and Consequent. 448,
106 Will of Man not determined by God, p. 5. Gods actings upon it, how
unfrustrable, how Physical, how Moral. 305, 306, 307, etc. Wisdom, the more
wisdom, the less liberty to do unwisely, 427. Requires variation in practice,
428, 429. Wisdom of God infinitely perfect. 431 World, what it signifies, 76,
80, 81
Z
ZAnchius defines Justifying Faith by assent, 400. for universal Redemption.
559
A Table, or brief Collection, of some general Rules for the Interpretation of
Scriputres, delivered in the foregoing Discourse.
The Knowledge and Consideration whereof will give much Light into the
Controversies there debated.

1. IT is frequent in Scripture to express a thing after the manner of an
Event, or Consequent, which shall, or will follow upon such, or such an
occasion, or means, some ways likely to produce it, which yet frequently comes
not to pass: nay the contrary whereunto many times follows, and comes to pass
in stead thereof. Page 216, 221, 234 2. Many Promises, absolute in form, are
yet conditionate in matter, and meaning. 154 209, 218, 221, 225, 258, 231, 307
3. Promises m ade with respect to special qualifications, are to be understood
with such an Explicarion or Caution, wherewith Threatenings against particular
sins are to be interpreted. 231 4. There is nothing more frquent in Scripture,
then to ascribe the Effects themselves, sometimes unto God, sometimes unto men,
only upon their respective actings to men, only upon their respective actings
or doings of such things, which are of a natural, proper, or direct tendency to
produce them, whether they be actually produced, or no. 187, 235, 239, 240 5.
When the doing, or performance of such things, are attributed unto God, wherein
men also are to join and act with him to render those actings of his actually
saving, or eventually successful unto them, such Attributions are to be
understood with these, or the like Explicaitons, or limitations, as much as in
him lies, as far as is meet, or proper for him, etc. 239 6. There is nothing
more ordinary in Scripture, then to attribute, or predict unto m^n, both future
punishments, and rewards, in respect of their present ways, whether good, or
evil, simply, and without any clause of exception, in case of an after-change
in either; whereas notwithstanding the possibility of a change is clearly
supposed, and a suspension likewise, as well of the said punishments, as
rewards hereupon, according as the change shall be. 257 7. Men are often in
Scriputre dialect said to do that, not which they always do, but which they are
apt and likely to do, and that which ordinarily, or frequently they do: and
sometimes, that which only is their duty to do. 263, 264 8. God is often in
Scriputre said to have done a thing, or given a thing, when he intends, or
purposes to do, or give, it, though at present it be neither actually done,
nor given, 208, (in the margent.) 9. The determinate signification of a word in
one place, is no argument of the same sense or signification of it in another.
92, 99, 108 109 10. There is scarce any idiome of speech more frequent in
Script: then to mention or speak of an act simply, and indefinitly, as
performed and done, when the doing of it has been fully resolved, concluded,
or consented unto in the heart and soul, whether ever it be actually and
externally done, or no. 15, 16 17 11. It is a form of speech frequent in the
Scriptures, to speak of things probable, or likely to come to pass, as if they
would, or should, simply and certainly come to pass: and so again to use the
Infinitive Mood in a Potential sense or signification. 15, 16, 17 12. It is not
necessary that all things accompanying or relating unto those aff^^ctions in
men, which are attrib^ted unto God, should be paralled in him, or have
something in his Nature corresponding to them. 30, 424 13. It is a known
propriety of the Greek tongue, to import the Reasons or Grounds of things by
their Participles. 313 14. It is a frequent Dialect of Scripture, to call the
means, and cause, yea and sometimes an opportunity only, which are proper and
effectual for the compassing and obtaining a thing, bythe Name of the thing it
self, which is to be, or may be, procured by them. 117 15. To put Restrictions
upon Scripture phrases, or assertions, without necessity, and this
demonstrable, either from other Scriptures, or unquestionable grounds of
Reason, is not to interpret the Scriptures now in Being, but (upon the matter)
to make new. 125, 406, 407 16. The particle, (...), that, does not always
import the certainty of the thing spoken of, by way of event, no not when
speech is of God himself, but oft-times the Intention only of the Agent. 234,
216, 221 17. God is said to do a thing, when he does that, toward the
effecting of it, which is proper for him to do. 239, 187 18. It is a frequent
Hebraism in the Scriptures, to call both things and persons, of special worth
and excellency in their kind, Elect, or chosen. 244 19. Such Intentions and
Desires in God, and in Christ, which are real and cordial, may very possibly
never take place, or be fulfilled. 32, 35, 215 20. Many Promises of God are to
be understood with reference to the present state and condition of things. 361,
230, 231, 217 21. The Negation of the Act frequently imports the Negation of
the Power also. 434 435 22. The Nenter gender for the Masculine, is a frequent
construction in the Scriptures, and emphatical. 436 23. Such conditional
Sayings, upon which Admonitions, Promises, or Threatenings, are built, do at
least suppose something in possibility, how ever by virtue of their tenor and
form they suppose nothing in Being. 275, 440 24. A Promise of receiving any
thing upon the performance of an unpossible Condition is equivalent to a
threatening that a man shall never receive it. 442 25. Such constructions, or
forms of speech, wherein the Consequent is put for the Antecedent, and so again
where the end or effect is named to signify the means proper for the
procurement of either, are familiar and frequent with the holy Ghost in
Scripture. 451, 452 26. The Purposes and Intentions of God, concerning such and
such Acts, or Dispensations, are very usually in the Scriputre expressed by the
names of the Acts or Dispensations themselves. 462
FINIS.
Reader, the miscarriages of the Press, are rather many, then material: yet
some there are, too material to be neglected. What thou meetest with more then
these corrected to thy hand, thou art desired to make them fewer, or rather
none at all, by taking the same course with them.
ERRATA.
Page 14, line tit. r. 28 21. l. 14. r. (...). 27, l. 27, r. his 34, l. 41. r.
distinct 41, l. tit. for 5 r. 3 l. 36. dele (...). 48, l. 24, r. tum l. 28, r.
the 61, l. tit. r. 27 l. 2. r. freest 79, l. 19, r. individuums 98 l. 35, r. or
l. 47, r. ratiocinantis 103. marg. r. (...). 107, l. 19, r. capacities 110,
marg. r. (...). 111, l. 1, dele and 118, l. 13, r. From 121, l. tit. r. Romans
l. 34 r. causing 122, l. 8, r. perseverance 123, l. 21, r. make 154, l. 31,
r. proves l. 43, r. worshipping P. 156, l. 31, r. blend 159, l. 2, 4. his, l. 4,
r. My l. 23, r. Conscience 165, l. 20, r. competible 169, l. 37, r. dissented
171, l. tit. r. Episcopalists 173, l. 18, r. drawn 174, l. 2, r. compelling
179, l. 39, r. tentations 183, l. 32, r. somewhere 191, l. 45, dele at 197, l.
6, r. are 203, l. 51, r. will 208, l. 23, dele, the sequel of 209, l. 40, r. of
210. l 25, r. astertions 240. l. 13. r. (...). 242, l. 41, r. grati simus 243.
l. 44, dele as 249. l. 36, r. sins 256, l. 25, r. life 260, l. 10, r.
implicitly 265, l. 49, dele by 267, l. 36, r. thrones P. 268, l. 28, r.
disaster 284, l. 10, r. cordial 285, l. 16, r. case 286, l. 10, r. partaker l.
42, r. dialect 287, l. 44, r. others 290, l. 30, r. immediately 302, l. 28, r.
an 308, l. 28, r. were 317, l. 18, dele not 340, l. 40, dele it 342, L. 41, r.
the 346, l: 48, r. is 378. l. 39. r. (...). 401, l: 34, r. grand 409, l: ult.
r. lidating 475, l: 48, r: known 520, l, ti^: r. Serpent ^30. l. 15. marg. r.
(...) l. 31. r. (...). 532. l. 35. r. (...). 548, l. 26, r. from.
Mis-pointings, and mis-spellings, with some other lighter oversights, expect
pardon of course.


