A True Relation WHAT SENTENCE Was passed upon the Servants of the Lord, by one
who is in Commission to do Justice, called by the world Sir William Walter,
with the consent of the rest of those called Justices, that sat upon the Bench
with him at that time, because we could not swear for conscience sake, but
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, who says Swear not at all; Also something in
Answer to it, showing the unjustnesse of their proceedings against us; With a
warning to them to repent, and turn from the evil of their ways, and fear the
Lord, least the judgments of God come upon them at unawares.
UPON the second day of the eight Month, called by the world October, in the
year 1660. the general Quarter Sessions for the County of Oxen was kept at
Oxford, and one which is called by the world Sir William Walter was Judge of
the Court, and I, and another friend, called Benjamin Staples was brought by
the Jailer of Oxford into the Court before them, and when they had examined me,
and could find nothing against me, they on purpose to ensnare me, tendered unto
me the Oath of Allegiance, I told them I owned the King to be the Supreme
Governor, in civil and temporal things, and was willing to obey him in all
just and lawful commands, but if King Charles and they that are in Authority
under him, command me to do that which is contrary to the Command of the LORD
JESUS, then I shall choose rather to obey CHRIST JESUS then King Charles, or
them that are in Authority under him, and so I told them I could not swear for
conscience sake, if it would gain me the whole world, because Christ Jesus has
forbid it, and says Swear not at all (and the Apostle James likewise) Matthew.
5. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. and James 5. 12.) but nothing would satisfy them that
could be spoken, except I would swear, and so in obedience to Christ I refused
to swear; then the aforesaid William Walter asked the rest of those called
Justices that sat upon the Bench with him, whether they had any thing to say
against it, whereby he might not pass judgment against me, they all with one
accord consented to him that he might, then he said unto me, HEAR YOUR
SENTENCE, You are out of the Kings protection, and all your Lands, Goods, and
Chattels are forfeited, and to be ceased on for the use of the King, and you
are to remain in Prison during the Kings pleasure; and then he command the
Jailer to take me away* and I asked him if he gave orders to the Jailer to put
Irons upon me (which was thereon when I was brought before them, and when I
came first into Prison) as Thieves and Murderers have, he answered, The Jailer
might do what he would with me (or words to this purpose) for I was out of the
Kings protection, and so the Jailer took me away, and brought the aforesaid
Benjamin before them, and when they had examined him and could find nothing
against him, then they tendered unto him the same Oath, but he refused to take
it (in obedience to Christ) for conscience sake, as I did, and so the aforesaid
William Walter, with the consent of the rest, passed the same Sentence on him
as he did on me; and so the Jailer sent us both away to Prison, and when the
said Jailer came down to the Prison, he spoke to the Common-Prisoners and told
them, if they wanted Coats, they might take ours off our backs, for we could
have no law against them; then one of the Prisoners answered, He would go naked
before he would take off ours. And this is Printed and published that all sober
minded people may see and consider, whether we be not cruelly used, and
unjustly dealt withal, by them that are now in Authority, contrary to the
righteous Law of God, (which is) that every one should do unto all men, as they
would be done unto themselves.

Now here follows something in answer to the aforesaid Sentence, which was
passed by the aforesaid William Walter, with the consent of the rest of those
called Justices which sat upon the Bench with him that day.

You that pretend to be the Kings friends, and to act for him, and in his name,
this I would have you take notice of, forasmuch as you have persecuted the
servants of the Lord, for obeying the command of Christ Jesus, and has cast us
into Prison, and passed an unjust Sentence against us, contrary both to the
Command of Christ and the Apostles, recorded in Matthew: 5. 33, 34, 35, 36, and
37. verses, and Jam: 5. 12. and contrary to the promise of King Charles, and
therefore you are enemies to CHRIST JESUS, and King Charles, for Christ says,
Swear not at all, and King Charles has promised, that we shall have the liberty
of our conscience, and not suffer for our Religion or Opinion (or words to this
purpose) and moreover he said, We had the word of a King for it; and this he
has promised to my friends, which is one with me in Spirit, and it is now in
Print, to the public view of his Subjects; therefore you are no friends
neither to God, nor the King, but on the contrary you are enemies to both,
because you go about, and do as much as in you lies to compel and force the
servants of the Lord to break the command of Christ, and make it of no effect
and force; and also you go about to cause the King to break his promise, and to
make his promise and word of none effect, which he has promised before the
Lord, and to his people, for which he must give an account to the Just God, if
he do not perform his promise which he made to them; therefore if you do not
repent of this your wickedness, and turn to God with all your hearts, and
forsake the evil of your ways and doings, and cease persecuting the people of
God, the Lord will cut you off from the face of the earth, and give you your
portion with the wicked and ungodly, and reward every one of you according to
your works, and pass this sad Sentence against you which he did against the
wicked and ungodly in the days of old, which is recorded in Mat. 7. 23. Mat.
25. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27, 28. verses, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and these went away into
everlasting punishment where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth; and the Lord is the same now (as he was then) and you your selves are in
the same nature, and as vile, and wicked, and guided by the same spirit as they
was, as your fruits make you manifest; and the same woe and misery that came
upon them for their wickedness and disobedience, will certainly come upon you
for your ungodliness and disobedience to Christ Jesus the Light of the world,
If you do not repent speedily, and fear the Lord, and cease from all your
ungodly ways, and Iearn to do well; for the God that we (who are in scorn and
derision called Quakers) own, serve, obey and worship, is the only true God
that made Heaven and Earth, who is pure, and of purer eyes then to hehold
iniquity, and not any that lives in pride, covetousness, high-mindedness,
vainglory, self-seeking, pleasures, vanities, hawking, hunting, gaming,
sporting, oppression, persecution, envy, wrath, swearing, lying, whoredom,
drunkenness, foolish jesting, corrupt communication, or any unrighteousness
whatsoever, can enter into Gods kingdom, nor any unclean thing whatsoever; and
they that are without purity and holiness, whose hearts are full of lust,
pride, and deceit, living and dying in this miserable state and condition,
cannot enjoy the pure presence of the Lord, neither in this life, nor in the
life which is to come after death; and verily the Lord God is provoked to anger
daily, and his Spirit is grieved to see the wickedness and the abominations
that is acted, committed, and done in England, and elsewhere, both amongst the
Rulers, Teachers, Professors, and profane now at this time, for all the whole
world lies now in wickedness, and are in the broad way that leads to
destruction, and there is no true change, nor reformation, neither amongst the
Rulers, Teachers, nor the generality of people, but they grow worse and worse,
and more vile and wicked then they have been formerly, and so their hearts is
hardened in sin and wickedness, and they are past feeling, whose consciences is
seared as with a hot Iron, for they have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, and the leaders of
the people caused them to err, and they that are led of them are destroyed,
for the leaders lives in pride, covetousness, and in all manner of
wickedness, and without the true fear of God, and so does the generality of
people that follows them, and so as they are, such are the people, for they
are patterns of ungodliness, and evil examples for others to follow, and
thousands are like to perish for want of the true knowledge of God, whom to
know experimentally is life eternal, and therefore if the blind lead the blind,
they are both in great danger to fall into the Ditch; therefore as you tender
the good of your souls, and the honor and glory of God, Prize your time while
it is called to day, and see that you walk more circumspectly then you either
have done, (or do) and take warning in time, and do not act against the Lord
Jesus, nor his people any longer, (as now you do) least the Jugements of God
come upon you at unawares.

And although you have passed an unjust Sentence against us, whereby to destroy
both our persons and estates, and deprive us from having any protection by the
King, or his Laws, which the righteous God will one day call you to an account,
both for this, and many other unjust things which you have acted against him,
which Gods witness in your own hearts and consciences will set you see, and
tell you what you have done against the Lord and his people, if you hearken to
it, and it will accuse and condemn you for what you have done. And this I would
have both you and others to know, that you cannot (neither is it in your power
to deprive us from being protected by the KING of Heaven and Earth, who is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and he is our King, Lawgiver and Judge, and he
does (and will) protect and defend us, and in his own time he will deliver us
out of the hands of our enemies, and out of the hands of all the wicked and
ungodly, and this we do verily believe that our God whom we serve and obey will
do for us, as he has done great things for us already, blessed and praised be
his great and glorious name for evermore; and our only hope, trust, and
confidence is in the Lord, who will never leave nor forsake his own people that
puts their whole trust and confidence in him; and in the mean time we are
contented with our present condition, and what the Lord has suffered to come
to pass, knowing that all things which the Lord brings, or suffers to be
brought to pass concerning his people, will work altogether for their good;
and this is suffered by the Lord to be thus done unto us, for the exercise and
trial of our faith and patience, and the Lord has made us willing to submit
unto his will, and blessed be his glorious name for evermore that counts us
worthy to suffer for his sake.

From the County Goal at Oxford, this 7. Day of the 8. Month. Thomas Goodaire.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate.
1660.


