Banner of Justification DISPLAYED: OR; A DISCOURSE, Concerning the Deep, and
Important Mystery of the Justification of a Sinner: Wherein the several Causes
thereof, being both numerous and various, are from the First to the Last
diligently enquired after, and their several Contributions toward so great
and happy a Work, clearly distinguished, and assigned to their proper Causes
(respectively.) AND More particularly is showed, How God, how the Grace of God,
how the Decree of God, how the Sovereign Authority of God; How Christ, how the
Active Obedience Christ, how the Passive Obedience of Christ, how the
Resurrection of Christ, how the Knowledge of Christ; How the Spirit of God, how
Faith, how Repentance, how Works, how Remission of Si^, how the Word, how the
Minister of the Word, how the P^^^ himself which is justified, may all truly,
though upon several Accounts, and after different Manners, be said to Justify.

By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, Isa. 53. 11. Solet
Scriptura, cum ad unum effectum multae causae concurrunt, modo uni, modo
alteri, effectum tribuere. Chamier. Panstrat. Tom. 4. L. 22. C. 4.. 39. Scire,
est per causas scire.
Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
LONDON, Printed by E. C. And are to be sold by H. Evers^^ at the Sign (...)
the (...)

Brief Passages of Scripture clearly showing, and proving, that all the
Particulars mentioned in the Title Page, as Causes of Justification, or
Contributors hereunto, are acknowledged, and supposed, for such in the
Scriptures themselves.
[IT is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33. Being justified freely by his Grace,
Romans 3. 24. This is the Will, [i. The Decree, or fixed pleasure] of him that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, should have
everlasting life [and consequently, be antecedently justified.] It is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns? [meaning, that his Authority in
justifying is Sovereign and Paramount, and so liable to no reverse] or
contradiction, Romans 8. 33, 34. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ,
etc. Gal. 2. 17. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed [and
consequently, not justified] with corruptible things -- but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
Much more being now justified by his bleod, Romans 5. 9. -- and was [i. Christ
was] raised again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. By his knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many, Isa 53. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God, etc. Rom* 5. 1. John did Baptize in the Wilderness, and
preached the Baptism of Repentance for remission of sins, Mar. 1. 4. Ye see
then how that by works a man is justified, etc. Jam. 2. 24 Blessed are they
whose Iniquities are forgiven, and ^^ose sins are covered [i. Who is justified,
as appears from v. 2. and (...) Romans 4. 7. -- And how shall they believe in him
[and consequently be justified] of whom they have not heard. So then Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. 17. And how shall
they hear, without a Preacher, Romans 10. 14. Take heed unto thy self, and unto
thy Doctrine: for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that
hear thee [and consequently, shall justify both, in as much as salvation
presupposes justification] 1 Timothy 4. 16. Even we have believed in Christ, that
we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, Gal. 2. 16.]

having charged the English Tilenus with making the Tryers to ask such
questions of those that come before them, as in all probability never came into
all their thoughts to ask, upon this his probable mis-de meanour (himself
making no more of it) he advances this Radamanthine and severe Sentence, both
against him, and me; Which (says he) Is such a piece of Impudence, as no one
has ventured to imitate him in, but that Ishmael of Colemanstreet, whose hand
being against all men, has provoked all men, even to the common Pamphleter, to
lift up an hand against him. The best is, (in case Mr. Hickman's reproach here,
could, without the help of the Figure (...), be admitted for true) That Jeremy
of Jerusalem was a man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole Earth,
as well as that Ishmael of Colemanstreet, and yet was a true Prophet, and never
the less like so to have been for the numerousness of his Contests. Noah also
was a Preacher of Righteousness, yet his proportion of Opposers in the World,
far exceeded mine, and the number of those, who embrace my Doctrine with their
whole hearts, far exceeds the number of those, who upon such terms received
his. Yea, our Savior himself testifies, that in the Church and Nation of the
Jews, they who had the more general approbation and applause, were the false
Prophets, not the true, Luke 6. 26. Woe unto them when all men shall speak well
of them, for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets.

But because Mr. Hickman judges himself Orthodox, in charging me with
Impudence: what if it be found that the Ingredients in the composition of his
Charge here levied against me, and proclaimed as with sound of Trumpet and Drum
in the Ears of the World, be notwithstanding all Errors, and broad untruths?
may he not make a covering of shame for his own Face of the Accusation, which
he has here drawn up against me? Let us fairly examine the Case, and with as
much Favor to the Examinate, as he, or his Friends, can reasonably expect.

First, Whereas he charge me with imitating his English Tilenus, is not here
a palpable and un-scholar-like Jeofail? Did Shemei in reviling David, when his
Condition was low and mean in the World, imitate Mr. Hickman, in reproaching a
Minister of Christ being under Hatches, and trampled upon by men; or did not
Mr. Hickman in this Action rather imitate him? He that acts before another,
what ever his Action be, does not imitate him that follows him in the same
kind of acting, but on the contrary, he imitates who follows the Example or
Pattern that have been set before. If there be any similitude between Tilenus
and me, in our respective handling of Mr. Hickmans Tryers, Tilenus must bear
the Crime of Imitation, not I, who was before him in what was done by me,
relating to those his Clients.

Secondly, Whereas he charge me with venturing to imitate Tilenus, in making
the Tryers to ask such Questions of those that come before them, as in all
probability never came into all their thoughts to ask: The truth is, that he
charge me with the Crime of such a Courage, or boldness, whereof I was never
Conscious. I never made any venture to imitate Tilenus, in such an Attempt, as
is here charged upon him; nor did I ever go before him in any such. I no where,
either challenge them, or charge them, With asking such questions of those that
come before them, which in all probability never came into all their thoughts
to ask. If I charge them with asking any questions in the Case, they are only
such, which themselves and their own Consciences know that they do, or did ask
frequently, and from time to time. And for the Questions which Tilenus himself
makes them to ask, as far as I remember, if they were not the same formally,
and in terminis, yet they were the same materially and in reality of import,
which they were wont to ask. And for a man in his own words, to report another
man's sense uttered in his, is no such venterous piece of Impudence: it is
rather a piece of this Calculation, so to call it. But,

Thirdly, Whereas my Accuser charge me with having my hand against all men;
neither is he Orthodox in this, unless he takes Sanctuary under the Wing of the
good Figure Synechdoche, which has had a privilege time out of mind, to grant
a pardon to men for this Delinquency in speaking, viz, When meaning only some,
they say, all; or, intending only a part, yet mention, or name, the whole. For
otherwise, Mr. Hickman himself is (doubtless) a man, though (to measure him by
himself, and so to please him, if it may be) one of a thousand. Yet my hand
(certain I am) was never against him; no, nor his against me, that I know of,
until Mr. Pierce of late touched him, where (it seems) he was very tender, and
hereby provoking his Choler and Scholarship together, put him into an Athletick
Passion: under the fiery and fierce conduct whereof, in his March, his hap was
to fall foul upon me, and so it fell to my share also to feel, as well as
others, the weight of his learned Faculty in reproaching. But it is a good sign
on the Truths side, when her Enemies retreat, and flee to their Patheticals.
For this argues that their Intellectuals fall short, and that their heart
serves them not to confide in them any further. Yet I cannot but mention this
by the way, as matter of sad consideration, although of too too frequent
occurrency; that men, who have competent Gifts and Parts of Wit and Learning,
whereby they might serve their Generation, and be useful unto many, yet
suffering themselves to be overgrown with a Conceit, that these Gifts and
Parts are far greater then they are, they hereby stifle their Opportunity, and
give Hostages unto sin, and Satan, that they will never do any great matters
against them. Such a Conceit as this, is a dead Fly in their Ointment, causing
it to cast forth a stinking savor, and betrayeth them into many, and sometimes
into sad, inconveniences. But to return to Mr. Hickman; although the Figure
Synechdoche interposeth with the best of her Authority for the salvage of his,
both Credit, and Conscience, in charging me with the being of my hand against
all men; yet this Figure will prove but a Cipher unto him for any such Service,
if his words in the Charge be but strictly interpreted. For in true
Construction and propriety of speech, his hand is with men, and for men, not
against them, which i^ stretched out, or lifted up, against their Errors only.
These are they that are against them, and they that wage War against these,
fight on their side. I am not conscious to my self that my hand has been
against any man in any other sense, then this. Nor is my severe Accuser able (I
believe) to prove the contrary: However, though I am no great Lawyer, yet
(methinks) Charges and Accusations against men should be of little value, or
force, which cannot be verified, or made good, but by the favor of Figures.
Yet,

Fourthly, (and lastly, for this) the remaining Article of his Charge [Viz.
That I have provoked all men, even to the common Pamphleter, to lift up an hand
against me] will keep him out of new Jerusalem also, without the mediation of
the said Figure, Senechdoche. See Revel. 21. 27. and Revel. 22. 15. I know it
would be offensive to the Gentleman, if I should relate how many Letters, and
Messages otherwise, of thankful acknowledgments of the Grace of God given unto
me, for the clearing of those Doctrines, of Election, Reprobation* etc. and of
Christian Encouragements, to proceed in my way, etc, I have received time after
time, from several persons of considerable woe th, for Godliness, and
Knowledge, inhabiting in several parts of the Nation, some of them Ministers of
the Gospel, and others of them Studients in the University of good standing,
etc. But because such a story as this, would (I presume) be a heavy burden to
a tender and weak shoulder, I shall forbear it. In the mean time, Mr. Hickman
must give me leave to tell him, and all the Woe ld this plain story, Viz, That I
know certainly, inf^ll^bly, above and beyond all possibility of mistake, that
he spoke not by the Spirit of God, when he said, That my hand has provoked all
men even to the common Pamphleter, etc. He is an Athenian, and seems to have
some sympathy in blood with him, that ^ayd claim to all the Ships that came
into Pireus, as his own. But he may know, if he please, that there are seven
thousand (and seven thousand more to them twice told) amongst the Israel of God
in this Nation, who either never bowed the Knee of their Judgment, to the
bloody Molech of his Reprobation, nor, to any of his Confederates, or else have
repented of that superstitious and unadvised Homage. But what emphaticall
reach, or Design he should have in mentioning the poor Common Pamphleter
disparaging-wise (as it is evident enough that he does) and yet make him one of
the Retinue of those, whom I have provoked to lift up their hands against me, I
verily understand not* Does he present him as an Index, or Significator of the
manners, quality, or condition of the whole Retinue? Would he have an Estimate
made by him, who, or what sort and kind of persons they are, whom I have so
provoked, as to move them to lift up their hand against me? Or is it his mind,
in singling him out from his Company, and showing him personally and
particularly, to say unto his Reader, Crimine ab uno Disce omnes; i. Know this
vile persons and know all the rest. I can hardly think that he should
understand himself no better, then thus to prevaricate with his Interest and
Cause, and to associate himself, and his best-respected Friends with the Common
Pamphleter. And yet I am to seek what other Treasure he should think to make of
him here. However, there is somewhat in the old Saying; Noscitur ex comite, qui
non dignoscitur ex se.


Men's Ways and Manners when they hidden lie, Are often betrayed by their Company.

If those whom I have provoked, make one Genius with the Common Pamphleter, Res
mea est in vado, I am in no danger of just blame for doing that, by which they
have been provoked. For that Saying of Seneca will at this turn guard me round
about: Recti argumentum est, pessimis displicere. The worst men are commonly
most displeased with that which is best. And thus we see with how great
weakness, and unworthyness, Mr. Hickman has quitted himself in levying the
sore Charge mentioned, against a person, that never did him, nor thought him
the least harm.

But in the Passage now examined, he has only Chastized me with his Rods:
elsewhere he makes a Scourge for my Back of Scorpions. For thus my
Transcription reports him. And indeed a spirit of most Childish Insultation
seems to have possessed as many as have lift up an English Pen against the
Orthodox in this Quinquarticular Controversy. I Will instance only in Mr. John
Goodwin, who in the Preface of his Triumviri, says, That he has not met with
any thing in the Writings of any, or of all the three men contesting with him,
which had in the least shaken his Confidence concerning the truth of the things
by him asserted, or that for the least space of time put him to any stond, or
loss in his understanding concerning them, or to seek what to answer to any
thing they offer or object against any of them. Which Lines the greatest
Charity must look upon as so much vapouring Rhetoric dropped from his Pen in the
absence of Judgment and Conscience, or as an Essay of the Spartans Valor, who
being struck down by a mortal blow, used to stop their mouths with earth,
that they might not be heard to quetch, or groan, thereby to affright their
Fellows, or animate their Enemies. Here is work enough for all day: But,

1. I perceive the truth of the old Saying is not yet out of date;

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.
Comply, and Friends thou shall create,
Speak truth, and look for mortal hate,
I perceive, if instead of speaking the truth in the Passage cited by Mr.
Hickman, I should have comported with him in his sense and notion, and have
said that the three men had given my confidence a Mortal wound, and had
objected such things against my Tenants, which put me to a stand, and that I
knew not which way to turn me for an Answer unto them, or the like, this might
have purchased me the right hand of his Fellowship, and have restored me to the
Synagogue of the Orthodox, out of which I was cast long since, and have
remained an Outcast several years. When the Lord Christ had said unto the
Jews, that God was his Father, and that he knew him, which they did not, this
Saying (as it seems) was ill resented by them, their desire being that he
should unsay it, and that he should not assume unto himself, any other, or any
more knowledge of God, then what they had. If I should say, (says Christ) I
know him not, I should be a Liar like unto you: But I know him, etc. John 8.
55. If I should have said, that I met with that in the Writings of the three
men, of whom Mr. Hickman speaks, which did put me to a stand, etc. I should
herewith have pleased him, because in so saying, I should have complied with
him, and made my self like unto him. But,

2. Mr. Hickman Arraigning me for the High Misdemeanour of speaking untruth,
(for his charging me to have written, as I did, in the absence of Judgment and
Conscience, amounts to no less) he should have done well to observe the due
process of Law and Reason, and first have made substantial proof of the Crime,
or matter of Fact objected, before he had proceeded to a sentence of
Condemnation; and have produced some Argument, or Objection, one, or more, out
of the W itings of some of the three men, which he should substantially prove
did put me to a stond or loss in my understanding what to answer. If he could
name any such Argument, or Ob^ection from any of the said men, that to his
knowledge did the Feat, which he presumes was done, though I deny it (I mean,
which did put me to a stond, etc.) this would not justify him, unless he could
give a sufficient account of such his knowledge unto others. For the Rule is;
Non esse, and non apparere, aquiparantur in jure: That which is not, and that
which appears not, are of the same consideration in Law. And yet I judge it an
easy matter for him to give an account of all the knowledge he has in this
kind. But the Law of Conscience and Christianity, forbids the sacrificing of
any man's Reputation, at the loudest instance of Probabilities, or Conjectures;
at least or such, which have no more weight, or reason in them, then those,
upon which Mr. Hickman has offered up mine upon the Service, whether of his
pleasure, or displeasure. But if either he, or any of his Colleagues in
Judgment, could, and would be pleased, to afford me the inter-view of any such
Argument, or Objection, against my Tenants (by-named Erroneous) whether out of
the Writings of some of the three men, or out of their own Treasuries, or out
of the abundance of any of their Judgment, which would put me to such a stond,
that I should not remove, or to such a loss in my understanding, that I could
never recover, or repair, they would be the best Benefactors unto me in the
good things of this World, that I have met with these many years; especially
they would have been such unto me, had they be-friended me in that kind
heretofore, whilst, and when, I was more capable of the Courtesies and
Benefactures of the World, then now I am, expecting daily to remove into that
Climate, where the Sunshine of this world has no warming, or cheering
influence at all. For certain I am, that those Tenants, from under the
Conscience whereof I might well have been delivered by the means specified,
have divided between the world, and me, and kept many the good things thereof
from me, by reason of their insupportableness unto the greater part of men, and
more especially unto the great men in the state of my sojourning, and to those,
who by their consent (yea, they love to have it so) exercise Dominion over
their Faith, under the importune claim of being Orthodox, and sound in their
Judgments from the one end of them even unto the other, in matters appertaining
unto God. I have neither any disposition within, nor occasion without, to turn
Plaintiff against the World; a man with a competency of wisdom may very well
be content with my portion in it. For my good God, (Etiam in vita mundi
Minerva) has fed me, and mine, with food convenient, yea, and clothed and
harbored us accordingly. And the truth is, that for things greater then these,
it is best receiving them at the Resurrection. Or,

3. If it be not matter of untruth (in my words of his angry Observation lately
mentioned) wherewith, and for which, my Accuser intended to humble me, but
rather the subject matter, or inward thought, imported in the words, as that I
should arrogate unto my self an attainment so incredible and rare, as not to be
put to a stond, or be at a loss in my understanding, what to answer to any
thing I had met with in any the Writings of the three men; if this (I say) be
the Sword that passed through the Soul of my Accuser, and be apprehended by him
so highly Criminal, as to deserve that heaped measure of Indignation, which he
has troubled his Learning to pour upon it, I shall, for the composure of his
Spirit, and for the dissolving of the unhappy appearance of so much guilt,
where none was, administer unto him that well-approved Dosis of Augustine; Non
est arrogantia, sed ^ides, praedicare ^a, quae accepisti: Upon occasion, to
professor declare, what a man has received of undeserved favor and bounty
from God, is no point of arrogance* o^ pride, but of Faith. And the truth is
that God has so blessed me in the labor and travail of my Soul, about those
great Points of Election, Reprobation, the Intent, or Extent of the death of
Christ, etc. wherein I have with some diligence, and with no less integrity and
simplicity of heart, exercised my self for several years past, that before the
coming forth of any thing Printed by the three men against me, I was Master of
such Principles and Grounds, partly from the light of Nature, and common
Impressions found in the Hearts and Consciences of all men concerning God,
partly from the Writings of learned and worthy men, as well of the
Contra-remonstrant party, as Calvin, Beza, Musculus, etc. as the Remonstrant,
but chiefly from the Sriptures, by which I was able to give my self present
satisfaction, about any thing I met with objected in my way by any of those
three men. And I partly believe that Mr. Hickman himself, though but a young
man (comparatively) yet conceives of himself at not much a lower rate, then to
be able without much study to maintain the peace of his present Judgment,
against all the Attempts, that either I in any of my Writings, or any other of
my Judgment, in theirs, have made upon him to disturb him. However if he should
make a Declaration, or profession of such a Tenor, or Import, I judging him to
be a man of Conscience, and sober minded, should not reflect upon him (nor do I
judge it my duty so to do) as a man speaking that which was not, nor yet
conclude him to be a man of a lofty, and confident, arrogating, or self-willed
Spirit; much less should I arraign him openly as a person guilty of such
misdemeanors. I confess it is very incident to men to abound in their own
sense to such a degree, as to presume that they want nothing wherewith to answer
any man that shall oppose it. Indeed if he should declare, or profess, after
this manner, or the like, Viz, That he is resolved, whatsoever has been
written, or whatsoever shall be written by any man, or men whatsoever, yea, or
whatsoever can be written, in opposition to his present Judgment in those
Points, that yet he will stand by this Judgment unto death, this (I confess)
would put me into thoughts of another nature concerning him. But I have not put
him to the trouble of any such consideration as this about me, my Profession,
with which notwithstanding he vexes his impatient Soul, being of a far
different Spirit. But

4. (and lastly) As to those words; And indeed a spirit of most Childish
insultation, seems to have possessed as many as have lift up an English Pen
against the Orthodox in this quinquarticul^r Controversy; I am real in
believing the truth of the^e words, but not in the meaning of him that wrote
them. But admit his sense and meaning in them for truth, never was the Spirit
of Childish insultation, more Childishly reproved, or with less authority and
power, in respect of the Tenor and notion of the reproof. For the credit of
that old saying of grave Cato, is Authentic to this day:

Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum;
A burning shame it is, when Teachers will
Reprove, and yet themselves commit the ill.
Or is there any species of Childish insultation, more impertinent and weak,
then Ante pugnam canere victoriam, to sing Victory before the Battle be begun,
or whilst it is yet with great heat of Courage and Confidence prosecuted and
maintained by the opposite side? Or is there any Soloecisme in Logic broader,
or more illogicall then that which they call, Petitio Principii, when that is
presumed or taken for granted, which is the main question in Dispute? Or when
Mr. Hickman takes the honor unto himself, and his Party, in the
Quinquarticular Controversy, of being, the Orthodox, and more signally and
peculiarly such, in the said Controversy, does he not cry, Victory, before the
Battle, or whilst his Adversaries, in good order, with their Troops unbroken,
yea, undaunted, without the loss of so much as an Inch of their ground, keep
the Field? Or is it not by a neer-hand interpretation, the very Spirit and
quick of the Controversy between him, and them, which of the two be the
Orthodox? yet Mr. Hickman gives us this Pill to swallow without chewing, that
he, and his, have the right end of the Staff, are the Orthodox, in the Points
and Questions depending. He does not walk by the King of Isreal's advice unto
Benhadad (1 King. 20. 11.) For he has but newly girded his ^^arness to him,
and yet boasts as if he were putting i^ off. But I would gladly here know of
him, how, by what Title, or right of Claim, he, and his, come to be, the
Orthodox. I am afraid, they came not to the Honor as orderly, or honestly, as
Aaron did to the Priesthood: but that they took it unto themselves, being never
called to it by God, or the Truth. Our Savior even in his own Ca^e
acknowledges equity in that Maxim of Law, That a man's Testimony of, or for,
himself, is invalid. If I (says he) bear witness of my self, my testimony is
not true. [i. Not true, or valid, in course of Law, John 5. 31. I never heard,
nor can I believe (unless Mr. Hickman, or some of his Friends could lend me
their Faith) that they hold the Title of, Orthodox, by any other right of
Claim, then that by which the Jews held that honor, which they received one of
another, John 5 44. No^ do I know any reason why they should bear away the Bell
of Orthodoxisme, from their Brethren (their friendly Adversaries) unless it be
because they are the far better Ringers, ever and anon, upon occasion, and
without occasion, Pealing and sounding it in our Ears, that they are the
Orthodox And as the Jews of old made great treasure of the^ Templum Domini* and
thought themselves safe enough under the p^otection of it, ever and anon having
it in their mouths, and importunely urging it to stave off the ^h^e^^nings of
the Prophets of God against them (...) (^s God himself by his Prophet Jeremy,
expresses they d^votion in this kind, Jer* 7. 4.) The Temple of the Lord* the
Temple of the Lord the Temple of the Lord are th^se. So is the cove^t of
Orthodoxisme in sacred request with the men we speak of* when they have
invested themselves with it they are as in a Castle of War; there is no coming
^t them, no touching them with any Charge, or Imputation of Error, Heresy,
Blasphemy, or the like; ever and anon in their Writings, in their Preachings,
in their Discoursings, they are in effect saying, The Orthodox, the Orthodox,
the Orthodox are these, [pointing at, or meaning, themselves, and those that
are of their Judgment] When they have once given such an account of their
Faith, as to be admitted to commence orthodox, they are as secure from
infection in their Judgments, with any of those noisome and poisonous Creatures
Errors, Mistakes, Heresies, as a Room built, or seiled with Irish Oak, is from
the danger of any Spiders Webb. But (doubtless) there can no sufficient reason,
or ground, in equity, be given, why, Pendente lite, the matter being under so
sober and serious a dispute between them, and their Brethren of opposite
Judgment, as it is, which of them are the Oxthodox, they should antedate the
Issue and success of the Contest, and run away with the Crown upon their own
heads, before they have won it; yea, if standers by, and unpartial men may have
leave to judge, before they are like to win it. So, then let the word Orthodox
(in Mr. Hickmans Passage lately mentioned) be taken Orthodoxly, and signify
those who are (as I verily believe) Orthodox indeed in the Controversy he
speaks of) and then without controversy what he says is most true; That a
spirit of most Childish insultation seems to have possessed as many as have
lift up an English Pen against the Orthodox in the Quinquarticular
Controversy. Of the truth of the words in his sense of Orthodox, he gave but
one instance only and this strained and stretched beyond its Staple (as has
been proved.) But of the truth of them in my sense of the said word, Orthodox,
I have prevented him (somewhile since) with two instances, pregnant, and
uncontrolable of two men, both of them great Doctors, and men of Renown, famous
in the Congregation of the Contra-remonstrants, Doctor Kendall, and Doctor John
Owen, whom (in my Preface to my Triumviri, and in the Discourse it self) I have
produced as Witnesses (beyond exception) against themselves as to the Point of
the Delinquency (whereof Mr. Hickman speaks) I mean most Childish insultation:
and in this Preface have given him measure heaped up, with a third instance in
the same kind, of a person highly (I question not) esteemed by him, though not
so well known unto him, I mean, himself.

As for his Spartan Valor, if his Breast be enobled with it, (...) if so much,
as a spark of it warms his blood; I doubt not, but he will have an Opportunity
to show it, by that time Mr. Pierce has done with him.

Good Reader, I have detained thee overlong with an Apologeticall story of no
great consequence, in respect of my self, nor (happily) unto thee. Only my hope
is, that the person concerned in it with my self, may, through the blessing of
God upon his perusal and second thoughts of it, advance somewhat toward the
better understanding of himself. I call God for a Record upon my Soul, that I
bear him not the least Grain of any Grudge, or ill will; I love my self
better, then not to love him. And that I do not neglect, or despise him: I
think the pains I have now bestowed, to set my self straight in his thoughts,
will sufficiently witness for me.

Nay, upon the account of what I have heard concerning the Genius and St^ein of
his Book, I judge him a man commendably pregnant; and that, if he shall take
heed of wronging his strength by over-pragmatickness, and confidence in
undertakings, or his Conscience by unadvised clashing with the Truth, he may
make happy Earnings of serving his Generation.

Thus far Mr. Hickman.

Concerning the sequel of the Papers now in thy hand; the Argument, or subject
Matter of it, is an Essay or Endeavor to make,

1. A discovery of all the Causes from the first to the last, as far as they
are either held forth, or insinuated, in the Scriptures, of that mysterious and
weighty Business, Justification.

2. To assign unto every of these Causes (respectively) their appropriate
Interests, Interposures, and Contributions, in, and about, and toward this
great and happy state of a Sinner.

As there is no ground in Christian Religion, that has (I conceive) more
Springs in it of Questions and sublime Contemplations, then this of
Justification; so neither is there any about which the Holy Ghost (to my
observation) has employed so many Pens, especially in that variety of
Discourse, and enquiry. Intending only an Epitome, or Summary Comprisall, of
the more material Points, or Difficulties relating unto the Subject we speak
of; we had no opportunity to insist upon any particular at large. That which
was chiefly projected and desired by this little Piece, was to make diligent
and narrow search after the different co-operations of those numerous Causes,
which God has judgded meet to employ (ordinarily) according to their
respective Natures and Capacities of acting, in, and about the investing of a
Sinner with that great Blessedness of Justification, which he has contrived
and provided for him. That knowledge in Matters of Religion, which is so
commonly presumed to be in Professors of this Age, above the former, is rather
a Bulk, then a Body of Knowledge: and though it commonly passes under the name
of Knowledge, yet in propriety of speaking it is not so, but rather a confident
persuasion, or belief that things are so, or so, as they apprehend them to be.
Which belief, though it answers the reality and being of that which is
believed, and so as it were by accident, be true, yet it is not knowledge, nor
does it argue Knowledge, unless the Believer understands the Reason of what he
thus believes, or at least, a substantial Ground why he thus believes it.
Yea, in all matters of doubtful Disputation from the Scriptures; for men to
pretend, or allege the Scriptures as a Reason, or Ground of what they believe,
signifies little, unless they should give a good and substantial Reason to
prove that to be the true Sense and meaning of the Scriptures, which must
Countenance and confirm their Opinion for truth against their Adversary. Yea,
when two shall contend for their respective Opinions, being opposite the one
unto the other, from, o^ by, the Authority of the Scriptures, if neither of
them be able to give any competent account why they interpret, or understand
the Scriptures so, or so, in comportance with their Opinion (was sometimes it
happens) they do but beat the Air with contesting, and both their Opinions
after the Contest, are but in the same condition of uncertainty, or of being
rejected, in which they were before. It was a right Saying of the Philosopher,
Scire, est per causam scire, Knowledge, emphatically so called, is when the
Reason, or Cause of a Thing is known, as well as ^he thing it self. But the
Reason, or Ground of a man's Knowledge may be one thing, and Reason, or Cause of
the thing known, quite another. A clear apprehension of the former may produce
certainty of Knowledge, but it is the like apprehension of the latter, that
causes the more perfect and satisfactory Knowledge.

In this brief Survey of the large Field of Justification, I have endeavored
perspicuity all along, and I trust with as good success, as brevity is wont to
find, or well knows how to expect. The several Causes of Justification I have
caused to stand forth, one by one, (respectively) no one incumbring, or
intangling his Fellow, yet all conspiring and joining hand in hand to help a
poor Sinner on with his Royal Robe of Justification.

This ^iece, though small, may (I conceive) do Service to some, that in some
particulars, are at a loss in their Judgments, about the carriage and
contrivance of the Business of Justification in the Counsel of God.

If thou mee^e^t with any thing, which at first sight does not approve it self
unto thee, lay it aside, but do not cast it away, until thou have
considerately reviewed it the third time.

I have read of a Statuary, whose Workmanship looked better, and gave better
contentment, by time. It may be, now and then I have taken a step or two out of
the common Road; but it still has been for thy profit, not for any pleasure I
take in this kind of digression. For in matter of Doctrine I never leave the
way that is most occupied by pious, sober, and learned men, as far as I know
it, unless it be either to carry some stumbling stone out of it, or else to
fetch in somewhat to make it more smooth and pleasant. And I believe it would
soon double and trebble my Accommodations and Comforts in the World, if I could
make a Covenant with my Judgment and Conscience to say, Amen to all that is
sung for Orthodox.

-- Sed ut valeas multa dolenda feres.
A good Conscience will not live upon Sacrifices that cost men nothing.

But (good Reader) I have (I fear) committed a Soloecisme in manners, in
keeping thee thus long in discourse by the way. That the ensuing Lines shall to
any degree balance thy inconvenience, or repair thy loss, I cannot undertake:
in many Cases, it lies as much, or more, in the Patient, then in the Agent,
what the issue, or success of the Action shall be. And I doubt not, but that an
ingenious and prudent behavior toward them, in thy perusal of them will win
their heart unto thee, and teach them how to build thee up in thy most holy
Faith, and ^o to en ich thee with better Treasure, then of Silver, Gold, and
precious Stones.

(...) of him that justifies the Ungodly, that opens the Eyes of the Blind,
that raises them that are bowed down, that loves the Righteous, be upon thine
Understanding, Judgment, Conscience, and Memory, in the reading of this little
Piece, and upon all thy Conscientious Applications of thy self otherwise, unto
the things of thine eternal Peace.

May 31. 1659. Thine, Cordially addicted, Both to please Thee, And to displease
Thee, FOR THY GOOD, JOHN GOODWIN.

A brief EXPLICATION OF THE SEVERAL CAUSES OF Justification: As they were
mentioned in the Title Page, and are found in the Scriptures (as was showed in
the next Page preceding:) Together with their proper and distinct Interests in
that great Work, and respective Contributions toward the Raising and
Production of it.
GOD is the first and great Father and Founder How God justifies, or what he
contributeth toward Justification.
Sinner is translated by believing, and which the Scripture commonly terms,
Justification. That which God contributes toward this Estate or Condition, is;
1. Will, or a willingness, that such a thing, as the justification of a Sinner,
should be. 2. Contrivance. 3. Authority. 4 Assistance, or help for actual
attainment.

First, There was no necessity either of Justice, or Equity, much less of
Constraint, lying upon God, ever to permit such a thing, as the Justification
of a Sinner, to be, or such a state, to be so much as once heard, or thought of
in the world: Therefore he being at liberty in this case, whether he would
cause the Justification of a Creature that had sinned, to be numbered either
amongst the things that are, or amongst the things that are not, and there
being none but he, or without him, able to Umpire, or determine this great
Affair; Evident it is, that he gave his Consent unto it, and that without his
contribution of Will and good pleasure toward the being of it, it never had
had being but in his own understanding only, where the World of pure Possibles,
and Things that might have been, but never actually shall be, as well as the
World of Things that are, and of things that shall be, is s^ituated.

Secondly, God contributes to the said happy effect of the Sinners
Justification, contrivement also; and this 1. In respect of the nature or form
of the thing it self. 2. Of such things, or means, which render it fecible or
producible with the salvage of his own honor, as well in point of Wisdom, as
of Justice. 3. And lastly, In respect of such means by which it may be actually
attained by the Sinner.

1. The nature, or form of that Justification we speak of, consists in
remission of sins (as is more largely proved in the sequel of the discourse)
and this by divine contrivement and disposure only.

2. God projecteth the method, means, and carriage of all things requisite for
the orderly and regular fecibleness, or producibility of it; As, That his only
begotten Son should take flesh of a Virgin, and become man; That he should take
upon him the form of a Servant; That he should be delivered up, or left unto
the wills of sinful, wicked, and malicious men, and so be obnoxious to suffer
an ignominious and painful death; That having suffered death, he should lie
three Days and three Nights in the Grave, and then rise again (to omit
several other particulars in this kind) without which, could, or should it be
supposed, that he would, or might have justified a sinner; it would, or must
have been without such a Declaration, or manifestation, at least, of the Glory
both of his Justice and Wisdom therein, as with which he has now contrived it
by the method and means specified.

3. And lastly, God has projected likewise (and this with an eye too, to the
glory of both those Attributes now mentioned) the way, and means how the sinner
may come to interess himself in the blessed Estate of this Justification; as,
Viz. By hearing the Gospel preached, the Counsel of God concerning his
Justification opened, by understanding, considering, and believing it, with a
sound and living Faith, and such which is operative by love. The Scripture
gives a loud and distinct sound of all these things, and somewhat further of
them hereafter.

Thirdly, God contributeth yet further toward the justification of a sinner,
by his Sovereign Authority: For by means hereof, that Law, or Decree, according
to the Tenor, and by virtue of which, the sinner is justified (of which
somewhat more presently) becomes inviolable, uncontrollable, and not liable to
any over-rulement, or nullification, by any power or Authority whatsoever:
according to that of the Apostle Paul; It is God that justifies: who is he
that condemns? Romans 8. 33. Meaning, that there is no person, or creature
whatsoever, that has any authority or power to recind, or make invalid that
Act, or rather, that Law of God, wherein, and according unto which he
justifies a sinner, which nevertheless might be done, and so the justification
of the believing sinner fall to the ground, and his person, notwithstanding his
justification by God, be liable to condemnation, if the Authority of God, by
which he is justified, were subordinate, and not sovereign, or supreme.

4. And lastly, God contributeth toward the justification of a sinner, In actu
excercito, that real help and assistance by his Spirit, in conjunction with
other means of ^n external nature, by which the sinner is enabled to believe
in Jesus Christ, and this with a living and operative Faith, and so by virtue
of that Decree, or Law of his, concerning Justification, He that believes in
my Son Jesus Christ, is, or shall hereby be, justified, he comes to be
interessed in that state of blessedness (as David terms it) I mean,
Justification.

How the Grace of God contributeth toward the justification of a Sinner.
Attribute commonly known by that name (for sometimes the word signifies the
Act, or acting of this Attribute, and otherwhile the happy success, or effect
of this acting) contributeth toward the justification of a sinner, as it
effectually disposes him to show kindness and do good, where there is no
preceding Merit, nor any provocation, Motive, or Inducement administered, why he
should either show the one, or do the other; and more particularly, as it thus
disposes him, to give his only begotten Son, unto those, to whom he was no
ways indebted or engaged for any Courtesy, and to impute Faith for
Righteousness unto [that is, to justifie] a believing sinner, who has deserved
no favor or respects of love, either in this kind, or any other, from him; but
the contrary. In this respect and consideration, we are said to be Justified
freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 24 Tit. 3. 7. and to be saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2.
58. We are said to be justified freely, [or Gift-wise, (...)] by his grace, not
so much (I conceive) if at all, because we are justified upon the account of
the satisfaction made by Christ for our sins in his death: in this respect, we
may rather be said to be justified righteously, or justly, then freely, and by
Grace: But we are said to be justified freely by the Grace of God, because
Jesus Christ, by whom we are justified, and this justly, and righteously on
Gods part, was given freely and out of mere Grace by God, to bring this great
blessedness upon us, we having no ways, not only not obliged him to do any
such great and worthy thing for us, but on the other hand, wholly dis-obliged
him from us as his Creatures, and provoked him by our rebellion against him. So
that in strictness of notion, the Grace of God, by which we are said to be
freely justified, is not merely, or simply Grace, but in the Apostles
Emphaticall expression, (...), (Romans 5. 20) that is, Grace in her greatest
super-redundancy, and height of exaltation. To do good, where, or from whence,
none has been received, is the genuine property of Grace; to do good against
evil, or where, and from whence injury and unkindnesses have been received, is
the property of grace well advanced, and of considerable growth and strength in
the Soul: But to do the greatest good, which the Doer is capable of doing,
where, and from whence, he has received the greatest evil, which he is
capable of suffering, is the property of grace (...) (as it were) overgrown,
and magnifying it self above it self, in any limited or created perfection.
This is a true and lively Character of that grace, by, from, or through, which
(as the Scriture speaks) we are justified and saved. So then the grace of God
justifies us, as it moved and prevailed with him, first by the gift of Jesus
Christ, to put himself into a capacity of justifying us, as, or though, Sinners
and Offenders: and 2. By acting according to this capacity, to, and in, our
actual justification.

Thirdly Justification may be attributed to the Decree How the D^cree of Go^
works towords Justfication.
because, or as, this ratifieth and establishes it, according to the terms, on
which it is granted, and takes place. This is that, which makes Faith in
Jesus Christ available and effectual unto Justification, which gives virtue
and force unto it [I mean, unto Faith] for the production and raising of so
glorious and blessed an effect, as the justification [and consequently, the
salvation] of a Sinner is. This is the will [i. The pleasure, purpose, or
Decree] of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes
on him, may have everlasting life, [which includes his Justification* John 6.
40. By the way, these words in this passage, which sees the Son, do not
express any essential part of the Will, or Decree of God, concerning either
the justification, or salvation of a Sinner, but are inserted by Christ
occasionally only, viz. because the Jews, with whom he now reasoned, had the
corporeal or external sight of him, and yet believed not on him, v. 36.
without which he affirms unto them (in the place cited) that such a sight of
him would stand them in no stead, as to matter of justification, or salvation;
because the Will of God required of men, Faith in him, as well with the sight,
as without the sight of him, in order to the obtaining of this. For that the
corporeal beholding of Christ's person, is not necessary, by any Decree of God,
or otherwise, either for the justification, or salvation of men, is evident by
those words of Christ unto Thomas, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Joh. 20.
29. Now there is no blessedness [of man] without justification, Romans 4. 6. 7,
8. So then it is the Decree, purpose, will, or pleasure of God that gives being
unto justification, in that way wherein, and upon those terms whereon, it is
now obtained. Faith in Christ, considered in it self, and apart from the Decree
of God in that behalf, although it be a means, or condition, of the best and
most proper complexion, or consideration, for God to entertain, or pitch upon
in a Decree for justification, yet would it not be a proper, or sufficient
means to justify any man; because, in such a consideration (I mean, as
separated, or divided from the justifying Decree of God) as it has neither any
natural, nor moral dignity, or worth commensurable to so high and sacred an
effect, as Justification; so neither would, or could it have any Instituted, or
Superadded authority from any other hand whatsoever, whereby to carry, or
atchieve it: whereas, if it be meet to suppose, that the justifying Decree of
God, could, or would have joined it self, or taken into communion wi^h it self,
any other thing, habit, or act; as suppose, love, humility, patience, or what
ever, besides Faith in Christ, for the work of Justification; this, by virtue
of the sovereign Authority, or force of the divine Institution, or decree, in
conjunction with it, would have justified all those, in whom they had been
found. Those Ordinances, Vestments, Ceremonies, and Observations recorded and
described, Levit. 8. and elsewhere, as enjoined by God under the Law, for the
creation and consecration of Aaron and his Successors, together with the
inferior Priests of the Tribe of Levi, into their respective Offices of the
Leviticall Priesthood, were, simply and in themselves considered, very comely
and proper for the investiture and making of Priests of this Order, yet would
no use, or application of them, to any person, or persons, of what Tribe, or
Family soeve^, have made any Priest, to serve at Gods Altar, either with
acceptance unto him, or benefit unto the people, had there not a Divine
Institution, or Law from God, interceded for the authorizing, or validating of
these things, to the making, o^ constituting of such Priests: In which respect,
the Law is said to make men high Priests (Heb. 7. 28.) and consequently, may as
well be said to make Priests of the inferior Order likewise. In like manner,
though the^e be an aptitude in Faith in Christ, above any other Grace, or
qualification, for the justification of a Sinner; yet that which makes it
actually and effectually justifying, is the Decree, or Will of God in that
behalf. Yea, the death of Christ it self would not be justifying, as now it is,
did not the Will of God interpose for the authorizing of it in that kind;
according to what we read, Heb. 10. 10. By the which Will [viz. of God] we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. So
that the Offering, of it self, of the body of Jesus Christ, does not sanctify
[and by the same reason, does not justifie] men, but as appointed, or ordained
by the Will of God hereunto; or (to speak more warily, and properly) not
without the authoritative concurrence of the Will of God with it for the
exhibition of such a benefit, or blessing unto the World.

^ow, or what (...) Authori^ of God con^ibuteth to^ards Justi^ation.
said) sovereign and supreme, and so the act, award, and determination of it,
not obnoxious to any defeisance, check, or annulment, by any other Authority
whatsoever, contributes unto the justification of a sinner (I mean, unto the
Justification, which himself has contrived, and declared, for such, in his
word) full, and final, and irreversible ratification and establishment. This
is that which the Apostle clearly supposes, or implies, where he demands, Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? [i. e. Of those who believe,
as is evident] It is God that justifies; as if he should say: If it were any
other but God, who should justify them, although in the same way wherein God
now justifies them, yet might their Justification be repeatable, at least by
God, and further matter of accusation might be laid to their charge. But now
God being he that justifies them, and there being none above him, nor yet
equal unto him in Authority, the^e is no fear that their justification should
be obstructed, recinded, or made invalid by any whosoever; or that any further
Crime, or matter of guilt should be charged upon them, that should be of force
by any equitable Law whatsoever, or otherwise, to condemn them.

Christ, as God, may be said, to justify in all How Christ ^ustifieth.
those considerations, or respects, wherein Justification has been ascribed
unto God: yea, being one and the same God, in nature and essence with the
Father, he acts and does all the same things, in reference to the Creature,
in conjunctiou and communion with him.

Secondly, Being (...), God, and Man, or Man subsisting in the humane Nature
personally united to the Godhead, by the willing offering up of himself as a
Lamb without spot, in Sacrifice unto God the Father, he made Atonement for
Sinners, in such a sense, wherein the Scripture is to be understood, when it so
speaks, notwithstanding his Justice, and perfect hatred of sin; yea,
notwithstanding his threatening of Adam, and all his Posterity with death, in
case of his sinning. The death of a Person of that transcendent worth and
dignity, was in true esteem, and so judged by the un-erring understanding and
wisdom of God, a valuable and equitable consideration, why he should actually,
and without any other thing intervening, pardon the ^in of the world (as it is
called, Joh. 1. 29.) that is, the sin of Adam, as imputed, or communicated in
the guilt of it, unto all his Posterity, together with all the actual sins of
all such of his Posterity as should believe in him. To say that Christ by his
sufferings merited either the justification, or salvation, of those who should
believe in him, as it is no Scripture expression, so neither is it exegeticall,
or explicative of any Scripture expression, nor (as far as at present my memory
serves me) expressive of any Scripture notion: and however, it is too narrow
and scant an expression of that Grace of of God in the death of Christ, herein
commended by him both unto men and Angels; unless we shall exclude from this
Grace all Infants dying in Infancy, or before they are arrived at a capacity of
believing. And as it is not so proper to say, that the blood of Bulls and
Goats, etc. under the Law merited those Leviticall purgations, or
sanctifications, which yet they who were ceremonially unclean, obtained by
them; as to say, that they were a competent and sufficient satisfaction, and so
esteemed by God, for such uncleanness, and so dissolved the guilt contracted
by them; In like manner, it is more agreeable to Scripture, both notion, and
phrase, and to the nature of the thing it self, to say, that Christ, in, or by
his death, being so highly considerable, as it was, made, or gave, satisfaction
for the sins of men, and hereby made way for the pardon and remission of them
by God, then to say, that by his death he merited the pardon of these sins, or
the justification of a sinner. For, in propriety of speech, a person is not
said to merit any thing for another, but for himself only. When a man has
unjustly taken away any thing from another, or has any way injured him, his
friend, by giving a reasonable, or valuable consideration to the person injured
for the damage sustained by him, may properly be said to make satisfaction for
him, or for the wrong done by him; by reason whereof he is in equity free from
being impleaded, or moles^ed by Law, or otherwise, by him, to whom he had done
the wrong. But it is somewhat improper to say, that a man in this case by
making satisfaction for his friend, merited that freedom for him. So when a
man gives a price, or sum of money, for the ransom of a Captive, it is not
usual nor proper to say, that hereby he meriteth his liberty. A man is very
unproperly said to merit that which he purchases at a price, whether for
himself, or for another. Now that which Christ in, or by his death contributeth
toward the justification of a sinner, is frequently in the Scriptures
expressed under the notion of a purchase, of a price paid, of a ransom,
redemption, etc. but no where, of merit. -- And ye are not your own: for ye
are bought with a price [meaning, out of the hand and power, and from under the
guilt, of sin, by the blood of Jesus Christ, whose therefore you are by right
of purchase, to honor and serve him.] 1 Cor. 6. 20. See also the following
Chapter, v 23. with 2 Pet. 2. 1. So Mat 20. 28. and Mar. 10. 45. -- And to give
his life a ransom for many. So again, Who gave himself a ransom for all men,
1 Timothy 26. So also; Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. So Christ has redeemed us, etc. Gal. 3. 13. And have
redeemed us to God. And Revel 5. 9. see also Romans 3. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Ephesians. 1.
7. Col. 1. 14. Heb. 9. 12. etc. And besides, I do not see any reason why it may
not be as truly, and properly said, that God the Father, in giving his only
begotten Son out of his bosom, to dye for the justification of men (and
salvation thereupon) contributed by way of merit, toward their justification
and salvation, as Christ by dying. And verily, why that Act of God the Father
should not be reputed every whit as great in point of merit, in reference to
the great business of justification, as the Act of Christ in offering up of
himself by death in order thereunto, I apprehend not. Certain I am, that the
Scripture commends and sets it forth, upon the same, o^ as great, terms of
grace, honor, and admiration, as the other, Joh. 3, 16 Romans 8. 31, 32. Romans 5.
8. (To omit other places of like import.) Now of the two it is (I conceive)
less probable, and Gospel-like, that the respective contributions of the
Father, and the Son, toward justification, should be of the one and the same
kind, then of a different. Yet of the same kind they would be, if both should
contribute thereunto by way of merit. Nor do I see how any clear place will be
left for praise and thanks unto God the Father from persons justified, for
their justification, in case it may be said, that Christ properly merited their
justification. For to render or give unto a person, only that which in rigor,
or strictness of justice, either himself, or another has merited, or deserved
for him, especially where no occasion, or tentation is in the way to persuade
him to do otherwise, is scarce any matter of praise to him that does it, nor of
engagement unto thankfulness upon him, who receives only his own in such a
case. It is true, there is somewhat a^i^e consideration upon a valuable price
paid for that which is bought, or purchased. If a friend lays down a sum of
money for the purchase, of procurement of my liberty, and this fully
commensurable therewith, and according to agreement with him, of whom he is to
purchase it, I am thus far, or in this respect no great Debtor of thanks unto
him, who sets me at liberty upon such terms. But in case he from whom I am to
receive my liberty (if I ever enjoy it) being a prudent and just man, and
withal at liberty, to keep me in bondage for ever, what terms soever should be
offered for my ransom, and moreover shall be so principled, that in regard of
my foul misdemeanor, by which I became a Captive, he could not condescend to
grant my liberty, but upon terms highly material and considerable, in this
case (I say) I shall be a signal Debtor unto him for my liberty, if he shall so
far commiserate my misery, as to move any of his Friends, or Relations, to
stand by me in this my great Exigent, and to do, or suffer that for the
procurement of my liberty, upon which he can, and will willingly grant it, and
especially he being no ways engaged unto me by any service done by me, or
courtesy received from me.

Now this is the case between God the Father, and men, in the gracious business
of justification. First, He was at full liberty, men having sinned, whether
ever to have justified any person, or not, on what terms soever. Secondly,
Being by nature infinitely prudent and just, he could not judge it meet for
him, in case he should be willing, or inclinable to justify men, to do it,
otherwise then upon terms every ways becoming those his Attributes. Thirdly,
Such terms as these were not to be procured, or had, but only from Jesus
Christ, and him voluntarily submitting himself unto death for this end.
Fourthly, (and lastly) Jesus Christ, though willing both to do, and to suffer,
what ever he did in either kind, for the justification of men; yet would not
have undertaken the business, nor actually either done, or suffered, any thing
in order to their justification, had not the Father been willing to part with
him, yea, and actually sent him into the world with order and commission from
himself, both to do, and suffer, whatsoever should be requisite on his part
thereunto, Joh. 3. 16. and 12. 10. 18. 12. 44, 45. 49. In these respects
(besides others) the generation of men are most signally indebted unto God the
Father for their justification, notwithstanding a valuable consideration, or
price laid down for the procurement of it.

But concerning the word, It is not unlike but that in some of my former
writings, before I made ^ m ^e narrow search into the district import of the
word, I my self have used it in that ordinary notion*
Merit, since it is so generally used by Protestant Divines, and other learned
and worthy men, in their writings and discourses about justification, to
express the congruity, complete sufficiency, yea, and super-sufficiency, of the
doings, and sufferings of Christ, for the procuring of it, and this without any
inconvenience, as far as I know, occasioned thereby; I shall not contend for
the laying it aside, or censure in the least those that shall use it: only, I
conceive that in Points and Doctrins of so mysterious a nature, and so weighty
a consequence, as the Doctrine of justification is, it is safest and best for
edification, to use such terms, which do with greatest propriety and strictness
of notion, answer, and unsold the words, and phrases, wherein God himself has
in the Scriptures delivered his mind and counsel in such things unto us.

If it be here (Objection-wise) demanded; But if Christ made a full and
complete satisfaction by his death, for the sins of men, and hereby satisfied
the justice and wisdom of God, so that he cannot justly, or equitably, require
any thing further, either from men themselves, or from any other on their
behalf, in order to their discharge, absolution, or justification from their
sins, how, or upon what account does he still capitulate with men, about their
justification, imposing Faith upon them (a Faith working, or apt to work, by
love; yea, and works themselves too, according to the judgment of some; whose
words in this case are not guilty, if their sense be innocent) in the nature of
a condition, without the performance whereof no justification is to be had,
notwithstanding the satisfaction made by Christ for their sins? Or how is the
satisfaction made by Christ complete and full, if justification be not given
upon it, without the addition, or intervening of some qualification, or
performance in men? And if God having received full satisfaction from Christ in
his death, for the respective debts, or sins of men, should yet require
satisfaction at their hands also in punishment, for the same debt, whether they
believe in him, or no, should he not be unjust? Or is it consistent with
Justice to demand the same debt twice, or to exact a second satisfaction, when
one has been given already, and this every ways complete and full, and so
acknowledged by the Creditor and Receiver himself? I answer,

1. The compleatners, or fullness of Christ's satisfaction, is not to be o^
imated by the will, or counsel of God about the application of it, or actual
communication of the virtue, o^ benefit of it unto particular men, but by the
proportion which it beaneth unto the ^n, unto which it relates in the nature
of a p^i e, ransom, consideration, or satisfaction. If it be commensurable in
rational worth, or value unto these, i. If it be a matter, or thing of that
Nature, consequence, and consideration, that God may with the salvage, or
sufficient demonstration, of the glory of his Justice, or perfect hatred of
sin, wisdom, etc. pardon the sins and transgressions of men, without any thing
added thereunto, by way of satisfaction, or punishment, it is in reason to be
^udged a sufficient, or complete satisfaction, although, upon some other
account, he suspend the benefit, or actual application of it unto particular
men, upon reasonable requirements of them otherwise. In case a Prince, or
Nobleman, charitably and bountifully disposed, should intend the redemption of
a company of persons out of captivity, and in order hereunto, should freely
give unto him, under whom they are in bondage, and who has power to set them
at liberty, a sum of money, fully answerable, according to the usual rate in
such cases, to the liberty of these persons, but should withal desire of, or
covenant with, him, to whom he has given, or paid the said money, and who is
the present Lord of these Captives, that he should not actually discharge, or
set at liberty, any man of them, until they had tendered* or made a thankful
acknowledgment of his Grace and bounty toward them; In this case (I say) the
condition of acknowledgment required of these Captives, by their great
Benefactors before they are permitted actually to partake of the benefit of the
price of their redemption; does no ways argue any scantness, or insufficiency
in this price, but only declares the will and pleasure of him that ransometh
them concerning their behavior, before their actual redemption.

If it be here demanded; But what if any, or all the C p^ives in this case,
should so far forget themselves, or be neglective of their own welfare, as not
to tender, or make such an acknowledgment to their Benefactor, what becomes of
that money, or price laid down by him for their redemption? would it not argue
want of wisdom, o^ providence, in him that should lay down a vast sum of
money for the redemption of such persons, the far greater part of which he knew
beforehand would be never the better for it, nor accept of their liberty upon
such terms, as he meant to impose on them, in order thereunto?

I answer 1. (to the former of these demands) in case any, or all, the Captives
mentioned, should be so desperately careless of their own welfare, as not to
accept of their deliverance upon those equitable and easy terms, on which it
is offered them, and may be enjoyed by them, their Benefactor may
notwithstanding have consideration for his money, satisfactory unto him, as
viz. both the conscience and honor of his most worthy, and heroic Act, in
sparing no cost to being men out of misery and th^aldome. Nor does the
Scripture any where suspend the glorious and high contentment which God takes
in that transcendent Act of his Grace in the gift of his Son for the redemption
of the world, upon the Faith of those who believe on him by means thereof, or
upon the great benefit, which by means of their Faith, they actually receive
from it, but upon the intrinsecall and divine worth and adorableness of the Act
it self. Yea, the Scripture seems to make that great Act of Grace we speak of,
of one and the same consideration, or contentment unto* God, whethermen reap
benefit by it, or no. For we are unto God (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 15.)
the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. So
that Christ, i. His Grace vouchsafed unto the world by Christ, for their
salvation, is of the same, or like savor [sweet, and pleasing] unto God,
whether men accept it (and so are saved by it) or whether they reject it, and
perish notwithstanding it. It is true, upon another account God is highly
oftended with men* when they reject his Grace; as viz. Because herein they act
most foolishly, and irrationally, not because they diminish, or make any
breach, upon his contentment in vouchsafing such Grace unto them.

2. To the latter demand, whether it would not argue want of wisdom, or
providence, etc. I answer;

1. That it argues neither want of wisdom, or providence, in him that shall
part with a great sum of money for the ransom of many thousand Captives,
although he should know beforehand that the greater part would be never the
better for it, nor accept of their freedom upon the terms imposed on them, in
order thereunto, in case it be supposed that he knew that a considerable part
of them (however) would accept of the favor, to the unspeakable benefit of
their enlargement. Yea (as was lately argued) though he had fore-known that
none of them would have accepted their liberty upon the terms required of them,
yet had the honor, reputation, and conscience of such an Act, been a
reasonable compensation for the money disbursed. But

2. Such a demand as this is unproper to the case in hand. For it cannot be
truly said, that God fore-knew, or foresaw that the greater part of men would
reject his Grace in Christ, and so perish this notwithstanding, before this
Grace was given unto them at least in his unchangable counsel, purpose, and
decree. For his Decree of sending, or giving Christ for the tansome of the
world, was from before the world began, I mean, from eternity: and consequently
there could nothing precede, or be before it, especially in order of time, it
being a Rule of unquestionable truth, that In aeternis non est prius, aut
posterius. But,

2. To the first Objection, or Demand, I answer further; That Gods purpose, o^
design in the death of Christ, was not simply, or absolutely, either to
justify, or save, men by it, neither did he judge it agreeable to his wisdom
and righteousness so to do; but to do both the one, and the other
conditionally, and upon terms such as he judged meet to prescribe and impose
upon them for the obtaining of these great privileges and blessings by it. So
God loved the World (says our Savior himself) that he gave his only begotten
Son, [not, that all men, or that any man, simply and without any more ado] but,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life,
Joh. 3. 16. Now the Collation, Application, or actual bestowing of the fruits,
or benefits of the death of Christ, not depending so much upon the intrinsecall
worth, value, or satisfactoriness thereof, as upon the will and pleasure of
him, who voluntarily gave him to dye for the justification, and salvation of
men, and consequently had a right of liberty to make the terms for the
collation of these benefits, what he pleased, he cannot with any color of
reason be deemed unjust, in case he denies them unto those, who refuse, or
neglect to perform his terms, notwithstanding they were by Christ purchased for
them; that is, with a full and clear intent on his part, that they should have
possessed and enjoyed them, upon their believing. So that,

3* (And lastly, for this) When God constrains those who belive not, to pay
their own Debts, and to make satisfaction themselves for their sins, by being
eternally punished, he cannot be said to require, or take a double
satisfaction, or two satisfactions, for one and the same debt, although it be
true in a sense (viz. that lately declared) That Christ satisfied for them. For
that satisfaction which Christ made for the sins of any person who believes not
(I mean, who dies in unbelief) was never received, or accepted, by God in the
nature of an appropriate, particular, or actual satisfaction for their sins;
but only as a potentiall satisfaction; that is, as a thing of complete worth,
and value, enough to have made a particular and actual satisfaction even for
such a man's sins, as ^ell as for the sins of those who believe, and which he as
fully intended to accept for such a satisfaction on his behalf, in case he had
believed, which he might have done, as he did to accept it upon such terms for
them, or for their sins, who do believe.

If it be objected; But if Christ made satisfaction, for the sins of him, who
never believes, and God accepts it not as a satisfaction for their sins;
does not God dis-approve, or dis-allow, either Christ's doings, or his
intentions, or both. For if Christ in, or by his death, made, or intended to
make satisfaction for the sins of Unbelievers, and God refuses to accept this
satisfaction, or that which Christ intended for a satisfaction, for their sins,
does he not reject that, which Christ desired, and intended, that he should
accept?

To this, I answer, That an Answer (in effect) has been already given. For in
such a consideration, or sense, as Christ either desired, or intended, that his
death should be a satisfaction for the sins of Unbelievers, dying in unbelief,
does God the Father accept of it. Christ neither desired, nor intended to make
satisfaction by his death for the sins of Unbelievers, any otherwise, nor upon
any other terms, then that God the Father should upon the account thereof,
justify such persons from their sins, in case they should have believed: and
in this sense he does accept it as a satisfaction for them, being for the sake
thereof, most ready and willing, to pardon all the sins, and so to justify the
persons, of all men without exception, as well theirs who never will believe,
in case they should believe, as theirs, who shall believe, and be actually
justified thereupon. So that God, in causing, or compelling Unbelievers to
suffer, or to satisfy, for their sins, does not require, or exact, a second
satisfaction for them, after a former received; but only puts them upon payment
of their debt themselves, who despised his Grace in providing for them that,
which was indeed intended for the actual and real satisfaction hereof, upon
condition of their believing, but was never upon these terms accepted by him,
by reason of their nonperformance of the said Condition of believing.

How the active Obedience of Christ justifies.
6. What tho active Obedience of Christ contributeth Mosaicall Law, the Beast
that was to be offered in Sacrifice, to make any of those Leviticall
Expiations, was to be perfect, and without blemish; it was neither to be blind,
nor broken, nor maimed, nor having a Wen, nor seurvy, nor scabbed, not having
any thing superfluous nor any thing lacking in his parts, etc. If it had any of
these, or the like imperfections in it, it was not accepted. See Lev. 22. 21,
22, 23. Now that which the soundness, perfection, and freedom from blemish, in
the Legal Sacrifices, contributed toward their acceptance, and consequently,
toward the efficacy of their respective Attonements, or expiations, the same,
or the like in proportion, does the active Obedience of Christ contribute
toward the acceptance of his Sacrifice of himself, in order to the
efficaciousness hereof forth justification of sinners. This similitude, or
proportion is plainly taught and asserted by the Apostle Peter, where he says,
Forasmuch as ye know ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with
Silver, and Gold, from the vain conversation received by tradition from your
Fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot. [i. As well without any Natural Original deficiency, or
imperfection, signified in the word, blemish, as without any adventitious, or
actual defilement, intimated in the word, spot] 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. So John
Baptist looks toward the same Analogy, saying unto the people concerning
him, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29.
The Lamb of God, i. A Person highly acceptable with God, as being every ways
qualified with Innocence, Righteousness, Holiness, etc. and so meet by his
death, to make Atonement for the sin of the World. So then, as that which the
unblemishedness of the Beast for Sacrifice under the Law, exhibited toward
that Atonement which was made by the offering of it, was the meetness of this
offering of it for acceptance with God, and consequently for this acceptance it
self, in order to his pardoning, or passing by that ceremonial impurity, or
uncleanness, for which it was offered, In like manner, the active Obedience of
Christ, in conjunction with the absolute holiness and inward purity of his
person, rendered his death, or the Oblation of himself a Sacrifice, every ways
meet and worthy acceptance with God, and consequently, accepted with him, for
the expiation, or Atonement of the sins of all men.

If Christ had been so much as touched with the least tincture of defilement
with sin, he had not been a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, holy,
harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, etc. but rather after the order of
Aaron, who needed to offer Sacrifice for their own sins. Neither had he been in
any condition, or regular capacity to have made Atonement for the sins of
others, until he had first fully expiated his own. That the active Obedience
of Christ does not operate in, or about, or toward justification, in that way,
or notion, which some have conceived, as, viz. by an imputation of the
particular acts thereof (in the letter and formality of them) unto those that
believe; whereby they should be constituted, or made properly and formally
righteous, we have demonstrated at large in a just treatise upon that Subject,
where it is made good upon several accounts, that the said notion, has neither
countenance from the Scriptures, nor any tolerable consistency with the clearest
Principles of reason.

passive Obedience How the passive Obedience of Christ justifies.
of Christ, has in, or about justification, we have in like manner Briefly
intimated in our Fifth Section. It rendereth that great Act of God in the
justification of a sinner, every ways comely and honorable unto him, and
worthy of him, and consequently makes him most willing and free to it. The Holy
Ghost speaks plainly enough of that comeliness, which the sufferings of Christ
put upon the justification of a sinner by God, giving some intimation withal,
that unless this Act had by one means or other been made thus comely for him,
he would never have lift up his heart, or hand unto it. For it became him, for
whom are all things, and by whom are all things, [meaning God] in bringing many
Sons unto Glory, to consecrate, [or make perfect] the Captain of their
salvation through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. That meetness, or comeliness for God
(here spoken of) intending the salvation and glorification of many, to effect
it in noother way then by the sufferings of him, who was to be the Prince, or
Captain of their salvation, respects mainly, if not solely, his Act in
justifying them, in order to their salvation, and glorification. For otherwise
supposing them already justified, there needed more the life, then the death,
of Christ, to save them; according to that of the Apostle Paul: But God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed
for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him. For if when we were Enemies we were reconciled unto God by
the death of his Son; much more* being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. We see here, 1. That our justification is ascribed unto
the blood, or death of Christ: and 2. That our salvation *our justification, or
reconciliation unto God, presupposed] unto his life, i. Unto that power, which
is given unto him in that life, which now he lives in glory at the right hand
of the Father, to exercise for the saving of all those that believe in him.
Life frequently imports vigor, activity, liveliness of strength, or power, for
action* as death imports weakness and imbecility for action.

If you ask me, But how, or in what respect, does the passive Obedience, or
death of Christ, render the act of justification, as now it is exerted, or
performed by God, so comely, or honorable for him? Or how may we conceive,
that either it would have been uncomely, or less comely for him to have
appeared in it, in case his hand had not been strengthened by the death of
Christ unto it? Or does it not well enough become the great God to forgive sin
freely and without satisfaction?

I answer, 1. Whether we conceive the import of those words spoken by God unto
Adam, and in him, unto all his Posterity, being yet in his Loins, In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, either in the nature, or
notion of a dreadful threatening in case of disobedience, or of a most sacred,
and severe Law, to restrain sin, and disobedience (the difference, I confess,
is not much material, as far as at present I apprehend) it was no ways
honorable, or comely for God to suffer either the one, or the other, to be
trodden, or trampled under foot by the Creature to whom they were given,
without looking after them, or calling for some satisfactory account for the
contempt measured out unto them. It cannot reasonably be thought, but that God,
by the denunciation of such a threatening, or promulgation, and sanction of such
a Law, awakened and amused both Heaven and Earth, and raised great expectations
in both what the issue, or consequence would be. Now then, Adam, and his
Posterity, being (as was said) now in him, rising up in disobedience in the
very face (as it were) and presence of so terrible a threatening, if God should
have passed by, and made no words of this high mis-demeanour, he might seem,
either on the one hand to repent that he had so sorely threatened them, and
therefore now proceeded not to execution; or else on the other hand, that he
was content and willing enough to be neglected, or affronted by his Creature:
both which, would have been very uncomely and dishonorable unto him. Nor would
it have been of much more comely an interpretation, had he accepted any thing
of an inferior value, or less considerable, instead of a Compensation, or
satisfaction, and had not stood upon a just and full vindication of his
Sovereign Authority, his excellent Wisdom, his Righteousness, and Equity in
his proceedings with his Creature; the glory of all which were very injuriously
handled, and suffered deeply in Adams prevarication. So then, Adam, and his
mis-carrying with so high a hand of disobedience, there devolved a necessity
upon God, if he meant to glorify himself, like himself, and as God, either to
punish the whole brood of Transgressors, according to the full exigency of
their demerit, or (which is the same) according to the tenor and import of the
threatening, or else to find out some other person to suffer for them, whose
punishment, or sufferings might be altogether as considerable, and argue as
great respects to his Authority, Wisdom, and Righteousness, as the punishment
of Adam, and all that were now Delinquents in his Loins (i. His whole
Posterity, the second Adam only excepted) up to the line of their transgression
and guilt, would have done. And thus the Apostle (as we lately heard) lays it
down indefinitely and in the general, that if God meant to save and glorify
any number of Adams Posterity, it concerned him in point of glory to provide,
that he, who ever he should be, by whom they were to be saved, should suffer to
perfection, [i. Proportionably to what they ought to have suffered, whom he
intended to save by him] For this I conceive to be the sense and import of
these words; For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons unto glory, to perfect [or make perfect] the
Captain of their salvation through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. That Description, or
Periphrasis of God, For whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
importing his transcendent Sovereignty, and greatness, seems to imply, that
these were considerations that made it necessary, and comely for him, in case
he intended salvation to Adam* and his Posterity, to take that course, which
now he has taken for the effecting it, viz. To impose such sufferings upon
him, by whom it should, or was to be achieved, which might in a rational
estimation, answer the sufferings which they had deserved; and that had it been
any, but God, or had God been any, but himself, the omission of such exactness
of severity, or justice, in, or about the accomplishment of the Design, would
not have been so uncomly for them, as now (it seems) it would have been for God
to dispense with it, his Augustissimall and unparralleld Majesty and Greatness,
being (as has been said) considered. For it no ways at no hand, becomes him,
to whom the whole Creation, Heaven and Earth, with all the Hosts of them, stand
bound to do the deepest homage and service, and whose wisdom and power have so
gloriously quitted themselves in the beautiful Fabric of the Universe, and in
all the parts and parcels of it, either to confess himself, either unadvised,
or over-severe, in making a Law for the Nurture and Government of his Creature,
or to minister any occasion in the least unto his Creature, so to judge, or
conceive of him; which he should have done, had he taken a company of his
Creatures, who had despised and broken this Law, into his Bosom, yea, into
part and fellowship with himself in his own blessedness and glory, without a
just compensation for these transgressions, and fully commensurable, in one
kind or other, thereunto. Now there being no Creature, no person to be found
either in Heaven or in Earth, nor any to be framed, nor made by any
appropriate, or new Act of Creation (at least as far as the understandings of
men are well able to reach) capable of suffering upon the terms mentioned, in
regard of the unpreventible inconsiderableness of their beings (Comparatively)
and of their sufferings accordingly, and so not competent to make a just
satisfaction for the high misdemeanour, or provocation of so many; hence there
arose a necessity (a necessity, I mean, for Divine convenience, and a salvage
of Honor) either that the Son of God, being first put into a suffering
capacity, by being made flesh, should willingly undertake and perform this
suffering Service for the Transgressors, or otherwise that the Transgressors
themselves, from the first to the last, should have born their own sin, and
fallen under it, and have perished by it for ever.

2. Suppose we, that some Creature might have been* either found, or made; yea,
suppose we, that some man might have been made upon like terms with Adam, whose
sufferings might have amounted to a satisfactory consideration for Adams
transgression (together with all theirs, who sinned in him, and with him) yet
first, if he in one respect or other, had not really and truly descended from
Adam, as Christ did, the satisfaction made by him had not been so proper, or so
clearly salvant of the Glory of the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God in the
Threatening, or Law, mentioned, In that day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye the death, as that now made by the death of Christ. For Christ was not only
of the same nature with Adam, but also lineally, though not according to the
course of common propagation, descended from Adam (Luke 3. 23. compared with
verse. 38. and the Verses intermediate) In which respect, the threatening, or
penalty of the Law, In the day that thou eatest, etc. was inflicted upon him,
to whom the Law was given, though not upon his Person (personally considered)
but as subsisting, and having a Being, in that special Branch of his
Posterity, Christ, as he had a Being likewise in every other Member of this his
Posterity, even as they also, in a reciprocal consideration, had a being in
him, whilst as yet they actually were not. In this kind of Dialect, God kept
Covenant with Abraham, when he performed those Promises unto him, as subsisting
in his Posterity, or Seed, which yet he made unto him personally (unless we
shall say, which happily may be true, and proper enough, that this and such like
promises made unto Abraham, remain yet to be performed and made good unto him
personally, in the first Resurrection, and during the Reign of Christ, and of
the Saints on earth, for a thousand years*) Thus he promised unto him yet
personally subsisting, and present, that he would give him the Land of Canaan;
Arise, walk through the Land in the length of it, and in the breadth of it: for
I will give it unto thee (Genesis 13* 17.) So elsewere: And in thee shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed (Genesis 12. 3.) which yet was not verified in
him personally considered, but as subsisting in that most glorious and
flourishing Branch of his Posterity, Christ. In like manner, Christ assuming
the humane Nature, wherein he suffered, from one of Adams natural Race, and
consequently from Adam himself, though in an appropriate and supernatural way,
the penalty of the Law, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the
death, being inflicted upon Christ, may in a sense, and this not much remote
from that which is literal, o^ proper, be said to have been inflicted upon
Adam himself. The Apostle having (as we lately heard) affirmed, that it became
God in bringing [i. pu posing, or designing, and accordingly attempting to
being many Sons, [as viz. His Son Adam, Luk 3. 38. and all his Sons, which were
many, and who, by reason of their descent from Adam, may properly enough be
termed the Sons of God also, the Scripture frequently giving the appellation
of Sons, or Children, to all lineally descending from the same Progenitors]
unto glory, to consecrate for so the word (...), very often signifies ot to
make perfect [i. Completely to qualifie] the Captain of their salvation [Christ
that was to procure their deliverance from death, by making Atonement for
them] through sufferings [proportionable to so great ^n Atchievement] and
consequently, to put him into a capacity of suffering, by investing him with
the humane Nature (as is plainly laid down, v. 14.) the Apostle (I say) having
asserted this* he gives this account of it in the words following: For both he
that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one; meaning, that
the one, and the other, are both of one and the same Original, or Descent; as
viz. From God by the Line of Adam, and likewise of one and the same nature, or
blood (as Act. 17. 26. And has made of one blood all Nations of men.) And
withal, that it was meet that thus it should be for conformity sake unto the
Leviticall Type, where the high Priest, and those that were Legally purified,
or sanctified by him, were both of one and the same nature, and likewise
descended from one and the same Progenitors.

2. It was very agreeable both to the goodness and wisdom of God, that he, who
by his appointment, and at his instance, should serve Adam and his posterity,
in so arduous and difficult an undertaking, as by his own death to re-instate
them in a condition of life and peace, should be satisfied with, and enjoy this
sore travail of his Soul, and not sink, or be wholly crushed under it: and
consequently that he should not only suffer death, but overcome death, or
(which is the same) be raised again from the dead, that so he might be capable
of that great recompense of Reward, which so transcendent a Service both unto
God, and men, well deserved. Upon this account also, the Lord Jesus Christ was
the only person, either in actual being, or in possibility of being, that was
accomplished, or meetly qualified for that great undertaking, of raising up the
Tabernacle of Adam, which was fallen, and of saving that which was lost. For
were it granted, or supposed, which yet I cannot encourage any man to suppose,
that some Creature might have been found, or else made, so holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separate from sinners, the shedding of whose blood, or whose
death, for Adam, and his posterity, might have been so considerable in the
sight of God, as that he could have judged it competently salvant of the glory
of his wisdom, and of the awfulness, and dread of his Sovereignty, to have
remitted the transgression of Adam, and his, upon the account thereof, yet is
it no ways probable, that the considerableness, or worth of this Sacrifice,
would, or could have ab^unded so high above the purchase, or procurement of the
redemption of Adam, and his posterity, as to in-title, or to inright him that
should have offered it, to a glorious Resurrection also, such as was meet for
him, that had been, the Author of salvation to a lost World. And if the Glory
wherein Christ appeared upon Tabor, was so exceeding great, that it only became
the only begotten Son of God, being a Garment too above measure rich for any
person to wear, but the only Son of the King of Kings (to which sense many of
the Expositors carry that of the Evangelist, Joh. 1. 14) much more would such a
transcendency in Glory, wherewith God has judged it meet to invest and
dignifie him, that is now the Savior of the World; As the making him higher
then the Heavens, placing him at his own right hand, giving him a Name above
every Name that is named, etc. have been vastly disproportionable to the Line
of any mere created Being whatsoever. And yet the Apostle plainly declares,
that such an high Priest became us; [i. Was necessary for us to have, in
respect of those high and vast Concernments, which were to pass through his
hands, and to be transacted by him] who (amongst other glorious Prerogatives)
should be made higher then the Heavens, Heb. 7. 26. In these Considerations
(and happily in some others like unto them) the contributions of the passive
Obedience and Sufferings of Christ, were soveraignly necessary to render the
high transaction, or dispensation of God, the justification of sinners, worthy
of him, and of a regular and clear consistence with his Glory. As for the
Tenent of those, who resolve this great Act, or Dispensation of God we speak of
(I mean, Justification) partly into the Sovereignty of his Greatness, or
Authority, and partly into the abundance of his Grace, and Goodness, and
liberty of his Will, and partly into the Obedience, and regular Conversation of
men themselves, excluding the death of Christ from any part, or fellowship
therein (at least by way of Atonement, or satisfaction for sin) I conceive it
to be broadly inconsistent with the tenor and purport of the Scriptures in
places and passages without number.

8. The Resurrection, or raising of Christ from the dead, How the Resurrection
of Christ from the dead justifies.
upon it) advances the business of Justification, by the assurance given hereby
from God unto the Souls and Consciences of men, that he is well a paid, and
fully satisfied concerning that great Debt of the sin of the World, the
discharge whereof was undertaken by Christ in his death; hereby encouraging
men, who had incurred his displeasure by sinning, to believe in him accordingly,
for their justification. This is the express Doctrine of the Apostle Peter,:
Who verily was foreordained (speaking of Christ) before the foundation of the
World, but was manifested in these last times for you, who by him do believe in
God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him Glory, that your Faith and
hope might be in God, [and consequently, that you might be found, or put into,
a state of justification (without which, Faith, and hope in God were little
available) 1 Pet. 1. 20. And in this consideration (doubtless) it was that the
Apostle Paul affirmed, Christ to be raised again for our justification. Who was
(says he, speaking of Christ) delivered [viz. unto death] for our sins, and
was raised again for our justification, (Rom, 4. 25.) meaning, that he was
raised again from the dead: [including in his Resurrection, by a kind of
Synecdoche, the great Glory and Dignity given him by God upon it] that hereby a
rational way might be made for sinners to believe in him, or in God, [for the
Gospel indifferently uses the one expression, and the other, to the same
effect] in order to their justification. Whilst the Surety, o^ he that has
undertaken the payment of a Debt, is kept in Prison, there is no likelihood
that the debt is paid, or the Creditor satisfied. And upon this ground the
Apostle Paul reasons first thus: But if Christ be not risen, then is our
Preaching vain, and your Faith is also vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14. And again verse. 17.
And if Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain: ye are yet in your sins;
Meaning, that they could have no reasonable ground to believe that they were
discharged, or acquitted by God from the Debt, or guilt, of their sins by means
of the death of Christ, if he should be detained in the Prison of Death (the
Grave) until now, and not have been raised again, and set at liberty. So then
the rising again, or rather the raising again, of Christ from the dead by God
the Father, justifies believing sinners (as it were) argumentatively, and as
exhibiting a rational ground unto them, whereon to build their Faith, of a
full and perfect Atonement made by Christ in his death for them, or for their
sins; by which Faith, according unto, and by virtue of, that Promise made, or
the Law enacted by God, in that behalf, they come to be justified.

Isaiah brings in God the Father, How the knowledge of Christ justifies.
speaking thus of his Son Christ: By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant
justify many: for he shall bear their Iniquities, Isa. 53. 11. That the
Particle, or Pronoun, His, is here to be taken objectively, not subjectively (a
construction frequent in Scripture) is (I presume) the award of every man's
Understanding. So that by his knowledge, [the knowledge of Christ] is meant the
knowledge of himself, which he shall propagate in the World by the Ministry of
the Gospel, and by means of this knowledge of him many shall be justified;
according to that of the Apostle; We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of
the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but
by the Faith of Jesus Christ even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the Faith of Christ, [i. By Christ believed on] as he
explains himself in the verse next following; But if whilst we seek to be
justified by Christ, etc. (Whence by the way it may be observed, that to be
justified by Christ, and by Faith, or believing in Christ, is of one and the
same import) So then, the knowledge of Christ is, or may be said, to justify
men, in somewhat a remote sense; viz. As it is a ground of encouragement unto
them to believe on him; by which believing they are immediately justified.

10. Men are said in Scripture, as well to be Justified, as by the Spirit of
God, and this as Justification is How the Spirit of God is, or may be say^ to
justify men.
distinguished from Sanctification. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Some Exposito^s indeed understand the word (...), ye were
justified, not of Justification properly so called, or which stands in
remission of sins, but of such a justification, which consists in a progress,
or proficiency in Righteousness, or in the profession and practice of
Christianity. For the justification of which Exposition, they plead the
exigency of the order, or gradation in the Text it self, as also the like use,
or signification of the word (...), in that of Apocal. 22. 11. (...), Let him
that is righteous [or just] be justified still. i. (As the Expositers we speak
of interpret) Let him increase and make forward in ways of righteousness. It
must be acknowledged, that to grow in grace and proceed in holiness and
righteousness from day to day may be called a man's justification in a
declarative, or arguitive sense, viz. As they argue, or declare a man to be a
justified person, and his Faith to be of the right kind, a living and growing
Faith: yea, they may be termed a man's justification, as they are just matter of
his app^obation, and commendation, which in many cases are used in a sense
parallel to that of the word Justification, as it is used sometimes. But the
Justification, which is the S^bject of our present Discourse, does not consist
in any Action, one, or more, nor in any Quality, one, or more; but rather in a
state, or condition, viz. Such whereinto a person is translated, or brought by
the pardon of his sins* or sentence of absolution awarded by God. Nor need we
take the word Justification in the Scripture lately cited (1 Cor. 6. 11.) in
any other sense but this. For Justification (in this sense) may be asc^ibed to
the Holy Ghost, as he has a special and appropriate hand in raising the work
of Faith, by which men are thus justified, in the hearts of those, who do
believe: in which respect, Faith is registered by the Apostle Paul, amongst the
fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. and by his Fellow Apostle Peter, they who
believe are said to obey the truth (speaking of the obediency of Faith to the
Gospel) through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 22. and Act. 18. 27. The Christians in
Ach^ia are said to have believed through grace, i Through the grace of God, in
his vouchsafement of his Spirit unto them, by whom they were enabled to
believe, yea, and actually believed. Now then (according to the known Maxim,
or Principle in reason, Quod est causa causae, est causa causati, That which is
the Cause of any Cause, producing an Effect, is the cause of the Effect it
self, as well as of the Cause producing it) Faith being the cause, or means of
Justification, and the Spirit the cause of Faith, Justification may as truly,
and not much less properly, be attributed unto the Spirit, as unto Faith.

Faith justifies, is the constant assertion of How Faith justifies.
the Scripture, and the Architectonicall Doctrine of the Gospel. Therefore being
justified by Faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Again, Therefore we
conclude that a man is justified by Faith without the Works of the Law, Romans 3.
28. Yet once more (to spare Citations in a case so generally known) We, who are
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, Knowing that a man is not
justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law, etc. Gal. 2. 15, 16. By the way, upon
occasion of these (with many the like passages in the New Testament, wherein
Justification by Faith is, (...), expressly affirmed) I cannot but mention my
dislike of their strein in teaching, who lay down and deliver it to the people
for a Doctrine, positively and plainly; that men are not justified by Faith, or
by believing. Doubtless it is not convenient, or comely, positively to deliver,
or assert that for a Doctrine of Truth, which is so diametrally opposite to the
frequent, clear, and express words of the Scripture. If there be a limited
sense, to be put upon such passages, wherein a Truth is commonly, and from
place to place held forth in the Scriptures, this may conveniently and timously
enough be done in the Explication or Opening of the Doctrine: But I judge it
very incongruous for any Minister of the Gospel to set up a Doctrine as it were
in defiance of, or in Contest against any thing so frequently, and so directly
in terminis affirmed in the Scriptures, as Justification by Faith. And
(doubtless) men need not be at all tender, or afraid, to deliver this
positively for a Doctrine of Evangelical Truth, that men are justified by
Faith, yea or by Faith alone, if they do but declare or signify withal 1.
What the Scripture means by that Justification, which it ascribes unto Faith.
2 What it means by that Faith unto which it ascribes Justification. For 1.
that Justification, which the Scripture attributes unto Faith, is precisely
that which consists in Remission of sins, as the Apostle plainly teaches,
Romans 3. 25. but more largely, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. (to omit other
places.) Now certain it is, that no kind of works whatsoever, enjoined in the
Moral Law, have any thing at all, little or much, to do, about Remission of
Sins, or in the procurement or obtaining of it. For in case a man should
transgress the Law, or sin, only once, and this in the lightest manner, and
should for ten thousand years together afterward, with all possible
exactness, observe and keep this Law, yet this long Tract or Series of
Obedience, or good Works, would not make his Atonement for that Sin, nor bring
him off from the Guilt of it with Peace and Safety. The reason is signified by
the Apostle, Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. The
Wisdom and Righteousness of God did not judge it reasonable, or meet, that
the payment of one Debt by the Creature, though amounting to never so great a
Sum, should satisfy for the Non-payment of another. Now the most exact
Obedience that can be performed or yielded unto the Law of God by any Creature,
whilst it has any being, is but a debt due from this Creature unto God:
Therefore no Obedience in this kind can satisfy for, or atone* either in
whole, or in part, the least Disobedience or Transgression. So that
Justification from sin (as the Scripture phrase is, Act. 13. 39.) i. which
stands in Remision of sins, cannot be purchased or procured, but by the Death
or Bloodshed of him, that should undertake the Redemption of Sinners. Only God
was pleased to decree, or make this for a Law (which the Apostle calls, the
Law of Faith, Rom* 3. 27.) that Faith, or believing in him through Christ,
should interess men in the benefit or blessing of the Death and Bloodshed of
Christ, i. in that Remission of Sins which was purchased by his Death. And in
this consideration Faith justifies, viz. by virtue of the Sovereign Authority
of that most Gracious Decree, or Law of God, wherein he has said, or decreed,
that it shall entitle men unto, or in-right them in, part and fellowship of
that benefit of the Death of Christ, which consists in Forgiveness of Sins;
or (which comes much to the same) as it is a Qualification, or condition
ordained, covenanted, or appointed by God to bring upon those, in whom it shall
be found, the great Blessing of that Pardon of Sin, which Christ has obtained
for Men by his Blood. And because God has not passed any such Decree, nor made
any such Law, concerning good works, as viz. that these shall bring men into
Communion of the benefit of Remission of Sins purchased by the Death of Christ*
therefore they have nothing to do to justify men in this notion, or sense, of
the word, Justification. If by Justification, we mean approbation,
commendation, acquitting from blame, or the like, (in which sense also the word
is frequently used in the Scriptures) See Job 11. 2 3^. 2. 33. 32. Isa. 43. 9.
^6. Isa. 45* 25 Jer. 3* 11. Ezekiel. 16. 5^, 52. Luke 16. 15. 18. 14. 1 Timothy 3.
16. Jam. 2. 21, 24, 25.
Good Works are proper and necess ry thus to justify us both in the sight of
God and Men; only with this Explication or Proviso, viz. that men live to meet
with Opportunities for the doing of such works, after their true believing. For
otherwise, if the case should so happen, that a true Believer should be taken
away by Death, the next moment to that in which he first believed, it is not to
be thought but that he should die, not simply with his sins pardoned, but under
the approbation of God also. Therefore Good Works, in actu exercito (as the
Schoolmen speak) or actually performed, are not absolutely, universally, or in
every case that may possibly happen, necessary, no not to that Justification it
self, which simpathizeth (as has been said) in import with Approbation,
Commendation, Vindication from blame imputed, or the like. It is true, in actu
signato, or as they are Radically, Seminally, or Vertually included in that
Faith which justifies by Remission of sins (of which more presently) so they
are universally, and in all cases possible, if we speak of persons capable by
Years and Discretion of Believing, necessary thereunto. And God who accepts
the Will for the Deed, when men want opportunity or means, for Action, looks
upon those good Works, which are conceived in the Womb of a true and unfeigned
Faith, as actually performed and done, when such a Faith wants means, time, or
opportunity to bring forth. In this notion our Savior himself must be
understood to speak, at least in reference unto many of those, to whom he
speaks, if he be conceived to speak unto all standing on his right hand
(which I judge to be the more rational to suppose) Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Come ye
Blessed of my Father -- For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a Stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and
ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came
unto me. Doubtless some, yea a considerable party, of those, to whom the Lord
Christ will express himself thus in that Great Day, will be such, who had been
poor in the days of their Flesh, and afflicted, and stood in need of being
relieved by their Christian Brethren, better accommodated in the World then
they, and in whose relief Christ will acknowledge himself relieved, v. 40.
Therefore such as these had not been in a condition or capacity to minister
actually unto the wants and necessities of other poor Christians in those
respective Supplies and Accommodations here specified: and yet we find
(according to our late supposition) that Christ gives the same testimony unto
them for these services of Charity, which he gives unto those that had actually
performed them. His meaning then must be, that even these poor distressed
Saints, who had not wherewith either to cloth the naked, or to give
entertainment unto Strangers, actually, yet had both one and other the same
works and services of Christian commiseration and charity here mentioned, in
the Bowels of the same kind of Faith, out of which they actually proceeded
from their better World-provided Brethren, and were performed by them But this
occasionally here, and by the way, for the better Explication of that
Justification, which the Scripture so constantly, (as we have heard) ascribes
unto Faith.

2. Concerning that Faith, unto which the Justification mentioned, is ascribed,
the Scripture describes it with much variety in respect of its object.
Sometimes it calls it a Believing God, Romans 4. 3. Jam. 2. 23* Sometimes a
Believing on God, Joh. 12, 44. Sometimes a believing in God, or in the Lord,
Act. 16. 34. Joh. 14. ^. Act. 9. 42. Once it is called, the Faith of the
operation of God, who raised Christ from the dead, Col. 2. 12. Sometimes a
believing on Christ, or, on the Son of God, or on the Lord, Act. 11. 17. Joh.
3. 18 and 12. 37. 1 John 5 10. (besides many other places) Sometimes again it
is called a believing in Christ. Joh 3. 15 and so, in Jesus, Romans 3. 26 (and
often elsewhere) Otherwhile it is expressed, by believing Christ, or the Son,
Joh. 3. 36. Sometimes, by a believing that Christ is Christ, the Son of God
that was to come into the World, Joh. 11. 27. and again a believing that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, Act. 8. 37. See also Joh. 8. 24. and again, Joh. 11.
47. Sometimes it is called, a believing in Christ's name, Joh. 1. 12. and Joh.
2. 23. and Joh. 3. 18. It is very possible that yet there may be in the
Scriptures a greater variety of Denominations or Expressions of that Faith,
which justifies, in reference to its object, then that now represented. But
all these that have been mentioned (and I doubt nor, but those others also
supernumerary unto these, if any such there be) are of an easy and ready
reducement into one and the same notion and import. But that distinguishing
character (one, or more) of the justifying Faith, which we are at present
enquiring after, respects not the Object, but the Intrinsic nature or
complexion of it. The Scripture, in reference hereunto, sometime describes it
to be a believing in the heart, Romans 10. 9. Other while, a believing with the
heart, Romans 10. 10. Sometimes again, a believing with all the heart, Act. 8.
37. It is twice called, a Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 5. The Faith
of a spurious kind, and which differs in nature, worth, and value from it, is
termed (...), a dead Faith, Jam* 2. 17. 20. 26. and by consequence the true
Faith which justifies, must be understood to be a living Faith. But the most
appropriate nature of this Faith, or the property of it, which is most
considerable, and which indeed (upon the matter) includes all the other now
mentioned, and most emphatically differenceth it from all other kinds of
Faith, which want the Seal of God to make them justifying, is that declared and
asserted by the Apostle Paul, Gal. 5. 6 where the Holy Ghost guided his Pen to
these words For in Jesus Christ [i. e. in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and by
the tenor, and import of the Gospell] neither Circumcision avails any thing
[viz. toward any man's Justification before God] nor uncircumcision, but Faith
(...), effectually operative, or thoroughly working by love. His meaning is,
that such a Faith in God, which is raised, or wrought in a man by means of
Jesus Christ as given by God unto men for a Savior, and which, withal is
spiritfull, lively and active in provoking the Soul in which it resides, to the
love of God and Men, and to ways and works suitable to such an affection, is
the only thing or means designed, authorized and appointed by God to bring men
into part and fellowship of that Justification, or Remission of sins, which
has been purchased or procured by the death of Jesus Christ* for men. A Faith
of this Genius, temper and complexion, borrows no aid, help or assistance
from any of her children (I mean from any of those good works, which proceed
from her) for or toward that justifying of men with that Justification, which
stands in Remission of Sins: she is by virtue of that authority derived unto
her by God, self-sufficient to give this great and happy investiture unto men;
yea should she die before she had opportunity to bring forth, she would do that
worthy service to him that had conceived her. It is true, as concerning that
Justification, of which the Apostle James speaks so much in his second Chapter,
which is a Justification of a person testified, declared, published, or made
known, the Faith we speak of stands in need of the help and Cooperation (as
the same Apostle there speaks v. 22.) of her Children. God himself will not
report any man justified (I mean, any man capable of Good works) nor would he
have any man (of this capacity) judged or reputed by others a justified person,
who has not justified or commended his Faith by such works. But this by the
way to vindicate and clear the Interest of Faith in the great business of
Justification, and to sever it from that of Works, not more contended for, then
confounded with it, by some.

To conclude this Section; The virtue or power, by which Faith justifies, it
receives from the designation, ordinance, appointment, or Decree of God: The
manner how it justifies, is by the giving of men Interest or part in the great
benefit of Remission of sins purchased by Christ, according to the tenor of
Gods Ordinance or Decree in that behalf. They who conceive or teach that Faith
justifies as it is an Instrument receiving Christ's righteousness, or Christ
himself, unadvisedly stamble at that Popish notion (as it is frequently charged
upon men of that persuasion, by Protestant Writers) which places the
justifying nature or virtue of Faith in somewhat, in some worth that is
essential and intrinsic to it. For evident it is, that there is nothing more
inward or essential unto Faith, then the receiving of Christ, or Christ's
Righteousness, this being the very nature and substance of it. Whereas the
Ordinance, Will, or Decree of God, which investeth Faith, or the receiving of
Christ, with the great privilege or power of justifying men, is apparently
extrinsecal and extra-essential to it, and so ministers no occasion in the
least unto Faith to boast of any excellency or considerablenesse of worth in it
self, but resolves that which is of that high and Sacred concernment in it unto
men, as viz. to justify and to save them, into the Grace and good pleasure of
God. But I have given an account of my judgment touching this point somewhat
more at large elsewhere. And this at present may serve to clear the Interest of
Faith in, or about Justification, and to show particularly and distinctly what
part it acts in the Investiture of men, who have sinned, with that
Blessedness.

12. Concerning Repentance, that it also is no Stranger How, or in what
respect, Repentance, is, or may be said, to justify.
very material employment or part assigned unto it by God about the enstating of
sinners therein, is the frequent and distinct voice of the Scriptures. Repent
ye therefore (says Peter unto the Jews, Act 3. 19.) and be converted, that
your sins may be bloued out etc. It is said of John, that he baptized in the
Wilderness, and preached the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins,
Mar. 1. 4. I suppose the great and blessed effect here mentioned,
Justification, or Remission of sins, is not intended by the Evangelist as the
effect of Baptism, either only, or so much (if at all) but rather of
Repentance: And that Baptism is therefore called, the Baptism of Repentance
for, etc. (if Repentance it self be not here rather termed, metaphorically, a
Baptism, i. e. a washing or cleansing a man's self from the defilement of sin,
but if this be not probable) Baptism (I say) may be called, the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of sins, because it is a Sacramental Pledge or
Ordinance of God vouchsafed unto the Christian World, to insure Remission of
sins upon Repentance, in such a character or form of speaking, as that of the
Prophet Elisha upon the shooting of an Arrow by the King of Israel as he was
directed by this Prophet; And he said, the Arrow of the Lords deliverance, and
the Arrow of deliverance from Syria; meaning, that the Kings shooting the Arrow
by order from God signified unto him by the Prophet, was a confirmatory sign
unto him, and so intended by God, that he and his People should be delivered
out of the hand of their Enemies the Syrians, 2 King. 13. 17. Of the like
construction is that of Peter to his new Converts, Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins, etc.
Act. 2. 38. The coupling of Remission of sins so close with Repentance, as is
found, Luke 24. 47. and Act. 5* 31. is (I conceive a pregnant Argument that the
latter has an indispensable Interest in procuring the former. The tenor of
the former of these Texts, is this. And [Christ] said unto them, thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the Dead the
third day: And that Repentance and Remission of Sins, should be preached in his
Name among all Nations, etc. Of the latter, this: Him has God exalted with his
right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give REPENTANCE unto Israel,
and FORGIVENESS OF SINS. Upon the same account likewise it was, that those
Christian Jews, Act. 11. 18. termed that Repentance which they concluded from
Peter's relation, that God had granted unto the Gentiles a Repentance unto life
[meaning, unto Justification, or, Forgiveness of Sins, which the Apostle Paul
calls, the justification of life, Romans 5. 18. that is, a Justification, which
restores a Sinner unto Life, i. e. unto a Right, Title, and Capacity of Eternal
Life, who before was under a sentence of Condemnation, and so dead in Law.

So then the Questionis, how Repentance may be conceived to operate toward
Justification, or what it contributeth thereunto. I answer,

1. In the General, it seems to be joined in the same Commission with Faith,
and to be insisted upon, and required by God in the nature of a Condition, or
qualification, to render men meet for so sacred an Investiture, or Privilege,
as Justification, or, Remission of sins. And it is matter of ready observation,
that the Scripture makes the like great and precious Promises unto the one,
and unto the other; yea and threatens the want of the one, and of the other,
with the same severe and terrible Judgments. This matter being so well known,
we shall not need Quotation-proofs. Yea,

2. There seems to be a kind of a mutual or reciprocal Involution between
Repentance, and Faith; not such as is between ordinary causes, and their
effects, but between such causes, and effects, which, in different
considerations and respects, are mutually both causes, and effects, the the one
unto the other. Repentance, considered in the initiatory, or imperfect work of
it, comprehends Faith in it, as Causes (especially Moral Causes) their Effects,
i. e. dispositively, seminally, vertually, and the like. Again, Faith being
brought into the Soul, by the opportunity of such a Repentance, as a form into
matter disposed, or prepared, carries on that Repentance to greater perfection,
by means whereof, whilst it was yet in its Minority, it self was furthered in
its being. So that as Faith was dispositively, or preparative-wise in
Repentance, whilst Repentance was imperfect; So is Repentance perfectively, or
in respect of its consummation, in Faith. The Scripture speaks evidently of a
Repentance precedaneous unto Faith; yea and seems to assert a necessity of the
precedence of it, in order unto Faith. And ye (says the Lord Christ to the
chief Priests, and Elders of the Jews) when ye had seen it, repented not
afterward, that ye might believe him (speaking of John's testimony concerning
him, as that he was the true Messiah, and Savior of the World) Mat. 21. 32. So
the Apostle Paul advises Timothy to instruct in meekness those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will [or rather, shall] give them Repentance to
the acknowledgement of the truth Tim. 2. 25.
, [i. e. a Repentance, which shall dispose, or put them into an immediate
capacity to believe the truth of the Gospel. As on the contrary our Savior
expostulates thus with the Jews: How can ye believe, who receive Honor one of
another (Joh. 5. 44.) clearly implying that there was a necessity lying upon
them to repent of that their ambitious and self-seeking humor, to put them into
a regular or hopeful capacity of Believing. Thus then we see that, according
to the Scriptures, there is a Repentance, which is an Harbinger or Way-preparer
unto Faith: In respect whereof, Faith may be said to be dispositively (as has
been said) and by way of preparation, in Repentance. But this Repentance,
notwithstanding the great service it does unto men in accommodating their way
toward believing, yea and proceeds also from the Grace of God, and is to a
degree and in its measure accepted with him, in whomsoever it is found, yet is
it but imperfect, and wants many degrees of that strength and soundness, which
afterward it receives by its conjuction and communion with Faith. And so, in
respect of this enlargement or additional perfection, it may be said to have a
being in Faith. I do not think it worth the making a Controversy, or Dispute,
whether that Repentance which goes before Faith, and qualifies the subject for
a more ready or willing reception of it, and that which follows and
accompanies Faith, be of one and the same species, or of different. Yet I
rather incline to think, that they do not only not differ specie (unless it be
specie accidentali, as a Man differs from a Child, a Man Learned from a Man
Illitetate, a Man that is poor, from a man that is rich, and the like,) but not
so much as in individuo; as Paul was the same individuum, when he was a Man,
which he was when he was a Child. That the one has Justification, or Remission
of sins, annexed unto it by promise from God, and the other, not, does no more
prove them to differ specie, no nor yet individuo, then Paul's proving in time a
great and faithful Apostle, and chosen Vessel unto God, proves him to have
been, either of another species, or another individuum, when he was a fierce
Persecutor, and (as himself acknowledges) of sinners the chief. But this
Circle of Discourse, is (I confess) somewhat Eccentrical to our business in
hand, which is not to distinguish Repentance as preceding, and as accompanying
Faith, but to inquire out, and declare, as God shall enable and direct, what,
or how, Repentance, as included in, or accompanying Faith, operateth toward
Justification, or Remission of sins. That which I conceive, is this. God not
judging it meet to invest a person, who yet retains the love and liking of
sinful and wicked ways, with so great, and sacred a privilege, and Grace, as
Forgiveness of sins, was pleased to establish it for a Law, that no Man or
Woman remaining impenitent, and without unfeigned remorse of Soul for their
sins past, should ever be admitted into part and fellowship of that unspeakable
Grace of his in Jesus Christ, which consists in pardon, or Remission of sins.
Again, being highly pleased with that most regular, generous, and worthy
deportment of Soul, in whomsoever it should be found, which consists in a
genuine and real hatred and abhorrency of all unrighteousness, and of
whatsoever is sinful or unclean, enacted another Law in honor of this Heroic
Act and Deportment, viz. that whosoever should with his whole heart and soul
repent of all his sinful miscarriages and misdoings, and stand resolved in
heart for ways of purity and uprightness for the future, should be translated
by him into that blessed state, which stands in Remission of all sin. So that
Repentance seems to operate two ways toward Justification, or Remission of
sins. First, in the nature, or after the manner, of that kind of cause, which
Logicians call Removens prohibens, i. e. which contributeth toward an effect,
by removing that out of the way, which being not removed, would have hindered
it. Thus the taking away of the Dignity, place, and power, of the Roman
Emperors, was the cause of the discovery or rising up of the Antichristian
Race, and their power, 2 Thessalonians. 2* 7, 8. So Repentance, by removing that
wretched and wicked habit or frame of soul, which being un-removed, would have
obstructed the Grace and Blessing of pardon of sin, contributeth toward the
obtaining of it. Secondly, as Repentance includes in the nature and
constituting Principles of it, a disposition or frame of heart so highly
pleasing unto God, that he judges it no ways unworthy of him, to honor and
reward it with so great a reward, as Remission of sins, so it may be conceived
to contribute or operate toward Remission of sins, or Justification, tanquam
causa dispositiva, i. e. as regularly qualifying the subject for the reception
of the form to be brought into it.

By this (I suppose) the interest of Repentance, or that which it acts
toward, in, or about Justification, may be clearly distinguished from the
Interest of Faith, and that which it acts in reference to the same end. When
God in Scripture is said to justify the ungodly, the meaning is not that he
justifies ungodly persons, whilst they are or remain ungodly; but he is said
to justify the ungodly, in like form of speech, as our Savior uses, Mat. 11.
5. (...), etc. That is, The blind see, the lame walk, the Leapers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear. The meaning clearly enough is, not that the
Blind, whilst blind, did see; or the Lame, whilst they remained Lame, did
walk, or that the Lepers whilst their Leprosy was yet upon them, were
cleansed, etc. but that such who had been formerly and until Christ relieved
them, Blind, Lame, Lepers, Deaf, were by him miraculously restored, such as
had been Blind, to their Sight; such as had been Lame, to the usefulness of
their Limbs for walking, etc. In like manner God is said to justify the
ungodly, when he justifies, or makes such persons righteous by the pardon of
their sins, who had formerly been ungodly, profane, etc. But he does not
justify them, or make them righteous by the Forgiveness of their sins,
whilst they remain ungodly; but upon the alteration and change of the sinful
frame of their hearts, by believing, he conferres this Justification upon them,
viz. the Forgiveness of their sins. And the reason why God does not judge it
meet to justify men, or forgive them their sins, whilst they remain ungodly,
unrighteous, wicked, profane, or the like, may be, partly to cut off all
occasion from his Creature to conceive of him as a friend to sin, or to
impenitent and obdurate sinners; partly also to contrive his Grace and high
favor in Justification, into an alluring Argument, and strong motive to
persuade men out of the love and liking of sin, and sinful ways, into the
love and practice of Righteousness and true Holiness. The Apostle Paul was
put to Apologize for his Doctrine of the Grace of God in Forgiveness of sins,
because according to it, this Grace is promised and given unto sinners, though
unto such sinners only, who repent, and bring forth fruits meet for Repentance.
But if (says he) whilst we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also
are found sinners, is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? [i. e. does Christ
by justifying such Sinners, as he justifies, viz. such who believe and repent,
countenance, abet, or promote sin in the world] God forbid, Gal. 2. 17. If then
inconsiderate and unworthy men conceive that God would be liable to an
imputation of favoring or cherishing sin in men, in case he should justify or
pardon all Sinners upon their Repentance, (which now he does) how much more
obnoxious would he have been, in such men's opinions, to this imputation and
charge, in case he should have indulged this high Privilege of Justification
unto sinners without Repentance? Upon this account then it is most probable,
that God has not judged it meet to admit or allow any other kind of Faith to
bring men into communion of the Death of Christ for the Forgiveness of their
sins, but only that which is accompanied with an unfeigned Repentance, or which
purifieth and cleanses the heart (or at least is apt so to do) from the love
and liking of all unrighteousness and uncleanness. If it be thus, then the
interposure or interest of Repentance about Justification is by way of
Qualification, or of rendering the subject, the sinner, regularly capable of
that high and sacred Privilege. And though it does not perform the office or
work of Faith about Justification, which is (as has been said) to bring men
into the fellowship of the Death of Christ where, and where only, Justification
or Remission of sins, is to be had, yet it legitimates or authorizeth the
person for the reception of this blessed Accommodation from the hand of Faith:
And for this reason also it may well be conceived to have the promise of
Justification, or Remission of sins, made unto it, as well as Faith it self.

How good works are, and may be, said to justify.
business of Justification, is the express affirmation of the Scripture. Ye
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2.
24. Again: Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had offered
Isaac his Son upon the Altar, Jam. 2. 21. We have already upon occasion, argued
and showed the Interest of Works in, or about Justification. Peruse 11. We
shall here partly add, and partly repeat; 1. That that Justification, which
consists in Remission of sins, and which enstates a person in a right of title
and claim to Eternal Life, is not attained, but by sinners being brought into
Communion with Christ in his Death; or (which is the same) into part and
fellowship in this Death, which is the only procuring cause of this
Justification, by way of purchase. 2. That whatsoever brings men hither, (I
mean, into Communion of, or with the Death of Christ) must be sealed and
authorized by God hereunto. 3. That a true and unfaigned Faith in God through
Jesus Christ (sometimes called, Faith in Christ, yea and several other ways
expressed, as has been already observed) and this Faith only, not any work, or
works, of what kind soever, or in what number soever, enjoined in the Moral
Law, has a commission or power from God to bring men into, or to give men part
and fellowship in the Death of Christ. Therefore Good works have thus far no
part or interest at all in Justification, as it stands in Remission of sins,
being excluded here-from by the same Law, by which Boasting also is excluded,
which the Apostle terms, the Law of Faith. Where is Boasting then? It is
excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but BY THE LAW OF FAITH? Rom 3. 27. By
this Law, Faith has the office or work of justifying men in this sense, and
with this kind of Justification, settled upon, and confirmed unto, it self,
alone. There is another kind of Justification, which the Scripture also
frequently speaks of under this name (as was noted. 11.) which consists in the
approbation, commendation, or vindication of a person from guilt or blame,
whether justly, or unjustly, imputed unto him. Of this kind of Justification,
when it is duly and justly given, or pronounced, Good Works, in one kind or
other, and for the most part those of the Moral Law, have a special and
particular interest in it, being the only regular ground upon which the act, or
sentence, of such a Justification, can, or ought to proceed. And though God, by
means of his appropriate privilege of (...), or knowing the heart, can, and
does, upon a sufficient ground, secretly and in himself, approve of him, who as
yet only believes (I mean, with a true and unfeigned Faith) and before he has
any ways justified or commended this his Faith by good works, yet he is not
wont to signify or declare, by one means, or other, this his approbation of
any particular person, until he has showed the World his Faith by his Works.
Nor does he require of any man to judge of any other person* as a man justified
in his sight by a true and unfaigned Faith, who has not given either unto him,
or unto some others, from whom he may receive the information, a fair and
reasonable account by works suitable, of such a Faith residing in him. And
questionless it was this kind of Justification, of which the Apostle James
discourses so largely in his Second Chapter, as appears all along the
Context, from verse. 14. to the end. Therefore when he demands, verse 21. Was not
our Father Abraham justified by works, when he had offered his Son Isaac upon
the Altar? Evident it is, that by Abraham's being justified, he does not mean,
that Abraham had his sins pardoned; for he had been thus justified long before.
And besides, his offering up his Son Isaac upon the Altar, could be no means of
obtaining Remission of sins from God. But when he is said to have been
justified by works, when he had offered, etc. the meaning is, that upon this
great testimony given by Abraham of the truth and effectualnesse of his Faith,
God highly approved of him, loved him, and dealt by him as by a person
righteous and just, and called him his Friend. The tenor of the story in
Genesis fully accords herewith. For immediately upon Abraham's stretching
forth his hand, and taking the knife to slay his Son, the Angel of the Lord
called unto him ^ut of Heaven, and said, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad,
neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fear God,
seeing that thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, from me, Genesis 22.
11, 12. A second time also, the Angel, upon this offering up of his Son, called
unto him out of Heaven, and said; By my self have I sworn, says the Lord: for,
because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only
S^n, That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply
thy Seed as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the Sea
shore; and thy Seed shall possess the Gate of his Enemies: And in thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my
Voice, Genesis 22. 15. 16, 17, 18. In these passages, is that justification of
Abraham expressed and contained; whereof the Apostle James speaks, affirming
him to have obtained it at the hand of God by Works, as well as by his Faith,
which he says, wrought together with them [meaning, toward the procuring, or
obtaining of this justification, or approbation from God] and was by them
perfected [or made perfect] i. Was declared to be perfect, that is, sound and
good; or else, was perfected, (...), i. Became effectual to the obtaining of
its proper end [Viz. The approbation and love of God, with favorable and
friendly respects from him] which is the perfection [Viz. Arguitive, or
Argumentatively] of any thing. As on the contrary, when any thing, pretending
to be a means for the compassing of such, or such an end, proves yet unable to
effect it, this argues, though (happily) not always demonstratively, the
imperfection, or weakness of it. In much a like sense to that, wherein Abraham
(as we have heard) is said to have been justified by works, is Rahab the Harlot
also, [i. Who formerly had been an Harlot] said to have been justified, v. 25.
The meaning is, that upon Rahab's Demonstration of the reality and truth of her
Faith,* in exposing her life to danger, by entertaining and hiding the Spies
sent from Joshua, God entreated her, as a justified, or righteous person, by
preserving her and her Fathers house, for her sake, with all that she had, when
the City she dwelt in, with all that was in it, both man, and woman, young, and
old (besides) were utterly destroyed with the edge of the Sword, Josh. 6. 21,
22, 23, etc. So that the word (...), to be justified, in this Coutexture of
Discourse, does not signify the proper effect of that Act of God, by which he
constitutes* or makes men righteous, or just, or by which he justifies them;
but the effect, one, or more, of some such Act of his, by which he expresses
himself lovingly, graciously, and bountifully toward such persons, who are, or
have been justified and made righteous by him, and hereby declares, and (after
a sort) pronounces them righteous. But he does not judge it fitting, or meet
thus to countenance them, or to entreat them as righteous, or justified
persons, until they have first given a good Testimony of the reality and
soundness of that Faith, upon, and by which, he justifies them. The expression
wherein a person is said to be justified, when he is only respected, or dealt
with, as being justified, i. As a justified person, is metonymicall, and
frequent in Scripture, the Antecedent being often put for the Consequent. Thus by
Hunting, Genesis 27. 3. is meant, taking, or getting, by hunting: and Deuteronomy. 21.
16. to make a Son the firstborn, signifies, to respect him, as the firstborn,
or to conser upon him the Privilege of the firstborn. So also, Romans 5. 19. to
be made sinners, imports, a being made liable unto punishment, or such a
Condition which belongs unto sinners (to omit many the like) In this sense and
notion of the word, justify, the Lord Christ may be said to justify those
that shall stand at his right hand in the great day, in saying thus unto them;
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World. The reason, or ground in equity of this justification,
is declared in the words next following: For I was an hungry, and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. (Mat. 25. 34, 35, etc.) This
most gracious address and application of Christ unto those that shall be saved,
especially in conjunction with that most dreadful and Soul-confounding address
(immediately following) unto those that shall eternally perish; Depart from me,
ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, etc. together with the reason hereof (in the
next words) For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc. I say, these
respective Decisions, or Adjudications of Christ, plainly evince and prove,
that no person whatsover [of years of discretion, and actually capable of
knowing Good, and Evill] shall receive the great benefit and blessing of
justification, by means of any such Faith, which shall not utter and approve it
self before God and men, by fruitfulness in welldoing, according to such means
and opportunities, as shall have been afforded unto them. And this also is the
apparent drift and scope of the Apostle James in that Discourse, some passages
whereof we lately sifted, and insisted upon, out of his second Chapter. Thus we
see what the interest and part of good works is in the great business of
justification, according to the Scriptures.

14. That Remission of sins likewise is no Alien, or How Remission of sins
justifies.
about it, is of ready demonstration from the Scriptures. The discourse of the
Apostle Romans 4. from v. 1. to v. 8. (inclusive) is pregnant to this purpose;
But to him (says, he, v. 5.) that works not [Viz. With an intent, or hope of
being justified by his working; or, that works not, i. That wants works
competent, or sufficient to justify him] but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly [meaning God, who justifies even those that have been ungodly, and
so must needs be without works meritorious of Justification, upon their
believing] his Faith is counted for Righteousness, [i. He is made a righteous,
or just man by means of his believing, and is accordingly looked upon by God]
Even as David also describes the blessedness: [i. Either the justification, or
the blessedness accruing by it] Of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness] i. Whom he justifieth] Without works [Viz. Which are any ways
meritorious of Justification: For this Apostle, by works, in opposition unto
Faith, in the business of Justification, constantly understands, The Merit of
Works: In which sense also his Adversaries the Jews understood, and urged it]
saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. By this
Description from the Pen of David, Of the blessedness of the man, unto whom God
imputes Righteousness. (i. Justifies, as has been been showed.) It appears,
that his Righteousness, or Justification (passively taken) which is the cause,
or means of his Blessedness, consists in the forgiveness of his Iniquities, or
which is the same in substance, though differing in consideration, or respect)
in the non-imputation of sin unto him. By means as well of the one, as of the
other of these, the man's sins are said to be covered; that is (I conceive) to
pass unpunished, Indemnity from punishment, being a kind of Veyl by which the
sins of Transgressors are kept from being much minded, or taken notice of by
men: As on the other hand, when God openly judges, or punishes men for their
sins, he is said to un-cover, or dis-cover them, Ezekiel. 16. 37. 57. Ezekiel. 23.
10. and elsewhere. Now by that Description (as the Apostle terms it) which
David gives (as we have heard) of the blessedness of the justified Person,
placing it in this, that his Iniquities, or sins, are remitted, or forgiven, It
is a clear Case, that Remission of sins justifies Per modum causae formalis,
as the form, or formal Cause is said to give being to that which is caused by
it. When a Painter makes a Wall white, Whiteness is the Form, or formal
Cause, by which the Wall is made white, or which makes the Wall white. Nor can
it be with reason reduced to any of the other kinds of Causes, as is evident;
it being no Efficient, or material, or ^^all Cause hereof, nor carrying the
least semblance of any of these. In like manner, when God justifies a sinner,
that which he does to him, or for him, is precisely this, He forgiveth him his
sins; this is the very form of that his Action, i. The form which by his Act of
justifying, he introduces anew upon the sinner. Nor does he any other thing,
directly and immediately, unto a person, when, and as he justifies him, but
only forgive him his sins. Of one and the same Act, or Action, there cannot be
a plurality of Effects, immediate and direct, really differing the one from the
other.

It is true, as there may be sundry collateral, constructive, vertuall, or
consequentiall Acts acted, or done, in the doing of some one; so there may be,
nay, there always is, an answerable variety of Effects produced by, and so
Attributable unto, this one Act. When a Prince prefers some Head of a Family to
a great place of profit and power in the State, or any other person, who is a
Lover of his Friends and Relations in blood, he may be said to cast honor upon
this person, to better his condition in the World, to raise his Family, to give
every particular Member hereof hope of being better accommodated in matters of
this life; yea, in case he does bestow this preferment upon him for his
Fathers, or any of his Ancestors sake, as for any worth in them, or for any
good Service done by them, or the like; in preferring him, he may be said to
impute the worth, or faithfulness of such an Ancestor unto him. But all such
Acts as these, are but mediate, constructive, or consequentiall; and so are
their respective effects to be interpreted likewise. A Prince when he prefers a
man, in strict propriety of speaking, does nothing else but prefer him, or
(which is the same) confers some place of profit, or of honor upon him. In
like manner, when God justifies a man, he may be said to bless him, to
translate him from Death to Life, to give him a lawful Title, or Claim to
eternal life, and his Heavenly Kingdom: and because he does it upon the
account, and for the sake, of the Obedience of Christ, as well active, as
passive (although in a more peculiar manner, upon the account of the latter,
the Scripture constantly ascribing Justification, unto the blood, death,
sufferings, etc. of Christ, and never, to my remembrance, unto his active
Obedience, unless happily as presupposed unto his passive, and as qualifying it
for its high Service) I say, because God justifies men for the sake of Christ,
and for what he has done and suffered in serving his counsel and good
pleasure, he may, when he justifies any man, be said to impute the
righteousness, or obedience of Christ unto him. And because, in order to this
Act of his (I mean his Act of justifying a man) he requires Faith of him, and
Faith only (in the sense formerly declared and asserted) when he justifies
him, he may be said, to count, or to impute his Faith unto him for
righteousness. Again, when he justifies a man, because he graciously confers
upon him a righteousness of his own Invention and Contrivance, and does not
justify him, with, for, or upon, any righteousness found in him, whom he
justifies, therefore when he justifies him, he is said, to impute
righteousness unto him, i. (as it were) To gratify him with a righteousness,
remission of sins being a righteousness, properly enough so called, in as much
as he, who is chargable with no sin, which is his privilege, or case, who has
all his sins justly and authoritatively remitted, must needs be looked upon as
an Observer of the whole Law. But when God justifies a person, he does none of
these things to him in a direct, formal, or immediate way, but constructively,
or consecutively only. All that he does upon such terms, is only this, he
justifies him, i. He remitteth unto him all his sins, remission of sins being
that absolute and complete righteousness, wherewith a sinner is invested by God
in his justification, besides which, such a person is not capable of any, nor
stands in need of any, for the attainment of any end, or benefit of
righteousness whatsoever. And as for those that have been the greatest sinners,
and neither gave Meat unto Christ, when he was an hungry, nor Drink, when he
was thirsty, nor clothed him when he was naked, etc. If so be God should remit
these, and all other their sins unto them (which yet he cannot without their
timely repentance, and contrary practicing for a season, because this would be
to deny himself, I mean, his righteousness and truth) they should hereby become
as righteous, and as capable of the reward of righteousness, as the greatest
Saints, and those who continued for the longest time walking with God. This
concerning remission of sins, and what part it bears in the great, and
mysterious work of Justification.

15. That the Scriptures, or Word of God, are not How the Scripture* or Word of
God justifi^
of Justification, but have somewhat to do in reference unto it, and for the
promoting it, sufficiently appears from these and such like sayings of the Holy
Ghost in the Scriptures. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God, Romans 10. 17. Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose Surname
is Peter, who shall tell the words, whereby thou and all thy House shall be
saved, Act. 11. 13, 14. Abraham believed God [i. The word of God] and it was
counted unto him for righteousness, Romans 4. 3. True Faith (whether in the Act,
or Habit, or both) having such an essential Connection by the will and pleasure
of God (as we have heard) with justification, and never failing to obtain it,
whatsoever any ways works Faith, or contributeth toward the raising of it
in the Soul, must needs in that respect, and so far, have an hand in
justification; according to that known Principle in Reason, (formerly
mentioned) Quod est causa causae est etiam causa causati: That which in any
consideration gives being to the Cause, is in that respect, a Cause of the
Effect produced by it. Now the Scripture, or the Word of God, (I mean, the
Mind, Council, or Will of God, which are the substance, matter, or truth,
contained and held forth in and by the Scriptures, which we are taught in them
to call the word of God, which matter, or truth, are held forth likewise,
taught, and declared, in part, other-wayes then in the Scriptures, as by the
light of Nature, Works of Creation, of Providence, etc.) I say, the Scripture,
or Word of God, thus understood, is the only object, or subject matter, of that
hearing, by which Faith (ordinarily) comes (as the Apostle even now informed
us) meaning, that Faith by which men are justified. And as Sanctification is
ascribed unto the Word o^ God [Sanctifie them through thy truth: thy word is
the truth, Joh. 17. 17.] Mediante fide, by the intervening and mediation of
Faith, or the belief of it (Heb. 4. 2) So may Justification by the same
mediation, be ascribed unto it likewise. Yea, Faith it self, which justifies
more immediately and directly (and consequently, Justification) may be ascribed
unto it, not only as it is the subject matter, or object of that hearing, by
which the Faith which justifies is produced (as has been already said) but as
it is such a word, or the matter of it so qualified and conditioned, that it is
very apt, pregnant, and potent, to work, or raise that Faith in the hearts and
minds of men, which by Divine Institution (as we have heard) is justifying. For
it is every ways, and on every hand, so (...), so worthy, meet, or fit to be
believed, and so authoritatively, and with that power of Evidence and
Conviction, commanding the obedience of Faith (as the Scripture speaks) unto
it, that such persons, to whom it is preached, or set forth like it self, must
needs have much, either of the Bruit, or of the Devil in them (if there be
place for the distinction, and the Bruit in men be not the Devil in the shape,
or likeness of a So^) if they give not the honor and homage of Faith unto it.
But of this I have reasoned more at large in a Treatise concerning the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures. And thus we see, how, and after what manner the
Scriptures also, or Word of God, are operative in their way toward the
justification of a sinner, and may be said to justify: they instruct and teach
men the way that leads unto justification; yea, they most effectually
persuade, urge, and press men to walk in this way (I mean, the way of
believing) and by their innate property to convince the Judgments and
Consciences of men, of the truth of what they teach, and say, they do much
facilitate, or make easy both men's entrance into, and their walking likewise
in, this way. And as the Law is said to have constituted, or made men high
Priests (Heb. 7. 28.) because it directed and taught men how to make them, as
viz. By the performance of all those Observations, Rites, and Ceremonies
prescribed in this Law, to give this great and sacred Investiture, to a person
capable by Gods appointment of the Dignity, and then by declaring and
authorizing them for such in the Name of God. In like manner, the Gospel, or
Word of God, may be said to constitute, or make men righteous, i. To justify
them, both because it teaches and prescribes unto them what they ought to do,
and must do, that they may be justified; and then by authority derived from
God, and in his Name, pronounce, avouch, and declare them for such (I mean for
persons justified) when they have performed and done that, which they prescribe
on this behalf.

16. That the Publishers, or Ministers of the Gospel, How the Minister of the
word may be said to justify.
and blessed business of Justification, and according to their Interest herein,
may be said to justify, is not a forced or far-fetch conclusion from the
Scriptures. For when the Apostle Paul writes to Timothy, that by doing what he
had directed him to do, he should both save himself, and those that heard him,
1 Timothy 4. 16. and so assumeth unto himself a capacity of the same glorious
Service, Romans 11. 14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are
my flesh, and might save some of them: when (I say) he ascribes that great Act
and Service of saving men unto the Ministers of the Gospel, he does
implicitly, and by neer*hand consequence, ascribe unto them the justifying of
them likewise: For there is no consideration, or respect, wherein a Minister
can be said to save men, but by a precedaneous, or presupposed Act of
justifying them. Nor is there any person capable of being saved by a Minister
of the Gospel, in his way, or capacity of saving men, who is not as capable
(or rather, more capable) of being justified by him. Yea, Dan. 12. 3. where our
English Translation reads, And they that turn many unto righteousness [shall
shine] as the Stars for ever and ever. Junius and Tremelius from the Original,
render it, Et justificant e multos* etc. And they that justify many shall
shine, etc. so likewise Arias Montanus translateth, together with the late
Dutch Annotators. The Scripture from place to place mentions it as the proper
work of the Minister; and as principally intended by God in the erection of the
Ministerial Function in the World, to make Men and Women the Sons and
Daughters of God by believing: The same [John] came for a Witness, to bear
Witness of the light, that all men through him might believe, Joh. 1. 7. So the
Apostle demands, Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye
believed? 1 Cor. 3* 5. And calls Timothy, his own Son in the Faith, 1 Timothy 1,
2. Now in such a sense, wherein men may be said to be made believers by the
Ministers of the Gospel, they may be said to be justified also by them;
inasmuch as both these are accomplished or effected by one and the same Act,
the former, directly and immediately, the latter mediatly and consequentially.
If you then ask me, What does the Minister contribute toward the justifying of
men, or in what consideration may he be said to justify them? My Answer is,
When he opens unto them the Council of God in the Gospel, concerning the
justification and salvation of men by Jesus Christ, so effectually, so
thoroughly, and with that evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, (as the
Apostle speaks) that men's Reasons, Judgments, and Consciences are so far
convinced, or persuaded of the truth of what is delive ed upon such terms, that
they truly, unfeignedly, and with the whole heart believe it: Now, and upon
this account, he may be said to justify them. He that makes a man a Believer,
Ipso facto, makes him righteous, that is, justifies him. There is nothing more
familiar and frequent in the Scripture, then for the same Action, and so the
same Effect, to be ascribed both unto God and Man: to the former, in respect of
a superior and more excellent interposure, proper unto him* to the latter, in
respect of that subordinate Efficiency, or Subserviency* wherewith, God has
been pleased to honor him; Non novum est, verba quae Deo summo jure competunt,
aut Christo, sensu qu^dam subordinato tribui h^minibu^, H^g. Grot. M. 1 Timothy 4
16.
yea, the Apostle Paul terms the Ministers of the Gospel, (...),
Fellow-workers, or workers together, with God [in, and about, the saving of the
Souls of men] 1 Cor. 3. 9.

17. That there is a consideration and sense also, wherein the person justified
may be said to justify himself, the Scripture it self seems to acknowledge:
For when it is said concerning Timothy, that by taking heed to himself, and to
tho Doctrine [taught by him] he should How a person may be said to justify
himself.
both save himself, and them that heard him, (1 Timothy 4. 16.) there is an Action
ascribed unto him, in reference unto himself, every whit as great, and as
incompetent to him, in the ordinary signification of the word, as the act of
justifying. To save a man's self, sounds altogether as high, as to justify a
man's self: yea, he that believes, may by much a neerer-hand consequence, and
with more propriety of speaking, be said to justify himself, then to save
himself. When a man labors* in his Calling, and puts forth that strength of
power which God has given him to get Wealth [Deut. 8. 18.] for such a purpose,
and withal thrives and prospers (through the blessing of God) in his way, he
may properly enough be said to enrich himself, or make himself rich; yea,
somewhat more properly, then when it is said, that the hand of the diligent
makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. In like manner, when a man does that, upon which, or
by means whereof, he shall certainly be justified, this fruit, or reward of his
Action, his justification, may without the violation of any Rule, either of
Grammar, or of Rhetoric, be ascribed unto him. Hence it follows, God having by
a perpetual and inviolable Decree settled the great benefit and privilege of
justification upon believing, that when soever any person, man, or woman, shall
life up his heart hereunto (I mean, to believe) by this Action he may be said
to justify himself; not indeed after any such manner, or upon any such terms,
as God is said to justify men upon their believing, as viz. Authoritatively,
or as having a sovereign right to justify whom, or upon what terms he
pleases, or the like; but in such a way, or sense only, wherein a person may
be said to do that, which, upon his Action, is done unto him by another.

Of this Construction, or Dialect, there are instances more then a few in the
Scriptures.

It may be here demanded, but is it meet, or tolerable to say, that a man, when
he believes, imputes righteousness unto himself, or forgiveth himself his
sins* and yet both these are done unto him by another (viz. God) upon his
believing* yea, these are (as has in effect been formerly said) but
interpretative expressions of justification it self. And therefore it seems,
that whosoever may in any sense be said to justify, may in the same sense be
said to do both the one, and the other of these; and this in reference to any,
or all of these persons, whom they are said to justify.

To this I answer, 1. That the Expressions put to the Question in this Demand,
are (indeed) uncouth and harsh, grating upon ears, that have any competent
taste of Words; Nor do I judge them fitting to be applied to, or spoken of him
that believes. But,

2. When a man is said by believing to justify himself, the meaning is not,
that he absolveth himself from his sins, or pronounces a Sentence of
absolution over himself, or that he imputes righteousness unto himself, or the
like; but only that he levieth, puts forth, or performs such an Act, whereby he
prevails with God according to his gracious Covenant and promise, to justify
him, and therein to do all these things to him, or for him. As when a man is
said to save himself (which, as we heard, is the Apostles own expression) the
meaning is not either, that by a strong hand, or by any physical power, he
over-matcheth the Devil, and keeps himself out of his Clutches, and from being
carried, or thrust by him into Hell, or that he invests himself with the state
of blessedness and glory, which is signified and meant by Salvation; but that
he takes such a course, as viz. By believing and persevering in it unto the
end, whereby he shall find favor in the sight of God, to do these things for
him. Now to say a man by believing takes an effectual and direct course to
prevail with God to forgive him his sins, to impute righteousness unto him,
etc. are as proper and convenient expressions, as to say, that he prevails with
him to justify him: yet,

3. (and lasty) It may be considered, that one and the same thing may admit of
several considerations, and different respects; and in, and under some one of
these considerations and respects, may admit of some attributions, of which, it
is not so regularly, or smoothly capable under another. As for instance,
Salvation, or the saving of the Soul, is one and the same act; yet it may be
considered, either as it is procurable at the hand of God by men, as, viz. by
Faith, and continuance in well-doing: or as it is a rescuing, or vindication of
men by strength of Arm, from the power of the Devil; or as it is an actual
instating in, or putting men into a real possession of that blessedness and
glory, which God has assigned by promise unto his Saints, and those that shall
be saved. Now in either of these two latter considerations, it is not
ascribable unto men, but in the first of the three, as we have heard, it is.

In like manner, the act of justifying is one and the same act; yet it admits
of sundry considerations. (1.) It may be considered, either as an act of God
imputing righteousness unto men, or as an act of his forgiving men all their
sins, or as an act of Grace and high favor purchased at his hand by Christ for
men: or (lastly) As an act attainable from God by men, for themselves, by
performing of such conditions, or terms, upon, and according unto which, he
has covenanted and promised the vouchsafement of it. The former considerations
of the act we speak of, are of that nature, and import, that in respect of none
of them, it is attributable unto men, they all importing such things which are
above the Line of men. But in the consideration last mentioned, it may in very
passable and convenient Language, be attributed unto men who believe, in
reference to themselves. Nor need it be offensive unto any man, to hear it
said, that men who believe, in that sense justify themselves.

There are two other Causes of Justification yet remaining, not mentioned in
the Title Page, amongst those that have been insisted on; Viz. The Material,
and the Final: of these in few words.

Concerning the material Cause of Justification, Christ himself, or the
Concerning the material Cause of Justification.
Righteousness of Christ, either active, or passive, or both, express themselves
very unproperly, and confound two Causes always distinct, and
contradistinguished; Viz. The efficient, and the material, the former being
always extrinsecall, the latter, intrinsecall, to the effect, or thing caused
by them (in conjunction with the other two Causes.) And besides, in so
notioning the matter, or material Cause of Justification, they decline the
ordinary Rule, by which, men who love exactness and propriety, as well in
conceiving, as in speaking, are wont to walk in both, in Cases of like nature
and import. For whereas no Action, (as no Accident besides) has any matter, or
material Cause (properly so called) yet being an effect, or somewhat that is
caused, there must be some Vice-matter, or somewhat answering the nature or
consideration of such a material Cause, found in it, or relating to it. Now
that which relates unto an Action with greatest Affinity unto matter, or to a
material Cause* properly so called, is, Subjectum recipiens, or Circa quod as
Logicians speak) that is, the Subject receiving the Action, or the Object upon
which the Action is acted. According to this notion, the believing, or
repentant sinner, or (which is the same) the person justified, or to be
justified, is the material Cause of Justification. Such a person exhibits, or
presents (as it were) unto God, matter duly fitted and prepared according to
his mind, for him to work or act upon, or about, justifyingly. And when God
does justify such a person, he does introduce a new form, as, Viz.
Righteousness, remission of sins, or justification passive (for these I take to
be much the same) into matter rightly and appropriatly disposed for the
reception of it; which matter is (as has been said) the sinner now believing.
As when fire heateth the water that is hung over it, or otherwise applied unto
it, the water is the matter upon which the fire acts in this act of
calefaction, and the heat which it causes in the water, is the form which it
induces, or introduces into it. This briefly for the material Cause of
Justification.

The final Cause of Justification is commonly distinguished into that which is
subordinate, or less principal, and Concerning the final Cause of
Justification.
with one consent affirmed to be the great benefit, or blessedness of the
Creature, or person justified; which Blessedness stands in two particulars
(chiefly) deliverance from under the guilt of sin, (with all the misery
consequentiall hereunto) and an investiture with a regular Title or Claim unto
that immortal and undefiled Inheritance, which is reserved in the Heavens, to
be enjoyed in due time by all those, who shall be found in a due capacity to be
admitted into part and fellowship therein. The ultimate, or supreme end, or
material Cause of Justification, is concluded with a Nemine contradicente (as
far as I know) to be the Glory of God, partly in the just vindication of a
sinner from under the guilt of sin, and from the punishment incurred thereby,
and partly in the Salvation, and eternal Glorification of the person so
vindicated.

As for the opinion, or notion of those, who conceive that God designeth
nothing, acts nothing (in strictness and propriety of consideration) for
himself, or for his own Glory, ultimately; but all for the good and benefit of
his Creature: I shall not upon this occasion, either plead, or implead it; only
I shall crave leave to say this, that as far as I have yet looked into it, and
conversed with it, I do not find it so extravagant, or uncouth, or so hard of
reconcilement, either with the Scriptures, where they seem most contradicting
it, or with any the received grounds or principles of Christian Religion, as I
suppose it is like to seem unto many at its first appearance and hearing. And
though there may be more in the opinion, were it narrowly examined and scanned,
from the one end of it unto the other, as well for the glory of God, as for the
benefit and comfort of the Creature, yet because such an examination of it may
happily require a just Treatise, and more of the ordinary rank of Professors are
more like to be startled or amazed at it, then to embrace it, I shall therefore
forbear to encumber the commonly received Doctrine concerning the final Cause,
or ultimate end of Justification, with any further mention of it.

The Conclusion.
Thus we have showed, how great a number, and what variety, as well of things,
as of persons, there are, all, both of the one kind, and the other, joining
hand in hand, and making (as it were) one shoulder to bring the great blessing
of Justification upon the head of a poor sinner. God, who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 28, 29.
judged it meet, that a matter of so gracious and rare, of so profound and
wonderful a contrivance, should pass through many hands, before his Creature,
Man, to whom it was meant and intended, should be invested with the actual
possession and enjoyment of it. There is scarce any thing of a more humbling
consideration to the height and pride of the Spirit of a man, then to be
subjected to a multiplicity of dependences, especially upon such, either
persons, or things, which he either judges but equal unto, but most of all, if
beneath himself, for the obtaining of that, of which he stands in need, and
without which, he fully understands that it cannot be well with him. Such a
posture, or subjection as this, sets him of^ at the greatest distance in his
condition from God in point of true Greatness and Glory. Nor is there any thing
in all the unlimited circumference of the blessedness of God, that renders him
greater, or more glorious in the eyes of his Creature, then his (...), or self
sufficiency, and his absolute independency upon all, whether persons, or things
whatsoever, besides himself. And (doubtless) in such cases, where the number of
dependencies is not established by any indispensable Law, or Decree of God,
they that can contract themselves to the smaller number of them, for the
enjoyment of themselves with comfort and contentment, will reduce their present
conditions to the nearest affinity, whereof it is capable, with the blessedness
of God himself. But where God has by any revealed appointment, or declared
will, suspended the attainment of any spiritual enjoyment, privilege, or
blessing, upon men's application of themselves unto him in the use of such and
such means, of what number, or kind soever, their non-subjection to this Law,
or appointment of his in the neglect of any one of these means, is of a very
dangerous and sad presage, that they will fall short in the attainment of the
blessing. And for this reason my Soul cannot but sadly lament over the case and
condition, of all those, who have in the ignorance, vanity, and pride of their
Spirits, turned their backs upon the Ministry of the Gospel, setting their
Faces toward Fancies and conceited Methods of their own (though of Satan's
Inspiration) for their justification in the sight of God; whereas it has been
evidently showed and proved from the Mouth of Godhimself, that amongst those
various Actors in and about, the great business of Justification, which have
been presented upon the Theater of this brief Discourse, he has assigned a
worthy cooperation, or part, unto the Ministry, and Ministers of the Gospel.
Therefore they, who disdain to have the royal Robe of Righteousness, or
Justification, put upon them by men of this Function and Office, as judging
them unworthy, and too mean to serve them in so high and sacred a Concernment,
for any hope that I am able, upon any good ground, to give them of a better
Issue, they are never like to wear it.

FINIS.
These Books following are to be sold by Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard.
IMputatio Fidei, Or a Treatise of Justification; wherein the imputation of
Faith for Righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4. 5, 6.) is explained by Mr. John
Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel: In Quarto.

Triumviri, Or the Genius, Spirit, and Deportment of the three Men, Mr. Richard
Resbury, Mr. John Pawson, and Mr. George Kendall, in their late Writings
against the Free Grace of God in the Redemption of the World, and vouchsafement
of means of Salvation unto men; briefly described in their native and true
Colors, borrowed of themselves in their Writings (respectively.) Together with
some brief touches (in the Preface) upon Dr. John Owen, Mr. Thomas Lamb (of the
Spittle) Mr. Jeans, Mr. Obadiah How, and Mr. Marchamond Needham, in relation to
their late Writings against the Author: In Quarto, by Mr. John Goodwin.

The Tryers and Ejectors tried and cast by the Laws of God and Men, by John
Goodwin.

Mercy in her Exaltation, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Tailor, by Mr. John Goodwin: In Quarto.

Anabaptists Meribah, or Waters of Strife; being an Answer to Mr. Lamb
Merchant, by Mr. Price, one of Mr John Goodwins Congregation.

The Natural Man's Case stated, Or an exact Map of the little World, Man, in 17
Sermons, by Mr. Christopher Love; to which is added a Sermon preached at his
Funeral, by Mr. Thomas Man^on of Newington: In Octavo.

A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live well,
the other minding all how to dye well; by Thomas Fuller, Author of the Holy
State.

Gospel public Worship, Or the Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and
Exposition of Romans 12. from Verse. 1. to 8. describing the ^omp^eat Pattern of
Gospel Worship.

Also an Exposition of the 18. Chapter of Matthew; to which is a^ded, A
discovery of Adams theefold estate in Paradise, Viz. Mo^^l, Legal, and
Evangelical, by Thomas* Brewer: In Octavo.

^^ds Glory in man's happiness, or the freeness of Gods Grace (...) us, by
Francis Tailor of Canterbury: In Octavo.

The Lords Prayer unclasped, being a vindication of it against all Schismatics
and Heretics, called Enthu^siasts and Fratricilli, by Harwood, B. D.

The Grand Inquiry who is the righteous man, by William Moor Minister in Whal^y
in Lancashire.

The just man's Defense, being the Declaration of the Judgment of James
Arminius, concerning Election and Reprobation.

Pearls of Eloquence, or the School of Complements, wherein Ladies, and
Gentlewomen may accommodate their Court by practice, by William Elder, Gent: In
12.

The Universal Body of Physic, in 5 Books; Comprehending the several
Treatises of the Nature of Diseases, and their Causes, of Symptoms, of the
preservation of Health, and of Cures. Written in Latin by that famous and
learned Doctor, Laz. Riverius, Counselor and Physician to the present K. of
France, and Professor in the University of Montpelier* Exactly translated into
English by William Car Practitioner in Physic.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the 9 first Chapter o^ the Prove. by
Fra^^ Tailor, Minister of Canterbury: In Quarto. An Exposition, with practical
Observations, on the whole Book of Canticles, by Jo. Robotham, Minister of the
Gospel: In Quarto.

An Idea, Or body of Church Discipline in the Theorick and Practick, by Mr.
Roggers: In Quarto.

The Right of Dominions, Or the Prerogative of Kings, proved from Scripture, by
Dr. Welden.

Lucas Redivivus, Or the Gospel-physitian, prescribing (by way of meditation)
Divine physic to prevent Diseases, not yet entered upon the Soul, by John
Anthony, Dr. in Physic: In Quarto.


