An Enquiry into ye Causes of the present Separation from the Church of England

Hic verus est cultus, in quo men's colentis, seipsam Deo immaculatam victimam
sistit.

Lact.

A Serious and Compassionate INQUIRY Into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion AND CHURCH OF ENGLAND: WITH Several
seasonable Considerations offered to all English Protestants, tending to
persuade them to a Compliance with and Conformity to the Religion and
Government of this Church as it is established by the Laws of the KINGDOM.

Tertual. Scorpiac. adv. Gnostic. Non in occasion frustrandi Martyrii jubet te
( Apostolus, scil.) subjici Magistratibus, sed in provocatione been vivendi

Sine ira and studio, quorum causas procul habeo.

Tacit. Ann. 1. London, Printed by Robert White for Richard Royston, Bookseller
to His most Sacred Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner. MDCLXXIV.

INstead of an Epistle to the Reader, as the manner is, I humbly submit the
ensuing Discourse to the Censure of my Superiors in the Church of England, and
to the consideration of all the Non-conformists of whatsoever Sect or
Denomination: hoping the former will pardon the defects of it; and that the
latter may (by Gods blessing) reap some benefit by it.

THE CONTENTS.
THE INTRODUCTION.
Wherein the Ancient Estate of Christianity in general is compared with the
present; and the Condition of the Reformed Religion in this Kingdom in the
first times of it, is compared with that of the present Age; And the Change
lamented.
PART I. An Enquiry into the Causes and Origin of the Separation from and
Contempt of the English Reformed Church.
CHAP. I. Wherein are represented several things that are pretended, but are
not the true Causes of our distractions and dissatisfactions; viz. 1.
Corruption in Doctrine; 2. The too near approach of this Church to the Roman;
3. The Scandalousness of the Clergy: All which are disproved. page 1. CHAP. II.
Of the more remote and less observed Causes of the infelicity of this Church;
such as 1. The Reign of Queen Mary and return of Popery under her in the
Infancy of the Reformation. 2. The bad provision for Ministers in Corporations,
etc. 3. Frequent Wars. 4. The liberty in Religion that Trade seems to require.
5. The secret designs of Atheists and Papists. p. 30. CHAP. III. Of the more
immediate Causes of the Distractions of the Church of England; such as, 1.
Rashness of popular Judgment. 2. Judaism. 3. Prejudice. 4. Want of true
Christian Zeal, in the generality of its Members. p. 56.
PART II. Wherein several serious Considerations are propounded, tending to
persuade all English Protestants to comply with, and conform to, the Religion
and Government of this Church, as it is established by Law.
CHAP. I. A Reflection upon diverse ways or Methods for the Prevention and Cure
of Church-Divisions. p. 85. CHAP. II. Of the true notion of Schism, the sin and
mischievous consequents of it. p. 105. CHAP. III. Of the nature and importance
of those things that are scrupled, or objected against in this Church; and that
they are such as may without sin be sacrificed to Peace, and therefore cannot
excuse us from sin in separating from the Church upon their account. p. 121.
CHAP. IV. The those that find fault with the Constitution of this Church, will
never be able to find out or agree upon a better. p. 140. CHAP. V. That God
lays very little stress upon Circumstantials in Religion. p. 151. CHAP. VI.
That the Magistrate has Authority to determine such Externals of Religion as
are the matters of our disputes, and what deportment is due from Christians
toward him. p. 159. CHAP. VII. Wherein Christian Liberty consists; and that it
does not discharge us from Obedience to Laws. p. 175. CHAP. VIII. Of a Tender
Conscience, what it is, and its Privileges. p. 190. CHAP. IX. The great
dishonor that disobedience to Laws and Magistrates and the distractions of
Government do to any Profession of Religion whatsoever. p. 212. CHAP. X. The
danger by our Distractions and Divisions. p. 223. The Conclusion. p. 240.
THE INTRODUCTION.
WHEREIN The Ancient estate of Christianity in general is compared with the
present; and the Condition of the Reformed Religion in this Kingdom in the
first times of it, is compared with that of the present Age; And the Change
lamented.

WHosoever seriously considers the Certainty and Excellency of the Christian
Religion in its own nature, and withal observes with how just Veneration it was
received, with what Ardour embraced, with what Courage and Constancy maintained
and practiced, then, when all the Powers on Earth sought to suppress it, when
the Wit and Malice of the World was combined against it, and when to be a
Christian, was the plain way to ruin, and the loss of whatsoever uses to be
dear to men in this world; And shall compare herewith, the present State of
Christendom, now since the offense of the Cross is ceased, and the Faith of
Christ as is become the Profession of Kings and Princes, and (besides all other
either arguments of its truth, or inducements to embrace it) is confirmed by
the successive Suffrages of so many Ages, and the concurrent Votes of so great
a part of Mankind: He, I say, that shall take the little pains to make this
Comparison, cannot choose but be astonished at the contrary face of things, and
be ready to say with Linacer, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus
Evangelici, Either Christian Religion is not what it was, or men are not what
they were wont to be.

For besides the palpable Contradiction of the Lives of the generality of
Christians now, to the Rules of their Religion, laid down in the Writings of
the New Testament, which is such, as would make an indifferent man suspect that
they believed those Books to contain absolute impossibilities, or at least, not
the things that are necessary to salvation; since so few take the Rule of their
Lives, or the Measures of their Actions thence: Besides this, I say, he that
shall observe how the Primitive Christians for several Ages after our Savior
are reported to have lived, and how far short the latter Ages fall of those
Examples, will be tempted either to pronounce the Histories of those Times mere
Romances; or the Men of these Times to be any thing, rather than what they call
themselves.

Such a general Declension there has been, that the complaint of Tully,
concerning the Philosophers of his time, may justly be applied to the
Christians of ours, That they made disciplinam suam, ostentationem scientiae,
non legem vitae; non obtemperant sibi ipsis, sed in eo peccant, cujus
profitentur scientiam. That whereas Christian Religion was calculated for no
other Meridian, designed to no other purpose, than the bettering and improving
the Tempers and Lives of Men, it is perverted rather to an Apology for our
Looseness, than applied to the Cure of our Disorders.

I cannot please my self with so odious a Comparison as the Case in hand would
admit of; nor will I trouble the Reader with long stories of the admirable
Conversation of those early Christians, which whosoever will take the pains, may
find in Justin Martyr, A thenagoras, Tertullian, Origin and others: And he that
is willing to decline that trouble, may find nearer hand in the Collections of
a judicious and faithful Writer, in his Book called, Primitive Christianity.

But it may not be unuseful to remark some few particulars.

Of old to be a Christian, was to be all that is holy, just and good, to be
adorned with all those Virtues that can render a man acceptable to God, or
lovely amongst men. Wherever this Religion came, it was a Principle of Purity
in men's Hearts, of Honesty in their Lives, and of Peace in Kingdoms and
Societies. It raised men's minds to a Contemplation and Pursuit of another
World, and enabled them both to despise the present, and to be a blessing to
it. It did not teach men to speak great swelling words, but to live, to do and
to suffer admirably; that the very Pagans (their mortal Enemies,) were
astonished at them; and some of them gave them this testimony, Hi sunt qui
vivunt ut loquuntur, and loquuntur ut vivunt; These are the men that are as
good as their word, and live as high and generously as others talk. The
Christian Faith was not then a mere trick of Wit, nor a bone of Contention; but
a Principle of sincere Honesty, which guided men into the knowledge of their
Duty, and inspired them with courage and resolution to perform it.

Give me, Lib. 3. 26. cap. de false sap.
says Lactantius, a fierce and contentious man, and if he will but apply
himself to the Grace and Institutions of the Gospel, he shall become as mild as
a Lamb: Give me a Drunkard or a Lascivious person, with this Doctrine I will
make him chaste and sober: Let a Covetous man hearken to this Doctrine, and he
shall presently dispense his money as charitably, as before he raked it
together fordidly: Give me a timorous and cowardly person, this Religion shall
presently make him valiant and despise death and danger. And so he goes on.

In those days Believing was not an excuse for Disobedience, or a commutation
for a holy Life; but a foundation of Obedience to all the Laws of God and man.

Then all the Professors of Christianity bad one heart and one lip, and then
they built toward Heaven in a good sense; but since, distraction of Mind,
alienation of Affections, and confusion of Language has made a Babel of a
Church. There was then but one division of men, (...) and (...) were the only
Sects the World was divided by; all good men were of one way, and evil men of
another. But now there are almost as many Opinions as Men, as many Parties as
Opinions, and as many Religions as either.

Time was, when men sacrificed their Lives in testimony to their Faith, as
frankly, as since they have done to their Passions, Revenge or Ambition. Then
was Charity counted as essential a part of Religion, as Censoriousness is now
with too many. Brotherly love and mutual dearness was a characteristical Note
of those then, that now may be as well known by their distractions and
animosities. Orat. 1.
St. Gregory Nazianzen said of those Times, That if one Christian took notice
of the error, sin or failing of another, it was to bewail it, to heal it, to
cover his shame, and cure his wound, and prevent a scandal to his Profession;
but he observed, that aftertimes made triumphs of men's weakness and follies;
and men learnt to justify their own wickedness by the miscarriages, of their
Brethren; and that he that would prove himself of the highest form of
Christians, set himself down in the seat of the scorner.

Nothing was then thought too good or costly for the service of God or
Religion: Men would not content themselves to serve God with that which cost
them nothing. It was only Julian, or such another, that envyed the costly
Vessels, wherewith Christ was served. Works of Piety and Mercy and Charity cost
them as much as Luxury and Contention now a days. When the Gentiles in
Tertullian's time, upbraided the Christians, that they made choice of a Cheap
Religion, and renounced the Pagan Sacrifices, because they would not undergo
the charge of them; and complained that the Frugality of the Christian Worship
caused a decay of Trade for the Eastern Gumms and Spices, that used to be spent
in the service of the Gods, and that by this means the Customs of the Emperors
were also diminished: To all this he makes this answer: We Christians spend
more in the relief of the poor, than you Gentiles do upon your Gods: And though
we use not Gumms and Spices for Incense, yet we as much promote Trade by the
vast proportions of those commodities we spend in the imbalming our dead. And
lastly, if it should happen that the Emperors Exchequer should lose any thing,
either by the temperance of our Lives, or the nature of our Religion, yet we
make it up another way; for we make conscience of paying him his just dues:
whereas you cheat and defraud him of more than the proportion of your expenses
above ours would amount to.

In those early times the Christian Assemblies drained and emptied the Roman
Theaters, and the multitude thronged into the Church, as earnestly as now they
crowd out; Coimus in coetum ut ad deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus
orantes, said the forementioned Tertullian. The confluence to the public
Worship was in those days so great, and the consent of heart and voice so
universal, that St. Jerome said, The Hallelujahs of the Church was like the
noise of many Waters, and the Amen like Thunder; Heaven and Earth then answered
each other in a glorious Antiphone, and made up one blessed Chorus: There was
joy in Heaven, and peace on Earth: The Hymn sung by the Angel at our Saviors
Nativity, was verified in those first Ages of his Religion, Glory to God on
High, on Earth peace, and Good Will amongst men.

The Holy men of those times that approached our Savior, had as it were some
Rays of his Divinity shed upon them, and their faces shone like Moses's, when
he came down from the Holy Mount.

A Christian Church was a College of holy and good men, and the Glory of God
filled the place where they assembled; and Fire came down from Heaven too, but
not to set the World in combustion, but to exhale and lift up the Odours of
pious and devout Prayers.

But since those times Zeal has decayed, as if it had not been the intrinsic
Excellency of Religion but the fires of Pagan Persecution that kindled that
heat in the breasts of Christians. And the Church so divided and broken in
pieces, as if it was not one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism that united them, but
a common enemy. Dry Opinions have been taken for Faith, and Zeal of a Party
has gone for Holiness of Life; Men have been busy in making new Creeds, and
have forgotten to practice the old one. And since the Empire has been divided
into East, and West, Churches have been at defiance, and as opposite to each
other as those points are. In short, the once famous Greek Churches are now
overrun with so squalid a Barbarism, that little but the Name of Christianity
is left amongst them: And the Roman Church, Romans 1. 8.
whose Faith was famous and spoken of through all the world, is now as infamous
for Usurpation, Superstition and Cruelty, and so deformed with Pagan Rites and
mundane Policies, that Christianity is the least part of her.

What shall we take to be the reason of this general Defection? Was it only
Novelty and not its intrinsic Goodness and Reasonableness that commended this
Religion to the World, that the longer it lasts, the less it signifies? Or are
the Principles of Christianity effete (like the Causes of the Gentile Oracles,
as Plutarch discourses) that all the motives of Virtue and Holiness have now so
little influence upon men's tempers and lives? Or is it true that was said of
old, Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit matrem, since Churches have
been endowed, men have espoused only the Fortune, and not the Faith? Or is the
true reason, that of old, Christianity was deeply rooted in the Hearts of men,
and brought forth the fruits of good works in their Lives: whereas now it is
only a barren notion in men's Heads, and is productive of nothing but leaves of
Opinion and Profession? Then it was the employment of men's hearts in
meditation, of their knees in devotion, of their hands in distribution and
beneficence: now it is become the entertainment of men's ears in hearing
novelty, of their tongues and lips in censuring and disputing.

But whatever the causes have been, such is the condition of Religion generally
in the Greek and Latin Churches; and I doubt if we come nearer home, we shall
not find things much better.

This Island of Britain had the glory not only to be the native Country of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, but a far Greater, that under Lucius
it received the Christian Faith first of any great Kingdom in the world.
Britannorum loca, Romany inaccessa, Christo vero subdita, says Tertullian,
The Cross made a more effectual as well as a more happy Conquest here, than all
the Roman Powers could do. And this Northern Climate was not only thus early
enlightened with the beams of the Sun of Righteousness, but had life and warmth
proportionably. An evidence whereof we have, in that we find British Bishops at
the Council of Arles which was held before the Nicene: And at the time of the
Nicene Council Britian was counted one of the Six Dioceses of the Western
Empire. And for the Zeal of the British Christians, the Martyrdom of St.
Albane, Amphilochius and others are great and glorious instances.

But to descend to lower times. The Inhabitants of this Island have not been
more famous for Martial Prowess against their enemies, hospitality to
strangers, and good nature toward all mankind, (which three things have been,
and, I hope, are still their peculiar glories,) than for sincere piety and
devotion. Polydore Virgil an Italian, and Erasmus a Dutchman, both of the Roman
Communion, and competent Witnesses, do affirm, That there was more true
Devotion and sincerity of Religion in this Church and Kingdom of England, than
in any one place of the world besides. What was said of Sparta, that ibi senes
sunt maxim senes, might be applied to this purpose, that here Christians were
so the most heartily and truly of any people in the world. The Universal Pastor
(as he would be called) I mean the Bishop of Rome, observed the Sheep of
England to bear such good Fleeces, and so patiently to submit to the Shearer,
that he kept a watchful eye over this Flock, and his vigilance was rewarded
with the Golden Fleece. He and his Emissaries found such large hearts and
devout minds here, that we are enabled to understand the reason of their great
concern for our going astray since, and their earnest and unwearied endeavors
to reduce us back again to that fold. Yet what by being oftener shorn than fed,
(and then not with the best Pastures neither,) what by the ill examples of
others, (but especially of their Guides,) and what by length of time;
corruption overspread this Church too: But then, as it happens in bodies of a
strong and vivacious Constitution, when they chance by ill Diet or other
accident, to be stuffed with Crudities and bad humors, they Critically evacuate
them by mere strength of Nature: So this Church gave certain proof that it had
sana principia, and a true sense of the reality of Christianity, that one of
the first in Christendom it returned to it self and a just temperament by a
Reformation.

And the Reformation of this Church, which the Romanists, for their own ends,
so much detest, and some others unreasonably slight, was as much the Emulation
of other Nations, as Glorious in it self. For,

1. It was the most orderly and best becoming Christianity; it was not brought
in with Tumult and Sedition, as most Changes are, but by Laws and the Supreme
Magistrate. There was no noise of Axes and Hammers in this Building, but the
several parts of this Fabric fell in together with a kind of Harmony, as the
Jews say of the Temple of Solomon.

2. It was the most moderate and temperate, as being the result of Deliberation
and Reason, not of blind Passion or an humor of Innovation. Our Reformers did
not purge out the good, because formerly it had been abused (as the humor of
some men is to do) but vindicated what was useful, from the abuse: they neither
countenanced what was evil by the good was to be found, nor rejected the good
for the casual adherence of evil. They did not abolish a venerable Order or
Office in the Church for the ill manners of some that had born it; but took
care to put better men in the rooms of such. They were not of opinion, that the
Church could not arrive at primitive purity, unless it was reduced to primitive
poverty; nor because they found some Ceremonies then used that were
superstitious and dangerous, and thought too many were but densome, therefore
concluded all decency in the service of God was Popish. And in short, they did
not depart farther from the Church of Rome by Reformation, than she had
departed from the Truth and her self by degeneracy and corruption. By all which
they demonstrated, that the change they made, was not for the sake of humor
and faction, but necessity and public good.

The Church of Rome reproaches us with the sinister ends of the Prince and
several of those that sat at the helm of this great affair: But who knows not,
that it is the usual method of Almighty God to bring about his own designs, and
accomplish the greatest benefits to Mankind, by making the sinister intentions
of men cooperate toward them? He made use of the unnatural cruelty of
Joseph's brethren toward him, to the preservation of the whole family of
Jacob, sending Joseph into Egypt as an Harbinger and Nurse to provide for them
in a famine. And in respect hereof Joseph tells them, it was not they, but God
sent him thither. The Cruelty of Pharaoh, who sought by severities to break and
wear out the Israelites, hardened them and prepared them for all the
difficulties they were afterward to encounter. The obstinacy and incredulity
of the Jews, proved to be the riches of the Gentiles. Acts 8. 4.
The persecution of the Apostles at Jerusalem made way for the spreading of the
Gospel into all other Countries. Instances of this kind are innumerable; or if
they were not, yet were it very unsafe for those of the Church of Rome to make
this objection, lest they provoke us to say what cannot be either denied or
justified, That the barbarous Tyrant and Usurper Phocas brought in the
Universal Pastorship of the Bishop of Rome, and that the most bloody and
rapacious Princes have ordinarily been the great Patrons and Indowers of their
Church; thinking, it seems, to hallow their own Villainies, and legitimate their
unjust acquisitions, by dividing the spoil with the Bishop and Church of Rome.

3. The English Reformation was the most complete and perfect in its kind, as
retaining the most ancient Doctrine and soundest Confession of Faith, founded
upon the holy Scriptures, and agreeable to the first General Councils, the most
Primitive Church Government, and a Liturgy the best accommodate to reconcile
and unite men's Devotions: Such a Liturgy, as Mr. Fox the Author of the
Martyrologie is not afraid to say was indicted by the Holy Ghost; but certainly
had a great testimony in the unspeakable joy and contentment holy men took in
it in King Edward the Sixths days, their zeal for the maintenance of it,
longing for the restitution of it, and sealing it with their blood in Queen
Mary's days, and the universal triumphs and acclamations at the restoring of
it in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

And admirable it is to consider how happy this Church and Nation then was; in
what Glory and Majesty the Prince reigned, in what Peace and Concord the
Subjects lived; but especially it is remarkable, how devout and pious an Age
that was, as is scarce perhaps to be paralleled since the time that
Christianity flourisht under Constantine the Great. what reverence was then
yielded to the Ministers of Religion? What devotion to the public worship? How
general an acquiescence of hearts and minds in it?

Which the greater it was, the more just is our wonder, and the more reasonable
our inquiry, what should be the Cause that in the same Church, and amongst
devout and honest-minded Englishmen, such a zeal should terminate in so cold an
indifferency, as may now be observed; or rather that such a blessed harmony
should degenerate into so much discord, as is now too discernable amongst us.

We read Ezra 3. that when the second Temple at Jerusalem was building, the
young men rejoiced at the reviving glory of their Nation and Religion, but the
old men that had beheld the far greater splendor and more stately Majesty of
the former Temple built by Solomon, they wept, as contemplating how far this
came short of that: so that it was hard to say, whether the shouts of the young
men or the lamentations of the elder were the more loud. And truly when we
consider in how low a condition the Church of England was some few years since,
till it had a happy Resurrection with the return of our Gracious Sovereign,
will see cause to rejoice and thank God that we are in no worse condition than
we are; But he that understands and considers what was the felicity of the
first Age of our Reformation, and compares it with the present condition of our
affairs, will have just cause to lament the difference.

For in those days so venerable was the Society of the Church, that to be cast
out of it by Excommunication was as dreadful as to be thunder-smitten; that
Sentence was like Proscription amongst the Romans, which they counted a Civil
death, and dreaded as much as a Natural. But now it is become a matter of
Ambition with some, and a piece of Glory; And to be cast out of the Church, is
as good as Letters testimonial or recommendatory to other Assemblies.

There were few or none then that did not constantly frequent the Church; now
the Church is become the Conventicle in many places, and the Conventicle the
Church, in respect of the fullness and frequency of the one and the
unfrequentedness and destitution of the other.

Aristonicus came to a certain City in Greece where he observed many Temples,
but few Men that would hear him. He therefore instead of the usual phrase
(...), cries out, (...), Hear O ye Stone-walls, less hard than the hearts of
men. The Application is too easy in our case.

In that time we speak of, the Liturgy and public Prayers were counted a
principal part of Gods worship; now they are not only nothing without a Sermon,
but in danger to desecrate the Sermon too by their conjunction. The Bible is
scarce Canonical, if it have the Prayers bound up in the same Cover; and so
extremely offensive are they grown to some, that they will rather totally
neglect the public Worship of God, and never receive the Communion whilst
they live, than have to do with the Common Prayers.

Heretofore there were but few things scrupled in the established Religion, and
those were very few that made use of any such pretense or scruple; but now it
is become the great point of Sanctity to scruple every thing. Mr. Calv.
There was one indeed, and he a great man, that said, there were tolerabiles
ineptiae in our Liturgy; and the most favorable return he met with, was, that
he had his tolerabiles morositates. Now the title of ineptiae is counted too
mild an expression; whatever suits not the present humor, is either Jewish,
Popish or Superstitious.

This Change is sadly lamentable, that good Laws should be thus trampled upon,
the best Church in the world thus despised, and the best minded People thus
abused.

Now my business is therefore in the first place, to enquire from what Causes
this has come to pass.

PART I.
An Enquiry into the Causes and Origin of the Separation from and Contempt of
the English Reformed Church.

CHAP. I.
Wherein are represented several things that are pretended, but are not the
true Causes of our distractions and dissatisfactions; viz. 1. Corruption in
Doctrine; 2. The too near approach of this Church to the Roman; 3. The
Scandalousness of the Clergy: All which are disproved.

WE have a Proverbial saying amongst us, that Every one that is forty years
old, is either a Fool or a Physician: But without a Proverb to justify the
undertaking, there are but few that (at what age soever) do not think
themselves at years of discretion enough, to pass a judgment upon, and
prescribe to the Body Politic, whether Church or State. Though it usually
happens, that such Empiricks, either to show their wit (suspecting distempers
where there are none) make them; or whilst they rashly adventure quiet a
movere, and like Englishmen will be always mending, they make work for better
skill than their own; or lastly, if they discover some small matter amiss,
mistaking the cause of it, not only lose their time and labor (which would be
easily pardonable) but exhaust the spirits of the Patient with improper
medicines, and purge out the good and useful juices as noxious humors, and so
the Physician becomes far the greater disease of the two.

That our Church is of a sound and healthful constitution, and might have
continued so, had it not met with this fortune, I think I have sufficiently,
though briefly manifested in the foregoing Introduction: But some men either
loving to be always reforming, or having first separated from it, that they
may either commend their own skill, or justify their own fact, must accuse the
Church.

We read of Brutus, that having killed Caesar, he was always after inveighing
against him as a Tyrant, Ita enim facto ejus expediebat, says the Historian,
It was expedient he should call Caesar Tyrant, for otherwise himself must be a
notorious Traitor. So these men, though the greatest disorders of the Church be
but what themselves have made, must find faults, that they may not seem to have
raised all the dust, and withdrawn themselves and others from it without cause.

1. And in the first place the Doctrine of this Church is blamed; though thanks
be to God, there are but few that are of so little discretion as to bring in
this charge, and those that are, will never be able to prove it.

The main (if not the only) thing excepted against in this kind, is, that the
thirty nine Articles are not so punctual in defining the five points debated at
the Synod of Dort as they could wish. But this though it neither needs nor
deserves an answer, yet I shall reply these two things to it.

First, That it is not so with the Doctrine of Christianity as with common Arts
and Sciences, which depend upon humane wit and invention, and consequently are
capable of daily improvements: For the mind of man having not an intuitive
knowledge, but proceeding by way of discourse, discovers one thing by another,
and infers things from one another; so that there is not a Ne plus ultra in
those things, but daily new discoveries, and dies diem docet. Whereto accords
the saying of wise men, Antiquitas saeculi, est juventus mundi, That which we
call the old World, is but indeed the infancy of knowledge, and the latter
Times must needs have as much the advantage of truth as they have of
deliberation and experiment.

But it is quite otherwise with Christianity, for that depending solely upon
Divine Revelation, can admit of no new discoveries; time may obscure it, and
the busy wit of man may perplex and confound it with its inventions, but can
never discover any thing new, or bring to light any truth that was not so from
the beginning. For if we admit of new Revelations, we lose the old and our
Religion together, we accuse our Savior and his Apostles as if they had not
sufficiently revealed Gods mind to the world, and we incurr St. Paul's Anathema
which he denounces against him (whosoever it shall be, nay, if an Anger from
Heaven) that shall preach any other doctrine than what had been received. And
St. Jude has told us the Faith was once, that is either at once, or once for
all delivered to or by the Saints. But if we shall pretend a private Spirit or
Revelation to discover and interpret what was before delivered, we do as bad;
we suppose Christ and his Apostles not to be able to deliver the mind of God,
and we open a Gap for all Impostures and delusions perpetually to infest and
corrupt Christian Doctrine.

The consequence of these premises is, that (contrary to what I affirmed before
of other Sciences) the elder any Doctrine of Christianity can be proved to be,
it must needs be the truer, and accordingly deserve the greater veneration from
us, as coming nearer the fountain of Evangelical Truth, Divine Revelation: and
that he that talks of more clear Light of the latter times, and clearer
discoveries in Religion, talks as foolishly as he that should affirm he could
discern things better at a miles distance, than the man that has as good eyes
as himself, and yet stood close by the object.

This being so, it must needs be the excellency and great commendation of this
Church, that her Articles of Doctrine agree better with the first Times of
Christianity than the last Age; and is an irrefragable Argument that she
derived it not from any Lake or lower streams troubled and mudded with men's
passions and disputes, but from the Fountain of the holy Scripture, and from
those who certainly had best advantage of understanding it in its own
simplicity, the Primitive Church. That no one Father or Writer of the Church,
whether Greek or Latin, before St. Austin's time agreed in Doctrine with the
determination of the Synod of Dort is so notoriously plain that it needs no
proof, nor can be denied. And if he (I mean St. Austin) agrees therewith, yet
it is certain that in so doing he disagrees as much with himself as he does
with us of the Church of England. And what if St. Austin, a devout good man,
(but whose Piety was far more commendable than his Reason,) being hard put to
it by the Manichees on one hand, and the Pelagians on the other, was not able
to extricate himself, who can help it? Shall his Opinion, and that which he was
rather forced into by disputation than made choice of, but especially shall the
Determination of a few Divines at Dort vye with the constant Doctrine of the
Primitive Church, or make that an imputation upon our Church, which is really
amongst its Glories? Must a novel Dutch Synod prescribe Doctrine to the Church
of England, and outweigh all Antiquity? Shall those that knew not how God could
be just, unless he was cruel, nor great, unless he decreed to damn the greatest
part of Mankind; that could not tell how man should be kept humble, unless they
made him not a man but a stock or stone: Shall, I say, such Men and such
Opinions confront the Ancient Catholic Apostolic Faith, held forth in the
Church of England?

Secondly, The Articles of the Doctrine of this Church do with such admirable
prudence and wariness handle these points we are now speaking of, as if
particular respect was had to these men, and care taken that they might
abundare suo sensu, enjoy their own Judgments, and yet without check subscribe
to these Articles. And accordingly it is well known, that not many years since,
when the Dort Opinions were very predominant amongst many Divines of this
Church, they used (it may be) a little more scholastic subtilty to reconcile
their own Opinions with these Articles, but never condemned the latter for the
sake of the former.

And at this day diverse good men are in the service of this Church that are in
their private Judgments of the Dort persuasion, and yet never thought their
subscription to these Articles did any violence to their Consciences or
Judgments: therefore this can be no cause of our Troubles, nor ground of
Separation from the Church.

A second pretense against this Church is, that it is not sufficiently purged
from the dross of Popish Superstitions, that it comes too near the Church of
Rome, and so the Communion of it is dangerous.

Popery is an odious Name in this Nation, and God be thanked that it is so, for
it deserves no less: But as Constantine when he condemned the Arrians and
decreed their Books should be burnt, appointed that they should be called
Porphyrians, a Name sufficiently detested by the generality of Christians: So
those men that have a mind to reproach the Church, know no more effectual way
of affixing an Ignominy upon it, than by laying the imputation of Popery to it.
And indeed if the Charge were as true as it is false, or if it were as probable
as it is malicious, it would not only serve to exasperate the Vulgar against
the Church, but to justify their Secession from it. But it is hard to say
whether the unreasonableness or the uncharitableness be greater in this
suggestion. For,

1. It is certain there has been little or no alteration made in either the
Doctrine, Discipline or Liturgy since the first Reformation; and therefore if
either of them incline too much that way, they did so from the beginning. Now
that which I inquire into, is, what should be the causes of the late revolt and
separation from this Church, or what should make that discernable change in
men's affections toward it, from what was in the former Age? And he that tells
me it was Popishly constituted at first, gives indeed a reason (if it was true)
why this Reformation should not have been entertained at first, but does not
assign a cause why those should depart from it now, that had embraced it with
so much zeal formerly. He therefore that would speak home to this case, must
show that this Church has lost its first love, and has warped toward the old
corruptions from which it was once purged. But this is so far from being
possible to be shown, that it is certain on the contrary, that all the change
that has been made of late years, has been merely in compliance with and
condescension to those that object this against it; and a man would reasonably
expect, they would easily pardon such Innovations.

But in truth the main quarrel is, that we are not always reforming, but keep
to the old Matron-like Dress, the Queen Elizabeth fashion. If the Governors of
the Church would comply with the curiosity of this wanton Age, our Religion
would quickly have the fortune of Apelles's picture according to the known
story. He to deride the conceited folly of the Age, exposes to public view a
Masterpiece of his work: And as it usually happens, that every body pretends
to skill in reforming (by the encouragement of the Proverb that says, facile
est inventu addere) scarcely any person that past by, but spent their verdict
upon the picture; All commend it in the general, yet to give some special
instance of their skill, every one finds some fault or other: One would have
had more Shadow, another less; one commends the Eye, but blames a Lip, etc. The
subtle Artist observes all, and still as any passenger had shot his bolt,
alters the picture accordingly. The result was, that at last by so many
Reformations it became so deformed and monstrous a piece, that not only wiser
men, but these vulgar Reformers themselves wondered at it, and could now
discern nothing worthy so famed an Artist. He on the other hand, to right
himself, produces another Piece of the same Beauty and Art, which he had
hitherto kept up by him, and had escaped their censure, and upbraids them thus,
Hanc ego feci, istam populus, This latter is my work, the other is a monster of
your own making.

This is our case; Christian Religion was by holy and wise men our Reformers,
divested of those gaudy and meretricious accoutrements the Romanists had dressed
her up in, and habited according to primitive simplicity; but this would not
please every body, every Sect and Party would have something or other added or
altered according to their several phancies and Hypotheses, which if it should
be allowed (the opinions of men are so contrary one to another as well as to
truth) the true lineaments of Christianity would quite be lost. Upon this
consideration has not this Church been very fond of alterations.

But to all this it is likely it will be replied, That now we have more light
and discover blemishes and deformities, which (though they were before, yet) we
could not discern when our selves came out of the dark Den of Popery. At first,
like the man under cure of his blindness, Mark 8. 24. we saw men as trees
walking, we discovered only some more palpable errors, but now we discern
though lesser yet not tolerable deformities.

2. To this therefore I answer in the second place, That it is certain all is
not to be esteemed Popery, that is held or practiced by the Church of Rome, and
it cannot be our duty (as I have said before) to depart further from her than
she has departed from the truth: for then it would be our duty to forsake
Christianity it self in detestation of Popery. To reform is not surely to cast
away every thing that was in use before, unless Barbarism be the only through
Reformation.

The Historian observes of those that spoil Provinces and ransack Kingdoms ubi
solitudinem fecere pacem appellant, when they had converted a flourishing
Country into a desolate wilderness, they called this a profound peace. But
sure to reform is not to destroy and lay waste, but to amend. Unless therefore
it can be proved against the Church of England that she holds or practices any
thing false or sinful, it will little avail them that object against her, and
as little be any blemish to her constitution, that in some things she concurs
with the Roman. Nor is it reasonable to say, such a thing is received from the
Church of Rome, merely because there it is to be found, unless it be to be
found no where else: for though it be true that many things are the same in
both Churches, (in as much as it is impossible they should be Churches of
Christ at all else,) yet it is as true that those things wherein they agree are
such (and no other) as were received generally by all Christian Churches, and
by the Roman before it lay under any ill character. But that this Church does
not so syncretize with that of Rome, as to make its Communion unsafe or sinful,
I suppose the following Considerations will give sufficient security to an
unprejudiced mind. In the mean time let me entreat him that has entertained
any suspicions of that kind against her, to give an ingenuous Answer of these
two or three Queries.

1. If there be such a dangerous affinity betwixt the Church of England and the
Romish, how came it to pass that the blessed instruments of our Reformation,
such as A. Bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer and others, laid down their lives in
testimony to this against that? For if those of the Church of Rome could have
been so barbarous as cruelly to murder those excellent persons for some slight
Innovations, or for differing from them in Circumstantials; yet certainly such
wise and good men would not have been so prodigal of their own blood, nor weary
of their lives as to cast them away upon Trifles. It is probable at least
therefore that those of the Church of Rome thought the English Reformation to
be essentially different from them; and it is more than probable that those
holy men aforesaid thought so, and did not offer to God the sacrifice of fools.

2. Or how comes it to pass that all those of the Roman Communion withdraw
themselves from ours, and are commanded so to do by the Head of their Church
under peril of damnation? And on the other side the true Protestants of the
Church of England, think it their duty to absent themselves from the Roman
Worship, lest they should defile their Consciences with their Superstitions? I
say how comes this distance and apprehension of sin and danger reciprocally, if
the differences between them be inconsiderable?

3. Whence comes it to pass, that the Bigots of the Romish Church have more
spite against our Church, than against any Sect or Party whatsoever? but that
they take us not only for Enemies, but the most mortal and formidable of all
those they have to do with.

Or Lastly, if both the Church and Churchmen of England are not far enough
removed from any participation with that of Rome, how comes it to pass that
they of all men most zealously and constantly upon all occasions stand in the
gap and oppose the return of Popery into England, when other men either slight
the danger, or are so fond of their own private sentiments, as apparently to
run the hazard of this for the sake of them? Any reasonable man would think
those men have not really such an abhorrence of Popery as they pretend, and
that there might easily be found terms of accommodation between them, when he
shall observe them more fond of every petty Opinion, than concerned for the
public Security against that common Enemy; And that they will rather venture
the danger of that breaking in upon them, than forgo the least fancy or
opinion; nay, will be instrumental in procuring a Toleration and suspension of
the public Laws for that, which they are so jealous others should have any
kindness for. And for proof of this, I call to witness the transactions of the
last year, when those very men that would be thought the Atlas's and only
supporters of Protestant Religion, and would give out as if their Zeal was the
only Bulwark against Popery, had by their separation from, and enmity to this
Church, weakened the common interest, and by their restless importunities and
unlimited desires of liberty, in a manner extorted a suspension of the Laws
touching Religion. Had not His Majesty and His Parliament timely foreseen the
consequence, and the whole Nation been awakned into an apprehension of the
danger by the serious and constant admonitions of the Episcopal Clergy, Popery
might have come in like a Landflood upon us, notwithstanding those quicksighted
Watchmen that can spy Popery so far off. I say had not the Churchmen
especially bestirred themselves, and showed both a better courage and zeal
against Popery, and also a better skill in that warfare than their Accusers,
the so much dreaded Enemy had ere this time been in fair hopes of attaining his
desires.

This was a passage of so much glory to the true Churchmen, and so great and
illustrious an instance of their integrity, that I am in hope whilst it shall
remain in memory, Malice it self will be ashamed to lay any imputation of
inclining to Popery either upon the Church or Churchmen of England.

I shall not need to add to all this, That there are as understanding men in
Religion, persons of as holy Lives, and of as comfortable Consciences, of this
Churches Education, as are any where to be found in the world besides. Which
three things together fully acquit any Church of participation with Popery. For
that degeneracy of Christianity is for nothing more truly hateful, nor by
nothing more discoverable than by its blind devotion, principles of immorality,
and the bad security it gives to the Consciences of men; which who so acquits
any Church of, (as every considerate man must needs do this Church) he shall
after that, very unreasonably leave any ill character upon her, at least of
that nature we now are speaking of.

3. But there is a terrible Charge yet to come, and that is against the
Sufficiency, but especially the Sanctity of the Clergy and Ministry of the
Church of England; as if they, like the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 15. made men to
abhor the offerings of the Lord. And this is made the pretense of resorting to
Conventicles, and forsaking the Church.

Now if this was as true as it is horribly false, it might be an Objection
perhaps fit for a Papist to make, who is taught that the efficacy of all Divine
Offices depends upon the intention and condition of him that administers; But
no Protestant without contradicting his own principles can make use of it to
justify his recession from the Church: For if the efficacy of all Divine
Ordinances depend upon the Divine Institution and the concurrence of Gods Grace
with my use of them, what can it prejudice me, that he that administers is an
evil or unlearned man, so long as I prepare my self to receive benefit
immediately from God in the use of the means appointed by him? This therefore
may serve for a malicious stone to cast at us from whom they are departed; but
no argument in the cause, nor excuse for themselves.

Yet I confess nevertheless, this way of arguing (for we must be forced to call
hard word by that name) is of great prevalence with injudicious persons, and
able to prejudice them against the best Constitutions in the world. For they
not understanding the reason of things, give reception and entertainment to any
proposition in proportion to the opinion or reverence they have for the person
that recommends it. It is a known story, how well the Spartans were aware of
this; and therefore if in their Council, a man of a bad life had propounded
excellent counsel, they would not suffer him, but suborn some other person of
great sanctity to be the Author of it: Amongst other reasons, lest the ill
opinion that was generally conceived of the person, should derogate from the
weight and value of the counsel and advice.

Therefore the more extremely to blame are those that acknowledging the truth
and excellency of the Doctrine of the Church of England, can yet find in their
hearts to undermine the success of it by sowing suspicions and in raising
scandals against them, that are to propagate it.

It will be to the immortal glory of the Great Constantine, that when at the
Nicene Council the Bishops and Clergy had exhibited to him a great bundle of
Libels one against another, he burnt them all together before their faces, as
thinking them fitter for the fire than the light. And protested he had so great
a zeal for the reputation of Churchmen, and such a sense of the concern and
consequence of their good same and reputation, that if he should see one of
them in the most scandalous commission, he would cover such a man's shame with
his own Purple.

But as I doubt in these days there is little of the Spirit and Charity of
Constantine, so thanks be to God, there is little need of it in this case; for
I doubt not to convince this suggestion against the Churchmen of as much
falsehood, as the former against the Church of frivolousness. For though there
want not those in these days that are so quick-sighted as to discover spots in
the Sun it self: Though I say, there be both those that have great skill in all
the methods of uncharitableness, such as can insinuate little whispers and
jealousies first, and then foment and hatch them up to a story, and then
aggravate the fact, and lastly make the folly of some one man, be the scandal
of the whole Order; And also those Atheistical persons whose interest it is (in
order to the extenuating their own villainies,) as much as may be to render the
persons of those that reprove them as ridiculous as they can, and to that
purpose are become great proficients of late in a scurrilous kind of drollery,
whereby they can sublimate their own vices and debaucheries into a kind of
vapor, a mere frolic and Gentile humor, and on the other side aggravate the
mere humane infirmities of graver men into great deformities: yet all their
combined wit and malice will never be able to affix any scandal upon the Body
of the present English Clergy.

1. For their Learning and Ability: If the Preaching of the present Age be not
better than that of former, I would fain know the reason why the Homilies are
in no greater reputation, and should expect to see the people desire their
Pastors to read them in the Congregation, and save the labor of their own
compositions.

If the Sermons of foreign Divines be better than those of the English, what is
then the reason that all Protestants abroad admire the English way of
Preaching, insomuch that some foreign Congregations (as I am credibly informed)
defray the charges of the travails of their Pastor into England, as well as
dispense with their absence, that they may return to them instructed in the
method of English Preaching.

Whether the Preaching in the Church of Rome be to be preferred before ours, he
that has not a mind to travail into those parts, may yet indifferently well
resolve himself, if he take but the pains to read a Book written by Erasmus of
the Art of Preaching: which whosoever has done or shall do, I verily persuade
my self, he shall quickly be able to reckon up more follies and ridiculous
passages, than all those gathered together by the Author of the Inquiry into
the Causes of the Contempt of the Clergy.

Lastly, He that shall take the pains or have the curiosity to compare the
Preachings generally in our Churches with those ordinarily in the Conventicles,
will either find them very unequally matched, or else if he has any reason at
all, he has reason to suspect himself intolerably prejudicate. For on the one
side, he shall find sound Theology, strength of Argument, gravity of Expression
and distinctiness of Method; on the other side nothing more frequent than
puerile and flat, oft-times rude, and sometimes blasphemous expressions,
Similitudes instead of Arguments, and either apish Gestures, or tragical
Vociferations instead of Eloquence.

Besides, a wise man may in great measure take an estimate of the wisdom and
abilities of a Preacher or Writer by the very subject he chooses to discourse
on, and not only by the manner of handling it. And he that shall impartially
apply himself to this little trouble, may easily observe the Sermons and
Tractates of the Non-conformists generally, to be either about. Predestination,
which (besides the danger of it amongst the people for mistakes) nothing but
unskilfulness could make any man confident enough to undertake the unfolding
of; or about Union with God and Christ, which themselves confess to be
unintelligible, and they help to make it so; or the sweetness, beauty and
loveliness of Christ's Person, which is seldom handled with any better effect,
than the stirring up some sensual passion or other in the fond Auditors, as I
have seen verified by experience.

God forbid that I should charge all the Non-conformists with such indecencies
as these; but it is manifest it is such kind of discourses as I have intimated,
that are the most taking and ravishing amongst them.

But then on the other side, you shall hear Discourses of the Nature and
Attributes of God, and the reason of Religion deduced thence; of the Divine
Providence, and Arguments of Contentment, Reverence and Submission inferred
therefrom; of the Eternal reasons of Good and Evil, and indispensable
obligations to Virtue, as the consequence of that principle laid upon the
Consciences of men; of the nature of Faith, the necessity of Holiness, of
Charity, of Obedience to Governors: all which are good and profitable, and of
great weight and importance.

If we now compare the Writings of both parties, the difference will yet be
more legible. Although it has been observed of old by a Wise and Great man,
That generally the ablest of men have not been most given to writing of Books,
as being loath to make themselves Themes for fools to comment upon; but a middle
sort of men are most disposed, and usually have best success that way, whose
Genius is more adequate to vulgar capacities: yet let any man of competent
judgment lay passion and prejudice aside, and say, if the Writings of the
Divines of this Church, both in the Controversies of Religion and most other
parts of Learning, have not matched any other Profession, any other Church, but
extremely overmatcht their Opponents? It were easy to name Men and Writings,
but I conceive it needless in so clear a case.

2. But then for the lives of Churchmen; Though I will not render evil for
evil, nor retaliate the reproaches cast upon the Sons of the Church, by ripping
up the miscarriages of the other persuasions: For (besides that I have not so
leaned Christ,) I have observed so much of the world, that such uncharitable
recriminations have not only made an Apology for the Atheism and Profaneness of
the Age, but afford a pleasant spectacle to all evil men, to behold Divines
coming upon the Stage like Gladiators, and wounding and murdering one another
reputation. To which add, that I verily hope the Lives, of the generality at
least, of the Clergy of England are so unblameable and commendable in
themselves, that they need not the soil of other men's deformities to set them
off or recommend them. Yet I will say these two two things further in the case.

1. If a man be a malcontent with the Government, and forsaking the Church
resort to private Assemblies, or if being a Clergyman and continuing in the
Church, he shall debauch his Office and undermine the Church which he should
uphold; such a man may then debauch his Life too, and yet have a very
charitable construction amongst the generality of dissenters. And on the other
side, if a man be of singular sanctity and the most holy conversation, but
withal zealous of the interest of the Church and his own duty in it, this man
shall have worse quarter and be more maligned by the fiery Zealots of other
parties, than one that is both of a more loose life and meaner abilities.
Whence it plainly appears, that the bad lives of Clergymen (if it were true)
is but a pretext, not the true cause of quarrel with the Church.

2. If impertinent and fantastical talking of Religion be Religion, if endless
scrupulosity and straining at Gnats, if censoriousness and rash judging our
Betters and Superiors, if melancholy sighing and complaining be true
Christianity, if going from Sermon to Sermon, without allowing our selves time
to mediate on what we hear, or leisure to instruct our Families; if these, and
such as these, are the main points of true Godliness, then I must confess, the
Sons of the Church of England are not generally the most holy men, and the
Non-conformists are. But if a reverent sense of God, and Conscience of keeping
all his express Laws, if Justice, Mercy, Contentment, Humility, Patience,
Peaceableness and Obedience to Governors, be the principal ingredients of a
good life; as doubtless they are, if we take our measures either from our
Savior, the Apostles or Prophets: Then I do not despair but the Churchmen may
be good Christians, and of far more holy lives than their accusers,
notwithstanding all the contempt cast upon them. For upon this Issue I dare
challenge Malice it self to be able to fasten any brand of bad life upon the
generality or body of the Clergy.

I know this Age is not without some of the brood of Cham, who will take the
impudence to uncover their Fathers nakedness, and expose those deformities,
which they ought, not only out of charity or reverence, but wisdom also to
conceal. And it is not to be expected that such a body of men, made of the same
flesh and blood, and solicited with the same temptations with other men, should
be altogether without spot or blemish: yet I do really believe, those are
extreme few of that number that justly deserve any scandalous character, and
also very inconsiderable in respect of the whole. And he that shall for the
miscarriages of a few, reflect dishonor upon the Clergy in general, shall do
as unrighteously, as he that shall take a downright honest man, and omitting
his many and great virtues and innumerable good actions, only rake up and
represent in an odious Catalogue all the follies of his youth and errors of his
life. By the which artifice, the best man in the world, much more the best
Society of men may be rendered odious enough. It is well enough known, that the
healthfullest body is not without some humors, which if they were all drawn
together, into some one part or member, would make an ill and dangerous
spectacle: but whilst they lie dispersed in the whole mass of blood, where
there is a vast predominancy of the good, or else are locked up in their private
cells, glandulae or other receptacles, till they shall be critically evacuated,
do in the mean time, little or nothing endanger or deform such a body. I need
not apply this to the case in hand. To conclude therefore; Were there but
either so much Charity and Humanity as ought to be in Men and Christians, or so
much unprejudicacy as becomes wise and good men, used in this matter; we should
instead of reproaching the failings or miscarriages of a few, heartily thank
God for that remarkable Holiness, Humility and Charity that is yet alive and
warm in the breasts of so many of the Divines of this Church in this cold and
degenerate Age. And for the rest we should think of that saying of Tacitus,
Vitia erunt donec homines, sed neque haec continua, and meliorum interventu
pensantur.

CHAP. II.
Of the more remote and less observed Causes of the infelicity of this Church;
such as 1. The Reign of Queen Mary and return of Popery under her in the
Infancy of the Reformation. 2. The bad provision for Ministers in Corporations,
etc. 3. Frequent Wars. 4. The liberty in Religion that Trade seems to require.
5. The secret designs of Atheists and Papists.

HItherto I have only noted and refuted the Scandals and Contumelies cast upon
this Church, which how groundless and unreasonable soever they are, yet do not
a little mischief when they are whispered in corners, and insinuated in
Conventicles.

I might have reckoned up some more of the same nature, and as easily have
disproved them; but they are either reducible to those we have touched, or will
fall under consideration in due time.

I now proceed from those Imaginary, to inquire into and consider of the true
and real Causes of the present disaffection to the English Reformation, and
they will be found to be of several kinds; but I will not trouble my self
curiously to distinguish them into exact Classes, contenting my self faithfully
to relate them, and represent their peculiar malignant influences. And in this
Chapter I will bring into view these five following.

1. It was the misfortune, and is the great disadvantage of this Church, that
it was not well confirmed and swadled in its Infancy. It is the observation of
wise men, that it greatly contributes to the duration and longevity of any
Society, to have a good time of Peace in its Minority, and not to have been put
upon difficulties and trials till its limbs and joints were settled and
confirmed, that is, till the people were competently inured to the Laws, and
the Constitutions by time digested into Customs and made natural to them. The
State of Sparta remained entire without any considerable change in its
Constitution or Laws the longest of any Society we have read of: And Lycurgus
the Lawgiver and Founder of that Commonwealth, is thought to have taken an
effectual course to make it so durable by this stratagem. When he had framed
the body of their Laws, he pretends occasion of Travail to consult the Oracle
at Delphos about their affairs, but first takes an Oath of all the
Lacedaemonians to preserve the Laws in being inviolable till his return. Which
having done, he resolvedly never returns to them again. By this means whilst
the people were by the Religion of their Oath and a long expectation of his
delayed return, for a long time used to the Constitutions he had established,
they grew so well practiced in them, that at last Custom had habituated and
even naturalized them to them, that they became unchangeable. Agreeable
hereunto is the observation of our own Lawyers, that the Common Law, as they
call it, is never grievous to the people, and seldom repealed, whatever
defects are in it, as StatuteLaws frequently are; because long Custom and Use
has fitted either that to the men or the men to it, that all things run easily
and naturally that way. It is observed also by Divines, That when God Almighty
gave a peculiar Body of Laws to the people of Israel, he took not only the
opportunity of their straits and adversities at their coming out of Egypt,
that his Institutions might the more easily be received; but also kept them
forty years under the continual education in and exercise of those Laws, and
that in the Wilderness, where they were not likely to take in any other
impressions, nor have other examples before their eyes to tempt or corrupt
them. And besides all this, in a wonderful providence he so ordered it, that
all those men that came out of Egypt (except Caleb and Joshua) and had
observed other Customs and Laws, and so might be likely to give beginning to
innovation, should all dye before they came into the Land of Canaan. That by
all these means, the Laws he gave them might take the deeper root, and so
remain unalterable to all generations.

I cannot choose but observe one thing more to this purpose, That when our
Blessed Savior had by himself and his Apostles planted his Religion in the
World, though it was such a Law as sufficiently recommended it self to the
minds of men by its own goodness, easiness and reasonableness, and therefore
was likely to be an everlasting Religion (or Righteousness) as the Prophet
Daniel calls it; yet for more security, it pleased the Divine Providence to
restrain the rage of Pagans and Jews for a good while, and to give the
Christians above sixty years of peace, before any considerable persecution
broke in upon them; that in that warm Sun it might spread its roots, and get
some considerable strength and footing in the world.

But it was the will of God, that the strength of this newborn Church of
England should be early tried. And that it might give proof of its divine
extraction, it must, like Hercules, conslict with Serpents in its cradle, and
undergo a severe persecution, the good King Edward the Sixth dying immaturely,
and Queen Mary succeeding him in the Throne.

By which means it came to pass, that as this Infant-Reformation gave egregious
proof of its intrinsic truth and reasonableness, many fealing it with their
blood; so it had this disadvantage (that we are all this while representing)
namely, that by reason of this persecution a great number of the Ministers and
other members of this Church, were driven into other Countries for refuge and
shelter from the storm; and there, were (as it is easy to imagine) tempted with
novelty, and distracted with variety of Rites and Customs, before they were
well instructed in the reasons, or habituated to the practice of their own. And
hereupon (as it is usually observed of English Travailers) brought home with
them those foreign fashions, the fond singularity of which is still very taking
with too many to this day.

I say, thus it came to pass, that those that went out from us, returned not
again to us when they did return, in regard that before they were well inured
to the English Reformation, they became inamoured of the Rites of other
Churches, not much considering whether they were better, so long as they were
fresher and newer, nor minding that there are oft-times reasons that make one
Form necessary to be established in one place or people, and not in another,
when otherwise it is possible they may be both indifferent in themselves, but
not equally fit to the humor and custom of the people, or consonant to the
Civil Constitutions; nor yet observing that many things were taken up and
brought into use in other Churches not upon choice but necessity, not because
they were absolutely better in themselves, but the state of affairs so
requiring. As for instance; where the Reformation had not at first the
countenance of the Civil Government, there the Reformers were constrained to
enter into particular confederations with one another; from whence Presbyterian
Government seems to have taken its rise. I say, these Exiled English
Protestants not entering into so deep a search into the special causes or
occasions of those different Rites and Forms they found in the places whither
they fled for succor, as to discover whether they were strictly Religious or
merely Political: but observing some pretexts of Scripture to be made for them,
and in process of time, during their abode in those parts being used to them,
and by use confirmed in them; they at last, when they might with safety return
to England again, came home laden with these Foreign Commodities, and crying
them up with a good grace, found too many Chapmen for such Novelties. Thus as
the children of Israel, even then when they had Bread from Heaven, Angels food,
longed for the Onions and Garlike of Egypt, remembering how sweet those were to
them under their bitter bondage, and had upon all occasions, and upon every pet
or disgust, a mind to return thither: So these men retained as long as they
lived a lingering after those entertainments which they found then very pleasant
when other was denied them; and so much the more, in that, as I said before,
they received a tincture of these before they had well imbibed or sufficiently
understood the reasons of the Church of England.

And though these men are now dead, yet the Childrens Teeth are still set on
edge with the sour Grapes their Fathers have eaten. For those persons being
considerable for their Zeal against Popery, and very much recommended to the
esteem of people at their return, by the travail and hardship they had
underwent for the Protestant profession, were easily able with great advantage
to communicate their Sentiments and propagate their Prejudices amongst the
Members of this Church. Here therefore I think we may justly lay the first
Scene of the Distractions of this Church.

A second Cause may be reckoned the bad and incompetent provision for a Learned
and Able Ministry in the Corporations and generality of great Parishes in
England.

It is easy to observe, that the multitudes of Opinions that deform and
trouble this Church, are generally hatched and nursed up in the Corporations,
Market Towns, and other great places; whereas the lesser Country Villages are
for the most part quiet, and peaceably comply with Established Orders. And if I
should say, that not only the Dissatisfaction with the Rites and Government of
the Church, but also the Convulsions and Confusions of State, took their Origin
from the bad humors of those greater Societies or Congregations of people, I
suppose I should say no more than what the observation of every considerative
man will allow and confirm.

Now he that searching for a reason of this difference shall impute it either
to the Ease, Fullness and Luxury of the former, whereby they have leisure and
curiosity to excogitate Novelties, and spirit and confidence to maintain and
abett them, whilst the latter tired with hard labor, neither trouble
themselves nor others, but apply themselves to till the ground, and earn their
bread with the sweat of their brows: or to the multitude and great concourse of
people in the former, amongst whom Notions are more easily started, better
protected, and parties sooner formed for the defense and dissemination of them.
He, I say, that discourses thus, gives a true account for so much, but searches
not far enough to the bottom. For had there been an able Learned Orthodox
Clergy settled in such places, they by their wisdom and vigilance, would in a
great measure have obvated all beginnings of these disorders; partly by
principling the minds of men with sound Doctrine, partly convincing
Gainsayers, and especially rendering the Government of the Church lovely and
venerable by their wise deportment.

In order therefore hereunto, there ought to have been the most liberal
Maintenance and ingenuous Encouragement settled upon such important places. That
where the work was greatest, and the importance most considerable, the motives
to undertake it might be so too. To the intent that the most able and judicious
Clergymen might have been invited to, and settled upon those places that most
needed them. But contrariwise it is most visible, that in those places where
most Skill is to be exercised and most Labor to be undertaken, there is little
Revenue to encourage the Workman.

In a little obscure Parish or Country Village oftentimes there is a well
endowed Church, but in these great ones, generally, where the Flock is great,
the Fleece is shorn to the Shepherds hands, and so pitiful a pittance left to
the Curate or Minister, that he can scarce afford himself Books to study, nor
perhaps Bread to eat, without too servile a dependence upon the Benevolence of
his richer Neighbors; By which means either his Spirit is broken with
Adversity, or the Dignity of his Office obscured in the meanness of his
condition, or his Influence and Authority evacuated, having neither wherewith
to live charitably nor hospitably; or all these together: nay, it is well, if,
to help himself under these Pressures, he is not tempted to a sordid Connivance
at, or Compliance with all those Follies and Irregularities he should correct
and remedy. And so like Esau, sell his Birthright (the Dignity of the
Priesthood) for a mess of Pottage.

Now how this comes to pass, that the greatest Cures have generally the least
Maintenance, is easily found; for it is well enough known that in those Times
when the Popes had a Paramount Power in England, a great part of the Tithes and
Revenues of Churches were by their extravagant Authority ravished from them, and
applied to the Abbeys and Monasteries, and this like an Ostracisme fell
commonly upon the greatest Parishes, as having the best Revenues (and
consequently the more desirable Booty to those hungry Caterpillars) and so the
Issue was, that the richest Churches were made the poorest, in many such places
little more than the Perquisites and Easter-Offerings being left to those that
shall discharge the Cure.

And then though afterward these superstitious Societies were dissolved, yet
the Tithes being not thought fit to be restored to their respective Churches,
the consequence is, that those places which ought for the good both of Church
and State to be well provided for, are too often supplied by the most
inconsiderable Clergymen, or those men made so by the places they supply. My
meaning is, that by reason of the incompetent Legal Maintenance provided for
such Ministers, the people have it in their power either to corrupt an easy
and necessitous man, or to starve out a worthy and inflexible one; and so
whatever the humor of the place shall be, it is uncontrollable and incurable.

To remedy these inconveniences, it has of late pleased His Majesty and the
Parliament, to make some provision so far as concerns the City of London, and
it is hoped the same wisdom will in time take like care of other great places
in the same condition; for till some such course be taken, it will be in vain
to expect that the Church of England or the best Laws of Religion that can be
devised, should either obtain just Veneration or due Effect.

3. I account the late Wars another Cause of the bad estate of the Church and
Religion amongst us. Which may perhaps seem the more strange, since when men
put their Lives most in danger, one would think they should then take the most
care to put their Souls out of danger. Besides it has been the wisdom of most
Nations to desire the countenance and encouragement of Religion in all their
Martial undertakings. The Romans made great scruple of enterprizing any thing
of that nature, till either their Priests (from inspection of the Sacrifice) or
some other of their Pagan Oracles had given them the signal. And the Turkish
Mufti or High Priest must give the Prime Vizier his blessing before he enters
upon the business. Whether it be that men indeed believe God Almighty to be the
Lord of Hosts, and to give Victory to those that stand best approved with him;
or whether it be only that they apprehend that the opinion of being under Gods
favor, gives reputation to their Arms, inspires their men with valor and
resolution, and disheartens their enemies; or upon whatsoever consideration: it
is certain the matter of Fact is true, and that Religion is of great efficacy
in Warlike exploits.

It may, I say, therefore seem the more strange, that War should be injurious
to that which it seeks to for countenance and encouragement. But most strange
of all, that Enemies abroad should make men quarrel with their Friends at home;
that Iron and Steel, Wounds and Blows should make men tenderconscienced; that
those who can find in their hearts to shed the blood of Men, of Christians, and
of their Brethren without remorse, should be so queasie stomached as to scruple
every punctilio and nicety in Ecclesiastic matters. And yet he that narrowly
considers the rise and progress of our Disorders, will find that the
distractions of the Church have kept pace with those of the State; and as
before the War our Religious disputes and dissentions were but few to what they
came to afterward, so by every War, they have sensibly increased and grown
upon us. For the proof of which I will desire the Reader to look no further
back than to either of the Wars between this Kingdom and the States of the Low
Countries; and if he do not observe the contempt of Religion to be greater, and
the state of the Church worse at the end of each of them than at the beginning,
I will confess my self too servere an Interpreter of the effects of War. How
War should so much debauch the Spirit of a Nation is not my business to
inquire; yet these four things following seem to give some light into it.

1. There are certain Doctrines and Opinions found to be very useful in War,
and to animate men in Encounters, that are utterly contrary both to Truth and
Peace. Such as that of the Fatal Necessity of all things; which in the natural
consequence of it is destructive of all Virtue. Yet however, the Turks find it
of great consequence in their Wars, and it serve to animate their Janissaries to
run desperately upon the very mouths of Canons. And this same persuasion, or
one very like it, was highly cried up and found serviceable to all bad purposes
of our late Civil Wars.

2. Those that have occasion to use men's Courage, are forced to be content to
wink at their Debaucheries, for fear they should emasculate the spirits of
those they employ, and turn the edge of their mettle. So Drunkenness, Whoring,
Swearing and Blasphemy ordinarily pass under a very easy Censure amongst
Soldiers. Men whose hearts are eagerly set upon a War are apt to permit those
whose hearts and hands they use in it, to be afraid of nothing, that so they
may be fearless of the Enemy. And when the War is over, these Extravagancies
are not laid down with their Arms: For when Lewdness has gotten a habit, and
men's Foreheads are brazen in their wickedness, they will not receive a check
from disarmed Religion; but rather harden themselves against it, and account
that their Enemy which they are sure will not give countenance to the Vices
they are now settled in. In short; War lets loose the Reins and incourages men
to sin; And when the War is over, these men are turned over to the Church for
cure of their Souls, as to the Hospital for their bodily wounds. But no man
will wonder if these men have no great kindness to the Church, which forbids
them the liberty and pleasure the Camp allowed them; especially if it also
prescribe them a severe course, and make their Consciences smart for the sins
they have formerly practiced with pleasure, and have yet a mind to.

3. War has its peculiar Laws different vastly from those of the Church and of
every well ordered Commonwealth too. The hazards and necessities of War make
many things lawful there, that are otherwise abominable; as to make no
difference betwixt things Sacred and Profane, to pull down Churches, and do
other such horrid things as nothing but War can palliate. And from hence it is
too ordinary for men to be led on by Custom, so as in time they forget the
Differences of things altogether; and the Church and the Stable, the Priest and
the Peasant are all one to them.

4. The mere disuse of Religion and its Offices antiquates the obligations of
it with many. When men have long heard the noise of Drums and Trumpets, they
are deaf to the still voice of the Gospel; and after long conversation with
Iron and Steel, the Weapons of the Spiritual Warfare are of no force with them.
Then, instead of Prayers men learn to curse and swear, and by disuse of
Religion grow to forget it and slight it; and from not going to Church for a
time (upon necessity) grow to plead a privilege not to come at it at all.

Since then the Sword does so much prejudice to the Gown, and the Camp to the
Church, it is no wonder when we have been so often engaged of late in the one,
that the other has been and is in no better condition.

4. I would in the next place, might I do it without offense, take the boldness
to say, that the vast increase of Trade does usually reflect some inconvenience
upon Ecclesiastical affairs. I mean no hurt either to any men's Persons or
Interest, I envy no men's Prosperity and Wealth; It is far from my thoughts to
wish the Tide of Trade dammed up: for I confess it is hugely advantageous to
the public, as well as to private persons in many respects. It much raises the
parts and sharpens the wits of a Nation by foreign conversation, to which some
apply that passage of the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 12. 4. Many shall pass to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

It opens a passage to the discovery of other Countries, and of the works of
God and Man, of Nature and of Art.

It is the great Incentive and the great Instrument of humane Society; it makes
all Mankind of one body, and by mutual intercourse to serve the occasions,
supply the needs, and minister to the delight and entertainment one of another.

It inlarges the Minds of men as well as their Fortunes; insomuch that any
Nation is unpolite, unbred, and half barbarous without it.

It inures men to hardship and danger, and instructs them in subtilty and all
the Arts of living, and self-security.

It adds much to the beauty, power and strength of a Nation, and to the riches
and revenue of the Prince.

Yet all this notwithstanding, I must crave leave to say, that the Enlargement
of Trade has usually been attended with as much Latitude of Conscience, and
the heat of that with as much coldness and indifferency in Religion. It is
commonly observed to introduce great diversity of Opinions, and consequently to
abate of men's Zeal for, and Reverence of, an Uniformity in what was before
established. For men by conversing much abroad or with Strangers, get a tincture
of the Humors and Persuasions, of the Customs and Sentiments of those Persons
with whom, and Places where, they have to do. And this is most remarkably true
of the English, whose temper is not so stubborn and inflexible as that of some
other People, nor so fastuose and contemptuous of other men's Opinions and
Practices. Their good nature prompts to look and think favorably upon such
things as they see in request with others; and from hence they proceed to
admiration, and at last to affect the novelty; and then they bring over with
them and set to sale at home many a new fangle amongst other vendible
commodities.

The wise Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians, of whom I have had heretofore
occasion to speak, in contemplation of this danger, and that the Laws and
Government might not be disturbed with Novelty, absolutely forbad Trade or
Traffic, and so much as travailing into other Countries, lest the Citizens
should barter away their own Laws and Customs for those of other Cities. But
thanks be to God, there is no necessity of having recourse to such a violent
Remedy; the Laws of our Religion do both admit of, and direct and govern
Commerce, and the reasonableness of our Christian Religion in general, and of
the English Reformation in particular is such, as that it may be well hoped
they may rather gain than lose Proselytes by being confronted with any other
Institutions, and allure considerate men to the embracing of them, whilst some
lighter and incogitant persons may be betrayed by their Curiosity. All the Use
therefore that I make of this Observation concerning Trade is, That since there
is some danger to Religion thereby, all those that do not make a God of the
World, and take Gain for Godliness, will think these three things following to
be reasonable.

1. That since it is plain, the same Means will not preserve Uniformity in
Religion, nor conserve the Reverence and Happiness of the Church in a Nation
vastly addicted to Foreign Commerce, as would do where the more simple way of
Agriculture was attended to (as it was amongst the Spartans and this Nation
formerly) that therefore there may be such Laws provided, and such care taken
as that the one be not discouraged, nor the other corrupted.

2. That every man will not only take care to inform himself in the grounds of
his own Profession of Religion, but also have so much Charity toward the
Governors of his own Country and this Church, as to think them both as wise
and as honest as in other places; that by both these his Reason may be
instructed, and his Affections somewhat composed against every assault of
Novelty from other men's Opinions or Practices.

3. That at least we will not think it just to impute all the Distractions of
men's Minds and Quarrels against the Church to the badness of its Constitution,
since this point of Trade has such influence as we see both in the Nature of
the thing and in the visible Effects of it.

5. It must not be omitted that both Papist and Atheist, though upon several
grounds, combine their Malice against this Church, and use all their several
Interests and Endeavors to render it as contemptible as they can.

For the former, Manet alta mente repostum
Judicium Paridis, spretaeque injuria formae.


We know they remember the slur we gave then in our Reformation; they are well
aware that the decent Order, the Dignity and ancient Gravity of this Church,
reproves and shames the Pageantry of theirs. They forget not how often the
eminent Abilities of our Churchmen have baffled theirs; therefore they are to
be reckoned upon as immortal Enemies. They know, nothing stands so much in the
way of their Designs as the Church of England. This has the countenance of the
Laws, the support of Reason, the favor of Antiquity, the recommendation of
Decency. They therefore can easily frame themselves to a complaisance toward
all other Sects, because they despise them; but here oderunt dum metuunt: their
fears and danger by this, provoke their endeavors, inflame their anger, and
suffer them not so much as to dissemble their spite against it. It is well
enough known, how under the disguise of Quakers and other names, they have
undermined its reputation and given it what disturbance they can how by their
Insinuations into some loose o^ weaker persons they seek to weaken is powers
and draw off her numbers; how they have furnished others with Arguments to
impugn it, and subaided all unquiet spirits against her. They that scruple
nothing themselves, nor will suffer any to scruple any thing in their own
Communion, can teach people to be very nice and squeamish in the Church of
England. They that are altogether for a blind Obedience at home, preach up
tenderness of Conscience abroad; and when an Implicit Faith will do well
enough in Spain or Italy, etc. yet in England nothing must content men but
Infallible Certainty, and that in the most circumstantial and inconsiderable
matters.

Then for the Atheists; They conscious of the odiousness of their pretenses
(though of late arrived at greater impudence than formerly) think it not safe
to laugh at all Religions at once, though they equally abhor all. Therefore
lest they should engage too many enemies at once, they deal by Retail, and
expose to scorn the several Parties of Christians one after another. But to be
sure, the better any Persuasion is, the more industriously they set themselves
to depress it; as knowing well, if they can bring that into Contempt, they may
be secure of the other, which must one time or other fall of themselves by
reason of the unsoundness of their Foundations. Besides it seems something
below them to set their wit against a Fanatic, they must have higher game, and
their Jests go off more piquantly when they gratify the popular envy, by being
levelled against that which has a great stock of Reputation, and the
countenance of public Laws.

These blind Beetles that rose out of filth and excrement, and now buz about
the world, hope, not only to cover their shame, but to increase their Party
daily by the divisions of Christians; and therefore labor to inflame the
Causes, to provoke men's Passions and exasperate their minds one against
another. They scurilously traduce all that is serious, and study Religion only
to find out flaws in it. And what they cannot do by manly Discourse, they
endeavor by Buffoonry. In short; It is their manner to dress the best Religion
in the world in a fantastical and ridiculous habit, that Boys may laugh at
it, and weak people brought out of conceit with it, and their Worships made
merry with the Comedy.

Now since the Church of England is beset with all these Enemies and under the
aforesaid Disadvantages, it is no wonder if the felicity and success of it be
not a little disturbed. It was noted amongst the Felicities of old Rome, as
that which gave it the opportunity of growing up to so vast a Greatness, That
till it had by degrees subdued all its Neighbors, and was now match for all
the World, it had never but one Enemy at once to encounter. Whilst this Church
in its first times had only those of the Church of Rome to confiict with, it
easily triumphed over them and maintained its Peace and Dignity at home: but
that now under the Circumstances I have represented in the five foregoing
Particulars it bears up so well as it does, is an illustrions argument of its
Strength and Soundness of Constitution; and they are very severe and
uncharitable persons that reckon its Enemies and Misfortunes in the number of
its Vices or Faults.

CHAP. III.
Of the more immediate Causes of the Distractions of the Church of England;
such as, 1. Rashness of popular Judgment. 2. Judaism. 3. Prejudice. 4. Want of
true Christian Zeal, in the generality of its Members.

COming now in this Chapter to enquire into the immediate Causes of the Evils
we groan under, I do not see how it is possible to be avoided, but that in
touching this sore I must make some body or other smart. And therefore I
bespeak so much candor of the Reader that he will believe it is not any
delight I take to rake in the wounds of my Brethren and Fellow Christians; but
that it is mere compassion to the Souls of men, and good will to the public
Peace, and nothing else, that prompts me to this undertaking. For had any other
ends swayed with me, I could better have pursued them in silence and privacy,
or at least in the choice of some other subject than this which is so tender
and ticklish. But conscious of my own sincerity in the undertaking, and in
confidence of a benign interpretation, I proceed.

1. And First, I persuade my self that it will be manifest to any considerative
and impartial person, that a great part of the aversation to the Church of
England, arises from that which is the constant and known Adversary of every
thing that is generous and excellent, namely popular Rashness and
Injudiciousness.

When weak persons judge of the Determinations and Counsels of wiser men, and
those that pierce no further than the mere surface of things, pass a Verdict
upon those whose Reasons are profound and deep; there can be no good Issue
expected. It is certain there are many men of honest Hearts, who yet have not
senses exercised (as the phrase of the Apostle is) whose Intellectuals are
either clouded by an unhappy Constitution of Body, or were never well opened
and enlarged by Education and Study. Those generally not being sensible of
their own infirmity, nor knowing how little that which they understand is,
compared with what they are ignorant of, are ready to think there is no larger
Sphere of Knowledge than that which themselves move in; and by reason that they
do ad pauca respicere, facile pronunciant, not foreseeing the difficulties,
easily come to a conclusion, and censure all that complyes not with their own
measures.

It Is easy to observe men hugging their own Phancies, and entertaining with
scorn and contempt things above their capacity, or out of the rode of their
meditations. I by no means commend the zeal of that Bishop, Virgilius by name,
who became a Martyr for the opinion that there were Antipodes, though it was
demonstrably true, and the contrary impossible. But I observe thence, how
severe and rash a bolt folly will discharge. And I little doubt, but that if a
man should assert the mobility of the Earth, or some other such opinion (which
yet the generality of the Learned are agreed in,) and do it with the like
constancy that Virgilius did, (if he had the people for his Judges) he would be
in danger of the same Fate.

But to come nearer my purpose; It is an Observation, not more ancient than
true, That the same thing seldom pleases the many and the few; Wise men
generally take middle Counsels, as finding by Experience, not only Peace but
Truth for the most part to be there placed. The Vulgar contrariwise are
altogether for Extremes, and when one Extreme disgusts them, run violently to
the other without stop or stay. (...), said the Historian, The middle opinion
is condemned by both extremes, and those that stand by it, (like those that go
about to part a fray) receive blows from both sides.

Erasmus, the glory of his Time and Country, for the sagacity of his wit and
simplicity of his temper, because he came not up to the height of either of the
then contending Parties (though he was admired by the Wiser) was mortally
hated, reproached and persecuted by the Vulgar of both Parties.

It is not much to the honor of Mr. Calvin, that he is said to have written to
Bucer who was employed in the English Reformation, That he should take care to
avoid moderate Counsels in Religion. In which advice he complied but too much
with the humor of the Vulgar, especially of this Nation; at least if the
observation of a witty Writer of the last Age be well taken. But perhaps it is
not the Levity, but the Spirit and Vigor and natural Courage of the people,
that middle Counsels are not acceptable to them: but however, it is easy to
remember, that when in the late Times some disgusts were taken at the public
management of Affairs, no Proposition or Expedient would at one the fault, or
propitiate the people, but the utter Subversion of the Government. When Popery
displeases, we think our selves never safe till we are run as far the other
way; and again when those that have been at the highest pitch of Fanaticism,
suspect their standing, and have a new qualm come over them, there is then no
remedy, no safety, no Ark but the Church of Rome.

Now the Church of England cutting by a thread (as it were) between both these
Extremes, escapes not a severe Censure on either hand. Those of the Church of
Rome cannot but confess, that all is good in our Liturgy, only they say it is
defective in many things that they have a great value for; Protestants on the
other side generally acknowledge the main to be good, but some things they
account redundancies, which they would have taken away: And so between them
both they give a glorious Testimony to this Church as guilty of the Faults of
neither Extreme, whilst yet she is accused of both.

But that which I chiefly intend is this; That a great part of men have not
their Minds elevated above the Horizon of their Bodies, nor take an estimate of
any thing, but by its impression upon their Senses. From whence it must needs
follow, that whatever most powerfully strikes them, must also be most admired
by such persons, and nothing else.

Now the Liturgy of our Church being composed plainly, gravely and modestly, no
turgid or swelling expressions, no novelty of phrase or method, no luxuriancy
of wit or fancy, seems therefore dull and flat to such men's apprehensions. And
on the other side, such Prayers as are occasionally conceived and uttered by
men of hot tempers (like themselves) with a torrent of words, and in a melting
tone, strike them with great admiration, and almost transport them. Insomuch
that they are ready to conclude (without more ado) the former to be a cold
formal Service, but these latter to be the very Dictates and Impulses, the
Breathings of the Holy Spirit.

And so for Preaching; Those Divines that deliver themselves gravely and
considerately, that take care to speak the words of truth and soberness, that
endeavor calmly and modestly to inlighten the minds of their Hearers, seem to
such people heavy and unedifying. But if there be a sort of heady and
incogitant Preachers, that have more heat than light, that thunder in men's ears
with a stentorian noise, and make use of such dreadful expressions as raise the
humors and passions of the body, or such soft similitudes as demulce and
mitigate them, or such mystical representations as transport their imaginations
and confound them; those seem mighty-powerful-soul-saving-Preachers. Who sees
not that this must needs be a mighty disadvantage to the Church of England,
When Devotions shall be esteemed by their noise and not by their weight, and
Sermons tried not by their light but heat?

But if to all this, Truth and Falsehood also, and that in the most sublime
points, and, which is more, Expediency it self must be decided at Vulgar
Tribunals, so that there shall not be that Doctrine so profound or nice, which
every man will not take upon him to determine, nor that Reason so subtle, which
the crassest minds shall not pretend to understand, nor that Rule or Art of
Government, which shall not fall under vulgar cognizance; if every man's Mind
become the Standard and Touchstone of every Truth: it is impossible (upon the
suppositions before laid) but there must be dissentions, disputes and
distractions in such a Church, and yet neither the Doctrine, Discipline,
Liturgy, nor Ministers thereof be to blame. For unless the Reformers of such a
Society be no wiser than the Vulgar, and the Clergy and Governors and all
Learned men have the same sentiments with the people; unless, I say, all could
be alike wise or alike weak, (where all will be alike Judges) it is absolutely
impossible it should be otherwise.

Those therefore of the Church of Rome have a cure for this; They appropriate
all Judgment to the Clergy, and deal with the rest of Mankind as Sots and
Idiots, not permitting them to read the Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue, lest
they should grow too wise to be governed; nay, they will not allow them to be
masters of common sense, but requre them to believe the most contradictory
Propositions, and make that an Article of Faith which a man may confute by his
Fingers ends. This is an admirable way to wean them from their own
Understanding, to unlearn them Disputes, and to exercise them to believe in and
obey their Rulers. This way makes the people Sheep indeed, but silly ones
God-wot.

But the Church of England has no such Antidote of Disputes and Divisions as
this is. She makes not her self the Mistress of men's Faith, nor imposes upon
their Understandings; She teaches that our Savior has delivered the Mind of
God touching the points of necessary Belief or essential to Salvation fully,
and plainly to the capacity of every considering man that will use the means;
and in other lesser matters debatable amongst Christians, she allows a
judgment of Discretion. Only since the Peace of the Church often depends upon
such points as Salvation does not, and since in many of those, every man is not
a competent Judge, but must either be in danger of being deceived himself and
of troubling others, or of necessity must trust some body else wiser than
himself: She recommends in such a case as the safer way for such private
persons to comply with public Determinations, and in so advising, she jointly
consults the Peace of the Church and the quiet of men's Consciences. So all that
she challenges is a Reverence, not a blind Obedience. And if after all this,
some people will be foolish, and proud, and contentious, she has no further
Remedy, than to declare them guilty of Sin and Contumacy, and that not
sufficing, to cast them out of her Communion. But when all this is done, men
may be peevish and wilful, and render the State of that Church unhappy, whose
Constitution is neither guilty of Tyranny nor Remisness.

Now if it shall be objected to this Discourse, That this cause from the
consideration of the Folly and Injudiciousness of men is too general, and will
equally extend to all other Reformed Churches as well as our own, and
especially that this might have brought forth all the Evil we complain of, and
impute to it, in the former Age as well as now, for as much as the generality
of people were not much wiser then, than now. To this I answer in two points.

1. If other Reformed Churches have not found the effects of Ignorance and
Arrogance joined together as well as we (which doubtless they have done more or
less) it is not to be ascribed to the happiness of their Constitutions, but to
the unhappiness of their outward Circumstances. Their Poverty, Oppression,
Persecution, or being surrounded with common Enemies, has probably prevailed
upon them to lay aside or smother their private Opinions, and to check their
animosities, more than our Gratitude to the Almighty for our Ease and Peace and
Plenty and Liberty has done, upon us. Who knows not that the Church of
Corinth first needed the severe check of an Apostle for their wantonness and
divisions, that one was of Paul, another of Apollos, etc. And who can give a
more probable account of this their Luxuriancy, than from the riches, ease,
plenty and liberty of that City? Or who has not observed, that whilst the
Primitive Christians were in Adversity surrounded with Enemies and under Pagan
persecuting Emperors, so long they had one heart and mind, they submitted
their private phancies and peculiar sentiments to public safety; but the same
constituted Churches quickly broke out into Quarrels and Factions, as soon as a
warm Sun of Prosperity shone upon them? We have reason accordingly not to
charge our unhappiness upon our Religion, nor our troubles upon our Prosperity,
but to lay them at the right door, of our Folly and Weakness.

2. That these Evils broke not out in our Church sooner, since the Seeds of
them were sown long ago, is due to the joy and contentment that men generally
took at their first emerging out of the darkness and superstitions of the
Church of Rome by the Reformation, which was proportionable to the deliverance;
and so great, that for a time it suffered them not to be very solicitous about
little disputes or scrupulosities. Like the people of Greece when the Romans at
the Isthmian Games by a public Herald pronounced them and their Country free,
they forgot the contentions they came together about, and used to be infinitely
taken with. But when the novelty of this great Blessing was over, Protestants
forgot the great and intolerable burdens they had escaped, and then began
scrupulously to weigh every petty inconvenience; and (by the goodness of God)
not having a public Enemy to unite them, quarrel amongst themselves. This
therefore may be admitted as one cause of our unhappiness.

2. That which I would assign as a second cause, I know not well what name to
give to it: But for want of a better expression, I will adventure to say, That
a great part of this Nation having been leavened with Jewish Superstition or
Jewish Traditions, has thereby been indisposed to an uniform reception of, and
perseverance in the Reformation of Religion held forth by this Church. How this
sour leaven should get in amongst us is not very easy to determine: Some
Stories would incline a man to think that it had been in the veins of this
Country, ever since it first received the Christian Faith; for the greatest
difficulty Austin the Monk found here, was to bring the Inhabitants from the
observation of Easter, and some other Rites according to the manner of the
Jewish and Eastern Churches, to that of the Roman and Western; and the doing it
(as the Story tells us) cost the lives of twelve hundred Monks, who it seems
stubbornly opposed his Innovation. Which (by the way) is a good argument that
this Church owes not its first Christianity to the Church of Rome or this
Monastic Apostle, as they would persuade us; since it is plain by this
passage, that he made our Ancestors only Romanists, but found them Christians
before, and perhaps of a better and more generous race of Religion than that he
ingraffed upon the old stock. But I will make no use of this; for perhaps we
may find the rise of this Judaism nearer hand, if we observe that the great
Patriarchs of the Nonconformity, such as Cartwright, Ainsworth, H. Broughton
and others, were great Students of the Rabbinical Writings, and the main of
their Learning lay that way; and as by this sort of Study (which was rare in
those days,) they got the reputation of great Rabbis, so perhaps they might
not only by this means be bewitched with the Jewish fancies themselves, but
propagate their unhappy Sentiments through their followers to this generation.

But howsoever it came to pass, the matter of Fact will appear undeniably true,
That a vein of Judaism runs through the whole Body of the dissenters from the
Church of England. Of which I will give some Instances.

And the first shall be their grand Hypothesis, That nothing is lawful in the
service of God, but what is expressly prescribed in Scripture. This is the
Characteristical Doctrine of that Party, and in confidence of the truth of
which, they cry out of us for uncommanded Rites, and humane Inventions and
little less than Idolatry. Now whosoever well considers this Tenet, will find
it so irrational in it self, so servile and destructive of all Christian
Liberty, and making so ill reflections upon the Goodness of God, (as I shall
have occasion to show hereafter) that it is not to be imagined how it should
enter into the minds of men, much less find such entertainment and so zealous
patronage, amongst so many honest and devout men, were it not, that they
studied the Old Testament better than the New, and graffed their Christianity
upon the stock of Judaism. And the case must be after this manner. They
considering and observing how punctually God prescribed some very little
matters touching the Temple and National Worship of the Jews in the Law of
Moses, carry this notion along with them to the New Testament, and thence
infer, That Christ Jesus must needs have also as punctually determined all the
Rituals of the Christian Worship: Otherwise he is not faithful in his house as
Moses was in his, (for that Scripture is brought to prove it). That all
absolutely Necessaries are so determined by our Savior we readily grant them,
and that all those Rites that are prescribed by him are necessary to be
observed, we will yield them; but that nothing is lawful but what is to be
found so prescribed, we utterly deny, and they will never be able to prove. Nor
indeed would they ever have been led by any principle of reason to think of or
expect such a thing, had it not been by the aforesaid prejudice. But having
gotten that notion into their heads, they will fancy the New Testament to
comply with it, or writhe it to their sense, though with never so much violence.

Of affinity with the former is another Notion of theirs, That all Princes and
Lawgivers are bound to conform the Municipal Laws of their several Dominions to
the Institutions of Moses; and where this is not done, sc. where Princes make
other Decisions of Cases, or appoint other Punishments than that Law allows,
they are in danger to have their Constitutions declared null, and themselves
irreligious.

This is a mistake as wide as the former, highly injurious to Sovereign Princes
and dangerous to Kingdoms and States, in a great measure disannulling the
public Laws, and stripping the Governors of all proper Legislative power.

But that which I consider now in this mistake, is not the consequence and
Effects, but the rise and Causes of it, which seems to be no other than the
fondness the Jews had to their Laws, and which they express in their Writings,
as if those Laws God gave them by Moses, were not only best for them, but best
in themselves also. The foundation of which Error is both detected and confuted
by this consideration, That God was not only the God, but the temporal Prince
of the Jews in a peculiar manner, so as he is not of any other people in the
world; he calls himself their King, appoints his Lieutenants and Vicegerents,
divides his Subjects their Inheritance, gives them Laws, takes up a Residence
amongst them, appoints their way of Address to him for Judgment and resolution
of weighty and extraordinary Cases, and reserves many Cases to himself, and
sometimes inflicts Punishments by his own hand. Any man that considers these
things well, will never go about to make those Laws oblige other Nations, or
require necessarily all Princes to conform their Policies to that of Judaea,
till he can persuade himself that every Nation has the peculiar Privilege of
the Jews, and its Government to be a Theocracy.

A third Instance shall be their notion of Excommunication, which they hold
must be denounced by a Synod or Presbytery, and the Prince as well as the
people must be subject to the sentence. And this against all Rules of
Government, the Prerogatives of Princes and the Peace of Kingdoms. But because
it was thus amongst the Jews, or at least some of the Writers of that Nation
say so, (whether true or false is not well considered) therefore this is the
only Gospel way.

I must by no means omit their Superstition about the Lords Day, which must be
called a Sabbath too, though such name is no where given it either in the New
Testament or in any ancient Writer that I know of; but contrariwise always
opposed to it. But that is the least matter. The Lords Day with these men must
have all the nicety of observation that the Jewish Sabbath had; and which is
yet worse, such observation thereof made one of the principal parts of
Religion. And because God appointed the Sabbath amongst the Jews to be a sign
between him and them, and to distinguish them from all other people, therefore
in the New Testament the superstitious observation of the Lords Day must be the
principal Character of a godly man. He that considers well this matter can find
no original of it but perfect Judaism introduced into Christianity. And
methinks any unprejudiced man should be convinced of this by this one
observation, That this kind of observation of the Lords Day distinguishes this
sort of English Protestants from all other Protestants and Christians in the
whole world besides; It being in no Church or Country observed with that
punctuality and in that Sabbatical manner, as by those persons. Whence it is
plain, that such observation thereof could neither be derived from Christianity
in general, nor from Protestantism as such, but merely from a Jewish tincture
these persons have received.

A fifth Instance shall be their Doctrine of Absolute Predestination. Which
though it be not peculiar to these men, yet is so universally and ardently
embraced by the men of that way, as is scarce to be paralleled. And he that
seeks the Source of so odd an Opinion, can in my opinion pitch no where more
probably, than upon the absolute Decree of God to favor the posterity of
Abraham for his sake. It pleased God to bestow the good Land of Canaan upon the
descendents of that good man, and he resolved and declared he would do it
without respect to their deserts: now this is made a sufficient ground to
conclude, That accordingly as he disposed in this Temporal affair, so he will
proceed by the same way of Prerogative in determining the Eternal Doom of Men.

I will add but one more, which is their superstitious observation and
interpretation of Prodigies. To this a great number of this Party are so
addicted, that every unusual Accident, every new Appearance in the World, be it
in Heaven above or in the Earth below, is presently commented upon, and
applications made of the errand of it: though for the most part with Folly as
manifest as is the Uncharitableness; yet with Confidence as if it were
undoubtedly true, that God governed the affairs of the World by as visible a
Providence now, as he did heretofore in the Land of Judaea; and the remembrance
of what he did then, seems to be the only imaginable account of this conceit of
theirs now.

Many other Instances might be given of this kind, but I have made choice of
these, because they contain the principal Doctrines and most Characteristical
Practices of the Non-conformists; and these carrying so plainly the marks of
Judaism upon them, and being no otherwise accountable than upon those
Principles, I think I said not improperly, when I called Judaism the second
Cause of our Unhappiness; since any man may easily see, that such Notions and
Principles as these are, must needs indispose those that are leavened with
them, to Conformity to, or perseverance in, the Church of England.

3. But if the weakness of Judgment or bad Instruction only obstructed the
prosperity of this Church, it were not very difficult to find a Remedy: but
alas! the minds of a great number of men are under such Prejudices as have
barricado'd them up and rendered them almost inaccessible; and that I reckon as
a third Cause of our Distractions.

Prejudice is so great an evil that it is able to render the best Discourses
insignificant, the most powerful Arguments and convictive evidence ineffectual;
this stops men's Ears against the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

This alone was able to seal up the Eyes of the Gentile World against the Sun
of Righteousness when he shone upon them in his brightest glory, and to confirm
them in their blind Idolatries, when the God that made Heaven and Earth gave
the fullest discoveries of himself that it was fit for mankind to expect.

Upon the account of this the Jews rejected that Messiah they had so long
expected, and gloried in before he came, though he exactly answered all the
Characters of Time, Place, Lineage, Doctrine and Miracles that their own
Writings had described him by.

Nay, 'twas Prejudice abused the honest minds of the Disciples themselves, so
that they could not for a long time believe those things Christ Jesus told them
from the Scripture must come to pass, only because they were against the grain
of their Education, and were cross to the persuasions they had received in
common with the rest of the Jews.

No wonder then if the Church of England suffer under Prejudice amongst those,
that have not only seen it stigmatized with the odious marks of Popery and
Superstition, and had been drawn into a Solemn League and Covenant against it,
as if it had been an act of the highest Religion to defy and execrate it, and
so had both their Credits and their Consciences engaged against it; But also
had lived to see it proscribed for near twenty years by a prevailing Faction.

Few have that Generosity and strength of mind to bear up against the torrent
of times, or Confidence enough to oppose the impetuousness of common vogue and
prevailing opinion: There are not many have the sagacity to discern the true
images of things through those thick mists that cunning Politicians cast about
them. It is very ordinary to take the condemnation of any Person or Party for a
sufficient Proof of the Accusation, and to think the Indictment proved, if the
Sentence be past with common consent. It was enough both with the Jews and
Gentiles against our Savior, that he was condemned as a Malefactor, the
Ignominy of his Cross was a greater Argument against him, with the generality,
than the excellency of his Doctrine or Evidence of his Miracles was for him.

This Church was dealt with like the Great Lord Strafford, run down by common
Fame, oppressed by Necessity, not by Law or Reason, and made a Sacrifice to the
enraged Multitude.

The Arguments against it were not weighed, but numbered: As that Great Lords
Impeachment was of Accumulative Treason, so was the Churches of Popery; there
was more in the Conclusion, than could be made out by the Premises; and in the
sum total, than in the particulars of which it consisted: for though no one
point of Popery or Superstition could be proved against it, yet it must be so
upon the whole. This being agreed, the cry then is, Crucifige, destroy it root
and branch. And now was the Church seemingly dead, and (as I said before)
buried too for near twenty years; but when by the wonderful Providence of God
it was raised again, as it was matter of equal Joy and wonder to all such as
were not too far under the power of these Prejudices, so it could not be
expected otherwise but that weak and timorous persons should run from it as
from a Ghost or Spectre.

To all which add, That it was the corrupt Interest of some to deceive others
into an ill opinion of it; partly as being enraged that by the Churches
unexpected Revival, they lost its Inheritance which they had divided amongst
themselves, partly being conscious to themselves that by reason of their no
more than vulgar abilities, they could be fit to fill no extraordinary place in
the Church, and yet were not able to content themselves with any ordinary one,
and therefore chose to set up a Party against it, and become Leaders of a
Faction, since they might not be Governors of a Church. And when it is come to
that pass that by this craft we get our Livings, like the Silversmiths at
Ephesus, no wonder if Apostolical Doctrine and Government be cried down, and
the Great Diana be cried up. The sum is this; Some men were blindly led by
their Education, others by their Interest, a third sort by their Reputation, to
make good what they had engaged themselves and others in; and these three
things are able to form a great Party against the Church.

4. The Fourth and Last Cause, (and I wish it be not the greatest) of the
Distractions and ill Estate of this Church, is the want of true Christian Zeal,
and of a deep and serious sense of Piety; in defect of which has succeeded
that wantonness, curiosity, novelty, scrupulosity and contention we complain of.

What was it made the Primitive Church so unanimous, that it was not crumbled
into Parties, nor mouldered away in Divisions, nor quarrelled about Opinions,
nor separated one part from another upon occasion of little scruples? How came
it to pass, (as I observed in the Introduction to this Discourse) that all good
men were of one way, and all evil men of another, that those that travailed to
the same City the heavenly Jerusalem, kept the same Rode and parted not company?

It could not be that they should be without different apprehensions, for men's
Parts were no more alike, nor their Educations more equal in those times than
now.

There were then several Rites and Ceremonies that might have afforded matter
of scruple (if the Christians had been so disposed) as well as now: and I think
both more in number, and as liable to exception as any thing now in use. There
was then bowing toward the East, observation of Lent and other days,
distinction of Garments, and innumerable other Observations in the early days
of Tertullian; and yet neither any Scripture brought to prove them, nor any
such proof thought necessary, and yet they were observed without suspicion on
one side, or objection on the other. Harum and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinarum,
si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies, sed traditio praetenditur
auctrix, consuetudo conservatrix and fides observatrix, says he in his Book De
Corona militis.

St. Austin says, in his time the number and burden of Ceremonies was grown as
great as under the Law of Moses, and therefore wishes for a Reformation
thereof, Ep. 118, 119.
in his Epistles to Januarius; yet never thought these things a sufficient
ground of Separation from the Church.

There was then some diversity of Expression in which the Governors and
Pastors of several Churches delivered themselves, yet did they not dispute
themselves hereupon into Parties, nor accuse one another of false Doctrine, or
either Side make the division of the Church the Evidence of its Orthodoxy, or
the Trophy of its Victory. The true reason then of the different Event of the
same Causes then and now, seems to be this, That in those days men were
sincerely good and devout, and set their hearts upon the main; the huge
Consequence and concern of which easily prevailed with those holy men to
overlook their private satisfactions. They were intent upon that wherein the
Power of Godliness consisted, and upon which the Salvation of Souls depended;
and so all that was secure, they were not so superstitiously concerned for
Rituals, nor so unreasonably fond of Opinions, as to play away the Peace of the
Church and the Honor of Religion against trifles and mere tricks of wit and
fancy. They considered that they all had one God, one Faith, one Baptism, one
Lord Jesus Christ, in which they all agreed; and these great matters were able
to unite them in lesser. They, Good men, found enough to do to mortify their
Passions, to their burdens of Affliction and Persecution, to withstand the
Temptations of the Devil, and the contagion of evil Examples from the world,
and had not leisure for those little Disputes that now employ the minds of men,
and vex the Church. They spent their Heat and Zeal another way, and so their
Spirits were not easily inflammable with every petty Controversy.

But when men grow cold and indifferent about great things, then they become
servent about the lesser. When they give over to mind a holy Life, and heavenly
Conversation, then they grow great Disputers, and mightily scrupulous about a
Ceremony. When they cease to study their own hearts, then they become
censorious of other men; then they have both the leisure and the confidence to
raise Sarmises and Jealousies, and to find fault with their Superiors.

In short, then and not till then, do the little Appendages of Religion, grow
great and mighty matters in men's esteem, when the Essentials, the great and
weighty matters are become little and inconsiderable.

And that this is the Case with us in this Nation is too evident to require
further proof, and too lamentable a subject for any good Christian to take
pleasure in dilating upon. I conclude therefore, in this Point lies a great
part of the Unhappiness of this Church and Kingdom.

PART II.
Wherein several serious Considerations are propounded, tending to persuade all
English Protestants to comply with, and conform to, the Religion and Government
of this Church, as it is established by Law.

CHAP. 1.
A Reflection upon diverse Ways or Methods for the Prevention and Cure of
Church-Divisions.

HAving in the former Part of this Discourse, diligently enquired into, and
faithfully recited the principal Causes of the discontents with, and secession
from this Church; It would now ill beseem Christian Charity to rest here; for
(God knows) neither the Evils nor the Causes afford any pleasant speculation.

It was a bad state of things at Rome which the Historian reports in these
words, Nec morbos nec remedia pati possumus, That they were come to so ill a
pass that they could neither endure their Distempers, nor admit of the
Remedies. But I persuade my self, though the condition of our affairs be bad
enough, yet that it is not so deplorable as to discourage all Endeavors of a
cure. And in this hope I take the courage to propound the following
considerations; wherein if I be deceived and miss of my aim, I shall
notwithstanding have that of Quintilian to comfort my self withal, Prohabilis
est cupiditas honestorum, and vel tutioris est audaciae tentare ea, quibus est
paratior venia.

It has not been the single Unhappiness of this Church alone, to be molested
with Disputes, laden with Objections, and dishonored by Separation. Nor can
it be hoped that where the business is Religion, and the concern Eternal Life,
that men should incuriously swallow every thing without moving any question or
stirring any dispute. And therefore all Churches must of necessity more or less
have conflicted with the same difficulties we complain of. And consequently the
disease being so common, it cannot be but that many and diverse Remedies have
been tried and made use of. And out of that store we will in this Chapter make
election of such as seem best to fit the condition of the Patient and are most
practicable in the Case.

And in the first place, they of the Church of Rome, (as many and great Schisms
as they have labored under formerly, yet) now glorying in their Unity and
Peace, and upbraiding all others with their respective Distractions, may seem
to have arrived at some remarkable skill, and to be fit to be advised withal;
and they attribute an admirable efficacy to the following Method.

First, By way of Prevention, they prescribe that the people be kept in
profound Ignorance, and then they suppose, they will never trouble the Church
with Disputes, nor themselves with Scruples. Let them but be blind enough, and
they will swallow many a Fly that others strain and boggle at: keep them up in
the dark like Birds or Wild Beasts, and you will render them tame and
manageable.

They affirm Pictures to be Books good enough for the Laity, and say, Those are
the best Sheep that know nothing but their own Fold. The Priests lips, they
confess should preserve knowledge; but so they preserve it from the people, it
is no great matter whether they have it themselves or no.

This Opiate or stupefactive Ignorance these Empiricks mightily cry up; and for
proof of the virtue of it, go but over into Spain or Italy, and you shall
observe what strange cures it has done. It has made as sagacious people as
any in the world naturally, so far from Disputes in Religion, that they scarce
know what it means. Administer but a large Dose of this, and it shall have the
same effect the Plague of Darkness had in Egypt, that suffered no man to stir
out of his place.

But this Advice how successful soever it has been in other places, will not
be admitted in England for two reasons.

1. If it were commendable in it self, yet it comes too late; for the people of
England know so much already that the only way to cure the inconveniences of
that, is to let them know more. And as an Excellent Person has well observed
concerning Atheism, That a little smattering in Philosophy disposes men to it,
by intangling them in Second Causes which they cannot explicate, but a through
insight into it leads them through that perplexed maze to the discovery of the
First Cause of all things. So it is only superficial knowledge in Christianity
that gives occasion to our troubles, when men think they know, but do not; or
because they know a little, conceit they understand all that is knowable, and
hereupon refuse instruction, and oppose their private opinions to the public
wisdom. Whereas did these men see further into things, they would then discover
a reason of many things they are now dissatisfied with, or at least distrust
their own understandings and grow modest and peaceable.

2. Besides, if this Advice came timely, yet we take the Remedy to be worse
than the Disease; for we esteem it better (if one be necessary) to err like
Men, than to be driven like Beasts, or acted like Puppets.

The Gospel Church is frequently called in Scripture the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Kingdom of light; but by this course of blind Devotion and stupid
Ignorance, it would become more like Hell, which they say has heat without
light.

God in the Gospel requires a reasonable service, and it can never be
consistent that those that pretend Christ Jesus is risen upon them as a Sun of
Righteousness, should think to worship this Sun by turning their backs upon
him, or shutting their eyes against his light. If it were or could be so, then
this Proposition would be true, That the way to become good Christians, is to
cease to be Men.

2. Secondly, They direct us to an Infallible Judge of all Controversies. And
this they so much magnify and represent as absolutely necessary to Peace, that
they tell us we shall labor in vain, in the use of all other Expedients, and
only roll up a weight with infinite pains, that will with the greater violence
return upon us again, till we make use of this Remedy.

But it is so Mountebank-like to pretend to Infallible Cures, that we desire to
be resolved of these two or three things before we can comply with the advice.

1. We would fain know how it came to pass, that so important a point as this
is (of an Infallible Judge of Controversies) which it is pretended would secure
the Peace of all States, preserve the Concord and the Dignity of all Churches,
stop the mouths of all Atheists, prevent the Sin and the Damnation of many
Souls, is no more plainly asserted in Scripture, nor proved by Reason, nor
better agreed of amongst themselves, that thus recommend it? A man would
reasonably expect that a business of this nature, (which is therefore of more
value than any one Article of Faith, in as much as that it hereupon depends
what shall be so,) should have been more clear and evident than those things
that depend upon it: but contrariwise, we find that no man ever yet could
persuade by Reason, that one certain man in the World was more than a man, and
all the rest less.

And then for Scripture, that plainly tells us, that all men are liars; i. e.
such as may deceive, or be deceived; and most undoubtedly would never have made
such a distinction of Christians, as strong men and babes in Christ, nor made
it our duty to consider one another weakness, and practice mutual forbearance,
if it had intended any where to direct us to such an Umpire as should have
ended all disputes, and made all men equally certain.

But then for agreement amongst themselves, where to lodge this Infallibility,
whether in the Pope alone, or in the Pope and Consistory, or in a General
Council, or in all these together, or in something else, is, for ought I see, a
Question that needs an Infallible Judge to determine.

2. How comes it to pass that all Controversies are not determined and Disputes
ended long ago, if this were true that is pretended?

Whether there be any Infallible Judge to resort to now, is the point in
question; but it is certain there was such a thing in the Apostles times: they
had the assistance of the Holy Spirit in such a manner as to guide them into
all truth, and gave miraculous proofs that they had so; and yet this would not
cure all the Schisms, nor resolve all Scruples, nor silence all Disputes then.
And how Infallibility in a Pope or any other person, (if it were there to be
found) should have better success now than it had in those more sincere and
simple times of Christianity, I think is not very reasonably expected.

Besides, We find manifestly that those that glory so much of this Remedy, have
not found such benefit by it, as that they commend it to us for. For it is well
enough known, that the Romanists have their Disputes as well as we; The
Franciscans against the Dominicans, and the Jansenists against the Molinists,
and their several Persuasions managed with as much heat as any of our
Controversies; saving that indeed they all agree in uno tertio the Supremacy of
the Pope. Therefore we say, Medice cura teipsum. Let us see all their own
Difficulties decided and Disputes ended, and then, and to be sure not till
then, shall we be encouraged to make use of the Remedy.

3. Thirdly, They have another Remedy which I must needs confess has done
strange things and been very successful amongst themselves, and I will
transcribe the Receipt of it out of an ingenious Book called Europae speculum,
page 34. of the Edition at the Hague, 1629. in these words: The particular
ways they hold to ravish all affections and fit each humor, are well nigh
infinite; there being not any thing either sacred or profane, no virtue nor
vice almost, nothing of how contrary condition soever, which they make not in
some sort to serve that turn, that each fancy may be satisfied. Whatever
wealth can sway with the lovers, or voluntary poverty with the despisers of the
world; what honor with the ambitious, what obediene with the humble; what
great employment with stirring and active spirits, what perpetual quiet with
heavy and restive bodies; what content the pleasant nature can take in pastimes
and jollity, what contrariwise the austere mind in discipline and rigor; what
love either chastity can raise in the pure, or voluptuousness in the dissolute,
etc. What change of vows with the rash, or of estate with the unconstant; what
pardons with the faulty, or supplies with the defective; what miracles with the
credulous, or visions with the fantastical; what gorgeousness of shows with
the vulgar and simple, what multitude of Ceremonies with the superstitious,
what prayers with the devout; And in sum, whatsoever can prevail with any man,
either for himself to pursue, or to love and reverence in another, the same is
found with them. -- On the one side of the steet a Cloister of Virgins, on the
other a Stye of Courtezans, with public toleration. This day all in Masks with
looseness and foolery, to morrow all in Processions, whipping themselves till
the blood follow. To conclude, Never State, never Government in the world, so
strangely compacted of infinite contrarieties, all tending to the entertainment
of the several humors of men.

Now no wonder that this course should keep them generally contented, since it
is in effect an universal Toleration, a permitting men to be and do what they
list, so they cast but some garb of Religion or other over it.

In the United Provinces, it is commonly said, There is an allowance of all
Opinions; but the truth is no more but this, That that State being made up of a
combination of several Free Cities, he that finds not his Opinion countenanced
in one City so much as he desires, may retire to another where it is publicly
professed. So in the Church of Rome, he that likes not the debaucheries of the
Court, may enjoy severities in a Monastery, he that is offended with one Order,
may make choice of another; a man may be a good Catholic as they call it,
without being a good Christian; he may perfectly accommodate his own humor, if
he have but the wit to make a right choice for himself; he need not be at the
Self-denial to conform his humor to his Profession, but may fit his
inclination with a way of Religion, if he have not prevented himself by an
imprudent election. He may almost do any thing, provided, as Erasmus observes,
He let but two things alone, which are the only dangerous points, that is to
say, that he meddle not with the Popes Crown, nor the Monks Bellies.

But we of this Church are not of opinion, that such a Tenet as this is, is
worth the prostitution of Religion, and the debauching of men's minds and
Consciences; and have too much simplicity and sincerity of Devotion, to make
use of this Remedy, to put an end to our Distractions.

4. Fourthly, But the great and infallible Remedy is yet to come, and is that
which others express by several words, Axes, Halters, Racks, Fire and Faggot;
but they by one word that signifies as much as all those, viz. the Holy
Inquisition. This is that Engine that stretches all men's Intellectuals to the
proportion of the Priests, or cuts them off to the public Standard; this
decides all Controversies, silences all Disputes, resolves all Scruples, and
makes perfect Peace wherever it comes. But,

Though we grant all this, yet will not this down with Englishmen. For besides
that our Gospel is not like (what they say of) the Laws of Draco, written in
blood, nor have we any Rubric, to kill men for quietness sake; besides this, I
say, the Genius of this Nation is both too courageous and too compassionate, to
be this way Governed.

No people in the world are less moved by the apprehension of death and danger
than they, and no people are more tender of the Lives of others than they. For
generally these two Virtues are inseparable, and the most generous tempers are
commonly the most merciful. The English will be led like Men, but not driven
like Beasts. They have great minds that will be moved by example, and wrought
upon by kindness, and melted by good nature; but will sooner suffer themselves
to be broken in pieces, than that cruelty shall force them, or fear and danger
prevail over them.

It is generally observable here, that no Laws so soon grow in desuetude, and
are rendered unpracticable, as those that are too severe. It is counted a
butcherly way of Chirurgerie with us, for every slight wound to cut off the
member. And the exercise of so much Cruelty upon the account of Religion, by
those Blood-letters in Queen Mary's time, has (thanks be to God) made that
Profession detestable to this day; and it looked so ill in the Romanists, that
we shall never be persuaded to practice it our selves.

Therefore none of the Romanists Expedients will work the Cure we desire in
this Church.

Let us see then what other courses there are to be taken, and there remain yet
these three to be considered of. 1. Universal Toleration. 2. Comprehension. 3.
Instruction and Consideration.

1. Universal Toleration. This is highly commended by some as the most
Christian Remedy, to let all grow together till the harvest. We are told, That
it was it made the Primitive Church so happy, and we may observe that this the
Christians pleaded for under persecuting Emperors, affirming, That it was
every man's natural right to serve what God, and use what Religion he thought
good. This the Great Constantine declared at his first entrance upon the
Empire, and they say that every Prince is bound to do so too. Besides, it is
affirmed, that this is the best way of propagating Truth and giving it
Reputation, and making its Triumphs conspicuous, by setting it upon even
ground, and giving it no advantage in the encounter of Error. And that the
minds of men will be as open to truth as falsehood, when they are delivered from
the prejudice. That it is Power and Interest make men of such or such Opinions.
That this is the only way to make a Learned Clergy, when they shall have a
necessity upon them to be able to prove substantially whatever they expect
should be received; and in fine, That the only way to make peaceable Subjects,
a rich Country and a happy Prince is to open a Pantheon, to give Liberty to
all Religions.

But two things would be considered of in this point.

First, That whatsoever fine things are said of this or whatever collateral
advantage may be reaped by it, they are of no other force, than to incline the
Magistrate prudentially in some cases to use Indulgence; for it never was nor
will be proved, that it is the express duty of a Christian Magistrate to
tolerate all Opinions whatsoever; for some are such as destroy all Religion
which he is to protect, others subvert all Civil Society which he is to
maintain: Therefore it can never be his duty to carry an indifferent hand in
Religion.

And though it be true, that the Primitive Christians used such general
expressions as are above-specified, and Constantine made such a declaration,
yet both he and they limited and interpreted themselves afterward. And indeed
it cannot be shown de facto that any Government in the whole Christian World
does tolerate all Opinions whatsoever. For should they do so, it must be
supposed, that the Magistrate is to have no Conscience or Religion himself,
that other men may have no check in theirs whatever it be.

2. But if it were true, that the Magistrate might (if he would) indulge all
Sects and Opinions, and also were disposed so to do; yet besides the
Inconveniences that would follow, This very thing would be very unacceptable
to the people of this Nation; amongst whom there is so much sincerity and
heartiness in Religion.

It might go down perhaps amongst such as have a great Indifferency and
Lukewarmness in Religion, with such people whose God is their Gain, and whose
Religion is their Trade or Interest. But devout and serious people had rather
suffer some hardship themselves upon the account of their Consciences, than buy
their own quiet at the price of Gods dishonor. And whatever kindness they may
have to some dissenters, or fondness to some by-path themselves, yet rather
than open so wide a Gap as that Popery and Atheism it self should enter in by
it, they would deny themselves and think it the duty of all other good
Christians to do so too.

2. Comprehension; whereby, I suppose, is meant the making the terms of
Communion more free and easy, an opening the arms of the Church to receive
more into her bosom, thereby to enlarge both the Society and Interest of the
Church. This is highly recommended by some good men as the most proper
expedient for a Protestant Church in our condition, as by means whereof it may
be both better strengthened and secured against its Enemies abroad, and enjoy
Peace and Contentment at home.

And truly for my part, if such a course please our Governors, I have no mind
to oppose any thing to it; but only I desire it may be considered, that there
are many things that look very probably in the general notion and speculation,
and that would flatter one into a great opinion of them, and expectation from
them, which when they come to be tried, they are no ways answerable to. Many
difficulties occurr in the reducing things of this nature to practice that were
not foreseen in the theory, and nothing more common, than for men's minds to
deceive them, or their constancy to fail them, so as that they shall take no
great pleasure in the enjoyment of that which they languisht with desire of,
whilst it was sweetened to them by the poinant sauces of hope and fear.
Besides, this is not yet done, nor do we know when it will be set about, and
it is pity the wounds of the Church should bleed so long as till that can be
effected, especially if there be any Balm in Gilead, any way of binding them up
in the mean time. And there seems to me to remain no other but that of the
third Consideration, which is the course I have pitched upon to recommend in
the following Chapters.

By which I mean nothing else but an Endeavor of better informing the minds of
men, in the nature of those things which are the matter of our disputes, and
occasions of our disturbances, together with the unhappy consequences of sin
and danger in persevering in our present case.

Which if it can be done, we may hope to see the Church recover its ancient
felicity and peace, and shall not need for cure of our distempers, to resort
either to such severities as are abhorrent to all Englishmen, or to such arts
as deform Christianity in general, or to be always changing and altering to
the great dishonor of Protestant Religion in particular. And this I do not
despair may be obtained, if those Protestants of this Church and Kingdom that
at present differ from the Church in some particulars, will impartially
consider the following Propositions.

CHAP. II.
Of the true notion of Schism, the sin and mischievous consequents of it.

THough the Will of man deservedly bear the blame of his miscarriages, as being
neither under Fatal necessity, nor subject to violence and compulsion, but that
it may suspend its own act till it be rightly informed; yet I have so much
charity to humane nature, as to think that most of its irregularities proceed
not merely from stubborn perversion, but mistake of the object. And that
therefore Mankind is very pittyable in its errors, having not that clearness of
perception, nor presence of mind that higher and more immaterial Spirits have.

And perhaps upon this account, it pleased the Divine Goodness to afford men
that which he denied to the fallen Angels, secundam tabulam postnaufragium, and
to open to them a door of hope by repentance and retrival of their faults. And
accordingly I observe, that those that cruelly murdered our Savior, he prays
for them in this form, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

And that it was not only the silly multitude that was so overseen, but also
the wisest of his Persecutors, St. Peter bears witness, Acts 3. 17. I wot that
ye did it ignorantly, as also did your Rulers. So that I am neither destitute
of reason nor example for my charity, if I think in the present case,
concerning the greatest part of those that are guilty of the distractions of
this Church, that did they rightly understand the nature of Schism and wherein
it consists, or the guilt and mischiefs that attend it, they would easily be
induced to change their course. This therefore I shall first offer to
consideration.

Touching the sin of dividing the Church, that it is of the deepest dye and
greatest guilt, I suppose we shall easily agree; for indeed no body can well
doubt of that, who considers what care our Savior took to prevent it, what
pains he took with his Apostles, that they might be thoroughly instructed, and
not differ in the delivery of his mind to the world, and with what
extraordinary ardour he prayed for them upon this very account, John 17. 11.

And the Apostles themselves answered their Masters care with their own
diligence and circumspection. He that observes how industrious they were to
resist all beginnings of Schism in every Church, to heal all breaches, to take
away all occasions of division, to unite all hearts and reconcile all minds;
How they taught people to detest this distemper as the bane of Christianity,
charging them to use the greatest caution against it, to mark and avoid all
those men that inclined that way, as persons of a contagious breath and
infectious society; What odious names they give it, as Carnality, the work of
the flesh and of the Devil: 1 Cor. 3. 4.
He, I say, that observes all this, cannot but be apprehensive of the greatness
of this sin.

But he that shall trace the sense of the Church a little farther, will find
the Primitive Christians hating it in such detestation, that they thought it
equal to the most notorious sins, Idolatry, Murder and Sacrilege.

St. Cyprian amongst the rest affirms it to be of so horrible a guilt, De
unitati Eccles.
that Martyrdom was not a sufficient expiation of it; that to dye for Christ
the Head, would not wash out the stain of having divided the Church his Body.

And all this was no more than the case deserved, for had the Christian Church
been broken into Factions and Parties in those times, as it has been since, it
is not easy to imagine, how it could have resisted the whole World that was
united against it: Or if yet it could have subsisted in its several divided
Parties, the mischief would have been little less; for then those of
aftertimes would have had the several Opinions and distinct and peculiar
Sentiments of those divided Parties, delivered down to them with equal heat and
earnestness, so that it would have proved impossible to have distinguished the
Truth of God from the Opinions of men, and the common Faith from the Shiboleth
and cognizances of the several Sects and Parties. And for this cause it pleased
God that his Church should rather in those early days be harassed with
persecutions, which made it unite it self the closer, and (paring off all
superfluities) keep to the necessary and essential Doctrines delivered to it,
than to be softened and made wanton by ease, and so to corrupt the Simplicity
of the Gospel.

Nor is the importance of Unity much less in these latter days of
Christianity, forasmuch as all Divisions in all times destroy that beauty and
loveliness, which would otherwise attract all men's admiration and affection.
Beauty properly is nothing but order and harmony of parts; the excellency of
any Fabric consists not so much in the quality of the materials, as in the
curious method they are digested into, and the good respect and correspondence
one part has with another. It is not the sublimity of Christian Doctrine, nor
the gloriousness of the Hopes it propounds, that will so recommend it to the
opinion and esteem of Beholders, as when it shall be said, Ecce ut Christiani
amant, when they shall observe the love, concord and unanimity amongst the
professors of it. And the want of this hardens the hearts of Jews and Turks and
Pagans more against it, than all the reasons and proofs we can give for it,
will soften them; and instead of opening their ears and hearts to entertain it,
opens their mouths in contempt and blasphemy against it.

But besides the disadvantage Christianity is exposed to by its Divisions, in
respect of those that are without, it suffers unspeakably within its own
Territories. For who will be persuaded patiently to hear, attentively to
consider, or impartially to judge of the discourses of him against whom he has
an animosity? Every thing the truer it is, the more it is for its advantage to
be calmly considered: and by how much of the more importance it is, by so much
is he that would have his proposition successful, bound in wisdom to take care
that the minds of men be not by passion and prejudice indisposed to receive it.

Livy observes, that prodigious Stories, Lies and Fables find best
entertainment in troublesome times, quia tutius finguntur and facilius
creduntur; men are not then at leisure to consider strictly what is true and
false, and so truth loses its advantageground, and error succeeds in it. Our
Savior therefore chose to come into the world in a time of the most profound
peace, not only because such a season became the Prince of Peace, but
especially for this advantage of his Doctrine we are speaking of, namely, that
he might find men in calm thoughts and at leisure to consider the
reasonableness of his propositions. For who can maturely weigh things when all
is in hurry and tumult? Who can discern exactly the difference of things, when
all is in motion? Especially who is there that is willing either to do good to,
or to receive good from him, against whom he has an exulcerate mind?

In short then, and to speak summarily, From Schisms and Divisions amongst
Christians, comes that prejudice upon the minds of people that discourages the
endeavors, and frustrates the labors of the Ministers of Religion. From
thence come all the Suspicions, Jealousies, Whisperings, Backbitings and all
other instances of Uncharitableness. These hinder the fervor of men's Prayers,
and abate the edge of their Devotions. These evaporate the true Spirit and Life
of Religion in impertinent Disputes, so that men lose the substance, whilst
they contend for the shadow. By these the sinews of all Society are dissolved;
for when the Church is disturbed, it seldom rests here, but the State is
concerned too; and Schism in the former, proves Sedition in the latter. And
this consideration is able to provoke the Magistrate to keep a jealous eye upon
the Church and Religion.

All these things are so true in themselves, and withal so generally
acknowledged by all Parties, that a man might justly wonder, how any Christian
should be guilty of Schism, which all so much abominate. Were it not that we
may observe too, that some have found pleasure to get that Child, they would by
no means have laid at their own door. Schism is so misshapen as well as
illbegotten a Brat, that no body is willing to father it. It was the early
proof Solomon gave of his wisdom, in discovering the true Mother of the living
Child, to which both the Litigants laid equal claim. It is a matter of no less
importance, and some think of equal difficulty, to make discovery, who the
distractions of the Church are justly to be imputed to. But as that Wise Prince
discerned the true Mother by the tenderness of her bowels toward the Infant,
so we perhaps may discover the true Children of the Church by their respect and
tenderness, and consequently the Schismatics by their irreverence and
unnaturalness toward her.

In order to which, I will therefore briefly and plainly describe the true
notion of Schism; In hopes that when men shall understand, wherein the guilt of
it lies, they will avoid the evil as well as abominate the consequence.

Schism is a voluntary departure or separation of ones self without just cause
given, from that Christian Church whereof he was once a member; or, Schism is a
breach of that Communion wherein a man might have continued without sin.

First, I call it a Departure or Separation from the Society of the Church, to
distinguish it from other sins, which though they are breaches of the Laws of
our Religion, and consequently of the Church, yet are not a renunciation of the
Society. For as there may be a sickly, infirm, nay, an ulcerous member, and yet
a member of the body: So there may be such a person, who for his wickedness
deserves well to be cast out of the Church, as being a scandal and dishonor to
it, yet neither separating himself, nor being cast out of the Society, remains
still a member of it.

Now what it is that imports a man's separation of himself or departure from the
Church, we shall easily understand; for it is no more but this, When a man
shall either expressly declare that he does renounce such a Society, or shall
refuse to join in the acts and exercises of Religion used by such a Society,
and to submit to its Authority. So he separates that refuses Baptism, the Lord
Supper, or to submit unto the Censures of a Church, and sufficiently declares
that he owns himself no longer of it.

Secondly, I call it a Voluntary Separation, to distinguish sin from
punishment, or Schism from Excommunication. For though the last makes a man no
member of a Church, yet it is supposed involuntary, and he does not make
himself so.

Thirdly, I call it a departure from a particular Church of Christ, or from a
part of the visible Church, to distinguish it from Apostasy, which is a
casting off of the whole Religion, the name and profession of Christianity, and
not only the particular Society: but the Schismatic is he that, retaining the
Religion in general, or at least a pretense of it, changes his Society,
associates himself with, or makes up some other body in opposition to that
whereof he formerly was.

Fourthly, I add those words whereof he was a member, because Schism imports
division and making two of that which was but one before. And so Turks, Pagans,
Jews cannot be called Schismatics, having never been of the Church.

These things I suppose are all generally agreed of; The only difficulty is in
that which I subjoyn in these words, an unnecessary separation, or without just
cause, or to separate from that Society wherein I may continue without sin. And
here we meet with opposition on both sides, some defining too strictly, and
others extending too far, the causes of Separation.

Of the first sort are the Zealots of the Church of Rome, who scarcely allow
any thing as a sufficient cause of Separation; for being conscious of so many
and great Corruptions in their Church, they know they can scarce allow any
thing as a just cause of Separation, that will not be in danger to be used
against themselves, and justify the recession of all Protestants from them.

But on the other side, some Protestants make the causes of Separation as many
and as light as the Jews did of Divorce, almost for any matter whatsoever.
Josephus put away his Wife (as himself tells us) because she was not mannerly
enough; another his, because he saw a handsomer than she; a third his, because
she dressed not his dinner well. As these Jews did by their Wives, so do many
Christians by the Church; One likes not her dress, another thinks her too
costly in her ornaments, a third phansies some German beauty or other that he
has seen in his travails, and all (to make way for new Amors) upon very
slender pretenses repudiate their former choice. But as our Savior when the
Case was put, found out a middle way betwixt allowing Divorce for no cause at
all, and for every cause; so ought it to be done in this business of Schism.

To hit this mark therefore, I say, that then, and then only, is there just
cause of Separation, when Perseverance in the Communion of such a Church cannot
be without sin; that is, when she shall impose such Laws and terms of Society,
as cannot be submitted to without apparent breach of the Divine Law.

And upon this foundation, I doubt not but we shall quit our selves well on
both sides; that is, both justify our Recession from the Church of Rome, and
demonstrate the unwarrantableness of this Separation of the Protestants of this
Kingdom from the Communion of the Church of England. For it is plain on the one
hand, that it cannot be sin to separate, when it is sin to communicate, since
no Laws of men can abrogate or dissolve the obligation of the express Laws of
God. And on the other it is as plain, that Schism being so great a sin, and of
so extreme bad consequence, that which must acquit me of the guilt of it in my
separation, can be nothing less than equal danger on the other hand, and that
when I may persevere without sin, it must of necessity be a sin to separate
upon inferior dislikes.

This methinks is so plain, that I wonder any doubt should be admitted of in
the case. Notwithstanding because I observe some men think to wash their hands
of the imputation of Schism upon other terms; as namely, Although a Church
shall not require or impose such conditions of Communion as are expressly
sinful, yet if she shall require indifferent unnecessary, or at most suspected
things; that in this case there is enough to excuse the person that shall
separate, from a participation of this sin. And also because this opinion bears
it self up by the great name of Mr. Hales, as his declared judgment in a
little Tract of Schism now very much in the hands of men, I will therefore for
the clearing of this matter say these three things.

1. I willingly acknowledge, that such a Church as shall studiously or
carelessly clog her Communion with unnecessary, burdensome and suspected
conditions, is very highly to blame; yet is it neither burdensomness nor every
light suspicion of sin, but a plain necessity or certainty of sin in
compliance, that can justify my Separation; forasmuch as I cannot be
discharged from a plain duty, but by an equal plainness of the sin. And for
this phrase suspected, it is so loose and uncertain, that there is no hold of
it; men will easily suspect what they have no mind to: and Suspicion having
this privilege, we shall quickly evacute every uneasy duty, and instead of
guiding our selves by Gods Word and sound reasoning, we shall give our selves
up to the conduct of Passion, Melancholy and Secular Interest.

2. If the non-necessity of some of the terms of Communion be a warrant of
separation, then there can be no such sin as Schism at all, forasmuch as there
never was, nor probably ever will be, such a Church as required nothing of
those in her Communion, but things strictly and absolutely necessary; as I have
showed partly in the Introduction, and could easily make appear at large
through all Ages. And then may the Author of the Tract about Schism securely,
as he does somewhat too lightly, call it only a Theological Scarcrow.

3. It will be manifest to any considering person, that some things are
necessary to the Constitution and Administration of a particular Church, that
are not in themselves necessary absolutely considered. And of this I will give
two instances.

The first in the Apostles times; The abstaining from things strangled and
blood, was by the Council at Jerusalem adjudged and declared necessary to be
observed by the Gentiles in order to an accommodation betwixt them and the Jews
(of which I shall say more hereafter) and yet I suppose scarce any body thinks
the observation of that abstinence so enjoined, necessary in it self.

The second instance shall be Church Government. Whatever disputes there are
about the several Forms of it, as whether it ought to be Monarchical or
Aristocratical. Episcopal or Consistorial, and whatever zeal for opinion may
transport men to say in favor of either of them, yet I suppose few or none
will affirm, that either of these Forms is absolutely necessary; for if one be
of absolute necessity, the other must be absolutely unlawful: and not only so,
but then also those that do not receive that absolutely necessary Form, can be
no Churches, for that Society which is defective in absolutely necessaries, can
be no Christian Church. Notwithstanding it is not only lawful to determine and
define this unnecessary point, but it is necessary to the constitution of every
particular Church, that it be defined one way or other, I mean so far as
concerns that Church; for if this be left indifferent in this particular Church
(as perhaps it is in it self in the general) it is manifest there can be no
Superior nor Inferior, no Governor nor governed, no Order, and consequently
a mere Rout and no Church. Therefore some things not necessary in themselves
not only may, but must be defined in a particular Church; and consequently it
will be no just exception against a Church, nor excuse from Schism, if we
separate from that Communion, because such definitions are made in it.

CHAP. III.
Of the nature and importance of those things that are scrupled, or objected
against in this Church; and that they are such as may without sin be sacrificed
to Peace, and therefore cannot excuse us from sin in separating from the Church
upon their account.

IT is the custom of those that have a mind to quarrel, to aggravate and
heighten the causes of discontent, to the end that the ensuing mischief may not
be imputed to the frowardness of their temper, but to the greatness of the
provocation. And passion is such a Magnifying-glass as is able to extend a
Molehill to a Mountain. The way of Peace therefore is to take just measures of
things; and as upon the account of Truth we must not make the matters of our
dispute less than they are, so for the sake of both Truth and Peace we ought
not to make them greater. Wherefore if men would be persuaded to set aside
passion, and calmly consider the nature and just value of those things that we
in this Church are divided upon, we should then be so far from seeing reason to
perpetuate our distance and animosities, that we should on the contrary, be
seized with wonder and indignation, that we have hitherto been imposed upon so
far, as to take those things for great deformities, which upon mature
consideration are really nothing worse than Moles, which may be upon the most
beautiful face.

To this purpose therefore, having in the former Chapter represented the nature
of Schism, and the guilt and mischiefs attending it, I proceed now to show the
unreasonableness of the temptations to it, I mean the littleness and small
importance of the Objections against this Church; and that neither any of them
single, nor all of them together can countervail the blessing of Peace or the
evil of Division.

In order hereto, I will first show that the causes of Dissensions amongst us
are not like those upon which we separated from the Roman Communion. 2. That
something must be given for Peace by them that will have it. 3. That all the
scruples and objections against this Church, are not too great a price to pay
for it.

1. Touching the first, it is said by some in heat and passion, That there is
as much cause for secession from this Church now, as there was from the Roman
in the time of our Ancestors: but with no more reason, than if the arguments
and discourses written against a notorious Tyrant and Usurper, should be turned
against a good and lawful Prince. As will easily be manifest if we consider the
just state of the case on either hand.

We could not continue in the Roman Church upon any better conditions than
Nahash propounded to the men of Jabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel 11. to put out our right
Eyes that we might be fit for her blind devotion. We must for the sake of Peace
have denied the Faith, renounced our Reason, and contradicted our very Senses.
That Church instead of instructing men in knowledge, professes to nurse them up
in ignorance; in lieu of the Scriptures, it gives them Traditions, and instead
of such things as were from the beginning, and the faith once delivered to the
Saints, it prescribes those things that had their beginning from private
interests and secular advantages.

They make seven Secraments, five more than Christ ever intended for such, and
take away from the people the half of one of those he expressly instituted and
enjoined. They teach men to pray to Saints instead of God, and to use a
Language in their Devotions which he that pronounces, understands no more than
the Saint, he prays to, does his Needs and Requests. Nay, they give divine
honor to a piece of Bread, and must swallow Idolatry in spite of their teeth;
herein little better than the Egyptians who worshipped that for a God which they
put into their Bellies. They have taken away one of the Ten Commandments and
have arts of evacuating allthe rest, for they elude the necessity of a true and
serious Repentance, and subvert the principles of holy Life. In short, they
have brought in Pageantry instead of Piety and Devotion, effaced the true
lineaments of Christianity, and instead thereof recommended and obtruded upon
the world the dictates of Ambition, the artifices of Gain, and a colluvies of
almost all the Superstitions, Errors and Corruptions of former Ages, and this
must be received and swallowed by all those that will continue in that
Communion.

These things could not be submitted to without grievous Sin and manifest
danger of Damnation; therefore there was just ground for our Recession: for, as
I said, it could not be sin to depart when it was so to continue. And it is a
very reasonable choice rather to be condemned by them of Singularity, than to
be damned for Company.

But now it is quite otherwise in the Church of England. No man here parts with
his Faith upon his Conformity, no man is bound to give away his Reason and
common Sense for quietness sake. No man needs to hazard the Peace of a good and
well instructed Conscience, for the Peace of the Church. No man is tempted to
renounce his Integrity, but may be as good and holy a man as he will, and the
more of that the better Churchman. This Church keeps none of her Children in
an uncomfortable estate of darkness, but teaches the true knowledge of God and
Christ sincerely and very advantageously. She has no half Communions, nor
debarrs any of her members of the privilege and comfort of Christ's
Institutions. She recommends the same Faith and the same Scriptures that all
Protestants are agreed in. The same God, and only he, is worshipped, the same
rules of holy Life are propounded, as well as the same hopes and happiness
expected.

By this brief representation the difference between the Church of Rome and the
Protestants, appears so wide and vast, that they agree neither in their Creed,
nor Object of Worship, nor Sacraments, nor Rules of Life. On the other side,
the agreements of Protestants with the Church of England is so full and
perfect, that they have not only the same God and Christ, but the same object
of Worship, the same way of Devotion in a known Tongue, the same Sacraments and
same rule of life, which certainly are all the great things that the
Consciences of men are concerned in.

A man might therefore justly wonder, (these things being so) what should make
a breach, and what place there is for contention; or what can remain
considerable enough to occasion the dissatisfaction, to provoke the animosity,
to countenance that distance that is between us. And I verily believe it would
be hard for a stranger to this Church and Nation, that understood the state of
the case thus far, to guess what should be the bone of contention amongst us.

I will now as well as I can both saithfully and briefly recite the matters of
difference. And I must needs confess, if we number them only, they are many;
But if we weigh them (not only against the things we are agreed in, but against
peace and agreement it self) I persuade my self they will be very light. But
that I must leave to the judgment of the Reader. The things themselves are
these and such as these.

Whether such Prayers shall make up the body of the public Liturgy, as have
been conceived by the Governors of the Church, and used ever since the
Reformation; or such as shall pro re nata be occasionally indicted by every
private Minister?

Or, which perhaps is much the same, whether such words, expressions and
phrases shall be continued in the public Service, as are by long use grown
familiar to, and intelligible by vulgar people, or such shall come in their
room, as are more modern and grateful to nicer Ears?

About the several postures of Standing, Kneeling and Sitting; and whether some
one of these be more decorous and accommodate to some part of Gods Worship than
another, and which to which?

About observation of Days and Times; as whether the Anniversaries of the
Birth, Death and Resurrection of our Savior and other great passages of the
Gospel be of use, and fit to be observed? And whether some special Time of
Abstinence and Mortification in conformity to the Primitive Church, may now be
retained or not?

About Habits and Garments, such as Gown, Surplice, etc. whether the habit used
in ministration in the time of King Edward, be not now as lawful as any other?

About the Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism, whether (whilst it is declared
not essential to Baptism) it may not upon other considerations be used in that
Sacrament?

Or lastly (which I think is as important as any of the rest) whether
Subordinacy of the Clergy in the Episcopal way, or Co-ordinacy and Parity in
the Presbyterian, be rather to be preferred?

Most of the Disputes we have amongst us, are either upon these questions, or
reducible to these, or at least of like nature with these. Now how
inconsiderable these things are in themselves, and how fit to be made a
Sacrifice to Peace, I forbear to say, till I have in the second place shown, as
I promised, that something must be forgone for it.

2. It was a worthy and memorable saying of Erasmus, Mihi sane adeo invisa est
discordia, ut veritas etiam displiceat seditiosa. He did not only suspect that
Proposition was not true, that was not also peaceable, but he thought Peace not
too dear at the price of some Truth. And he that pretends so high a value for
the latter, as to have no esteem for the former, neither understands the one
nor the other.

Greg. Nazianz. puts this Question, (...); and answers, (...), That peace is
not only the most beautiful flower in the Garden of Christianity, but also the
most sovereign and useful. Though it be commonly dealt with as some famed
beauty, admired and courted, but not espoused.

The Apostle, when Romans 12. 18. he so passionately exhorts, If it be possible,
and as far as in you lies, have peace with all men, surely did not mean, that
we should only accept of Peace when it is offered us for nothing, or be quiet
till we can pick a quarrel; but that we should be at some cost to purchase it,
and part with something for it, and deny our selves something which (but upon
that account) we might lawfully have enjoyed.

It is true we may buy Gold too dear, and so we must have done our Peace, if we
sought it at the hands of those Hucksters of the Church of Rome, as I showed
before. But that we cannot reasonably expect it for nothing in any Society in
the World, I think is demonstratively evident by this one consideration, That
there are scarcely any intellectual Menaechmi, I mean hardly any two persons
perfectly of the same apprehension or stature of understanding in the whole
world. So much difference there is in men's Constitutions, such diversity of
Education, such variety of Interests and Customs, and from hence so many kinds
of Prejudices and various Conceptions of things, that he that resolves to yield
to no body, can agree with no body, and consequently cannot be happy in any
Church or Society on this side of Heaven. There indeed some think men's minds
shall be all of one capacity, but whatever be the truth in that particular, I
much doubt, whether those persons will ever make up that society of the Church
Triumphant, that think themselves bound to disturb the state of the Church
Militant, unless all things fall in with their own humor. For every peaceable
man sees he must either go out of the world, or set it all in flames, if he
will not subdue his own passion, and castigate his heat; That he must suffer
shipwreck in the tempestuous Seas of dispute and contentions, if he will not,
both take in his sails, and lighten the ship by casting overboard the fardles
of his private phancies and opinions. He that will require all other men should
assent to what he thinks, and will conceal nothing he is persuaded of, and yet
expect to live in peace, must either have very little wit or extraordinary
fortune. And he that will bear nothing that God has not expressly imposed upon
him, nor part with any thing he may lawfully keep, nor offer any Sacrifice to
those touchy Deities, received Custom and vulgar Opinion, must expect often to
feel the effects of their rage and power. In sum, he that will sacrifice
nothing to public tranquillity, must be sure to live in perpetual flames here,
whatsoever become of him hereafter.

The Apostle was not, certainly, of this stubborn humor, who declares of
himself that he became all things to all men, that he might gain some. To the
Jews he became as a Jew, to gain the Jews; to them that were without Law, as
without Law; to them that were weak he became as weak too, 1 Cor. 9. 20. He was
now no longer a starcht inflexible Pharisee, but a complaisant Christian, or as
some perhaps would have called him, a Latitudinarian Apostle.

When a whole Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, Acts 15. (which is a
passage I have often occasion to mention, and well deserves to be studied by
every peaceable Christian) when I say they decreed that the Gentiles should
abstain from things strangled and from blood, they deprived them of a great
part of their Christian Liberty merely to conciliate the Jews to them, and
required that to be done for peace, that no Law of God otherwise required at
their hands.

St. Greg. Nazianzen affirms of St. Basil that he dissembled the Coessentiality
of the Holy Spirit, and delivered himself in ambiguous terms on that great
point, lest he should offend and lose the weak; which neither would that holy
man have done, nor much less his especial Friend and admirer have told of him,
if either of them had thought it to have been too great a price for the
purchase.

But we need no other, and can have no greater, instance in this case than our
Savior himself, who when he came into the world complied with the Rites and
Customs he found, and condescended to the very humors of that stubborn people
amongst whom he was; he used their phrase in all his discourses, he observed
their Feasts, he made his own institutions of Baptism and the Lords Supper as
consonant to their Customs as it was possible; to the end that he might not
disturb them with Novelty, but ingratiate himself and his Doctrine by these
complyances. When a certain Tribute was demanded of him, he first proves that
he was not obliged to pay it, yet lest he should offend them, determines to pay
it, and works a Miracle to make Peter to do it, Mat. 17. 27.

What shall we say to all this? Are these Instances only to trace out an
example of condescension in Magistrates and Governors to their Inferiors? or
are they not most certainly as Landmarks to all of what degree or condition
soever to direct them how to steer their course, and behave themselves in order
to Peace?

Let me appeal to the Consciences of men, Is it not plain from hence, that
although I be persuaded such a certain Rite is less commendable in it self, yet
if it appear to be an instrument of Accommodation, that it is therefore in that
case best upon that account? And that such things as are indifferent, or have
no essential goodness of their own, become not indifferent but good, as they
are useful or necessary to that end? Or if I am persuaded, that such an opinion
is more true than that which is publicly received (so long as the main
Doctrine of Christianity is not in dispute) I may not for all this conceal it,
rather than disturb the Church? This was the counsel of the famous Constantine
for the preventing and silencing disputes at the Council of Nice, though the
things in controversy there, were of a higher nature than ours are. But if any
man be not satisfied with the Judgment of so great and good a Prince, let him
go and learn what that of St. Paul, Romans 14. 22. means, Have thou faith? have
it to thy self, and that before God. In short therefore, it will be no
hypocritical tergiversation, no wrong either to our Religion or to our
Consciences, if when the case shall so require, we change any phrase of speech,
how fit soever in our apprehension, for one less fit, but more acceptable and
current; any Rite or Ceremony that we have a great kindness for, for one more
grateful to others; and that we may comply with the Laws in being, so they be
not palpably contrary to the Scriptures or common reason, though we think
better might be made in their room. And that according to the saying of the
Lord Bacon, we may take counsel of the elder times what is best, but of the
present times, for what as fittest. And in a word, that we part with all that
which is no essential point of our Religion, for Charity, which is.

3. Let us now for a Conclusion of this Chapter reflect back upon the
aforementioned Catalogue of things in difference, and see if they will not all
appear to be of such a nature as we have hitherto supposed them, that is, such
as may be fit to become a Peaceoffering, and sacrificed to the Magistrate, the
Laws and the Church. And that we shall be easily able to resolve of, by the
help of these five following Remarques.

1. That the things now scrupled in this Church are such as were heretofore
submitted to by the most Leading men of those that now hereupon depart from it;
and if those things were in themselves lawful then, they cannot change their
nature by time, and become unlawful now. It will not be replied, That then they
made no conscience of what they did, lest it should be suspected they do but
pretend it now; for he that confesses a guilt of the same kind, strengthens the
suspicion of that whereof he is accused. But if it be said, they did it
Ignorantly then, and now having more light, cannot outface it: To this it will
be as easy to answer, That the engagements of Interest and Prejudice are as
liable to be suspected now, as Ignorance heretofore; especially if we consider,
that there was no appearance of any extraordinary light breaking in, when our
troubles and divisions broke out, but as soon as opportunity offered, and
occasion invited, that is, when Laws were laid asleep, and Authority taken up
with other cares, then presently without further deliberation, all these
objections start up, and new Models set up for themselves, which if they had
been the effect of light and knowledge must have proceeded gradually in
proportion to that, and increased by time and deliberation; but this is so far
from being the case, that it is scarce (if at all) possible to find any
objection that is not much elder than he that makes it.

2. Thanks be to God, some Non-conformists daily come over to the Church, and
those not of the meanest Character for ability or piety; but let them bragg of
any one if they can find him, that has since the resetlement of the Church at
His Majesty's Restoration apostatized to them.

Now they must be horribly uncharitable that can conclude, either all those
that continue in the Church Ignorant, or those that return to it Hypocritical;
and if they do not judge so, they confess the matters in difference to be not
certainly evil, but that prejudice has made them seem so.

3. That there are men of as clear Understanding, as good Life and as
comfortable Consciences in the Society of this Church as are any where else to
be found; and if so (which Impudence it self has not the face to deny) then
there is no capital error in its constitution, since those three answer to the
whole design of Christianity; and it can never be, that there should be danger
that neither troubles the Conscience with fears, nor displayes it self in a bad
Life, nor is discoverable by an honest heart and sound understanding.

4. The things objected against this Church are but at most disputable matters,
because all wise and good men are not agreed upon them. But that which is sub
judice, and yet under dispute, cannot be called Evil till the dispute is ended,
and the decision made against it.

5. And lastly, the things scrupled in this Church, are such as the like may be
found and complained of in any Church of the whole world, at least since the
Apostles times.

Now if these things be true, as I am confident they will appear upon impartial
consideration, then are the matters of our difference such as I have supposed,
namely, of no greater value, than that we may forgo our private opinion, fancy
and custom in and concerning them, for the Peace of the Church. And if we
resolve not to unite our selves to the Church whilst there is any thing of
this nature to discontent us, it is too much to be feared that Peace will for
ever be hid from our eyes. But to prevent that, let me here prevent my self in
one thing that will fall in more opportunely hereafter, viz. That since there
is no grand matter of Religion concerned in the Controversies between us, nor
any violation of the Laws of God in our complying with the Laws of this
Society, and since either Mahomet must go the Mountain, or the Mountain must
come to Mahomet, i. e. one side or other must yield, we will be persuaded to
think it reasonable, that the Subject should submit to the Governor, and
Opinion give place to ancient Custom, and Novelty to the Laws in being.

CHAP. IV.
That those that find fault with the Constitution of this Church, will never be
able to find out or agree upon a better.

IT was seasonable advice which a Member of the Long Parliament is said to have
propounded then when all were for pulling down, and Desolation was called
Reformation; That they should do well to let the old Building stand till they
had Materials in readiness, and were agreed upon a model of a Fabric to be set
up in the stead of what they destroyed. And not unlike was the Gloss of the
Lord Bacon upon the words of the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 6. 16. Stand upon the
ways and inquire for the good way, etc. that is, says he, Inquire for a
better way, but stand upon the old ways till you have discovered it. And
agreeably Mr. Seldom, Accuratius circumspiciendae viae omnes, de semitis
antiquis consulendum, quae vero sit optima seligenda. And these sayings are not
more valuable for their weight or elegancy, nor for the reputation of their
Authors, than considerable in our case. We confess generally the old way of the
Church of England to be right for the main, but certain Circumstantials are
uneasy to some of us, and they, till those are redrest, will proceed no
further. But it is reasonable then we should be able to agree upon and produce a
better Model, lest instead of having a new Church, we have no Church at all.

For, First, It can never be thought by wise men that such a Society as a
Church, can be conserved without some Rites or other, forasmuch as no petty
Corporation or Company can; nor that God can be worshipped without all
Circumstance, at least by men, that have Bodies, and are bound to glorify him
with their Bodies as well as Souls.

2. It is as plain, that neither any Society can continue, or any public
Worship be performed, if all Ceremonies and circumstances, such as of time,
place, persons and the like, be left indefinite and undetermined; for who shall
know whom to obey, whom to hear, where to assemble, or where to meet, if these
be not defined?

2. If therefore there must be some determination in Circumstantials, it must
be made either by God or Man; And whether God has made any such determination
in the case we will now consider; and the rather because this is made a popular
Theme to declaim upon against the Church, and jus divinum is boldly instamped
upon those Models that have been designed to supplant it.

Indeed in the Old Testament, so far as concerned the Temple at Jerusalem and
the Worship there to be performed, God was very particular in his directions.
And we (blind as we are) may discern plain reason for so doing; because both
the one and the other, I mean the Temple and the Worship to be performed
thereat, were Mystical and Figurative, and designed by Typical representations
to lead that people into some apprehension of those things that were not then
plainly revealed, but were afterward to be exhibited in the times of the
Gospel. Now if it had been lawful for the Jews to have innovated or made
alterations in those things whereof they understood not the reasons, they must
of necessity have mis-guided themselves, and God had lost the principal end of
those institutions. For since (as I said) they had no sufficient and clear
knowledge of the things typified, the change in the Rites, (which people (so in
the dark) were likely to make,) must of necessity have led them further beside
the mark God aimed at; as a Copy the more removes it is from the Original
draught, is likely to have less of the Life: and so the effect would have been,
that by those alterations they would not have left themselves so much as the
shadow to guide them to the knowledge of the substance or body.

But in their Synagogue Worship it is very observable, that they had no such
limits set them, nor no such punctual directions given them by Divine
Revelation, but were wholly Governed by Prudence and the general reasons of
Religion; insomuch that neither the very building of Synagogues, nor any part
of the Worship there performed, had any Divine Law concerning it, in all the
Old Testament: nor indeed was it needful there should, here being nothing
Symbolical (as in the former) but natural Religion, which the notions they had
of God, and the common sense of Mankind was sufficient to guide them in. Or at
least, if those common Rules should fall short in any respect, yet by any error
of that kind, they could not deprive themselves of any farther advantage or
discovery God intended them, as in the Temple worship they might.

Now thus it is in the Gospel; The Christian Religion being a plain, easy,
intelligible and rational way of serving God, it was not necessary that our
Savior or his Apostles should curiously order, or minutely describe what Rites
and Circumstances should be used in it, but might safely enough leave those to
prudence and expediency; the general reason of so plain and natural a Religion,
being sufficient to secure the Church against any capital mistake. And
therefore he that reads the Gospel without colored Spectacles, will find that
our Savior made it his business to expound the Law, to vindicate it from the
corrupt glosses of the Jews, to prescribe men the Rules of true Holiness and
Righteousness, to raise them to a noble and generous pitch, and set them an
excellent Copy of the Divine Life, and to encourage their endeavors after it,
by revealing and demonstrating the Judgment to come, and the rewards in
another world; and never went about the composure of Laws either of Civil or
Ecclesiastical Policy. And for his Apostles, they preached the Gospel of the
Kingdom, and gave certain directions suited to the conditions of the times and
places and people respectively, but never composed a standing Ritual for all
aftertimes; which will be put beyond all dispute by this one Observation, That
several things instituted by the Apostles in the Primitive Churches, and given
in command in their Sacred Writings, their Epistles, were intendded and so
construed to be obliging only so long as circumstances should stand as then
they did, and no longer. Of this nature were the Feasts of Love, the Holy Kiss,
the Order of Deaconesses; which things with several other are no where, that I
know of, now observed, nor is any man scrupled about the abrogation of them.
Which is a plain evidence, that the generality of Christians (where passion and
prejudice do not mis-guide them) acknowledge it to have been no design of the
Apostles to have strictly obliged men to a certain form of Rituals.

But besides all this, the Religion God instituted amongst the Jews, was only
fitted to that people, and appropriate to that place and Country, and intended
to oblige no body else. It was contrived on purpose to distinguish them from
all other people in the world, and therefore is called by the Apostle the
middle wall of partition, Ephesians. 2. 14. And to the end that such separation and
distance might last, the boundaries of their Rituals must be immovable. But
the Christian Religion was to throw down all Enclosures, to unite all the world
under one Head, and make of all Nations one people, and therefore must be left
with that freedom as to Circumstantials, as that all Nations, notwithstanding
their several Limits, diverse Customs and Forms of Government, might be capable
of receiving it. For as our Savior tells us, his Kingdom was not of this
world, so he never intended that his Religion should alter the Bounds, or
change the Customs, or disturb the Governments of people; but only principle
the hearts of men with true holiness and goodness, and so leave them to their
distinct Policies. And indeed it was one of the singular advantages of the
Christian Religion, and that which made it fit to be the Catholic Religion
(that is, of all times, Countries and people) That the external Policy of it
being undetermined, it reconciled it self to the condition and state of things
where it came, as well as recommended it self to the minds of men by its
reasonableness and goodness. Hereto agrees the known saying of Optatus
Millevitanus, Respublica non est in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia est in Republica,
That the Church being contained in the Civil Society, conforms it self as to
Externals, to that which contains it.

Upon all which it is exceedingly evident, That it is very unreasonable to
expect, that every Ceremony made use of by Christians should be found
prescribed in the Scripture or proved thence, and therefore those that expect
to find such definitions in the New Testament, do (as they do too often in
other cases, as I have noted heretofore) bring an Old Testament Spirit to the
writings of the New, and Jewish prejudices to the Christian Doctrine. And those
that can be so fond as to persuade themselves they can find such prescriptions
there, it is hard to say whether humor or weakness does more betray it self in
such pretense; for they catch hold of such weak twigs as no body would do, but
in desperation of other help, and they plead such obscure passages, as it is a
wonder if prejudice it self can be contented with them. And in short, they can
as little agree amongst themselves either in the proofs or the things to be
proved, as they do with us.

4. If then there must be some determination of Circumstance or no Society, and
God has made no such determination, what remains, but that men must? And then
who fitter than our Governors who best understand the Civil Policy, and what
will suit therewith, and with the customs and inclinations of the people under
their Charge? And when such determination is made, what should hinder us from
obedience and conformity thereto, especially when the particulars so
determined, (as they are not enjoined by Scripture, so) are not contrary to it,
or forbidden by it?

I conclude therefore, Whosoever shall go about to disturb a settled Order,
concluded on by good (...) men, reverenced and admired by others, incorporated
into the Laws of the Land, rivetted by Custom, and that has now given proof
of it self by above an hundred years experience, for the sake of new and
unpracticable Notions, shall little consult the real advantage of the present
Generation, and less their own reputation for discretion with Posterity.

This occasion brings to my mind, the famous Story of Pacuvius Calavius of
Capua: The people were all in a rage against their Senate; and would needs in a
hurry have them all deposed, and have used other outrages to their persons.
This wise Plebeian shuts up the Senators all together, and puts a Guard upon
them, and then coming to the people, tells them, all was in their power now,
advises them to determine their several faces according to their demerits one
by one. This they very readily hearkened to. But as they past a Doom upon any
one, he approves the Sentence, but before the execution persuades them, to
bethink themselves of another and better man to be in his Room, since a Senate
they could not be without. But here the business stuck, as he had foreseen it
would, the people who agreed unanimously against the old Senator, could by no
means accord who should succeed, one named this person and another that, but
whosoever was named by one party, was rejected by another; that in conclusion,
as great a pique as they had conceived against the old Senate, for want of
agreement in better men to fill their places, they were constrained to continue
them in. I only make this application of the Story, That it is easy and
obvious to find fault with things present, but not so to find better for the
future. And till that can be done, it is neither just to call any thing evil
that is the best of its kind, nor done like wise men, to quarrel with a Church
for some infirmities which we know the worst of by long experience, lest
thereby we come to have either none at all, or such an one as may give us cause
sadly to repent our choice.

CHAP. V.
That God lays very little stress upon Circumstantials in Religion.

TO make that which we have hitherto discoursed the more clear and convictive,
and to ease the minds of men of their scrupulosities and superstitious fears,
let it be considered in the next place, That even then when God Almighty did
with the most punctuality prescribe the Ceremonies and Circumstantials of
Religion, he never laid such stress upon them, but that so long as the main of
Religion was provided for, and the substance of his Institutions observed,
Alterations might be and were made in those lesser matters without his offense.

And if this be made appear, it will tend to beget in men better notions of
God, and better measures of Religion, as well as dispose them to Conformity to
the Church of England. For they will have no reason to think of God as a
captious Deity that watches advantages against his Creatures, nor make Religion
a piece of nice scrupulosity, and consequently will neither swallow Camels, nor
strain at Gnats, but serve God with the generosity of a free and a comfortable
mind.

Now to this purpose it will not be unuseful, to take notice of a distinction
mentioned by Maimonides, That the Jews acknowledge some things in their Law to
be primae intentionis, and some things secundae; That there were some things
God required for themselves, as being intrinsecally good, and that other things
were only required for the sake of, and in order to, the former. The first kind
that were essentially good, were also absolutely necessary, and never could be
otherwise, such as we call moral Duties. The latter kind were of so indifferent
a nature, as that not only they might not have been commanded, but also having
been commanded, they may in some cases not be a Duty; An instance whereof
(though the Jews were a great while before they understood it, and soundly
smarted for their Ignorance) is that Maxim they have now generally received,
Periculum vitae dissolvit Sabbatum. But the fullest instance of the kind, is
that which is remembered by Mr. Seldom in his Book de jure Naturali Gentium,
lib. 2. cap. 10. That in case of sickness a Jew might not only eat such meats
as were otherwise forbidden, but (say they) for the recovery of his health, or
avoidance of any great danger, he might break any Precept, save only those
Three great ones against Idolatry, Murder and Incest.

But these things come not home to my purpose, only I note them, to show that
that superstitious people had some general notice, that God did not so
precisely animadvert in little matters, so the great were minded.

That which I choose to insist upon for the evidencing of this Observation, is
the Passover, which was a great Sacrament instituted by God himself upon
weighty reasons, made a Statute for ever throughout their generations, and the
soul that observed it not was to be cut off from among his people, Exodus 12.
And in the eleventh verse of that Chapter the most minute circumstances are
defined, amongst other that they should eat the Passover with staves in their
hands, shoos on their feet, and their loins girt; by which expressions is
plainly intimated (and accordingly they understood and practiced) that they
should eat it in the posture of standing.

Nevertheless it is well known, that when they were come into the Land of
Canaan to settled habitations, they eat it sitting or lying according to the
usual custom of feasting in those Countries. And this change continued all
along till the times of our Savior, without any reproof from God, and our
Savior himself conforms to them herein, and in the same posture eats the
Passover with his Disciples.

Now this is the rather observable, because whenas the posture enjoined by God,
was symbolical of the haste in which they went out of Egypt, They in the
change aforesaid instituted a Ceremony which was symbolical too, but quite of
another matter, namely, of the rest and peace God had now given them in the
good Land of Canaan. And all this alteration made upon prudential
considerations, and the reason of the thing, without any warrant from God for
their direction, or check for the change.

Let us take another Instance; Though God had so carefully described the
Circumstances of the Temple-worship (as I have showed before, and the especial
reasons of so doing) yet we find David distributing the Priests into Orders for
the convenience of their Ministration, which might have been called an
Innovation in Religion: but besides that, he institutes instrumental Music to
be used in the Worship of God without any Commission from God (that appears).
And yet this novelty also was so far from incurring any reprehension, that it
was thenceforward constantly retained and made use of.

I might for the fuller Evidence of this notion observe, That though God had
with great solemnity instituted Sacrifices as the means of propitiating his
Divine Majesty toward sinful men, and had with great accuracy prescribed the
Laws thereof, yet he puts a great slight upon all of that nature, as a thing he
regarded not in comparison with the substantial points of Virtue and Obedience.
Particularly, Psalm. 50. v. 8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, etc.
v. 14. Offer to God the sacrifices of righteousness. As if he had said, Let me
have these latter, and I shall not much complain for defect of the former. But
especially Micah 6. 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten
thousands of rivers of Oil, etc. but he has showed thee O man what is good,
and what does the Lord thy God require of thee but to do justly, to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God. For a full explication of all which and
several other passages of Scripture to the same purpose, that Aphorism so
frequently made use of by our Savior upon several occasions will be very
considerable, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Particularly Matthew. 12. when
the Pharisees who were mighty curious of little things, censured the Disciples
of our Lord for violating the Sabbath in their rubbing the Ears of Corn as they
went through the Fields and were hungry on that day, our Savior answers, That
David did also break one of the Ceremonial Precepts in eating the Shewbread,
and v. 7. tells them, If they had known what that means, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice, they would not have condemned the innocent. Where though it
be sure enough, that God did not repeal his Law of Sacrificing by enjoining
Mercy, yet it is sufficiently intimated, that God does not only preser Moral
acts before Ceremonial, but also does make great allowances, limitations and
exceptions in the one case and not in the other. For it is as if our Savior
had said, Had you Censorious Pharisees, understood either God or Religion as ye
might and ought to have done, ye would have known that so long as there is not
contumacy and contempt in the neglect of those rituals, but the excuse of a
just necessity, or the rational consideration of a greater good to preponderate
the omission, God does not impute it for a sin.

And if this was the case and condition of things in the Old Testament, where
God seemed so punctual in his Prescriptions, so rigorous in his Animadversions,
and where the danger of erring capitally from the design of those institutions,
by the least deviation from the line of Divine Revelation, was so great, as I
have showed before; Then certainly in the New Testament, where the Divine
Wisdom has expressed far less concern for such little points, may the minds of
men be secure from such superstitious fears.

But I will give one Instance out of the New Testament also. When Circumcision
was abolished (the distinction betwixt Jew and Gentile being taken away) and
all Believers become the children of Abraham) And when the Apostle St. Paul had
vehemently declaimed against the necessity, and proclaimed the danger of
Circumcision, as is obvious to any one that reads his Epistles; yet this same
Apostle, Acts 16. 1. circumcises Timothy, to the intent that thereby he might
render himself and his Ministry more acceptable to the Jews. In which carriage
of his he has beyond all exception demonstrated to us, that all Ceremonial
appendages are perfectly subordinate, and ought to yield to the designs of
Peace, Charity and Edification, as the greater good.

I will conclude this Point with what the Apostle concludes his Discourse about
eating or not eating of meats sacrificed to Idols, Romans 14. which created as
much dispute and scruple amongst weak Christians then, as Ceremonies do now. V.
17. he says, The Kingdom of God, that is, the Gospel, is not meat and drink,
that is, consists not or lays little stress upon those nice and perplexing
matters, but in righteousness, peace and joy: all the weight is laid upon the
more substantial observances of a righteous and holy life, and a peaceable
spirit and conversation. And adds a proof, v. 18. For he that in these things
serves Christ is approved of God and accepted of men.

CHAP. VI.
That the Magistrate has Authority to determine such Externals of Religion as
are the matters of our disputes, and what deportment is due from Christians
toward him.

HAving showed in the former Chapters, That God has neither made any exact
definition of Religious Circumstances, nor is, very curious about them, further
than to secure the great things of Christianity; It follows, that then either
those lesser must be determined by men, or not at all. It will therefore now be
seasonable to inquire what Authority and Interest the Magistrate has in this
affair.

And although there want not those that Chameleon like live upon the air of
vulgar applause, and get themselves a reputation of extraordinary zeal by
daring to censure the actions, and asperse the persons of Magistrates, and with
such persons, he that shall vindicate the just Rights and Authority of his
Superiors, shall hardly escape the reproach of flattery and time-serving; yet
being conscious both of the truth and importance of what I am to say, and of
the sincerity of my intentions in so doing, I will deliver my self freely in
these two points.

1. That the Magistrate exceeds not his Commission when he interposes for the
determination of the Circumstantials of Religion.

2. That common Prudence, Christian Charity and Humility do all require of us
to presume of the wisdom and reasonableness of such his determinations. The
result of which two things will be, that it is much more our duty peaceably to
comply with and obey them.

1. The former of these has been so fully and substantially proved by the
incomparable Hugo Grotius in a just discourse, and by a late eminent Divine of
this Church, that it is enough to refer the Reader to them; yet because some
person may perhaps read these Papers, that will not take the pains, or has not
opportunity to read those larger Discourses (that yet would better compensate
his labor) I will therefore say these three things.

1. It is certain, the Magistrate had once a power in the Circumstantials of
Religion, and that in the Old Testament. David (as I have showed before)
altered some things and instituted others even in the Temple-service it self.
Hezekiah without a Scripture for it, broke the brazen Serpent to pieces, though
it was a symbolical Ceremony of Gods own institution: but besides this, he
caused the Passover to be kept by all Judah and Israel on the second Month,
though it was not according to divine institution, but done by the advice of
his Council upon pious and prudential considerations, 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. He
appointed also the Levites to kill the Passover, v. 17. which by Gods
appointment was to have been performed by the people themselves. And Chap. 29.
v. 34. he prefers the Levites to assist the Priests in killing the other
Sacrifices, which never before they were admitted to.

Many other instances might be brought out of the Old Testament to this
purpose, but these sufficiently make it appear, that the best Princes did not
think they exceeded their own bounds, or entrenched upon God, when they
prudently ordered such particulars; and they are so far from having any blot
laid upon their memories for these things, that they are recorded to their
immortal honor.

Now since Magistrates had once such a power, how came they to lose it, or be
divested of it? Is it that God is more curious and jealous of every punctilio
in his Worship now, than he was heretofore? That would be the most absurd
supposition in the world, as we have sufficiently demonstrated. And he that
without evident proof shall go about to deny them what Christianity found them
in possession of, shall do very bad offices to the Religion he pretends such
zeal for. For it would be a small encouragement to Princes to entertain and
countenance the Christian Religion, if it was told them, That the power which
God had allowed them in the Old Testament, was now found too exorbitant, and
therefore he had retrencht it in the Gospel. Would it not mightily move Kings
and Princes to become nursing Fathers to the Church to hear this Doctrine
preached to them?

2. The New Testament is frequent in asserting the power of Princes and
Magistrates, and requires all to be subject to them and obey them of what
quality or condition soever, and no where excepts the case of Religion;
therefore undoubtedly that is under their power, (so far I mean as
Circumstantials and those things that God himself has not defined) For when
God has made them a general commission and made no exception of this kind, who
shall put it upon them? If they have not power in such matters of Religion as
we speak of, it is manifest they have no Magistracy or Legislative power in
Religion at all. And then one would have expected the Text should not have run
absolutely and in general terms, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, but with this limitation, in things Civil only; or at least that some
other Scripture should have as plainly restrained them, as this and other
impowers them. Which since it is no where done, we wrong both our selves and
them, to abridge them herein. Besides that, when our Savior tells us, his
Kingdom is not of this world, he sufficiently intimates, that it was neither
necessary that he should, and that consequently he had no intention to alter
the forms of Government, or revoke the Authority Governors were in possession
of.

3. It is generally acknowledged (and accordingly practiced) that Fathers and
Governors of Families have authority in matters of Religion within their own
Families, at least so far as the case in hand. Who doubts but the Father or
Head of a Family may prescribe what Chapters shall be read, what Prayers used,
what Times shall be set apart for Devotion, what Postures, whether kneeling or
standing, and being uncovered, who shall officiate in his Family, and in what
Habit, with innumerable others of a like nature? Do the children or servants
use to require of him an express Scripture to authorize his Commands, and to
warrant their Conformity, or else they will not obey?

And if he in his private capacity and narrow sphere has this Authority, with
what color of Reason, or with what Modesty, can every private man deny his
Prince what he arrogates to himself? One would reasonably think, that as Civil
Government arose out of Paternal, it should by inheritance challenge that
Authority it was born to; and besides that, as it has a larger sphere and a
greater concern, so it should have due to it proportionably a greater latitude
of Authority.

2. If the Magistrate may determine those matters, then not only Christian
Charity and Humility, but also common Prudence require us to presume of the
Wisdom and Reasonableness of his Determinations, and much more to obey them.

It is enough to warrant and require our Obedience, that a thing is the command
of our Superior, and not beyond the sphere of his Authority; but if he have
not only Law but Reason on his side too, then it is both a sin and a shame to
disobey. Now Humility requiring that we think meanly and modestly of our own
Reasons, Charity that we judge favorably of another, and Prudence that we
think best of the Magistrates; all these together make it our duty not only to
obey, but to do it with all cheerfulness imaginable.

It is as great as it is a common mistake, to think Charity and Compassion only
due from Governors to their Inferiors in the frame and composure of their
Laws; for it is also as due from Inferiors toward them, and that they
reciprocally make a fair and candid interpretation of their Injunctions, and
that they indispose not themselves nor others to obedience by irreverent
censures of the abilities, and suspicions and jealousies of the ends and
intentions of the Lawmakers. It was a Saying of Greg. Nazianzen, well worthy
of so wise and peceable a man, (...), That any man the more conscious he is to
himself of his own honesty and invincible integrity, so much the less prone he
is to entertain sinister suspicions of the intentions of others. Christian
simplicity, as it means no hurt, so it does not easily suspect any; and
humility and modesty require, that men think others intend as wisely and as
honestly as themselves. Charity, (says the Apostle) hops all things,
believes all things, bears all things. But it is the Genius of an evil man
to suspect every man means mischief, because he does so himself: whereas a good
man supposes every man intends well (at least till the contrary appear) because
consulting his own breast he finds that he does so. For its natural for all men
to take measures by themselves, nor is it more reasonable that men should do as
they would be done unto, than it is common and usual for men to presume that of
others which they are privy to in their own bosoms.

It was an ingenious Repartee, that Tertullian made to the Pagans in his
Apology; They accused the Christians that in their nocturnal assemblies, they
took a little Child and sealed their confederacy by eating the flesh and
drinking the blood of the harmless Infant: But says he, Since you only suspect
and never saw this done, either you could do such a horrid thing your selves,
and then you are monstrously unnatural; or you could not, and then you are as
unreasonable to suspect that done by others, which you do not think possible to
be done by your selves.

There is nothing more frequent than for a silly man to suppose there are no
other nor better reasons of things, than what obviously appear, because if
there be other or better, he cannot reach them. On the contrary, a wise man,
when the surface of things is weak and mean, always imagines there is some
better foundation at the bottom, because he knows that he himself would not be
led by such weak confiderations as those are that appear. If therefore we would
approve our selves either humble, or charitable, or wise, or good, there is no
better argument to demonstrate any of these by, than the censures we make upon
the actions and intentions of others. And if any where it be of importance to
give such a testimony of our selves, and to proceed by such measures, it is in
the case of the Magistrate, not only for the common equity, but also upon the
account of the dignity of his place as Gods Minister, and the usefulness and
necessity of his Office and Ministry.

Is it fit, says Elihu, Chap. 34. 18. to be said unto Princes, Ye are ungodly,
or to Rulers, Ye are wicked? Is it tolerable to repute our Governors Dolts and
Idiots? to suspect they have no sense of their duty, or to reproach their
Sanctions as Tyrannical, Superstitious or Antichristian? If I must put the best
construction the case will bear, upon the Actions of my Equal or Inferior,
will it become me to make the harshest interpretation of public Laws and the
Actions of my Superiors?

It was an unhappy slip of a great and worthy person, whose name I will
conceal, for the reverence I bear to his profession and worth, when reflecting
upon the Statute of the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth concering the Jejunium
Cecilianum, or the Wednesday-Fast; he calls it a Law and no Law, a mere
contradiction, a piece of nonsense. That it must bind the Conscience if it be a
Law, but the Lawmakers (says he) declare it shall not bind the Conscience,
and so it is no Law: with a great deal more to that purpose. Now the words of
the Statute are these; it is declared penal, if any man shall say, That this
Fast is enjoined upon any necessity for the saving of the Soul or the service
of God, otherwise than other political Laws be. Had that excellent person read
and considered these words, they would have afforded him no color for the
aforesaid imputation; for the Lawmakers do not declare, that this Law shall
not bind the Conscience, but the contrary, that it shall as other Political
Laws do: but they take care that the end and reason of the Law may be
understood, which was not Religious but Political (for the maintenance of the
Wars) I say that clause in the Statute had not the least intention of limiting
or declaring the obligation of the Law, but only of preventing rumors of
superstitious designs in the end and intentions of the Lawmakers. Nor is there
any other the least passage in the Law that gives countenance to the
reflections he makes either upon the Law it self or the Lawmakers. And I note
it only for this end, that we may observe how much more prone men are to pass
censures, than to consider to the bottom, the true state of the things we pass
sentence upon.

But to let pass that as a mere oversight, it is intolerable to hear the
immodest clamours that are raised upon mere mistakes and surmises. Men, it
seems, think to recommend themselves as persons both of more than ordinary
Sagacity and also of singular purity of Conscience by finding faults of this
kind. Whereas did they indeed consider either the divine Image born by
Magistrates, or the great consequence of public Peace, and well weighed how
much that depends upon public reputation and reverence, they would certainly
choose some other subject to serve those little ends by.

The Scripture calls the Magistrates, Masters of restraint, Judges 18. 7. (See
the Hebrew) and as such they must needs be an eyesore and grievance to all
loose and exorbitant persons, and consequently it is mightily to their wish,
that Authority should lose its force, and Laws their veneration, and thereby
the sinews of all Society be loosened, that so their Extravagancies may be
uncontrolled, and their Vices indemnified. Therefore by how much it is the
interest of all evil men to have Magistracy and Laws in contempt, by so much is
it the wisdom and concern of all sober and virtuous men to strengthen those
hands that others would enfeeble, and support that reputation they would
infringe and violate. And those that consider this, will not out of levity,
wantonness or rashness, control Laws, or dispute with Magistrates about
smaller matters, lest they thereby render them unable to protect them in their
greater and more important concerns.

Nos ipsius dei imperium in Imperatoribus suspicimus, said Tertullian in the
name of the Christians in his time. They then made their interpretation of
Authority and Laws in favor of obedience and of the Governor; they did not,
as St. James expresses it, instead of being Doers of the Law, make themselves
Judges of the Law, and Lawmakers too.

Nor will it be either a foolish charity or a blind obedience, to permit our
selves to the conduct of our Superiors in those little matters we discourse
of, since we have great reason to persuade our selves, that as those that stand
higher than we, may see further, so those that are concerned for the whole may
give a better judgment, than those that respect but a part. And that we our
selves may as easily lie under prejudice as they; and be as much transported
with consideration of Ease and Liberty, as they may probably be suspected to be
with Ambition. For why may not they have a reason for their actions which
either we cannot reach, or are not come to the knowledge of? Especially since
that may be best for the whole, that is less commodious to us in particular;
and by being so, it is not made unlawful for him (that has the charge and
oversight of the whole) to command, nor warrantable for us to disobey. Nulla
lex satis commoda omnibus, id modo quaeritur si majori parti and in summum
prodest, said Cato in Livy.

Besides (as I have intimated before) There are no less different capacities of
mind than constitutions of body, and as great a difference in men's outward
circumstances as in either of the former; therefore neither can the reasons of
Laws be equally understood, nor the matter of Laws or the things imposed be
equally easy and accommodate to the practice of all men. And consequently
those that would have the Laws exactly fitted to their own humor, without
respect to other men, imitate the barbarous custom of the infamous Procrustes,
who is said to have either rackt all those persons that fell into his hands,
and stretched them to his own size if they were too short, or cut them off to
his own proportion, if they were too long: So these men would exercise the same
cruelty themselves; which they forbid the Magistrate, and lay down a principle
of equal severity toward others, as of fondness and indulgence to themselves.

Till we can reconcile the diverse Constitutions (I say) of mind and body, the
several humors and contrary Interests of all men to one standard, it will be
impossible that the wisest Constitutions imaginable, should prevent all
scruple, or be alike acceptable to all Parties. Either therefore there must be
no Laws made, which must be the ruin of the whole, or one of the Parties must
be content upon the account of public good, that their private Interests or
Opinions be less complied with: that is, Since the Laws cannot be fitted to
every man, some men must fit and accommodate themselves to the Laws. And this
being resolved on, the only question remaining will be, on which of the Parties
this shall fall; that is, which shall bend to the Law. And the decision of this
will be very easy; for though on the one side Self-love and favor to our own
Persuasion incline us to contend for the case and encouragement of our own way,
yet Christian Charity on the other side, requires as great a condescension to
our Brethren. And if now the scales seem even, then certainly the consideration
of the Magistrate and Laws in being will be of weight enough to turn the
balance, and that Humility and Obedience our Religion teaches will prevail with
us to leave it to public Wisdom to decide between both Parties.

And then the result of all will be, that instead of prescribing to the
Magistrate what he shall determine, or disputing what he has concluded on; we
shall compose our minds and order our circumstances to the more easy and
cheerful compliance therewith. And call to mind the saying of Paulus Aemilius,
who when several of his Soldiers would be suggesting to him, their several
Models of management, Vos gladios acuite, bids them whet their swords and be
ready to execute what should be commanded them, but leave the management of
affairs to him their General.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein Christian Liberty consists; and that it does not discharge us from
Obedience to Laws.

ALL that we have hitherto discoursed of the Power of the Magistrate, some
think may be avoided by pleading the Magna Charta of Christian Liberty
contained in the Gospel. It will therefore be necessary in the next place to
consider the true notion and extent of that.

That there is such a Charter is out of doubt, the New Testament frequently
making mention of it, putting of us in mind of the gratitude we owe to him that
purchased it for us, of the price it cost him, and requiring us to stand fast
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1.

But what are the Contents of it, is not so well agreed on; and indeed it is
too evident that few of those that contend so much for it, and plead it upon
all occasions, know what it is, or wherein it consists. It was a smart Answer
of a Spartan Captive, who being exposed to sale in the Market, and there asked
(as the manner was) by one that came to buy Slaves, quid sciret, what he was
good for, what business he understood: answered, Scio quid sit liberum esse, I
know what belongs to freedom. Had Christian Liberty been all along as well
understood as talked of, the Religion had obtained more Reputation, the Church
more Peace, States and Kingdoms more Security, and more Souls had gone to
Heaven: but for want of this, men have committed as gross errors as that Tully
complains of Clodius for, That he set up Simulacrum Meretricis Tanagraeae, The
Image of a famous Harlot for that of Liberty.

The Gnostics about the Apostles times pleaded Christian Liberty, both on the
behalf of their cowardly Revolts from Christianity in times of Persecutition,
and of their sensual Debaucheries: as if the knowledge of the Truth gave a
privilege neither to profess nor practice it, when either the one proved too
incommodious to their Secular Interests, or the other too disgustful to their
sensual inclinations.

Others, and they also in the first times of Christianity, thought Christian
Liberty had been a Civil Infranchisement, and had extended so far as to cancel
all bonds of peoples subjection to their Princes, or of Servants to their
Masters; and hereupon like the pretense of zeal amongst the Jews (in their
degenerate times) Christian Liberty was the Passport of fugitive servants, and
the pretext for Outrages and Rebellions. And this made it necessary for the
Apostles almost in all their Writings to press Obedience to Superiors.

A third sort of men have mistaken this Gospel Liberty to be a discharge from
the obligation of the Moral Law, and have been so prodigiously absurd as to
take the Gospel to contain nothing else properly, but a publication of Gods
Promises or Decrees rather, and to require only a bare assent to them or belief
of them, and that those Promises are absolute and without any condition of our
obedience, save only as that should reciprocally become us by way of gratitude,
not that justification or salvation depended upon it. This is the Doctrine of
the Antinomians or modern Libertines, and is a persuasion fit to debauch the
whole world, were it not that few men can be so unreasonable as to believe it,
though they would. But it is so contrary to the very name and nature of a
Covenant, which the Gospel is styled to be, so expressly contrary to the whole
design of Christian Doctrine, and goes so cross to the very sense of every
honest mind, that I shall not spend any more time or words about it.

There is a fourth mistake, which (though I will not say it is equally
dangerous with any of the former, yet) is mischievous enough and equally false.
That though the bonds of Civil Subjection are not quite dissolved by the
Gospel, yet that all Christians are discharged from the interpositions of the
Magistrate in affairs of Religion, and that there he ought no further to
intermeddle, than he can produce express warrant from Scripture for his
particular Injunctions. But if notwithstanding the Governor shall arrogate to
himself a larger sphere of Authority, and make any definitions in Religion, or
especially the matters of the first Table, It is then and in that case not only
lawful for a good Christian to refuse Obedience, but that it is his duty so to
do, to withstand an Invasion of his Christian Liberty, and an incorachment upon
the Prerogative of God.

This is the mistake that is most rife amongst us, and which has given
occasion to much of the unhappiness of this Age. It is not my work laboriously
to confute this opinion, nor do I think many words necessary in the case, yet
of the many absurd consequences let us note these following.

1. This opinion makes all Civil Government the most ticklish and uncertain,
and the condition of Magistrates the most servile and precarious, that can well
be imagined; forasmuch as there is scarcely any thing can fall under their care
and cognizance, or capable to be made matter of Law or Injunction, but has
such affinity to, or connection with Religion, as to be sufficient (upon this
principle) to raise a dispute of Jurisdiction.

So that the case between the Civil Laws and Religion will be like the
condition of affairs that often happens in those places where the Supremacy of
the Pope and Court of Rome is received, there is a perpetual contention about
bounds and limits of Jurisdiction between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts;
for whilst the Civil Judge goes about to take cognizance of the cause, the
Ecclesiastical will (it may be) challenge the person as belonging to his
Jurisdiction: or if the person be Laick and alieni fort, yet it will go hard
but the cause shall be found to have some connection with Religion, and so the
Ecclesiastical Court either directly or in ordine ad spiritualia draws all
matters to it.

And not unlike was the state of affairs a long while together in the Kingdom
and Church of Scotland by virtue of this very persuasion: The Prince or the
State could enact nothing almost but the Kirk-men found themselves grieved and
Religion concerned, and Excommunication is denounced: The Kirk on the other
side make their Decrees, and the Civil Power declares them null, and grants
Prohibitions, etc. He that will satisfy himself of the truth of these things
and thereby convince himself of the mischief of the Principle we are speaking
of, let him read the Judicious History of the Church of Scotland written by the
Most Reverend ArchBishop Spot swood: And he shall find that this unhappy notion
raised and maintained for many years a bellum limitaneum, and that it is like
the Marches or bateable ground betwixt two bordering Potentates, a Scene of
contention and a field of blood. Whereas did we agree of certain Limits, and
make the Magistrates Power and Province extend to all that which God has not
taken in by express Law, both Gods Glory and the Magistrates Authority would be
kept entire, and there would be neither cause nor room for Controversy.

2. This opinion at once condemns all the States and Kingdoms in the whole
world of Impiety and Irreligion, forasmuch as there neither is, nor ever has
been any such constitution, as has not had some Laws of Religion that could
not be deduced particularly from the Scriptures. And so he that is of this
persuasion and will be true to it, is bound in Conscience to be a Rebel
wherever he lives.

3. It is an unreasonable Fear, a mere Melancholy Jealousy, and express
Superstition instead of Religion, to suspect that either the Magistrate can
offend in making, or the people in obeying such Laws as (though they are not
expressly warranted, yet) are no where forbidden by the Scripture. For it is a
supposition that a man may be a Sinner, when yet he breaks no Law, contrary to
the express words of St. John, 1 Ep. 3. 4. who defines Sin to be a
transgression of a Law. And as is the usual Genius of all Superstition, it
mis-represents God as cruel and tyrannical, that can condemn men ex post sacto,
for doing of that against which there was no Law in being. But,

4. Which is most observable, this Doctrine instead of asserting Christian
Liberty, in truth subverts it, and lays far more severe bonds upon the
Consciences of men than the very Law of Moses did. That was a yoke (say the
Apostles, Acts 15. 10.) which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear,
upon this account, especially, because it enjoined a great number of little
Observances, which by their multitude were hard to be remembered, by their
nicety difficult to be observed, and by their mere positive nature, and having
no essential goodness in themselves, had less power upon the Consciences of men
to awaken their care and diligence about them. It is manifest that Law
contained no precept that was in it self impossible to be performed, but
because it is hard for the mind of man to attend to many things at once,
especially if also the things in which his care and obedience is required be
such, as are not enacted in his Conscience, and when he can see no other reason
of, or advantage by his obedience, but merely his obedience, therefore was that
Law called impossible. Now if a man were bound by the Gospel to avoid all those
particulars that were commanded by Moses, it is plain, the servitude and the
difficulty would be the same; but if not only so, but he be also bound to avoid
all that which the Scripture is silent in, his obligation is infinite, and his
servitude intolerable. For Positives are determinate and definite, and so fall
more easily within our care and attention: but Negatives are infinite, and
therefore such a yoke must be properly impossible.

These mistakes therefore being removed, The true Notion of Christian Liberty
will best be understood, if we consider, That in the times of the Old
Testament, the visible Church of God was enclosed within a narrow pale, and
none could be members of it, without submission to Circumscision and the other
Rites of Judaism. Whence it came to pass, that at the first publication of the
Gospel, it was a riddle and an astonishment to the very Apostles themselves,
that the Gentiles were to be taken into it. And when the effecting this was
taken in hand, Acts 15. 1. the Jewish Christians stood upon their privilege,
and would not admit the Gentile Converts into Society, nor become of one body
with them, unless they would be circumcised and keep the Law. Hereupon a
Council is called, and there the Apostles find out a temper and middle way for
both parts to meet in for the present, which was that the Gentile Converts
should submit to the terms of Proselytism at large or the precepts given to the
Sons of Noah, as some understand the passage, or (as is indubitable) that they
should comply with the Jews in these three things, of abstaining from
fornication, from things strangled, and from blood. And on the other side, the
Jewish Converts should abate of their rigor, and not require of the Gentiles
the strict terms of complete Judaism. At which decision the Gentile Christians
were transported with Joy, rejoiced at the consolation, v. 31.

For (as I said) till then, none could be of the same body with the Jews in
respect of visible Church Society, without Circumcision and universal
submission to the Law of Moses. This therefore was an expedient for the
present, till the Jews should be by degrees better instructed in the liberty of
that Christian Religion they had lately received. But when the Gospel was fully
published, then the aforesaid Enclosure is laid open, and all Nations invited
into the Society of the Church upon equal terms, neither party being bound to
those nice Laws of Moses, nor any other but those plain and reasonable ones
contained in the Gospel, and such other (not contradictory to them) as public
Wisdom, Peace and Charity should dictate and recommend.

And to this purpose is the observation of Eusebius in his Praepaeratio
Evangelica, That Christianity is nothing else but the old Patriarchal Religion
revived, a restitution of that Primitive simplicity and liberty that was before
the Law of Moses, and that now there lies no more bonds upon the Consciences of
Christians, than did upon the Ancient Patriarchs, saving those improvements our
Savior has made upon the Law of Nature, and those few positive Institutions
of his expressly set down in the Gospel. And that men obeying these are at
liberty to conform to whatsoever common Reason and equity, or public Authority
shall impose. And this discourse of Eusebius is in effect the same with that of
the Apostle, Romans 4. and Gal. 3. especially v. 19. where he puts this question,
Wherefore then served the Law? he answers, (...), it was added, etc. it was a
kind of interim, or like a parenthesis, which when it shall be left out, the
former and latter parts join together again, without any interruption of the
sense. That is, when this interim or temporary provision of the Law shall be
taken away, the Primitive Patriarchal Religion and that brought in by our
Savior shall seem to be of one piece, the latter beginning where the former
ended.

The Contents then of the great Charter purchased for us, and brought in by our
Lord Jesus, are these; That beside the freeing of us from the power and
dominion of sin, which the Law of Moses could not do, and from the Tyranny of
Satan which the Gentile world lay under till Christ came; I say, besides these
(which are no matters of our present dispute) our Christian Infranchisement
discharges us not only from a necessity of observing the Mosaic Law and Rites
of Judaism, but further and especially sets our Consciences at Liberty to
pursue our own Reason, and to obey any Laws of men that shall not contradict
the express Laws of the Gospel. That we are as perfectly free as those were
that lived before any Scripture was written, as to all those things that are
not determined in those Scriptures; and that within all that sphere we may
without guilt or burden upon our Consciences, serve all the interests of peace
and order in the world. And consequently, that neither the Magistrate need to
fetch a particular warrant from the Scripture to authorize his Prescriptions,
nor we an express license thence to legitimate our respective obedience; but
the former may freely consult his own reason, common prudence and the interest
of his Government, and the latter their own peace and tranquillity.

This is true and real Freedom, when with a good and a quiet Conscience we may
conform our selves to the Wisdom of our Superiors, and the interests of
Society; when I have a power in utramque, and may do or leave undone all those
matters that are not defined in Scripture, according as public Laws and the
ends of all Society shall require.

And that this is the true notion of Christian Liberty will appear further by
this, That the Apostle in several of his Epistles, but especially that to the
Romans, injoyns the Christians in their scruples about Eating or not Eating of
certain Meats, and in the conduct of themselves in all such matters, to consult
charity toward their weak Brethren, the peace of the Church, and their own
edification; that is, such principles of resolving scruples as before I
described, and bids them not to apply themselves to any Scripture, or to expect
a determination of such questions thence. See Romans 14. 3, 5, 13, 14, 15, 19.
and chap. 15. v. 2, etc. From whence these two things follow.

1. That Christian Liberty does consist in a freedom in utramque, that is, that
antecedently to the considerations of Prudence, Peace and Charity, it is
equally in the power of a Christian to do or not do any or all those things
that are not expressly forbidden by the holy Scriptures: and that where the
Scripture is silent the Conscience is free in the general, and only to be
determined by those considerations.

2. That it is no infringement, but an exercise of this liberty, actually to be
determined to that side toward which Prudence or Charity shall incline, though
in the mean time the other side be in the general as lawful as that. Hence it
is that we find liberty and condescension or self-denial joined together by St.
Paul, Gal. 5. 13. Ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty as an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another; and by St. Peter, 1 Ep.
2. 16. As free, yet not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God. Which two places are so clear in themselves, as no
Commentary can make them more so, and so full to our purpose, that nothing
further can reasonably be desired.

And so these two points thus gained, will give abundant foundation for a third
to be inferred from them, viz. That whatsoever is so free to me that I may do
it or not do it, according as I shall be inclined by the consideration of
Brotherly Charity and Compassion, must of necessity be also as free to me to
obey the Magistrate and serve public Peace and Order in, without either
prostitution of my Liberty, or violation of Gods right and Prerogative. For
whatsoever I may do in compassion to my Brothers infirmity, surely that I may
much more do in reverence to Gods Ordinance, the Lawful Magistrate; which is
the point we have all this while drove at.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Tender Conscience, what it is, and its Privileges.

IF pleading our Charter of Christian Liberty will not give us a discharge from
Obedience to our Superiors, whether in things Sacred or Civil, as I have
proved it cannot, yet possibly the plea of a Tender Conscience may.

This is thought to have not only a Privilege, but a kind of Prerogative, to
carry with it an exemption from all humane Laws whatsoever, but especially
Ecclesiastical. It pretends to be Gods peculiar, and exempt from any inferior
cognizance, like the Monastic Orders in the Church of Rome, which are
immediately and only subject to the Pope, so this to Gods Tribunal and none
else: Nay, it looks like a Dictatorian Authority, and seem to be legibus
soluta. This (they would make us believe) can limit the Magistrate, null Laws,
forbid execution, and which is yet more, change the very nature of things, and
make that good and holy which was wicked and rebellious before. This can
canonize any Opinion, legitimate any action, warrant any extravagancy in the
person that owns it. The man of a Tender Conscience may pass all guards; all
mounds and bars that are set to confine others, must be open to him. He is a
righteous man, and for him there is no Law, no controllment, no punishment. The
Tenderness of his Conscience is an inviolable Sanctuary, and he that meddles
with such a man, is a fighter against God. Make use of the best arguments to
convince him, discourse to him with the greatest evidence, he is not bound to
hear you, his Conscience is his Priest, Prophet and King too, he hangs and
draws and all within himself (as we say;) whatsoever he thinks can be no
heresy, and whatsover he does can be no sin.

Unless therefore we can pull down this Usurper, we must look for no
Magistracy, and except we discover the weakness and absurdity of this
pretension, all endeavors of restoring Uniformity in the Church will be vain
and useless. Let us 1. Therefore consider what Conscience is in general, and
then we shall better come to understand the grounds and strength of this mighty
pretender: 2. What a tender Conscience is; 3. What privileges or exemptions it
may lay claim to.

1. What Conscience is. And indeed the original of the mistake in this matter
seems to lie here; some have given such pompous and Romantic descriptions of
Conscience, that they have beguiled men into an apprehension that it is far a
Mightier Potentate than indeed it is. I have read of a vulgar person, who first
having heard himself resembled to the Prince for stature and complexion, and
afterward heightened up into the conceit by the flatteries of some and arts of
others that had ends to serve by him, came at last to conceit himself to be the
Prince indeed, and gave sufficient trouble to the King in possession. Men have
spoken so magnificently of Conscience, that diverse have grown into a belief,
that it was some Ghost or Spirit, and little thought it was nothing but their
own inconsiderable selves.

It is called a Tutelar Genius, a Familiar, a Domestic Deity, a God within
men, and at least Gods Vicegerent inthroned in our bosoms. Now under these
disguises men have been ready to fall down and worship themselves, and like the
Pagans, have given Divine honors to their own Passions; but the least that
could follow from such premises, was that the Magistrate must strike sail to
this admired Numen. Hence probably Quakerism took its rise, the men of which
way are generally a stubborn and incurable generation: Bring Scripture or
Reason or any Authority against them, they slight all, and only appeal to the
light within them, that mighty Deity, that internal Christ, their Conscience.
Hence also it is probable, that mischievous principle arose, That it is lawful
to do Evil that Good may come of it, in spite of the Apostle: And it is
believed that for a good cause, and under a good intention (that is, the
persuasion of our Conscience, (especially if Providence also smile upon our
undertakings, and encourage us with hopes of success,) that it is lawful for
any man of what quality soever to set up for a Reformer and turn the world
upside down. Nay; so far have some been bewildred by these cloudy and misty
descriptions, that whatsoever Humor has been predominant in their Bodies,
whatever Passion of their Mind, whatever Prejudice of Education, or Interest,
or Profit, all this has past for Conscience, and under that name been
uncontrollable.

But now if such men would consider, and loved plain English, and to understand
what they say, Conscience is neither God, nor Angel, nor Spirit, nor any thing
that will bear all that weight is thus laid upon it. But is plainly this and no
more; namely, It is a man's own mind or understanding under the distinct
consideration of reflecting upon himself, his own actions and duty. When we
take notice of things that do not concern us morally, then this notice is
called understanding only, or mind, or opinion, or science, or some such name;
but when we consider whether a thing be good or evil morally, lawful or
unlawful, that is, whether it be agreeable to such a rule of action or suitable
to the end of eternal happiness, then we call this notice or reflection of our
mind, Conscience.

Now when we speak thus plainly, a great part of the aforesaid Legendary
conceits vanish; for scarcely any man that says his Conscience is
incontrollable, will say his own opinion or Reason is the ultimate rule of his
actions: but will confess he may as a man err and be mistaken, and therefore
has need of a Guide, or some Law or light to direct him. Therefore it is plain,
that men deceive themselves with Metaphors, with words and phrases.

Some man perhaps will say, That allowing Conscience to be nothing but the Mind
of man as aforesaid, yet even so it is subject to no humane Laws, forasmuch as
no man can force me to think otherwise than I do, nor compel me to be of his
opinion in the inward sense of my mind: My Mind therefore or Conscience is only
obnoxious to God.

But the answer to this is easy, That though it be true, that neither men can
know my thoughts, nor put any constraint upon the free actings of my Mind; yet
for all this, since my Mind is not infallible, I may and must needs have
something to guide my mind, in its judgment and determinations, and that is it
which we call Law; and though this cannot force me to follow its direction, yet
it morally obliges me, that is, it will be my sin if I do not. In short; The
most that Mind or Conscience can pretend to, is to be a Judge, yet is it but
such a Judge as is subject to the Laws, and they must guide it, as that guides
the man, or otherwise its petty Sovereignty that it pretends to, will not
secure it from the wrath of the great Sovereign of the world, by whom Kings
reign.

But if it be further objected, That we are notwithstanding bound to obey the
dictates of our Mind or Conscience before any Law or command of any humane
Authority whatsoever, if they happen to interfere.

I answer, It is true in things notoriously and plainly evil, and the reason
is, (not because my Mind or Conscience supersedes the Law of the Magistrate,
but) because some higher Law of God or Reason by which my Conscience is guided,
has in that case made a nullity in the Law of the Magistrate; for if my
Conscience have not the direction and warranty of such superior Law, the mere
Opinion of my Mind or Conscience will afford me no security, for where those
are silent, there the Law of the Magistrate is the immediate Rule of my
Conscience; and then to oppose or contradict that, is to affront the public
Tribunal with a private Consistory, and to set my own Opinion against Gods
Institution.

If yet it be further urged, That if after all my consideration of the reason
of public Laws, I cannot satisfy my self of the lawfulness of the thing
commanded, I must then govern my self by my Conscience, and not by the Law.

I reply, That if the unlawfulness of the thing commanded is not as plain and
visible, as the Command of God for obeying Authority is, my Opinion or
Conscience will be no excuse to me, because I forsake a certain Rule to follow
an uncertain.

But if after all endeavors of satisfying my self to obey the humane Law, yet
the thing commanded by the Magistrate (however innocent it may be in it self)
seems to me as plainly unlawful, as obedience is plainly a duty, I say this
case is pittyable, and will make some abatement of the sin of disobedience, but
does not totally excuse it, much less make a nullity of the Law. It cannot make
the Law null; for that depends upon its own Reasonableness and the Authority
enacting it, and not upon the Conceptions of men. Nor can it totally excuse
from sin, for sin is the transgression of a Law, according to the definition of
the Apostle. All therefore that can be allowed in the case is, That by reason
of such a man's unhappy circumstances, his disobedience will then be only a sin
of infirmity, which is pittyable amongst men upon consideration of common
humanity, and is pardonable with God as other errors are upon a general
repentance.

2. Now let us proceed to consider what a Tender Conscience is, and how that
will alter the case.

And it is no more easy to find out what men mean by Tenderness, than what
they meant by Conscience. Doubtless when men speak of a Tender Conscience, they
do not mean such an one as will endure no check or restraint, that like an
unbroken Horse will admit of no rein of Government: nor yet a nice and
fantastical Conscience, that can brook nothing contrary to its own humor.
These at the first view are plainly vicious and most of all need and deserve
the restraint of Laws, and to be inured to that they so stubbornly decline.

Nor yet on the other side, can Tenderness be taken in the same latitude with a
Good Conscience. Every good man has such a tenderness as to be afraid of sin,
and to decline the occasions and temptations to it; and it would be too
arrogant and presumptuous for those that plead the tenderness of their
Consciences, to suppose themselves the only men that make Conscience of what
they do; for then the contrary to a tender Conscience must be a brawny and
obdurate or stupid Conscience: which it would be too contumelious to reproach
all other men but themselves with.

It remains then, That that which is meant by Tenderness, is something betwixt
these two; namely, neither a steady well instructed, nor yet a sturdy and
rebellious Conscience, but a weak, unsettled and timorous one. And now having
before resolved Conscience in general to be nothing but the Mind or practical
Understanding, a Tender Conscience will be nothing but either an ignorant or
uninstructed Mind, or a sickly, melancholy and superstitious Understanding. And
then to speak plainly, A man of a tender Conscience is such a person, as being
right and honest for the main, yet either through the weakness of his
Intellectuals or prejudices of his Education, or through the melancholy of his
Constitution, does not rightly understand his duty, and consequently is apt to
doubt and scruple and fear where no fear is; and by this mistake (from the
causes aforesaid) renders those things evil to himself that are not so in
themselves.

Now this being so, that a Tender Conscience is this and no more, a man will
justly wonder whence it should come to pass, that either the pretense of such a
Conscience should be a matter of ambition as we see it is with some, and much
more that it should be thought fit to give Laws to the world as it seems to be
the mind of others.

However we grant it pittyable, but before we show what privileges it may
claim, we will a little unfold more particularly the qualifications it must
have to be able to sue out its privileges. And in general I have said already,
That such a person must be right and sincerely honest for the main. Now of that
he that pleads tender Conscience, must give proof in these following Instances.

1. He that pleads for Compassion upon the account of his Weakness, must be so
ingenuous as willingly to submit himself to instruction, for he that scorns it,
and thinks himself wiser than all the world besides, of all men has the least
right to make this plea. I do not see how he that has the confidence to be a
Preacher to others, or a Disputer for opinions, can pretend to the privileges
of that Tenderness we speak of. For either a man owns himself an ignorant or a
knowing man; if he be an ignorant man, he ought not to take upon him to teach
others, but to learn; if he be a knowing man, he ought not to scruple, but to
obey.

2. He that pretends Tenderness of Conscience, must make good his claim by
being uniformly conscientious; that is, making as much Conscience in other
things, as that he pleads exemption from. Otherwise it will be but Pharisaism,
to strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel. David's heart smote him when he cut off
the skirt of Saul 's Garment, but it would never have been called Tenderness of
Conscience in David, if at another time he should have attempted the life of
Saul. St. Austin speaks of some that prescribed to themselves stricter limits
of Matrimony than the Laws did, per Mores non fiebat quod per Leges licebat,
and factum horrebatur licitum, ob vicinitatem illiciti. But then, they were
severly holy men in all their conversation, otherwise this would have deserved
no better esteem than Superstition in them or worse. He that shall scruple a
Ceremony, and neglects an Institution of Christ, that dares not kneel at the
Sacrament, but dares neglect the Communion, that scruples the observation of
Lent, but scruples not Sensuality or Lust, Drunkenness or Gluttony, that is
afraid to eat blood, but not afraid to shed the blood of men, that will abstain
from things strangled, but not from fornication: Let such a man pretend what he
will, he neither has nor can plead the privileges of a Tender Conscience.

3. He that is truly tender, if he cannot do all that he is commanded, will yet
do all that he can. He will not make the breach wider, nor the distance greater
than needs must, lest he should betray more of humor and stomach than
Conscience. He that cannot bow at the name of Jesus, yet perhaps can stand up
at the Creed; or if not that neither, yet probably he can be present at it. He
that cannot kneel when he is required, may express so much reverence as to
stand; And he that is not satisfied in all the parts of the public Prayers,
may possibly be able to come to Church; or if none of these, yet at least

4. He that cannot perform what the Laws require of him, may forbear judging
and censuring those that do. His Conscience is a rule to himself, but does not
oblige him to pass severe Censures upon all other men. It is a very proud
Conscience that will transcend its own Province, and prescribe to all the world
besides. If he be weak and ignorant, it is very unsuitable that he should carry
himself as the only sagacious man, and make his mind the public standard of
truth and falsehood, of good and evil. For in so doing he contradicts himself,
pleads ignorance and pretends knowledge, would be dealt with as the most weak,
but deals by others as if he was the most strong and skilful.

The man of a tender Conscience finds it enough to rule and judge his own
actions, but leaves other men to their own masters. He is so modest upon the
sense of his own defects, and consequently so charitable as to think other men
may know a reason of that he is not satisfied in. But they that must erect a
Judicature for all those that differ from them, and arraign them of
Superstition or Popery, that are not of their own mind, shall sooner convict
themselves of pride and pragmaticalness, than give proof of any true tenderness
of Conscience.

5. The truly tender Conscience will freely part with Money and whatever else
uses to be valuable of that kind to preserve its own Innocence and Peace, and
is far from the humor of pretending Conscience to advance his Gain, or excuse
his Purse. If such a man cannot conform to the Laws, yet he can pay the
penalty; if he cannot go to Church, he can pay his Tithes: otherwise it is his
Money he is tender of, and not his Conscience; his God is his Gain, and his
Profit his Conscience. He that comes up to these five points of honesty, may be
heard in his plea of Tenderness, and no man else. And now I will in the last
place show what consideration is to be had of such a case, and that in these
three particulars.

1. Every private Christian is bound in charity and compassion toward such a
man, to deny himself of some part of his liberty, to please and to gain him.
That is, in those things that are the matter of no Law, but left free and
undeterminate, there the rule of the Apostle takes place, Romans 15. 1, 2. We
that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please
our selves. And let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification. I say, in such things as are not the matter of any Law, for I may
not do evil that good may come of it; I must not break either the Laws of God
or man out of an humor of complaisance to my Brother, for this were as we say,
to rob Peter to pay Paul, or to commit Theft or Sacrilege, that I may give
Alms. But in such things, as both the Laws of God and man have left me at
liberty, and at my own dispose, I may then justly and ought in charity to
consider his weakness, rather than use my own strength; and ought not to walk
over Rocks and Precipices, where I know the infirmity of others is such that
they cannot follow me. For though my own strength would bear me up, yet it were
very charitable to descend from that height which I know others cannot climb up
to without giddiness.

To do all that I may do without danger to my self, and not at all to regard
what oaths can comply with, or to use my own liberty to the offense of others,
is to be unchristian and uncharitable. It is to surfeit of my own abundance
when my Brother is in want. And in this sense only are we to understand all
these discourses of the Apostle about Scandal and Offense. In those times the
Magistrate being Pagan, took no care of the Church, nor had passed any Laws
concerning the manage of the Christian Religion; therefore whatsoever God had
left free and undetermined, was so still: so that the Christians had a great
deal of scope and room for mutual condescension, and accordingly the Apostle
exhorts them, that in all that materia libera, they should by love serve one
another. And with great equity; for he that will provoke his Brother to sin, by
doing that which he himself can omit without sin, is guilty of sin in so doing.
But the case is quite otherwise when there is a Law in being; for if my Brother
will be offended, unless I break a Law to comply with him, in that case Charity
begins at home, as we say, I must look to my self first, and if he take
offense, he does take it where it is not given, for I do but my duty. And as I
may and must give Alms of what is my own, and what I can spare from my own
occasions, but am neither bound to deprive my self of necessaries, that I may
serve any man's needs, nor much less to rob another of his right, that I may
furnish him that wants; so the same Charity requires that in all those cases
where no Law of God or man has restrained my liberty, I there consider the
infirmity of a another, rather than the pleasing of my self. And that this is
it which St. Paul meant in all those passages, appears by consideration of the
instance he gives in himself, and wherewith he concludes the argument, 1 Cor.
8. 13. Wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while
the world stands. The eating of flesh was under no Law, and consequently he
should not offend if he forbore it, therefore he resolves that he would abridge
himself of his own liberty, rather than offend another.

2. It becomes the wisdom and compassion of a Christian Magistrate so far to
consider the satisfaction of peoples Minds as well as the peace and safety of
his Dominions, as not to make those things the matter of his Laws which he
foresees men's weakness will make them boggle at: unless there be weighty
reasons on the other hand to counterballance that consideration. Such as, that
the things which some scruple, are nevertheless necessary to Government, or
grateful to a greater or more considerable part of his Subjects. If without
these considerations he shall however constitute such Laws, I will not say such
Laws are therefore null, (for the weakness of people does not take away his
power) but I will say they are unkind and ungracious. But those considerations
being supposed, that is, if such Constitutions as are apt to be scrupled by
some, be yet either necessary to Government, or very grateful to the more
considerable part of his Subjects, he has then no obligation upon him to
consider the offense of a few, but the good and safety of the whole. Yet when
those interests are secured, there is great scope for his compassion, and
consequently it is the duty of a good Magistrate (as of a good Shepherd) to
drive as the Cattle can go.

3. If it shall be found necessary upon the considerations before intimated, or
any the like, to make such things matter of Law that were before indifferent in
themselves, and which being so made, are likely to be scrupled by those who
ought to obey; It becomes a Christian Magistrate who considers he governs Men
and not Beasts, to afford means of instruction to such weak and scrupulous
persons, and competent time for those instructions to take place, and in the
mean time to suspend rigorous executions. For it is not in men's power to
believe what they list, much less what others would have them: and it has
always been found that force without instruction has been prevalent only upon
the worst of men, and set the more conscientious farther off by prejudice. But
after such instruction afforded and time allowed, if then such persons be not
rightly informed and satisfied, yet the Magistrate is unblameable, for he
commands but what is reasonable in it self, and he has done what lay in him,
that men's Judgments might be convinced, and Conscience quieted.

It is very observable that in the Council held by the Apostles at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. of which I have sometimes made mention, whilst there was hopes of
gaining the Jews to Christianity, and until they had time to be sufficiently
instructed in it if they would, for so long time the Apostles used them with
great tenderness, and as it appears made that Decree in compliance with them,
whereby they abridged the Gentiles of the exercise of a considerable part of
their Christian Liberty in mere condescension to the Jews: but after such time
as the Jews might have been sufficiently instructed, but remained incurable and
obstinate, then this Indulgence grew into desuetude, and the Gentiles resumed
their due liberty. From the same consideration was it that St. Paul (as I also
observed before) practiced Circumcision in the case of Timothy, which he
otherwise declared useless and dangerous. And again upon the same grounds did
the Apostolical Canons enjoin the observation of the Jewish Sabbath as well as
the Lords Day, and several other things were both acted by private Christians,
and decreed by the Authority of Councils in favor of the Jews, till they
appeared no longer pittiably weak and ignorant, but contumacious and
intractable. And as the Elder Christians did by the Jews, so seems the Great
Constantine to have done by the Pagans; He considered that those that had been
all their lifetime kept in the darkness of Gentilism, could not presently bear
so great a light as Christianity. Therefore though he zealously recommended it,
yet he did not presently make it penal not to be a Christian, but for a time
gave every one leave to be of what Religion he would, to choose his own God and
his own way of Worship. In the mean time care was taken, that all should have
opportunity of understanding the truth if they would, which when they had
enjoyed for a competent time, he then requires all the Roman Empire to embrace
Christianity. This last instance I confess fits not the very matter we have in
hand, which is touching things in their own nature indifferent: But it agrees
with the general reason of proceeding, which is sufficient to my purpose.

But now after all this, if people will not be instructed, but shall be so
ridiculous as to pride themselves in their folly, and glory to continue weak,
when they may be strong, that is, will affect Ignorance, to countenance
Disobedience, I see no obligation upon the Magistrate either to forbear to make
or execute such Laws as he apprehends for the good of his Government, as I said
before.

And so I hope I have cleared this point, That though a Tender Conscience has
its Privileges, yet it has not such a Prerogative as to null the Laws, or
suspend the Power of the Magistrate in the Sphere of Religion. And therefore
this pretense will be no longer an excuse for men's Nonconformity to the Laws
and Church of England.

CHAP. IX.
The great dishonor that disobedience to Laws and Magistrates, and the
distractions of Government do to any Profession of Religion whatsoever.

HAving, as I think, sufficiently demonstrated the sin and mischiefs of Schism,
and evacuated all the excuses and palliations of it from the plea of Christian
Liberty or the pretense of Tender Conscience, I cannot see what should remain
able to perpetuate our distractions, unless it be a point of honor, that some
think themselves obliged to persevere, because they have begun: A humor like
that Tull notes and taxes in the Stoics, That when Arguments failed them,
Constancy supplied that defect, and that they were not deserted of their
Courage, when they were destitute of Reason. It is, I confess, too common with
men, to the intent that they may not seem to have had a bad and indefensible
Cause at first, they will endeavor to give it reputation by the courage and
constancy of the Defendants, whereby they hope to gain one of these points,
that either by Victory they shall have it adjudged to them, or at least extort
Honorable conditions to lay down Arms, which is a kind of parting stakes.
Hereupon it is far more easy to convince men, than to satisfy them, because
at last it comes to be a contention of Honor and Spirit, and not a debate of
Truth.

They say, nothing subdues English Spirits but Cession and Condescension; yield
them a little, and they will in Bravery and Generosity, give you up all the
rest: but if you continue to contend, they will fight, not because it is either
hopeful or necessary, neither because they can reasonably hope to obtain the
victory, nor because they must be ruined if they do not, but because they
cannot brook the dishonor of being vanquished. Honor is a kind of Gentile
Conscience, and tender like that too. And I confess, though it be a very
virtuous, yet it is no very easy thing, to come about perfectly, to change
ones course, and to proclaim ones self to have been in the wrong before, to
forgo a man's opinion and his reputation together, wholly to yield up the cause
we have long contended for, without any conditions to salve our honor, without
abatement, qualification or comprehension. For though wise men will censure our
obstinacy if we persist, yet the multitude will reproach us with levity and
cowardice if we retreat. And though many a man could contentedly give up
himself to the instruction of the few, yet to be exposed to the contumelies of
the vulgar is harsh and uneasy. This consideration has, I acknowledge, a
great deal of Rhetoric, and I doubt prevails with not a few in our present
case. I will therefore endeavor to show the unreasonableness of it in these
two points.

1. I affirm, That it is no real dishonor, but a manly generosity and a
Christian virtue to change our minds upon mature deliberation, and the evidence
of better reason. Indeed to change we know not why, or merely because we are
weary of old things, is a vicious levity; or upon new interests to espouse new
persuasions, is base and unworthy either of a Christian or a Man: yet on the
other side, obstinately to maintain whatever we have asserted, is as far from
Christian stability and perseverance, as it is from ingenuity. That very temper
which our Savior requires in his Disciples, and which is the preparatory
disposition to the entertainment of Christianity, especially consists in a
simplicity of mind; and an indifferency to comply with whatsoever shall best
recommend it self to our faculties. And whosoever is not of this disposition,
it was merely by chance that he became a Christian; or whatsoever opinions he
has better than any other man, nothing is owing to his virtue, but his
fortune; and he is not the better man, but had the happier Education. For since
no man is infallible, nor has an intuitive knowledge of things, he must either
make himself a mere Machine to be filled and moved by others, and receive
without discrimination whatsoever is instilled into him by others, that does
not think it becomes him to leave room for better reasons, and further light in
all such matters as we speak of, and where Almighty God has not once for all
expressly delivered himself. And those are not only the most ingenuous men, but
ordinarily the most useful also, that are what they are, not by Instinct and
the prejudices of Education, but by Conviction and Argument. In short, he that
resolves never to change his opinion, nor hopes to be wiser than he is, either
will be always a fool, or has the fortune of such an one, or both.

Now then, he that seeing Reason to incline him to take new measures, shall yet
upon Secular considerations think fit not to own a change, may have the
reputation of a cunning man, but never of an honest, and shall lose more in the
Judgment of wise men, than he shall gain with the vulgar.

2. Epecially let it be considered, how much the honor of our Religion is of
more value than our Personal reputation, and how much that is concerned in the
peaceable and obedient temper of all those that pretend to it; and withal, what
it suffers in defect of this: And surely a due sense of these things will have
such weight with all those that are sincerely Christian, as to depress and keep
down the turgency of our fancy and vain glory.

It was an effectual course Haman took, Esther 3. 8. (and he had wit in his
malice,) when he designing to ruin the whole Church of the Jews, first
undermines the reputation of their Profession, delates their Religion as not
fit for the protection of the Prince, and that it contained Laws contrary to
all people, and that they would not obey the Kings Laws. There is nothing casts
so indeleble a blemish upon Religion as when the Professors of it are
turbulent, unperswadable, ungovernable. When that which should strengthen the
hands of the Magistrate, shall weaken them, when that which should ease his
care and save the labor of his Animadversions, shall it self awaken and raise
his Jealousy; when that which should enact his Laws in the very Consciences of
men, shall pretend to abrogate or dispense with them; when men shall smite and
break the two Tables one against another, and put other limitations and
conditions upon Princes than God has, and pretend a revocation of the Broad
Seal of Civil Authority by the Privy Signet of Religion: wherever this is
done, that Prince or Magistrate had need be a very devout man indeed, that
casts a benign aspect upon that Profession which has so malignant an influence
upon his Government. And all considering men will with great reason doubt,
whether that Religion be of God that gives such trouble to his Vicegerent, and
whether that will carry men to Heaven hereafter, that makes tumults, confusions
and a Hell upon earth.

But I have said so much to this business heretofore, when I considered the
mischiefs of Schism, that I shall need to say the less now. Only let me
observe, That the more raised and elevated any Religion pretends to be, the
more it professes a Contempt of this world, the more it speaks of Patience,
Contentation, Humility, and the more it glories in the hopes of another world,
still the more horribly absurd and contradictious will it be, that this should
give countenance to disobedience and disturbance of Government.

I have also noted before, that it was the great advantage Christianity had for
the planting it self in the world, that it disturbed no settled Form, made no
noise or commotion, but fell like the dew of Heaven upon a Fleece of Wool. Our
Savior himself was so careful of giving offense, that he not only gave no
jealousy to those in possession of the Government, but also abridged his own
Liberty, rather than he would seem to retrench their Power. St. Paul when he
was accused by an eloquent Orator Tertullus, Acts 24. 5. as a mover of
Sedition, does with equal eloquence disprove the charge, and detest the Crime.
And that the generality of Christians were of the same temper and spirit,
Tertullian gives ample testimony. Externi sumus, and vestra omnia implevimus,
urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium,
senatum, forum, etc. cui bello non idenei, etc. Apol. c. 37. We want, says he,
neither numbers, nor Leaders, nor Spirit, to enable us for any attempt; but
that we have learnt to suffer ill, and not to do it, to obey and submit, not to
contend with our Rulers. And Ammianus Marcellinus, a Pagan Soldier in Julian's
Army, and therefore the more undeniable witness in the case, gives this short
description of the Christian Religion, Nil nisi justum suadet and lene: It is,
says he, compounded of nothing but mildness and innocence. It makes men just
and honest, it fills men's hearts with virtuous principles, but not their heads
with troublesome niceties; It teaches men not to be troublers of the World, but
to go quietly and inoffensively through it, with as little noise and
provocation as is possible, and so to arrive at eternal rest and peace in
Heaven. And as this is the known glory of Christianity in general, so it was
peculiarly of the English Reformation in particular, as I showed before. It was
brought in by the Prince, not by the rout of people; it was established orderly
by Law, did not force its way by popular tumult, and was truly what it ought to
be, a revival of Primitive purity and simplicity. And it is infinite pity, that
its glory should afterward be stained by the insolence and impatience of those
that pretend to it. It is a great blot in the writings of Mr. Calvin, that
after he had discoursed rarely well of the power of Princes and the duty of
Subjects, in the last Chapter of his Institutions and the one and thirtieth
Paragraph, he undoes all again with an unhappy exception, in these words, de
privatis hominibus semper loquor: A passage of that ill aspect upon Government,
that it is suspected by some, and not altogether without cause, that most of
the confusions of Kingdoms which have happened since, and especially the
troubles of this Nation, have received encouragement, if not taken rise from
thence. But whether that be so or no, it is certain that it has furnished the
Papists with a recrimination upon the Protestant Doctrine, when we have charged
theirs as blowing a Trumpet to Sedition and Rebellion. And though the true
Protestant Doctrine be as innocent, as theirs is guilty in this kind, yet if it
can be objected against us, that our Churches are always infested with
Divisions, and the States under which we live, imbroyled in troubles, we have
reason to be concerned, forasmuch as we have no reason to expect that our
Adversaries will be so just or charitable, as to distinguish betwixt the faults
of the Doctrine and the miscarriages of those that Profess it, but will be sure
to involve both in the dishonor. For it cannot be, but that either the Seed
must be very bad, that brings forth such Fruit, or the Soil very corrupt, that
makes good Seed so degenerate; that is, either the Religion must be very
faulty, that fills men generally with so bad Principles, or at least, the Men
must be extremely evil, that debauch good Doctrine. And whether soever of these
two things be concluded on, (as it is certain one must and both may) we ill
consult either for our selves or our Profession that by our divisions,
disputes, turbulencies and disobedience, make the aforesaid dilemma inevitable.
And all the wit and courage we show in defending our private opinions, and
maintaining our several parties, when the common cause and interest is by this
means rendered odious and contemptible, is but like the foolish solicitude of
him that shall be adorning his private Cabin, when the Ship is sinking. And
those men have little cause to triumph in their particular successes, who lose
to a common Enemy whatever they gain upon one another.

CHAP. X.
The danger by our Distractions and Divisions.

IF neither the consideration of the sin of Schism, nor of the dishonor to our
Religion by our divisions will prevail to unite us, yet perhaps the
apprehension of Danger may.

It was observed of old, that the Conquest of this Island by the Romans was
facilitated by the Intestine divisions of the Inhabitants, and said, dum
singuli pugnant universi vincuntur; whereas had they consulted in common, and
made a joint defense, they had doubtless either preserved their liberty, or at
least sold it at a dearer rate. And we have too great cause to fear the
Religions interests of this Nation now, may be endangered upon the same point
that the Civil were lost then; I mean, that whilst we contend with one
another, and with our Rulers about little things, we lose the main, and by the
opportunity of our Divisions and Subdivisions, a common enemy break in upon us.

It is certain, that no advantage can more encourage the attempt or befriend
the designs of our Adversaries, than the present condition of our affairs; and
therefore unless we could be so fond as to persuade our selves we have no
enemies, or so mad as to think them as secure and supine as our selves, it must
be unreasonable presumption to think our selves safe in this distracted
condition. But because it is observed of Englishmen, that they generally (as
conscious to themselves of their own undaunted courage in encounting dangers)
are less vigilant against the approaches of them, I shall therefore for a
conclusion, rather hazard the being accounted timorous my self, than that
others should be secure and so surprised, and endeavor to unite the minds of
all true Protestants of this Kingdom, by representing the joint danger by a
threefold enemy ready to attacque them, viz. Atheism, Popery, Fanaticism.

1. Atheism. He that has not observed the prodigious growth and progress of
this Monster in this last Age, and what confidence it is arrived at above the
proportion of former times, either has lived to little purpose, having made no
observation of what has past by him, or is intolerably overweening to some
private opinion.

Heretofore it was only the fool that said there was no God; but now this name
Atheist, speaks a Wit and a man of more than ordinary sagacity: And those that
were either so foolish or so abandoned of all reason and goodness as to doubt
whether there was a God or no, yet were not so immodest as to profess their
Infidelity, as the Psalmist expresses it, they said in their heart there was no
God, but made it not an Hypothesis or a professed Tenet. Time was, that only some
hated villain, some man of abject-spirit and desperate fortunes was thought
capable of such black impressions, and that nothing but the brawniness of men's
consciences or the hopelesness of their condition could betray them to but the
suspicious of such a thing; and those that had any taint of it, the light, and
were only to be found in Gaols and Brothel-houses: Now the Atheist is become a
Gallant, an Hector, and this uncircumcised Philistin appears armed, and defies
the Armies of Israel. The general contempt that such men lay under was such,
that heretofore they were not thought fit to live in a Commonwealth, but now
they have gotten such heart as to think themselves the only fit persons to
prescribe Laws and Models of Government.

It is not uneasy to unfold all the causes that have concurred to the unhappy
growth of this extreme evil; nor is it necessary that I should now undertake
it: yet I presume I shall easily obtain the Readers pardon if I gratify my own
and his curiosity so far as to make a little digression to observe the motion
of so unusual and prodigious a Phenomenon.

And in the first place it is an Observation of the Lord Bacon's, That
Superstition in the foregoing Age, usually becomes Atheism in the succeeding
generation. And so it is likely the seeds were sown in the late times, though
the unhappy fruit appears but now.

For when witty men shall observe that the generality of those that pretend to
the highest pitch of Religion, do either represent God Almighty so incredibly
and contrary to the natural notions men have of him, or Religion so apishly and
ridiculously (as is the Genius of Superstition to do) It will be very ready and
easy to them to conclude, there is no reality either in the one or the other:
Especially if those happen to make the observation, whose vicious and desperate
courses have made it become their interest that there should be no such things.
When men shall see the most absurd Propositions, and such as they are sure
cannot be true, received with the same credulity, and recommended and contended
for with the same zeal that the most certain and most essential points of
Religion are or should be, what can be more natural, than to think those things
alike true, that are alike embraced and have equal stress laid upon them? And
then the result is plain, that seeing some are notoriously false, therefore it
seems more than probable to them that the rest are so too. It is in this case
as in the hearing of Civil Causes, when it appears to the Judges, that there is
false play made use of and some suborned Witnesses brought to give evidence,
they are hereby prejudiced against the rest.

And (which is further considerable) it is very probable that those very men
that were formerly sunk into the mire of the aforesaid Superstitions, may
afterward when they happen to emerge out of their delusions, make up a
considerable part of the Atheists themselves. For by the same reason we gave
before, these men finding themselves cheated and imposed upon even in these
very points that they were as confident of, as of the Articles of the Creed,
grow hence to suspect even them too, forasmuch as with them it has no better
foundation than the things that now are apparently false: And thus from too
large and prodigious a Creed they come to have no Faith at all. When they
discover that they believed many things without ground, they think now they
have ground to believe nothing, and from fierce and hot Bigots, become cold
Scepticks and Atheists.

In the second place I suspect the lewd practices that have gone under the
cloak and countenance of Religion, have had a great hand in this mischief also.
That not only the prodigious Faith, but the monstrous Life of some great
pretenders to Religion has made men scorn and abhor the very notion of it.
When not only men's ridiculous Follies, but also their Vices, their Pride, and
Passion, and Rancour shall be fathered upon the Spirit of God (as we know when
and where such things have been done) when men shall seek God for all the
Villainies they are resolved to commit, when they make long Prayers to devour
Widows houses, and proclaim a Fast that they may kill and take possession; when
Religion shall be prostituted to all bad designs, and in nomine Domini incipit
omne malum: when, I say, the most specious Profession is a cloak for the vilest
Knavery; It cannot be much wondered if such men as I described before, be
inclined by these things to think there is no reality in any of the discourses
of God and Religion. For as, if a man were to observe whether the Sun was risen
upon the Hemisphere, he would direct his eyes to the tops of Mountains,
expecting to see him displaying his beams first upon them that are nearest
Heaven: So a man would think if there were any such thing as Religion and a
sense of Divinity amongst men, it should be found amongst those that have
always God in their mouths, and such a Garb of Religion upon them. But if he
find himself disappointed here, and that these men that pretend so high, have
as great Sensualities, Passions, Covetousness, Malice as other men, he will
despair of finding it any where, and conclude with Brutus, O virtus, quaesivi
te ut rem, sed tantum merum nomen es, that there is no such thing at all.

3. To the aforesaid Causes we may well add the perpetual Janglings and
Disputes between Professors of Religion, as not only making Religion unlovely,
but even calling it wholly into question. When so many shall tell us there is
such a place and state as Heaven and a World to come, but every one tells us a
several way thither; witty men who know that all cannot be true, but all may be
false, think it not comporting with their discretion to take the pains of the
journey, till the Guides shall be agreed of the way. The disagreement of the
two rank Elders in their testimony against Susannah's chastity, whilst one
said the fault was done under one kind of Tree and the other under another,
discovered her Innocence and their Hypocrisy.

It is true indeed, there may and must be diversities of apprehensions in
several points of Christianity, whilst men are of different capacities, and
this need not, nor if things be modestly carried, will give any just advantage
to the Atheist. But when every private opinion is made necessary to salvation,
and men pronounce damnation against one another upon every little diversity,
when they make as many Religions as there are Opinions, and as many Ways to
Heaven, as there are Notions amongst men, it cannot be hoped, but that the cold
Sceptick should be encouraged in his Neutrality.

4. But if to all these we consider with what rancour and malice the several
Parties prosecute one another, what odious and defamatory Libels, and bitter
Invectives they write one against another, wherein all the secret follies of
each party are blazed and published, all the errors aggravated, all the
Opinions racked to confess blasphemy in their owners and defenders; one party
said to make God a Tyrant, the other to deny his Wisdom, or Sovereignty; the
one side accused of Idolatry, the other of Rebellion: he, I say, that considers
how usual all this is, and how ready all those that have no good mind to
Religion are to catch up the darts that each of the parties cast at each other,
and make use of them against both, and with what seeming Reason they conclude,
that the Confession of the Parties against each other, and their mutual
Impeachments of each other should argue the guilt of both, and observes that
all the defamatory Sermons and Libels that men write in heat and passion
against each other, (wherein they charge folly, blasphemy and nonsense upon
each other reciprocally) at last rebound or are retorted upon the wheel of
Religion, cannot be altogether to seek of the rise of the Atheism of this Age.
But whether these be the principal causes of the great appearance which Atheism
makes in this Age above the proportion of other times, or whether there be
other of a more latent and malignant influence, I shall not further enquire at
present, since it is manifest, that the matter of Fact is true, and that being
so, the danger to Religion cannot be obscure. We have reason therefore better
to govern our passions and lay aside our animosities for the future, and to
unite our forces in an uniform order of Religion against this common enemy,
lest the gravity and piety of this Nation end in Buffoonry, and our best heat
and spirits being spent upon one another, or against our Governors, the mortal
symptom of a cold clammy stupid Atheism succeed.

2. Popery, is another Hannibal ad portas, an enemy that watches but till our
Divisions shall open the Gates to him. I hope I need not exaggerate the
formidableness of Popery to those that remember either eighteen thousand souls
dispatched out of the World by the hands of the common Hangman in about three
years time in the Low Countries under the Government of the Duke of Alva, or
the French Massacre, or Queen Mary's Reign in England, or the Gunpowder
Treason. There was a clause in our Litany in Henry the Eighths and Edward the
Sixths time, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and his detestable
enormities, Good Lord deliver us; and upon what reasons soever it was since
left out, it was not certainly, because either their Errors are less enormous,
or their Spirits less cruel; but God forbid, that because they at present hide
their Teeth, we should think they cannot or will not bite, for if we should be
so good natured as to warm this Snake in our bosoms that now pretends to have
neither power nor will to hurt us, I doubt we should quickly find it to resume
its malice and poison together with its warmth and strength.

If any one shall be so hardy as to apprehend there is no danger of its return
in this Nation, I pray God his foresight be as great as his courage; but he
that considers the following Circumstances will think it advisable not to be
over secure. For,

1. It is not with this party as with any other Sect whatsoever, these have a
Foreign Head and great interests abroad, the Pope and all the Popish Princes
to unite, to direct, to animate and employ them, which must needs render them
very dangerous to any State that is inclined to middle counsels, that is, that
does not either effectually please them, or effectually disable them. And upon
this account the Turkish Sultan (who has scarcely any need to learn reason of
State from any body) uses the Latin Christians with greater caution and
severity under his Dominion than the Greek, because he accounts the former
always dangerous upon account of their Foreign Head and Alliance.

2. We cannot but observe how diligent they have been of late, how full of
projects, and how erect their minds with expectation of some success. They
heretofore walked in Masquerade, disguised themselves sometimes in the habit of
one Sect and sometimes of another; but of late they have had the confidence to
lay off their disguise and play a more open game: And such are the numbers of
their Emissaries, so desperate and daring are the Bigots of that party, and so
close and crafty are their Insinuations, that we have little reason to think
our selves out of danger, especially whilst we have such Divisions and
Distractions amongst our selves as at once both encourage them to attempt upon
us, and also furnish them with a very popular argument to use with softminded
and weakly principled Protestants to draw them off from us, namely, the
consideration of the Divisions in our Church, and the perfect Unity in theirs.

For prevention of all which, there seems no way so effectual as that we learn,
if not to submit our private quarrels to the public Magistrate, yet to public
safety, lest whilst the Gamesters quarrel, those that sit by sweep the
stakes. And certainly it is more advisable to sacrifice our Opinions to our
Safety, than our Religion and Liberty to our Humors and Opinions. And although
blessed be God, we have now a Prince to whom the Protestant Religion came
sealed with his Fathers Blood, and who in his own unhappy Exile had however
this advantage to be well aware of the cheats and impostures, as well as the
designs of that Faction: yet if ever it should be our fortune to have a Prince
indifferent in Religion, and who preferred his own quiet before the Civil or
Spiritual Interests of his people; the unreasonable petulancies we betray, our
untractableness by fair means, and our endless disputes and unnecessary
scrupulosities would tempt such a Prince (growing weary of the burden of our
unquietness, and despairing otherwise of bringing us to obedience) to put us
under the insolence of that hard-hearted Pharaoh, whose little Finger would
prove heavier than the Loins of all our present Governors, and set Egyptian
Taskmasters over us to break our Spirits by bitter bondage; which Gods Mercy
and our Wisdom for the future will I hope prevent.

But if we should escape both these dangers, yet our Divisions and Distractions
continuing, there is a third danger that I do not see how it is avoidable. And
that is,

3. Fanaticism. For it is not imaginable, but that the Church growing into
contempt, and Laws into daily neglect, that things can long stand at this pass,
but some change or other must ensue; and if Popery come not in to chastize our
follies, nor Atheism (that damp of the bottomless Pit) come over us and stifle
all our life and warmth of Religion, but that we must (the aforesaid causes
remaining and daily increasing) fall into a Religious Frenzy, or that raging
Calenture I last named. What that is, and what the insufferable mischiefs of it
are, I need not represent. It is, in short, instead of Church Government to
have a Spiritual Anarchy, where the hottest head is made the highest Governor;
where Pride and Impudence are the only qualifications of a Preacher; where
Humor is called Conscience, and Novelty Religion. This, for ought I can see,
is like to be our condition, if neither the Atheist nor Papist succeed in their
projects. But if any man shall be so fond as to hope we shall not fall thus
low, but may stay in Presbytery, I shall say but this, Let such person consider
how few and inconsiderable that party is, compared with the vast numbers of
Quakers, Ranters, FifthMonarchy-men, Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc. and how
little acceptable the Presbyterian way or interest is to any of those Factions,
and therefore how unlikly to be set up by their means: But especially let it be
remembered that when that Party had the Ball at their soot, they were not able
to keep it, but lost it and the Goal too, to those more numerous and
adventurous Gamesters. I therefore say again, I cannot apprehend, but that
there must be a better union and compliance with the Church of England, or I do
not see it possible, but we must fall into one or other of the aforesaid
dangers. And the calamity will then be so great which way soever we fall, that
I protest I think every honest minded Protestant ought to be inclined to bear
with cheerfulness whatsoever burdens our Superiors can be suspected capable of
imposing upon us, rather than make experiment of the danger.

Conclusion.
I Have now adventured to stretch forth my hand to stay the tottering of the
Ark, and to cast in my Mite to the public Treasury for the service of the
Church, which I hope God and Good men will accept of.

Of what efficacy the foregoing Considerations shall be, is at the mercy of the
Reader. But if it please Almighty God to give him such candor and so
unprejudicate a mind in the reading, as I call him to witness I have been
sensible of in the writing, I do not then despair but they will prevail with
all Englishmen that love the Protestant Religion better than their own humor,
to Conform to the Church and Laws established; or at least that they shall seem
of such weight, as that a few scruples shall not be thought a counter-ballance
to them.

Yet the more to assure this so desirable an Issue, I will crave leave for a
Conclusion, humbly to recommend these following particulars.

1. That all those that are zealous of the honor and interest of the Church of
England, will (the more effectually to demonstrate the excellency of it, and to
stop the mouth of slander,) oblige themselves to a singular holiness of life.
Let us be ashamed that since we pretend to have, and have really, a better way
of Religion, not to have so much better Lives as we have better Principles. Let
us disdain that any petty Sect whatsoever should outgo us in that which is the
great end of Church Society. When those that bring prejudice to our public
Worship, reproach it as a cold Service, Let us labor to have our hearts
invigorated with such a sense of Devotion by it, as may not only consute the
slander, but maintain a spiritual heat and life of Godliness in all our
conversation. For let us assure our selves, this is that the credit of any
Profession depends upon, when we have used all the Arguments, and the best
Vindications of our selves and our Church, it is Holiness of life is the best
and most prevalent Apology.

2. That since for the bringing others to Conformity, we must persuade them to
for go some part of their natural Liberties, forasmuch as otherwise they can
come under no Government whatsoever, but must be either Outlaws or absolute
Princes: To the end, I say, that we may prevail with them to deny themselves in
some things for the public good, we should do well to give them example in our
own self-denial and abridging our own liberty in condescension to them in such
things as are not the matter of Law. And that we will not outrun the Laws to
contradict and vex them, but comply with them in what we may without sin. This
is that Charity and avoiding Scandal the Apostle so earnestly recommends, of
which I have spoken in the Considerations. And the consequence is plain; If it
be their duty to restrain themselves in the use of that Liberty God has left
them, in compliance with the Laws and Magistrate, and for the sake of public
Peace and Order; then it is our duty to restrain our selves in the use of that
Liberty the Laws of God and Man have left us, for the sake of the same Peace
and in Charity to our Brethren. Besides that nothing works upon men's ingenuity
like Cession and Yielding, and peculiarly with Englishmen, as I have heretofore
observed.

3. That we use no provocation or exasperation toward Dissenters, nor
countenance those inconsiderable persons that have no other way to show their
Zeal to the Church, but by reviling and vexing those that differ from it. It
were good all Governors of the Church did (and I hope they do) imitate Memnon
the General for Darius against Alexander, who when he found one of his
Soldiers instead of Darts casting Scoffs at the Enemy, tells him, You are not
entertained ut maledicas sed ut pugnes. For besides that this carriage where
ever it is, is but counted a strong argument of a weak Cause, it stirs up the
mud of men's passions, clouds their understandings, and by representing men
worse than they are, tempts them to be worse than they would be: And if I see I
shall be always nosed with my former Ignorance and folly, I am deprived of one
of the greatest encouragements to forsake it.

4. Though I have as I hope sufficiently proved in the foregoing Discourse,
that there is no absolute necessity of making any abatement of the Legal terms
of Communion with this Church, forasmuch as nothing is required or imposed by
the Constitution thereof, but what may be submitted to without in; And
therefore I will not be guilty of the presumption to prescribe to my Superiors
either one way or other in that matter: Yet I humbly suggest, that if any such
thing shall be thought fit to be done out of condescension to the
Non-conformists, and to gain them to the Church, it may be done freely and
spontaneously, nor as extorted either by their importunity or the necessity of
affairs. For whatsoever is gotten the latter way, is not accounted yielded, but
won, nec amicos parat, nec inimicos tollit, it passes no obligation upon men,
but rather incourages their importunity, and confirms their obstinacy. And
there is nothing that wise men do or ought to resent more, than the miscarriage
of their favors, since thereby they lose not only what they grant, but their
reputation too.

The Council of Trent therefore would hearken to no terms nor Propositions on
the behalf of the Protestants, lest they should by some few drops of
Concession, increase their thirst of more. But had they had as much of the
innocence of the Dove as of the subtilty of the Serpent, or been as sincere as
they were wise in their generation, they should have prevented all
importunities by a liberal Grant of what was fit and just, and by such an act
of Goodness and Charity they might either have wrought upon the ingenuity and
moderated the heat of the other Party, or at least, having done what became
them, they should then have had good ground peremptorily to have refused
whatsoever should have been arrogantly demanded. But they (as I have said)
wisely enough in their way, considering that if they once came to acknowledge
any thing due to the Protestants, must be forced upon the same terms to yield
them more than they were willing to part with, and indeed little less than the
whole, resolved therefore to yield nothing at all.

But as the case of our Church is not like theirs, so there is no necessity we
should make use of the same Politics; for where there is nothing sinful in the
Constitution, nothing can be required to be abated but upon the terms of
Prudence and Compassion; and if it shall happen that those Arguments be thought
fit to be heard, it is great pity in that case that the resolution should not
be so carried, as that it may be evident to all, that those causes only had
influence upon the effect.

If these things be considered by those that favor the Church, and the
foregoing Considerations be impartially weighed by the Protestant Dissenters
from it, I for my part shall conceive good hope that the Clergy of England
shall recover its ancient and due Veneration, our Churches be better filled
than the Conventicles, a blessed Symphony in our public Prayers, and an
Universal Peace, Love and Goodwill be restored in this divided and distracted
Church and Nation. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

