THE Leaven of Pharisaism and Sadducism PURGED OUT. A SERMON Preached before
the COURT of ALDERMEN AND City of London AT THEIR GUILD HALL CHAPEL On Sunday
December. 16. 1688.

By J. GOODMAN, D. D.

Imprimatur,

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
Jan. 3. 1688/9.


LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Robert Clavel at the Peacock at the
West End of St. Paul's, 1688/9.

CHAPMAN Mayor, etc.
Cur' Special' tent' apud Grocers-Hall DieVen' in Festo S. Thomae Apostoli
xxio. Decemb' 1688. Annoq' R' R's Jacobi Sec' Angl', etc. Quarto.
THis Court does desire Dr. Goodman to Print his Sermon Preached on Sunday
Morning last at the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Chapman Knight. LORD MAYOR: And to the Right
Worshipful The Aldermen of the City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen.
IN Obedience to your Order, I here present You the Sermon which I lately
Preached at your Chapel: And although it has never been my custom to Dispute
your Commands in this Case; yet at this time, I think my self under a double
obligation to comply with them: Partly, in regard that Your Lordship by a
sudden and dangerous Distemper of Body, was then disabled from affording your
Presence at the Delivery of it; and partly in consideration of the
seasonableness of the Subject of this discourse, which I verily think to be
such as may in a great Measure Atone for whatsoever defects there may be
otherwise in the Management of it; and in that confidence, without further
Preface or Apology; I commend it to Gods Blessing and your Candor.

May it please the Divine Majesty to restore Your Lordships Health, and
therewith sill You with such a Measure of his Grace and Holy Spirit, as may
enable You to adorn that great Station in which he has placed You, till it
shall please him to prefer You to an Higher in his own Kingdom.

And may all you the Worthy Magistrates of this Great and Famous City, live to
see Jerusalem in its Glory; I mean, not only the Times wherein you live,
Blessed with Peace and Prosperity, but the Church of God settled, and the
Protestant Religion (which is no other than Primitive Christianity revived in
its native Purity and Simplicity) firmly Established, which as it will be the
greatest Glory to this Age and the greatest Blessing to Posterity; so that You
in your Stations may be instrumental in so Glorious a Work, shall be the Hearty
Prayer of

(My Lord and Gentlemen) Your Obedient Servant J. GOOD MAN.
Jan. 1st. 1688/9.
A SERMON Preached before the ALDERMEN AND CITIZENS of LONDON.
St. Matthew. XVI. 6. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the
Leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
THere are two very common and very unhappy miscarriages in the External
management of Religion. Whilst (on the one side) some Men think themselves
obliged severely and rigorously to Prosecute all that differ from them,
although it be but in mere opinions, or the Circumstantials of Religion. And
others on the other hand, seem so cold and unconcerned in this great affair as
if all Religions were alike, and it were perfectly indifferent what Principles
a Man entertained, so he had but some kind of Devotion.

The former of these Mistakes takes its rise from too confident a presumption
of our own Judgment, and a fond and groundless pretense to Infallibility, and
therefore exacts of all other Men a Conformity to our Measures. The later
proceeds from as unreasonable a Diffidence and Distrust of the grounds of
Believing, as if there was really no (...) or Standard of Truth, and Falsehood;
and consequently these last sort of men are as void of Faith as the other were
of Charity: To be sure, both of them are very dangerous, forasmuch as the one
beginning in Confidence, ends in Cruelty: The other beginning in Skepticism,
commonly ends in Atheism.

But, both these dangers may in a great Measure be avoided, and great Light
gained toward the government of our selves in this weighty and difficult
business, by attending to the Carriage of our Savior toward the several Sects
of the Jews respectively. For where as it is well known, that there were three
notable Parties amongst them, commonly distinguished by the Names of the
Essenes, the Pharisees and the Sadducees; it is very remarkable concerning the
first of them, namely the Essenes: That though they were very numerous at the
time of our Savior; and withal, held several very odd and unjustifiable
opinions; yet our Savior is so far from all Bitterness and Severity toward
them, that we do not find that he makes any kind of Reflection upon them. But
for the other two, viz. The Pharisees and Sadducees, he upon all occasions
sharply inveighs against them, and severely exposes them.

Now the reason of this very different Carriage of our Savior seems to be
this: That the Essenes, though they were mistaken in some Opinions, yet were
sincere in their minds, harmless in their Lives, quiet and peaceable in their
Spirits: They contented themselves to enjoy their own Consciences, and let
other Men alone; they were not a Confident and Boisterous sort of Men, that
must either have the sole Government of the World, or else be always Plotting
and Contriving of Mischief; but humble and modest, and so capable of being
recovered from their Errors: But the other two Sects, viz. The Pharisees and
Sadducees, they were quite another sort of Men, pretenders to Infallibility,
and consequently presumptuous and over-bearing, perpetual Dictators in opinion,
fastuous and disdainful toward all others, too wise in their own Eyes to learn
of any one, and too sanctimonious to be reproved by any Body; withal, they were
a Crafty and Projecting sort of Men that must either Rule or Confound the
World. Our Savior therefore (to Teach us to make a discrimination in the like
Cases) as I observed, gently passes by the Essenes, but always sets himself
most severely against the two other Sects, and particularly here in my Text,
gives his Disciples caution against them; Take heed and beware of the Leaven of
the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

The special occasion of these Words was this; If we look to the beginning of
this Chapter, we find these two busy Sects (though at other times they had Hot
Disputes between themselves, yet now) lay their Heads together and Conspire
against our Savior: But (as the usual guize of Hypocrites is) they come to him
very demurely with these Words, Master, we would see a Sign from thee.

What! Had they had no Signs hitherto; had Jesus wrought no Miracles amongst
them all this while, or were these Men only strangers to all the great passages
of that time?

But, We would see a Sign from Heaven. And why a Sign from Heaven; would that
be more unexceptionable than any he had hitherto given them; would this
convince them? No, that was not their Errand, they came not to be Converted,
but to be hardened; they had a mind not to believe, and seek only a color for
their unbelief; they ask him therefore for that which they verily thought he
would not grant them, that they might have some pretense for their Infidelity.

Now therefore, our Savior having discovered their Design, and detected their
Hypocrisy in the 2, 3, and 4, Verses in my Text, turns himself toward his
Disciples, and gives them this serious caution against them, and all such kinds
of Men Take heed and Beware, etc.

For the full opening of which, I will briefly inquire into these Four things.

First, What is the Importance of this Metaphorical expression Leaven, and what
our Savior means by the Leaven of Pharisees and Sadducees.

Secondly, More particularly we will inquire what was the peculiar Leaven of
these two Sects, so often mentioned in the New Testament.

Thirdly, We will consider what was the danger of that Leaven, and its
contrariety to the Doctrine and Design of our Savior.

Fourthly and Lastly, We will inquire what this Caution of our Savior implies,
and what he would have his Disciples to do, when he bids them Take heed and
beware, etc.

And by that time I have given Account of these Four things, I shall not only
have opened the full scope of the Text, but I hope every attentive Auditor will
be satisfied of the seasonableness of this subject for the present Time.

I begin with the First, viz. What our Savior means by Leaven: In the Words
following my Text, Verse 7. We find that the Disciples took our Savior
Literally, and reflecting on themselves for their Omission, to provide Bread
and necessaries for the Voyage which they were now entering upon, though he had
obliquely reproved their carelessness in that particular, and that he had thence
took occasion to interdict them all Trade and Civil commerce with those two
Sects of Men. But by the 12. Verse they understand their Master's mind better,
and knew at Length That he spoke not of the Leaven of Bread, but of the
Doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

Indeed it is usual with our Savior, by that Metaphor, to represent Doctrine,
whether good or bad, for Matthew. chap. 13. 33. He compares his own Institution
to it, saying the Kingdom of Heaven is like Leaven, which a Woman took and hid
in two Measures of Meal, till the whole was Leavened, etc. And the resemblance
is very fit and Natural, for as it is the nature of Leaven, that it works
insensibly, quickly insinuates it self, and Universally diffuses its Efficacy
over the whole Mass into which it is put; so in like manner Doctrine works upon
the minds of Men, and gives a Tincture of its own Nature and Temper to them:
Insomuch as that such as a Man's persuasions and Principles are, such ordinarily
at least will his Life and Practice be.

It is true indeed, that sometimes Men's Lives are better than their Principles,
and sometimes also worse: For it may fall out that Men of very unhappy and
mischievous Opinions may yet live virtuously, when the Probity of their Temper
is such, as that it Antidotes them against the Malignity and Venom of their
persuasions: And on the other side, it is no infrequent (though an unhappy)
spectacle, to behold others of very Noble and Generous principles, as to
Doctrine, yet to live very Lewd and Profligate Lives, such Men withholding the
Truth in unrighteousness, (as the Apostles Phrase is) or outfacing the Light,
and Debauching their Consciences, in compliance with their Lusts and carnal or
secular Interests.

But, (as I said) ordinarily it is otherwise, for such a state of contradiction
to Principles must needs be violent and unnatural; and the lives and actions of
Men do as reasonably bear proportion to the Principles of their Minds and
Consciences, as it is Natural for the stream to rise as high as its Source and
Fountain, and no higher. Hence it is, that our Savior, Matthew. 12. 33. says,
Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good: or the Tree Corrupt, and the
Fruit Corrupt: And again, Matthew. 6. 23. He pronounces, If the Light that is in
Thee be Darkness, that Darkness must be great and intolerable. To the truth of
which Observation, the general experience of all the World, bares ample
Testimony amongst several instances of which, I cannot but remark a very
pertinent passage of an Heathen Historian in the Life of that wicked Emperor
Tiberius; his Words concerning him are these: Erat circa Deos negligentior,
quippe Mathematicae addictus, persuasionisque plenus omnia sato agi. Which I
render thus, q. d. Tiberius was a profane Prince, careless of Religion, and
without any Devotion toward God; and no wonder, for he was an admirer of
Astrology; and full of the Opinion, that the Stars or Fate governed the World,
and not God.

And in short, this is the true Reason of all Education, and of all the Care
and Diligence that evil and good Men use in Propounding and Propagating good
Doctrine, and preventing the contrary; not that they think God is pleased with
dry opinions and speculations, but because they are aware that Principles draw
on Practices, and that evil opinions Corrupt good Manners. But so much for that;
I proceed,

In the second place, to inquire what was the peculiar Leaven of these
Pharisees and Sadducees which our Savior thus cuations against. And for this,
the Learned Jewish Historian, Josephus in his 13th. Book of Antiquities, and in
his 2d. Book of the Jewish Wars, has given us a very exact Account of all the
Sects of Religion amongst that People, and from him I shall present this
Auditory, with the substance of what he delivers, touching the Pharisees and
Sadducees wherein we are at present concerned.

And first, it is notorious that the Sect of the Sadducees utterly denied the
being of Angels and Spirits; or of all Spiritual substances, and acknowledged
nothing but Matter or Body in the whole Universe; and consequently hereof, they
must also renounce the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the Body,
and Eternal Life in the World to come: Whereas on the contrary, the Pharisees
acknowledged all the aforesaid great Articles, as we Learn, Acts 23. 8. Only
this is to be added withal, That these latter entertained so many Legendary
Stories about these great Points, and had such very crasie notions of them,
that they thereby rendered the very Doctrines ridiculous and incredible.

Again, the Sadducees were gross Idolaters of the Letter, and as they received
only the Law of Moses, (excluding the Prophets and all other sacred Writings)
so they understood the Books of the Law in the most crass and litteral sense,
and admitted not of any interpretation or consequence from it, though never so
clearly and naturally deduced; On the other side, the Pharisees not only
received the whole Scripture of the Old Testament, but besides were great
Patrones of Oral Tradition, and allowed as great or greater authority to it
than the written Word; and consequently thought themselves obliged under as
great a necessity to the observance of those things that came down to them by
the Tradition of their Fathers, as to those they found written in the Law and
the Prophets; from whence it came to pass (as it must needs do) that their
Creed became Vast and Voluminous, and their Devotion was Clogged with
innumerable Rites and Ceremonies.

The result of all which is this; that the Pharisees had too much Faith (such
as it was) and the Sadducees (properly speaking) none at all: The Sadducees
could upon their Principles have no ground for any Religion or Piety; and the
Pharisees, by their Prodigious additions to Gods Institution, had quite
corrupted and lost the true Idea of Religion. In short, whatever cold pretenses
a Sadducee could make to Civility or Morality; it is evident, he could have no
Devotion. On the contrary, the very Character of a Pharisee was a confident
Devotionist, without Morality.

Now, from what has been delivered in this short Account of these two Sects,
it will be easy to discern the reason why our Savior gives such caution
against their Leaven, and what the mischief and danger to his Doctrine and
Design was from each of them singly, or both together. Which is the

3. Third Inquiry; but because herein lies especially the Emphasis of the Text,
I will give a more particular Account of this matter as follows:

And first as touching the Sadducees; it is manifest by what has been said,
that their Leaven was the same with that of the Epicurean Philosophers, and
could by no means be a Principle of Conscience or Religion, but a Doctrine
Calculated for this present Life; for believing neither Angel nor Spirit, nor
any thing to be in the World but mere Matter; it was impossible they should
have any concern for another World, and consequently they could have no
Religion, only as the Law of Moses was lex Terrae the Law of the Land; so far
it stood them in hand to observe it, or at least to pretend an external
Conformity to it, for the sake of their secular Interests and Advantages. To be
sure such Principles could lay no obligation upon their Consciences; and
therefore they were the truest Race of Latitudinarians, and could comply with
whatsoever was uppermost; and upon that score, could not withstand the
Temptation of being of the Religion of the Prince, whatever it was.

Accordingly, it is observable in a Parallel place to this of my Text; namely,
Mark 8. 15. For the Leaven of the Pharisees, we have the Leaven of Herod, as
signifying the same thing, for these Men it seems consistently enough with
their Principles, could flatter that vile Prince, so far as to cry him up for
the Messiah.

It was I say, a Sect or Leaven fit for Men of Covetous and Ambitious designs,
and was successful to those purposes; for Acts 5. 17. We find the great Council
or Sanhedrin of the Jews, chiefly consisted of those of this Leaven.

These Men were of the Spawn of the Leviathan, and derived the sanction of
Religion from humane Legislation, and the commands of God obliged no further
than they were inacted by the Civil Magistrate.

Besides all this, they had the right knack of Triming between all Religions;
for whatsoever was the inward opinion of their mind, they could conceal or
deny, or mince the matter, so that their Persuasion should never expose them to
any damage, nor their Conscience interfere with their Interests.

Now, the Christian Religion which our Savior came to introduce and to plant
in the World, being not only a very strict and Holy, but a most solemn and
serious institution: Nothing could be more contrary to it, than such loose
Principles as these; His was a Religion fitted to please God, not to flatter
and humor Men: It was a Religion designed for the saving of Men's Souls in
another World, and to fit them for Eternal Life, and not to serve a turn, or to
save a Stake in this World. Upon all which, there can be no wonder that he
earnestly Cautions against the Leaven of the Sadducees which undermined the
Principles of all Religion.

And then in the next place, for the Religion of the Pharisees, that (by what
was said in the description of their Leaven) consisting of so many incredible
Articles of Faith, grounded only upon Tradition and Legendary Stories, and of
such innumerable trifling and Arbitrary Rites and Ceremonies, and yet made
essentially necessary to Salvation, was utterly contrary to the whole tenor and
design of the Gospel, as might be made appear in innumerable instances, of
which I will here specify only these five particulars following.

In the first place, a principal Design of our Savior in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, was to instruct Men with right notions of God, which is not only the
first and most immediate honor to the Divine Majesty, but the only solid
Foundation of all Virtue and Piety: The right apprehension of Gods Perfections
and Attributes, being the great obligation upon our minds, to reverence and
observe him in general, and being of great use also, to direct us in the
particular instances of our Duty toward him. Now the Pharisees Superstition
was contrariwise very apt to breed in Men, very mean and unworthy notions of
the Divine Majesty; and so tended naturally both to confound the Measures, and
to subvert the very ground and Reason of Piety and Virtue.

Partly, as it mightily abated of his Grandeur and Majesty whilst it
represented him, as insisting upon so many little things as carried neither
weight nor worth, nor intrinsic Reason in them. We always count it an Argument
of a little mind to be wrought upon by mere Complements, to be pleased with
Trifles, and to be offended with such Ceremonious Omissions: And we cannot
naturally esteem him to be a Wise and great Man, whom we observe to be of that
temper; much less can we imagine that he should be an infinitely wise God, a
full perfect and self-sufficient being, that will endure to be flattered with
Ceremonies, be forced with Gifts, be propitiated with formal Oblations, be
complemented with external Addresses, imposed upon by shows and shadows, or be
offended for the want of any such things. Now the Pharisees Leaven consisting
wholly of these, without regard to true Piety, and generous Obedience and
conformity of Heart and Life to him, quite clouded and obscured the glory of
his Divinity, and rendered him more like a Man than a God, and indeed more like
a little necessitous narrow minded Man, than a wise and a great one.

Partly, as it rendered him an unbenign and captious Deity, such an one as
insisted upon very Punctilio's, and was prone to take advantage of his
Creatures upon the smallest omissions; the effects of which must needs be, that
Men might be possibly Tempted to fear, and to stand under the slavish dread of
such a God, but it was plainly impossible they should love him; without which
there can be no Life nor Soul in Religion.

Above all this, the Pharisaical Leaven represented the Divine Majesty as a
Selfish and Tyrannical Being, as if he looked only at his own ends, and had no
regard to the good of his Creatures, and more aimed at the obtaining his own
Will of them, than had any respect to the true use and reason of things, or
design of the good and happiness of Men: For how could it be otherwise; or how
could Men think otherwise of him, that insisted as much upon clean Hands as
upon a pure Heart; that was as much offended with the Omission of a Ritual, as
of a Moral precept, and that would take the Sacrifice of a Beast, in the
exchange for obedience of a Man. Now the Doctrine of the Pharisees bringing in
such apprehensions of Religion as these are, must needs there withal introduce
very mean, low and unworthy notions of God, and thereby undermine true Piety,
and especially that of the Gospel.

Again, in the second place, the design of our Savior was to make Religion
easy and delightful, and not only passible, but acceptable to all Men; that so
his institution might become the Religion of all the World, the truly Catholic
Religion.

To this purpose, he was to lay open all Enclosures, to pare off all
Superfluities, to retrench the redundance of troublesome and unnecessary
Ceremonies; so to bring Religion into as narrow a compass as was possible, that
it might fall in the better with the occasions of humane Life; and that the
affairs of Heaven and Earth might not interfere, he was to make it fully
reasonable, and the reason of it so conspicuous as that it might commend it
self to the minds of all Men; He was to accommodate it to humane Nature in
general, so that no quality or condition of Life should be incapable of it,
that it should be impossible to no constitution; excluded from no place,
Climate or Country; that it should be inconsistent with no form of Government,
nor inconvenient for any Age or time of the World.

All this was aimed at in the institution of Christian Religion; and all this
was Crossed and Contradicted by the Leaven of the Pharisees, for that consisted
of so many Articles of Faith, as it was impossible to persuade all Men of: It
had so many Rites and Ceremonies, peculiar to one Country, or Climate, or
Place, or Condition, or Constitution of Men; and others so numerous, as were
very troublesome to those that were most Conscientious of them, and most of
them founded upon such reasons, as few Men could be satisfied with, and yet all
of them made indispensably necessary; that it became not only a very uneasy
Religion, but impossible to a great part of Men, and unacceptable to all: And
therefore, was so far unfit to become the Catholic or Universal Religion; that
it could be only the Cognizance of a Sect and Party, and fitter to divide the
World than to Unite it.

It must needs have been very burdensome to the Bodies of Men, to be bound to
observe so many washings and instances of external Cleanness, as their
Superstition required: And it could not but be very troublesome to the minds
and Memories of Men, to retain so many little things as were strictly to be
observed, and yet could not take hold of a Man's mind, because they had no
Foundation in reason: And above all, it must needs be intolerable to the
Consciences of Men, and hold them in perpetual anxiety and solicitude; when a
Man's Duty was so large, as that he could scarce ever tell when he had done, and
yet every thing was alike necessary, and so the danger was Fatal, if he Omitted
or failed in any part of it. Upon all these Accounts, Pharisaism contradicted
the design of our Savior in the institution of Christianity; and therefore he
cautions his Disciples against it.

Moreover Thirdly, such a troublesome and circumstantial way of Religion as
that of the Pharisees; under the form, supplants the very Power of Godliness:
Partly, as these nice and troublesome observances weary the minds of Men and
exhaust their best Spirits; and so that Zeal is spent upon Trifles which should
have been reserved for more weighty occasions: As we commonly observe of a bad
Diet, that it not only corrupts the humors of the Body, filling it with ill
Juices, but also clogs and satiares the Natural Appetite of the Stomach, and
deads it to all those things that might be wholesome and beneficial; but
principally, this Pompous Form undermines the power of Religion, as it renders
Men prone to hope to make amends for the defect of the latter, by the
redundance of the former; for it is too common and usual for Men to think to
expiate Immorality by Superstition: And we generally observe, that those who
are over-precise in little matters, are apt to indulge themselves too much in
great.

Thus, our Savior upbraids these very Men we speak of, Matthew. 23. 23. That
under pretense of being more than exact in Tythings, Mint, Ann^s, and Commin,
they neglected the weighty matters of the Law; Justice, Mercy, and Faith: And
again, Matthew. 15. 3. He tells them they notoriously made void the Commandments
of God through their Traditions; for by their Corban, they Legitimated
unnaturalness toward their Parents; by their long Prayers, they hoped to make
amends for devouring Widows Houses, and by outward washings, to expiate their
inward Impurities: And for the sake of these things, our Savior (whose Design
was to introduce true and unfeigned goodness, and sincere and unaffected Piety)
severly interdicts this Leaven.

Furthermore, in the Fourth place; as it is usually observed, that light things
are puffy and turgid, so it is certain that such an empty and Pompous Religion
as that of the Pharisees, usually swells and puffs Men up with Pride and
conceit of themselves, which temper is the furthest projection from that of the
Gospel: Such a Train of observances as they had, made a very Glorious and
Sanctimonious show, and raised the admiration of the World, and thereby
deceived them into a great Opinion of themselves: It was an easy and cheap way
to Saintship, for the observation of Rites and Ceremonies cost them little
self-denial and mortification; and yet it served to make them to be thought the
only People: Accordingly they had a saying amongst the Jews in those times;
that, If there were but two Men to go to Heaven, the one would be a Scribe, and
the other a Pharisee. Thus were these Aerie Bubbles blown up to Heaven, both in
the conceit of the World, and in their own Opinion: So we observe in the
Gospel, Luke 18. 11. Whereas the poor Publican is dejected in the Presence of
God, in contemplation of his own miscarriages; and therefore dares scarce look
up toward Heaven, but modestly smites upon his Breast, and Prays, God be
Merciful to me a Sinner: The Pharisee transported with vulgar Applause and
Self-admiration, boldly out-faces God and Man, and cries out, God, I thank thee
that I am not like other Men, for I Fast twice a Week, and pay Tithes of all I
Possess, etc. And therefore challenges Heaven as due to his Merit.

Not unlike Servants are the new invented Orders of Modern Pharisees, who upon
the Account of their Observation of certain Rules of their own Invention, and
of the Vows of Fantastic Poverty, uncommanded abstinence from Flesh or
Marriage, and blind Obedience to their Superiors, call themselves the
Religious; and all the World of good Christians besides, the Seculars or the
Men of this World. Of such a flatulent Nature is Superstition: And thus
fastuose and supercilious does it render all the Proselytes to it; and
therefore our Savior, whose intention was to bring Humility and Modesty into
Fashion, cautions earnestly against this Leaven.

Fifthly and lastly, our Savior by his Institution, designed to bring in
Gentleness and Kindness, Love and good will amongst Men. But such an external
and ritual Religion as that of the Pharisees, naturally tends to make Men
quarrelsome and contentious, Carnal and Sanguinary: For in the first place, the
materials or instances of Superstition are many and numerous, and so liable to
be mistaken; for in many things we offend all; or where our Obligation is very
large, our Duty is very Nice and difficult: Again, such things being neither
manifestly required by clear Reason, nor by evident Revelation, must needs be
always uncertain, and so become matter of endless dispute and contention;
especially if all things be alike necessary, and that Eternal Life depends upon
every Punctilio: No wonder if Men be fierce and eager, for he that is mortally
vulnerable in every part, must needs be very jealous and curious: To all which
add; that the Man who has his Religion at his Fingers ends, or in ritibus ad
solos digitos pertinentibus, as Lactantius expresses it; this Man must need be
very peremtory and dogmatical, very decretory and decisive; so that there can
be no dissenting from such a Man without Anathema's; and his Superstition by
all these considerations, will raise him to such a Heat and Confidence, that he
will think he does God good service to kill those that differ from him.

Of this St. Paul himself was an Example; he was bred at the Feet of Gamaliel,
a Learned Traditionary Doctor, and after the strictest Sect of the Jewish
Religion, a Pharisee; and all this served to inflame him against Christ and his
Religion and Disciples, to such a degree, that he confesses he was mad against
them, and thought he ought to do whatsoever he did or could do against that
Name and Institution.

The same thing Tertullian 1400 Years ago observed of the Jews in general; his
words are, Synagogae Judaeorum fontes persecutionum: The Jewish Zelots were
constantly the great inflamers of Persecution against Christianity; and they
when they could not do it themselves, exasperated the Pagans and put them upon
it.

A Jewish Spirit is everlastingly a persecuting Spirit, and of all mankind a
Pharisee (whatever he may pretend) can never be in earnest for Toleration: I
would to God the Experience of all Ages had not born too undeniable a Testimony
to the truth of this Observation, and that modern Pharisaism had in this
respect amended the matter: But Leaven is Leaven, and will ever have the same
Operation.

The Man that considers his Religion, and weighs the reasons of it before he
embraces it, will be Gentle and Charitable toward those that differ from him,
or are not of his Attainment; he considers the shortness of humane
Understanding, that he may be deceived himself, and therefore pities those that
are so; he makes allowance for different Constitutions, several ways of
Education, and the prejudices incident to Men in this World: but the blind
Zelot that believes with his Will, not his Understanding, that sees with other
Men's Eyes, and inslaves his mind to other Men's dictates; in a word, the
Traditionary Pharisee, is bold and violent, cruel and unmerciful.

And the Man that is heartily and sincerely virtuous, he is pitiful and
compassionate to the infirmities of mankind; he considers humane frailty, and
the Temptations we are beset withal, how many times we do that which we cannot
allow or justify, and judges of other Men as he would be judged himself: But
the supercilious Pharisee, makes no reflection upon himself; and therefore has
no Mercy nor Compassion toward others.

St. Austin, in answer to the Manichees, and particularly to that Epistle of
theirs, called, Fundamentum, has this Noble and Christian passage: Illi in vos
saeviant, qui nesciunt quanto cum labor veritas inveniatur, and quam
difficulter errores caveantur; with many other excellent Words to that purpose.
(Let those says he) Persecute you, who neither knew the difficulty of
discovering Truth, and of avoiding Error; but so will not I, who have Erred as
you do, and hardly recovered the firm ground of Truth, that work is only fit
for them that have their Religion by Rote, and their Devotion by instinct, that
never studied for Knowledge, nor labored for Virtue; that are Infallible by an
implicit Faith, and devout without Piety, that is, those that are of the right
Leaven of Pharisaism.

These in short, are some of the Causes why our Savior gave such a strict and
Solemn charge against the Leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. And
now, it is time to come to the Fourth and last Branch of my Text; namely, to
show what our Savior means by this expression, Take heed and beware, and what
is the Duty of his Disciples in this particular, and that I will now endeavor
briefly to explain, and then conclude.

In order to which, in the first place it is to be observed; that the Emphasis
lies in the word Leaven; for it is not so much the Men of the Sect of the
Pharisees and Sadducees that are to be avoided, as the Leaven of those Sects,
and that is so much the more to be taken care of; because there may be the
Leaven of those Sects, though the Name be forgotten, and the Men so called, be
gone off the Stage: And it is much to be doubted, or rather it is past doubt,
that there is a Leaven of Pharisaism, and Sadducism amongst Christians as well
as there was amongst the Jews, and perhaps amongst Protestants as well as
Papists; and therefore, it will be our Duty to observe and distinguish it; As
for Instance,

Wherever we find a sort of Pretenders to the Atomical or Epicurean Philosophy,
that assert there is nothing but Matter or Body in the Universe; these Men, let
them be otherwise never so Ingenious, or let them cover and disguise the
business as well as they can, must necessarily upon their Principles, take away
the being of Angels and Spirits, and all the concern of another World; and
therefore, are of the Leaven of Sadducism.

Or if there be in this Age those that would persuade themselves and others,
that it is a piece of Superstition to be strait-laced in Conscience, or a kind
of Fanaticism to be curious what Religion a Man is of, and that that whole
affair is Matter of indifferency, since God is pleased with variety, or regards
not what Principles Men are of, so they be Devout and Honest in their
respective persuasions: This conceit wherever it is, is nothing better than a
piece of the Old Leaven of Sadducism.

Or if there be those that assert, that the Religion of Christ Jesus, is only
to be of the Religion of the Prince and Country.

Or that whatsoever a Man believes in his Heart, it is lawful for him to
conceal and disguise it, and to make profession of that which comports best
with his Safety and Interest; all this is Sadducism.

To give one instance more on this Head; Whosoever they be that would persuade
us, we must needs understand those Famous words, Hoc est Corpus meum, in the
gross literal sense, against all the Reason of the world, and the very
Testimony of our Savior; this is neither better nor worse, than a spice of old
Sadducism.

And then on the other side, (for the Pharisees) Wherever we observe Men
building their Faith and Religion upon Oral and unwritten Tradition, and
equalling that to the Holy Scripture and written Word of God, this is
Pharisaism.

Or wherever we find Men imposing upon others, a vast and voluminous Creed, and
enjoining a World of Nice Observances, under the Peril of Eternal Damnation,
(if they be not complied with) or the Yoke laid upon the Neck of the Disciples
of our Lord, no whit Inferious to that of Judaism; in all this, there is the
Spirit of Pharisaism.

Wherever we see Men lay mighty stress upon disputable Opinions, or to Save or
Damn Men accordingly as they are of such or such a Party, here is the plain
Genius of Pharisaism.

To name no more, Wherever we observe Men to be mighty pretenders to Devotion,
but careless of Justice and Charity, or to strain at a Gnat and swallow a
Camel; all this is the Leaven of Pharisaism, wherever it is found, and to be
avoided accordingly.

In the next place, let us consider the Emphasis of these Words of our Savior,
(...), Take heed and beware; it is an earnest expression that I do not remember
to have observed above once more in the whole New Testament, and (to be sure)
imports no less, than that great application of mind is required in this
particular. Religion is certainly a business that deserves to be well
considered of, and to be carefully examined and well understood as well as
Devoutly prosecuted; nor is there any thing in this World, for the sake of
which God gave us our Understanding, more than to inquire into this weighty
affair: And the least that can be made of the charge here in the Text, is, that
we by no means allow our selves Supinely to swallow whatsoever is either first
Suggested, or imperiously Dictated to us, since such an Implicit Faith, is the
very first working of the Leaven of the Pharisaism and Sadducism; and the
vindicating our selves to our selves, and the asserting the Freedom of our own
Thoughts and Liberty of judging for our selves is the first Step to true and
generous Christianity, and the way to be everlastingly secured from the
aforesaid Leaven; For example,

If we freely consult our own Reason, we shall never be able to think of God
Almighty as of a partial Deity, or an accepter of Persons, that will Save or
Damn Men in gross, accordingly as they shall be of such a Sect or Party: We
shall never be able to imagine, that a great and wise Majesty, will have any
great value for empty forms and mere Pageantry of Religion; as if we had a
Fancy like that of the Pantomime at Rome, who having been admired by the
Rabble, would needs have the fondness to go also into the Capitol, and play his
Tricks over before the Gods, as if God must needs be pleased with what the
silly multitude admired.

It can never enter into a considering Man's thoughts, that the Divine Majesty
should be propitiated with Beads and Baubles, that Money should Purchase his
Favor to the Wicked Man, that he should be corrupted with Bribes, or imposed
upon, and won with Complements.

In a word, no Man that has, and makes use of the discretion of a reasonable
Creature, can think so unworthily of God, as that he should be fatally offended
with little mistakes in Opinion; or that he will cast away a very sincere and
Devout Man, merely upon the Account of a Ceremony under or over; and he that
allows himself but this kind of modest Freedom of mind, has made good
Provision against the danger of the Leaven of Pharisaism and Sadducism.

Again, in the Third place; the most effectual security against the aforesaid
Leaven, is to keep to the Holy Scripture, especially of the New Testament; to
study that, and take all the Measures of our Religion thence: If we trust to
the Authority and dictates of Men, or to the Customs and Fashions of the World;
they will betray us to those Leavens; or if merely upon unwritten Tradition,
that like a common Sewer brings down for the most part, the Trash and Rubbish
of former times; very often letting the most weighty things sink and perish in
the passage: For proof of which, we need no other evidence, but the experience
of the Jews, amongst whom, one cannot but admire, what childish and ridiculous
Stories, this way of Tradition has filled them with; insomuch, that this Oral
part of their Religion, has almost quite disparaged that which was written and
Divinely revealed, merely by the Vicinage and Conjunction with it.

Whereas, if we attend, to and study the Holy Scripture; that will not only
preserve us from such mean and unworthy Notions of God and Religion; but will
engage us in such a method as shall both make us better Men, and the World the
better for us.

If we govern our selves by Tradition and the Fancies of Men, then all our Care
and Devotion will be laid out in Cultivating an Opinion in Ceremonious
Addresses to the Deity, in Pompous Oblations, or in Scrupulous Observance; but
if we consult the Scripture, that will teach us, that God will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice, and that a pure Mind and an Holy Life, are more acceptable to
him than long Prayers, frequent Fasts, and the most costly Offerings: There we
shall find, that the first and great Commandment of Gods Law is, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Mind, and with all
thy Strength; and that whatever demonstrates sincere Love to him, be it little
or much, is sure to procure his Favor: These we shall learn expressly, that the
Lord our God is not pleased with the Fat of Lambs, nor propitiated with Rivers
of Oil; neither does he require the fruit of our Bodies, to expiate the Sin of
our Souls; but that we do justly, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with our God:
The due consideration of which passages of Scripture, will effectually Antidote
us against the Infection of any of the aforesaid Leavens.

To all which; I add in the last place, that if we do but mind the Nature and
Notion of Christianity, and consider the Genius and Spirit of that Religion, we
are safe; particularly, if we do but look upon it under the representation
which those two Words or Phrases give of it; whereby it is called, a reasonable
Service, and a Spiritual Worship.

As for the former, no Man can be so absurd, as to think that a reasonable
service which is built upon an implicit Faith, and where a Man understands
nothing of the Reason and Grounds of his Religion, but in a Blind Obedience,
servilely and brutishly gives himself up to the Conduct of others, or when he
Worships God in a Language whereof he has no knowledge or understanding.

And as for the other Phrase of a Spiritual Worship; can any Man of common
sense take that to be a Spiritual Religion, which is made up of Bodily
Drudgeries; of mere Forms, and Rites, and Ceremonies? But to be a Christian, is
to have worthy Notions of God in our minds, and a flame of servent Piety and
Devotion to him in our Hearts; to Love him, to Fear him, to Trust in him, to be
Holy, and Just and Sober in our Lives, and to be peaceable in our Spirits; such
a Religion as this is worthy of God, was fit for the Son of God to be the
Author and Publisher of; and the Conscientious Observance of it will fit us
for, and in due time bring us to the possession of the Heavenly Mansions above,
and the Eternal Society of glorious Saints and Angels in Heaven: Which God
grant to us all, through the Merits and Mediation of the same Jesus Christ Our
Lord: To whom be Glory and Honor, and Adoration, for ever, and ever, Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Golden Rule: Or, The Royal Law of (...) explained. By J. Goodman* D. D.
And are to be Sold by Robert Olavel at the Peacock, at the West End of St.
Paul's.

FINIS.

