A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honble Society of LINCOLNS-INNE, Upon the 26th of
July, 1685, Being the Thanksgiving-Day for His Majesty's Victory over the
Rebels.

By JOHN GOODRICK, M. A. Chaplain to that Honorable Society, and to the Right
Reverend the Lord Bishop of Norwich.

IMPRIMATUR.

C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domesticis.



LONDON, Printed by J. D. and to be sold by Israel Harrison at Lincoln's Inn
Gate in Chancery Lane. MDCLXXXV.

To the Worshipful The Masters of the BENCH, AND The rest of the Members of the
Honorable Society of LINCOLNS-INNE.
SIRS,
IT was your pious and devout Recognition of the Divine Favor in giving
Victory to our King, and an utter Overthrow to those that rose up against him,
which gave occasion to this Sermon. And it being preached by your Command, and
by the repeated Solicitations of some (who had a just Power over me) being
desired to print it, I resolved upon the Publication of it. Now though I am not
ignorant how things of this nature will be treated by a malevolent and
Censorious Age; yet under Your Patronage (I hope) it may light of such a
Construction, as my Sincerity then designed it. Of Right the Dedication belongs
to You; from whom I have received an ample Encouragement for many years of my
Pains and Attendance. But further, that I may give a Testimony to the World of
the sense I have of that great Obligation that lies upon me, to let all Men
know the Respects you have constantly shown to such as have had the Honor to
serve You in the Ministry; May Religion, Loyalty, and the Study of the Law
always flourish among You, is the sincere Prayer of

SIRS, Your obliged Servant, and Chaplain, J. Goodrick.

PSALM. xlvi. 10, 11. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among
the Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the
God of Jacob is our refuge.
THis Day being appointed by his Majesty for a solemn Thanksgiving to Almighty
God, for deliverance from intestine Wars and an unnatural Rebellion; I shall
not bend my Discourse to a bitter Invective, or Satirical Harangue, either
against the Wickedness of the Persons, that were disturbers of our Peace; or
awaken your Fears, by setting forth the Miseries and woeful Calamities of a
Civil War. The effects of one above forty years since are still felt among us,
consisting in the contempt of God, and Religion; in the practice of the highest
Immoralities, Injustice, and Debauchery; and in a great, if not a total
disregard of our Superiors and Governors, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.
And when we know that these are the necessary consequences of Pride and
Ambition, of Rebellion and intestine Wars; methinks, no Man endued with Reason,
enobled by Blood, courted by Greatness, loved by many, and envied by few,
should be so fond of that black Tragedy, as not only to bear a principal part
in it himself, but also to assign others what share they should have in it, to
the scandal of Religion, the shedding of innocent Blood, and to the utter
undoing of themselves.

This Subject I shall leave to others, whose keener Wits, assisted by some
necessary Qualifications, are more able to decipher this so abhorred a Villainy.

That which I shall do at this present time, shall be to improve this Blessing
of Restored-Peace, into expressions of Thankfulness to the Divine Goodness for
this Deliverance; and to show what is our Duty consequent upon it. That whoever
may be the Instruments, yet it is God's Prerogative to make Peace and War. For,
he makes Wars to cease unto the end of the Earth; he breaks the Bow, and
cutteth the Spear in sunder, he burns the Chariot in the fire. ver. 9. of
this Psalm. Wherefore it is our Duty, not to repine and murmur with God's
dealings with Men in this case, but to lay our hands upon our mouths, to be
still and quiet under his Dispensations. To trust and depend upon him, for he
is God: And notwithstanding the Imperious Resolves of Men, He will be exalted
in the Earth. And this is the comfort of all good Men, that the Lord of Hosts
is their God, and Refuge; so the Psalmist in the words I have now read. Be
still, and know that I am God, etc.

This Psalm, whether of David, or some other person, is a large profession of
trust in, and dependence upon God, in all times and conditions of Life: God is
our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble, v. 1. And it seems to
be composed in the time of that profound Peace and Tranquillity, which David
enjoyed when he had wholly vanquished and subdued all Intestine Broils and
Foreign Enemies. And although some Jewish Writers would make it to be occasioned
by that Deliverance of Jerusalem from the Assyrians by the Angel in Hezekiah's
time, recorded in 2 King. chapter 19. yet seeing nothing of this is mentioned
either in the title of the Psalm, or in the subject matter of it, I rather
think it to refer (as I before hinted) to that Peace, which David had when he
was fully settled in his Kingdom. As you may read 2 Samuel 8. 13, 14, 15. And
David gat him a Name, when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the
Valley of Salt. And he put Garrisons in Edom; and God prospered David
whithersoever he went. And David reigned over all Israel: And David executed
Judgment and Justice unto all his People. And further, it appears from the
contexture of the Psalm, that there was a strong Conspiracy against him, many
potent and most cruel Enemies, resolvedly bent for his destruction: (For he
compares their Tumults and Combinations to Mountains, and the raging of the
Sea; intimating their strength and malice, v. 3, 6.) yet notwithstanding all
this, he placing his trust and confidence in God, was not at all terrified or
disheartened: being well assured that upon the performance of his duty, by daily
and constant Prayer, he should meet with that success, which he could well hope
for, or desire. Wherefore he summons all good Men, duly to weigh and consider
of the Goodness, Power, and Providence of God in these matters: Of his Justice
to all wicked and rebellious Sinners: of his Power in governing of the World,
and disposing of Events according to his Pleasure: and, lastly, his Mercy and
Goodness to all good Men, that have a full trust and affiance in him, from ver.
8. to the end: Come, behold the Works of the Lord, what desolations he has
made in the Earth; he makes Wars to cease unto the end of the Earth, etc. Be
still then, and know that I am God, etc.

In speaking to which words, I shall do these five things:

1. Consider the Power and Providence of God, in ordering the Events of War and
Peace.

2. I shall endeavor to show the necessary consequence of acquiescing in these
his dealings without murmuring or repining; Be still, and know that I am God.

3. What reason we have to trust God in the ordering these Events.

4. The comfort and encouragement good Men have to depend upon God at all
times, he is with them, and is their refuge.

5. Draw some Inferences from the whole pertinent to this solemn Occasion.

I begin with the first of these. To consider the Power and Providence of God,
in ordering the Events of War and Peace. For the Psalmist here speaks of his
Enemies combined together with rage and malice for his destruction; and also of
his deliverance from their designed Mischief. Wherefore upon this experience of
God's Power and Goodness, he in a solemn manner summons all good Men to come
and behold, i. e. seriously to consider God's Providence in these matters;
sometimes causing Desolations; and at other times making Peace and Tranquillity
in the Earth. And this appears true both from the Person, the Author of these
Events, and the nature of the thing.

First, from the Author of these Events: Know that I am God. As he is the
Creator, so he is the Governor of the World; and nothing happens in the course
of things, but what is ordered by his overruling Power. The most minute things
here below are directed by his alwise Providence: how much more the great and
weightier Affairs of Kingdoms and Nations? His Power is visibly seen in the
Mutations and Changes in inanimate Beings and sublunary Bodies: and the whole
course of Heaven and Earth are managed by his Governance: But more especially
this is apparent in the rise and fall of Kingdoms and Nations. For he pulls
down one, and sets up another: He scatters the People that delight in War:
And when he speaks Peace, who can give Trouble? I will not spend time to cite
Instances of this nature, recorded at large by the Greek and Latin Historians,
The many Alterations in the Jewish State, their Success and Victory, their
Decay and Overthrow are remarkable proofs of the point in hand. Whilst they
were obedient to the Law and Commands of God, who was their Supreme Governor,
with what few Numbers, and almost incredible Success did they overturn and
conquer mighty Nations and People, strong as the Anakims: and all this, as
Moses tells them, not by their might and strength, but by the Power of God: But
when they fell back from his Service, they were oppressed by their Neighbor
Nations, carried captive into strange Countries, their Land made miserably
desolate by Nebuchadnezzar, God's Scourge; And in tract of time abandoned to
all the Infelicities that Omnipotent Power was pleased to threaten and inflict
upon them. So true is that which is spoken by Daniel concerning the same
Nebuchadnezzar in this very case, God does according to his Will in the Army of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay his Hand, or
say unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4. 35. But we have a remarkable Instance of
this matter of fact nearer home; For we cannot but remember the best of Kings,
once the Darling of his People, the delight of their eyes, and the breath of
their nostrils; supported by his own Power, possessed of the whole Strength of
the Nation, and wanting nothing either of Goodness or Grandeur to make him
beloved at home, and feared abroad: yet after all this, by the malice of wicked
and turbulent Men, given to change, by popular Pretenses, by sly and false
Insinuations, made the Enemy of his Country, the Mark to be shot at, the
Betrayer of his Peoples Liberties, the Patron of Immorality, and the Subverter
of Religion: By which he was hunted (like David) as a Partridg on the
Mountains; by Rebellious Arms divested of his Power, seized, imprisoned; under
the formality of Justice, illegally tried for those very crimes, which they
themselves were guilty of; and at last fell a Sacrifice to that accursed
Faction, bringing the foulest stain upon our most Holy Religion, the Honor of
the English Nation, and the highest Guilt and Desolation, that can be mentioned
in any Story. On the other hand; when God had permitted these sons of Belial to
tire and weary themselves with their Iniquities, He by his Almighty Providence
turned all into a profound Peace; and without Bloodshed, restored our late
dread Sovereign, and this our now gracious King, to their Rights, together with
our Religion and Liberties. En! Digitus Dei. This is none other but God's
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; As the Psalmist expresses it in the
like case, Psalm 118. 23.

2. The nature of the thing requires that God should order these Events. For,
being infinitely wise, he knows how to direct all Affairs and Actions to their
best and noblest ends; what is most for his Glory, the Benefit and Welfare of
Mankind; When the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong: When
time and chance happen to all men, i. e. that Events are contrary to their
Causes, and these sublunary things seem to be left to their own governance, as
it shall happen: Then if Men will sit down and consider, their own Reason will
tell them, that there is a Superintendant Power that manages second Causes,
else these would not fail of their proper Effects. For let Men talk never so
Captiously, or Atheistically rather, it will appear an avowed Truth, That were
it not for the interposition of the Divine Providence, Force and Power would
always prevail, and necessary Causes would produce the designed Fruits. For if
it be demanded, What should hinder? They must assign, that the Reason of it is
either from themselves, or from some other more potent Being. If the first,
then they are not necessary Causes, and it is to no purpose to speak of their
force and energy, when they are not able to effect that which is the proper
Reason of their being such. And if it be from without, that they do not attain
their end; let those Scepticks (if they can) assign any other Being whatsoever,
besides Almighty God, which can overruled Events contrary to their Causes. The
truth is, some Men, because of their vicious lives and practices, are justly
afraid of the Dread Majesty of Heaven; and therefore endeavor to dispute God
out of the world: rather taking up with the fantastical Hypothesis of Epicurus
(whose Contrivance is as silly as it is blasphemous); or with the grave Notions
of an imposing Leviathan, (who has subjected the Supreme Deity, and his
Attributes, Vice and Virtue, to the overruling Power of the Magistrate, and
these sublunary things to a fatal necessity) Rather, I say, beguiling
themselves with these trifles, than owning a Providence to govern them, or a
God to judge them. But would Men impartially consult their own Reason, that
would tell them, without the help of Revelation, That it is absolutely
necessary, in order to the solving the Doubts that do and will arise, to grant
the Being of a God, and his Providence, and that he does direct the issues and
events of things: For, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 58. ult. -- so that a Man
shall say, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous; verily he is a God that
judges in the Earth. And thus I have done with the first Observation from the
words. I proceed to the second,

2. To show the necessary consequence of acquiescing in these his dealings
without murmuring or repining; Be still, and know that I am God. And this by a
plain connection follows from the former Position: For if God's Power and
Providence order all Events of War and Peace; then to acquiesce in these
dealings is highly reasonable: for, notwithstanding our petulency, we cannot
alter the nature and issue of things, they being disposed by an Almighty Power,
which none can resist. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and who can
say to him, What do thou? And if this be true in respect of temporal Princes,
it is much more so with regard to God, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice. For on the one hand, let Force and Counsel, Strength and Policy, a
good Cause, and a wise-formed Prosecution; let Numbers, and the Sinews of War
be all united together to effect the designed Purpose: yet all these shall be
too little, and stand in no stead, when God pleases to overthrow the
Enterprise. Nay, suppose further, that the subject matter of the Undertaking be
just and good; and (to speak without a cant) that it be really the Cause of
God, the defense of Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, (as was truly the
case of the blessed Martyr King Charles I.) in that Civil-War and Rebellion,
and of this late Conspiracy, notwithstanding their false Shows and Pretenses to
the contrary) I say, supposing all this, yet it is God alone that can give
Victory and Success, and to make the Issue and Event prosperous. And again;
when wicked Achitophels, and traitorous Absoloms combine together in Treason
and Rebellion; when their Strength is united, and their Force formidable: when
their Plots are laid as low as Hell, and their breaking out as terrible as that
of a mighty Torrent; It Is God alone that can frustrate these Designs: His
Counsel shall stand, maugre all their Imaginations. He brings to naught the
Counsels of the Wicked, and makes their Devices of none effect. In the same
Net which they hid, is their foot taken. The Snare is broken, and (blessed be
God) that we see this Day to give Thanks that we are delivered.

Now the result of our reasoning in these matters comes to this, That seeing
the Power and Providence of God, orders all the Events of Peace and War, we
should always (be the issue what it will:) As to refer all things to him, so to
rest satisfied with what is done; well knowing that he in his Wisdom best
understands what is fittest and most condusive to our Good and Happiness. And
would we patiently submit to God's Will in all concerns of life; especially in
such extraordinary cases, as Tumults and Insurrections, Commotions and
Rebellions; it would more contribute to the quelling of those, and effecting
our Peace, than any other course whatsoever we could take. Let us consider that
God governs the world, and that whatsoever is done in the Earth, he does it
himself; That his Will shall take place, be our Contrivances and Devices what
they will: And then these Meditations cannot choose but banish all our Fears of
the worser part, raise our Hopes, fortify our Trust, and mightily encourage our
Undertakings: or at least, let the extremest and sorest happen, it will cause
us with all humility and patience to acquiesce in God's Dispensations, and to
say, Not my will, but thy Will he done: Or to expostulate with our selves in
the words of the Psalmist, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my Countenance, and my God. Which brings me to the third Observation
from the words, what reason we have to trust God in the ordering these Events.

Now tho I have in a great measure prevented my self, by what I have already
spoken upon the former Heads, viz. from the Power and Providence of God in
ordering all Events, not to murmur and repine, when the issue of things have
gone contrary to their causes: yet because good and holy Men have made this the
matter of their complaint, and has proved the ground of great trouble and
disquiet to them, (as I could instance in Job, David, and Jeremiah;) I shall
therefore consider this Case a little further, and show what reason we have
to trust God in these Events, and to rest assured that he will be favorable
and propitious to us.

I deny not but that wicked Men have grown great and prosperous in the World,
have by their Cunning and Force prevailed to the Overthrow of Righteous Kings
and Nations: yet it must be acknowledged also, that this is a rare Case, and
seldom happens: And when it does, besides the secret Reasons which Almighty
God reserves in his own Counsel, not too narrowly to be pried into by us,
because not revealed, this I may positively affirm, that Sin is the moving
Cause of such Evils; according to that of the Prophet, For the Iniquities
thereof, the Land shall mourn. Virtue and Vice, Sin and Repentance are the
standing Reasons of Prosperity and Affliction. So the Prophet tell us, Jer. 18.
7, 8, 9. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, pull down, and to destroy; if that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, then I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation,
and a Kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it
obey not my Voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would
benefit them. So that this is one Reason why we should trust God with these
Events, because he has promised that he will deliver us out of Calamities.
Which Promises are not to be taken too strictly, as if it were never otherwise,
but (...), i. e. For the most part it will hold true, that God will protect and
defend such as do their duty, and depend upon him. We have the highest Reason
imaginable to trust God with all our Concerns; because if we do so, that God
who is Truth it self, and cannot lie, has promised Protection and Deliverance.
Thus David in that Thanksgiving-Psalm, after his Deliverance from Saul, and all
his Enemies, tells us, 2 Samuel 22. The Lord is a Buckler to all them that put
their trust in him; God is my Strength and Power; He teaches my Hands to war,
so that a Bow of Steel is broken by mine Arms. And Ps. 37. 39, 40. The
Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their Strength in the time of
trouble. The Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them from
the Wicked, and save them, because they put their trust in him. And hence it is
that David upon all occasions speaks confidently of his Salvation from all his
Enemies, because of God's Promises; The Lord is my Light and Salvation; whom
shall I fear? the Lord is the Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?
Though an Host should encamp against me, mine heart shall not fear: though War
should rise against me, in this will I be confident. Psalm. 27. 1, 3. So that it
is very reasonable to trust God in these cases, because he has promised to save
those that do place their confidence in him. It is better to trust in the Lord,
than to put confidence in Man: for the Lord is my Strength and Song, and is
become my Salvation. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 8, 14.

But this will more fully appear, if we consider, 2dly, the matter of fact,
that God has in an extraordinary manner shown himself for the deliverance of
such as have depended upon him for Salvation. There are many Examples to be
brought in proof of this matter: But I shall confine my self to two especially,
recorded in Sacred Writ: The first is that of Joshua, mentioned in the tenth
Chapter of that Book; where five Kings combine together against the Kingdom of
Israel; Their Strength great, their Numbers far exceeding those of Joshua;
their Interest such, as could not but animate and provoke to a bold and
obstinate resistance: Yet for all this, Joshua encouraged by God (ver. 8.)
saying, Fear them not, for I have delivered them into thine hand, there shall
not a Man of them stand before thee. This mighty Army was soon discomfited,
their Force broken, and a total Overthrow given to the whole Army: God himself
appearing signally in their defense by Miracles and Signs from Heaven. For, as
the Text tells us, The Lord cast down great Stones from Heaven upon them unto
Azekah, and they died: they were more which died with Hailstones, than they
whom the Children of Israel slew with the Sword. v. 11. And further, that it
might appear that God fought for them, (contrary to the course of those
Celestial Beings) the Sun and Moon stood still, until the People had avenged
themselves upon their Enemies, v. 13. So true is that of the Prophet, spoken of
the temporal deliverance of Judah, Isa. 54. 17. No Weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord.
The other Instance is that of Hezekiah; against whom Senacherib unjustly wageth
War, and sends Rabshakeh with a mighty Army against Jerusalem: The King being
in a great Strait, applies himself to God by the Prophet Isaiah; and by earnest
Prayer obtains Assurance and Victory over that mighty Host: for in one night
the Angel of the Lord went out and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an
hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose in the morning,
behold, they were all dead Corpses. 2 King. 19. 35. This may be sufficient to
prove the point in hand, that it is highly reasonable to depend upon God as to
the event of these things, because he has promised he will deliver those that
trust in him; and in fact has delivered his People signally out of the hands of
their Enemies.

From whence likewise does arise, in the fourth place, great Comfort and
Encouragement to Good Men, always to trust God in all conditions. The Lord of
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. If we consider Man single by
himself, or in conjunction with others, such is the condition of humane Nature,
that without the intervening Providence of God, it were better for him not be
at all, than to be so miserable as the frailties of corrupt Nature would expose
him to. For in such a state Men would be Wolves and Tigers to one another, and
instead of being fellow creatures, (made for mutual help and society) they
would soon devour each other, and the weak become a prey to the stronger party.
Insomuch as Hobbs his Status Naturae, would justify all Wars, Rebellions, and
unjust Invasions upon the Rights of others. But for our comfort, these are only
the wild Fancies of one that would serve a turn, and was timely calculated to
support an Vid. Earl of Clarendon's survey of Hobbs's Leviathan, p. 8. where he
tells my Lord, that the reason of his writing that Book was (to express it in
his own words) the truth is, I have a mind to return into England.
Olivarian Usurpation. The Lord of Hosts is our Refuge; and happy it is for us
that we are under the conduct and guidance of his all-wise Providence. For if
he be on our side, it matters not who is against us. It is He that gives Peace,
who then can trouble us? The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what Man can
do unto me. Tho the Winds blow, the Sea rages, and all the Earth be moved with
the Tempest thereof; yet if we depend and trust in God, we may rest assured,
and comfort our selves in this, that none of these evils shall ever take hold
of us, that nothing shall harm us if we be followers of that which is good. All
which administers great Comfort under all Pressures and personal Afflictions,
under all Straits, Commotions, and Distractions; when enraged Faction, and
rebellious Fury threaten all with Ruin and Desolation to devour, This (I say)
is our Comfort, that God is on our side, and has promised to deliver those, who
with a full Affiance trust in him: That it shall be well with those that fear
him; and that all things shall work together for good to such as love him. The
Lord will be a Refuge for the Oppressed, a Refuge in times of Trouble. And they
that know his Name, will put their trust in him: for thou, Lord, have not
forsaken them that seek thee. And not only a covering from the Storm, but a
Shield and Defender from the face of the Enemy. O Israel, trust in the Lord, he
is their Help, and their Shield.

And thus I have done with what I proposed to speak to from these words; I
shall only in the 5th and last place, draw an Inference or two pertinent to the
Occasion, and conclude.

1. Seeing the Power and Providence of God orders all Events of Peace and War,
Let us acknowledge in all our Deliverances this as the Supreme Cause of our
Safety. For whatever are the Instruments, it is God alone that gives the Success
and Victory. He is the Lord of Hosts, this is his Name, (as he tells his People
Israel) because he peculiarly presides over the Armies of the Earth, and orders
the Events thereof. Therefore in this, and all other Deliverances, let us own
him as the Author; and ascribe the Honor to his Power. There is no King (says
the Psalmist) can be saved by the multitude of an Host, neither is any mighty
Man delivered by much Strength. This was too sadly experienced in the first
Rebellion; where that good King and Martyr, King Charles the first, outweighed
the Numbers, Power, and the then stated Policy of the headstrong Faction: And
on the other hand, in this late accursed Design, (according to the best
information from Prints) neither their Numbers, nor their Confederacy, nor
their Cunning, nor their Courage (enflamed by an Enthusiastic Zeal) were so
far to be despised, as to think that we were able in a moment to blast and
overthrow them: for the Case in appearance was quite otherwise; and to God only
must we ascribe the Honor of the Day, and give him the just tribute of it. If
the Lord himself had not been on our side, may Israel now say; if the Lord
himself had not been on our side, when Men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us up quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. But
Salvation belongs unto thee, O Lord; the Help that is done upon Earth, he
does it himself. God has showed us his Goodness plenteously, God has let
ussee our desire upon our Enemies. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name be the Praise, for thy Mercy, and for thy Truth's sake.

2. Which is the second Inference, and the Duty peculiar to the Day; Let us
return our just tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to our great Sovereign the
King of Heaven and Earth for this so signal a Mercy; well knowing, that such
public Blessings (as his Majesty most devoutly words it in his Proclamation)
are Invitations from Heaven to us to render cheerful Expressions of
Thankfulness to the Divine Goodness. It has pleased God in his Mercy, and
Justice too, to use various Methods to save us from our Sins, and the hands of
our Enemies. He has tried us by a series of Mercies, and a train of Judgments,
and this on purpose to make us such a People, as he may delight in us to do us
good; and to save us even against our wills and obstinacy. But this last
Deliverance is of such a nature, as could we see to the bottom of this
Rebellious Design, (as I doubt not but those who sit at the Helm, are
sufficiently acquainted with it) it would at one and the same time strike us
with horror and amazement for the danger we were in; and fill our hearts and
mouths with joy and gladness for the strangeness of the Deliverance. The truth
is, God has wonderfully appeared in the Preservation of this King and Nation.
He has delivered Him out of six Troubles, and out of seven: So that those
words of the Apostle in his own case, may (without a tort) be in some measure
applied unto Him; That tho he was in Perils of Waters, in Perils by his own
Countrymen, in Perils in the Sea, and in Perils by false Brethren; yet the
Almighty God still was his God and Refuge: And notwithstanding the Counsels of
some to debar him of his Right, (the Consequence of which the greatest part
then assembled (I charitably suppose) did not think of,) yet God frustrated
them, and settled him peaceably in his Throne.

This I mention (God knows my heart) not to exasperate, or satyrically to grate
upon any; but to excite our Praise and Thankfulness to the God of Peace, who
out of that Evil has wrought so great a Good.

Let us with all Sobriety and Reverence render unto God, the Author of our
Deliverance and Peace, all Praise and Thanksgiving, saying in the words of the
Psalmist, (with which I will conclude) The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock;
and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. It is God that avengeth me, and
subdueth the People under me. He delivers me from mine Enemies: yea, thou
liftest me up above those that rise up against me: Thou have delivered me from
the violent Man. Therefore will I give Thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the
Heathen, and sing Praises unto thy Name: for great Deliverance gives He unto
his King, and shows Mercy to his Anointed; to David, and to his Seed for
evermore.

Now to God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost be ascribed all Honor, Glory
and Praise now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

