Good NEWS from Londonderry in Ireland. BEING A full and True Relation of a
Great and Signal Victory which the Protestants there have most happily obtained
over the French and Irish-Papists, June 5th. 1689.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.
SIR,
IN my former, I gave you an Account of the late King's coming before London
Derry, and what afterward happened, till the 23d. of April, when Kilmore was
surrendered, at which time Colonel Lundce their then Governor, that very
Morning made his Escape. It now remains, that I give a Relation of what has
fallen out since, and of the Condition of the Place.

The Besieged having rejected all Offers made them by the late King, and
provoked the Besiegers in diverse Sallies; as also being uncertain when Relief
would arrive from England, resolved to put themselves into the best Posture
they could; and to that purpose unanimously declared their Resolutions to Live
and Die with their new Governor, Mr. George Walker, and Mr. Henry Baker, and
to submit with an entire Obedience to their Conduct and Commands for defense of
the City.

In the first place they examined the Public Treasury, where they expected to
have found the Five hundred Pounds sent them from London by Captain Beverly, in
the first Ship that brought them Arms and Ammunition, and a far greater Sum,
but the Birds were flown. Then they took a View of the Ammunition and Stores,
and found near 500 Barrels of Powder untouched, Ball and March sufficient, as
also Bullets for their great Guns, of which they have 24 mounted upon the
Bastions of the Walls, upon the Tower of the Church two, and eight within the
City; that is to say, one at each Gate, and one at each Corner of the
Market-House in the middle of the City, and fronting each Gate.

In the third place, They made Inspection into the Stores of Provisions, and
found a vast quantity of wheat, Meal, Oat-meal, Beef, Bacon, Salt, Salmon, and
Butter, Cheese, Malt, Beer, Brandy, etc. which was all Inventory'd, and put
into public Storehouses, with Guards set over them. Also all Merchants, and
Tradesmen, to prevent imbezling their Wares, and Merchandises, took Inventories
of their several Goods, and carried them into public Storehouses, which are
guarded day and night.

Moreover, upon a Muster of all that bore Arms, they were found to be about
12000, which are all formed into Regiments and Companies, every Regiment under
a Col. Lieutenant Col. Major, and Captain, etc. amounting to 17 in all. The
Colonels are, Col. George Walker, Governors. Col. Henry Baker, Governors.
Col. Adam Murray, General of the Field, who upon Enterprises Commands in Chief,
and Orders all the Sallies. Col. Hugh Hammel. Col. Henry Muroco. Col. Michael
Bourn. of Tyrone, etc. Col. Tho. Whitney. Col. Henry Crofton. Col Alexander
Sanderson


Eight more whose Names I do not at present remember.

Tho. Johnson is also made Mayor of the Town.

All the Women and Children that brought no Subsistence along with them into
the City, nor could give any account of themselves; as also many that are unfit
to bear Arms, were put our of the Town just before the Siege began, which was
one reason that they have so many now in Arms, in regard that many who brought
no Subsistence into the Town, rather than be turned out of the Gates, gladly
took up Arms to earn their Sustenance. But of two thousand Horse, which after
the Protestants were broken at Clawde-Ford, marched into London Derry; there
are not now a hundred left for want of Forage, which constrained them to turn
the Horses out of the Gates, the greatest part of which fell into the Enemies
hands, only some few are still left that graze under the protection of the City
Canon, which the Irish however now and then pick up, as often as they dare
adventure, and for which as often they pay very dearly, being either shot dead,
wounded, or taken Prisoners.

The great Gates of the City are barricado'd withinside with huge pieces of
Timber; the Keys are kept at the Main-Guard, and eight Captains, two to a Gate
are upon the Watch every Night. When there is occasion, the Keys are not to be
delivered, as was usual to a Sergeant, but into the hands of the Captains that
guard the particular Post.

Two Regiments are upon Duty every Night, and upon the least Alarm they are
all to repair to the Walls, without expecting any other Orders.

There are in the Town five Ministers who have the Commands of so many
Companies, and have every one of them given signal Proofs of their Valor;
particularly one Mr. Christopher Jenney.

The private Soldiers are all in good Heart; the Allowance to each Man for a
Week, being a Salmon and a half, two pound of Beef, and four quarts of
Oat-meal. Good strong Beer is also ordered to be sold at a Penny a Quart,
though not to the Soldiers after Eight at night, to avoid Disorders.

Blinds are also set up by the Command of the Governors to secure the Men upon
the Walls from the Enemies Battery.

There is in Derry one C. Darus of Plattin, in the Courty of Mead, who is kept
a Prisoner, as having been taken at Chapel in Scotland, and was one that
Commanded in the Recruits sent by Tyrconnel to the late King into England.
General Hamilton has wrote several Letters to the Governors to have this
Captain set at Liberty, but they do not think fit to part with him;
nevertheless they use him civilly.

The Irish also very much lament the loss of Major Robert Nangle, (the Son of
Tory Nangle, that was shot at Longford-Bridge) who together with two Troopers
was drowned, while they endeavored to get over the Pass at Clawdeeford. It Is
also believed that Col. Dominic Sheldon is dead of the Wounds he received in
one of the Sallies made by the Besieged, from the hands of one Mr. Arthur
Ivory, a brisk young Gentleman, who fought the Colonel hand to hand, till at
length two of the Irish coming into the Colonel's Rescue, shot the Gentleman,
dead.

The late King has made Col. Charles Moore Governor of Colraign, where he
keepr with a Garrison consisting of 1000 Men. The Marquess of Antrim is made
Governor of Charrick Fergus, which has the same number of Soldiers to defend
it. And Gourdon Oncale is also made Governor of Charlemont, though not having
with him above 200 Soldiers.

Chester, The last Week arrived here a Vessel from Ireland with Passengers, who
credibly report, that the late King have received Advice from the Camp before
Derry, that they were not a number strong enough to storm the City, nor to
withstand the Enemy, should they have Succors from England: and besides that
they wanted Ammunition and great Guns, gave Orders for a considerable Recruit
to march Northward, but that when they came within two days March of Derry, the
Regiment Commanded by young Sir Maurice Austace in the County of Kildare, and
some other Regiments fell into a great Mutiny, swearing by their Shouls they
would not go to the King's Slaughterhouse to be killed, as the French
Generals, Sir Patrick Dowdel, Major Taaf, and the rest had been, and that they
wolud rather turn to the Protestants, and serve King William, than be Slaves to
the French. Upon which hundreds of them ran away, and betook themselves to the
Bogs and Mountains.

On Saturday May the 18th arrived from Dublin at Dawpool, betwixt Chester and
Liverpool, one Can, Master of a Vessel belonging to those parts, on Board of
whom were wany Passengers, who had all of them Passes, for which they paid at
the Secretaries Office in Dublin, 3 l. 10 s. for every individual Person,
though most we^e Women and Children. They left Dublin the 15th, and bring
Advice, That on the 14th an Order came from the late King, to grant no more
Passes. They also say further, That the Duke of Tyrconnel was at Chapel Izard,
but dangerously ill of the black Jaundies, and of a shot in his Shoulder, and
wound in his Hand, that the Physicians had given him over as past recovery.
That Mr. Fitz: James is dead, and many of the Soldiers dye daily (they fear of
the Plague) in the Camp, for that having no Salt, they are forced to hang what
Flesh they kill on the Trees to dry, which had bred many Distempers amongst
them* On Monday the 13th, another Reenforcement Marched from Dublin toward the
Camp before Derry, with two Cannon, a very large Morter-piece, and some large
Bombs; the Morter-piece was drawn by 16 good Horses; but as they were drawing
it up Cork-Hill, the Chains broke, and the Piece rolled back again to the
bottom, which made one of the Officers, Major Barker swear a bloody Oath, he
believed they were bewitched, and to curse a Protestant Gentleman that stood
near, with the Appellation of Heretic Witch, etc.

Some of these Passengers say, That the late King has lately lost many Men
before Derry, and that they saw at Dublin four Velvet Coffins, wherein were the
Bodies of four great Persons that were Slain before that Town, and which were
privately Interred at Midnight.

Several Highlanders have attended the late King for Commissions, which they
have obtained, and have promised him great things, as he has done to them, if
Fortune favors them with Success.

On Thursday the 16th. Major General Kirk with three brave Regiments Embarked
at Liverpool for Londonderry, having on Board him many Engineers and Gunners,
with great store of Ammunition, Arms, Morters, Bombs, and a great quantity of
Wheat, Barrels of Beef, etc.

On Friday they set Sail, but the Wind did not prove so fair as was hoped; but
they are still at Sea, or else at Derry e're this, for that they resolved to
Sail down the River in spite of all that could be done by the Fort of Kilmore,
which they doubted not to beat about the Ears of the Irish, if they durst stay
within it to make any resistance.

After these Persons had left Dublin, Advice was brought to the late King that
6000 Foot of the Garrison of Londonderry, and about 100 Horse in two Troops,
had made a Salley at Midnight upon his Camp, Killed, wounded, and taken some
thousands, and thereby had raised the Siege, and made themselves Masters again
of Kilmore, of which we expect the Confirmation every hour. The last Letters
from Scotland of the 17th instant, do say, that there Advices from Ireland give
account that London Derry and Inniskilling hold out bravely; that the latter
within these few days had made a great and vigorous Sally, in which they killed
a great number of the Enemies, and made a safe Retreat into the City.

By a Vessel come into Bristol on Monday the 20th. instant, in four days from
the Isle of Man, the Master whereof says, he there left diverse of the
Protestants newly arrived from Ireland, who do affirm, that the Irish Army,
having received a Reinforcement, made a General Assault upon London Derry last
Sabbathday was fortnight, with great fury; that the Besieged made a most
gallant Defense, and with that Success, that they beat them above a Mile beyond
their Camp, and killed some thousands, of which are many Persons of Quality,
particularly Major General Ramsey, and Cap. Cussack, (the Duke of Berwick not
yet heard of) they had in their Camp 13 Coaches, which they filled, and drew
off with the dead Bodies of Persons of Quality and Officers. And so obstinate
and bloody was the Fight, and their Loss so great, that they were forced to
raise the Siege, and are retreated above 40 miles to a place called Lambeg
Lissnegarney. They have since in the County of Down, and other places, most
barbarously murdered many English, and give out, they daily expect Recruits,
and will be Masters of Londonderry, or hazard the whole Army. The Ship Master
aforementioned likewise says, those he saw at the Isle of Man of the
Protestants from Ireland, escaped with their Lives only, having used them
barbarously.

Another Person who came Wednesday last from Dublin, confirms the Fight to have
been very bloody, as there related; and that the Protestants have regained
Kilmore. So that it is believed the three Regiments of Maj. Genesis Kirk, Sir W.
Hanmore, and Col. Stewart, with the rest of their Squadron, are all got safe
into London Derry without any Opposition, and have had a joyful meeting with
those brave Souls who have stood in the Gap to save a Nation.

A Vessel is also come into the West from the Town of Lymerick, the Masters
says, That the Irish are extremely unwilling to meet the Protestants in Battle,
especially the English Army, of whom they are so afraid, that in Lymerick it
self there are but 4 or 5 Companies of raw, undisciplined Men, not half Armed,
who take all Opportunities to run away they can. And it is thought one Man of
War with 2 or 300 Men, might soon be Masters of the place. And that the like
might be done at Galloway, and bring off that gallant Gentleman, Sir Thomas
Southwell, and about 140 more of his followers, now under Condemnation there,
for no other Crime, than their own Defense, and being Protestants, which is now
Crime enough to balance all the Services and Loyalty Flesh and Blood can be
capable of; an eminent instance of which is not many days Old.

Col. Russell of Ireland, who was Governor of Galloway, and commanded the best
Regiment of Horse in that Kingdom, since the late King's arrival in that
Kingdom, was turned out of his Government first, and soon after from his
Command as Colonel; and in the height of his dissatisfaction, humbly waited on
the late King, and laid before him his constant Services to his Father, his
Brother, and himself; and what an Affliction it was to him to have now his
Loyalty questioned, etc. The late King told him, He must needs confess and own
all he had said was true -- But it was also as true, that he was now under
Circumstances that would not permit him to trust any Man of his Profession,
viz. A Protestant of the Church of England.

London, Printed for J. Williams, in Fleet Street. 1689.


