The Sum of a CONFERENCE Had between TWO DIVINES OF THE Church of England. And
Two CATHOLIC LAY-GENTLEMEN. At the Request, and for the Satisfaction of Three
Persons of Quality, August 8. 1671.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel, for him and Matthew Turner. 1687.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
SInce Printing of Conferences seems now in Vogue, I will venture to be in the
new Mode; I have so good an Example of it before me, that I hope no body will
take it ill if I follow it. In the Year 1676. there happened a Conference about
Points of Religion, between some Protestant Divines, and some Roman-Catholic
Gentlemen, which after a long silence, has been now lately set out the A
Relation of a Conference, Apr. 3. 1676.
second time, in a fine Dress, and with a long Preface: This gave me the
Curiosity to seek further into those Matters, and meeting accidentally with a
Copy of another Conference held in 1671. wherein some of the same Persons were
concerned, I thought good to present you with it. By it is plain Expressions and
unstudied Discourse, you may easily judge it to be the naked Truth of what was
then spoken. Peruse it, and think seriously of it.

The Sum of a Conference had between Two Divines of the Church of England, and
Two Catholic Lay-Gentlemen, at the Request and for the Satisfaction of Three
Persons of Quality, Aug. 8. 1671.
THE Persons for whom the Conference was intended, desired the Subject might be
Schism.

Subject agreed.

Drs. It is fit we presuppose some Principles before we enter into dispute.


Cath. Content.


Dr. 1. Schism is a wilful Separation from the Communion of the Church, without
cause.


Cath. Though we know very well there can be no cause of Schism, yet we will
admit (to come quickly to the Question) your notion of Schism with these words
without cause in your Definition of it.


Dr. 2. Another Principle is, Men may without Crime separate from a Communion,
in which they cannot continue without Sin.


Cath. Agreed.


Dr. 3. There are certain Laws antecedent to Communion, by which every
particular person ought to judge what Communion he ought to be of, or forsake.


Cath. We do admit, that there are external Motives antecedent to Communion,
which do induce and oblige a particular person to choose the Communion of which
he ought to be a Member, and to which he ought, being a Member, to submit in
Faith and Government, of which every particular person may and ought to judge:
But we do deny, that the interior Doctrins or general Practices of a Communion
are subject to the Judgment of every particular Man; so that every private
person judging this or that Doctrine or Practice to be False, Heretical, or
Idolatrous, (though the Communion, of which he is a Member, judges it Catholic
and Orthodox,) has lawful cause to separate himself from that Communion,
without being guilty of Criminal Schism; for without this Distinction there
could be no such thing as Schism in the World.


Dr. You must prove us guilty of Criminal Schism.


Cath. We will. In the year 1517, you wilfully separated from the Communion of
the Church, without cause; Ergo you are Criminal Schismatics.


Dr. I do deny that the Separation in the year, 1517, does concern us; nor do
we think our selves obliged to defend or justify it; we do only maintain, that
the Church of England is not guilty of Criminal Schism.


Cath. The same Argument presses the Church of England, as the Lutherans; Let
it be therefore put thus. In King Hen. the 8th. Ed. the 6th. or Queen
Elizabeth's Days (date the Birth of your Church from what time you please) you
wilfully separated from the Communion of the Church without cause; Ergo you,
the Church of England, are guilty of Criminal Schism.


Dr. I deny your Antecedent, we did not separate without cause.


Cath. I prove it. If you had lawful cause, you can assign it; but you cannot
assign any lawful cause; Ergo you did separate without cause.


Dr. I will assign the cause, It was thus. In the -- Year of Henry the 8th. the
Parliament declared, That the Right of Reforming the Church of this Kingdom was
in the King; upon which the King did reform, and upon this Reformation the Pope
did Excommunicate the King and Kingdom, which Excommunication was confirmed by
another Pope in Queen Elizabeth's days; so that the Pope by Excommunicating made
the Schism, and not we by Reforming.


Cath. The Declaration above mentioned, and the Reformation thereupon, were
antecedent to the Excommunication; so that you must prove that the Parliament
had just Power and Authority to make that Declaration, and to Reform upon it,
and that they did indeed Reform, and not spoil the Doctrine they undertook to
mend; for if it had not, all its Proceedings were unjust and criminal; and
Excommunication was but the just and proper Punishment for that Crime: And then
sure it would be reckoned very strange, to say, That a lawful Authority
punishing an Offender, is made guilty of the Crime it punishes, by inflicting
that Punishment.


Dr. The Parliament did not ascribe any new Power to the King; but only
declared that the same was in him, which all Ages appropriated to their Kings,
and was allowed by all; And I can show from time to time, that the Popes
Authority has been refused, and his Legates forbid entrance into the Kingdom
several times.


Cath. I pray show substantially (if you can) that the Church of England before
the Reformation, did never at any time accept, or (which is positive) did at
all times refuse the Pope all sort of Authority and Superiority over them; else
to quarrel sometimes with his Authority, or some part of it, or stop his
Legates, might be just: For that it is possible for a Power which has lawful
Authority, to challenge and demand some sort of Authority which is more than
what is lawfully his; and in such case the Inferiors may at least remonstrate
to their Superiors, if not oppose them in such unlawful Demands; and this might
be the case between the Pope and the King of England at some particular time:
At other times Inferiors might be stubborn and disobedient, and for a time deny
that to their Superiors which is really due. Therefore to say, that the Kings
of England did for a time oppose the Pope in some things, is not enough to
prove the Declaration aforesaid (which was universal, denying him all Authority
whatsoever,) to be no ascribing of new Power, but only a Declaration, that the
same Power was in That King, which all Ages appropriated to their Kings, and
was allowed by all; but the contrary, to what is now demanded to be proved (and
must be proved before that Declaration can excuse the Declarers from the guilt
of causeless Separation, and consequently Criminal Schism, and consequently of
deserving justly Excommunication) is so evident, that I appeal to these present
worthy persons, who are to judge in this point, whether this be not
sufficiently manifest from the Histories which they themselves have read, and
the general Confessions, which they themselves have met withal from very many
even learned Protestants, That the Pope of Rome was at least Patriarch of the
West, and, as such, had Patriarchal Authority, at least over the Church of
England, and therefore was allowed to be the proper Judge of Ecclesiastical
Matters, the very day before the foresaid Declaration was made; and therefore
was the only proper Judge of the said Declaration, and the Authors of it,
whether it were well and legally made: And this said Judge having judicially
determined the said Declaration to be Schismatical, condemned it legally, and
justly Excommunicated the Authors. Most certainly a Declaration made by every
one, that pretends Power to make one, is not presently lawful, because it is
pretended to be so. The late long Parliament pretended to declare, That the
Supreme Power of England was in the People, and that the said People might
Judge and Depose the King whenever he misused that Power, which the People
entrusted him withal; and we know what followed upon it. I hope the Doctor will
not justify that Declaration, nor can he show a disparity between this and the
other, both being made by those, who were universally esteemed, at the time
they made them, Subjects and Inferiors to those against whose Authority they
made them, in those very Points, concerning which they did then declare.


Drs. The Pope was never content to be esteemed barely the Patriarch of the
West; and there is great difference between the two Declarations, that in Hen.
Eighth's time against the Pope, and that in King Charles the First's time
against his Majesty.


Cath. It matters not now, whether the Pope were content or no to be barely
esteemed Patriarch of the West; if he had reason to challenge more, that no
ways justifies you; Do you allow, that he was Patriarch? If you do, answer the
difficulty; and say, how his Inferiors came by a Power to Depose him; and as to
the difference between the two Declarations, you must show it us, before we
believe there is any.


Gentlemen to the Doctors. Sirs, we do not doubt, but that the Pope was allowed
some Authority in England before the Separation, we do not therefore desire to
dispute that; but supposing he had not, you separated your selves from the
great Body of all Christians United before in one Communion, we desire to know
what cause you could have for that.


Drs. We had cause to separate, for that the Communion from which we separated,
taught false Faith, and were guilty of Idolatry; I instance particularly in
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and their Adoring the Host.


Cath. To the Company. Though you may be pleased to remember, that we did at
first deny, that any particular person, (and the same holds of particular
Diocesses, Provinces, and Nations, all which United make but one Catholic
Church, and therefore the biggest of them all to be considered only as a Member
of the whole Body) has Power to judge, and condemn the Doctrins and Practices
of the whole Church as false or Idolatrous, when the Body against this Member
says, that the said Doctrins or Practices are Orthodox and Catholic, so as to
have lawful cause to separate from the said whole Communion, without being
guilty of criminal Schism; That what we said of a particular Person, holds to a
Nation, or any Inferior Authority to a Superior, is evident, upon supposition,
that God has required and commanded, that his Church be one, which could not
be, if a Secular Sovereign Power has Authority to break its Unity, upon
pretense of judging any one of it is Doctrins or Practices false or Idolatrous:
For if one may, another may; and then Swisserland may have as many Religions
and Communions, as Cantons, and the World as many Churches as Secular
Sovereigns, though God has said he will have but One: And here in England the
Bishops may as well wave the Archbishops Authority, private persons pretend to
Judge and Censure the Bishops Power and Authority, or any one Man control the
Authority of his Pastor. Though this we denied at first, and might therefore well
refuse to proceed, till the Doctors had proved, that a single Person might
condemn a whole Church's Doctrine legally, or a lesser Authority, judge and
censure a greater; yet because perhaps this Method may have been proposed by
your selves, we are content to do any thing for your satisfaction: but then you
must be pleased (considering our Communion at the time of the Separation was
infinitely greater than the Reformers, as Learned and as Holy, for ought any
body knows, and in possession for many hundred years of the Doctrins and
Practices now condemned by these Reformers) to demand more clear and evident
proofs against our Doctrins than we bring for them: for upon but equal proof,
we that are forty to one (and every whit as learned as the others, especially
having received, what we profess, from our Forefathers, from Christ's time, for
ought any body knows; for no body can say when what we hold and practice begun)
have no reason to submit to so much a less number, at the charge of so great a
confusion, as must needs happen, and God's Command of Unity be broke into the
bargain. You must therefore demand the most evident proofs that Nature can
admit of, to prove those Doctrins of theirs, upon which they ground their
Separation, or else it will be criminal Schism, and you must desert their
Communion. If they attempt to prove it from Scripture, they must not bring
obscure passages out of it, to oppose or interpret clear ones; for that is not
to explicate, but to confound; not to draw Light and Truth out of Scripture,
but to cast more Darkness upon it. Neither can an obscure and doubtful Title
lawfully or reasonably cast any Body out of the possession of a belief, for
which he has clear and evident ones to show. They must therefore bring Texts
that prove their Points in Terms; for their interpretation is no more to be
allowed of than ours, and Scripture ought to be taken literally, where the
literal sense does not imply a contradiction.


Note. It may be reasonably supposed, that these undeniable Principles were the
cause, why the Doctors (as it will appear in all this Conference) would never
venture upon any citation of the Scripture to prove their Doctrine, for which
they separated from the Roman Church, acknowledged then universally for the
true Church, but were forced to fly to some obscure Sentences of the Fathers,
even which will yet appear to make more for the Roman Church, than for the
Reformers.


Drs. All Scriptures ought not to be expounded literally, which do not imply a
Contradiction in a literal sense: I am a Vine, ought not to be expounded
literally, yet it implies no Contradiction, or at least no more than this,
Christ is Bread.


Cath. I am a Vine does imply a Contradiction, for Christ cannot be Christ and
a Vine at the same time; Christ is Bread, is also a Contradiction; but where is
that Proposition in Scripture? or what Catholic in the World holds it? We say,
that which was Bread ceases to be Bread, and becomes the Body of Christ, which
is no more a Contradiction than to say, that which was Water, ceases to be
Water, and becomes Wine.


Drs. That Text you build your Faith upon, This is my Body, implies a
Contradiction; for it must signify, This Bread is my Body, which is as much a
Contradiction, as Christ is a Vine, or Christ is Bread, which you have
acknowledged already for a Contradiction; or else it must be an identical
enuntiation, and signify, This my Body is my Body.


Cath. This Bread is my Body, is a Contradiction, but cannot be meant in the
Text; for in all Languages (but English) where the word which signifies this is
altered according to the different Gender the Antecedent is of, to which this
word should relate, it is always put in the Neuter Gender, hoc in Latin, and
(...) in Greek, which it could not be, if it were to agree with Bread, or have
relation to it, that being always Masculin, as panis in Latin, and (...) in
Greek; therefore to say, this Bread in the Latin or Greek Language, would be
false Grammar; and English, I suppose, has no reason to govern the other
Languages, but they it, they being more and old, against one and new. Nor need
it be, This Body is my Body; the Particle this is a Pronoun demonstrative,
signifying only some exterior Object undetermind'd, as to its Nature or Name,
without some other additional Word, as this is a Horse, this is a Hat, are, I
hope, proper Speeches, and therefore no Identical Enuntiations. This only
supposes an Object existing and exposed to Sense, and determined by the
following word Hat or Horse, of what Nature and Quality it is. Besides, This is
my Body, is an Efficient Proposition, and is the cause of the change, which is
not wrought till the Proposition be completed, and therefore this is not
determined till the whole be pronounced.


Drs. It is impossible it should be taken in your sense, for Transubstantiation
cannot be without a Miracle; and no Miracle can be without appearing so to
Sense; Nay, it would destroy all possibility of judging of any other Miracle,
they being not to be discerned but by Sense, which cannot be relied upon, if it
may be deceived in this.


Cath. A Miracle may be, and yet not appear to Sense to be so, yet ought to be
believed: For the hypostatical Union was never discerned by Sense, yet is
believed a true Miracle; so that your first Proposition is false. To your
second, I pray say, whether it be possible for God to make a thing appear to
Sense to be, what it is not: Then supposing it possible, may not God discover
to Man that he has made a thing to appear one thing, and to be another, as well
as he has discovered, that the Divinity was united to Christ's Humanity, though no
such thing appeared? If he may and does, ought I to believe Gods Word against
my own Senses, or my Senses against Gods Word? Notwithstanding this, my Senses
shall judge of a Miracle at all times, unless when God assures me upon his
Word, that his Omnipotency has interposed between my Senses and their Natural
Object.


Drs. But we will show you by the Fathers, and not of the first 300 years, but
since, that your Doctrine was not held, neither in the Greek nor Latin Church.


Cath. We do expect you should show us by the Scripture and Fathers of all
Ages, (and do not care to be complemented or spared as to the first 300 years,
if you have any Authority from those times, let us see them) and very clearly,
that your contrary Doctrine was held, else you cannot be justified or excused
from Schism in your separation.


Dr. It is sufficient to show against you, that your Doctrine has not had that
constant Succession you boast of: And that I will do by producing Instances
plain and clear, that your Doctrine was not maintained in one certain Age since
Christ.


Cath. Though that can never justify your separation, or make your Communion
safe; for if it were not safe to stay in the Roman Communion, because a Doctrine
believed by them, was in one Age since Christ's time, not believed, it can never
be safe to abide in yours, where many Doctrins are now believed, which you
acknowledge were not believed by the true Church for many Hundred years
together: Yet let us hear your proofs.


Dr. I will show you a Homily used in the Saxon Church, from which you shall
see how that Church and your Augustine agree in this Doctrine.


Cath. At least it is some kindness to grant Augustine to be ours, who Converted
England above 1000 years ago.


Narr. Truly the Homily we did never see before, nor never heard of it, nor do
we know what credit it bears, nor can I remember the words exactly; but in the
first place the Doctor quoted, for he produced two, the sense was, that the
Bread and Wine which the Priest Consecrated at Mass, was turned into the True
Body and Blood of Christ; which Text we prayed the Doctor to read in English,
which he did; and after a little stumble at the word Missam, he told us, he
cared not though he rendered it Mass, which he did; This very Quotation we urged
against him; but he told us this must be explained by another, in which he
brought us the same, or like words again concerning the change, but at the end
of the Sentence were these words in a distinct remarkable Character, not
Corporally but Spiritually. Where, or by whom this Book was Printed, we could
not learn, or what Authority it was of; but it might very well be Authentic,
for all that distinction, it being frequently used by Modern Catholics, who are
not denied to hold the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; They commonly say, that
it is not changed Corporally, taking Corporally to signify carnally; as the
Capharnaits understood our Blessed Lord, when he spoke of this Mystery; but
Spiritually, taking that to signfie, as St. Paul uses the word Spiritual,
speaking of the Resurrection, where he says, it is sown a natural Body, it
rises a Spiritual Body. there is a natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body;
Now if this way of speaking be frequently used by those who are,
notwithstanding such an expression, confessed to hold Transubstantiation; why
must it signify more evidently the contrary Doctrine in this Author, than it
does in others, especially when this Author delivers the Roman Doctrine in this
point, in his other expressions, as evidently and plainly as can be, and cites
the Mass as the Doctor confesses? But he stood not much upon this Question, but
laid his whole stress upon two others.


Dr. I will prove now evidently, that your Doctrine was contradicted in the
fifth Age, both by the Greek and Latin Church; nay by a Pope of Rome himself:
For Gelasius disputing against the Eutychians, who maintained, that the Human
Nature of Christ was changed into the Divine Nature, so that there was but one
nature in Christ; confuted their Heresy, by showing, that the Human Nature was
no more changed into the Divine Nature, than Bread was changed into the Body of
Christ; that is, not at all; for Gelasius has these express words: Certe
Sacramenta, quae sumimus, corporis and sanguinis Christi, divina res est,
propter quod and per eadem efficimur divinae consortes naturae; and tamen esse
non desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini; and certe imago and
similitudo corporis and sanguinis in action mysteriorum celebrantur; which is
in English thus, Truly the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ which we
take, is a Divine thing, and by them we are made partakers of the Divine
Nature; and yet the Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine, do not cease to be;
and truly the Image and Similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ are
celebrated in the action of the Mysteries: Where it is evident, that the
substance of Bread and Wine, is not changed into the Body and Blood of Christ.
Theodoret proves the same thing; for he says, the Mystical Signs after
Consecration do not recede from their Nature, but do remain in their former
Substance, Figure and Form, and may be seen, and touched as before; this
evidently contradicts Transubstantiation.


Cath. To the Company. We desire you to remember, that you must have clear
proofs to justify the Alteration, much clearer than those in possession can
bring for the Doctrine they continue to hold, and which the others would Reform:
Be pleased to consider these two Quotations here brought (I suppose the
clearest they have, if not all they have) and if they do not appear clear
against them, I am confident they will appear, either Nonsense or
Contradictions, and far enough from being clearer for them, than any we can
bring for our Doctrine; which yet they ought to be, to excuse their Schism from
being wilful and Criminal. We will examine Theodoret first. He writes against
Eutyches (as the Doctor has told you) which he does by way of Dialogue between
Eranistes an Eutychian, and Orthodoxus, which is himself, in these words.

Eranist. It happens luckily that you speak of the Divine Theod. Tom. 2. Dial.
2. page 236. Edit. Colon. 1617.
Mysteries, for even from that very thing I will show you, that the Body of our
Lord is changed into another Nature; answer me therefore to what I ask.


Orthodox. I will answer.


Eran. What do you call that Gift which is brought, before the Invocation of
the Priest?


Orth. That which is made Nourishment of a certain Grain.


Eran. How do we call the other Sign?


Orth. A Common Name, which signifies a kind of Drink.


Eran. But after Consecration what do you call them?


Orth. The Body of Christ, and the Blood of Christ.


Eran. And do you believe that you are made Partaker of the Body and Blood of
Christ?


Orth. I do believe it.


Eran. As therefore the Symbol of the Lord's Body and Blood are one thing
before the Invocation of the Priest, and after the Invocation are changed and
are made another thing: So the Body of our Lord after Assumption is changed
into the Divine Substance.


Orth. Thou art caught in the Net, which thou thy self have woven: For the
Mystical Signs after Consecration do not recede from their Nature, but do
remain in their former Substance and Figure and Form, and may be touched as
before; but are understood to be what they are made, and are believed, and are
Adored as being the same things which they are believed.



Cath. I pray be pleased to ask the Doctor whether this whole Discourse now
cited be not built and founded upon the Supposition of Transubstantiation.


Drs. I do acknowledge the Argument is founded upon that Supposition; but it is
brought by an Heretic, an Eutychian, which is not much for the credit of your
Doctrine.


Cath. Yes, we account it much for the credit of our Doctrine, that you cannot
name any Age, in which you are not forced to allow, that it was Professed. You
say it was Professed in this Age only by Heretics: Make that out, if you can,
more clear than I will the contrary; I do assure you, your two Quotations will
not do it, as I will show you presently; but the contrary seems evident, viz.
That the Heretics did not differ from the Catholics in this Point: For
Eutyches, who was Condemned at a General Council, for maintaining one Nature
only in Christ, would certainly have been Condemned at the same time for
holding Transubstantiation, had it been esteemed an Error by that Age,
especially so Absurd, Monstrous, and Idolatrous an one, as Doctor -- calls it
in his new Book; but he was not Condemned, nor so much as Accused of Error in
this Point, either by Council, or any particular Writer of those many, which
have wrote against him, and yet you do acknowledge, that he and his Adherents
held Transubstantiation: Besides, you confess that his Argument was against an
Orthodox Catholic, founded upon this Supposition; therefore most certainly he
took it for granted, that the Catholics allowed the Supposition; for it would
have been ridiculous to dispute upon a Supposition, which he knew his Adversary
denied. I should account it absurd for me to argue against a Protestant upon
supposition of Transubstantiation, which I know they deny; and so it would have
been in Eranist, if he had not known that his Adversary owned that Doctrine*
which he made the Foundation of his Argument. Besides, Theodoret himself, an
Orthodox Catholic, making this Discourse by way of Dialogue, would make himself
ridiculous to frame it upon a Supposition which he denied. After all this, the
place now cited, is so far from being so clear against us, as it ought to be to
vanquish our standing Possession, that the Century-Writers of Magdeburg, who
were Magd Cent. 5. cap. 4. de Inclinatione Doct. tit. de Coena Domini.
great Enemies of Popery and Transubstantiation, do condemn Theodoret of that
Doctrine from this very place, and do say he speaks dangerously of the Lords
Supper, in saying, that after Consecration the Symbols of our Lords Body and
Blood are changed and made another thing. And the words next after these, which
you quote as such clear ones against our Doctrine, must either import Idolatry
according to the aforesaid new Book, or Nonsense, if they do not imply the
Actual Presence of Christ's Person by Transubstantiation; for he says, they (the
Mystical Signs) are understood what they are made and believed, and are Adored
as being the same things they are believed: So that the whole Sense is thus;
The Symbols of our Lord's Body and Blood are one thing before, and another
after Consecration; yet they continue so in their Nature, Substance, Figure,
and Form, as to be seen and touched as before; but are understood to be what
they are made by Consecration, and are Believed, and are Adored as being the
same thing they are believed, i. e. notwithstanding they are changed, they
appear to our Sense (as to their Nature, Substance, etc.) to be seen and
touched as before: but are believed to be somewhat else, i. e. what they are
made: And this Belief is not Chimerical or Imaginary, but the things are really
what they are believed to be, and for that they are so, are Adored; so that
they must be really changed into Christ's Body, for else they could not be
Adored without Idolatry: The very Words, as they lay, convinced the
Magdeburgenses, that Theodoret held Transubstantiation; and, I suppose, had not
these two Words Nature and Substance been in the Quotation but only Figure and
Form, we had never heard of it at this time. If therefore I show you, that
Nature and Substance are frequently taken to signify that which is as
consistent with our Exposition, and the Catholic meaning of Theodoret, as
Figure and Form in this place are, I shall not only make it cease to be clear
against us, but also show that it will be clear for us. Nature and Substance do
sometimes signify what the Philosophers call properly Substance, as
distingush'd from Accidents, i. e. Matter and Form. And thus taken it can be no
Object of Sense, can neither be seen nor touched. Sometimes it signifies the
Properties, natural Qualities, and Accidents with which those Substances are
clothed. Physicians frequently say, that they have the Substance of Herbs in
their Medicines, when they have only the Virtue of those Herbs, and not all the
Matter and Form: So we say of Meat, that it has but little Juice or Substance,
when it has but little Virtue or good natural Qualities. The Fathers say, that
the Substance of Man was depraved by Original Sin, i. e. the Inclinations and
natural Affections: St. Paul says, that by Nature we are the Children of Wrath,
that the Gentiles by Nature perform the Law: In all which Speeches, and a
hundred other, Nature and Substance do not signify strictly, as Philosophers
use those Words, when they are opposed to Accidents, but Popularly and
Vulgarly, and signify no more than Properties, Conditions, Qualities, etc. Now
supposing Theodoret to take Substance and Nature in this place, in the latter
Sense, and to mean by them no more than the exterior Substance, or visible and
sensible Qualities of Bread and Wine, the Text is evidently for us. And that
the Father must take the Words in this popular Sense, is evident from the whole
Discourse: For he says first, That before Consecration they are one thing, and
after Consecration they are changed and made another thing: Now if they be
changed and made another thing, the change must be either in the Interior or
Exterior Substance; but it is most plain, they are not changed in the Exterior
Substance, for as to that, they remain visibly the same, and do not recede from
their Nature, as Sense assures us; Ergo, it must be in their Interior
Substance, which is not liable to Sense; and therefore, as the Father in this
very place says, They are seen and touched as before, but are believed to be
another thing, i. e. what they are made, and are adored as being what they are
believed. The Doctor has told you in the late Book I mentioned, the danger of
adoring any thing but God; therefore, according to him, this Father must hold
these Symbols he here speaks of, to be changed into the Body of our Lord,
before they become the Object of Adoration, or else he must be guilty of
Idolatry, in teaching that something besides God ought to be Adored, i. e.
Worshipped with Divine Honor. As to the place quoted out of Gelasius, the same
distinction above of the sense of the Words, Nature and Substance, solves that;
And that there must be such a distinction in the Words of this Father, is most
evident; for without that, he contradicts himself in the Words quoted; for he
has two Words five times in ten lines; and if in all these Places they must
signify strictly, the Father talks Nonsense, and so, far enough from being a
good Authority to justify a Separation. But if the Words must be taken in
diverse Senses, and it not being evident which Sense is applicable to this or
that place, then it is at least uncertain and dark, and consequently not fit
(as not being so clear as it should) to justify a Separation. But if the Place
it self, from its own terms, disposes us to apply the strict Sense in this or
that Part, and the popular Sense in this or that other, so as to countenance
Transubstantiation, then this Quotation will be very far from doing them any
Service. Now let us consider the Words: He says, By the Sacrament we are made
Partakers of the Divine Nature, yet the Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine
do not cease to be. If Nature must be taken strictly and philosophically in
both places, then we are made Partakers of the Divine Nature strictly and
philosophically, and not only effectually or virtually: then the Divine Nature
must be actually there, and yet the Nature of Bread and Wine will not cease to
be there; so that this perhaps thus far might favor Lutheranism, but can no
way help the Church of England: Then follow these words, And surely the Image
and Similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ are celebrated in the Action of
those Mysteries. We do own this Expression, and do acknowledge it is frequent
amongst the Fathers to say, that the blessed Sacrament is a Figure of Christ's
Passion, and that the Exterior Substances, which we see, are a Figure to us of
the Interior Substance of Christ's Body and Blood, which we see not, but are to
believe to be contained under those Species: Then he goes on and says,
Therefore it appears evidently enough to us, that that is to be understood by
us in our Lord Christ himself, which we profess in the Image of him, Observe,
that Image is here used, as we said above, We celebrate and take them, and even
as they pass into this, to wit, the Divine Substance, by the Power of the Holy
Spirit, remaining notwithstanding in the Property of their Nature, etc. We
spoke to the signification of the Word Nature above, speaking to the foregoing
Words of this Father: Now let us consider the Word Substance, which the
Protestants must have to signify strictly and philosophically in the Words
before, or else this Quotation proves nothing: But that being supposed, they
must show us, that it signifies otherways in these last Words, They pass into
the Divine Substance, or else they must grant, that it signifies strictly here
also; and then it is Nonsense, for it amounts to thus much, The Elements of
Bread and Wine pass into the Divine Substance strictly and philosophically, and
we are made partakers of the Divine Nature strictly, etc. Yet the Substance and
Nature of Bread and Wine do not cease to be strictly and philosophically. Can
any Body understand this? What does pass into the Divine Substance? Nothing
sure, if the Nature and Substance of Bread and Wine taken strictly and
philosophically do remain: But the Internal Substance of Bread and Wine may
well pass into the Divine Substance, and yet the Exterior Nature and Substance
of Bread and Wine, signifying the Properties and Accidents of Bread and Wine,
may well remain. And that this must be the Sense of the Father, is plain enough
from his own words; for he says absolutely, and without any limitation, That
they pass into the Divine Substance, which must be meant of the Interior
Substance of Bread and Wine, if any; for it is clear, the Exterior remains, and
does not pass. But then again, he qualifies too the Nature, which he says
remains, and calls it the Property of their Nature remaining: Which Expression
does, as we think, clear the distinction, and determins to which side the
strict, and to which the popular Sense ought to be applied: At least, we are
sure there can be no clear Evidence from hence against us, which yet we must
have before we can be removed from the long possession, which we have had of a
Doctrine and Practice of such concern as this.


Drs. The Exposition now given, cannot be possibly the Fathers meaning, for
that that Sense would quite enervate the force of the Answer; for the Answer
must be proper to the Argument, which it is intended to Answer, and to the
Point which the Argument was made use of to prove: Now the Point to be proved
was the Doctrine of the Eutychians, viz. That the Human Nature of Christ was
changed into the Divine; to prove which, the Eutychians urged the change in the
Sacrament, and from thence urged to the change of the Natures; to which the
Father answered, that there was no change in the Sacrament, nor no more change
in the Natures, than there was in the other: This must needs be the meaning of
the Father.


Cath. The Exposition above given by us makes the Fathers words very much more
a proper Answer to the Eutychians Argument, than they could be otherways; for
whereas he asserted an absolute and total Conversion of the Human Nature in
Christ, into the Divine, so that it was wholly devoured and swallowed up by it,
like a drop of Honey by the Sea; and endeavored to illustrate Ibid. Dial. 2.
page 234.
it from the change of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament into the Body and
Blood of Christ, as a Point acknowledged by both Parties; to this the Father
answered, that the very Instance he gave was against himself; for that after
the change in the Sacrament, there were still two Natures remaining, viz. the
Nature of Christ's Body in the strict Sense, and the Nature of Bread as above
Explicated, for the Natural Properties, in the popular Sense. And this being
sufficient to retort the Eutychian's Argument upon himself, by showing him
there was not such a change in the Sacrament, as he vainly imagined in the
Incarnation, it was all that was necessary for the Father's design in that
place: For as for the Interior change, himself acknowledged it, as well as the
Eutychian. Are these all the Authorities you have?


Dr. These are enough, for they are very plain.


Cath. We will leave that to judgment: But withal, we hope the Company will
remember, they must be much plainer than any we can bring for our selves: We
therefore desire now to show some for us. And because we will show how truly
the Doctor has asserted, That in an Age since the first 300 years, this Doctrine
was generally contradicted, and the contrary Doctrine, viz. that of the Church
of England, generally professed and taught (for that he must be supposed to
have designed to prove, or else he does nothing in Justification of his
Separation) and has pitched upon the fifth Century to make good his Assertion,
we will insist particularly upon the Authority of Fathers of that very Century:
And first, we desire him to consider, St. Austin, Tom. 8. in Psalm. 98. Printed
at Venice, An. 1584. Where he says, Exaltate Dominum Deum nostrum, and adorate
Scabellum pedum ejus, quoniam sanctum est: Quid habemus adorare? Scabellum
pedum ejus; sed videte Fratres, quid nos jubeat adorare. Alio loco Scriptura
dicit, coelum mihi seeds est, terra autem scabellum pedum meorum. Ergo terram
nos jubet adorare, quia alio loco dixit, quod sit scabellum Dei, and quomodo
adorabimus terram, cum dicat aperte Scriptura, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, and
hic dicit, Adorate scabellum pedum ejus? Exponens autem mihi quid sit scabellum
pedum ejus, dicit, Terra autem scabellum pedum meorum: Anceps factus sum, timeo
adorare terram, ne damnet me, qui fecit coelum and terram: Rursum timeo non
adorare scabellum pedum Domini mei, quia Psalmus mihi dicit, Adorate scabellum
pedum ejus. Quaero quid sit scabellum pedum ejus, and dicit mihi Scriptura,
Terra scabellum pedum meorum. Fluctuans converto me ad Christum, quia ipsum
quaero hic, and invenio quomodo sine impietate adoretur terra, sine impietate
adoretur scabellum pedum ejus: Suscepit enim de terra terram, quia caro de
terra est, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit; and quiain ipsa carne hic
ambulavit, and ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit; nemo autem
illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adoraverit; inventum est quomodo adoretur
tale scabellum pedum Domini and non solum non peccemus adorando, sed peccenius
non adorando. We desire the Doctor will be pleased to put this place of the
Father into English, that the Company may judge of the Sense of it, especially
at the latter end, which is chiefly to our purpose.


Dr. I will, it is thus. Wavering I turn my self to Christ, because I seek him
here, and I find how the Earth may be Adored without impiety; without impiety
his Footstool may be Adored; For of Earth he took Earth, because Flesh is of
Earth, and he took Flesh of the Flesh of the Virgin Mary; and because he walked
here in that Flesh, and gave that Flesh to us to Eat for our Salvation; but no
Man Eats that Flesh, unless he first Adores; we have found out how such a
Footstool of our Lord may be Adored, and not only not sin by Adoring, but we
sin by not Adoring, This is the English of the words quoted, which makes
nothing against us, for we in the Church of England, do always Adore when we do
receive.


Cath. What do you Adore when you receive? Do you Adore that which you do
receive? If you do, then that which you receive is the Flesh of Christ, or you
are Idolaters, as lately great pains has been taken to prove. If you do not
Adore that which you receive, as the Object of your Adoration, but something
else, then you will find that St. Austin is against you, for that he Adored the
Footstool, that is, the Flesh i. e. that Flesh which is eaten; for it were
impossible to think, that the Father could be in that doubt and trouble which
he expresses, about the Question, whether Christ were to be Adored or no? He is
concerned about the Footstool, which he endeavors to make so plain, that he
repeats the same thing over and over again, and tells his fear of Adoring or
not Adoring: At length he says, By Footstool, (because Earth is the Footstool)
is meant Christ's Flesh, in which Flesh he walked here, which very Flesh he gave
to us to Eat, which very Flesh no Man Eats, but he first Adores, what? The
Flesh of Christ sure: And if that Flesh he gave to Eat, be the same Flesh he
took from our Blessed Lady, and in which he walked, as the Father says here
most absolutely, then surely Flesh to be Eaten, is as much the Object of
Adoration, as that he took and walked in, which I hope the Doctor will not
deny, but was to be Adored. So that now, says the Father (having just before
spoken of the Flesh which Christ gave us to Eat, and which no Man Eats without
first Adoring) I have found out how such a Footstool ought to be Adored, and
that we do not only not sin by Adoring, but we sin by not Adoring such a
Footstool, to wit, Flesh, which was given us to Eat. Besides the Adoration the
Doctor speaks of, may be given at any time, and before any thing, as well as
Bread and Wine in the Sacrament; for if it be only the person of Christ sitting
in Heaven, which ought to be Adored, and is Adored when we are put in mind of
him by such Instruments; we might as well fall down and Adore the Person of
Christ in Heaven, when we see an Image of him, because that puts us in mind of
him (which yet the above named Doctor says is Idolatry) or take a piece of
common Bread at ones House, remembering by it what Christ once did with Bread,
fall down and Adore before that Bread.


Nar. St. Ambrose, who was somewhat Elder than St. Austin, and his Master, has
the Plainest Quotations to prove this Point that can possibly be, in his Book,
De iis qui Mysteriis initiantur. Cap. 9. in his fourth Book, de Sacramentis,
Cap. 4. and Cap. 5. which Books we desired; but the Doctor being in his own
House (though he confessed he had the Books) he might choose whether he would let
us have them or no. And indeed for one reason or other we had them not, nor St.
Chrysostom of the same Age, out of whom we would have shown only his 83 d.
Homily, upon the 26th. of St. Matthew, and his Sermon of the Eucharist in
Encoeniis, to prove our Doctrine; we would have shown very many places from that
Father; but having not these Books, nor others we asked for, we were forced to
quote some places without Book, as one out of St. Gregory Nyss. Orat. Catechet.
Cap. 37. Verbo Dei Sanctificatum panem in Dei Verbi Corpus credo transmutari,
etc. hoc autem fit virtute Benedictionis in illud transelement at a eorum quae
apparent natura. I do believe the Bread Sanctified by the Word of God to be
changed into the Body of God the Word, etc. but this is done by the Power of
Consecration (or blessing) the nature of those things which appear being
Transelementated into it. St. Cyril of Jerusalem we had, out of whom we desired
the Doctor to read these following words in English. Cum igitur Christus ipse
sic affirmet at que dicat de pane, HOC EST CORPUS MEUM; Quis deinceps audeat
dubitare? Ac eodem quoque confirmante ac dicente, HIC EST SANGUIS MEUS, quis
inquam, dubitet and dicat non esse illius sanguinem? Aquam aliquando mutavit in
Vinum, quod est Sanguini propinquum in Cana Galileae sola voluntate, and non
erit dignus cui credamus, quod Vinum in Sanguinem transmutasset? Si enim ad
nuptias Corporeas invitatus stupendum miraculum operatus est, and non multo
magis Corpus and Sanguinem suum Filiis sponsae dedisse illum confitebimur?
Quare, cum omni certitudine Corpus and Sanguinem Christi sumamus: Nam sub
specie Panis datur tibi Corpus, and sub specie Vini datur Sanguis, ut sumpto
Corpore and Sanguine Christi efficiaris ei comparticeps Corporis and Sanguinis,
(...), Christopheri erimus, hoc est, Christum ferentes, cum ejus Corpus and
Sanguinem in membra nostra receperimus, atque ita, ut beatus Petrus dicit,
Divinae Naturae consortes efficiemur, etc. Hoc sciens, and pro certissimo
habens Panem hunc, qui videtur a nobis non esse Panem, etiamsi gustus Panem
esse sentiat, sed esse Corpus Christi, and Vinum quod a nobis conspicitur
tametsi sensui gustus Vinum esse videatur, non tamen Vinum, sed Sanguinem esse
Christi. Sir, if you please, I will spare you the trouble, and render them my
self; and pray tell the Company when I wrong the Text: The English then of
these words, is thus:

When therefore Christ himself affirms and says of Bread, THIS IS MY BODY; Who
afterward will dare to doubt? And the same also confirming and saying, THIS IS
MY BLOOD; Who, I say, may doubt and say, That it is not his Blood? He once
changed Water into Wine, which is next to Blood, in Cana of Galilee, by his
only Will; and shall he not be worthy that we believe him that he changed Wine
into his Blood? For if being invited to a corporal Wedding, he wrought so
wonderful a Miracle, shall we not much more confess, that he gave his Body and
Blood to the Sons of his own Spouse? Wherefore let us take the Body and Blood
of Christ with all assurance; for under the Species (or Appearance) of Bread,
the Body is given thee; and under the Species of Wine, the Blood is given: so
that the Body and Blood of Christ being taken, thou art made to him a
Fellow-partaker of his Body and Blood. We are made Christophori, i. e. Bearers
of Christ, when we take his Body and Blood into our Members. So as blessed St.
Peter says, We are made Partakers of the Divine Nature, etc. Knowing this, and
holding it for most certain, that the Bread which we see is not Bread, though
our Taste judges it to be Bread, but the Body of Christ: And the Wine which we
see, though it may appear Wine to our Sense of Tasting; yet is not Wine, but
the Blood of Christ. Doctor, Is this plain English, and is the Father
faithfully Translated?


Drs. We do not deny, but the Fathers now cited, have the Words quoted in their
Writings; nor do we deny but that they are well enough Englished: but we do
confess all they say; for we of the Church of England do own and acknowledge a
very great Change and Alteration in the Sacrament, and do not deny, but that
the Fathers do frequently make mention of some wonderful Change; but we do not
undertake to determine Magisterially, and say what manner of Change this is, nor
does our Church impose such a Determination, as a neccessary Condition of
Communion with us, as the Church of Rome does; and such a one as the Fathers
contradict, as we have shown out of Theodoret and Gelasius. And this very
Father quoted here, viz. St. Cyril, calls it Bread and Wine, at the same time
that he calls it the Body and Blood of Christ: For the first Words of his
Quotation are, When Christ affirms of Bread, etc. You must show that the
Substance of Bread ceases.


Cath. The Evidence you pretend to from Theodoret and Gelasius, we think we
have spoke to sufficiently already. If the Fathers do mention some wonderful
Change in the Sacrament, and the Protestants do agree with them in allowing
that there is such a Change, but cannot say what a one it is, what cause have
they to separate from a great Communion, even the whole visible Catholic Church
upon Earth; when, for ought they know, this Change which they grant, may be
Transubstantiation, which they deny, and make the Cause of their Separation, as
being false? For they acknowledge they know not how it is changed, and in such
Cases as this, I cannot imagine how they can attain a Negative Knowledge
without a Positive, i. e. how they can be certain it is not Transubstantiation,
when the whole Catholic Church said it was; and not to be able to know
Certainly what it is; especially when to believe right of this Point, is an
Article of Faith, conditional of Man's Salvation; and therefore necessary to be
believed in its true Sense; especially when the Consequence of believing wrong
will be Blasphemy or Idolatry in the Practice. For if Transelementation in St.
Gregory, and Transmutation in St. Cyril, both which terms the Doctor owns and
allows, should mean as much as Transubstantiation; then are the Protestants
guilty of Heresy, in believing the wrong side of a Proposition, which contains
in it an Article of Faith; and of Blasphemy in practice, in robbing God of his
Honor, and using him like a Creature. Now what should make them think (for
know, I am sure they cannot) that Transelementation signifies less than
Transubstantiation? For sure by Elements are meant Substances. Moreover, in all
Changes, there must a Term from which, and a Term to which. In this Change I
desire to know the Term from which, and to what it is changed: From Bread to
Christ's Body, were an Answer intelligible, and agreeable to the Terms by which
the Change is expressed: But to say from Common Bread to Sanctified Bread, is
to talk very unintelligibly, and very unanswerably to the expression you use to
this Change; for this would not be at all wonderful. We see Churches and
Churchyards thus changed every day, from Common to Consecrated or Sanctified
Places, and yet we think it no Wonder, or account it no Miracle; yet we should
wonder to hear one say, after consecrating a Church or a Churchyard, it were
Transelementated or changed wonderfully by the Word of God, as St. Gregory
says; or By the power of the holy Spirit, as Gelasius has it; or By the
Omnipotency of God, as St. Cyprian says, and many other Fathers in such like
Expressions. You say, you do not determine the Change, etc. the more to blame
you. For if it be necessary to Salvation, to believe right in this Point, i. e.
to believe that the Object present to you after Consecration, is the Body of
Christ, if it be so; and to believe it it is not, if it be not so; then ought
you at least to determine whether it be so or no, and make a firm Assent to that
your Determination a necessary Condition of Communion with you (a firm and
actual Belief of one of these two Propositions, It is really the Body of
Christ, or it is not, being a necessary Condition of Man's Salvation.) For sure
you will hold, that that which is a necessary Condition of Salvation, ought to
be made a necessary Condition of Communion; therefore if you do not determine at
least so far, as to say, It is, or it is not the Body of Christ, and require
that this your Determination be believed as a Condition of Communion with you,
you do by the first, i. e. not determining, leave all People in your Communion
in a very great uncertainty, as to the Condition of their Salvation: For how
can private persons have any kind of certainty in a disputed Point, without
some judicial Determination of that dispute? After which indeed, they may have
Certainty, or Probability answerable to the Authority of the Determination,
which will be infallible, if the Authority be infallible; or only a
Probability; and that greater or less, according to the Degrees of Credit,
which the Authority may challenge, if that Authority be but able to give a
probable Determination. By the second, viz. not requiring the belief of your
Determination, as a Condition of Communion, in case you do determine, you do
consess that Heretics and Blasphemers, or Heretics and Idolaters, may be of
your Communion, though professedly such, i. e. you do allow your Communion to
them who observe not the Condition of their Salvation. For if determining it
not to be the Body of Christ, you do not make the belief of this Determination,
a Condition of Communion, you do allow those that believe contradictorily, (i.
e. that it is the Body Christ, and in consequence of that belief make it the
formal Object of Adoration,) to be of your Communion; and yet if your
Determination be true, these last, who believe and adore, as a aforesaid, are
Idolaters, and do break thereby the Condition of their Salvation. Now I leave
to the judgment of the Company, whether this undetermined Doctrine of yours be a
lawful cause for you to separate from the Church you were once Members of, and
was acknowledged the true Church, to believe you know not what your selves; for
I am sure you cannot determine what change it is.

As to the Term Bread used by the Father, it can create no difficulty; for when
we said, as we did at first, that all Scripture was to be expounded Literally,
if the literal Sense did not imply a Contradiction; we did suppose that in case
it did imply a Contradiction, it ought to be expounded otherwise. Instance was
given in this, I am a Vine: What we supposed of the Scripture, must hold of all
Speeches, if the literal Sense implies a Contradiction, they must be expounded
otherwise. Now mark the Father, he says, Christ affirming of Bread, this is my
Body, etc. This Bread is my Body is a Contradiction, therefore Bread or Body
must not be taken Literally. At the latter end of this Quotation, the Father
says, the Bread which we see is not Bread, but the Body of Christ; there cannot
be a plainer Contradiction than is, and is not; therefore Bread the Subject in
this Proposition, of which so palpable a Contradiction is predicated, must
needs be under some other Signification besides it is Literal one, because this
Predicate so peremptorily Negative, is not Bread, and so determined positively,
but Christ's Body, are so evident and plain, that they are not capable of being
misconstrued, especially being Predicates, which always limit and determine the
Subject. So that Bread is so called, because it once was Bread (as Moses his
Rod, though changed into a Serpent, was notwithstanding called a Rod, because it
had been so) and still appears to the Senses to be Bread, as the Father here
tells us, with this Reduplication for fear of mistake, yet it is not Bread. I
cannot use plainer words to explicate the Father, than his own. He that can
make Protestantism out of these Texts, may expound Bellarmin and the Council of
Trent, when they please, and make them Protestants too.

As to your Demand, that we should show that the Substance of Bread ceases; I
think you never need have it shown plainer than in the words before you, which
say, that that which seems Bread is not Bread; I suppose by Substance of Bread,
you mean the Being of Bread; therefore the Being ceasing, the Substance must
cease; but the Being ceases according to this Text; for that which was Bread is
not Bread, therefore the Substance ceases, and there is a change, which you
grant wonderful; and what can this change be, but this Substance ceasing to be
is changed into another Substance, which we call Transubstantiation? And yet

Because St. Cyprian lies here before us, I will show St. Cyp. de C^en. Domini.
you a Quotation out of him, where he says, that Bread is changed, not only in
Effigy, or Similitude, but in Nature, being by the Omnipotent Power of God
made Flesh.


Dr. I wonder you should quote that place out of St. Cyprian, which is
notoriously known to be none of his, for the Manuscript of that Work is now in
Oxford Library, and bears the Name of another Author, some Hundred Years
younger than St. Cyprian.


Cath. But do you acknowledge that the words quoted out of this Work (be it
whose it will) do signify Transubstantiation?


Drs. We do not deny, but that many Authors of latter Ages have writ very odly
of that Point, and we do think this, among the rest, one of them.


Cath. This is the first time, that ever we heard of any such Manuscript of
this work in Oxford; and yet I have met with many Protestants that have made it
their business to prove it none of St. Cyprians; and it is much that none of
them should ever hear of this Manuscript and urge it, if it were so evidently
known to be another Man's, and whose, and of what Age. But this I am sure, that
Cocus, the famous Man for excepting against places brought by Catholics for
their Doctrins, does impugn this Book chiefly from Bellarmin's Confessions, who
indeed does say, that it may seem to be none of St. Cyprians; but adds
immediately after, that it was the work of some Learned Man of the same Age, as
our Adversaries acknowledge, to which Cocus says nothing, and therefore may
well be thought to allow it. Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament, upon 1
Cor. cap. 7. fol. 282. says, the Author de Coena Domini, which is the Work now
mentioned, was not in time much Inferior to Cyprian: And Erasmus (a great Man
with the Protestants) in his Annotations annexed to St. Cyprians Works, Printed
at Basil, 1558. fol. 287. affirms it to be the Work of some Learned Man of
that Age; so that taking Cocus his silence to what Bellarmin says, and Mr. Fulk
and Erasmus their plain affirmations of the Age of this Work, to be worth any
thing; and taking this Doctors Confession, that the words in this Work are odd,
as savoring of Transubstantiation, you have an Argument of Transubstantiation
in St. Cyprians Age, or at least of a time not much inferior.


Gentlem. to the Doctor. Sir, I have observed the Discourse as well as I could,
and I find the great Point in Dispute, is, what the Fathers held a great while
ago. As to the Doctrine in debate, you have brought places of both sides, which
we must consider more at leisure; but at present will you be pleased to Answer
me a Question or two, which occur to me to ask?


Dr. With all my Heart.


Gent. How long is it since Transubstantiation (the word I mean) has been
Established?


Dr. Ever since the Lateran Council, about 450 Years ago.


Gent. Did the Church understand the word Transubstantiation, then to signify
any new Doctrine, or only to express the very self same Doctrine which they
believed before?


Dr. We do believe that the word was not taken to signify any thing but what
was believed before.


Gent. When did the Church begin to believe that Doctrine, which it seems it did
believe at and before the Lateran Council, and thought then well expressed by
the word Transubstantiation?


Dr. We confess we cannot tell, for great Errors arrive often from little
beginnings and do grow up insensibly.


Gent. How long was it after the Lateran Council before this Doctrine was
complained of?


Dr. About three hundred years.


Gent. How came we to discern this to be an Error three hundred years after,
which our Forefathers held for a Truth three hundred years together in express
Terms, and no body knows how much longer they held the same thing in other
Terms? Is it not much, an Error could be so general, and so long maintained
without any Opposition or Notice taken of its Birth or Origin?


Dr. It was not so General, but that some opposed it, as the Waldenses; but it
is not strange that an Error should be general and long maintained; for the
Church of Rome says, that the Greek Church erred generally and long, in
teaching that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son.


Cath. But the Church of Rome never taught, that the whole Catholic Church
erred in teaching that Doctrine; for though that part which is now called the
Greek Church, be condemned for that Error, yet we know how and when it began,
and who opposed it; we know that very many of the Greeks never consented to it,
but did then, and have always since continued in Communion with the Church of
Rome; so that that Error was so far from being general, that it was always
opposed by the Latin Church, and great part of the Greeks too; whereas no Body
opposed Transubstantiation, but known Heretics, who began before the Lateran
Council we speak of, and were condemned by it; and were such as the Waldenses,
(a People, as I suppose, you would be loath to own for your Predecessors.) And
that all the World should, consent so quietly all at one time to adore that for
God, which the day before was universally believed to be but a piece of Bread,
and was used accordingly; and no Man living in the World take notice when this
was done, nor upon what occasion, or give it the least Opposition, is a Miracle
ten times greater (if there be any Degrees in Miracles) than this, which you
cannot believe for its difficulty, viz. Transubstantiation; especially when we
can show in every Age, when any Opposition was made to this Doctrine, who they
were that did it, and what became of them. Berengarius was above a hundred
years before the Lateran Council; yet we can show that he was opposed by
Bishops and Fathers of almost all Countries, as by Lanfranck of Canterbury,
Durandus Troaernensis, Guitmundus, four Bishops of Rome, and by the Pastors of
all Countries, how he recanted three times, and how he died. Joannes Scotus
Erigena, who lived about two hundred years before, and had laid some Grounds
for Berengarius his Error, was treated as an Innovator by Hincmarus and others,
himself forced to retire out of France, and his Book not heard of again till
two hundred years after; and no Man living can tell us, when this absurd
Doctrine (as the Doctor calls it) which has had such Success in the World, as to
obtain Belief universally, for several hundred years, ever had any Beginning,
or any considerable Opposition. For though the Word Transubstantiation was not
commonly used before the Council of Lateran, it matters not, nor makes any new
Belief, since it has always been the constant practice of the Church in the
General Councils, when it did condemn Heretical Opinions, or decide any Point
in debate, to expound the true Sense of Scripture, upon that very Point, by
some very significant Word, to leave no occasion of Cavilling or Disputing upon
its Decisions, declaring by an explicit Act and positive Definition, what was
the true Sense of Soripture, and what implicitly all the whole Catholic Church
did believe before, as it appears in several other Councils, as in that of Nice
against the Arians, where the Word Consubstantial was found out to condemn
their Heresy, they pretending that the Son was (...), that is, of like
Substance to the Father, when the Council defined him to be (...), i. e. of the
same Substance or Consubstantial. The same you may observe in the Council of
Chalcedon, where Nestorius was condemned by the new distinction of (...) and
(...).


Gent. Supposing, Sir, that the Roman Doctrine in this Point be false, and their
practice Idolatry, and yet both were Universal for several Ages together, which
way can the Church of England pretend to good and lawful Ordination? for they
pretend to none, but what they received from Idolaters, i. e. the Church of
Rome.


Dr. Very well, for though they were Idol^ters, they might give good and lawful
Ordinations, for the very Church of Rome holds, that mortal sin does not hinder
a Bishop or Priest from executing his Function.


Cath. All Mortal Sins may not hinder a Bishop from executing his Function, or
giving good and lawful Ordination, yet some may: For if a Bishop should become
a Jew, (and the same thing may be said if he becomes an Idolater) you surely
will not allow him to give good and lawful Christian Ordination: For that which
destroys the Essence of a Church or a Christian, must needs disable those it
falls upon, from giving legal Commissions at least, to others to govern the
Church, or to administer the Sacraments of Christ.


Drs. There are two sorts of Idolatry, one of the Heathens, and another (if you
will have it) of the Church of Rome.


Cath. We will have any thing that you will make evident; but when you tell us
of two sorts of Idolatries, I hope you do not mean Material and Formal
Idolatry, the first of which, if purely such, is no Crime. We speak all along
of Formal Idolatry, which you must accuse the Church of Rome of, or else, (...)
nothin^ (...) if you do, I pray show how the nature of formal (...) becomes
changed by its relation to Heathens, from what it is when it relates to a
Papist. I doubt you mean by your two sorts of Idolatry, Idolatry which is
Idolatry, and Idolatry which is not Idolatry, like the honest Preacher (...)
talked of three sorts of Seekers, one that sought and found, another who sought
and did not find, and a third which neither sought nor found; the first
Idolatry (...) belong to the Heathens; and the second, the no Idolatry, to the
Papists.

And now we shall leave it to the Judgment of this worthy Company to consider,
how clear and evident you have made it, that you had such just Cause to
separate from the whole Church, as to excuse you from formal or Criminal Schism.


FINIS.

