Pritchard Mayor.
Jovis xxiio Die Februarii 1682.
Annoque Regis CAROLI Secundi Angl. etc. xxxvo

THis Court does desire Doctor Goodman to Print his Sermon lately Preached at
the Guild-Hall-Chapel, before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

THE INTEREST OF Divine Providence IN THE Government of the World.

A SERMON PREACHED At Guild-Hall-Chappel, before the Right Honorable the LORD
MAYOR and ALDERMEN of the CITY of LONDON, Febr. xi. 1682.

By J. GOODMAN D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
MDCLXXXIII.

To the Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM PRITCHARD LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of
LONDON, And to the COURT of ALDERMEN.
My LORD, and Gentlemen,
IN Obedience to Your Order I have printed, and here humbly present to You, the
Sermon I lately Preached before You; and therewith I make my Acknowledgments of
the Respects You have showed me in the kind Entertainment of my Endeavors to
serve You.

I made choice of the great Doctrine of Providence for the Subject of my
Discourse, as well with a peculiar regard to the distracted condition of the
Times we live in; as upon the general account of its perpetual usefulness to
all the great purposes of Religion: and I am now confirmed in my Choice by the
testimony of your judgments and approbation.

My Lord, Though I live not much in the Air of this busy World, yet a man must
be quite out of it that is not sensible, not only of different Apprehensions
and Disputes amongst us, but of the most violent passions and animosities,
insomuch that no Terms of Reproach are thought virulent enough to bestow upon
one another, but we must rake the Sinks of other Countries for odious Nicknames
to distinguish Parties, and to perpetuate our Quarrels.

Nor is this the worst of our Case neither, for now at length (as it uses to
happen in declining Age) our Choler seems to be turned into Melancholy, and our
Anger into Jealousy. We grow suspicious of our best Friends, of our
Governors, of our Clergy, of one another. By which means not only Religion is
scandalized, but the very Sinews of Society are relaxed, and the strength of
the Nation is dissolved.

And what Remedies can be sufficient to recover us from this Condition? It is
true we have a Gracious Prince, but who can preserve a Kingdom divided against
it self? We have good Laws, but what can they signify when they have lost
their veneration? We have a great many Good Men, but who will take upon him to
make peace, when he that parts the Fray is likely to receive the most Blows,
and he that pretends to be a common Friend (to the angry Parties) shall be
treated as tbe common Enemy? In a word, we seem to be very near that condition
which the Historian bewails in his own Country, Nec Morbos, nec Remedia pati
possumus; We can neither subsist without a Cure, nor yet will admit of the
Remedies.

Now, My Lord, my Text affords us hope even in this condition. It brings into
view a mighty Majesty, able to awe men into a composure: It gives us assurance
that we are under his Government, who can cool our Heats, allay our Passions,
prevent our Fears, and cure our Melancholy. Almighty Providence can turn the
hearts of men, change the Scene of things, and make a Tempest become a Calm.
And that in his own good time he will do this for us, we have encouragement to
expect from the former experience we have had of his Goodness, and upon the
interest of the Protestant Religion, that Vine which his own right hand has
planted amongst us.

Now that it may please him to effect this in our days, and to make Your
Lordship, and the rest of the Worthy Magistrates of this City (in their several
Places) instrumental in so happy a Work, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Lordship's Most Humble Servant, JO. GOODMAN.
March 5. 1682/3
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord MAYOR and ALDERMEN Of
the CITY of LONDON.
PSALM XCVii. Verse 1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice; let the
multitude of the Isles be glad thereof.
WHether this Psalm was penned by Moses upon occasion of the Victory obtained
over Sihon King of Heshbon, as the first Omen of Israel's success in the
conquest of the promised Land? (as the Jewish writers think) Or, Whether it was
composed by David upon the recovery of his Throne and Kingdom, when the
conspiracy of Absalom was defeated? (as the Greek Interpreters seem to
intimate) Or lastly, Whether the same David indicted it, upon the huge
enlargement of his Dominions, by the addition of all those bordering Countries,
his Conquest whereof we have recorded 1 Chronicles. 18. (as seems most probable.)

It is however certain in the general, that the Psalm is an Hymn of Praise to
the Divine Majesty, and a devout acknowledgment of his power and providence in
the management of the affairs of the World. And like as at the inauguration of
some virtuous and brave Prince, or especially upon some glorious specimen or
instance of his Wisdom and Prowess in the conduct of Affairs, it is usual for
the people to make mighty shouts and acclamations: So here is the shout of a
King in my Text, and all the World is summoned to celebrate the glories of this
great Monarch Jehovah. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice; let the
multitude of the Isles be glad thereof.

By the Earth, I understand the Land of Canaan and bordering Countries, the
Territory of the Church. By the multitude of the Isles, I conceive is meant all
the remoter parts of the World; for by that name the Jews in their language
were wont to call all but the Continent on which they inhabited, as may appear
Genesis 10. 5. where speaking of the posterity of Japheth, the Text says, by
these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided.

So the words afford us these two observations:

First, That the Divine Majesty is not a mere necessary Agent or passive Being,
or unconcerned Spectator of the Affairs of the World, but manages and governs,
as well as observes the course of things.

Secondly, That this Divine Providence and Government of the World, is matter
of security and satisfaction, of triumph and rejoicing to all mankind. And that
although the Church of God have a principal interest in it, and advantage by
it; yet no part of the World is neglected by God, or destitute of a Providence.

And these two shall be the subject of my present discourse. I am well aware
that neither of them contain any new Doctrine to entertain and gratify
curiosity; but I am withal very certain, that they represent to us matter of
the greatest usefulness and importance that can be for any times, but most
peculiarly seasonable at this time. The Doctrine of a Providence (and
especially such an one as the Text speaks of) being the only consideration able
to allay our Passions, to abate our Fears, to remove our Jealousies, to cure
our Melancholies, and consequently to promote Peace and Settlement both in
Church and State. Therefore I shall not doubt either of your patience or
attention whilst I give account of these three things.

First, I will show what is meant by this expression, the Lord reigns.

Secondly, I will demonstrate the truth of the assertion, That God Almighty
exercises a reigning Providence in the World.

Lastly, I will bring this down to practice, by discovering the great influence
this truth has upon all the interests of mankind.

And by that time I persuade my self you will be ready to make the application
in my Text, and give example to the rest of the World, to rejoice that the Lord
is King.

1. I begin with the first, what is meant by this expression, the Lord reigns.

I cannot imagine that any one that hears me should fancy this expression to
give countenance to a Fifth Monarchy (as they call it) as if such an interest
in the Government of the World was hereby asserted to the Divine Majesty, as
should repeal or disannul the Authority of Temporal Princes and Potentates; or
that they must become Usurpers because God is King. For besides that (as I
shall show anon) they are only Gods Vicegerents and Instruments of his
Government; and so being subordinate cannot be repugnant to him: (Besides this
I say) it is evident that David, who (I suppose) indicted this Psalm, reigned at
this time as a Temporal Prince, and neither thought his Royalty impeached by
the Divine Sovereignty, nor an invasion of the Divine Prerogative.

And as little can I suspect that any should be so unreasonable, as to think
that the supposition of a Divine Providence should supersede and discharge the
use and efficacy of second causes, for it is a reigning Providence we speak of;
now to reign is to command in chief, not to transact all things immediately, to
prescribe to and govern, rather than to dispatch business by himself.

That which therefore we are to understand by Gods being King, is no more but
that Omne regnumest sub graviori regno; that the Lord God is Lord Paramount,
who though he not only suffers but inables other causes to act under him, yet
keeps the reins of Government in his own hand; and consequently can and does
whenever he pleases, interpose, suspend or control them, and overruled all
things to his own will and pleasure.

That things are neither carried by the hurry of a blind fortune, or chance as
the Epicureans dreamed;

Nor born away with the swinge of fatal necessity, as the Stoics imagined:

Nor yet left either to the will of man, or the natural efficacy of second
causes, but that God sometimes interposes, and always guides and governs them.

This is that which was darkly and figuratively, but elegantly expressed by the
Prophet Ezekiel in his first Chapter, where the course of second causes is
compared to the Wheels of a Chariot, which run on in a Road with a mighty
cariere; but then v. 18. there are said to be eyes in those Wheels, intimating
that God takes notice how all things go; and not only so, but v. 20. there is
said to be a Spirit that guides and governs all their Motions.

Thus the Lord is King and reigns in the World; and so much for that point, I
pass to the second:

2. Which is to make plain and demonstrative proof of this assertion, that so
we may discover a just foundation for that joy and triumph which the Text calls
for upon that occasion; and for this I offer these four following Arguments.

First, I argue from the very nature and notion of a God after this manner:
Every man that frames in his mind any worthy notion of the Deity, conceives him
to be a Wise, Powerful, Just and Good Being; and whosoever conceives of him any
otherwise, or leaves out any of these Attributes, debases him below the common
notion that men have of him, and renders him no fit object of love, or fear, or
worship and adoration, (as I shall show more anon.)

Now he that denies such a Providence as we have explained, denies to the Deity
all those perfections at once; and in so doing forfeits and forgoes the most
natural and general apprehension of a God; so that either there is in effect no
God, or there is a Providence. For if he cannot take notice how things go in
the World, we cannot esteem him Wise.

If he sees how things go, but cannot help or hinder them, we cannot allow him
to be powerful; and if he sees, and can help, but will not, men will have no
apprehensions of him as either Just or Good.

But because we certainly conclude him to have all those perfections, when we
acknowledge him to be a God, therefore he does govern the World. And thus in
short we have all the branches of Divine Providence, at once, demonstrated from
his Nature and Being.

Secondly, My second Argument shall be from the Spirit of Prophecy, or from all
those Predictions of things to come, which have been verified in real effects
in any age of the World.

He that denies that any thing has been foretold, and come to pass according
to the Prediction, must deny the Faith and History of all the World; and he
that grants such things, cannot avoid the acknowledgment of a Providence.

For it is evident, that he who certainly foretells what is to come, must see
through all the series of causes that tend to the production of such an effect,
and especially if he define the very precise time and other circumstances
answering to the accomplishment of the Event, his knowledge must be very
accurate and intimate to the whole intriegue of causes. But above all, if he
declare beforehand, not only what shall come to pass according to the course
of natural and necessary causes, but even such things as are casual and
contingent, and such as are subject to the liberty and indifferency of the will
of man and free agents: Then (whether men be able or no to discover the secret
manner and means of this foreknowledge it matters not) it must be
acknowledged, that he not only is privy to the Cabal, and sees the
consultations and workings of these causes; but that he also governs the result
and isfues of them, which is that we here mean by a reigning Providence, as we
before explained it.

Now all this matter of fact is evidently true in innumerable instances;
amongst all which, I will only take notice of the Prediction of the deliverance
of the Jews, first from their Egyptian Bondage, and then from the Babylonish
Captivity.

In the former of these, the Event was foretold above 400 Years before it came
to pass, and the accomplishment was exact to a very day, as you find it
observed, Exodus 12. 41, 42. the words are these, And it came to pass at the end
of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day it came to pass,
that all the host of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt: it is a night to
be much observed to the Lord; this is that night of the Lord, etc.

In the other passage of Providence, viz. the Babylonish Captivity, it was
foretold above Seventy Years before it came to pass, and in a time of the
greatest unlikelihood of any such Calamity to befall them, namely, in the time
of their greatest Prosperity; and the period of their Captivity was precisely
determined to the just time of Seventy Years continuance, and then they were to
be delivered and restored to their own Land again: and all these strange things
were punctually and precisely fulfilled, as appears by comparing together 2 Chronicles. 36. 22. and Ezra ^. 1.

In both which passages there are so many admirable circumstances, so great
were the obstacles in the way of their accomplishment, and also so much of the
will of man concerned in the whole case, that of necessity there must be a
governing Power as well as a foresight in the bringing it about; in which two
things lies the notion of a Providence. This is the Argument of Tertullian,
Prescientiae (or Providentiae) Deus tot habet testes, quot fecit Prophetas; i.
e. Look how many Prophets or Prophecies ever were in the World, and so many
infallible evidences of a Providence.

Thirdly, My third Argument is from Miracles, or the several instances of
Divine Interposition, either in raising and improving, or in depressing,
suspending and altering the natural and ordinary course of second causes: For
most assuredly, if ever the course of things has been interrupted and brought
into order again, there is plain evidence of a superior Power and Management;
forasmuch as it is not imaginable, that natural causes should go out of course
of themselves, without their own decay and failure, and impossible that being
once out of order (upon such decays and declensions) that ever they should
recover themselves into their former order again; therefore if ever such a case
has happened, it must be the overruling hand of Providence.

Now, that there have such extraordinary things happened in the World, as this
Argument supposes, the most Epicurean and Atheistical Wits do not altogether
deny, but endeavor to find out some wise salvo or other for them, upon natural
Principles, in which enterprise they are much forsaken of all true Reason and
Philosophy, as they are destitute of Devotion; for to resolve that into natural
causes, which is either above them, or contrary to them, is the greatest
instance of humor and folly that can be assigned.

They will observe, perhaps, that in the Plagues of Egypt, or in some of the
miracles done in the Wilderness, there was some appearance of natural causes;
but besides that, those causes were apparently incompetent to the effects:
there was also such a strange and sudden bringing of those causes together, as
could not but bespeak an Almighty Power and Government.

But then let them try their skill to tell us, what natural causes made the Sun
stand still in Joshua's time, or made that unnatural Eclipse at our Saviors
Passion, when the two Luminaries were in Opposition. Or let them tell us, how
men utterly unlearned (as the Apostles and other Primitive Disciples were)
should be able to speak all kind of Languages on the sudden? how incurable
Diseases should be healed? nay, men be raised from the Dead by a word speaking:
in all these, and a thousand instances more, there is undeniably the
interposition of the Divine Majesty, and so God governs the World.

Fourthly, and lastly, I argue for a Providence from the Conspiracy and
Cooperation of all things that happen in the World, to a certain and uniform
end, which cannot be without the direction and management of Divine Power and
Wisdom.

Things that are and happen in the World (as we see plainly) have different
natures, and various tendencies, nay sometimes run flatly cross to each other;
but now if all those lines meet in the same point and center, if all apparent
contrariety conspire to the same end, then there must be (...), a God in the
World. For if things were either carried by blind and uncertain chance, it
would be very strange, if they should not often clash and interfere; or if they
be acted by their respective necessary causes, yet those causes being often
contrary to each other, no one end can be jointly pursued and carried on
between them; therefore when we see (all this contrariety notwithstanding) all
things so attempered and adjusted, that they at last cooperate to one great
purpose, viz. the glory of God, and the good of men; then it is apparent that
they are subordinate to one great, and wise, and universal cause, which
presides over the World.

There are an infinite number of noble instances of this kind in all History
and Experience, such as the afflictions of Joseph in Egypt, which God turned
into a Blessing to Joseph, to all his Fathers Family, to Pharaoh, and to all
Egypt. Such was the drowning of Jonas in the bottom of the Sea, and his
miraculous escape thence, which was made an effectual means to convince the
Ninevites, that God sent him with that awakening Message. Thus the Persecutions
of the Church, which in the first aspect, looked like the most effectual way to
suppress Christian Religion, proved in the issue, the most successful method of
propagating of it.

So the afflicted condition of good men in this World (upon a superficial view)
looks as if virtue was under some malignant Planet, or that if any God minded
it at all, it was only to discountenance and dishearten it; yet it proves
nothing else in the conclusion, but a design to exercise, to try and confirm
it, especially God so ordering the matter, that ordinarily the lives of such
men are intermixed, and as it were checquered with Prosperity and Adversity;
the latter paring off their luxuriancy, and not suffering them to grow light
and vain, and the former preserving them from melancholy and despondency; the
one affording them ballast, and the other sails, that by the help of both
together, they may steer an even course through the World toward Heaven.

This is the Argument of the Apostle, Romans 8. 29. All things work together for
good, to them that love God, etc. and that shall be my last Argument for this
great Point; it were easy to add a great many more, but I think these fully
sufficient.

3. I come now to the third and last thing I propounded, viz. to show the
eminent and signal advantages that mankind has by being under such a
Providence, that so they may be sensible what cause they have to rejoice that
the Lord reigns: And this I represent in the six following particulars.

First, The belief of such a Providence as we have proved, is the prime Pillar,
and the very Basis and Foundation of all Religion; not only of this or that
Religion in particular, but of Religion it self, and in the general notion of
it. Forasmuch as the belief of a God, is by no means sufficient to support that
great Fabric, without this also of a Providence. For let a man not only
acknowledge the Being and Existence of a Deity, but also let him look upon him
as never so great and admirable in his nature; yet if he conceive of him as
inactive, such an one as either cannot or will not trouble himself to take
notice of men's carriage toward himself: in a word, if he neither reward nor
punish, the great obligation to Religion is wanting; for the mere reverence of
his excellent nature will be utterly ineffectual, either to keep a man steady
and constant in the difficulties of a strict and devout life, or especially to
restrain him from such sins, as both his temper is greatly prone to, and to
which he has the strong allurements of Pleasure and Profit; seeing such a man
is sensible all along that he is (upon this supposition) as safe in despising
and affronting, as in fearing and worshipping the Divine Majesty.

And therefore the Epicureans, for all their acknowledgment of a God, were
reputed Atheistical by the wiser Sects of Philosophers, and that not
unworthily; because (as I said before) they making him to enjoy his ease, and
to be unconcerned in the affairs of the World, subverted Providence, and with
it overthrew all the reason of Religion and Piety.

Nay further, suppose a Man should acknowledge not only a God but some kind of
Providence also, yet unless it be such a Kingly Providence as we have before
stated, it will signify little or nothing to the purpose of Religion. For so
we see the Stoics acknowledged both: But forasmuch as they apprehended the
Deity to be bound under the Iron Bonds of fatal and invincible necessity, so
that though he was aware how it went with men, and might perhaps pity them in
their distresses, yet could not help them; they hereby cut the main Sinews of
Virtue and Devotion.

But now upon supposition that God is not only a great and everlasting Being,
but a powerful, wise and free Majesty, and that there is such a Kingly
Providence as we assert; then it is apparent that Virtue and Vice have vast
differences, and Piety and Religion are the greatest concerns of Mankind. And
therefore it is very observable, that this is the great Argument of the whole
Old Testament, the main Doctrine of those times, and of all those Sacred
Writings of Moses and the Prophets, to awaken the World into the belief of such
a presence of God in, and superintendence over the World. But I proceed.

Secondly, Not only the Internal Reason and Obligation to Religion is founded
upon Providence, but also the External Profession of Christian Religion in
special, and the whole Society of a Church subsists by the support and
protection of it.

Our Savior has told us he would build his Church upon a Rock, and the Gates
of Hell should not prevail against it: But it is certain, that it is not the
inherent strength of the Constitution of this Political Body his Church, which
can maintain it in all times, and against all assaults; but the strong hand of
Almighty Power that preserves it: otherwise it is not imaginable but it had
been shattered to pieces long e're this day. For either the violence and
cruelty of Persecution had dissipated it, or the contagion of evil Examples
would have debauched it; or profane Wit and Drollery would have laughed it out
of countenance, or its own follies and Divisions would have crumbled it to
nothing.

But Providence has taken care, that neither the strength of its Enemies, nor
its own weakness, neither their wit nor its foolishness, neither their combined
malice and union, nor its own animosities and distractions, have had their
(otherwise probable and) natural effects upon it.

And that this admirable event is not to be attributed to Chance, or any other
causes, but is the mere effect of Divine Providence, will be evident by this
further Observation, viz. That so long as any Church has kept close to God,
and approved it self to him and to the Laws of its Institution, so long it has
always been safe and flourishing, (at least if we except only the very infancy
of the Christian Church and Religion, at which time it pleased the Divine
Wisdom to work a greater Miracle of Providence than all the rest, in exposing
his Church in so much weakness to such strength of opposition, and yet
preserving it (as the Burning Bush) and thereby giving a more illustrious
evidence to all the World of his Providence over it, than constant prosperity
could have afforded.)

But contrariwise, whenever this Church or any Branch or Member of it, has
by wantonness and self-confidence, by pride and schism, by hypocrisy or
profaneness, forfeited this Divine protection; if Divine patience and moderate
chastisements have not in due time reclaimed it, it has by a severe act of the
same Providence been most remarkably delivered up to confusion and barbarism:
God has pulled down his Fence, and the wild Beast of the Field spoils it, and
the Boar out of the Woods devours it.

But lest any man who has observed the horrible degeneracy, the hypocrisy and
corruptions of the Church of Rome, and yet withal takes notice of the great
pomp, splendour and prosperity which that Society enjoys, should make this an
Objection against that which I am discoursing, I freely answer, That I think it
has pleased God to make that singular instance on purpose, and by an act of
the same Providence by which he punishes other degenerate Churches, he has
kept up that debauched Church (just as he did those wicked and idolatrous
Princes the Kings of Babylon and Assyria, etc.) to be a plague and a scourge
whereby to chastise and reclaim other and better, but declining Churches.

In all other cases my Observation is abundantly verified; not only in the
Church of the Jews, but in all those once famous Christian Churches of Asia and
Africa. Which whilst they were humble and holy, true to their Principles, and
worthy of Divine protection, so long they were happy and glorious: But when
they had provoked God to desert them, from that time it was neither their wit
nor wealth nor learning, neither their numbers nor their reputation, neither
their former zeal nor their Apostolical foundation, could preserve them from
ruin and barbarism. I proceed further.

Thirdly, Divine Providence is the security and protection not only of the
Church but of the State also. Of Kings and Princes, of Magistrates and
Governors, and of Government it self: for it is not the Satellites of Princes,
their Lifeguards that secure them, their Sword and Scepter that defends them,
not their purple and all the Ensigns of Majesty; but an all-seeing of
Providence over them, and an invisible Guard of Providence that protects them.

It was well observed by Sir Francis Bacon, that in some respects the condition
of Crowned Heads and Sovereign Princes was more unhappy and uncomfortable than
of meaner persons, and in this respect amongst the rest, because they have a
great deal to fear, and little or nothing more to hope for in this World. They
cannot go much higher, and they may fall a great deal lower. Other men if they
have something to fear, yet they have a mighty sphere of hope to cheer and
encourage them. Princes have but little scope for their desires or ambitions,
but on the other side, by reason of their long Train, ill Fortune has great
advantages against them. And indeed in these respects their condition were very
melancholy, but that there is a Providence which watches over them, and
prevents their fears, and their dangers.

They are God's Vicegerents, and He maintains and upholds them in their Offices
under Himself; He strikes an awe and reverence of Magistrates into the hearts
of Subjects, that an enraged multitude shall tremble at the sight of one man,
and He in other respects like themselves, saving that he has the Stamp and
Character of Divine Authority upon him.

He that calms the raging of the Sea, and says to the proud waves, Hitherto
shall ye go, and no further; it is He also that stills the rage and madness of
the people. Therefore Psalm. 99. 1. The Lord reigns, be the people never so
impatient; He sits between the Cherubims, be the Earth never so unquiet: i.
e. The Divine Majesty has that influence upon the spirits of men, that it is
not all the brutal rage and passion, nor all the combined force of evil men,
shall be able to dissolve Government, or interrupt that Order He has
constituted.

Let us take one great and famous instance of this, 2 Samuel 17. The people of
Israel made a General Defection from David their King, and, as one man, were
all for setting Absalom upon his Throne: The number of the Conspirators was as
the Sand upon the Seashore, that in the expression of Hushai they were able to
fall upon David and his Handful of men with him, as the Dew falls upon the
Ground; and if he should betake himself to any City or Strong-hold, all Israel
shall bring Ropes, and draw that City into the River; so that there shall not
be one small Stone left. What becomes of David in this case? Who shall
withstand this Torrent? Only Divine Providence, this divides the Waters, this
dissolves that great black Cloud, and makes it fall in a gentle Dew (otherwise
than Hushai intended) and the result is, That (...) the same men strive who
shall be the first and forwardest in setting David upon his Throne again.

Therefore whatever Prince or Magistrate shall slight a Providence, they slight
the best Fort of their Empire and Jurisdiction, they dismiss their Guards, and
lay themselves open to all the follies and rage and insolences of the people.

Fourthly, Divine Providence is also the peoples caution and security against
the weaknesses, passions and extravagances of Princes and Magistrates, so that
they shall not need to resort to Arms or any seditious and unlawful means in
their own defense. We use to appeal to an higher Court when we are oppressed in
an inferior Judicatory, and this is our proper refuge, when our Rights and
Properties are invaded, to look up to God the supreme Potentate of the World,
that he will restrain the exorbitances of his Ministers.

God is King of Kings, not only because he is above all other Princes, but
because he restrains and controlls them, he makes and rules them, he invests
and devests them. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, ejus jussu Reges
constituuntur, aptique illis qui ab ipsis in illis temporibus regnantur, said
the great (...) Saint Irenaeus. He that made men makes Kings, and he fits and
qualifies them for the times wherein, and the people over whom they reign.

For it is He that can (amongst other instances of his transcendent
Sovereignty) turn their hearts also. So Solomon himself a great and a wise King
has told us, Prove. 21. 1. The heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord,
and he turns it as the Rivers of Water; that is, as an Husbandman or
Gardener, can by Drains and Trenches derive the Water from one place to
another, to his use and purpose; so does God Almighty dispose and incline the
hearts of Princes, be they never so strong and deep.

Cyrus was a mighty Prince, and had a heart as averse to the People of the
Jews, and to their Religion also, as any of his Predecessors, that carried them
into, or kept them in Captivity. What was the matter then? what reason of State
was there that he should let them go, and lose so much People, and so much
Tribute? nothing, but the Text tells us, God stirred up the heart of Cyrus.

Nebuchadnezzar was so stiff-necked and impious, as that he defied any such
Providence over him as we are speaking of; but God turned his heart first to
that of a Beast, and put him out to Grass till he had learned, that the most
high rules in the Kingdoms of men.

It is therefore no deceitful or illusory method of security, to appeal to, and
trust in Providence, in the greatest cases possible. It is true the safety of
Religion, Liberty and Property are mighty concerns; but certainly they are not
too great a stake to trust in the hands of God, who we see, both can secure
them, and is obliged by the honor and interest of his own supereminent
Government to be tender of them, against all the Arbitrary Invasions of those
under him.

But perhaps some man will suspect, that it will look like Cowardice, if not
Treachery (in confidence of a Providence) to neglect other means of security;
and that it will be like him in the Fable, that lay in the Ditch, and used no
endeavor to get out, but only cried to God to help him: To which I answer,
that if the Providence of God have afforded us other means that are lawful and
warranted by the standing Law and Rule of his Word, we tempt God if we neglect
them, when those great Interests are endangered; but unless the means we use be
as certainly and manifestly lawful and warrantable, as the cause we pretend to,
shall be just and honorable, we shall but provoke Providence instead of
subserving it. We forego our greatest security by not being contented with it;
for by superseding Providence we alienate it, and by shifting for our selves we
fight against God.

Fifthly, Providence is our security against private Fears as well as public,
against solitude and dangers of all kinds, whether by ill accidents and
encounters from Brute Beasts, or more Brutish men.

Man is a very feeble creature, and impotent for his own defense in a thousand
cases that happen every day; it were therefore a most melancholy condition of
life, if we were not under the shelter of a Providence, if we had no Patron, if
there were not a Superior Genius, an higher nature continually solicitous
about us for our protection: And therefore the well known Gentleman of
Malmsbury might well be timorous and afraid that every man should have designs
to kill him, or that every accident might take away his life, for the man did
not well believe in a God above, nor had any confidence in a Providence.

And indeed such a case is so sad and deplorable, that it seems to be a very
silly thing to desire to live if it were true: A man had better dye once than
live in perpetual fears of dying; and nothing but childish cowardice could
tempt a man to wish to live one day, if he were confident there was no such
thing as a Providence.

But if I believe there is a God that over-looks me wherever I am, that is
tender of me, that can and will preserve me as long as he sees good, in spite
of all evil designs or accidents: this erects a man's mind and fortifies his
spirits; this suffers him neither to fear nor to wish for death, but enables
him both to live patiently, and to dye bravely.

And consequently of this, the trust in a Providence is the great encouragement
of all generous enterprises and performances; and these, whether they be
public or private, if a man design a secret good thing, what can be the
inducement to it? where can be the wisdom of giving himself the trouble about
it, when he can expect no reward in this World, because the performance is kept
secret from the notice of men; and if there be no Providence, it is certain
there can be no reward in another World, and so his labor is wholly lost.

But if it be a public action he designs, he shall be sure to meet with those
will envy and malign him, a second sort will suspect him, and a third will
traduce and defame him; and amongst the rest there will not want those that
will find it to be their interest to oppose and hinder him: so that in short,
without a special hand of Providence, no man shall have either the heart to
undertake, or the power and success to effect any noble action; but grant this
great point, and men are born above envy, opposition, and even above themselves.

I cannot upon this occasion forbear to take notice of a noble and memorable
passage of the Roman Orator, in one of his Orations to the Senate of Rome, his
words begin thus, Quam volumus licet, patres conscripti, nos amemus; tamen nec
numero Hispanos, nec viribus Gallos, nec calliditate Poenos, nec doctrina
Graecos, etc. the sense of the whole is to this effect, as if he had said,
Fathers of the Senate, let us entertain as good an opinion of our selves as we
will or can; yet it must be acknowledged, that we neither equal the Spaniards
in numbers, nor the Gauls in strength and stature, nor the Carthaginians in
craft and subtilty, nor the Greeks in learnimg and knowledge; and yet it is as
certain, we have overcome and triumphed over all these Nations: Now inquiring
into the reason of this success, I can attribute it to no other cause, nor give
any more probable account of it than this; namely, that we live under a better
and a quicker sense of a God and a Providence than any of them do, and this,
and this alone gives us all the advantage.

Sixthly, But Sixthly and lastly, and to speak summarily, Providence is of
unspeakable advantage and influence upon the spirits of men, both in prosperity
and adversity. It may seem indeed, that whilst a man is in prosperity, he is
in no need of a Providence; and it is too commonly true, that men do not use to
think much of God whilst all goes well with them. Nevertheless this practice
however general, is very foolish and unreasonable; for besides the uncertainty
of worldly Prosperity, and that nothing is more ordinary than for men's fortunes
to be soon at a stand, for all their broad sails and most earnest endeavors,
if once the wind of Providence desert them: Besides this (I say) it deserves
the most serious consideration, that all worldly Prosperity is very little
worth (even whilst it lasts) if there be no Providence. For what great joy or
contentment can the greatest affluence afford a man, if all come by mere
chance, or the course of the Stars, or by fate or any such undiscriminating
causes. But on the other side, if a man can look upon his comforts, as the
gifts and favors of a wise and a good God, then and then only they are
comfortable indeed.

And then for a state of adversity, that is sad indeed if there be no
Providence; think what it is to be in a storm at Sea, where the Winds roar, the
Sea rages, the Ship cracks, no Anchor-hold, no Shores to land upon, no comfort
in Pilot or Governors of the Vessel, nothing but a prospect of death every
way; if a man cannot look up to Heaven, and have hope in God, what a case is he
in? Or suppose a man be close Prisoner, and denied the comfort of his friends,
together with other refreshments of life, or confined to a sickbed, or be
buried alive with obloquy and reproach; in a word, that a man be friendless and
helpless; now if it can be said to such a man, there is no help for him in God
neither, here is the very quintessence of misery, a case sad beyond expression:
But contrariwise, if a man in all the dismal circumstances aforesaid, shall yet
firmly believe a Providence that orders all things well and wisely, that can if
he please bring a man out of all those difficulties, that certainly will make
all these work for his good, and at last judge righteous judgment, and make him
amends in another World; then is any condition in the mean time very tolerable
whatsoever it be.

And thus I have, I hope, performed the three things I promised from my Text;
and what remains now, but that we make Application of all to our selves, and
that in these two instances:

1. By settling this great Doctrine in our minds. And, 2. By improving it in our
hearts to all the comfortable consequences aforesaid.
First, Let us settle this truth in our minds, that God Almighty exercises a
Kingly Providence in and over all the World; and let it (if it be possible) be
a principle with us firm as a first notion, and indisputable as the verdict of
our Senses: my meaning is, let nothing make us stagger or be able to shake our
belief of that which is of so vast consequence to us. Forasmuch as without this
Persuasion, not only our Religion is nonsense, but we are the most abject and
pitiable Creatures in the World.

Brutes and other inferior Creatures have indeed no apprehension of a
Providence, and yet enjoy themselves in proportion to their natures; but then
this is to be considered, they foresee nothing, they suspect nothing, and so do
not torment themselves before the time. But man suspects dangers where they may
not come, and foresees them when they are coming, is a sagacious and jealous
Creature, and so anticipates calamities, and accumulates them. Now if there be
no Providence, his condition is worse than that of inferior Beings, he is
doubly miserable, and that without remedy.

Shall then a trifling Epicurean objection, nay, shall a Skeptical surmise, or
a flash of Wit and Drollery, baffle us out of that wherein the honor of our
natures consists, and upon which all our comfort depends?

Laugh at and scorn them that laugh at a Providence, poor pitiful wretches that
worship blind fortune, or a manacled and fettered Deity, bound hand and foot by
fatal necessity: Our God is a wise and good and free Agent, restrained, limited
by nothing, but his own Wisdom. He sees all things without difficulty or
deception, manages all things without fatigue or weariness, governs all things
with just order, judges without partiality, pities in all adversity, can
relieve in all necessity, and with unspeakable glory rewards those that
faithfully serve him.

And pursuant of this belief let us in the Second place raise our affections to
the highest pitch of triumph, let us make a shout as in the Text, The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad
thereof: Or as you have it in the 10. Verse of the Psalm immediately foregoing,
Tell it out amongst the heathen that the Lord reigns.

Let all foreign Nations, and all foreign Churches, all that have good will,
and all that have ill will to our Religion, or to our Country, know that the
Lord is King, and that we trust not to the number of our Forces, or the Wisdom
of our Counsels, our Seas, or our Rocks, our Courage or Conduct, but to our
King, to that Divine Providence which watches over us:

Let our Prince and our Magistrates take courage against the rage or the
follies, the numbers or combinations of evil men, in consideration that they
are the instruments of Divine Providence, the Lieutenants of Gods Government,
and he that set them in office under himself, will stand by them, and bear them
out in discharge of their trust and duty.

Let the People be quiet, not listen to noise and rumors, but be sure to
banish all disloyal thoughts of resorting to irregular means for the asserting
their pretensions. Is not God in the World? has any one wrested the Scepter
out of his hand? why then should we not trust in him?

When Philip Melancthon, otherwise a very wise and peaceable and mild-spirited
person, began to be out of humor with the then state of the World, Luther
addresses to him in these words, Exorandus est Philippus ut desinat esse rector
Mundi; q. d. Good Brother Philip let God alone to govern the World.

Let the Oppressed, the Widow, the Fatherless and Friendless take comfort, for
he that sits in the Throne will judge righteous judgment, and first or last
avenge the cause of his meanest Subject.

Nay, let the man that is tempted and assaulted by the Devil, hold his ground,
and fear nothing, for God is above the Devil.

To conclude, let us all lay aside our fears and our jealousies, our sighs and
complaints, our melancholy and despondency, Is there not a balm in Gilead, is
there no Physician there, Jer. 8. 22. Have we not a Wise and a Powerful, a
Glorious and a good Prince, why then should we murmur? why accuse his Reign?
why reproach his Government?

Novum seditionis genus otium and silentium, said the Historian; A sullen
uncomfortableness and dislike of our condition, our discontent with the state
of affairs, is a kind of Sedition against Heaven, our murmuring is no better
than a libelling of Gods Government.

Wherefore (to say no more) let us stick close to this God, this mighty
Potentate; let us hope, trust, and rejoice in him, and he shall bless our King,
our Church, our Magistrates, and all our Concerns.

Now to this Universal Monarch of the World, this King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, be all Glory and Praise, Worship and Adoration World without End.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAGE 12. l. 2. r. are as p. 21. l. 14. r. all-seeing eye of p. 24. l. 19. r.
great Saint.

Books written by the Reverend Doctor Goodman, and sold by R. Royston, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner.
THE Penitent Pardoned; Or, A Discourse of the Nature of Sin, and the Efficacy
of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son. The Second Edition
Corrected and Enlarged.

A Sermon preached at Bishops-Stortford, August 29. 1677. before the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, at his Lordship's Primary
Visitation.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England.

A Sermon preached before the Right. Honorable Sir Robert Clayton Lord Mayor,
and the Aldermen of the City of London, at the Guild-Hall-Chapel, Jan. xxv.
1679.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable Sir John Moore Lord Mayor, and
the Aldermen of the City of London, at the Guild-Hall-Chapel, December. 18. 1681.

The Interest of Divine Providence in the Government of the World. A Sermon
preached before the Right Honorable Sir William Pritchard Lord Mayor, and the
Aldermen of the City of London, at the Guild-Hall-Chapel, February the 11th.
1682.


