(...) OR, A BEING FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT.

Wherein is proved, That it is a Duty incumbent on all men (especially
Believers) that they be filled with the Spirit of God.

The gracious Counsels of God, the Laws and Terms of his proceeding with men in
order hereunto, with Rules laid down whereby to judge whether men be filled
with the Spirit of God, or a contrary Spirit: L^kewise, the way and means
whereby men may be filled with the Spirit of God, are all largely opened from
the Scriptures.

AS ALSO, The Divinity, or Godhead of the HOLY GHOST Asserted, and the
Arguments brought against it thoroughly Examined and Answered; The Grace of God
^n the fullness and freeness thereof evinced; and many things relating to the
Saints Communion with God, and God dwelling in them Explained.

The necessity of the Ministry of the Gospel (called the Ministry of the
Spirit) discussed, and the usefulness thereof maintained; With several other
things of great importance in order to the benefit and peace of men.

All heretofore delivered in several SERMONS from Ephesians. 5.18.

By that Pious, Learned, and Laborious Servant of God, Mr. JOHN GOODWIN,
Sometime Minister of the Gospel in Coleman-Street LONDON; And published after
his Death for the Common good of all.

But if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of (...) body, ye shall
live, Romans 8.13 And they chose Stephen a man full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6.5.
Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19. How much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that as him? Luke 11.13. Basil Homil. (...).
LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden, at his Shop under the Crown-Tavern
in West-Smithfield, 1670.

THE PUBLISHERS TO THE Ingenuous and Christian READER.
Good Reader,
THat great Law of Nature that has uttered it self from the Lips of some of
the Sons thereof, That no man is born for himself only, but the rest of Mankind
do challenge a share in him (or rather the whole of him) And this, by the
Interpretation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself, is the Sum, or
whole of the Second Table of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, and contains
our whole Duty to our Neighbor, viz. That we love him (that is, all men) as
our selves. This great and Royal Law both of Nature and Grace has occasioned
this Discourse in thy hand to become public; The nature of it being spiritual
and sublime, carrying much of the peace and inward felicity of men and women in
it, has imposed a necessity upon us not to confine it amongst our selves, but
to present it to the public view of all (whose hearts shall serve them to make
a diligent and conscientious perusal thereof) for their Accommodation in the
things of their Present and Everlasting Peace and Welfare: For this is certain,
that when any man, or numbers of men have any Treasure in their hands to bless
the World withal, the Law of God obliges them to minister unto the wants and
necessities thereof, they being generally so craving by reason of that
ignorance and darkness that men are filled withal.

We shall not need to say much as to the Author of this Discourse, nor to the
time when these things were delivered by him in the course of his Public
Ministry, it being sometime since, and we question not but that there are many
yet alive of those that heard it, who have not lost the sense and spiritual
resentment thereof, but have many of those great Principles of light and truth
remaining alive in power and great strength within them, and will be glad of
the opportunity of a second review of them. The Author himself (which is now at
rest) having finished the work which God judged meet for him, and for which he
was sent into the World, was a man whose heart was set within him to serve his
Generation with all faithfulness, in the great Work of the Ministry of the
Gospel, not much val^^ng the opprobation, or displeasure of men, when the
Interest of his great Lord and Master, and the present Peace, and Everlasting
Welfare of men were concerned, being indeed very faithful and laborious in that
great Work. So that we may without vanity say of him (as our blessed Savior
when time was said of John the Baptist, Joh. 5.35.) that he was in his time a
burning and a shining light, and many did much rejoice (at least for a season)
in his light, although at some times, and some turns in the faithful discharge
of his Duty he met with the same measure that his great Lord and Master had
measured out unto him in the days of his flesh, Joh. 6.60, 66.

For the Subject it self, thou will find it as a light to guide thee in a dark
place, there being many of the great and gracious Counsels of God concerning
men largely opened, especially of such a nature, whereon much of their
spiritual Welfare does depend; viz. as to the manner and method of the Spirit
of God in his proceedings with men; and those Rules and Laws which he has
prescribed unto himself in his advance, and decrease in their hearts and souls,
in order to the carrying them up into the Mount of God. We mean into those high
strains of the Gospel, where the richest and choicest Consolations lie, and
where men and women may drink abundantly of them, and be thereby put into the
best capacity to serve God upon the highest terms of acceptance with himself;
as also, may be great blessings and Benefactors to the World round about them,
according to the design of the Lord Christ in that choice which he makes of men
by the Gospel, which as the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 2.9.) signifies, is, the
making of them a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a
peculiar People, for this very end and purpose, namely, That they might show
forth the Praises of him who has called them out of darkness into his
marvelous light. The design of this Discourse being to carry thee up into the
way of life (which the Wiseman says) is above to the Wise, that he may depart
from hell beneath, Prove. 15 24. which whilst men who love to dwell with their
minds and hearts in these lower Regions are never like to be partakers of. For
this World and the things thereof were never intended by God as that which
should answer the vast desires of men, he having prepared better things for
them, that those noble Endowments of theirs might be conversant with matters of
far greater concernment, such as will advance and raise their felicity to a
near Affinity and likeness with the Angels themselves, those firstborn Princes
of Heaven, who by beholding the Face of God continually, are thereby filled
with unspeakable joy and satisfaction, and by means hereof are made blessed
indeed: Even so God in the Gospel through his abundant grace shines forth the
knowledge of himself unto the Children of men, that so beholding as in a Glass
his Glory, they may be changed from glory to glory, and be made as like unto
him in felicity as far as their nature will bear, in order to the rendering them
capable of enriching the World with the saving knowledge of the truth where
ever they shall become; this being one property of felicity, and true
greatness, and nobleness of Spirit (where ever it is) to dilate and utter it
self for the real good, benefit, and comfort of all that are round about it,
and within its reach. Of these things thou have a large account in the ensuing
Treatise, both as to the provision that is made by God in the Gospel for his
Saints, and those that serve him, as likewise the nature of him that is the
chief Agent (the Holy Ghost) to manage, and to be their Assistant in all their
spiritual Works and Services, which by virtue of the abundant grace of God in
the Gospel they are called unto, and might be partakers of; he being none other
than him that has all Power in his hand both in Heaven and in Earth; Not a
Creature, lest any man should despair of ever being strengthened with might in
the inner man, or should fear of ever being able to arrive unto that
blessedness which is prepared for those that love God, and wait for the
appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: But this Holy Spirit, which
thou art advised to be filled withal, is no less, no other, than the increated
Spirit, God blessed for ever. Which, in case thou have but such a sense of thy
Salvation, as to be found working of it out with fear and trembling, thou
may assure thy self that it is none other than God himself, who is both able
and willing; yea, is already at work within thee, and will enable thee not only
to will, but also to do, and that according to his good pleasure; whose will
and good pleasure concerning the manner of his coworking in men is largely
opened in this Discourse. And likewise his Godhead argued, and with clearness
proved both by Scriptures and sound Reason. As also, those Grounds and
Arguments that are commonly brought to prove him to be of a created and finite
extraction, punctually, sedately, and faithfully answered; and the Scriptures
that are brought to serve in that Warfare are dismissed, and discharged from
that Service: And we look upon this part of the Discourse as so much the more
seasonable (and we hope a good hand of Divine Providence in bringing of it
forth at this time) inasmuch as that Spirit of Error is now stirring more
effectually than of latter times, to the endangering of the Everlasting Welfare
of the precious Souls of Men, rendering the Gospel, and the Grace of God which
has appeared to all Men by Jesus Christ, and that unspeakable Gift of the Holy
Ghost, or Spirit of God, which is to remain with the Saints until his coming
again as very inconsiderable. Thereby making the neglect of this Grace of God
and his good Spirit a thousand times more tolerable than indeed it is, or is
like to be, unto those who shall be found to neglect so great a salvation, that
is brought so near unto them, and that by God himself, with the gracious offer
of himself, and his own help and assistance herein. Thou have likewise an
account given thee by what means it is, that the Spirit of God himself (if thou
shall submit unto his most gracious Counsels herein) will advance his Presence
in thee, whereby thou may have as much of his assistance as thy heart can
desire; Together with some Rules laid down whereby to judge whether a man's
self, or others, be filled with the Spirit, or with some other Spirit which
only pretends to be the Spirit of God, but is not, but a Spirit of Error, and
Delusion; very useful at all times, but more especially now, when Satan that
lying Spirit is playing his Last Game upon the World: his time being very short
he is put upon it more than ever to mingle his spiritual wickednesses with
heavenly things, which are his most dangerous Weapons, and thereby does greater
execution than Men (generally) are aware of. There are many Wiles and subtle
Devices by which Men are taken off from attending upon the Ministry of the
Gospel, which is called the Ministry of the Spirit (which are very mischievous
and destructive it is to be feared to many, and endangering more) that are here
detected, and their nakedness laid open: As also the great business of the
Saints Communion with God both as to the freeness, and fullness, or largeness
thereof discussed, together with the great advantage of a large interest in God
by Prayer discovered. In all which there are many Scriptures clearly opened. We
question not but that persons who have the use and exercise of their Spiritual
Senses, and are to any considerable degree able to discern things that differ,
will find their precious time well spent in the reading hereof, and will find
the discourse pleasant to their Spiritual Palate, and receive nourishment
thereby in their inner man.

Good Reader, We have only two Requests to make unto thee, before we leave
thee, First, that if there be not in all, and every passage of this Work the
same height of Style, and Elegancy of Expression as is in other his Writings,
thou will excuse the Author, inasmuch as it seemed good to Divine Providence to
finish the days of his mortal Pilgrimage, and to gather him unto his Fathers
before this Work could be made fit for Public View: And we nothing doubt but
that thy Christian Candor and Ingenuity will take this for a sufficient excuse
on the behalf of those things for which we Apologize.

Our Second Request is (if thou expect to receive good by this Discourse) That
if at any time thou have been prejudiced against the Author thou will lay all
things of that nature aside (as thou love thine own Peace and Eternal
Welfare) and engage with an honest heart and sincere mind in the reading
hereof. For although (possibly) there may have been some difference between him
and thee, and some others, in some Doctrinal Points, yet this being mainly
Practical, he and all other good men more generally agree in matters of this
nature. N^w that the God of all Grace may fill thee with a rich Presence of his
Spirit, that so thou may be rendered most acceptable to him in all thy
ways, and be put into the best capacity to serve thy Generation, and in the
end be made partaker of the highest Glory with the Saints in light, is the
Desire, and shall be the Prayer of

The Publishers.

To all that desire to be filled WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT.
THere is a great Ambition in the Sons of Men after Fullness, and so there is in
the Sons of God also; but the Fullness, which the Sons of the latter and better
Denomination do most mind and covet, is of another nature and kind than that
which the Sons of the other and lower Denomination are ambitious of. There is
an Earthly Fullness, which Filii Terrae, the Children of this World, or
Earthly-minded men do affect and set their hearts upon, viz. To have their
Barns full, their Purses and Chests full, their Bellies full, etc. ( Psalm.
17.14. and 144.13. Ezekiel. 16.49. Phil. 3.19.) though this be but (as I may say)
to be full of Emptiness; or (as the Wiseman better expresses it (of Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit; for that is the best that Earthly things afford; so that in
the Fullness of their sufficiency they are in straights, as it is Emphatically
observed in Job 20.22.

There are also who may (woe unto them!) be called Filii Diaboli, the Children
of the Devil, who mind a Fullness of a worse sort than that newly named, and
that is to be full of Sin ( Acts 5.17. and 13.10, 45. and 19.28. Romans 1.29.
Jam. 3.8. 2 Pet. 2.14. Rev. 17.3, 4.) but this (alas!) is to be full of Wrath
and Misery; for Sin has no better Attendants and Effects.

But Filii Dei, the Sons of God, the Children of the most High do mind, are
ambitious of, and do cover after another and better Fullness, viz. To be full of
Light, Mat. 6.22. Of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. with 16. Of Joy, Joh. 15.11.
Acts 6.3. and 11 24. Romans 15.13. 1 John 1.4. Of Faith, Acts 6.5. and 8. Of
Good-works, Acts 9.36. Of Goodness, Romans 15.14. Of Knowledge and Assurance,
Col. ^ 9. and 2.2. Heb. 6.11. and 10.22. Of a full Age or perfect Stature, Heb.
5.14. with Ephesians. 4.13. Of Mercy, J^m 3.17. Of Righteousness and its Fruits,
Phil. 1.11 To be filled with all the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. And at last to
receive a full Reward, 2 John v. 8. Beside all this, there is one special
Fullness more, which they greatly desire and no less endeavor after (while they
are here below) in Relation to all the other Fulnesses, that they may be filled
with them all; which is, to be full of the Holy Ghost, or to be filled with the
Spirit, Luke 4.1. Acts 9.17. Ephesians. 5.18. and this is the thing about which the
following Treatise is chiefly employed, and mostly taken up; and of which
indeed it treats to very good purpose, and to very great advantage.

I cannot but acknowledge to have profi^ed by the perusal of it, and do
heartily pray that the Lord (who teaches to profit) will teach all that ^^ad
it to profit by it, and make it instrumental to their being filled with the
Spirit, wherein there can be no Excess (no sin) as there is in being filled or
drunk with Wine, as the Sacred Text and truth assures us; but advantages
innumerable beyond all that Mirth and Glee, which men presume they shall, and
fanfie they do attain by being filled with Wine.

Though I confess my self not to be of the same mind and opinion with the
Learned Author in some other controverted Points, yet I cannot but give my
Testimony concerning this Piece, That I find an excellent Spirit moving on the
face, and acting in the heart of it, to promote the Glory of God, the Power of
Godliness, and consequently the good of men, especially of Christian men.

Possibly an Expression here and there may (as all Humane Writings do) call for
a grain of Salt, as we use to phrase it; but as to the tenor of the whole and
the tendency thereof I do judge it to be very inoffensive, and not a little,
but very useful. The Author ('it is true) according to his wonted Genius does
often traverse a great deal of ground, and fetches some compasses before he
come to his designed journeys-end; yet he makes it pleasant too by such
variety, and will thereby pay the Reader for his pains and patience, in
following of him. The Epistle of the Publishers, and the Contents of the Book
will give so clear and full an account of the whole, that I shall need to say
no more concerning it. That this and all good Books may be well read and
improved is the hearty Wish and Prayer of him, who is a lover of all
Christians, yea, and of all men

Ralph Venning.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THe Coherence, and sense of the words opened. What it is to be filled
with the Spirit: Four Doctrines raised from the words: Proved from the
Scriptures that it is the duty of all Christians to be filled with the Spirit.
Page. 1 CHAP. II. The first Reason of the Doctrine propounded and argued, viz.
That it is the Duty of all Persons (especially of all the Professors of the
Gospel, or Christianity) to be filled with the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God;
Because if men be not filled, or in a way of being filled, with the Spirit of
God, they will be filled with some evil Spirit one or other. Page. 15 CHAP.
III. The second Reason of the Doctrine; without being filled with the Spirit,
the hearts of men and women will never serve them to do excellent things for
God. Acts 5.3. Chapter 13. 9, 10. Chapter 20. 22. 2 Cor. 5.13. in part opened. Page. 41
CHAP. IV. The Doctrine demonstrated by a third ground, viz. That we are never
like to be any great Benefactors unto the World, which yet we stand bound in
duty to be, unless we be filled with the Spirit. He is a great Benefactor unto
the World, that gives a real account of his believing in Christ. Why Abraham
called the Father of Believers. The force of Example. A man's keeping the
Commandments of Jesus, a great benefit and accommodation unto the World in two
respects, Gal. 6.2. in part opened. 2 Timothy 3.8. in part opened. So Ephesians. 3.14,
15, 16. The Saints praying for any good thing, frequently in their prayer
mention the means, by which God is wont to give, or effect it. Page 45 CHAP. V.
The fourth Reason of the Doctrine propounded, and argued: Men are not capable
of receiving the rich Consolations of the Gospel, unless they be filled with
the Spirit. 1 Pet. 2.9. in part opened. So Heb. 6.17, 18. Ephesians. 3.17, 18. 1 Pet.
1.8. Ephesians. 1.18. Jam. 2.13. Prove. 19.16. Acts 17.28. Mar. 4.5. and 6.16. Page 65
CHAP. VI. The fifth (and last) Reason of the Doctrine argued: Men stand bound
in duty to put themselves into a capacity of the fullest, and highest rewards
which God has prepared for, and holds forth unto the Children of men.
Inequality of rewards in glory argued. The Parable of the Penny, Mat. 20.
considered. The advantages of late Converts. Inconveniences incident to to the
early, which yet may be avoided. Dan. 12, 3. in part opened. 1 Cor. 3.8. Ephesians.
6.8. Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 15.58. Romans 6.23. Psalm. 138.2. Psalm. 25.8, 10. Mat.
13.43. Phil. 3.21. 2 Timothy 4.8. Mat. 20.20, 21. Romans 9.15. Mat. 5.48. Number.
25.11, 12, 13. 2 These. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.23. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Heb. 11.10, 17, 18, 19, 26. Heb. 12.2. Joh. 17.5. Luke 22.43. Page 91 CHAP.
VII. Three Questions propounded, to give further light into the Doctrine; The
first of them enquired into, namely, who, or what this Spirit (mentioned in the
Text) is, viz. Whether he be an increated Spirit, even God blessed for ever; or
whether a created Spirit? Several Scriptures opened and argued (both from the
Old and New Testament) proving that the Spirit, spoken of in the Text, is none
other than Johovah, or the most High God, The several Pleas brought against
these Scriptures, by persons contrary minded, taken off, and rendered invalid.
As also some Grounds in Reason propounded and argued to prove that the Holy
Ghost is very God. Page 142 CHAP. VIII. The most material Arguments that are
generally insisted on, by those who deny the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, are
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary. Wherein also those Scriptures which
are generally insisted on by those who persuade themselves, and would also
persuade others, that he that is the Searcher of hearts is but of a finite
extraction, or the Holy Spirit of God is but a Creature, are all discharged
from bearing that burden which is laid upon them. As also the great
profitableness, yea, the great necessity of this Discourse (though somewhat
large) is asserted. Page 196 CHAP. IX. The Second Question propounded, namely,
How, or by what mean^ a Believer, or any other Person, may be filled with the
Spirit of God. Some difficulties removed, with one Direction propounded, and
largely discoursed, whereby men and women may understand the intent of the
Exhortation, and what it is that is required of them when they are commanded to
be filled with the Spirit. Wherein also the Grace of God, and the free working
of his Spirit is clearly vindicated and asserted. Page 239 CHAP. X. The
Resolution of the Second Question further prosecuted: And six Directions more
given to show how men and women may come to be filled with the Spirit of God;
and what is to be done by them in order hereunto. Page 279 CHAP. XI. A third
Question propounded, viz. How a man or woman may know whether himself or others
are filled with the Spirit of God, or will some other Spirit that pretends to
be the Spirit of God, but is (indeed) a Spirit contrary to it? Wherein are
several Rules laid down in order to a clear understanding thereof. Pro. 6.9,
10. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Jam. 3.17. Prove. 2.22. Chap. 9.6. Romans 8.13. Psa.
145.17. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. in part opened. p. 316 CHAP. XII. The first Use of the
Doctrine, by way of Instruction, in four main Points; First, Showing how comely
a thing it is for men and women to be found obedient to the Commands of God in
general; and particularly, how beautiful and honorable a thing it is for men
and women to be filled with the Spirit of God, and to be found acting
accordingly. Secondly, An account given what strangers the Saints themselves
are unto many great Duties, and more especially unto this great Duty of being
filled with the Spirit, insomuch that even this Generation are (as it were)
asleep thereunto. Thirdly, That this great blessedness of being filled with the
Spirit is no impossible thing but is attainable by the endeavors and
engagements of men. Fourthly, and lastly, That it is the Will and Design of God
that Believers should be a Royal Generation of Kings and Priests unto himself,
and that they should live accordingly. p. 345 CHAP. XIII. A Second Use of the
Doctrine being a Use of Reproof unto all those who are Enemies unto this
heavenly Exhortation and Counsel of the Holy Ghost administered unto men,
namely, to be filled with the Spirit, and who by any means obstruct the course
of it. A first sort are such who scoff at such a thing as a being filled with
the Spirit of God. A second sort of Offenders are such who persuade men that
the Spirit, which they are exhorted to be filled with, is but a finite Spirit,
an Angel, and not God. Wherein many things are further argued, proving the Holy
Ghost to be the most High God. Page 358 CHAP. XIV. A third sort of Offenders
reproved are such, who, instead of following the Exhortation of being filled
with the Spirit, take a course to be emptied of the Spirit of God: Who make it
matter of Conscience to turn their backs upon the Ministry of the Gospel (which
is called the Ministry of the Spirit.) Wherein the several Scriptures and
Reasons by which they strengthen themselves, in their evil way, are examined,
and found bent against them. And likewise the necessity of the Ministry of the
Gospel, and the great benefit thereof largely asserted, and vindicated. Page
387 CHAP. XV. Five sorts of Offenders more under the Second Head reproved:
First, Such who are chill and cool in their respects unto the Ministry of the
Gospel. An account of the Causes thereof: The danger of false Notions
concerning God. A second sort reproved for withdrawing from a lively and
powerful Ministry: Reasons of such miscarriages. Legal and Evangelical Ministry
distinguished. What renders Persons duly fitted for the Ministry of the Gospel.
The third sort, justly reprovable, are such who neglect to be led by the Spirit
of God. How, and when the Spirit of God is neglected, A fourth sort justly
reprovable also are such that do resist the Holy Ghost or Spirit of God. The
fifth and last sort of Offenders are such who refuse to sow unto the Spirit of
God. Page 419 CHAP. XVI. The fourth (and last) Use of the Doctrine being an
Exhortation to use all means we are capable of in order to a being filled with
the Spirit of God. Three Motives propounded: The first, More generally taken
from the nature of the Commandments of God. That this Duty is one of the holy
and righteous Retinue of Duties enjoined us by God. Neglect of his Commands
provokes him to Jealousy. The second Motive. This being known to be a Duty
enjoined by God, neglected, hinders the Soul from prospering in the things of
its own peace. The vast difference and great danger of an habitual Omission of
known Duties in comparison of Duties a man is ignorant of. A third Motive. This
is a Duty enjoined by the Lord Christ, who speaks now from Heaven. The
difference between God's speaking on the Earth, and now speaking from Heaven.
Neglect of Evangelical Duties much more provoking than the neglect under the
Law. Heb. 12.25. in part opened. A being filled with the Spirit purely
Evangelical. Page 452 CHAP. XVII. Four Considerations more to enforce the
Exhortation. The fourth Motive: the great benefit accruing unto men and women
by a serious engagement in a course likely to issue in a being filled with the
Spirit. It will free men and women from foolish, unclean, and noisome lusts,
somewhat peculiar in this engagement differing from others, though worthy in
their kind. A fifth Motive, proving that in case men do what God has and does
enable them to do in order to a being filled with the Spirit of God, this their
enterprise shall assuredly prosper in their hand. Hope of obtaining great
encouragement unto Endeavors. Some more of the great Privileges that
accompany a being filled with the Spirit. A sixth Motive, That the Reasons and
Understandings of men are not capable of being employed upon terms of greater
benefit and advantage than in this engagement. A seventh Consideration, taken
from the uncertainty of obtaining the things of this World by all the means
that can be used, and also from the uncertainty of the continuance of these
things, if gotten: Whereas a being filled with the Spirit, as it is attainable,
so by a perseverance in the use of means our seize in this kind shall
stand by us for ever. Page 463 CHAP. XVIII. The Eighth (and last) Motive: That
a being filled with the Spirit will render the Condition of men and women most
desirable in this World, and in that which is to come. That no other course
will do it but this, or none without this. Four things, a concurrence whereof
will render a man's Condition in this life most desirable. 1. A freedom from
all troublesome, distracting, and tormenting fears and cares. 2. A heart and
conscience abounding in Joy and Peace. 3. A large and free Communion with God.
4. And lastly, A rich and large interest in God to be able to carry great
Matters in Prayer with him. Three of these insisted on: 1. A being filled with
the Spirit will discharge men from all troublesome and distracting fears and
cares. 2. The Peace and Joy of men will abound by a being filled with the
Spirit. 3. A third particular which renders men's Condition so desirable in the
World is a free and large Communion with God. 1. What is meant by Communion
with God. 2. What by a free Communion. 3. What is meant by a large and full
Communion with God. 4. How this Communion renders man's Condition very
desirable in the World. 5. That this Privilege must needs accompany a being
filled with the Spirit. What it is for God to dwell or abide in man. How a man
may know that God dwells in him by the Spirit which is given him. How perfect
love casts out fear. In what respect the Spirit may be said to witness with
our spirits that we are the Children of God. A well-grounded Confidence. The
Causes of a false Confidence enquired into. A good Conscience a ground of
Assurance. Page 482 CHAP. XIX. The Eighth Motive further opened in the fourth
particular, a being filled with the Spirit does interest men with a rich and
large Interest in God. How this Interest does arise by being filled with the
Spirit of God. Reasons why so little is done by Prayer now, in comparison of
what was done in the Primitive times. Without being filled with the Spirit none
of the great blessings, formerly mentioned (and which render a man's Condition
so desirable in this World) are to be obtained. The Reasons whence it comes to
pass: And the equitableness of God's proceeding with men therein. The
difference between a fearless and dreadless frame of spirit, that is
counterfeit, and that which is raised upon good Grounds. A being filled with
the Spirit is the only way to cause the Crown of glory to flourish on the head
of a man; And that with a greater measure of glory in the World which is to
come. Page 522
ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 22. for te read to. p. 14. l. 28. for of r. as. p. 16. l. 23. for
never r. ever. p. 18. l. 23. for the inspiration thereof r. his inspiration. p.
24. l. 20. for men r. man. p. 60. l. 34. after on r. of. p. 61. l. 8 for
effecting r. affecting. p. 63. l. 21 dele [or doth] Ibid. l. 4 r. for and r. of
the. Ibid. l. 42. for of the r. and. p. 66. l. 11. for Princes r. Prophets. p.
77. l. 16. for heavenly r. lovely. p. 84. l 5. for it r. them. p. 87. l. 10.
for maniture r. manuducture. p. 107. l. 2. for leaving r. left p. 109 l. 36.
for of 1. as. p. 121. l. last for most r. not. p. 146. l. 2 for that r. though.
p. 162. l. 18. after whci r. it. Ibid. l. 40. for in r. into. p. 163. l. 41.
for appearance r. appearance. p. 165. l. 8. for it r. he. p. 181. l. 24. for
interest r. request. p. 186. l. 2. r. it is the first born. lb. dele it is. p.
190. l. 18 for consent r. conceit. p. 191. l. 10. for zealoufly r. jealously.
p. 213. l. 26. for or r. but. p. 216 l. 19. for undeceivedness r.
underivedness. p. 228. l. r. after Believer r. But. lb. 18. dele But p. 231. l.
19. for any r. an p. 236. l. 15. dele that. p. 248. l. 28. add whereby. p. 254.
l. 34. for exhibiting r. excitings. p. 268. l. 21. dele because. p. 284. l. 23.
for by r. for. p. 289. l. 26. for having r. have. p. 300. l. 21. for I r. A. p.
311. l. 25. for obtain r. attain. p. 323. l. 6. dele of. p. 346. l. 10. for
grateful r. graceful. p. 348. l. 17. for absolute r. obsolete. p. 352. l. 24.
for to r. who. p. 354. l. 19. for picking r. higgling. p. 364. l. 28. dele
that. p. 366. l. 25. for suits r. fruits. p. 374. l. 27. dele judges that he.
p. 385. l. 8. for who r. we p. 396. l. 18. after seen r. in. p. 397. l. 8 dele
that. p. 400. l. 24. dele of. p. 423. l. 19. for chose r. choose. p. 430. l.
41. for of r. for. p. 445. l. 43. after yea r. there are. p. 456. l. 6. for if
r. which. p. 375. l. 15. after sums r. are. p. 484. l. 1. for where to be r. to
be where. p. 490. l. 11. for be r. he. p. 506. l. 5. for as r. so as. p. 538.
l. 37. dele was.

(...) OR, A being filled with the Spirit.
Ephesians. 5. the latter part of the 18 verse: But be filled with the SPIRIT.
CHAP. I. The coherence, and sense of the words opened. What it is to be filled
with the Spirit: Four Doctrines raised from the words: Proved from the
Scriptures that it is the duty of all Christians to be filled with the Spirit.
THe tenor of the former part of the verse is this: And be not drunk with
Wine, wherein is excess: but be filled with the Spirit. The Apostle having in
the former part of this Epistle (as his usual method was) declared and laid
down foundation-wise, that great Doctrine of the Christian Religion; namely
justification by [or through] faith in Jesus Christ; In the latter part
thereof, he builds upon this foundation Precepts and Exhortations, to such
duties and behaviors, which may very justly and equitably be expected, upon
the account of such rich grace, from God vouchsafed unto sinful men, in their
free justification by Christ. Now in Precepts and Exhortations unto Christian
duties, there is not always a dependence or relation of coherence, between
duty and duty, or between that which goes before, and that which follows
after: But Exhortations are many times like unto Solomon's Proverbs, which
resemble Jewels or precious stones, not set together in order, or in any form
of special aspect, one upon another, but as it were laid together in great
heaps: Yet there is (I confess) a relative opposition, between the words read,
and the former part of the verse plainly intimated by this adversative Particle
But: And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: But be filled with the
Spirit. Which Particle clearly implies, that to be drunken with wine, (as we
have it) or, as the word (elsewhere) frequently signifies, To drink wine
freely, or to be given inordinately unto it, to sit upon the brink of the pit
of drunkenness, though (possibly) you may not fall into it; Is a thing
inconsistent with your being filled with the Spirit. For wine being freely
drank, as it inflames a man, or the body of a man: So on the contrary it
quenches the Spirit in him, and causes that to abate its fervency by degrees,
and to withdraw more and more from the Soul; or else obstructeth his entrance
into a man. For the clearing the sense and meaning of the words there are three
things briefly to be opened.

First, viz. from being drunken with, or from being given to much wine.

For the first, There are several significations of the word Spirit, (...),
which yet it is as clear as the Sun, that the Apostle has nothing to do with
in this place. 1. It sometimes signifies the wind, Joh. 3.8. 2. Sometimes it
signifies courage, or such a frame of heart which is opposite to despondency,
or extremity of fear, Josh. 5.1. Neither was there Spirit in them any more. 3.
It sometimes signifies the mind, disposition, or inclination of a man, Pro.
14.29. But he that is hasty [or rather according to the original, short,] of
Spirit. i. e. that is of a Choleric, or rash temper, or disposition, being not
able to contain himself, or hold out in patience, for a little season under
temptations, exalts folly. 4. It sometimes signifies the soul of a man; and
this is a frequent acceptance of this word in the Scripture. I need not cite
any instances for this, places of this import are obvious and frequent.
Sometimes the understanding, or discerning powers, or faculties of the soul are
signified thereby. Exodus 35.21.
Every one whom his Spirit made willing; i. e. whose judgment and understanding
in artificial work inclined him to a willingness in that kind, viz. for the
work of the Sanctuary. There are these, and several other significations of the
word Spirit, which by comparing the place in hand with the particularities of
them, it will be found as clear as the Sun at noon day, that they are none of
them to be understood, or meant in this place: and therefore for expedition
sake I shall omit them; Neither shall I argue against any of those several
senses, of the word Spirit even now mentioned.

That by the Spirit, divine Being, or Essence; Besides the concurrent judgment
of the best Expositors upon the place, It may be evinced from the Antithesis,
or opposition the words read have unto the former part of the verse; As also
from the comportance and perfect agreement in the next verse, with this
signification of the word Spirit.

For the first, the Apostle opposes their being filled with the Spirit, to
their being drunken, or filled with wine. Now take the word Spirit, in any
other signification whatsoever, besides that we have pitched upon, viz. for the
Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God, and you will not find any such emphatical
liveliness, in opposition between being drunken with wine, and being filled
with the Spirit: you may make trial, and take an account of particulars at your
leisure. But now between being drunk with wine, and being filled with the Holy
Ghost, or Spirit of God, there is such a strong clear and pregnant opposition,
that the one fights against (and excludes) the other; For he that is drunk
with wine, is full of the spirit of sin, and of the devil; and during either
the act or the habit, but especially the act of such a drunkenness, such a
person is utterly incapable for that time in sensu composito, so long as he is
under the power of his drunkenness, of being filled with the Spirit of God: As
on the contrary, he that is filled with the Spirit of God, is in no capacity,
during this his fullness, of being made drunk with wine wherein is excess: But,

Secondly, That by the Spirit, here is meant the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God,
is further evident from what the Apostle immediately subjoyns, in the next
verse: Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
making Melody in your hearts unto the Lord. As men that are drunken or enflamed
with wine are apt to speak to themselves, and to entertain one another, with
light, vain, and unsavory mirth, and Songs of carnal and sinful jollity: In
like manner, if ye be filled with the Spirit of God, you will be apt, and able
to speak to your selves, and solace and delight your selves, and be in a steady
posture to teach, and admonish one another, with matters of a spiritual and
heavenly import. So that God himself will take a holy contentment in your
mirth, and rejoice with you. Whereas the vain and sinful mirth of the others,
namely, of those that are drunken with wine, is the hatred and abhorring of his
soul. But now there is no filling with the Spirit in any other sense of the
word Spirit (that only excepted which is pleaded for) that is proper or likely
to qualify men or women for these spiritual exercises of an heavenly mirth: It
is only a being filled with the Spirit of God that is like to act or work the
heart and soul of a man into such a posture or frame of spiritual rejoicing. We
might further confirm this exposition, by taking into consideration all those
instances in the Scriptures (which are many) where men are said to be filled
with the Holy Ghost; and by comparing them in their respective context with the
Scripture in hand, we might show that the Holy Ghost there, and the Spirit
here, are one and the same, See Acts 2.4. c. 4.31. c. 9.17. c. 13.52. We read
likewise of persons full of the Holy Spirit, Luke 4.1. Acts 6.3, 5. c. 7.55. c.
11.24, etc. thus you see what is meant by the Spirit.

Secondly, filled with the Spirit? Or, What is it that the Apostle means, or
what is the nature or property of the duty he requires of them, and which is
imposed upon them when he charge them to be filled with the Spirit, or, as in
the Original, (...), be ye filled, in, or with, or through the Spirit? For to
be filled with the Spirit, or through the Spirit, is one and the same. Now,
fullness or filling, in the Scripture Language, do not always (indeed very
seldom, if at all) signify, an absolute or exact fullness, or a filling up to
the brim, (as we use to say) or as great a quantity or proportion of a thing as
the subject or vessel is any ways able to contain or receive; for, in this
sense, no man was ever filled with the Holy Ghost, except it was he that was
more than a man, the Lord Christ himself, to whom God is said to have given the
Spirit, (...), without measure, or not by measure, Joh. 3.34. But things or
persons, in Scripture Phrase, are said to be full or filled with a thing when
they have a good, rich, and plentiful proportion of it. Thus Acts 9.36. Dorcas
is said to be full of good works when she had done or performed many, and been
fruitful in well doing. In this sense of the word, the Heathen; of whom Paul
speaks, Romans 1.29. are said to be filled with all unrighteousness; Not as if
the meaning was, that they had as much wickedness as they were capable of, or
as it was possible for them to be filled withal: But that there was a great
degree of wickedness amongst them, and some doubtless were more vile, unworthy,
and abominable than others. But it is said, that they were full; that is, There
was abundance of unrighteousness in them, or amongst them. Besides other like
instances. So then, when the Apostle wills them to be filled with the Spirit,
or with the Holy Ghost, his meaning is, that he would have them have the Holy
Ghost very actuous and operative within them; or more plainly, That he would
have them take such a course, go so to work, (as we use to say) and so behave
themselves, that the Holy Ghost might be very actuous, operative, and vigorous,
and put forth himself, or his power abundantly in them. Or if we shall urge the
strict litteral sense, Then the meaning will be to this effect, Be ye filled
with the Spirit; that is, Let the Spirit advance his presence and power in you
as far and to what degree and height himself pleases: Do not distaste, check,
or grieve him in his way, by any neglect, or rejection of any of his motions,
by any unworthiness whatsoever; Do not obstruct him in his Progress, but
comport with him in all his applications unto you; and do not think you have
enough of him until you be filled with him even to the brim, and the
receptacles of your Souls will hold no more. This Exposition supposes that
Christians should desire and labor to obtain as much, or as great, and as rich
a presence of the Spirit of God as they are capable of, and as the heart, and
soul, and nature of man is able to bear. This sense of the word may very well
stand. And then his meaniag is not, as if the Apostle did impose a necessity
upon them to reach and attain unto such a fullness as we speak of, in the
highest degree; but only, that they should not content themselves with, or
pitch upon any degree inferior unto, or beneath the highest enjoyment of the
Spirit of God, they are capable of. As when a man bids his child to shoot at
the Sun, he does not intend, or imagine that his child should hit the Sun; His
meaning is, that he would have him put forth his strength in shooting as high
as he is able: So when the Apostle lays and imposes this upon the Ephesians
by way of duty, that they should be filled with the Spirit, his meaning is;
That they should behave themselves with all wisdom and understanding in the use
of all means, within the reach of their own arm, as if their design and
resolution was to be filled with the Spirit as full as possibly they could.

If it be demanded by way of Objection: Holy Ghost in the power of men? Or can
men do any thing to fill themselves with the Holy Ghost? Is he obnoxious unto
men, or within the compass of their wisdom and endeavors? Have men any thing
in their hands to do, whereby, or by the means whereof, they may fill
themselves with the Spirit of God?

We shall hereafter have occasion fully to answer to this question; only by the
way, (reserving that till God shall give opportunity) for men to do such and
such things, upon the doing whereof they shall have the Spirit of God more
operative and active, more intensive, and more raised in their hearts and
souls: I say, If the Apostle makes the doing of such things a means whereby
they may be filled with the Spirit, and cause him to delight in them; and
withal supposes men to be capable of doing such things, or using such means
whereby this blessed end may be accomplished; As it is evident he does by the
Exhortations and Injunctions which he lays upon them: Then men in this sense
may be truly said to be capable of filling themselves, or of being filled with
the Spirit, when they shall be faithful in the use of such means, which will
certainly accomplish this most desirable effect. Yet does it not follow from
hence, or from what has been spoken, That the Spirit of God is subject unto
men, or that men have any power (to speak properly) over him, or that he is any
way obnoxious unto them. This indeed follows from what has been spoken, viz.
That the Spirit of God has graciously subjected himself unto his own Laws, and
Rules, and Will in this case; and has been pleased to make such gracious
promises unto men, that if they will go along with him, and follow his leading
and ducture, they shall have as much of his presence and company as their
hearts can desire. I say, If men will but give up themsElves to his leading,
yea, and shall love to be moved unto, and acted in, things that are excellent,
and to be carried or transported this way, or that way, by Him: Such a
demeanor of men toward the Spirit of God will put him into a holy and
honorable capacity to advance in his presence in them, and toward them (I had
almost said) to what degree they please; and so to work them up from one degree
of holiness unto another, and consequently of joy, comfort, and peace, until
he has (as it were) brought them up into the Heavens. So then, the Premises
considered, the reason why men by doing thus, shall be filled with the Spirit,
is not simply or merely because men do such and such things; or as if there
were any thing considerable in what men do in order to their being filled with
the Spirit, as if there were any thing either of merit or desert in them; No
nor yet, as if there were any thing in what men do, in a natural way, able or
tending to produce such an effect as the being filled with the Spirit: But the
reason of this Connection and Conjunction of these two things; namely, that upon
the use of such means, as we speak of, this great effect shall be produced, or
end attained unto, viz. a being filled with the Spirit: The reason (I say) of
this Connection, is, the eternal Counsel, the gracious Law and Decree of God,
and so of the Spirit of God himself: He having set it down, and determined it,
and accordingly revealed it, That thus it shall be; so that the effect of being
filled with the Spirit of God, is not the result of the means: but the proper
product of that Eternal Law and Decree which God himself has made. For
otherwise, if we shall suppose that there were no such Law or Decree of God in
being; if men should use never so much means, do the same things a thousand
times over, it would never be accomplished; so that the reason why men come to
be filled with the Spirit of God upon the using such and such means, is not
because of the means: but it arises from the mighty force, and irresistible
power of the Decree of God; this is that which triumphs over all the use of
means. The Decrees of God are so full of grace and bounty, that they do not
stand to measure inches (as we use to speak) in the things of men, so, that
unless they find so much worth or goodness in them, they shall never pass with
God, neither the performers of them be made partakers of any rich anointing
from him. No: This is not the tenor of the Decrees of God in general, nor of
that of which we are speaking particularly; but it has a more favorable
aspect upon his Creature man, and imports such a thing as this. I know the
nature of my Creatures, Men, and Women, and the utmost of what they are able to
do, their weaknesses and frailties being considered; Yet let them but do what
they can, let them show their willingness to comply with me, and they shall
have as much assistance from me, and from my Spirit, to help them on in this
blessed design, of being filled with my Spirit, as their hearts can desire. And
indeed, this is one of the highest and greatest vouchsafements of God unto the
children of men, that he has opened unto them such an effectual door or way
whereby they may fill themselves, or be filled with the Spirit; All other means
which God by his providence has vouchsafed unto men, of another nature, as to
make them great, rich, honorable, etc. amongst them all, there is none
greater; Nay, none so great, and of so sacred an import unto them, as this
which we are speaking of, viz. That God has showed them a way, and vouchsafed
unto them means to be filled with the Spirit; which has this blessed tendency
in it, to raise them to the highest pitch they are capable of in the love and
favor of God. When men are filled with the Spirit, they are no more like unto
other men; They are more excellent than their neighbors: Prove. 12.26.
For by this means (as we shall hereafter show more at large) they shall be
enabled to act in a peculiar Sphere by themselves, leaving the world, yea, and
the Saints themselves, who have but a little or small proportion of the Spirit,
to move in a lower and more inferior Region; Whereas they shall mount up on
high, and be carried (as it were) on Eagles wings, enabled to do worthily:
Great and excellent things shall put forth themselves in them, things that
shall have more of heaven, more of glory, more of beauty, more matter for
admiration, than can be found in, or raised from the stirrings, movings, and
doings in the world round about them. So that by this you may easily judge, of
what a blessed consequence it is unto men to be filled with the Spirit of God.

3. The third and last particular, filled with the Spirit, by way of Antithesis
or opposition to the negative dehortation not to be drunken with wine. I
answer, this seems to be the reason thereof; because that which invites men to
drunkenness is a certain kind of jollity, lightness, or freeness of spirit that
is occasioned by the drinking of wine, according to the judgments of many who
write concerning the tempers of men, who say, that there is a kind of lightness
and frenziness of Spirit, which is occasioned by the drinking wine, wherein
some men take more content and satisfaction than they do in any other thing.
And therefore the Holy Ghost does direct them to such a course wherein they
shall have far better contentments, not (indeed) of the same kind, or flowing
from the same cause: but however they shall be satisfied in that which they so
much desire; they shall have jollity, lightness, and cheerfulness of Spirit
indeed of a far better nature, and upon far better and more excellent terms
than what they could expect from their being filled or drunken with wine. That
jollity or mirth of spirit which men please and solace themselves in, when they
are under the influence of wine, is but melancholy, and dull or dead, in
comparison of that mirth and rejoicing, that pleasantness of mind and spirit
which they shall certainly attain unto, and be made partakers of, if they would
but take the same course to be filled with the Spirit which they do to be
filled with Wine. So that this is the reason (as I conceive) why the Apostle
subjoyns this affirmative Precept unto the negative Dehortation.

The Doctrines, which we shall raise from the words thus opened, [But] which
(as has been said) notes an opposition between the latter part of the verse
and the former. Doctrine springs forth, viz. That drunkenness with Wine, or
inordinate drinking, is altogether inconsistent with a being filled with the
Spirit. Or if you will, we may phrase it thus: That inordinateness in drinking
is inconsistent with a filling with the Spirit.

Secondly, From the Phrase here used, Be ye filled with the Spirit; The
Apostle's meaning only being (as was showed) that he would have them use the
means, take such a course that they might be filled with the Spirit; Doctrine
is: That in matters of Religion, and things appertaining unto Salvation, to use
the means, and to obtain the end, are interpretatively and in effect one and
the same. Or thus: That in spiritual concernments, a regular use of means, and
the obtaining the end, are by the Counsel and Decree of God inseperably joined
together. The Apostle had in vain exhorted the Ephesians to be filled with the
Spirit, if having used the best means they were able thus to be filled, they
might notwithstanding remain empty. The Counsels and Exhortations of God in the
Gospel are not like unto a Lottery, into which a man may cast his money, and
yet be far enough from drawing a Prize.

Thirdly, to be filled with the Spirit, this Doctrine arises: That neither
men, nor women, can expect (I mean upon any sufficient, yea, or tolerable
grounds) te be filled with the Spirit of God, but by the use of such means as
are proper and appointed by God thereunto. If the Ephesians had had any reason
or ground to have expected this blessed accommodation here spoken of (viz. a
being filled with the Spirit of God) without their endeavors for the obtaining
of it, it had been impertinent and needless for him to have imposed it upon
them by way of duty.

Fourthly, (and lastly) From the plain, express, and full import of the Precept
or Exhortation we may observe: That it is the duty of all persons (especially
of all the Professors of the Gospel, or of Christianity) to be filled with the
Holy Ghost, or spirit of God. This being the Point that lies most clear and
large in the words read: Contenting our selves with the bare mentioning the
other three (unless something relating unto them shall occasionally fall in; in
our intended discourse) we shall proceed only with it.

First, Doctrine; had we no other proofs for it from the Scriptures but the
Text in hand, this alone by reason of the evidence and expressness of it were
sufficient to carry it: But there are other Scriptures also, which being well
understood, and thoroughly searched into, speak and import the same thing; as
(viz.) that it is matter of duty lying upon all men (especially those who do
profess Christianity) to be filled with the Spirit, Jude v. 19. Sensual, not
having the Spirit [namely, of God] as is clear from the Character he gives of
the persons here spoken of, unto the Christians that he writes unto: For, what
should be the reason, why the Apostle takes this notice of them? Namely, that,
whereas they separated themselves from the Congregation of the Saints, yet were
they sensual, not having the Spirit; who though they did pretend to a greater
degree of light, and more familiarity and acquaintance with the Spirit of God
than other Christians did; yet the Apostle tells those Christians to whom he
wrote that they should not believe them, because they were sensual, only
talking and boasting of the Spirit; which conceit, and confident presumption in
them, of their having the Spirit, was the ground or occasion of their
separation and dividing from the Assemblies of other Christians: But the truth
is (says our Apostle) they are sensual, not having the Spirit: Nay, they take
a course not to have the Spirit, which is by their giving themselves up to
sensuality. They (indeed) pretend to the Spirit, that so they might the better
satisfy themselves and others concerning the liberty which they take in the
ways of the flesh, such as other Christians did not take; bearing themselves,
and others in hand that they had the warrant for their practice by special
revelation: And they understood their liberty better than other Christians: and
that they came to this privilege by the super-Evangelical Communion which they
had with the Spirit of God; And yet notwithstanding all these pretenses the
Apostle positively concludes, that these men had not the Spirit; clearly
implying withal, that this was their sin not to have him; yea, and futther,
that their not having of him, did interess them in the guilt of many other
sins. That it was sinful in these (and is so in all others) not to have the
Spirit, is evident from hence; because they might have had and enjoyed him,
would they but have complied with God in the use of such means as he had
vouchsafed unto them for that end. And that it was nothing but sin and iniquity
committed by them that kept the Spirit of God from them; this may be gathered
from the testimony of God himself by his Prophet, Your iniquities have turned
away these things, and your sins have withholden good things from you Jer.
5.25. And that the Spirit of God is withheld from none, but only from those
that do refuse or neglect to ask him of God by prayer, is somewhat more than
affirmed by Christ in this high assertive Interrogation: If ye then being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children: How much more shall your Father
which is in heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Luke 11.13. So
also Joh. 4.10. compared with Chap. 7.38, 39. and Acts 5.32. God is said to
give the Holy Ghost to them that obey him. So that it was unquestionably sinful
in these sensual Separatists in Jude, that they had not the Spirit. Now then,
if this was matter of sin in them, not to have the Spirit: It clearly follows,
that it was their duty, and a thing that they ought to have sought after, to
possess and invest themselves with him. And if it were a matter of duty,
incumbent upon them simply to have the Spirit, to have him in any measure or
degree; then it follows, by a straight line in reason, or by a necessary
consequence, That it was matter of duty also unto them, to have him in the
greatest measure, and in the highest degree or proportion that they were
capable of attaining unto. For this is clear in reason, that whatsoever is our
duty simply to do, if the duty, or the doing of it, will admit of degrees, that
it may be done more or loss perfectly, (which is the condition of most duties,
if not of all:) then it is our duty to do it in the highest degree, and with
the greatest perfection. If it be our duty to love God (simply) then certainly,
to love him to a greater degree, yea, to the greatest degree of all, is our
duty also; namely, to love him with all our hearts, Mark 12.30.
souls, mind, and strength. So likewise, if it be our duty to love our
neighbor: Then is it our duty also, to love him with a pure heart, fervently,
1 Pet. 1.22. which is the highest pitch or degree of this affection. The case
is the same in all other duties whatsoever, and therefore we ought to
endeavor, and stir up our selves unto the most perfect manner of performance.
A duty is more our duty, and nearer to the intent of the Precept, or
Exhortation enjoining it, when performed with much intensness of mind and
spirit, and when it drinks up much of the heart and soul of him that
performs it, and consequently more acceptable unto God than when it is only
simply, barely, and cursorily performed. So that this Scripture does prove
plainly enough the truth of the Doctrine in hand: viz. That it is the duty of
all Christians to be filled with the Spirit: And if any man do fail of this
grace of God, and become sensual, it is because he does not comport with the
Spirit in his motions and applications of himself unto him; for by this means
the Spirit withdraws his former influences from such a person, and affords
him but a faint and scanty presence of himself afterward.

Again, These. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit, the truth of the Doctrine may be
further argued, even to a demonstration; For if it be a duty lying upon
Christians not to quench the Spirit: i. e. Not to do any thing that may justly
occasion him to cease from his wonted activity within them, stirring their
hearts, and causing them to burn with inflamed desires after God and Jesus
Christ, and the things of their eternal peace; I say, If it be a duty to take
heed of quenching the Spirit in such a way as this: Then must it needs be a
duty lying upon them to be filled with the Spirit, the fullness of whose
presence (as was formerly more than hinted) will cause their hearts to burn
within them, and (as it were) to mount up unto heaven in a flame. It is an
approved Rule, frequently made use of by learned Ministers, for the right
understanding of the Decalogue or Moral Law: That every Negative Commandment
includes the Affirmative contrary unto it: As that which forbids the
destroying, or the taking away the life of a man, enjoyneth withal the
preservation of his life with all tenderness and care. There is another Rule,
delivered by some worthy Expositors of the Scriptures, very necessary to
acquaint us with the emphatical import of some expressions here. The Rule is to
this effect: Adverbs of denying do very frequently import the contrary unto
that word unto which they are joined. Many instances of this Rule might readily
be given, but this may be done upon some other occasion: only for the present
take notice, that this Scripture agrees to that which is imported in both
these Rules. This Negative dehortation, Quench not the Spirit, carries in it
some such Affirmative and commanding Precept as this: See that you be prudently
industrious, and careful, with all diligence, to nourish and advance the life
and vigor of the Spirit of God within you; entertain him with all worthy and
honorable respects in your souls, let him have all the obedience that he
desires or requires of you: By this means you shall be so far from quenching
him in his motions and operations, that he will burn like a bright flame of
heavenly fire within you, and work wonderfully in your souls. That some such
sense as this was intended by the Apostle, in the said Dehortation, is not
obscurely intimated by that negative Precept, not to despise Prophesying,
immediately subjoyned unto that, of not quenching the Spirit; (especially) if
it be interpreted by one, or both the Rules given for the interpretation of the
former passage. For then, Not to despise Prophesying will signify, to put an
high esteem upon Prophesying; (that is, in the Ministry or Preaching of the
Gospel:) which is done, partly, by a constant or frequent attendance upon it;
as with reverence and fear; so with a lively and steady expectation of meeting
with God and much good in it; partly also, by a conscientious subjecting all a
man's ways, words, and works, unto the authority and guidance of it. Now not to
despise [that is, to honour] Prophesying, upon such terms as these, (and duly
honored it cannot be upon any other:) is a direct and pregnant course, to
cause the Spirit to take pleasure in us, and to be as fire in our breasts and
bones, not suffering us to be in the dark, concerning any such spiritual
things, which are necessary or meet for us to know; nor yet to be remiss,
negligent, or cold, as to ways and works that are truly honorable, and worthy
our high calling. And what does all this signify, being interpreted, but to be
filled with the Spirit? Nor is there any way more dangerous unto men, or more
threatening the great evil and misery of being emptied of the Spirit, than to
despise Prophesying, or the Ministry of the Gospel, which is called, The
ministration of the Spirit, (2 Cor. 3.8.) And the Ministers of it; The
Ministers not of the Letter; that is, Not so much of the words, matter, or
contents of the Gospel; but of the Spirit: Because the Spirit of God, according
to the counsel and good pleasure of God, in this behalf, is wont to join
himself, with the glorious truths of the Gospel, published and proclaimed by
his Messengers, when he has an intent or desire to go forth into the world,
and to visit the hearts and consciences of the Sons and Daughters of men. See
upon this account Acts 10.44. Gal. 3.2, 5. And as the Spirit (ordinarily)
comes unto the souls of men in a golden shower of Evangelical truths, rained
down upon them from the mouth of a Church Angel: So does he not only continue,
but increase and enlarge his presence in them, proportionably to that honor
and obedience which is given by them unto those truths by which he was brought
into their souls. Therefore as the despising of Prophesying, whether it be by
undervaluing or neglecting the Ordinance, or dispensation of it; or whether it
be by disobeying, and casting behind their backs the holy Counsels, and divine
Injunctions of it, is a ready way to quench the Spirit: So on the contrary, to
have this heavenly Ordinance in high esteem, and with constancy in attending
upon it, to join a reverential and awful subjection unto the voice of it in our
lives and conversations, is a method or means sealed by God whereby to obtain
that inestimable treasure of being filled with the Spirit. Thus you see how the
Apostles charge of not quenching the Spirit leads us directly, and by a clear
light to the acknowledgment of this: That it is every man's duty to be filled
with the Spirit.

That other Dehortation of the same Apostle, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
( Ephesians. 4.30.) being rightly argued and searched into, will give us the light
of the same truth at the bottom of it. But let us first consider what it is to
grieve the Spirit, and then we shall see by the light of the two rules,
mentioned in the opening of the former proof, how it does follow from hence,
That it is the duty of Christians to be filled with the Spirit. The Spirit here
spoken of is neither the Spirit of Man nor Angel, (as we shall have occasion to
show hereafter) but the eternal Spirit of God, the third Person in the Trinity.
Now to speak properly, this Spirit is not subject unto grief, nor any other
Passion whatsoever: But men are said to grieve the Spirit, when they cause him
to do, and act toward them that which men are used to do under the Passion of
grief. Now you know that men, whilst they are under the guidance of that
Passion, are listless, and indisposed unto action; Grief contracts and
straightens; it is of a wasting and consuming nature unto the heart and spirit,
( Psalm, 31.9, 10.) It makes men heavy, lumpish, and sad, averse unto all
action, as if they had neither life nor soul, (as we use to say) being like
unto David's Images, That have hands, and handle not; feet, and walk not, etc.
Psalm. 115.7. And Jobs three Friends (Job 2.13.) cast themselves down with him
upon the ground, and for seven days, and seven nights together none of them
speaking so much as a word unto him; the reason is given, because they saw that
his grief was very great: Meaning, as Junius well interprets it, That the
greatness of that grief, which they perceived had taken hold of the spirit and
soul of their Friend, so afflicted them, and because that sympathy and
commiseration had wrought such a grief in them, that they sat all this while
as persons astonished, and were not able to stir up themselves to comfort him;
by these instances you may see it is the nature of grief to contract the heart,
and to make men listless unto action. In like manner, the Spirit, through the
ungrateful, disobedient, and unworthy behavior of men toward him, is said to
be grieved, when by such means men have wrought him (if we may so speak) to the
like listlessness of acting, and putting forth the excellency of his power in
their hearts and souls as formerly he did, and does sometime in others. On the
other hand, a man is never in a right posture for action, or for the doing of
any thing that is of any good, or great concernment unto others, but when he
enjoys himself upon the highest and richest terms of satisfaction and
contentment: So then, the Spirit of God is said to be grieved by men, when they
shall deal so unkindly with or by him as to reject and neglect his heavenly
motions, and inspirations, by giving over such and such ways of honor,
Christian excellency and worth, which they had sometime lift up their hearts
and hands unto, and walked with delight in them: When men (I say) shall cease
to go on in such ways as these, and prefer the ignoble and base motions of the
Flesh, or of the World, before those that come from him, and which are all
honorable, and heavenly, such a demeanor of men toward the Spirit of God
grieveth him; that is, Makes him listless unto action, and causes him to
abate, and to fall lower in his operations, and to give out himself more
faintly than before: Whereas he had been active, and ever and anon stirring,
and provoking them, and this with efficacy and power unto this and that good
way and work; now he withdraws by degrees, and declineth these motions and
operations, upon which the soul of man becomes listless, and dull to any thing
of a spiritual concernment; like a Ship becalmed on the Seas, whose Sails a
little before were filled with fresh and pleasant gales of wind, carrying her
amain to her desired Port. Now then, if it be a duty lying upon Christians not
to grieve the Spirit; Then by the authority of both the Rules (by which we
found out the true sense of our former proof, both of them being as proper and
useful here) it is their duty also to cheer and delight the Spirit; I mean, to
keep themselves in such a frame or posture both inwardly in heart and soul, and
outwardly in life and conversation, that he may take delight in them. And if it
be the duty of Christians to be pleasing unto, and compliant with the Spirit,
simply, indefinitely, and in any degree; Then upon the grounds formerly argued
and made good, it is more their duty to endeavor with their whole heart and
soul to please him in the highest. Now, when he takes delight and pleasure in
any man, in more than an ordinary degree, he will signify not only his
contentment in this kind, but even the measure and degree of it also, by a
proportionable advancement of his gracious activity upon all occasions. This is
that we intend, and hold forth in the Doctrine from the Apostles expression of
being filled with the Spirit, which also by warrant of the same authority we
affirm to be a duty lying upon all Christians.

We shall insist only upon one proof more to confirm the truth of the Doctrine:
Be kindly affectioned (says the Apostle) one unto another, etc. Be not
slothful in business: but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.10, 11.
To be fervent in Spirit, especially in the Service of God, or of Christ,
requires a great presence or fullness of the Spirit of God in a man; For the
Spirit of a man acted only by it self, or by its own strength, wisdom, or
goodness will never rise so high in any true and real Service of god as
fervency of spirit does import. Neither will an ordinary presence or assistance
of the Spirit of God (himself) carry the heart of a man up unto any such pitch
of devotion: He that will have an ear to hearken to the voice of this
Exhortation, of being fervent in spirit in the Service of the Lord, must find
out a way how to engage, and how to comport with the Spirit of God, that he may
vouchsafe unto him a measure of his presence heaped up to make him capable of
so great and worthy an undertaking. Yea, men (I suppose) cannot be fervent in
spirit in doing any thing which they call, or judge to be the Service of God,
although it be a Service of their own fancy, or genius, or of some worse
deity, unless they be acted therein by a spirit more active than their own. So
then, if it be a duty lying upon all Christians to be fervent in spirit,
serving the Lord; then is it a duty that bears with the same weight upon them
to be filled with the Spirit: Inasmuch as the performance of the former of
these duties cannot stand but by the performance of the latter: so that from
hence it is evident that it is a duty incumbent upon all Christians to be
filled with the Spirit. Besides these Scriptures now argued, we might (if need
were) increase their number for the proof of our Doctrine, by arguing in like
manner all those Scriptures which require such things of men that cannot be
performed by men without a being filled with the Spirit; such passages of these
(which are not a few) do clearly import, that it is a duty, yea, a duty of
duties; such a duty without the performance whereof great numbers of other
duties will suffer, and never appear in their glory. Texts of this import are
these, with their fellows, Rom 8.13. Joh. 16.24. Luke 21.36.

CHAP. II. The first Reason of the Doctrine propounded and argued, viz, That it
is the duty of all persons (especially of all the Professors of the Gospel, or
Christianity) to be filled with the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God; Because if
men be not filled, or in a way of being filled, with the Spirit of God, they
will be filled with some evil Spirit one or other.
IT is therefore the duty of all Christians to be filled with the Spirit; of
being filled with any spirit contrary to the Spirit of God; and spirit of sin
and wickedness whatsoever. That it is simply necessary to prevent such a
polution or defilement, so miserable a state and condition as this; is not (or
at least ought not to be) a question unto any man, who minds but to any degree
the things of his peace. Now that it is a duty lying upon all, etc. to be
filled with the Spirit is evident, if we shall consider; that there are many
other Spirits abroad in the world, every one of which has a direct antipathy
to the holy Spirit of God. That which the Apostle John speaks more
particularly of Doctrines: Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they are of God, 1 John 4.1. may be said of Spirits in general:
For there are many Spirits walking up and down in the World, Isa. 19 3. a
spirit of perverseness, Deuteronomy. 32.5. a spirit of whoredom, Hos. 4.12. a spirit
of covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. a spirit of slumber, Romans 11.8. a spirit of fear,
2 Timothy 1.7. Now when principles, or dispositions in men, whether they be
disposions unto virtue and holiness, or unto sin and vice, are grown up unto
any fullness, so that they put forth themselves with force, and are vigorous and
active in them; It is usual in the Scripture language, dialect, or manner of
speaking, to express such or such principles or dispositions by the name of
Spirit: As when love acts vigorously in men, to express it by the name of the
spirit of love: So a meek and humble frame of heart, by a spirit of meekness:
So on the other hand, a perverse and froward spirit, by a spirit of
perverseness: an inordinate love of money, or inordinate coveting after riches,
by a spirit of covetousness.

Now the reason of this denomination to call covetousness where it is strong
and raised in men, and when they favor strongly of it, by the name of a spirit
of covetousness; and so, of fear, when it is active and vigorous in men, by a
spirit of fear: There is the same consideration to be had of love, meekness,
holiness, etc. for these principles or dispositions, when they are active and
vigorous, are as well denominated unto us by the name of spirit, as those which
are of a contrary nature and import. The reason hereof, is, First, to show that
when principles and dispositions in men are raised to any great degree of
strength, and become vigorous and active, and have gotten any considerable
power, in, or over men (if I may so speak) they are hard to be resisted; Even
as Spirits [or Angels] who, as the Psalmist says, excel [or according to the
Hebrew reading in the Margin, are mighty] in strength, Psalm. 103.20. they are
yery potent and powerful, not easy to be resisted in their operations: Even so
it is with principles, and dispositions, when they are grown to any
considerable height in men, and become strong, and potent, they are hard to be
resisted, and therefore called by the Holy Ghost by the name of Spirit. Or else
happily the reason may be (which I chiefly eye) because all dispositions in
men, and principles of action, whether good or evil, when ever they are raised
any whit high, and have gotten strength within them; there is some spirit or
other, good, or evil, that mingleth it self with them, and by this means does
add vigor and strength unto them, and does raise them above that measure and
pitch of strength and activity, which they would never be raised unto without
the interposure of some such Spirit, good or evil, properly so called. It is
true, When holy dispositions in men are in their greatest strength and glory,
there is but one Spirit by which they are acted, and that is, the Spirit of
God, or the Holy Ghost; who through the infiniteness of his power does answer,
yea, more than anwer, yea, even far surpass in power, the innumerable company
of unclean Spirits: and therefore when holy dispositions and inclinations are
raised in men, though they be many and various, and spring from different
principles in the heart and soul of a man; Yet this one and indivisible spirit
is able through, or by means of his concurrence with them, and influencing of
them, to add strength, power, and energie unto them, and enable every one of
them to fructify, and bring forth genuine fruit according unto its respective
kind. But now as concerning evil and sinful principles and dispositions; it is
very probable that the case is far otherwise: For as there is a vast number and
company of devils and unclean spirits, so is it no ways dissonant unto reason,
to conceive that they have their distinct employments and offices: One sort of
them may be employed to raise, stir up, and strengthen a spirit of uncleanness
in men: Another, a spirit of covetousness: A third, a spirit of malice and
revenge: A fourth, a spirit of gluttony and excess, etc. The Ephesians. 1.21. Col.
2.15. Mat. 12.25, 26.
Scripture, and that not obscurely, seems to countenance this notion, ( viz.)
that they are ranged into orders, and are under a kind of regiment, and that
they are in a straight band, league, and confederacy to carry on one and the
same grand design. And if so, their nature considered ( viz. their wisdom and
subtilty) it is most probable that every one of them is employed according to
his proper genius. Some, because they are of a more bloody and cruel nature
than others, may be employed to stir up, and to strengthen in men a spirit of
malice and persecution; Others, that are otherways disposed, may be employed
to stir up, and cherish a spirit of pride and wantonness; A third sort of them,
whose genius lies that way, to strengthen and increase a spirit of error: But
we may have occasion to speak more of this afterward.

In the mean season this is that which we say in the reason in hand: to be
filled with the Spirit of God, they will by degrees, (at least) and perhaps
sooner than they are aware, be filled with some evil and contrary spirit; a
spirit of some sin and wickedness, one or other. The reason hereof is plain,
and near at hand, because the evil and unclean Spirit, that is, the old
Serpent, Job 1.7.
commonly called the Devil, who walks up and down the world, compassing the
earth too and fro (as his own expression is) seeking whom he may devour: (...),
i. e. whom he may devour at once, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and with as much haste as possible may be; meaning by filling them with all
unrighteousness, with uncleanness, love of this world, fearlesness of God, and
of his Laws, Precepts, and Commands. For he (namely Satan) has no other
weapons to destroy men and women withal but these: And in these (and in these
only) lie his murdering and devouring attempts. So that where he meets not
with one that is greater, and stronger than himself to oppose him: And there is
but one to stand in his way, of whom the Apostle John gives this testimony,
That he that is in you (namely, the Saints) is greater than he that is in the
world, 1 John 4.4. I say, When he meets not, and is not encountered by this
Spirit of God, that is stronger than he; Yea, if this Spirit have not advanced
in his strength and assistance (by the means before spoken of) to some good
degree in the hearts and souls of men; He (namely, the evil one) is very likely
to prevail, yea, and questionless will prevail over men, and fill the hearts
and inward parts of men with all unrighteousness, covetousness, love of the
world, etc. and with all manner of sinful inclinations, dispositions, and
propentions, which will be their ruin. For sin (as the Apostle James
testifies) when it is finished brings forth death, Jam, 1.15. When it is
finished, i. e. impenitently persisted in, unto the last, it certainly brings
damnation, or eternal destruction upon men: Or if you will thus, Sin when it is
finished [or perfected,] that is, when it is raised, has much of strength and
power in the heart and soul of a man, and when they are full of sin: Then it is
apt and likely to bring forth death; the workings and operations thereof
incline, and tend strongly that way, yea, and will certainly issue in Death (as
was even now hinted) if it be not stopped in its way by a more than ordinary
care and diligence to make resistance against it. Now, that Satan or the evil
Spirit will certainly prevail with men and women to fill themselves with him,
or with his fruits, unless they be filled, or in a way of filling themselves
with the Spirit of God is evident upon these two gradual considerations taken
together.

First, that which is born of the flesh, according to our Saviors expression,
Joh. 3.6. i.e. inordinate desires, sinful inclinations, and lusts that are
engendered and occasioned by the flesh: I say, in both these considerations,
whether we take the flesh either literally, or metaphorically, it is wholly
confederate with Satan against the soul and spiritual life of man, ready to
open unto him, and comport with him in all his dangerous and destructive
applications of himself unto them: and consequently, such men, that are only
flesh, or full of it, receive the Laws of their minds from the inspiration
thereof, and are not furnished with any principles wherewith to oppose him; and
as it is said concerning John the Baptist, That they that persecuted him did
unto him whatsoever they listed: Mat. 17.12. Mar. 9.13.
Even so the Scriptures speak of, or concerning such persons as we are now
treating of; That Satan carries them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and fills them with what kind of lusts and uncleanness he pleases, yea, and
to what degree he pleases. When men are filled with the Holy Spirit, so that
it acts with much strength and vigor in them, and that they are subdued and
brought under the power thereof, the Scripture is used to speak of them as
wholly diabled and debilitated to sin. So the Apostle Paul speaks concerning
himself, (and of such others that were made partakers of the same anointing
with him:) For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor.
13.8. So on the contrary, they that are filled with the spirit of the devil
have nothing in them but what is born of the flesh, and therefore they can do
nothing for, but against the truth; no not in their own souls, judgments, and
consciences: still comporting with Satan against the truth, and their own
peace and comfort. But

It is a Question (perhaps) of no easy resolution; Whether there be any
person, man or woman under heaven who is wholly destitute of the Spirit of God,
unless it be those which have blasphemed the Spirit of God, and have stumbled
at that stumbling stone, which will certainly not only break, but grind all to
powder which shall fall under it: That sin which is the seed of immortal,
eternal, and irreconcilable hatred and alienation between the Spirit of God
and the Spirit of him whosoever he be that has committed it: I mean the sin
against the Holy Ghost. I rather (at present) incline to the affirmative part
of the Question, and do conceive, That there is no person of mankind, who from,
or after his first enlightening by the Spirit of God, upon, and after his
coming into the world, under the guilt of any sin or sins whatsoever (except
that sin only before excepted) that is, at any time until the day and hour of
his death, wholly bereaved of the presence, and assistance of the Spirit of God
with him. Of which my apprehensions I have (as I remember) heretofore given
some account, and may (possibly) have occasion to speak more largely unto it
hereafter. But for the present, Whereas some in the Scripture are said not to
have the Spirit. Jude the 19 verse sennsual, not having the Spirit (a Scripture
formerly made use of upon another occasion.)

I answer, the meaning is not, as if they had no degree or presence, not having
the Spirit, is meant, That there was no appearance of the exercise of the
Spirit, is meant, That there was no appearance of the exercise of the Spirit of
God in them: They appeared unto the judgments of men, as such who had not the
Spirit; their lives and conversations were such which did not show forth any
presence of the Spirit of God in them. A person, in the Scripture Phrase, is
said not to have that which he does not make use of, or improve, or that which
he does not seem to have; For unto every one that has (says our Savior, Mat.
25.29.) shall be given, and he shall have abundance: But from him that has
not, shall be taken away even that which he has. By him that has, (in the
former clause) to whom more shall be given, must needs be meant a man that
uses, or imployeth that which he has, so, and upon such terms, that he gives
an account unto the world, makes it known unto men that he has received some
Talent, one or more from God: For otherwise if we shall take the word [hath] in
a Grammatical, and proper sense, it will follow, that every one shall have more
given, and so every one shall have abundance. For all men have in such a sense
of having. All men have somewhat from God originally: But now in as much as he
(namely, who had the one Talent) is said to have buried it in a napking,
therefore our Savior presents him under this notion, and character of one that
had not; because he did not make use, or improve that which he had; took no
course to make it appear unto men that he had any such Talent, or means from
God. So it is frequent, and ordinary in the Scripture, to express one who uses
not what he has, and which gives no testimony or account of what he has, by
the Phrase of not having at all. In like manner, in the place under
consideration, where it is said, that men of such a Character have not the
Spirit; The meaning is not, that they had not the Spirit at all, or in no
degree: But only this that they being sensual, were chiefly guided, and that
their ways and works were influenced, by the flesh, and fleshly principles:
But as for the Spirit of God, he was wholly neglected, neither did they take
any course to improve his presence in them, nor to give any account unto men by
their lives and conversations of any presence of his with them. This is one
consideration from whence (in conjunction with that which follows) it appears,
that he that is not filled, or at least in a way of being filled with the
Spirit of God, is in eminent danger of being filled with an evil or contrary
spirit. The consideration (as you heard) was this, that whosoever is destitute
of the Spirit of God, or is wholly flesh, (in the sense declared) has nothing
wherewith to resist the unclean spirit that shall seek to enter into him, and
to fill him with his presence, but all things which are confederate with him,
and assist him.

Secondly, Mar. 6.5.) That being in his own Country he could do no great works
there because of their unbelief: The Evangelist Matthew, speaking of the same
thing, or recording the same History, ( Mat. 13.58.) rendereth it thus: That he
did not many mighty works, etc. Now that which Matthew expresses only in these
terms, That he did not, Mark, expressing the same thing, does it with more
Emphasis and weight, namely: That he could there do no mighty works, etc. He
could not work himself to be willing to do any great works: he had not any
motive before him to incline his will that way: but on the other hand, a grand
diswasive from it, and that which did quench and take off his will, and made
him listless to any such action, namely, their unbelief. Now what a man cannot
will to do, he may properly enough be said not to be able to do; because a
consent, or concurrence of the will, is every whit as necessary to an action as
the ability or power of acting. There are two things equally necessary to every
action: The one is, That the will be consenting thereunto; The other is, That
the person so willing and consenting have a respective power, or ability of
acting: when either of these shall be wanting, the thing or action can never be
done or performed. As if a man have not a will unto a thing or action,
impossible it is that ever it should proceed from him, or by his means. Now
certain it is, that the will cannot rise up unto a consent and concurrence with
the executive power in order to an action, unless it have potent and congruous
motives (one, or more) to help it up, or raise it: No man can will any thing
but only that which he conceives to be good, there being no other object
capable of affecting or moving the will: So then, the working of Miracles, or
great works about Nazareth, the sottish and wilful unbelief of the people
considered, had not in the understanding of Christ rationem boni, the
consideration of good in it; and so it was impossible that his will should be
moved, and affected by it, to consent unto it; and consequently it may very
properly be said, that he could not do any such things. In the same dialect of
speech, the Spirit of God himself may be said not to be able to oppose and
resit Satan in his attempting to fill men with sin and wickedness, when his
presence in and with men is despised and neglected, when they take no knowledge
of his being so near unto them, nor of his gracious offers to relieve, help,
and assist them against their spiritual enemies. For though his power of
executing, namely, for the frustrating and dissolving the attempts of Satan
which we are speaking of, be not impaired, nor (indeed) impairable (to speak
properly) by any negligence, unfaithfulness, or unfruitfulness of men
whatsoever; Yet the exerting, or putting forth of this power of his in such
cases, may be hindered by men, namely, when they shall so demean themselves
toward him, that he has no consideration before him to render him willing to
do it, but many to make him unwilling. Hence it comes to pass that the Spirit
may truly and properly be said not to be able to exert his power, or not to
unbare his arm for the assisting of men in their resisting and vanquishing of
Satan in such attempts as we speak of.

Another Scripture of the same character with the others even now mentioned you
have, Joh. 14.17. Where our Savior, speaking of the Spirit, tells his
Desciples, that the world cannot receive him; the reason he renders, is,
because it) namely, the world) sees him not, neither knows him: So that the
reason why the world did not receive the Spirit in that measure that the
Disciples did, is, because they did not see him, neither know him. Though he be
near unto them, yea, though he be in their hearts by his word; yet they not
minding nor contemplating this word of his, nor regarding his motions in their
souls, but suffering the eyes of their minds to be fixed upon this present
world, and the sins and vanities thereof, do not see him though he be near unto
them, and ready to do great things for them, had they a mind to employ him: But
their thoughts, and mind being otherwise engaged, and entangled, they do by
this means, and during the Regency of such principles, render themseles (upon
the matter) in an utter incapacity of receiving the Spirit; because they favor
so much of the Spirit of this world, and render themselves such a kind of
sinners, and such an unworthy generation, that the Spirit of God can have no
will, or lust, can take no pleasure or content to manifest himself unto them.
This is the second consideration, by which you may perceive, that unless men
shall take a course to be filled with the Spirit of God, they will lay
themselves open and obnoxious to be filled with some unclean spirit or other.

If it be here objected,

I answer,

Secondly, I answer further, That though the Spirit of God be most gracious and
free in all his operations and workings; Yet, as the Apostle Peter, speaking of
the Promise of the Lord Christ concerning his coming, says, The Lord is not
slack concerning his Promise, as some men count stackness, 2 Pet. 3.9. Even so
say I of the Spirit of Christ, That he is neither gracious, nor free-working,
as some men count gracious and free-working, he is neither the one, nor the
other in any way of contrariety unto himself, I mean, either to his own
holiness, or his love of holiness in men, nor yet to his wisdom, or the
interest of his glory, but only in a direct and clear consistency with these.
Some men's imagination or notion concerning the gracious and free working
disposition of the Spirit of God is,

1. That there have been, and are some men, to whom he never has, nor ever
will vouchsafe his gracious presence to the least degree, and merely out of his
freedom, has willed never to have to do with them little, or much; not because
of any peculiar strain of wickedness in them, but merely, and only (as I even
now said) from his own will and pleasure.

2. On the other hand they conceive, That God vouchsafes such a presence unto
some others, so powerful and effectual, that they are not able to resist the
motions, influences, and workings of it: but are necessitated thereby to
repent, believe, and work righteousness.

3. And lastly, Others notion of this grace and working of the Spirit is such,
as if no course or strain of sin and wickedness whatsoever in men, though still
persisted in, no impenitency, no neglect, or contempt, whether precedent, or
present of the Gospel, and of the great Salvation offered therein, were, or are
any way considerable, as to the obstructing or hindering the Spirit of God from
vouchsafing even the richest, highest, and fullest measure of himself and his
gracious presence unto them. Now that Neither the grace of God, nor the freedom
of the Spirit in working is to be estimated, measured, or computed by any such
notions or principles as these has been already sufficiently evinced, and
proved, and might here be done again would it not occasion too long a
digression. That graciousness and freedom of working which the Scripture any
where, yea, and sound reason it self, asserts unto the Spirit of God, consists
and shows it self in these particulars:

First, All men without exception having sinned in Adam, and thereby justly
deprived themselves of all friendly converse and communion with God; yea, and
justly incurred his high displeasure, hatred, and indignation: There was
nothing of any engaging, or inviting, much less of any obliging import in man
to move or incline the God of Heaven to have any thing more to do with him in
any way of love, favor, mercy, goodness, or the like, to the days of
Eternity: So that God having been pleased, notwithanding this low, and
despicable condition of his Creature man, to comport with him again upon terms
of grace, and reconciliation, and to offer himself unto him; namely, to be
re-enjoyed upon terms (and these very possible to be performed) by him, and to
put him into a capacity of blessedness and glory, his former provocations
notwithstanding: must needs be matter of pure and mere grace, and consequently
of free grace, so far as it was matter of grace at all.

If any shall say, The misery and sad extremity of the Creature man,

To this I answer:

2. That compliance, which God vouchsafed unto his Creature man, considered as
now misrable, is not properly matter of grace, or an act of grace, but of
mercy: so that though the mercy of God, out of which he has vouchsafed means
of relief unto man, may be said to have been invited, or wrought upon by his
misery; and in this respect not so absolutely free: Yet this hinders not, but
that the grace of God (properly so called) out of which he has been moved to
do any thing for the good of this Creature of his, may be absolute, and in all
respects every way free: For the object, or opportunity for grace to show it
self, or for to act, is not in strictness of consideration, misery, or
extremity: these are the appropriate objects, and opportunities of mercy. But
the proper opportunity for grace to show it self, is either:

1. A flat, or dead irrelativeness in point of merit in him to whom grace is
shown, or to be shown, in reference unto him that is supposed to show grace, so
that the person is no ways beholding, no ways debtor unto him, to whom he is
willing to show himself gracious: Or else,

2. A relation of demerit, injury, or provocation in him to whom grace is
showed, toward him that shows grace, or deals graciously by him: So that
he that shows grace, has not only no tie, or engagement at all upon him to
show any such thing; but on the other hand, has much before him to dissuade
and take him off from it: Now, if he shall be pleased to overlook all these
injuries, and shall (these) notwithstanding deal graciously, and show kindness,
this is properly an act of grace.

3. Neither was it simply, or only the misery wherein men lay plunged, that
wrought upon the mercy of God so far as to move, and prevail with him to open
that door of relief and deliverance unto him which now he has done; but it was
his misery so, and so circumstantiated in one respect or other: as is evident
from hence; because otherwise the misery whereinto those more excellent
Creatures of his, the lapsed Angels, are fallen, being every whit as great, if
not far greater, than that of man, would have had the same motive or operation
upon the mercy of God to do the like for them, which the misery of man had; and
so have prevailed with him to have provided deliverance for them also. But this
only by the way.

4. (And lastly for this) That which was properly matter of grace in God
toward man being fallen, was not procured, or drawn from him by any thing in
man any ways obliging him thereunto, or by any consideration whatsoever
relating unto man, or his condition; But was every way free, merely, entirely,
and absolutely from himself. And this is one thing, and the first thing wherein
the graciousness, and freeness of acting in the Spirit of God consists: viz.
That without any moving or obliging cause whatsoever from without, or on man's
part, He is pleased to entreat him sweetly, and lovingly, and to come unto him
(as it were from heaven) to visit him, to converse with the Children of men in
the secret of their hearts and souls, to instruct and teach them the things of
their eternal peace, to admonish and excite them to the embracing and
prosecuting of them, yea, and to follow them with his Promise to look after
them, and assist them. And these things he does to all men without exception to
a certain degree when they first come by the use of their judgments and
understanding, and by the putting forth of their consciences to be capable of
them; yea, and does increase, and advance these his gracious workings in them,
until either by a long continued neglect of his presence with them, or by some
higher hand of sin and wickedness practiced in opposition to such gracious
motions and transactions of his within them, they weary him, and quench those
gracious operations which his presence affords unto them, and bring it so to
pass that he takes no pleasure or delight in them.

Secondly, viz. That he is pleased sweetly and graciously to entreat men not
only without any cause on their part moving or obliging him thereunto: But
against many provocations that might in reason have persuaded him to the
contrary; I mean to have absented himself from them, and to have abandoned, and
abhorred them for ever, and left them to have perished in their sin eternally.
Who can number all that variety of sins and provocations which centred and met
together in and about that first and great transgression of Adam? What strain
of sin and wickedness was there wanting? There was unthankfulness, pride,
unbelief, contempt of God, sensuality, murder of Posterity, and that without
end, and what not (almost) of all that the soul of God abhors? And all this
great concourse and assembly of all sorts of Impieties and Provocations, from
the greatest to the least of them, were as so many Orators, and Pleaders
against man before God, and disswaders of him from ever respecting, or taking
the least care or thought what became of him: and yet the grace of God, and of
the good Spirit, (as we have both heard and known to our comfort) has through
that abundant freeness thereof magnified it self against them all. It had been
grace, yea, freeness of grace (in the strictest consideration of both words) if
God, or the Spirit of God should have moved in mercy, or love toward his
creature Man upon a level, or plain ground, I mean, without any worthiness or
desert, or any inviting consideration in man: But that the Spirit of God should
be in his visiting of men like a river of water running up a steep hill; my
meaning is, should vouchsafe to make applications of himself unto them, in
order to their eternal peace, against such height, and fierceness of demerit,
injury, and provocation, is (indeed) somewhat more than simply and merely free
grace, if we had a word of more excellent signification to express it by; and
the truth is, we want words to express it: For that grace which God has
vouchsafed unto men in their salvation, and in the means thereof, and in the
great condescension of the Spirit of God unto men, is more, and somewhat of a
higher nature, it carries a richer, and more glorious notion in it than simply
of grace, of mere grace, or of free grace; because this free grace might have
been showed unto men, in case they had never sinned. It was the grace of God to
create man upon those terms that he did, to put him in a capacity of continuing
in that honor and happiness wherein he was created, and to adorn him with such
rich and excellent qualifications; because the Creature could deserve none of
these things, it could deserve nothing before it was: But having sinned, for
God to exhibit such terms of love, and goodness, and bounty, as he has done,
this is somewhat more, if we know what to call it, than mere grace, or free
grace. The Apostle Paul makes it more than so: and an higher expression of it
than his, I think, could not have been given down from Heaven (at least, 2 Amat
compositiones Paulus cum Prepositione (...).
that should in any degree have been intelligible by men:) (a) For he takes his
beloved Preposition, (...), and compounds it with a Verb, which without it,
signified somewhat more than simply an abundance, and so calls it, (...), Grace
superabounding, or rather grace superredounding, But where sin abounds grace
superaboundeth, or abounded much more, Romans 5.20.

Thirdly, Huge Grot. in Romans 5.20.
is, that in all that he acts, and moves, and works in men, according to all
that variety and manifoldness of working, which proceeds from him at any time,
he does proceed by his own Laws, and these every ways gracious, full of equity
and sweetness; and not by any thing, any Law, engagement, or terms imposed upon
him by men. When men by having (as the Scripture expression is) that is, by
employing and improving what they have ( viz. from the Spirit; for men have
nothing of any spiritual or gracious import but from him) come to have more
given, ( viz. by this gracious Spirit) more light, more knowledge, more wisdom,
love, zeal, courage, faithfulness, etc. they come by this means to have in
abundance. Now they that have (in this sense according to our Saviors promise)
this advance of his presence, and growing tenor of his operation, do not
procure or draw it from him by any virtue, or engagement of merit, nor by any
terms imposed upon him by the endeavors, actings, or improvements of their
own; but only the rich efficacy and virtue of his most gracious good pleasure
and will, who was pleased to prescribe the Law of this grace and goodness unto
himself. As when God justifies and saves those that believe, he does it freely
of himself, and from himself, because he has made this Law unto himself, and
established it; he has published and declared, That whosoever believes in
Jesus Christ shall be justified, and consequently, saved, he does it freely,
and of mere grace, not by judging himself obliged to do it by any worth or
merit found in men's believing; and yet he does it constantly toties quoties,
and without failing; as often as he meets with believers in Jesus Christ, he
justifies them, he saves them. And (indeed) it is impossible he should do
otherwise, because (as the A postle informs us) he cannot lie, neither can he
deny himself in his truth and faithfulness: In like manner the Spirit of God
has prescribed unto himself the like Laws and terms for all his transactions,
dealings, and proceedings with men according to the tenor whereof, he will
enlarge and advance his presence in the hearts, and souls, and spirits of men,
and will not walk contrary to them, nor advance or put forth himself in any
eminency of working; but only where his lower or former motions have been
obeyed, and consented unto: Yet he does not this because men regard his
presence, but because he regards his own righteous counsels and purposes. That
which the Creature does in this case, is but a weak and inconsiderable thing to
engage such an infinite Spirit, as the Spirit of God is, to do such great
things as those in men. And as God will not save those that believe, because of
any merit that is in their Faith, but because the counsel of his will is so to
do: So the Spirit of God will not do as has been said, because of any
worthiness in men's compliance with him, but he has made this for a Law unto
himself, (and honors his own Law, and himself too, by observing it) To him
that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly: but from him that
has not, shall be taken away even that which he has. Now we shall prove from
that very passage, that it is a Law which the Holy Ghost has made, and
declares that he would walk by it toward the Sons and Daughters of men in all
their succeeding Generations to the worlds end. To him that [hath] that is,
that shows that he has, that declares that he has, that improves and imploys
that which he has, (namely, that which is given originally to him by way of
stock from the Spirit of God) to him, that thus has, shall be given; namely,
by way of addition, he shall have more abundantly; he shall still be going on,
and be having, and having, and having; he shall have, and have still: At last
he shall have abundance, he shall have a full and glorious estate in Spiritual
riches, in wisdom, in knowledge, in understanding, in Faith, in humility, in
love, in zeal, in temperance, in patience, and whatever else is necessary to
enrich the soul of a man, and to prepare him, and put him into a capacity of
the richest and highest glory. So that we see this is a clear and declared
method, by which the Holy Ghost will proceed with men and women in his
communications of himself unto them. And though their be nothing in the
creature to invite and move him in this kind, yet nevertheless there is his own
wisdom, his own righteousuess and goodness, by which he made this Law, and
imposed it upon himself: these are sacred engagements upon him, to do all that
he does in the case we speak of. And (doubtless) there was abundance of reason
which did induce him to it: whereof though we be not so capable (for his
Counsels are very deep) yet something in the business may, with good
probability, be conceived by us. But for the thing it self, he (it seems) will
do it as constantly as universally (at least in his ordinary dispensations) as
if it were the greatest injustice in him, and most inconsistent with the
rectitude and purity of his nature, not to do it.

It may be here objected, Pentecost, like a mighty rushing wind, I mean, with
an high hand of power and conviction, and so in short time works the great work
of Conversion and Repentance in them? Was not Paul a stiff-necked Pharisee and
Blasphemer, a Persecutor of the Gospel, and of the Saints, all his days
before? Yea, (as himself says) the chiefest of sinners? And did not the Spirit
of God come upon him, as a whirlwind, with a strong and high hand in an
irresistible and miraculous manner, to effect his Conversion? To this I answer:

First, That when with the Holy Ghost himself, we say, that unto him that has
shall be given, and interpret this to be meant of the Holy Ghost, advancing his
presence and operations in men, even as they hearken unto him, and
(respectively) comport with him in his preventing and lower motions; And so
again on the other hand, That from him that has not, shall be taken away even
that which he has, understand it of the Spirits withdrawing of himself from
men, and falling lower and lower in his presence, and motions, proportionably
to men's unthankfulness, neglect, and opposition to him: we do not conceive
either of the one or the other of these Lawsor Rules, as if the Holy Ghost
would universally, and in all cases whatsoever, bind himself unto them,
especially to that in either of them, which bears hard upon the Creature; but
that our Saviors meaning was only to declare unto the world what the Common
Laws or terms of the Spirits proceedings and dealings with men would be, and
what men were to trust to, and expect ordinarily from him, and so bethink
themselves of behaving themselves accordingly. If you ask me, what I mean by
that which bears hard upon the Creature in each of the Laws or Rules
mentioned? I answer, concerning the former Rule, to him that has, shall be
given; if it should be meant, that the Holy Ghost will give unto none, but unto
him that has, (that is) that improveth and makes use of what he has
received, this would bear hard upon the Creature. By bearing hard, I do not
mean any manner of injustice or unrighteousness, or hard dealing of the Holy
Ghost toward men; but only such a thing, which if it should take place, and be
done, would turn to the damage or loss of the Creature, as it must needs do
unto many, if that the Holy Ghost should give only unto those, and to none
other but those that are said to have: because the greatest part of men have
not (in the sense of this saying) but the Holy Ghost may walk by this Rule;
that is, may give to every one that has (in the sense declared) and yet may
give to many also that have not: as a rich man may give relief to all his poor
neighbors, and yet sometimes give an alms to him that is a stranger also. As
to the latter Law, From him that has not, shall be taken away even that which
he has, it is not necessary to suppose, neither, that this should import, that
the Holy Ghost should universally, or in all cases without exception, wholly
desert or forsake him that has not, (that is) does not always entertain his
motions respectfully, and apply himself unto them. Nay, I suppose, that in the
rigor of this sense this Law is never observed by him. For according to this
sense it would follow, that if a man should for never so short a time, were it
but for a day, or an hour, deal unkindly by the Holy Ghost, neglect, or reject
his motions, that he would out of hand totally and finally withdraw himself
from him. But as to this point, the Scriptures frequently show the case to be
far otherwise, and that the Spirit of God is full of patience and
long-suffering toward men, even toward froward and gainsaying men, waiting a
long time upon them, if yet they will consider and bethink themselves of
compliance with him. How long ye simple ones (says the Spirit of wisdom, Pro.
1.22. to foolish and froward men) will ye love simplicity, etc. which shows
that this Spirit had for a long time attended upon them. And so 2 Chronicles. 36.15.
The Lord God of their Fathers sent unto them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place. And they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his
Prophets, and misused his messengers, until the wrath of God rose upon them,
and there was no remedy. This passage plainly shows, that the Spirit of God
fought (as it were) a pitched battle with them, or rather with their
wickedness, endeavoring to overcome it. He had them under his hand, and was
persuading and instructing them for a long time, before he withdrew himself
wholly from them.

And therefore when our Savior threatens, from him that has not, shall be
taken away, etc. the meaning, first, must needs be this: From him that has
not, (viz.) within some considerable time, after that the Spirit of God has
graciously entreated him, and lovingly stroven with him. He that does not
within the time of a man (as we may say) that is, in which men may very well,
and (as we use to say) at leisure, bethink themselves of the grand concernments
of their souls, and within which, usually such men, as do ever repent, are wont
to repent, and return unto God; from such a man the Spirit of God will withdraw.

Secondly, Concerning that clause, shall be taken away even that he has; the
meaning is not, as if all that such a man has, all the presence, or gifts, or
gracious workings of the Spirit, shall be withdrawn from him suddenly, or at
once; but shall be taken away (viz.) by degrees, and in time: Such a man shall
still be on the losing and declining hand, as long as he is amongst the number
of those that have not, and at last will be stripped of all, and left utterly
naked.

Thirdly (and lastly) That which I would have especially to be considered in
this Minatory, or Penal Law, asserted by the Scripture, From him that has not,
shall be taken away even that which he has, is not so to be understood, either
as if in no case, or for no accommodation, either of the Gospel, or of Men, or
of the Glory of God, or the like, it were dispensable; or as if the Holy Ghost
had so obliged himself by it, that upon no occasion whatsoever he would vary
from it; but this Law is enacted in Heaven upon these terms, that it should be
the express, the usual, and ordinary course, which the Holy Ghost would observe
in treating with men, about the great matters of their peace, and that no man
shall expect other dealings from him, the said Law being most equitable and
just, meetest (indeed) to be the standing Law of his transactions with men;
however, in some special cases, a strict observance of it might not be so
expedient.

It is very frequent in the Scriptures, Sam, 2.30. I said indeed (speaking unto
Ely) that thy Fathers house should walk before me for ever; there was no
Condition expressed in this Promise of God unto Ely his Fathers house: But yet
it is clear in Ely his own case, and the instance of his own person, that God
in this promise intended a Condition which he had reserved to himself, which
was, that in case his Father, and those of his Posterity, should walk
uprightly, and serve him in the great Office and Dignities of the Priesthood,
as became the Honor, and Holiness, and Majesty of it, then the Priesthood
should never have been translated from him. And so Acts 27.24. Paul says that
an Angel of God appeared unto him, bidding him to be of a good courage, God had
given him the lives of all that were in the Ship with him. Now, though this was
absolutely delivered unto Paul by the Angel, yet in the 31 verse it appears
that it was a conditional promise, for (says Paul to those in the Ship
concerning the Mariners) except these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved. And
so Ezekiel. 33.13. When I shall say unto the righteous man, he shall surely live;
that is, when I shall declare it as my positive and real purpose and intention,
yet if he shall trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity,
notwithstanding this promise of mine, in his iniquity he shall dye. And
(indeed) more generally all the threatenings of destruction denounced by God
against wicked and ungodly persons, you shall find them (more generally I say,
if not constantly) delivered in positive and absolute forms of speech, 1 Cor.
6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be
not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Here you see that this threatening against wicked
men is delivered absolutely. And yet we all know, that there is a Condition of
repentance included; which intervening keeps off the threatening from being
executed upon the offender. If a man be a covetous person, or an unclean
person, the threatening goes forth against him absolutely; and yet, through the
grace of the Gospel, if this person shall repent, and turn him from the evil of
his ways, he shall not be excluded from the Kingdom of God. Jonah 3.4. Yet
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet we know, that forty and twice
forty days passed over their heads, and yet the City not destroyed: The reason
was because the threatening was but Conditional, though not a letter or tittle
of it did appear unto Jonah until the event declared it. So that, when by
authority of our Savior his declaration of that great Law of heaven mentioned
touching the Holy Ghosts proceedings, and treatings with men, in and about the
great matters of their Salvation, we teach and affirm, that the Holy Ghost
still advances, or retreateth in the souls of men, as his entertainment is,
either kind or unkind; We do not intend to affirm, either that there never was,
or that there never will be any case wherein he will not take liberty to act
above the line of that grace which is stretched over the world in that Law: But
only thus (as has been already touched) that the Law mentioned (so understood
as has been opened) is the common Law, it is all the Law God would have the
world to take notice of; in particular, and according unto which he would have
men expect measure from him, and from his Spirit. If sometimes he acts by
another Law, this is but Lex horae (as the Jewish Doctors are wont to call a
Precept or Law given man in an extraordinary Case) the Law of an hour; whereas
the other is, Lex seculi, the Law of an Age, and this does not reflect any
error, falsehood, or disparagement upon the general Law.

Secondly, Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife; therefore God also,
because he would put an end to all doubtings, jealousies, and troublesome
debates in the minds of men concerning his truth, and faithfulness in his Word,
and great Promises of the Gospel, he swears too. So likewise in Laws enacted by
men, this being a common and standing principle, Lex non curat particularia,
the Law does not regard and take notice of particular or extraordinary Cases.
Laws are made, and ought to be made, only for ordinary Cases, for Cases of
ordinary and frequent occurrence or concernment amongst men. There may be a
Constellation, or meeting together of such Circumstances, once, or at some one
time, which are not like to be found in the same Position again for many Ages
after: And so may constitute a case extraordinary, like unto which another may
not fall out in many Generations. Therefore men do not (nor, indeed, well can)
make Laws for the regulating of such Cases, but leave all such to be regulated
by the known and general principles of common Equity, together with the
Sovereign Law, the good, and benefit, and welfare of the Public, for which the
ordinary and standing Law was made. So that in case the benefit of a variation,
or digression from the standing Law be manifestly expedient for the good and
safety of the Public, the standing Law is not thereby violated or broken: And
(doubtless) it was the very intention, of the Lawmakers themselves, that their
Law, calculated for the regulating ordinary cases only, in such cases as these
(I mean extraordinaries) should be waved: So that now, upon the account of the
benefit and safety of the Public, men may walk contrary to the Letter of the
Law, and yet be blameless, and no transgressors of the Law. In like manner,
when God makes general Laws, and Rules, and declares them unto the world, that
these are they by which he will move, and act, and treat with the children of
men; his intent is notwithstanding, to leave these Laws to be regulated by
himself according to the exigency and requirement of the general good, and
public benefit of mankind; which by his wisdom he is able to estimate and
judge of, knowing how to regulate all his proceedings with men, as well in
extraordinary as ordinary cases, for their profit, in conjunction with his own
glory.

Thirdly, cases to that supreme Law we speak of. In like manner, when the Holy
Ghost comes in unto, or falls upon any person, man or woman, on the sudden,
when they have been formerly and until then vain, loose, and profane, it is
upon some special and weighty occasion, and of high importance for the benefit
of the generallity of men; not so much for the benefit of any single or
particular person; no: but for matter of greater consequence and more
comprehensive than the good or benefit of any one. I say, when ever God varies
from a general Rule, it is always in order to the benefit and relief of the
communities of men, as (for example) for the preserving and keeping alive, in
the judgments and consciences of men, some great principle of truth, one, or
other, which was ready to dye, and so be lost in those parts of the world where
his providence so acted. Now to preserve and keep such a principle alive in the
souls and consciences of men, if God shall appear in an extraordinary manner,
or the Holy Ghost work out of course, it is a sign that it was not likely to be
preserved by any other means; or however, not by any means so proper, or so
well consistent with the wisdom of God as this. For that is to be minded: when
there is any ordinary way, or means, to accomplish any end, as (to instance in
our present case) to preserve and keep alive any great truth, then, and in such
cases, God never betaketh himself to that which is extraordinary. But as to the
business in hand; an instance may be in the Apostle Paul his Case: he gives
this account of Gods going out of his ordinary way of Grace, in bringing him
unto himself, viz. That it was for the benefit of men, yea, of such men, who
were not like to be wrought upon otherwise. For this cause (says he) I
obtained mercy, [not so much for mine own sake principally, but] that in me
Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them that should
afterward believe on him to eternal life, 1 Timothy 1.16. As if he should have
said; God in vouchsafing that extraordinary grace to me in my conversion, in
bringing me to the knowledge of Christ, did not look so much on my salvation,
nor upon the great benefit that I should receive from it; but was pleased to
pitch upon me, that he might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to
them that should afterward believe, he speaks here of his own Countrymen, the
Jews, that were called, or to be called, to believe on Christ. And because God
would give an advantage unto them for their believing, being a stubborn and
stiff-necked Generation, a people that had desperately rebelled against the
Gospel, he was pleased to set this Apostle as a Pattern for them; that when
they had such a Pattern before them, they might conceive thus with themselves:
There was a man every whit as wicked as we, as unworthy, as great an enemy to
Christ and the Gospel, as we; yet he was called, and with a high hand of
acceptance received, therefore (doubtless) we may trust in him, and expect,
that if we will subject to him, and come in and accept of mercy, we shall be
received into grace and favor also. So now, if there can be any such instance
produced in our days, or in the places where we have conversed, viz. That any
extraordinary thing has been done for men in a way of a real and through
repentance and conversion, (for a seeming repentance and conversion may be in
many where true repentance is seldom wrought) but if (I say) there can be the
truth and reality of any such unusual work of the Holy Ghost demonstrated;
(doubtless) there was, or is, some great principle, one or other, some
important truth in a declining condition, in those parts and places where any
such extraordinary power of God, and of his Spirit does appear; and it is to
keep alive, and in power and authority such a Doctrine. As for instance, it may
be the free grace and mercy of God, and that readiness in him to entertain and
receive Sinners whenever they shall return unto him; this great truth (I say)
may be so weakened in the judgments and minds of men, that it may need more
than an ordinary confirmation: And so that men have no cause to be jealous of
their former courses, as if these having been so wretched and vile, they might
repent, and yet be cast out from God. Again, That wicked men have as much right
unto, as much to do (if not more) with the Promises of the Gospel, as Believers
themselves: and so that persons, that have not been so, or so, humbled, or
terrified by the Law, may as lawfully, yea, and as truly believe as those that
have been in the greatest terrors of Conscience by means of it; Now, for the
relieving and reviving of such Evangelical Principles and Conclusions as these,
and the like in the hearts and Consciences of men, there may [possibly] be some
extraordinary working of the Holy Ghost, in and about the conversion of some
man, or some few.

Fourthly, Primum in unoquoque genere est excipiendum: That the first of every
kind of things is to be excepted (meaning, from the Common Law of the rest:) So
that in this case God does go along with men in their own manner of
proceedings. To make the observation clear; When God gave being to the first
man Adam, intending by him the propagation of great numbers of men, he did not
observe the decrees or Laws of nature or natural production, which he does in
giving life and being to other men: So when he began that Church, the members
of which were afterward numerous, even the whole Nation of the Jews, he
appeared unto, and called Abraham in somewhat an extraordinary manner: This was
the first beginning, the head of that kind of dispensation in the world. For
God had not a peculiar Church raised out of any stock or generation in the
world before: it was to him the beginning of Churches. No marvel then that he
should begin this Church after another manner, and in a method somewhat varying
from that which he took in after Ages for the propagating of the members of it:
Yea, or of such of the members of it, who in Faith and holiness resembled
Abraham their head. So likewise when God began to take unto himself a Church of
the Gentiles; he proceeded (we know) in sundry particulars in somewhat an
extraordinary manner; which we shall not at present stand to mention. We may
yet take another instance: When God set on foot that great Ordinance of
Circumcision, the Command was, that Abraham, being now ninety nine years old,
should be circumcized; whereas the common and standing Law for the
administration of this Ordinance afterward, was, that the Male-child was to be
circumcized at eight days old. So likewise in case of Baptism, in the beginning
of this ministration, there was one called to this employment in an
extraordinary manner, and who himself had not been baptized, but none of the
after Dispensations of this Ordinance was to be performed, or practiced upon
such terms, either in the one respect, or the other. So then, Paul being the
first Founder under Christ, and great Father, of the Gentile Churches (1 Cor.
4.15.) as Abraham was (though in somewhat another sense) of the Church of the
Jews, and being intended by God (as we lately heard) for a Pattern of believing
unto the unbelieving Jews, it is agreeable to the general Rule concerning
beginnings, and beginners of Administrations (formerly mentioned) that there
should be somewhat more than ordinary in his conversion.

Fifthly, But then (in the next place) though God, Paul said of himself, that
he was the chiefest of sinners, yet notwithstanding this (says he) I obtained
mercy, because I did it ignorantly and in unbelief. Therefore there was
something in Paul, though far from any thing that did balance in value or
consideration the extraordinary mercy vouchsafed unto him, yet something (I
say) there was, there was a certain negative frame of heart (as we may call it)
in him, and that during all the time of his wickedness, which God did take
notice of as comparatively good; and had it not been found in him, the grace,
which he so much magnifies, had not been vouchsafed to him. For if therefore he
was received to mercy, because, though he did thus and thus wickedly and
unworthily, yet he did it ignorantly and in unbelief (that is, not knowing, not
believing the Gospel to be from God, nor those to be his servants whom he
persecuted) he did it upon lightning and easing Circumstances, which took off
much of the guilt and provocations of it in the eyes of God. If this was the
reason, why he received mercy, or at least, that, without which he had not
received mercy, it follows clearly, that had he done these things with
knowledge, and against the light of his judgment and conscience, or believing
the things of the Gospel to have been true, certainly he had never seen that
great salvation of God, but had been excluded from it with the rest of the
wicked of the world. So he had another strain, which God was much delighted in,
which was, to be zealous for him, and in his cause according to the real
persuasion of his soul and conscience: and therefore (says he) God who counted
me faithful putting me into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. And thus we see, that
even in Paul's Conversion it self, which was objected to infringe the credit,
and disparage the truth, of that which (from the Scriptures) we showed to be
the general standing Law, or Rule, by which the Holy Ghost walks toward men in
all things, wherein he has to do with them, as in his fluxes and refluxes, in
his advances, and in his retreats, etc. We may see (I say) in the case of Paul's
Conversion (as it has been briefly, and in some particulars only, presented)
that when he does upon some extraordinary occasions recede from the said Rule,
yet he keeps as close and near to it, as conveniently he may, he walks (as it
were) within sight of it. For though Paul had been a grievous sinner and
blasphemer (as we heard) yet he had not debauched his conscience, nor offered
any indignity or affront to this great Vicegerent of God within him. For as
himself afterward (when he was not like to speak an untruth, being now filled
with the Spirit of Christ) professed; He verily thought with himself that he
ought to do many things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 26.9. And
that as touching the righteousness of the Law he was blameless, Phil. 3.6. That
he was zealous toward God, Acts 22, 3. And for his great sins of persecuting,
and blaspheming, these were committed by him, not only ignorantly (that is,
without his knowing them to be sins) but out of ignorance, that is, upon such
terms of an ingenuity of conscience, that had he but known them to be sins, he
would not have committed them. For he that is zealous toward God, (as Paul
was, as we lately heard) cannot but, upon knowledge and conviction that any of
his ways are hateful unto God, presently hate and abandon them. Now such
things as these being in Paul before his Conversion, though I am not willing to
say (because I am not confident in believing it) that they did reduce him into
the number of those, who, in our Saviors Rule (all this while discoursed) are
said to have (in the sense formerly declared) to whom it is promised, that more
shall be given, and that they shall have abundantly, yet (doubtless) they were
both of them of such an import in themselves, and of such an interpretation
with God, as to place him in a very near neighborhood unto them. So that if it
must be granted that God, or the Spirit of God did not, in Paul's Conversion,
act by that Rule, which we affirmed to be his odinary or standing Rule observed
by him in his actings, yet certainly he did herein act by such a rule, which
holds good correspondence therewith, and is of near affinity with it.

However, By what has been formerly argued, and said, you may see clearly,
that it is no derogation from the truth, or from the authority of a general
rule, that there are some instances now and then that do digress and vary from
it. The credit and authority of the Law, or Rule under present consideration,
is not impaired, nor at all shaken thereby; because in such Cases there is
another Rule, and Law of grace, (though this be a Law of grace too) yet there
is a Law of superior grace, and of more transcendent goodness, which does
overruled the common and standing Law which God has thought fit to propose
unto himself, and unto his Spirit, for his dealing with the world. And for
exceptions, it is a common saying and true, that an exception from a general
Rule, strengthens and confirms the Rule in all particulars not excepted (for
there is no general Rule, as the saying is, that has not some exceptions.) Now
these exceptions that are to be found, from the general Rule we speak of, are
so far from taking it away, or making any breach upon it, that (indeed) they
give great confirmation and authority unto it. By that standing Rule we speak
of, God does explain himself to this effect, that men should not expect any
extraordinary coming of the Holy Ghost upon them, but wait for him in his
ordinary way. And the truth is, those standing Laws and Rules, of which we have
spoken, may be the result of the choicest and most excellent wisdom of the Holy
Ghost, and of God in ordaining them; and yet it may be a point of the same
wisdom likewise in some cases to act contrary to them. There is a time (says
the wise man) to build, and a time to pull down; though these be contrary
actions, yet according to the exigency of differing times, and seasons, and
occasions, both may be done with a like wisdom. So that the Holy Ghost may
ordinarily walk by one rule, and yet in extraordinary cases may walk by another
Rule, and both with uniformity unto his grace and goodness toward the world.

But it will be still objected, That the Holy Ghost does not move, or act, by
any determinate Law prescribed unto himself, no,

But in the sixth place we shall add this, (to the five preceding, which we
will not stand now to name) that persons, that have been loose, profane,
despisers of God and the Gospel, etc. may on the sudden, and at once, seem to
be truly converted and brought home unto God, when that which is wrought in or
upon them in this kind, is but either that which some call a Sermon-sickness,
when the Conscience of a man is only troubled, or wounded with the dreadful
concernment of the things he hears, but soon after recovers himself out of this
fit, and is the same man he was, or worse than before.

As when Paul before Felix was reasoning of Righteousness, Temperance, and
Judgment to come, it is said that Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. But this was but
like an earthquake, under which the earth is much troubled, and shaken, as if
it would be removed out of its place, but soon after recovers, and returns to
its wonted stability. Or else the work we speak of, suddenly wrought in loose,
sensual, and profane persons may possibly not vanish and come to nothing, and
yet not be a real work of Conversion; yet does it not follow, that the Holy
Ghost should be found therein to recede from his own Law mentioned, To him that
has shall be given: because (possibly) a man may have more in him by way of
improvement within the space of one hour, and perhaps in a far shorter time
than another in the space of several hours, yea, or years, and yet be an Haver
too (in the sense formerly declared) my meaning is this, That a man or woman,
may (possibly) with a less assistance of the Spirit more effectually provoke,
and stir up themselves, and advance their minds, and attentions, to the hearing
and considering of the Gospel, the words of eternal life, when they are
speaking unto them, than another man with a greater measure of assistance of
the same Spirit may do within the space of a far longer time, and yet be doing
somewhat all the while. As in matters of a Civil concernment, one man with a
lesser stock, only with more diligence and wisdom, may advance his estate more
within the space of one year, than another with a greater stock, being less
industrious and provident may do in three, and this man may not go backward
neither. That has been heretofore signified unto you, that the Holy Ghost
seldom or never withdraws from any man so low (unless it be in the case of the
unpardonable sin) but that a person may, by means of his gracious presence with
him, if he will provoke and stir up himself accordingly, he may consider the
things of his eternal peace, and act and behave himself accordingly. That God
is said to open the heart of Lydia, Acts 16.14, So that she attended to the
things that were spoken by Paul, does not prove that Lydia had a greater
presence, or assistance of the Spirit of God, than any other that were present
at the preaching of the Gospel whereby she was converted: But only notes the
happy event and success, which that assistance she had, had in, and upon her
heart, like unto which there was none wrought or produced, in any other there
present, by any presence or assistance of the Spirit which they had. This is a
Principle, or Rule, according to which many things are spoken, and are to be
taken and understood in the Scriptures, viz. that when one and the same action
is raised and produced by a joint concurrence of two different causes: one
principal and independent in its efficacy, or working, the other subordinate
and dependent in the acting thereof; the effect, or work, produced between them
is sometimes (as in good propriety of speech it may be) ascribed to the one,
and sometimes to the other; but more commonly to the former, that which is the
principal. So that act of opening Lydia's heart, because God was the principal
agent in it, and cause independent in working it, though this was not, could
not be without Lydia's act in consenting. God opened, and she opened too, for
she repented and believed, (see Rev. 3.20.) yet the work is ascribed only unto
God: But this by the way.

Seventhly, viz.) a person on the sudden converted and brought home unto God,
which has formerly been loose, vain, and profane, there may be somewhat more
than an ordinary presence of the Holy Ghost, in and about the work, without any
declining of that Law or Rule before mentioned; from him that has not, shall
be taken away even that which he has. For it is to be supposed, and not at all
to be doubted, that even he that has not (in our Saviors sense of the word
have) that has not any thing upon improvement of his original stock, yet may
have somewhat commodious and advantageous unto him at this turn upon the
account of some other, one or more, that has labored with God in prayer for
him, (I mean, for his repentance or conversion.) Neither do I conceive it
incident to any of your thoughts, that the Holy Ghost should act or move by any
such rule, which should render the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man,
much less the effectual fervent prayers of many righteous men on the behalf of
another, of none effect. It must needs (I conceive) grate upon any man's
understanding to think so. For God has commanded men to pray one for another.
And Parents especially are bound to lay up in Prayers for their Children, as
well as in Lands, or money, and that which is laid up (or, if you will, laid
out) by worthy Parents for their Children in Prayers, is like to turn to a more
certain account in benefit, and good unto them, than that which is laid up, or
out, for them otherwise. And to this purpose, Ambrose.
that saying of Jerome unto Monica, Austins Mother, who wept and prayed for her
Sons Conversion night and day for a long time together, whilst he, like a lost
sheep, was going astray in the error and vain practices of the Manichees; this
woman (I say) making her moan to Jerome about this her Son, received this
answer from him, full of comfort, Non potest perire filius tot lacrymarum: A
Child that has so many tears bestowed on him by a Parent could not perish;
meaning, could not lightly perish. As when we express any great hope,
concerning the obtaining or coming to pass of a thing, we often express our
selves by such a kind of Hyperbole, and say, It cannot be otherwise. For it is
worthy our taking notice of, (by the way) that when we pray for the repentance,
or the conversion, of a child, or friend, or whoever, if we pray regularly, and
agreeable to the mind and will of God, we do neither pray simply, or
absolutely, for his repentance; as if in case he should not be brought to
repentance, then God cannot be said to have heard, or granted our Prayers; nor
yet conditionally neither in such a sense, as if we should, or in duty ought to
leave him at liberty whether he would grant our Prayers in this kind or no,
(for he has not left himself at liberty in such cases, neither would he have
us leave him at such a liberty) but when we pray for the conversion of a Child,
Husband, Wife, or any other person, our Prayers ought to be absolute in this
kind; that he would be pleased to vouchsafe to entreat the person, for whom we
pray, very graciously, and effectually by his Spirit, in order to the bringing
him to repentance; that he will move and incline his Will with a high hand of
persuasive power, that if it be possible he may not any longer remain
impenitent. This is the tenor, or effect of any Prayer that can be made
advisedly, and regularly according to the will of God, for the repentance or
conversion of any. But if this be the sense of our Prayers, that God would
compel men to repent, or (which is the same, though there has been much
beating of the air to find, or rather to make a difference) that he would
incline his will by an irresistible power hereunto; this is not according to
the will of God, nor does he convert any man, nor will he, upon the Prayers of
an Angel in Heaven, bring any man to repentance upon such terms as these. Nor
does it stand with his wisdom, nor with the great end of his glory, which he
has on foot, and carries on from day to day in his Government and
Administration of the World. Yea, and though the repentance of the person, for
whom we pray for upon such terms, should follow, yet it is not to be imputed to
our Prayers, as if they obtained it; though (happily) that good and Christian
intention, out of which we may pray in such a case, may prevail with God for
that grace to be given unto him, who is prayed for, by which he is brought to
repentance. So then, that which I say is this, That though a person has been a
long time loose, careless, and profane, a despiser of God, and of his Grace,
yet if his condition has been frequently and fervently commended unto God by
Prayer, and this by persons of any considerable interest in God, such as Noah,
Daniel, and Job; all their Prayers may possibly meet together in one, and
center in some more than ordinary excitation of the heart and soul of such a
person by the Holy Ghost, as in the hearing of a Sermon, or some other like
opportunity, by the advantage whereof he may possibly be brought to repent and
believe. And in such interposures of the Holy Ghost, as these, he is not to be
conceived to make any digression from the standing and common Rule, To him that
has, shall be given, etc. For the person we speak of, though all this while
wicked and profane, yet may be said to have, upon the account of that which
has been put up to God for him, the prayers and intercessions, the cries and
tears that have been presented by any person or persons, who have been in
favor with God: this has been given unto him, and is of the same
consideration in Heaven, and with God in relation to his case and condition, as
if he himself had made such an improvement of what he had, which is wont to
bring men under the blessing of the Promise. To him that has, shall be given,
etc. And thus much for answer and satisfaction to that objection concerning the
sudden conversion of men formerly ungodly, and profane, and for the first
reason of the Doctrine. If men be not filled, or in the way of being filled
with the Spirit of God, they are in danger of being filled with some other
spirit.

CHAP. III. The second Reason of the Doctrine; without being filled with the
Spirit, the hearts of men and women will never serve them to do excellent
things for God, Acts 5.3. Chapter 13.9, 10. Chapter 20.22. 2 Cor. 5.13. in part opened.
THe second Reason of the Doctrine is this: be filled with the Spirit of God.
Because without such a filling the hearts of men and women will never serve
them to do any excellent things for God, their hands will never bestrong enough
to be lift up to the high Commandments of God; which yet doubtless is the duty
of every Servant of God, I mean upon occasion to lift up his hands even to the
highest of the Commandments of God. Men and women, without some competent
fullness of the Spirit, will ever and anon be apt to stumble, and betray the
honor of God, and the peace and comfort of their own souls. For where there is
not such a fullness of the Spirit of God, there must needs be space left in the
hearts and souls of men for foolish apprehensions, vain desires, and carnal
projections to lodge there; and these will watch their opportunity, and sooner
or later will break out and show themselves in the world: Or if they should not
break out into action, yet they will greatly incumber and break the very heart,
and cut the sinews of the motions and excitations of the Spirit of God in men.
The motions of the Spirit of God, where these inmates are, hardly thrive, or
come to any maturity; but will be as the untimely fruit of a woman, which never
comes to see the Sun.

There are some actions so necessary to be achieved for the honor of Christ,
that this is like to suffer much, unless they be performed. And these are of
such a contrariety to the flesh, that unless men be filled with the Spirit of
God, the flesh will never give way for the performance of them; because they
have such a desperate antipathy to it, and to the works thereof: But when a man
is full of the Holy Ghost, he is now so full of the sense of the goodness of
those honorable purposes, that are conceived in his soul, and of all high
achievements in the service of God, which he judges will be both for the
glory of God, the advancement of the Gospel, and for the good of mankind, as
also for his own peace and comfort; that there is no place left within him for
the flesh to suggest any thing to the contrary, either to take him him off
from, or to retard him in the prosecution thereof; He is as full of such
occasions and engagements, as these, as ever he can hold, which keep out the
motions and insinuations of the flesh. Whereas if there were room for them to
interpose, it is a thousand to one, but they would strangle, or stifle all good
purposes and resolutions within him.

You may the better understand what it is to be filled with the Spirit of God,
filled with an evil spirit. Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the
Holy Ghost, (says the Apostle to Annanias, Acts 5.3.) The Apostle supposes
that Satan had filled his heart, upon this ground, because he had reason and
grounds in abundance to speak the truth, in as much as he saw and knew that
Peter was endued with a miraculous and extraordinary presence of the Spirit of
God, whereby he could discern whether he spoke the truth or not; but Satan had
filled his heart with foolish imaginations, and vain conceits about the profit
or benefit that he presumed would accrue unto him by his lie; that there was no
room for the consideration of those grounds and reasons as were before him to
speak the truth, though these were pregnant and near at hand. So on the
contrary, when a man is so full of the consideration of the high services of
God, and of purposes and resolutions to quit himself worthily therein, that
there is no place left in his soul to encertain any contrary thoughts or
suggestions that might ensnare him and turn him aside; now is he full of the
Spirit, and in a meet frame and posture to lift up his heart and his hands to
the great and high Commandments of Jesus Christ. It is said, Acts 4 8. Then
Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, ye Rulers of the people, and
Elders of Israel, etc And Acts 13.9, 10. Then Paul filled with the Holy Ghost
sit his eyes on him, (viz. Elimas the Sorcerer) and said, O full of all
subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? The
reason, why here is mention made of the Apostles being filled with the Holy
Ghost, when he was engaged in such a notable service for Jesus Christ, as to
reprove a man of that great authority and esteem which Elimas was of amongst
them: the reason hereof (I say) was to show that he was not like to have
performed such a work as this, had he not been so full of the Spirit of God,
that there was no room in his heart for any fearful apprehensions, nor thoughts
of danger, or reward, to obstruct him herein. So elsewhere the Apostle (in a
Phrase a little differing) says, Behold I go bound in the Spirit unto
Jerusalem, Acts 20.22. To be bound in the Spirit, is (upon the matter) to be
filled with the Spirit. As a man that is bound hand and foot, may be ordered
any way, he can make no resistance, any man may carry him whither he will; So
says Paul, I go bound in the Spirit, or by means of the Spirit. He has
brought me into these bonds, having filled me with satisfaction touching the
excellency of the service that I shall do unto Christ by going to Jerusalem in
the face of all those great Enemies I shall there meet with: Yet says he,
notwithstanding any danger that may befall me, I go bound in the Spirit; so
filled with what the Spirit has put into my judgment, and conscience, and
soul, touching the acceptableness of the service, that I can give no audience
to any reasons or proposals against it: I cannot resist the motion carrying me
to it. And 2 Cor. 5.13. The same Apostle speaks of being besides themselves;
For whether we be besides our selves, it is unto God: or whether we be sober,
it is for your cause. For the love of Christ constrains us, etc. Constrains
us; namely, to both kinds of practices, those wherein they should seem unto
many to be besides themselves; and those also wherein they should seem to be
sober; wherein he supposes, that there are many turns, wherein the honor of
Jesus Christ cannot be provided for, as it ought, but some men must act like
unto men besides themselves to make the provision: And of all kind of actions
and services these are the highest, and most spiritual, and of the greatest
consequence unto the interest of Jesus Christ and his affairs. And the truth
is, that setting a very few persons aside, that are more spiritually wise than
the common sort of men, yea, of Christians themselves, there are not sufficient
witnesses of the worthiness of such actions but Jesus Christ himself, because
the grounds and reasons by which such actions must be promoted are so high, and
have so much of God in them, that persons of an ordinary understanding have no
skill of them: they cannot cast it, or conceive in their minds, but that such a
man might have done better, might have been wiser, and might have kept a good
conscience, though he had not run such an hazard, and exposed himself to such
or such a trouble, or loss, etc.

Now it is only the Holy Ghost that can enable men to do that, can enlarge
their hearts unto such actions and services as those wherein they shall be
looked upon as men besides themselves. And when the Holy Ghost shall come and
fill the heart, and display the worthiness and glory of such a service, that
seems vain, rash, or needless in the eyes of most men; then the glory of it
shall shine round about him, and he shall see (as in a vision of the noon day)
this convenience and that, this consequence and that, attending upon it, all
great, and excellent, and worthy; and by this means the heart comes to be full
of it, full of the greatness, and the goodness, and the worthiness of it; full
of the sense of the benefit and blessing, which it will bring along with it. So
that though all the world should rise up against him, to dissuade him from it,
they could not do it: For (in such a case) there would be no opportunity, no
roomth in his heart or soul for any carnal dissuading interposure to enter, or
to intermeddle about taking him off from it. As when the glory of the Lord had
filled the Temple, the Priests could not enter into it, (to do their Office, or
any work belonging to them here) 2 Chronicles. 7.2. In like manner, when the Holy
Ghost has filled the Temple of the soul with the glory of great and high
engagements for God, and for the Gospel, such reasonings and conceits, which
are wont to purvey for the flesh, and to sacrifice all that comes to net,
pleasures, and profits unto it, cannot now find entrance hither, to inveigle,
or entice the hearts or consciences of men to hearken unto them. So that we see
the truth of this reason, That unless men and women be filled with the Spirit
of God, they will never be able to advance in such ways, and courses, and to
hold out in many practices, and services, without which the honor of God, the
reputation and credit of the Gospel of Christ cannot be maintained like unto
themselves in the world. The Gospel will suffer loss, and lose ground, unless
it be held up, and the present interest of it maintained by some such worthy
practices and undertakings of the Saints, as those we have now spoken of; and
which we have showed will hardly be attempted, much less performed, and carried
through with that height of courage and resolution, which will make the face of
the Gospel to shine, unless they, that shall be called to be Actors of them,
shall be so emptied of themselves, as to be filled with the Holy Ghost, and by
this means be lifted up above themselves.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine demonstrated by a third ground, viz. That we are never
like to be any great Benefactors unto the world, which yet we stand bound in
duty to be, unless we be filled with the Spirit. He is a great Benefactor unto
the world, that gives a real account of his believing in Christ. Why Abraham
called the Father of Believers. The force of Example. A man's keeping the
Commandments of Jesus, a great benefit and accommodation unto the world, in two
respects, Gal. 6.2. in part opened. 2 Timothy 3.8. in part opened. So Ephesians. 3.14,
15, 16. The Saints praying for any good thing, frequently in their prayer
mention the means, by which God is wont to give, or effect it.
THe third Reason of the Doctrine is this: be filled with the Spirit of God.
Because otherwise a man will never become any great and signal benefactor unto
the world: He will never bless, or serve his Generation at any worthy rate, or
as become^h an heir apparent to life and immortality to do. There are two
things in this Reason, the one supposed or taken for granted, as clear and
evident enough in it self; the other plainly affirmed. That which is supposed
is this, That it is every man's duty to become a Benefactor, and this in some
degree considerable unto the world: This is nothing but what every man stands
charged with by God; I mean to be singularly, and signally active for the real
and crew interest of the world, whilst he continues and abides in it. That
which is plainly laid down and affirmed, is, That a man without being filled
with the Spirit will never be in any rich or competent capacity to perform his
duty in this kind. Now concerning the former, though it be a truth shining
clear enough with its own light, yet because every man's eyes (happily) are not
sufficiently opened to see it, let us make a little eye salve of the Word of
God to anoint them with, that they may be opened to see it. First then, that
all men are bound to believe in Jesus Christ, at least all men that have the
Gospel preached unto them (though there be little question, indeed, of others.)
Secondly, That they are bound to do the best they can to make the world believe
this concerning them; I mean that they do (indeed) believe on him. As will the
one as the other, of these is (I suppose) every man's apprehension, and no man's
question or doubt. Now if this be true: Full, that every man and woman of us
stands bound to believe in Jesus Christ: And secondly, to do that which is
proper and sufficient to convince the world that we do thus believe, it
evidently follows, That every man stands bound to do some great and worthy
thing for the World, and to be a Blessing to his Generation. For there is
nothing, lies within the sphere of humane activity, of more worthy or higher
accommodation, or concernment unto the World, than to present it with a clear
Vision of the sight of a man Believing with his whole heart in Jesus Christ, or
else to show unto men the sight of the World it self Conquered, and Overcome by
a man. With both these sights every such man or woman presents the World, who
tells the World, with authority and power, (that is, by a manifest contempt
of the World in all, that it can either do for him or against him,) that he
believes in Jesus Christ. There is not a greater sight to be showed, or seen
in the world, than to show it plainly, and cause it to see distinctly, the
heart of a throughout Believer in Christ, or to show it in like manner the
World Overcome by a weak and mortal man. Now both these sights a man does show
when he does cast contempt upon the World: Such a man presents the World with
both these, with a man really believing in Jesus Christ, and with a man having
the World under his feet. Most men, when they pretend, or go about, to let the
World know that they believe in Jesus Christ, speak like unto the Spirits of
Divination: the manner of whose speaking the Pophet Isaiah describes, by
peeping and muttering, ( Isa. 8.19.) as if they were afraid to speak out, or
plainly, lest they should be taken tardy with speaking a lie; being conscious
to themselves of their inability (positively) to declare the truth concerning
the things which are inquired about at their hands by their Proselites and
Customs. In like manner, the generality of Professors amongst us, who pretend
to give the world to know that they believe in Jesus Christ, do but peep and
mutter, their lives and doings speak their Faith but brokenly, and
indistinctly; they do but whisper, so that the generality of men can understand
but little of what they say in this kind: They speak in their way as men that
were jealous, and half afraid, least in time they should, or might, be
discovered to speak untruth, when they say they believe in Jesus Christ. Such a
broken, intricate, and uncertain account, as this, given by men unto the World
that they believe in Jesus Christ, does no great service unto the World. For
all such a restimony, or assertion of these men's believing in Christ, the World
will be at liberty, and find it self loose enough, from being persuaded, or
convinced, that such men do in deed and in truth believe in him. And whilst
they remain at liberty in this kind, they are but where they were; the Faith of
a person made known but by halves, has but a weak influence, but a faint
operation upon men; being like unto a Trumpet, that gives an uncertain sound,
upon which no man prepares unto the battle (as the Apostle speaks.) But now
he that shall speak out, shall speak plainly, and without a Parable, that shall
with authority give, or rather make the World to know, that he does really and
in truth believe on Christ; he will do some worthy execution upon them, he will
make work to some purpose in the hearts and consciences of men: Such a
testimony will cause men to awake out of their sleep, and stand up from the
dead, and so prepare and put them in an immediate capacity of receiving the
light of life from Christ, Ephesians. 5.14

We know there is an attracting, an encouraging, Paul said, Many waxed
confident by his bonds and suffering, ( Phil. 1.14.) and were hereby much more
bold to speak the Word without fear. For seeing Paul make no more of his bonds
than he did, they began to think that suffering persecution for the Gospel was
no very great matter. Therefore now they also would preach the Word confidently
and with all boldness, as he had done. In like manner, when men shall see the
World neglected, trodden and trampled upon, by a person believing in Jesus
Christ by means of this his believing, and shall behold this person raised in
his spirit, enlarged in his comforts, and enjoyments, with the World under his
feet; the sight of such an example as this will provoke them also, to trample
the World under their feet likewise. Your Zeal (says the Apostle, speaking of
their great forwardness and alacrity in contributing toward the necessities of
the poor Saints, 2 Cor. 9.2.) has provoked very many, ( viz. in the same kind,
to the like bounty and liberality.) And yet we know men are as hard, as
unlikely to be provoked by examples in this kind (I mean, to part with their
money) as by any other kind of example whatsoever. In like manner, the zeal of
any man in believing in Jesus Christ, being made visible unto men, by such
deportments and actions, which can in reason, or in the judgment of conscience
have no other root to bear them but this; the zeal (I say) of such a Believer
may set the whole World on fire round about him, and provoke many to do
likewise. Abraham may very probably be thought to have the spirit of this glory
cast upon him, to be styled the Father of Believers, because his notable
Example was in the nature and proper tendency of it so generative, so apt and
likely to replenish and fill the World with a generation of Believers.

And the Apostle Heb. 12.1, brings a cloud of Witnesses to this very end, unto
those to whom he writes; viz. to encourage, strengthen, and provoke them to
believing yet more and more, and to continue believing unto the end. So then
this is one Reason, which plainly demonstrates an Obligation lying upon every
man to be a signal Benefactor unto the world; viz. That he stands obliged, by
command from God, to believe in Jesus Christ, and not only this, but to compel
the World to know that he death (indeed) thus believe. He that shall do this,
shall lift up his hand on high to bless the Generation of the Sons and
Daughters of men, amongst whom he converseth, and shall take a course to open a
door unto them, to become the Sons and Daughters of God by believing likewise,
and consequently to become happy and blessed for ever. And because of this
notable efficacy, and potent tendency which a man's Faith in Christ,
demonstratively asserted by life and ways appropriate to it, has to bless the
World, by drawing men into Communion in the same course of engagement with him,
the Lord Christ has (I conceive) imposed it in the nature of a spiritual
Assessment on every man and woman in the World that believes, namely, that
they make Profession of this their Belief in the Face of the World; that so the
World may be made to know, that they believe: yea, and has included it in the
same act, by which Salvation it self is granted unto believers. Thus Romans 10.9.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart,
etc.

Now, because Confession is one way by which the Faith of men may be made known
to the World, therefore does he impose by way of Tax the Confession of the
mouth, his meaning is (as Expositors generally understand it) the whole life
and conversation. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Here he
joins faith, or believing, and profession together, and insures Salvation upon
both. Baptism, or to be baptized, in those days (especially) was (as it were)
the first born of their profession of Faith in Jesus Christ. And therefore I
take it to be an assertion that is to be understood figuratively, or
syneedochically, viz. for a solemn or serious Profession of their Faith. He
that believes and is baptized, that is, he that believes, and shall let the
World know that he believes, such a man shall be saved. So Mat. 10.32. He that
confesses me before men, him will I confess, etc. So that we still find, that
upon men's Believing, or upon their Conversion, they have had some such
spiritual imposition as this laid upon them, viz. to be helpful to others. When
thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethreu; So behave thy self, that this
Conversion of thine may efficaciously tend unto the Conversion, or Confirmation
of others. And so David knew what his duty was, what was imposed upon him, when
as God should restore unto him the joy of his salvation: Psalm. 51 13.
Then (says he) shall I teach transgressers the way, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee; As if he had said, I know the task that is laid by the
hand of the Righteousness of Heaven upon me; namely, that recovering my self
again from my sins, and receiving grace and favor from God, restoring me to my
former enjoyments, I should teach transgressors his way. This then is one
reason to prove clearly that it lies upon every man and woman of us to be
great and signal Benefactors to the World. First, Because we stand bound to
believe in Jesus Christ. Secondly, To make the world know that we do really and
indeed thus believe.

Secondly, viz. That every person of mankind, man and woman, and more
especially the Generation of Believers, stand bound, according to their several
capacities, means, and opportunities, to cast liberally into the treasury of
the World that which is likely and proper to enrich and bless it. This is the
keeping the Commandments of Jesus, the translating of all his Words, of all his
Sayings and Precepts into Actions and Practice before the World. He that stands
bound to do this, without all Controversy, stands bound to be a most worthy
Benefactor to the World by doing that, which is of a most blessed accommodation
to it. Now, that we all stand bound to keep the Commandments of Jesus, and not
to cast the least of them behind our backs, or tread them under our feet, is (I
presume) voted long since by all our consciences with a Nemine Contradicente:
and therefore we shall not stand to prove this. Now, that the performance of
this great and worthy engagement, and the quitting our selves in it like men,
is of a most sovereign import and tendency to bless the World; I shall nor need
to go far, nor make any long work, to prove. The World may be said to be
blessed in two Considerations, or in two different degrees; First, In the
things of its present peace, Secondly, In the things of its future and eternal
peace. Now, That he that diligently and faithfully keeps the Commandments of
Jesus, is a worthy Benefactor unto it in both, is a truth near at hand, and
prepared (in a manner) with its own evidence, for every man's understanding and
consent.

First, That worthy thing we speak of, the obeying Jesus Christ in what he has
commanded, is matter of a rich and precious import to bless the World in the
things of their present comfort and peace. And this in two respects (in the
general) may be made clearly to appear.

First, By showing that the very Acts themselves of Conformity and Obedience
unto the Laws and Commands of Christ, are simply and in themselves of a sweet
and beneficent nature, full of a spirit of goodness and comporting with the
present peace and comfort of the World.

Secondly, By showing that the exemplariness of such Conformity, though
exhibited and given by one single person, or a very few at first, may in a
short time turn to a very good account for the further accommodation and
benefit of the World.

First, The whole Systeme and Body of the Laws of Christ is composed with a
most exquisite and clear proportion, are full of a spirit of goodness, insomuch
that were they all observed and kept on all hands, it would presently turn the
Waters of the World into Wine, it would change the Earth, which is now as a
roaring Wilderness, into an Eden, or Garden of God to the Inhabiters of it:
Whereas now the prospect of the World, as it appears in the eyes of God, and
Angels, and Men, is as of men taking one another by the throat, every man
tearing out of another bowels or belly, to put into their own. Upon the
supposition mentioned, the prospect or face of it would be quite contrary: For
then the World would seem, yea, and really be, quite another thing: Every man
would be found, what Moses was unto Aaron, ( Exodus 4.16.) instead of God unto
another: There would be no Emulation, or Contest, between men, but only who in
giving honor, and doing good, should go before other. Our Savior ( Mat. 22,
37, 38.) reduces the Law of God to these two heads: Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy soul, with all thy strength, etc. And thy Neighbor as thy
self. Now, if these two general Laws were, in their due compass and extent,
observed in the World, you would soon have a new Heaven, and a new Earth. If we
could persuade those, who have Silver and Gold in abundance to minister with
these unto the necessities of the poor and needy, and those that have other
things (though they want these) wherewith they may bless the World otherwise,
to serve the occasions of it accordingly, (as Peter and John had neither Silver
nor Gold, Acts 3.6. yet they had wherewith they blessed men at a far better
rate than those who had most of these.) I say, if men's hearts were really and
truly set within them to promote the welfare and prosperity of mankind with
what they have available and conducing in any kind hereunto (which is nothing
but what the Royal Law of Christ requires at their hand) would not all tears
be soon wiped away from the eyes of the world, and men on all hands be as those
that dream, or as if the Kingdom of God had prevented them, and come upon them
unawares? Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not high minded,
etc. 1 Timothy 6.17. If this one Precept of Jesus Christ were but duly and
conscienciously practiced and observed from time to time, what a mighty change
would there be made in the World by the means of it? How would the faces shine,
which now through hunger and cold have gathered blackness? How would the voice
of joy, and health, and thanksgiving, be heard in those Habitations, which are
now filled with sighings, groanings, and lamentations? And so there is another
Law of Christ, which the Apostle calls his (namely, Christ's) in an especial
manner. This is to bear one another burdens. Bear ye one another burdens:
and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. This also would make a great and
happy change and alteration in the World, if persons would but bear the
burdens one of another. But what is it to bear the burdens one of another? I
answer, When we do not make our selves strangers unto men, nor draw back our
helping hand from them, nor refuse to do them any office or service of love,
because of such and such infirmities; as because they are not so discreet or
well-advised in some of their ways or doings, as they might have been; or
because either in a Passion, or through want of Consideration, they have spoke
unkindly to us, or unworthily of us; or have acted somewhat to our prejudice in
one kind or other, or the like. But men generally are so far from bearing the
burdens of others, that they throw them upon their necks, and make them bear
them themselves. For when because of any weakness or infirmities, which men are
subject unto, or because of any discourteous behavior in word, or deed, used
toward us, we shall be at any greater distance from them, or shall be less
kind or serviceable unto them, than otherwise we would be, in case no such
weakness were found upon them, or no such unkindness had been done unto us;
this is the casting of men's burdens upon their own necks, and to reject the
Commandment of Christ, by which we (our selves) stand charged to bear them. The
Apostle in this injunction of hearing one another; burdens, seems to suppose,
that even in men of the best temper, and most Conscientious and Circumspect in
their lives and ways, there is somewhat, more or less, that is burdensome,
that is distasteful, unpleasing, and (in some degree) offensive unto others.
This notwithstanding, if men would but fulfill the Law of Christ, and cut
Tallies one with another, every man gratifying other with bearing his burdens,
the great Commonwealth of Mankind would be prosperous and happy, and little or
no damage or inconvenience accrue unto it by the weaknesses, or want of wisdom,
in the respective members of it: There would be the same, as full, as quick, an
intercourse and commerce of love, and of the services thereof, as there would,
or could be in case they were all perfect, and as so many Angels of God. Yea,
(my Brethren) this bearing the burdens of one another, did we freely submit
unto it, and practice it, would turn to a very happy account ot us in another
day. For God will not give greater rewards for any kind of works, or service,
than for bearing the burdens of men, especially, the burdens of the Saints;
and most of all for the bearing the burdens of Christ, (viz.) persecution for
righteousness and a good conscience sake. We shall hardly find any of the
Commands of God, or of jesus Christ, but the keeping of them would turn to the
peace and comfort of men: These are they that in the very nature of them all,
are apt to create peace and prosperity in the World; and the want of a diligent
and faithful performance of them is that, that does occasion trouble between
man and man, and makes breaches upon their mutual Comforts. You can hardly
break any of the Commands of Jesus Christ, but you will make a breach upon the
peace of the World, you will fall foul one of another: But so long as you keep
on in the ways of Christ's Commands, you comply and comport with the peace and
comfort of the World round about you.

Secondly, Zeal (says the Apostle to the Corinthians) has provoked many, 2
Cor. 9.2. And (as the Scripture demands) a little fire how great a matter, or
how great a wood, (for so it is in the original) how great a wood or forest of
wood does it kindle, or set on fire? So one person, one man, or woman, that
does clearly, and in the face of the World, walk in a through Conformity to the
Law of Christ, that is, tender, and circumspect, and takes all his Commands in
their respective seasons, along with him in his course, may propagate a great
Generation of Conformists in the same kind. For who knows how many trees of
the Forest of this World may be set on fire by this Example? Men and Women
(more generally) seem to look upon the Laws of Jesus Christ as if they were
given to men only to hear, and speak of, or at most to live by in another
World; and so the neglect, or breach of them touches few men's Consciences,
makes no breach upon their peace. Whereas, if these Laws were but translated
into practice by flesh and blood, by men and women subject to like passions and
infirmities with themselves, this would beget other manner of thoughts in the
hearts and consciences of the World (generally) concerning them: Did men but
seriously consider it with themselves, that if flesh and blood, men of the same
nature, liable to the same tentations with themselves, by the same means and
assistance, both inward and outward, which are afforded unto them, can keep the
Commandments of Jesus Christ, and walk holily; they could not lightly but be
convinced, that certainly the God of Heaven will look for it at their hands,
that they go and do likewise.

Again secondly, Jesus in the view and sight of the World, must needs be a
signal Benefactor unto it in the things of their Eternal peace, which are of a
thousand times greater consequence than all the concernments of this life. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, etc. Mat.
5.16. Our Savior in this passage clearly implies, that there is a proper
tendency in men's good works to prevail with others to glorify their Father
which is in Heaven (viz.) by repenting and believing in him, and living unto
him, and this is a most blessed accommodation unto the World. The Apostle
speaks concerning the faithful behavior of Servants toward their Masters,
Tit. 2.9, 10. telling them that by such a carriage and behavior, they shall
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Now (Brethren) What is the
reason that the hearts of men are not drawn out more freely to the Doctrine of
God and Christ? Why do men's hearts stand off, and make no more treasure of it
than they do? Doubtless one main reason hereof is, it wants adorning and
beautifying; it is not set forth before their eyes with that advantage, to take
the hearts of men, wherewith it might and ought to be. But who are they that do
adorn this Doctrine, and consequently, that commend it in the sight of men, and
make it a beautiful, lovely, and desirable object unto them? They that deal by
their Great Lord and Master Jesus Christ, as the Apostle would have other
Servants to deal by theirs, viz. by being obedient unto them, and pleasing them
well in all things, Tit. 2.9. They that shall diligently and faithfully observe
and keep the Commands of Jesus Christ, they will adorn it, they will commend it
with authority and power to the souls and consciences of men. Such men when
they shall but utter and assert the plain words of the Gospel, when they shall
say unto any man, or unto any numbers of men, that certainly Jesus Christ is
He: He is the Savior of the World, and whosoever comes unto him shall be
saved by him, or the like; such persons (I say) as these we speak of, by such
plain and known words as these, are like to pierce and wound the hard hearts
and consciences of sinful and unbelieving men: The words of God in the mouths
of such men are as Arrows in the hand of a Giant, (as David speaks, Psalm.
127.4) they pierce deep, and do execution afar off. Other men, that for matters
appertaining unto God, are but like the rest of the World, and have nothing
singular in their lives and conversations, though using and uttering the same
words with the former, are yet but as sounding Brass or tinkling Cymbals in
comparison of them. Yea, when men shall be found or known to be (as it were)
rent, and torn, or broken in their obedience unto the Gospel, (alas) they know,
or may know, that when they shall preach the Doctrine of Faith, Repentance,
Mortification, or the like, men will have wherewith to answer all that shall be
spoken unto them by such men, from their own mouths. For who regards words and
sayings, where actions and works are of a contrary import? As he that speaks
Contradictions, one while affirming one thing, and at another time the quite
contrary, this man edifies no man by such a kind of discourse, no man can tell
whether he speaks truth in the former Proposition, or whether in the latter,
and so they go away as if nothing had been spoken: they who speak at no better
a rare, destroying one saying with the other. In like manner, they, whose lives
and actions rise up against their teachings or speakings, are of kin to those
dumb Dogs of which the Scripture speaks, ( Isa. 56.10.) For what they teach or
affirm in words, they deny in works, and so in effect teach nothing at all. The
reason why Christ is said to have taught with authority, and not as the Scribes
and Pharisees, is given by some to be this, (and I conceive it very pertinent)
viz. because he did what he said and taught, and they said and did not. So when
they that keep the holy Commandment, and walk up to the Rule of the Gospel,
shall teach, admonish, and instruct, they shall do it with power and authority;
the Conscience and Judgments of men will give them reverence and do homage unto
them. As it is said of Herod, that he feared John, knowing that he was a just
man and an holy, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things,
Mar. 6.20. And our Savior takes notice elsewhere of his righteousness and
holy life, as making his Doctrine much more commendable, and of force upon the
Consciences of men, and withal charge such persons very high who did not
embrace and submit unto his Doctrine: John (faith he) came unto you in a way of
righteousness, and yet you believed him not, ( Mat. 21.32.) as who should say,
You declared your selves a Generation of Vipers, indeed, when as having such a
man as John come among you, a person so innocent and holy, that you could lay
nothing to his charge, yet you reject his Doctrine, you believe him not; which
is contrary to the light of Reason, and argues a preposterous and perverse
spirit, frowardly bent against the Truth. So that if men be not of this
Generation, men of a viperous spirit, and desperately set upon their own ruin
and destruction; it cannot lightly be, but the Gospel coming from the mouths
of just and holy men, will do great execution upon them, and make the powers of
sin and darkness to fly before it. Thus we have made good that in the Reason
given, which was supposed, being this, That every man stands bound in duty
toward God, to act the part of a worthy Benefactor unto the World round about
him, and as far as in him lies, to bless his Generation.

The other thing which is affirmed in the Reason, filled with the Spirit of
God. And this we have in part made good already in what was delivered in
opening the former Reason. There we showed, That men and women will never do
any great, any singular thing for God and the interest of the Gospel, unless
they take a regular and due course to be filled with the Spirit. There is the
same consideration of doing great things for the World: Men and women will fall
extremely short of their duty herein also, and withold that from the World
which is its due, unless they take an effectual course to strengthen their
hand, and their heart, to the work, which must be by filling themselves with
the Spirit of God. For as they, who give munificently and like Princes, had
need be Princes, or at least have the the Estate and Revenues of Princes: So
such men and women who shall cast in any thing considerable into the Treasury
of the World, to cover the nakedness, and feed the hunger, and heal the poverty
of it, had need be full of the Divine Nature, and have a special Magazine
within them of Faith and Love, of Wisdom and Knowledge, of Patience and
Humility, of Mortification, and elf-denial, and many other heavenly endowments:
Otherwise they shall never be able to rejoice over mankind, to do it much good,
nor to sow liberally and plentifully unto it. As the Lord Christ; had he not
been Rich (as the Apostle faith, 2 Cor. 8.9.) the making of himself Poor would
not have extended to the making of many Rich; so in case that a person has but
a little inward worth in him, if he be scanted in true excellency and nobleness
of spirit, though he should empty and pour out himself to the World, the
poverty of it is such, and the necessity of it so extreme craving, and so
devouring above measure; that such an estate would do little more toward the
relief of it, than the seven fat Kine in Pharaohs dream did toward the seven
that were lean and ill favored; the Text faith, when they had devoured them,
they were not seen upon them, but they were as lean and starven, and as evil
favored as before; the fat had need (it seems) to have been seven and seven,
and twenty times seven times fatter than they were, to have wrought a Cure upon
the leanness and hard-favouredness of the other. And as Andrew (Simon Peter's
Brother) informed Christ of a Lad that had five barley loaves and two small
fishes, but viewing the multitude that were to be fed, demanded, but what are
they amongst so many? Joh. 6.9. And the truth is, without the miraculous
interposure of a Divine Power for their multiplication, they had been very
little (indeed) amongst the multitude, that was to be relieved by them: In like
manner, he that shall diligently consider, and compute, not so much the
numberless multitude of souls, or of men and women, in the World round about
him, as the numberless multitude of their spiritual necessities, and those very
sad, and threatening with open mouth eternal ruin and destruction on every
side, cannot lightly but confess upon the view, that he, that shall minister
unto them with any likelihood of recovering them to any degree of health, and
soundness of mind, had need be one of a thousand (as the present stature and
constitution of the World generally now is:) I mean, had need be a person as
like unto an Angel of God, as flesh and blood is capable of the assimilation, a
person so deeply baptized into the hope of life and immortality, so acted and
carried out of himself by the Spirit of the World to come, that he has left
the know ledge both of persons and of things after the flesh, and knows
nothing, neither the one nor the other, but according to the Spirit only, that
is, how they relate unto the honor and glory of God, and how they may be made
serviceable unto the peace and comfort of men. The Apostles being made by the
Lord Christ Feoffees in trust for the World, in the managing and ordering the
invaluable Treasure of the Gospel to the best profit and advantage for the
Inhabitants of it, yet as concerning the preaching of this Gospel, were
directed by him to stay at Jerusalem, until they were endued with strength
from on high, until they were baptized with the Holy Ghost, Luke 24.49. The
reason hereof was, least, in case they should go forth into the World no better
provided with Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, and Courage, etc. than they were at
present, and before the golden shower had rained upon them; the work and
service they had to do for the World in preaching to Gospel and otherwise,
would have been found too hard for them, and to overcharge them, and have been
unto them as New wine in old bottles, which by reason of the strength and high
working of the Spirit of it, it being yet new, is like to rent and break them
in pieces, and so to make both them and it self useless. And indeed men had
need be endued with strength and power from on high, to do such things as will
reach the necessities of the World with any likelihood to relieve them. For
these (the necessities of the World) are very many, and some of them very
great, and hard, and difficult to come at; yea, there is nothing more difficult
than to make the men themselves willing to receive a Cure. Therefore he upon
whose hand it lies to relieve the deep poverty of the World (as it lies upon
all our hands to bear a part, and this as large as may be in so great and
blessed a work) had need be endued with special strength and power from on
high. And what is this but to be filled with the Spirit, these being desirous
to let the World know, and cause men to understand he was their Messiah,
without which knowledge he could not bless them; this (I say) being his design,
and desire, he was necessitated, upon this account, to do such things among
them which no man ever did, nor (indeed) could do, Joh. 15.24. otherwise they
had been in no capacity of receiving any benefit or soul-accommodation by his
heavenly Doctrine, nor by any work that he should have done among them, unless
they had had this distinguishing and peculiar Character, whereby to have been
known from all the works in the World besides, and that they were such that no
other man could do. For if they had been no other than what others could do as
well as he, it is like they would have proved but like to the former works of
Moses, which wrought not at all upon Pharaoh, or the Egyptians, because Jannes
and Jambres, the Egyptian Sorcerers, did the like: whilst their hand held out
with Moses all that he did was to no purpose, as to any conviction upon
Pharaoh, or his people, that Moses was sent by God. The Sorcerers, by doing
things like unto those which Moses did, are said to have resisted, or withstood
him, 2 Timothy 3.8. ( viz. in his attempt and endeavors, by working miracles, to
convince Pharaoh that he was sent unto him by God to require of him the
dismission of his People out of his Land.) For as long as his Inchanters were
able to vie Miracles with Moses (at least as name of God. But now when Moses
came to do such works, which neither Jannes, nor Jambres, nor their Master
himself (the Devil) could do, nor any like to them, then Pharaoh and his
Egyptians began to look about them; and the Magicians themselves acknowledged
in these the finger of God, Exodus 8.19. So if we intend to bless the World, or
do any great things for our Generation, so long as our ways, and course, and
Spirit that works in us, are but like the ways and spirits of other men, that
do not declare stoutly and aloud for Jesus Christ: whose live and doings have
no peculiar relation to him; so long (I say) as we go but their pace, and act
at their rate, alas! the World will despise us, and all our sayings and doings.
For whilst natural and carnal men's works will hold out with the works of
Professors, all this while the World stirs not, but keeps its wonted posture of
security and obduration: whilst those that pretend to Faith in Jesus Christ,
shall not rise up in Acts of Christianity above the Line and Level of all that
can be done by any other hand or spirit whatsoever, (but only that same most
glorious spirit of Faith) all this while they minister little or nothing to the
necessities of the World. My Brethren, our arrows will fall short of the mark,
and we shall do little more than beat the air: if we think to do any worthy
service unto the World, unless we shall quit our selves as a peculiar People, a
Royal Priesthood, and a chosen Generation. We must be a Generation by our
selves, and in all heavenly worth and excellency above the World, before we can
have any power over it to work and fashion it into any shape or form that God
may take pleasure in. And if we shall do works distinguished by a Character of
such excellency and beauty in them, like unto which there is none found amongst
the Children of men, (excepting such who are eminently the Children of God
also) this is that which will reach the World, and make the foundations of the
unbelief and wickedness thereof to quake and tremble: Then, and not till then,
are we like to stand the World in some considerable stead. but consider we a
little the particular in hand: We gave instance of three things (in general)
which all persons stand bound to do, and by the performance whereof they shall
approve themselves signal Benefactors to the World, and occasion many to say
unto them these, or like words; Blessed are the Wombs that bare you, and the
Paps that gave you suck. The first was. to believe with the Centurions Faith, (
Mat. 8.10.) I mean, with a Faith so great, that there is none to be found like
unto it, no not in Israel, to believe above the Faith of ordinary Believers.
Yea, (doubtless) it is the duty of every soul of us, to believe above the
present degree of the Faith of the greatest and best resolved Believers amongst
the Children of men. The second thing was this; to display, manage, and act
this Faith before the World, that they may see it (as it were) face to face;
and that the fruit, evidence, testimony, and account of it, may be fully
adaequate and Commensurable to the truth, and all the degrees of the reality of
it. The third (and last) thing, whereunto all men stand bound, and by the
performance whereof they must needs bless the World, was the keeping of the
Commands of God. How, and in what respects, the performance of all these must
needs stand the World in eminent stead, was showed formerly: We have now only
to show, how they cannot be performed without their being filled with the
Spirit of God who shall perform them.

First, Holy Ghost; so much less can any excellent or worthy strain hereof be
raised or exerted in men, but by the glorious might of the same Holy Ghost.
Doubtless, there is no man believes upon any other terms, than those did, who
are said ( Acts 18.27.) to have believed through grace, that is, through the
gracious operation and assistance of the Holy Ghost. So likewise, 1 Pet. 1.22.
Seeing you have purified your hearts, (or souls) in obeying the Truth through
the Spirit, etc. implying, that neither had they obeyed the truth (meaning the
Gospel) that is, believed it (the Gospel being there, under the notion of
truth, as elsewhere, made the Object of Faith) had not the Spirit of God done
very graciously by them in awaking and exciting them hereunto: They would never
in any serious manner, have so much as though upon this believing, had not the
Holy Ghost put them upon it. The Gospel, and men's hearts are commonly
strangers: the World, and their sensuality, and folly, make them so. They have
little knowledge one of another, and (doubtless) would never have been brought
together but by the mediation of that most gracious and blessed Spirit. Now the
Spirit of God brings the hearts of men, and the Gospel together, by causing a
kind of enterview to be between them for a while, upon which if there be not an
extreme frowardness, and desperateness of folly in the hearts of men, the glory
and beauty of the things to be believed, being presented unto them by the Holy
Ghost, will overcome them, and so there will follow a blessed union and
agreement between them. Now, as the first and lowest greeting, between the
Souls and consciences of men and the Gospel, was procured by the simple
interposure of the Spirit of God; so must that glorious and more near interview
between them, which we call face to face, viz. such a Faith which gives
presentiality, or real subsistence unto the great things of the Gospel in the
spirits and souls of men (which alone is the Faith that will bless the World,
by amazing it with its glory breaking forth in semblable actions) this (say we)
must be obtained not simply by the Holy Ghost, but by him in his more sublime
and raised actings, Ephesians. 3.14, 16. For this cause (faith the Apostle) bow I my
knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in
Heaven and Earth is named, that he would grant you, according to the riches of
his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man, etc.
The Apostle traveling in birth with a great matter of grace and spiritual
blessing, for this people and Church of God, he tells them, he bowed his
knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in
Heaven and Earth is named, etc. meaning by this Character and Consideration,
that he is the Root of all that Family that is worthy to be put into account,
that is, of all that are holy and righteous where ever they be, and that they
take their denomination, as well as their spiritual and happy being, from him.
But for what did he bow his knees to the Father of, etc? It was, That he would
grant them, according to the riches of his glory (see how he labors and
toyleth to be delivered of what he had conceived to ask of God for them) to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit, etc. But why does he insert this clause,
according to the riches of his glory? Doubtless, his meaning is, to inform
them, that though the request, which he was now making unto God for them, was
exceeding great ( viz. that they might be strengthened with might by his
Spirit, etc.) yet there was good ground of hope that he should obtain it,
because the grant of it was, but according to the riches of his glory, that is,
proportionable or suitable to that glorious abundance of Grace, Love, Bounty,
Power, etc. which reside in him, and are his Glory. So that he knew that God
could very well afford it, notwithstanding the greatness of it, being so richly
furnished with all things necessary for the performance of it. So that it is,
as if he had said, I know it were in vain for me to how my knees to God for any
such benefit for you, as your strengthening with might by his Spirit, did not I
know he is exceeding rich in Glory, in Bounty, in Grace, in Love, etc.
Therefore in this you may be comforted, that I do not beg this heavenly bread
for you out of any desolate place, or at such a hand where it was not to be
had; or from any such heart, which is shut up against you: no, but from him,
who is both able, and willing to give unto all that ask, Good measure, heaped
up, pressed down, and running over, Luke 6.8. Yea, and this in things of
greatest consequence and value, well knowing that it is his glory thus to do.
Now to be strengthened with might in the inner man signifies more than simply
to believe: Yea, more than simply to be strengthened in, or by believing; it
imports a powerful strengthening, or an excellent and high degree of
corroboration, or stoutness, in their spirits, hearts, and souls; by means
whereof they should be able both to do, and to suffer, and this without much
regret, or trouble, greater things for God, and for the Gospel, than the common
sort of Believers can. But why does pray, that this mighty strengthening in the
inner man might be wrought by the Spirit? I answer, Because it is the
appropriate work of the Spirit, thus to elevate and raise the hearts and
spirits of men above fears and doubtings; God never conferring this high
Privilege upon Believers themselves without his interposure. And besides, it
is considerable, that it is the manner of the Saints throughout the Scriptures
(and so it was observed by Christ himself in his Prayer, Joh. 17.11, 17, 19,
20. that whenever they make any great request unto God, they do not simply
mention, or insist upon what they desire; but they desire it in Gods way, and
by that means by which they knew God was wont or likely to confer it. Thus when
Christ prayed for the Sanctification of his Apostles, he prayed not simply,
that God would sanctify them, but that he would sanctify them by his truth;
because he knew that, that was Gods standing way and method, by which he was
wont to sanctify men. So the Apostle here knowing that God would not do that
great thing, for the Ephesians, which he prayed for on their behalf ( viz. that
they might be strengthened with might in their inner man, be made glorious in
their Faith, and believe like Princes) but by the interposure of his spirit, He
frames his prayer for it accordingly. And this is further to be considered,
that to be strengthened with might in the inner man, (supposes that the Spirit
of God must advance above his ordinary degree of acting to effect it: He must
not only act or interpose, in men to work it, but at such a rate of energy and
power, which is proportionable to such an effect. And that is another Rule to
be minded: when any thing is prescribed, or mentioned, by way of means in order
to such or such an end, though the proportion of the means be not expressed;
yet it is to be estimated and judged of by the nature and quality of the end,
to be obtained thereby. But we have not time to stand upon this. So that the
Apostle (we see) plainly supposes this, that there is no strengthening with
might in the inner man, which in plain English is, that there is no believing,
at any high rate, but by the interposure of the Spirit; yea, and of such an
interposure, wherein he must give out himself at another manner of rate, than
it is requisite that he should do in making men simply to believe.

Secondly, very visible, or to have many degrees of visibility or lightsomness
in it, to produce, or cause an Act of Sensation: In like manner the capacity
and principle, in the World, whereby it is in any degree apprehensive, or
sensible of the things of its own recovery, welfare, and peace, being
depressed, scant, and low, they who desire to work effectually upon it, and
make it serviceable unto the World notwithstanding, must present it with such
things, which are very notorious, and next to miraculous in their awakening,
effecting, and restoring property. Or as when the stone or wood is hard, or
very resistive against the incission, or impression that is desired to be made
upon it, the Tool or Instrument used for this purpose had need be sharp and
keen: So the temper of the World being very obdurate, and stubborn against such
impressions, that are like to benefit and accommodate them in their miserable
condition, that which is any ways probable, or hopeful to work a cure upon
them, or to bring them to an effectual and lively remembrance of themselves,
must have so much the more of the Spirit, and of the life, of the vigor and
power of Faith in it. Therefore if men's ways, and works, shall be but low, and
ordinary, and but level with those of the common sort of men in the World; yea,
if they shall not be much above them, and magnify themselves beyond them
(though it were supposed that the Faith of the persons we speak of, were very
Royal, and Prince-like) yet will they not come at the World, nor reach the
obdurate Consciences, and besotted Judgments of men by the mediation or
interposure of such works and ways. The Faith which is in men, though it be of
never so large a growth and stature, yet will it not reach the sore and sad
malady of the World; but only by an outstretched arm of Works. For let me say
this, (though (happily) the thing may seem otherwise unto you) that a man's works
do not always hold out weight and measure with his Faith, nor are the greatest
Believers always the greatest Doers. A full fountain (indeed) always sends
forth a stream of water answerable to the fullness of it: But this is because a
fountain is a natural cause, and so always gives out it self to the uttermost
of its power; whereas a Believer being a voluntary Agent, may moderate and
temper himself as he pleases, in the exercise of those principles, out of
which he acts. Hence it comes to pass, that some men though they be large in
believing, yet are they strait in giving testimony to their own Faith. We know
many have the gift of wisdom, who have not the gift of utterance; many that are
very excellent in wisdom and deep in understanding, yet they are flow of
utterance, and so under a great disadvantage to get forth their wisdom. so many
having an excellent and a glorious work of Faith, yet may they suffer through
an ineptitude, or backwardness of spirit to assert that high degree of Faith by
Works proportionable thereunto, or any ways competent to evince what manner of
Faith it is that reigns. The frequent and fervent exhortations unto good
works, and fruitfulness in well-doing, given by the Lord Christ himself, and by
his Apostles, unto Believers, sufficiently prove, that the Faith of men does
not necessarily, or always, give out its strength in good works. For what need
he to press and importune men to such things, which they cannot refrain, or
forbear, whether they be persuaded or pressed unto them or no? Yea, persuasions
and exhortations are most proper (if not only proper) where there is some
degree (at least) of a backwardness, or indisposition unto the things exhorted,
or persuaded unto, in those, who are persuaded and exhorted unto them. When the
Apostle Paul writes thus to Titus, ( Tit. 3.14.) And let ours also learn to
maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful; he clearly
supposes, that they who truly believe in God, are in danger, notwithstanding
their Faith, of being unfruitful: and that to maintain the honor and necessity
of good works by an exemplariness in the practice of them, requires a peculiar
strain of wisdom and care, over and besides a man's believing. But this only by
the way, to show that men's Works do not always keep pace with their Faith, but
are very frequently much behind it.

Thirdly, be filled with the Spirit of God. For (my Brethren) the Commands of
God, and so of Christ (we know) are spiritual: The Law, faith the Apostle, is
spiritual, Romans 7.14. and Believers themselves, even they that believe in the
highest, the worthiest Believers under Heaven are carnal in a very great
measure; whilst they carry about them the body of flesh, that will still be
importuning them to take care and make provision for it, yea, for the
inordinate desires and lusts of it in several kinds. It will ever and anon be
putting, even the best men, upon projecting and contriving its gratification,
in this pleasure and in that, in this enjoyment and in that, without end. As
the dunghill sends forth noisome and offensive vapors and stenches
continually: So the Flesh all the day long cease nor to breath upon us, in
many unsavory, foolish, troublesome, and importune suggestions and motions
still lusting (as the Apostle expresses it) against the Spirit. And
(doubtless) it was an obnoxiousness in this kind, that drew from him that sad
complaint, not only of his being carnal, but even sold under sin, Romans 7.14
(meaning that he was a man seldom free from some sinful insinuations or other
from his flesh) yea, and that pathetical lamentation also, Oh wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Ver. 24. Now these
continual workings and movings of the flesh, are of a strong antipathy against,
and next to an utter inconsistency with the keeping of the Commands of Jesus
Christ. For (as we lately heard) it lusts against the Spirit, and so fights
against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. And therefore the Apostle himself was fain to
take order with his body, to keep it under, and teach it subjecton (to the
Spirit and Word of God) 1 Cor. 9.27. So we should nurture it likewise, and
teach it to demand, and require of us only things that are regular, and
agreeable to the mind of God, and to be content with things that are requisite,
needful, and comely for it. And if the Flesh would but contain it self within
this compass, and not exceed in craving, and desiring the bounds of that Law
which God has prescribed unto it, it would not much interrupt us in our course
of obedience unto Christ: But now there is no man's flesh so well taught or
nurtured, or brought into any such subjection, but that it will be importuning
him for things that are inconvenient, and be unreasonable in its motions, as it
always is, when it lusts against the Spirit. Sometimes, and in some things,
it lusts with the Spirit, as when it requires (I mean [or doth] without
impatience, or frowardness) only such things as are convenient and meet for it;
as such meats and drinks, such clothing and harbor, such rest, etc. which is
for the support of it, and without which, the health and strength, and
serviceable activity and vigor of it cannot, in a natural or ordinary way, be
maintained: All this while it lusts with the Spirit; for the Spirit demands
and requires such things of us for the flesh and outward man. But now for the
most part it lusts against the Spirit, as in seeking to be gratified in
things contrary to the Spirit and the dictates hereof, to those Laws of
holiness and righteousness, which God himself has judged meet to prescribe
unto it. So that unless we be in a great measure spiritual, (which must be by
being filled with the Spirit of God) certain it is, we shall ever and anon
faulter, and be broken in the course of our obedience, and not carry on the
great design of observing the Commands of God, with that throughness, with that
evenness of tenor, with that authority, life and power, which are very
requisite and necessary to be found in those, whose worth and goodness have
engaged them to attempt the Blessing of the World. For if there shall be any
breaches and empty places found in our obedience, if we shall ever and anon
fall foul upon any of the more remarkable Commands of Jesus Christ: alas, we
shall endanger the repute and worth of the goodness of those other things,
wherein we shall obey, and walk regularly; they will lose much of their virtue
and authority in the hearts and consciences of men, if they shall be mated and
coupled with actions and practices that are ignoble and base; yea, though it be
but with omissions and neglects of such duties, which the World knows we stand
bound to perform, as well as those which we do in their sight. Therefore there
is an eminent and clear necessity for the interposure of the Spirit of God,
both to enable, and make us willing, to nurture and keep under the flesh, that
it moves orderly and regularly, so as not to be troublesome unto us with
craving any thing that is sinful and inordinate, or which intrencheth upon the
glory of God, and honor of the great Lawgiver Jesus Christ, or at least to
make us resolute and peremptory to reject with indignation, all dishonorable
and unseemly motions, that it shall make unto us, and to hearken unto it in
nothing, in our condescension whereunto any of our great interests, or
spiritual concernments are like to suffer in the least. Even this is an high
and holy privilege, and not to be obtained or enjoyed by men without the high
exertions and workings of the Spirit of God in them. And by the careful and
constant exercise and use hereof, we spin such an even and strong thread of
obedience to the Commands of God, whereby we shall be able to draw the world
unto him. For as Christ said long since unto the Jews, ( Joh. 4.48.) Except ye
see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. So the truth is, that men generally
will never look into their hearts, nor reflect seriously, or to any purpose,
upon themselves till they be some way or other amused and struck with
admiration. If we shall not reduce the World to some such pass as to marvel,
and to wonder, and to think strange of us, what manner of persons we are, or
what we mean, or whence we have our Principles, etc. we shall never come at the
dull hearts, and at the sleepy Consciences of worldly and carnal men; They must
see signs and wonders of Righteousness, Goodness, and Humility, Love, Patience,
Meekness, and other like Christian Virtues, whereof they are capable: Otherwise
they will think themselves excusable in their not believing. So then this is a
third reason of the Doctrine, Without being filled with the Spirit, we are
never like to be any great Benefactors to the World.

CHAP. V. The fourth Reason of the Doctrine propounded, and argued: Men are not
capable of receiving the rich Consolations of the Gospel, unless they be filled
with the Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.9. in part opened. So Heb. 6.17, 18. Ephesians. 3.17, 19. 1
Pet. 1.8. Ephesians. 1.18. Jam. 2.13. Prove. 19.16. Acts 17.28. Mar. 4.5. and 6.16.
The fourth Reason: It is therefore a duty lying upon every man and woman
(especially upon those who pretend to the honor of the high Calling of Saints)
to be filled with the Spirit of God, because otherwise they will be in no
capacity to receive from the hand of God, and to be filled with those rich and
strong Consolations, during their abode here in the World, which God has
provided for them in the Gospel: And which he will actually confer upon all
those that shall be found meet to receive them. In this reason (as in the
former) we suppose one thing and, affirm another. The thing we suppose and take
for granted, as not questioning the truth of it: Yet for the satisfaction of
those, who possibly may question it, we shall a little put to the
consideration. The thing is this (I mean that which the reason supposes) viz.
That it is every man's duty, and more especially every Believers, to desire and
seek after part and fellowship, not only in the Consolations of the Gospel, but
in the highest and richest Consolations which the Gospel administreth, or which
are attainable by means of it: Upon what account this is, or may be, a duty,
will appear presently by inquiring into it. But that which we affirm in the
Reason, is this, That without being filled with the Spirit of God, we are not
meet Subjects, nor Vessels regularly prepared to be filled with the strong and
excellent Consolations of the Gospel.

For the former of these (the thing supposed) That it is every man's duty, and
more especially, the duty of all that look upon themselves, or are looked upon
by others, as Believers, to thirst after the sweetest and richest waters of
life, that the heavenly Fountain the Gospel, from any place or vent of it, one,
or more, sends forth; and to break through all impediments, all difficulties,
to come at them, is evident enough upon this ground, viz. That we all stand
bound to declare and testify unto the World, and this as well by deeds, or
real demonstrations, as by words, or verbal account or assertion, the
unsearchable riches of the grace, and great bountifulness of God toward the
Children of men, in this present world, as well as in that which is to come, 1
Pet. 2.9. But we are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People; Why all this? To show forth the praises, or virtues, or (as
the Etymology of the word imports) the pleasing or lovely things of him who
has called you out of darkness, into his marvelous light, etc. That you may
show forth, (...), the word signifies to speak out, or declare aloud, so that
all may hear that your sound may go forth into all the World. Now when he minds
them, that they are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, etc. that they
should thoroughly, and effectually, show forth the virtues of God, etc; He
plainly shows that it was Gods intent in honoring and enabling them, in
making them Kings, and Priests, and Princes, by the Gospel, to put them into a
way or capacity of informing the World, upon terms of the best advantage (as
the word (...), which signifies to show, or declare out, imports) to make
known unto the World what manner of God he is, how abounding in all excellent,
desirable, and delightful properties, and dispositions, and with whatever else
is likely to commend him, and his service, and ways unto his Creatures the
Children of men. Now, if God desires such a thing as this, casting such a
Spirit of Glory upon men by the Gospel, in making them a separate and choice
people, that they should thus publish and proclaim all that which is excellent
and glorious in him, certainly it is their duty to do it, and this upon the
most worthy terms they know how; and consequently, to enlarge their Capacities
to the utmost, that they may do it effectually, that they may do it with
authority and power: Yea, if it be possible, to the astonishment and holy
amazement of the World round about them. This certainly is the duty of men, to
contrive and cast about, how they may recover or gain the best ground of
advantage, for the performance of such a service, as this is, unto God. So then
this is that, which we said, that all that claim the dignity of Saintship
(especially) stand bound by virtue of this claim, above other men, to steer
such a course, to use such means, that they may be Children of the richest and
most glorious Consolations of the Gospel, because otherwise they will stand
upon a lower, and less advantageous ground for the service; they will be but in
an under capacity to make known unto the World the things that God has
prepared for them that love him; they will not be able to publish them without
some detriment and loss of their transcendent worth and excellency: which
inconvenience they might, in a great measure at least, have prevented by the
course mentioned.

For first, the Consolations administered by the Gospel, take them in their
height, and strength, where they rise highest, they are very glorious,
unspeakably glorious. Secondly, Such persons, who do not provoke and stir up
themselves mightily, that do not lift up their hearts to such means which are
proper to obtain them, are not likely to obtain them. Thirdly (and lastly) they
that are not possessed of them, that do not enjoy them, are in no better
posture to show forth the virtues, or lovely things of God, like themselves,
and as they might, and ought to show them, than Zatheus, by reason of the
Iowness of his stature, was to see Christ in a great throng and press of
people, until he climed up into the Sycamore tree, Luke 19.3. So long as men
have their Vessels only washed with the water of life, and not filled up to the
brim, they will never be upon such terms of advantage, to do that great Service
for God, whereunto the Law of their high and heavenly calling obliges them.

First, That the Consolations of the Gospel, Wherein God (says the Apostle)
willing more abundantly to show the Heirs of the Promise the immutability of
his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable things, by which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have (valid, or) strong Consolation,
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.17,
18. We see God has raised the Pin of the Gospel to such a height, that it is
not only able to furnish men and women with a good proportion of comfort and
peace, but he has put so much of himself, of his grace and love, bounty and
magnificence into it, that it powers out unto men abundantly of the highest
and strongest Consolations; although there be very few that understand, how or
where, to hold their hearts, that these pourings out of the Gospel may run, or
fall into them. Now, the Consolation which is strong and potent (indeed) is
able, not only to suppress, and subdue its enemies (discouragements, doubts,
fears, etc.) and withal to maintain it self in peace against them: but also to
discourage (as it were) and dishearten these Enemies from ever attempting any
thing against it. For he properly is strong whose strength being known makes
an enemy to have no mind to meddle with him, but causes him to fear to rise up
in opposition against him; by means whereof be enjoyes himself with little or
no trouble or disturbance. Such is the Consolation of the Gospel, and is
accordingly found by men, when it is received in the power and glory of it. It
is not only able to suppress, and keep under fears, and doubtings, and sad
apprehensions in every kind, which are enemeies to it; But to enjoy it self in
fullness of peace and security, without any danger of being infested, or annoyed
by them. This is the height of the Consolation of the Gospel, he that is
baptized into the Spirit of it, enjoys himself with a divine security, in the
frailty of a weak and mortal man. To this we may add that of Peter, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Now in telling
them, that believing they rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory; I
suppose his meaning was not, that they did now at this time actually enjoyce at
the rate he speaks of, however at other times they may be pensive and said: But
that they were in such a state or condition, and had such a Gospel preached,
known, and believed amongst them, whereby they might and ought to rejoice
habitually, and as often as they should set their hearts about it. For in
Scripture Phrase, Persons many times are said to do that, not only which they
actually, or at present, do, but which they may, or have opportunity, and
means, and are like to do: And sometimes it speaks of men as doing that which
is their duty, and what they ought to do, whether they actually and indeed do
it or no. Thus Romans 1.21. it is said of the Heathens, when they knew God; that
is, when they had opportunity and means to know him, they stood upon account to
him as men that did know God; so that if they did not walk, and act, and
glorify him as became men and women that did really and truly know God, they
were as deep in condemnation, as such persons would be, who did know him, and
yet refuse, or neglect, to glorify him. So 1 John 4.2. Hereby know ye ((...))
the Spirit of God, etc. that is, you may at any time know and discern this
Spirit. Thus Romans 13.3. Rulers are said to be, not a terror to good works, but
to the evil; not, that they are actually, or always are, either the one or
other (I mean, no terror to good works, but unto evil; too frequent experience
proves the contrary, viz. That they are a terror to good works, and not to
evil) but because they ought to be so. so Verse 8. they are said to attend
continually upon this very thing (the Service of God in the due execution of
their places) not that they do thus attend, but because the Law of their
Institution binds them unto it, they ought to attend continually hereupon. This
kind of expression occurs frequently in the Scripture. We might add that of our
Savior, Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and that they might
have it more abundantly. I am come upon such terms unto the World, and have
brought along with me such a Gospel out of the bosom of my Father, and opened
unto men such Counsels and gracious intendments of his touching his love, and
favor, and that affection toward the world, that they may have life in what
measure or proportion they please: They may have life, that is, comfort and
peace, joy, happiness, etc. (for life, in Scripture, frequently imports, a
being with much contentment; death, the contrary) more abundantly, viz. than
ever they will seek or endeavor to have and enjoy; or more abundantly, that
is, that they may have it with all the variety of pleasures and delights they
can desire. So likewise, Luke 1.14. That he would grant to us, that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him without fear,
etc. To serve God without fear (my Brethren) this also does amount to matter of
strong Consolation. For what can a man or woman desire more for their comfort,
than to be exalted above fears, sorrows, troubles, and every thing that is of a
discouraging and disconsolating nature in, or from the World? The horn of
Salvation is lift up to such an height in the Gospel, that, by beholding of it
in its Elevation, we may serve God without fear of any enemy, or evil
whatsoever; and that not only for such a time, day, or year, as when, or
whilst, we are, or may be extraordinarily acted, or superacted by a spirit of
joy, but even all the days of our lives. This horn of Salvation is so raised
in the Gospel, that peace, and joy may flow in the hearts and souls of men
uniformly; as a great River whose waters fail not.

Secondly, We added this, that they whose hearts do not serve them, Deus omnia
labor vendit: God sells all his Commodities unto men for labor and pains; His
meaning was, that God was wont not to give, or grant, any thing (at least
ordinarily) but upon a diligent use of means and endeavors. That which he is
said to do, or give freely, most freely, (I mean, the grace of Justification)
yet he gives it not but by, and upon the use of means; I mean, Believing.
Neither does he give Faith, or Believing, but by, and through, means used to
obtain it, viz. by diligent hearing, attending unto, and considering the Gospel
preached. Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. compared with Mark 4.24. and
Act. 16.14. Cha. 17.11, 12. As for those that think Justification cannot be
free, or of Free Grace, in case it be obtained by believing, they declare
hereby, that they little understand what the Scripture means by Grace, or by
God's doing any thing freely. You may do well to take notice of this, though it
falls in only Collaterally with the business in hand. It is worthy your
observation, and will help you to understand many passages of Scripture, (viz.)
That when Grace is opposed to Works it is not opposed to Works simply, much
less any kind of Works, but to Works in point of merit, and as in the strictest
Justice they deserve, that he who does them should be justified by God. In this
sense Grace is opposed to Works in Justification: If it were by Works in this
sense, that is, by, or upon, the merit of Works, then (indeed) it could not be
of Grace, or freely given unto men, because it should be due to them in point
of Justice. But Justification is said therefore to be free, and of Grace,
because though God confers it upon no man, but by, and through, his belieeving,
and this believing requires much of a man to compass it; yet he gives it upon
such terms, or upon such Works, which are far from any meritoriousness of so
high a reward as Justification: Yea, he gives it so, that he stood no ways
bound to justify any person under Heaven upon any such terms, nor (indeed)
upon any other. In this respect he is said to justify men freely, and of mere
Grace. Yea, whereas he now requires of men Faith simply, and only, for their
Justification, if he had required a full assurance of Faith, or faith in the
utmost perfection of it; yea, or any hard or difficult work or service besides,
in order hereunto, yet had Justification been free notwithstanding, yea, of
Free Grace, as now it is. For whatsoever good thing a person is no ways bound
to do, and yet does it, he is free in the doing of it, and does it of Grace.
But this only by the way. The business before us is to show, that no man is
like to carry the high privilege or prize, of being lifted up to Heaven upon
the wing of Gospel Consolations, but only he that is willing to advance a
proportion of means answerable to it. He that intends to make his nest among
the Stars, whilst he carries a body of flesh and blood about him, must resolve
to climb up the Ladder of many rounds and staves, to carry life and Salvation
on the end, which yet (we know) may be done by the lowest and least degree of
Faith, if it be unfeined and sound: Life (I say) and salvation, in the very
lowest terms, where they are to be compassed by men, yet cannot be obtained but
by great diligence and care. What striving, what contention of mind heart and
soul, does it require of men to be counted worthy or meet for that blessed
Inheritance? This the Scripture takes notice of, and runs very high in
expressions of this import (of getting to Heaven, of obtaining Salvation upon
any terms) Luke 17.24. Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many I say
unto you will seek to enter in and shall not be able. So Luke 21.36. Watch and
pray continually that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. So Joh. 6.27. Labor
not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life.
So again, Heb. 4.11. Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest Heb. 6.12.
See that ye be not slothful, but followers of them, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises, (with many the like.) By these places it
appears, that for a man to get to Heaven in the lower or lowest way of all,
and that which is most passable with flesh and blood, will yet put him hard to
it, and impose on him much labor both of Flesh and Spirit. If this requires so
much labor and travel both of body and soul, be a matter of so much
difficulty, and is not to be effected without such intentions of mind, such
strainings and strivings of the heart and soul, as the Scriptures now mentioned
clearly imply; What will it require to go by the way of the Mountains, to be
carried thither in a Triumphant Chariot of confidence and rejoicing, to be
accompanied with that joy, which is unspeakable and full of glory, all along a
man's Pilgrimage through this World? I say, if a creeping, or scambling Faith,
(as we may call it) ever and anon ready to be assaulted and encumbred with
fears and doubtings, will take so much of a man, of the heart and soul of a
man, to procure and raise it, and then to feed, maintain, and keep it in life
and being unto the end; What will such a Faith require in this kind, which
shall trample all fears and doubtings under its feet; Which shall make the face
of the inward man to shine like the face of an Angel: which shall dissolve more
than the one half of the difference between this present World, and the World
which is to come? Therefore certainly, as the Captain said concerning his
freedom of the City of Rome, that he purchased and obtained it with a great sum
of money, Acts 22.28. So if any man be free of the Jerusalem which is from
above, and of the Consolations thereof; I mean, be free from all fears of the
wrath which is to come, and raigns with assurance like a Prince, he has
obtained it by a very great sum of spiritual labor, and with many high
Contests of soul. The water of this Well cannot be come at, cannot be drank,
but by breaking through an Host of the Philistines: I mean, of many temptations
and allurements from the Flesh, and from the World, which are hard and tedious
to be encounted, resisted, and overcome by flesh and blood. The Apostle
requires a being rooted and grounded in love, ( Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.) to put men
into a capacity of comprehending with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, and so to be filled with all the fullness of God. Consider the place;
he clearly implies, that without being rooted and grounded in love, men and
women are not in a capacity, or condition, of comprehending what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of Christ which passes
knowledge. He does not speak of a full, or absolute comprehension of this love:
For this no Creature whatsoever, how deeply and firmly soever rooted and
grounded in love, is capable of. Yea, the Apostle himself, presently speaking
of the love of Christ, says, it passes knowledge; meaning, that the compass
or riches of this love are greater, and more vast, than to be fully estimated
and computed by men, yea, or by any finite or created understanding whatsoever;
but he speaks of such a comprehension (or apprehension rather) which the
nature of man may by means and helps be advanced and carried up unto; which is
a comprehension comparatively; I mean, in respect of that narrow, imperfect,
and obscure knowledge hereof, which is generally found amongst the Saints
themselves: because the hearts of so few of them serve them to be at the costs
and charges of that which is more raised, and would do double the service of
the other.

But first, What does he mean, by being rooted and grounded in love? rooted and
grounded in love, to put them into a capacity of comprehending the heights, and
depths, and lengths, and breadths thereof (of the love of Christ?) I suppose
these dimensions here spoken of do denote four special things considerable in
the mystery of the love of Christ.

First, The breadth of it, I conceive, imports the extent of the love of
Christ, as it is held forth and declared in the Gospel, in reference to the
Persons to whom it is vouchsafed and born. As concerning this dimension (the
breadth, or extent) of it; he had a little before ( viz. in the former part of
this Chapter, and all along the second) taught them, that it was Commensurable
unto the World, and that it did not contain it self within the bounds of the
Jewish Nation, but dilated and spread it self over the whole World, and
rejoiced over all the Nations of the Earth.

Secondly, The length of it seems to note the duration of it, which reaches
from Eternity to Eternity, or (in the Scripture expression) from Everlasting to
Everlasting. It was conceived in his breast of old before the Foundations of
the World were laid: from thence it brake forth, and discovered itself in time,
and now it runs along, and has continued in and with the World, and will
continue together with the glorious fruits and effects of it to Eternity.

Thirdly, The depth of this love may point at either the great and most
profound Condescension, whereunto Christ was drawn by it for the benefit of
men, as when he stooped from the height of all glory in the highest Heavens, to
seek for a lost World in the heart or lower parts of the Earth, having
undergone by the way a most dolorous, painful, and ignominious death; or else,
at the peculiar manner of the efficacy, or working of this love, in that it
wrought downwards, even to the depth and bottom (as it were) of that misery,
wherein the World lay plunged, and out of which there had been no redemption
for it, had not the love of Christ we speak of, by its most adorable virtue,
strength, and vigor, made its way to it, and wrought the Cure.

Fourthly (and lastly) By the height of this love, the Apostle (questionless)
signifies, either the lifting up, and magnifying of it self over and above the
high misdemeanors and provocations of the World, by which it was not turned
out of its way, nor so much as put to the least stand; Or else the efficacious
and successful tendency of it to raise the blessedness of those, that should
reap the fruits of it, exceeding high. Now to put you into a capacity to
comprehend these dimensions of the love of Christ to comprehend them (I say) as
they may be comprehended by you to your unspeakable comfort and joy, you must
be rooted and grounded in love. But what is it to be rooted and grounded in
love? (For this was the former question propounded.) I answer: Some by the love
here spoken of, wherein the Apostle requests of God, that they might be rooted
and grounded, understand the love of God; that is, that love which God bears
unto mankind, and expresses in the Gospel. But though it be good to be rooted
and grounded in this love, yet is not this the meaning of the Holy Ghost here:
As for other reasons, so more especially for this. That this love is, upon the
matter, and for substance, the same thing which he would have them to be in a
capacity of comprehending. For the love of God and of Christ are (in effect)
the same. Now, to be rooted and grounded in any love (whatsoever, cannot be
said to be a means to make us able to comprehend (in the sense lately declared)
the same love. Because it must thus be comprehended, before we can be rooted
and grounded in it. Therefore (doubtless) the love here spoken of, is that
affection of love, which is, or ought to be in men; whether toward God, or
toward man, or both: though I judge it best to understand it of both. But what
is it to be rooted in this love? Rooting in a tree implies a kind of conveying,
working, or infinuating it self into the Earth, by those parts of it, which we
call the root which are given unto it by God in Nature for that end and
purpose. By this means it comes to have a kind of firm footing and standing in
the earth, where also, being once rooted, it grows. Now to be rooted in love
seems to import some such thing as this: Namely, that a man has by the use of
his Reason, Judgment, Understanding, and Conscience (faculties and powers given
unto him for this, and such like purposes) as it were conveyed himself into the
midst of such Reasons, Motives, and Arguments (whereof there are plenty in the
Scriptures; yea, and many in the book of Nature and Conscience also) which are
effectual and proper to fill him, heart and soul, with these affections of love
to God and men. Many there are, that may be said (in a sense, and that
according to truth) to love God, and to love men, that yet are not rooted and
grounded in this affection. Either they have conceived, or taken hold of some
light thoughts, persuading them to the love of God and men, or convincing them
of their duty in this kind. Or it may be there being in men a kind of natural
love to God, as in Children to their Parents, they are under some impressions
of this affection. But then a person, man or woman, may properly be said to be
rooted and grounded in love, when they have considered over and over, and
thoroughly beaten their hearts, and souls, and consciences with such
considerations and motives, which are as natural and proper, not only to
provoke and engage them to love both God and men, but also to continue resolute
and firm in this affection; as the Earth is to give unto the Trees fixedness
and fastness of standing, where its place at present is of standing, when it
has once shot its roots into it, and wrapped them about the stones of it, as
Job 8.17. When a tree is thus rooted it will bear a strong gust of wind,
without being borne down, or overturned by it: So when a man has had his soul,
judgment, and conscience much exercised with, interessed, and engaged in; when
he has thoroughly pondered, and kindly digested those great and blessed truths,
which have a kind of imperious and commanding influence upon men, to cause them
to love God and men, he will become one spirit with this heavenly affection,
and so (as it were) incorporated in soul with it, that the strength of death it
self will hardly be able to separate him from it, much less is he in any great
danger of being overcome by other temptations.

For the other Metaphor of being grounded (or rather as the word signifies,
founded) in love, this (I conceive) notes the constant exercise, or practice of
the affection, as the former of rooting, pointed at the method or means of
introducing and setting it in the soul. And as an house or building (for from
these it is borrowed) stands firm and fast upon its foundation, and is not
removed of, and on, at any time; So he prays for the Ephesians, That, in order
to the end mentioned, they may be and continue as uniform and constant in
showing love both unto God and men, as well in doings, as in sufferings,
without interruption, or declining at any time.

But (to come to the latter Question propounded) how, rooted and grounded in
love should make men capable, or able, to comprehend the love of Christ, in the
four Dimensions specified. There are two things to be considered in the
business.

First, Love is of a dilating and enlarging nature, it opens the heart to a
greater wideness, and makes it capacious to receive many things, which
otherwise it would not. Charity or Love, (...), says the Apostle) believes
all things, hops all things, (1 Cor. 13.7.) meaning that it disposes and
inclines men to believe and hope the best in all things concerning others,
viz. where there is no apparent ground to judge otherwise. Whilst the heart of
a man is destitute of the love of God and men, it is scant, and narrow, and (as
it were) clung together; there is no room in it for things of any great extent
or compass to be received or entertained there. Men that love none but
themselves, their hearts are shut up against God and men, and they think that
all other hearts are so likewise. Whereas if a man be sensible that he himself
has a large heart, can do and suffer thus, and thus, can spend, and be spent
upon the Service of God, and the Generation of men round about him; such a man
will be ready to say of others, it may very well be that they likewise are the
same, or rather greater in goodness with my self. That men find themselves
inclined by nature to give good things unto their Children that ask them, is,
as Christ plainly intimates ( Mat. 7.11.) a rise and advantage unto their
Faith, to believe that God much more is ready and willing to give good things
unto those that shall by prayer ask them of him. Therefore when a man shall
find his heart drawn out in this heavenly affection of Love, far beyond his
Children, even unto God his Father, and unto all his Brethren; descending from
the same Progenitors, and partakers of the same flesh and blood with him, and
shall for some space of time have had the experience of the real, genuine, and
constant working of this affection in him, this must needs facilitate and
prepare the way of his Faith thoroughly to believe all that immense love which
Christ bare, and yet bears unto the World, as it is held forth and asserted
in the Gospel. And this is (in the Apostles Phrase before us) to comprehend the
love of Christ in all the Dimensions of it. This then is one Consideration in
which to be rooted and grounded in love, must needs be conceived to enable men
to the said comprehension. Or else another thing may be, that God, considering
how highly he does honor and prize this heavenly affection of Love, where he
finds it, how greatly he delights in it in his Creature, therefore has
reserved such a great and excellent reward as that comprehension we speak of,
to stir up the hearts of men to desire and possess themselves of it. And
(happily) this may be the meaning, 1 Cor. 2.9. As it is written, eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God has prepared for them that love him. The place has formerly been
understood, as if it were meant of the enjoyments in Heaven; but now men more
generally, and more truly understand, that by the things here spoken of are
meant the hidden and secret things of the Gospel, the several strains and
contrivances of the manifold wisdom and counsel of the righteousness and love
of God that are couched there: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things, etc. Some understand the heart of a
natural man, or of a person not yet converted. But I conceive he means as well
the heart of a man converted, but meanly and weakly furnished with the Love of
God, as unconverted. God is said to have prepared (in the Gospel) things of
most rare and wonderful consideration, for those that love him [meaning those
that love him like himself, that love him, as Peter speaks, with a pure heart
fervently] because he reserveth for, and intends the discovery and revelation
of His most wise and profound Counsels here unto such persons, judging them the
only meet and worthily qualified subjects for such Communications. Love and
true Friendship are the most reasonable and equitable grounds of imparting
secrets unto men; according to that of our Savior to his Disciples. Henceforth
I call you not Servants: for the Servant knows not what his Master does: but
I have called you Friends [that is, have dealt with you as with Friends,
knowing that you truly love me] for all things that I have heard of my Father I
have made known unto you, Joh. 15.15. The Gospel consists of the plain and
easy things of God, and of the deep things of God (as the Apostle
distinguishes, 1 Cor. 3.10.) Now the spirit of a man, by the ordinary
assistance only of the Spirit of God, may search and comprehend the easy and
plain things of God in the Gospel: but it must be the Spirit of God, which he
is wont in special manner to give to those that obey him, Acts 5.32. (that is,
who express their love to him by obeying him, Joh. 14.21.23.) which Spirit is
called the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. that searches (that enableth men
to search and dive into) the deep things of God (in the Gospel) which deep
things are very emphatically and significantly expressed, by what the eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, etc. meaning,
that they are things so transcendently wonderful for the excellency and
ravishing import of them, that nothing like unto them in such a consideration,
ever came within the apprehension, either of any of the senses, or of the
understanding, or imagination, or discoveries of men. Amongst the deep things
of God, there are none deeper or more profoundly wonderful, none more remote
from the ordinary thoughts and apprehensions of men than the dimensions of the
love of Christ specified, the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of
this love. Now, as God is said to have prepared things of so mysterious and
glorious an import, to impart in a way of friendship, or friendly retribution,
unto those that love him, so (doubtless) he is more free, and large-hearted, in
these Communications, unto those that are rooted and grounded in this
affection, that is, who have expressed most love to him, and hereupon are most
likely to continue herein unto the end.

Thus then we see that men are not like ever to know what the rich and glorious
Consolations of the Gospel mean, unless they take a regular and due course to
interess themselves in so high a privilege, and more particularly, unless they
shall be rooted and grounded in love, as has been showed.

The third (and last) particular of the three mentioned, (viz.) either a good
will to the service, or else skill and dexterity, to manage it, the work will
suffer, either in the performance, or by the nonperformance of it.

First, It is clear, that no man's heart will be full of the service we speak
of, unless the strength of the Gospel-Consolations has taken his heart kindly,
and made it (in a sense) like unto the heart of God himself. Secondly, As
evident likewise it is, that he that has not been made drunk with the New Wine
of the Gospel, that has not drank deep of the sweet and rich Consolations of
it, must needs be defective in point of dexterity and skill how to manage such
a work. For first, That the heart of a man will never be full of the excellency
of the work or service, unless it has had intimate and familiar converse with
those rich Consolations of the Gospel, we may conceive upon this account: Such
a frame and temper of heart and soul, as we now speak of, that is carried out
with strength of desire to be showing forth the virtues of God in the World,
cannot reasonably but be supposed, and judged such a frame and complexion of
soul, which is morally distant by many degrees from that which we call (though
not so truly or properly) the natural frame of it, or that frame which at first
commonly it works or reduces it self unto. For take the heart of a man, in
the natural frame and temper of it, that is, wherein it was found before the
Gospel came at it, and made an alteration in it, and compare it with the frame
of the heart we now speak of, the distance between them will be found as great
as that betwixt Heaven and Earth; the heart, before the Gospel touched it, was
a dull heart, full of it self, of its own thoughts, of its own interest, of its
own lusts; no thought stirring or moving in it of the least contriving, or
intendment, to bestead the name of the great God of Heaven and Earth upon such
terms, not the least impulse or inclination, to bring forth the virtues and
heavenly things of God into the World. The Soul, until it be Evangelically
inspired, is at as great a distance from such a constitution or frame, wherein
it should be active for God, and zealously addicted to the declaring of his
Name unto the World, as lightly can be imagined. Now then consider, that as the
Heavens and the Earth, being at so great a distance the one from the other, and
so fixed to their respective Centers, as they are, can never greet or kiss one
another, nor touch one another, nor ever change places, or situation, but it
must be by a strong, and mighty, and outstretched arm: So likewise, in case we
shall suppose so great and wonderful an alteration in the heart and spirit of a
man, that whereas it was full of it self, and no place found in it for any
thought concerning God, for the magnifying of him, or for the doing any great
thing for him; it is now altered and changed in such a strange manner, that it
comes to be filled to the brim with zeal for the glory of God, and with a
desire to have him great in the World, and to have his Name exalted upon a high
Throne amongst men; this change (I say) must needs be supposed to be brought to
pass by the intervening of some means or other of an admirable and transcendent
virtue, of such an efficiency which is proper and likely to effect it. This
must of necessity be supposed; For Reason will not endure to think of Effects
brought to pass without proportionable Causes; great Effects without great and
weighty Causes answerable unto them. Now the change of the heart mentioned,
being so wonderful and incredible a change, it is next to that which is
impossible to conceive, or for the understanding of Men, or Angels to imagine,
how such a Change as this should be brought to pass, as namely, that a man
should be wholly driven out of himself, and out of his own heart and soul, that
all his foolish and unworthy desires to advance and seek himself should be cast
out of him: And that desires of glorifying God in the World like unto himself
should spring up in their stead; Nothing (I say) lightly imaginable that should
alter the property of the heart of a man upon such terms as these, but the
soul-ravishing Consolations of the Gospel, and that joy in the Holy Ghost,
which is unspeakable and full of glory: These, being all spirit and life, and
of an heavenly activity, are a means rationally promising even as great and
strange a turn in the soul of a man as this. As we see New Wine, because of the
spirit-fulness, the heat and activeness of it, being freely drank, will make
men that are of a slow speech or discourse, backward and indisposed to much
talk, will make (I say) even these men to forget themselves, and to pour out
words apace, after the manner of those that love, as we say, to hear themselves
talk; the pleasant vapor of the Wine overcoming with the warmth and heat of
it the coldness of the Brain, and so giving free motion unto the Tongue, under
such a provocation or encouragement as this, even men that are naturally slow
will speak and utter themselves at another manner of rate than ever they were
known to do before: Even so when the strong and high-spirited Consolations of
the Gospel have once taken the head, and the heart and soul of a man, and
seated themselves there, they will soon alter and change the inward
constitution and temper of the man; So that whereas before he was dull and
heavy, yea, and as dead unto God, and could savor and relish nothing but his
own things, his own personal interest, as his ease, pleasure, and the like: Now
he is (as it were) turned quite about, and is all for God; these Gospel
Consolations, when they are apprehended clearly in their strength, and height,
and set to work in the soul accordingly, then they are operative like unto
themselves, and have such a property, and peculiarity of virtue in them, so to
affect the heart and soul, that they will not be able to refrain, or contain
themselves, but will be still speaking of their great and heavenly Benefactor:
When once they shall have received a strong sense and feeling of that abundant
grace from him, which the Gospel presents, and tendereth unto the World, and
are possessed of those matters of joy, and high exaltation of spirit, all the
waters of this World will never be able to quench this flame, but they will be
ever and anon breaking forth against all oppositions of the Flesh, and all
carnal Interests whatsoever, laughing all these to scorn; and if it be
possible, they will lift up the Name of the Great God that has done such great
things for them, that has (in effect) prevented them with life and immortality
already.

Secondly, starveling, no ways Commensurable, nor holding out with the Heights
and Depths, with the great and worthy things of God. No man can discourse the
Royal state and excellency of a King or Prince, but an observant Courtier that
has had Communion with the grandeur, and glory, and goodly things belonging
thereunto. So a man that has but lightly tasted of the grace, goodness, and
bounty of God in the Gospel, that has always kept in the valleys of the
visions thereof, and had Communion only with the rudiments and first beginnings
of Evangelical knowledge, can never be able to show out the the virtues of God,
or bring them forth into a perfect light. Something in this kind such a person
possibly may do, he may (as it were) whisper, and stammer out, in some broken
manner, somewhat of the transcendent excellencies of God. And verily this is
the length of such a man's arm: he can lift up the Name of God no otherwise, or
upon no better terms in the World. But now persons that have (for a
considerable space of time) dwelt much in the upper Regions of the Gospel which
border upon the third Heavens, where life and immortality dwell (as it were)
bodily, persons that have, with a clear eye of Faith, seen the unsearchable
riches of the grace of God in Christ, and know not how to fear, or whereof to
be afraid, being full of the love of God, which casts out fear; they are the
only men that are able to speak a Dialect proper to express those glorious
things of God, which are otherwise hard to be uttered, especially unto the
World, being so dull of hearing in this kind; the only men that know how to
translate the virtues of God into such a Language, whether by words or actions,
that the World may come to some reasonable and competent knowledge of them. To
this purpose the Apostle, Peter admonished his scattered Saints, to whom he
writes thus, 1 Pet. 2.9. You are a Royal Priesthood: that you should show
forth the praises of him that calls you; meaning, that they were Evangelical
Priests, of a Royal and Princely Extraction, and had withal spiritual or
Evangelical Demesns and Revenues of joy, peace, and heavenly contentments,
answerable to both their great dignities of Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. and
that they had received these great things from God, that hereby they might be
fit, and in a capacity to show forth the virtues of God, and of Jesus Christ
that had called them out of darkness, etc. clearly implying, That they which
are not Royal (that is, royally spirited, and so far from all servility, and
slavishness of spirit, through fear) are not in a condition to show unto the
World, either their Creator, or Redeemer, in all their glory, or like unto
themselves. It is the Prayer of David, Psalm. 51.15. O Lord open thou my lips,
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Now God has no way, or means, at
least none so proper to open any man's lips to a due wideness for the showing
forth of his praise, as by causing him to know that by the blood of Jesus
Christ his Conseience is purged from dead works, see Heb. 9.14. And thus we see
the second thing also cleared, that they that are not the Sons and Daughters of
the richest and choicest Consolations of the Gospel are in no advantageous or
worthy capacity to show forth, or make a declaration unto the World of the
virtues, or lovely things of God. And if they shall attempt to do any thing in
this kind, they will do it to loss and disadvantage, I mean comparatively, in
respect of what they might have done, had they stood upon an higher ground of
Gospel peace. For otherwise in simple consideration, it is most true which the
Levites acknowledged, Neh. 9.5. that the glorious Name of God excels (or, is
exalted above) all blessing and praise. Consonant whereunto are these sayings
of the Son of Sirach, What power have we to praise him? For he is above all his
works. Praise ye the Lord, and magnify him as much as ye can, yet does he far
exceed, etc. Ecclus. 43.28.30. And thus we have done with the proof of that,
which was supposed and taken for granted in the Reason, which was, That it is
every man's duty, and more especially the duty of every Believer, to desire,
and seek after part and fellowship in the highest Consolations, which the
Gospel administreth, and which are attainable by men thereby; because without
being baptized with such a baptism as this, men will not be in that singular
and signal capacity to show forth the virtues or pleasant and lovely things of
God, which they ought to lift up their hearts and desires unto.

That which (as we said) is asserted plainly in the Reason, filled with the
Spirit, men and women will never be able to reach the Consolations of the
Gospel, where they run high, and carry in them a strong savor of life and
immortality. Now, for the opening and clearing of this unto you, you are to
take knowledge, and consider, that men and women may so go to work, may stand
upon such terms before God, and the Gospel, for many years together, that
according to the ordinary and settled course of Divine Providence in the World,
and the exigency of second causes, they will not be like (I mean, whilst they
continue in such a way) to know what the Consolations of the Gospel in those
veins of it, in which they are most sovereign, rich, and glorious, mean. Yea,
the truth is, considering the present experiment which persons of both Sexes
generally give of themselves in the World, there is scarce one of a City, or
two of a Tribe, whose hearts do in any measure serve them to live up to such
terms which are like to render them capable of eating the fat and drinking the
sweet of the Gospel. For,

First, men that savor (as the Scripture speaks) the things which are of men,
and love this present World, are not in any likely capacity, but only upon the
changing of the frame of their mind, and of their course of life, ever to know
what is the hope of their Calling (as the Apostle speaks) either in respect of
the ground of it, what pregnant, lively, and abundantly satisfactory arguments
and grounds there are, why they should hope for, and expect all the great
things, which the Gospel promises, or else what is his hope in respect of the
object of it; how glorious, excellent, and wonderful these things are, which
are now hoped for, and will be found of all those that shall with Faith and
Patience wait upon God for them. Men and women (I say) that stick fast with
their minds and hearts in the mire and clay of this present World, are never
like to know what the hope of the Gospel-calling is, (in either consideration)
and consequently, not to inherit or enjoy in this World the riches of the glory
of the Gospel Consolations. The Reasons hereof are many, we shall hint only two.

First, Because when the intellectual powers and faculties of the Soul are
drunk up with worldly and sensual engagements, or over-acted upon the things
which are seen, they become awkward, indisposed, and unserviceable for
spiritual negotiations, and employments about heavenly things. By such low and
mean Converse as this, they contract an habit of a kind of intellectual
rudeness, and disingeniousness, by reason whereof they know not how to quit, or
behave themselves about more noble and highborn objects; nor indeed care not
much to have to do with them, or come into their company. Even as persons that
have been always bred and brought up inter sordes, amongst rude and rustical
people, of course and rough behavior, cannot presently change their temper and
disposition, and so become capable of conversing orderly, and according to the
principles of Civility, with persons of better quality and more refined
carriage; and by reason of a consciousness to themselves in this kind, they
avoid as much as well they may the company of such persons: In like manner,
those divine discoveries made in the Gospel, those veins of wisdom, and of the
knowledge of God there, upon which (I mean, upon the apprehension of which) the
high raisings and liftings up in Evangelical Consolations (of which we speak)
chiefly depend; being of a very fine spinning, very spiritual, and remote from
the common thoughts and apprehensions of men, and much more from the thoughts
of such minds and understandings which have accustomed themselves wholly (in a
manner) to this Worlds affairs; persons of this Character, knowing that these
things lie out of the way of their Genius, and that they are not able to
conceive of them with much contentment to themselves, nor to speak of them with
contentment unto others, in these respects take little or no pleasure to
enquire after them, nor to engage themselves to any purpose in the study of
them. So then, this is one reason why such persons, who are over-intent and
bent upon this present World, are not like to ascend in spirit into the Region
of light, where the Consolations we speak of have their dwelling, and are to be
found, (viz.) because, by continual digging in the earth with their reasons,
apprehensions, and understandings, they make them blunt and dull, and
altogether unapt to take the Genuine and through impressions of such
Gospel-notions, wherein the riches of the comforts thereof are laid up as in a
storehouse.

Secondly, Another Reason hereof is, because (as we lately heard) the
revelations and discoveries of these Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, that
are hid in the Gospel, in the understanding and clear apprehension whereof (as
we lately likewise showed) the strength of the said Consolations lie are made
over; or (as we may speak safely enough, and yet more plainly) are promised by
God by way of reward unto those that love him; and proportionably, the fuller
measure of them to those that love him above the rate of his ordinary friends.
Now, the Holy Ghost expressly informs us, 1 John 2.15. That if any man love the
World, the love of the Father is not in him. Yea, the Apostle James goes
somewhat further, or at least speaks more plainly, affirming, That the
friendship of the World is enmity with God: and that whosoever will be a friend
unto the World, is an enemy unto God. James 4.4. If the love of the Father (of
God the Father) be not in men, the deep things of God in the Gospel, such as
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. are not prepared or made ready to be
communicated unto them; nor (indeed) are they prepared, or fit to receive and
understand them. This then (in a word) is another Reason, why persons, much
addicted to this present World, are not like to sit at the upper end of the
Table which is spread with the Consolations of the Gospel.

Secondly, James' expression, Jam. 2.13.) rejoices against judgment, in one
sense, so does judgment rejoice against unmercifulness in another. But how, or
in what sense, mercy rejoices against judgment, we have opened unto most of
you formerly upon another occasion: In a Sermon entitled, Mercy in her
Exaltation.
we shall briefly remind you of it again. Mercy is said to rejoice against
judgment, because a person that is conscious to himself, that he is of a
merciful disposition, and that he has abounded in works of mercy, stands upon
a ground of advantage to be made, or to become confident, that God will not
deal severely by him, or destroy him. It is a frequent Dialect in Scripture to
attribute that to the abstract, or form, which properly belongs to the
subject as qualified therewith: Charity (says Paul) bears all things.
believes all things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. That is, not only
inableth, but effectually also enclineth the person who is the subject of it,
to do all this, meaning, that a person endued with Charity does the one and the
other. So mercy rejoices against judgment, that is, a person, in whom mercy
resideth, is qualified and strengthened hereby to rejoice against judgment,
that is, not to be afraid of judgment; whether by judgment we understand an
appearing before God to be judged, or that Condemnation, which God threatens
in his Word against wicked and unbelieving men, which frequently passes under
the name of judgment, it comes much to one. Now, to rejoice against a person
or a thing, that is terrible in it self, and unto others of the same nature and
condition with us, imports, or rather supposes, and includes a kind of
neglect, or non-fearing of it, in him who is said thus to rejoice; Rejoice not
against me oh mine Enemy, Mic. 7.8. that is, Do not despise me, or look upon me
as if I were a People or Nation forsaken of my God; because I am brought low
and afflicted; please not your selves overmuch with my present distress, be
not too confident, as if I should never recover out of this afflicted state and
condition. And as mercy in this sense is said to rejoice against judgment, so
may judgment, in a sense little differing, be said to rejoice against
unmercifulness; because of all other kind of sin or sinners it will prevail and
magnify it self against these: the Judgments of God will handle unmerciful men
most terribly; or according to that of James (in the same place) he shall have
judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy. They that shut up their
bowels of compassion (as John speaks, 1 John 3.17.) against their Brethren,
that have need, lie under this judgment of darkness in common with other wicked
men, viz. to think that God is like unto them ( Psa. 50.21.) Therefore being
regardless of other men's miseries, and no ways inclined to acquaint their
souls with the sufferings and sorrows of any but their own, they are apt to
transform or change in their imaginations the glory of the most gracious and
merciful God into the similitude of their own hard-heartedness toward others,
and so must needs be under a most sad disadvantage to apprehend and believe
those most glorious things which the Gospel speaks concerning the love, and
mercy, and tenderness of compassion in God toward men. Which yet must be
clearly apprehended, and steadily believed to invest the hearts and souls of
men with the blessed privilege of being lift up to Heaven upon the wing of
Gospel-Consolation. So then, of all kind of offenders and transgressors in the
World, men that are straight of bowels, and uncompassionate, are the most
incapable of part and fellowship in the Consolatory Enjoyments of the Gospel,
those especially that are fullest of spirit and life; the Gospel every where
lowering and frowning upon them, staving and beating them off from all hopes,
and conceit of finding mercy at the hand of God, or of Salvation, but only upon
the change and turning of their hearts within them upside down. Yea,

Thirdly (and lastly) persons in any kind who despise their ways (as Solomon's
expression is, Pro. 19.16.) who live at peradventure, the marrow and fatness of
the Gospel Consolations. The reason is, because it is a thousand to one but
they, who shall despise their ways, and resolve to walk on in such and such
courses de been esse, and (as it were) upon proof when no Letter of the Law
presently and expressly rises up against it, (I say) it is a thousand to one
but that they will be polluted in some or other of their paths; and however,
the very neglect of enquiring at the mouth of God in the Scriptures, what is
his mind concerning us in all our actions and ways, must needs grieve the good
Spirit of God within us: as (indeed) every practice, yea, and omission also
does, about which his interest lies to instruct and direct us, if recourses be
not made unto him accordingly. Now, if men shall pitch upon a course ex
tempore, and (as we lately expressed it) hand over-head, and not consult with
him about the goodness or lawfulness thereof, this is enough to entangle us
with the guilt of grieving the Spirit of God. And if the good Spirit of God in
men be still grieved, and not again in time relieved and recovered from under
this Passion; certain it is, that all this while men are in no capacity at all
to be carried up by him into the Mount of the Gospel, where the glory of the
Consolations thereof shines; No, if the Spirit begins to withdraw himself
from men, or forbears his wonted activeness and employment, and stirring in
them, and does as men, who in time of solemn sorrow and grief are wont to
retire themselves from their wonted company and employments; Now, they are in a
very ill capacity, and much disqualified for the enjoyment of the Consolations
of the Gospel in their strength and glory. Men will never be mightily
strengthened (as the Apostle speaks) in the inward man but by the Spirit of
God; nor will they ever be mightily strengthened there by him, when he is
grieved, or upon any other terms, than when he is highly pleased with the
deportments, and comportments of men. Now these things being so, first, that
neither men addicted to this present World; secondly, nor men of straight and
hard bowels; nor lastly, men that despise their ways in any kind, are meet
subjects or vessels prepared to receive the waters of life from the Gospel,
where they are richest and sweetest, and most quickening to the soul; It plainly
follows, that without a very great presence of the Spirit of God they are not
like to arrive at, or to obtain that capacity we speak of: I mean, of being
filled with these heavenly Consolations. This is that which we said was
directly laid down and affirmed in the Reason given.

For the proof hereof we shall not need to add much to what has been already
delivered upon the same account. For we have showed and proved from that of the
Apostle, Romans 8.13. That the deeds of the body cannot be mortified but by the
Spirit; yea, and by the Spirit acting and working at some excellent and very
considerable rate, which imports a man's being filled with the Spirit (in the
sense first declared.) Again, from that of the same Apostle, Ephesians. 3.16. we
proved, that no person could be mightily strengthened in the inner man but by
the Spirit of God; And this (as we said in the former case) advancing himself
to some worthy degree in his operation and working upon the heart and
consciences of men. So then, he that is not filled with the Spirit is like to
be a man of this present World, addicted to the ways, pleasures, or profits of
it; and consequently, in an incapacity of those Sovereign Consolations of the
Gospel we speak of (according to what was lately proved.) For inordinacy of
addiction to this present World, and the things thereof, is a lust of the
flesh; and consequently will not, cannot be effectually subdued or mortified
but by the assisting efficacy of the Spirit of God. For, it is the Spirit (as
the Apostle informs us) that lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. And (indeed)
it is the Spirit only that lusts against it, as being contrary to it (as the
Apostle there speaks) and nothing else contrary, at least nothing so
vigorously, so perfectly contrary unto it as the Spirit. If you ask me, In what
sense or consideration is the Spirit of God said to lust against the Flesh? I
answer,

First, The nature, or native and proper Genius of the Spirit of God is to
desire, and to delight in, and to act such things as are of a contrary nature
and tendency to the Flesh, and to the things which that desires and delights
in; and in this respect may be said to lust against the Flesh, ( viz) because
it desires, and this very strenuously, things opposite to the things desired
by the Flesh.

Secondly, The Spirit may be said to lust against the Flesh, because he stirs
up motions, and desires in men contrary unto those which are occasioned by the
flesh. As the flesh inwardly provokes unto, and causes men to desire things
that are unjust, unholy, and things displeasing unto God, etc. The Spirit
secretly exciteth to all things contrary hereunto, as to things which are just,
and righteous, and holy. Or

Thirdly (and lastly) the Spirit may be said to lust against the flesh, or the
unregenerate or corrupt part of the soul, or rather that weakness, or aptness
unto sin which cleaves unto the soul; because it seeks the utter abolition
and destruction of it; or because it admonishes the Saints to desire and
endeavor this abolition of it; yea, the utter extirpation and rooting of it
out of their Kingdom. Now then, as no man is slain, or ruined by any person
(unless it be casually or against his will, which is no common or ordinary
case) but only by him who lusts against his life, and this at an high tate of
lusting (for every motion of envy, and hatred, or wishing that a man were dead,
will not lead a man so far as violently to take away his life) so neither is
the flesh like to be abolished, crucified, and destroyed by any, but only by
such, or by that, which lusts against the very life and being of it, and this
with some potency and strength of lusting. And this must needs be the Spirit of
God, because there is nothing that lusts against the life, and being, and
continuance of it but the Spirit of God.

If it be objected and said, filled with the Spirit; viz. by being filled with
Reason, or Conscience at least, if the crucifying of the flesh be sufficient to
invest men with this capacity. To this I answer.

First, That if Reason or Conscience do at any time lust against the flesh,
oppose or stop the lustings, or movings of it, they do it by virtue of a
certain superintendency and instigation of the Spirit of God: It is the Spirit
of God which puts them upon it. For in him [that is to say, through or by means
of him] (says the Apostle, speaking of God, and more particularly and
appropriately of the Spirit of God) we live, move, and have our being, Acts
17.28. When he says, in him we live, he does not mean, we Saints, we
Believers, as if none lived in God, or through the Spirit of God but such men:
But we men (for it was spoken by a Heathen Poet) and the Apostle does justify
the saying by incorporating it with the Word of God, by using it as, or instead
of, a saying from God himself: For so it was, though it passed through a
corrupt hand, yet it came from God. In him we live; we move, we men, all men in
the World, Saints, or others, we live in God, that is, by God, or through God
(for so the Preposition (...), in, often signifies) that is, by means of his
supporting us. If men do not only live in, by, or through Gods supporting of
us, but move also; and this as well morally as naturally; with our hearts and
wills, as well as with our bodies, or the members hereof. Certainly, when we
move regularly, and as becomes us, as we do when either Reason or Conscience
within us do their office in any kind, and when they do not regard the flesh
within us, when ever (I say) we act or move thus regularly, we do it by
somewhat more, at least by nothing less, than an ordinary exertion or putting
forth of his gracious presence in us. If we move one way or other, morally or
naturally, sinfully or righteously; yet every of these motions that proceed
from us, proceeds also from, or by the Spirit of God, (though the sinfulness of
no motion proceeds from him) much more when we move according to Rule, then
certainly this is by means, at least of his ordinary, if not to a degree more
than an ordinary putting forth of himself and his gracious presence with us.
Thus then in the first place, if Reason or Conscience do at any time, or in any
particular case, lust against, or oppose the flesh, or corruption in man, they
do it by means of the Spirit of God within them. For as there is an
inhabitation, and consequently an operation of the Spirit appropriate to the
Saints or Believers; so there is an inhabitation (though of another kind. or
upon other terms) of the same Spirit, which is common to all those that are not
yet in the number of Believers.

Secondly, When Reason or Conscience lusts against the Flesh, only by such an
instigation or incitement hereunto of the Spirit of God, which is wont to
proceed from him, when, and whilst his dwelling is with men unregenerate, and
according to the manner of his presence here; this lusting against it is,
first, but particular, only against some of the desires, motions, and ways of
it; others being dispensed with, as Herod's case was, ( Mar. 6.20.) who did
many things at the preaching of John Baptist, but some things (it seems) he
would not do. By the maniture and help of the Spirit, he laid many channels of
the flesh dry, and turned the waters running there out of their course, but he
suffered them to run elsewhere, and to have a vent or issue another way; and as
it is often seen that a Tree, which is too luxuriant in branches, prospers, and
flourishes more, and bears more fruit when some of those branches are lopt
off; So the Flesh many times being abridged of some of the wonted haunts and
eruptions of it runs with the fuller and higher stream and tide, and rages
more some other way. This appears by several things upon record to have been
the case of many Heathen; who by some Authors, in respect of many things
commendable in them, are reported to have been very virtuous and worthy men;
who yet are known by the observations and relations of others to have been
vicious otherwise: So that the Flesh cares not for such lusters against it as
Reason and Conscience are. And concerning those Heathen men we speak of, many
of them by what is extant upon good Record, though in respect of sundry of
their ways and courses they were very excellent and worthy praise, yet they
had their secret issues and vents for the flesh, and those corruptions which
wrought effectually in them, and in a most notorious kind and fuller measure
than in ordinary men. So that (as I say) the Flesh suffers not much, is not in
danger of being crucified by Reason and Conscience, although these (in a sense,
and in respect of some of the beloved ways thereof) lust against it. When they
are put upon this lusting, and backed therein, only by the lighter and weaker
puttings on by the Spirit, wherein he is wont to appear in persons who have not
attained an effectual or saving knowledge of God; it is not that body of the
flesh (as the Apostle calls it) but some members of it only upon which
execution is done: Whereas the lustings of the Spirit against the Flesh in
persons that are regenerate, especially when he is in his advance, and they
filled with his presence, are comprehensive, and extend themselves to all the
avenues of the flesh; yea, and seek, and attempt the very life of it, by
stifling it, and stopping all the breathing passages and spirations of it,
provoking and engaging such men universally to an utter abolition, to a through
mortification of it. That of the Apostle, Romans 6.6. imports as much, Knowing
this, that the old man is crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin. This is that which the Spirit lusts
after in the Saints, that is (according to a Rule not long since delivered)
which he stirs up in them, and prevails with them to lust after, at least
when he fills the Temple of their Soul with the Glory of his Presence, even to
have the body, the whole and entire body of sin destroyed; and not only here
and there a member of this body maimed or disabled, other members in the mean
time remaining sound and serviceable, that so the Saints might not serve sin;
meaning, in any of the services thereof, or in any thing tending to the
establishing, or advancement of the Kingdom, or power of it in the World. Again,

Thirdly, Jews of old, as it is in several places described in the Scriptures,
Hos. 6.4. Judge. 2. Joh. 5.35. to be like the morning cloud, and early dew. We
know the morning cloud has nothing but a kind of light substance in it, has
no body of rain in it. Thus it was with the Jews; as the early dew does not
continue, but is soon licked up with the Sun, because it is but thin, and has
no root; so their goodness was but superficial and slight, it had no depth in
their hearts, like the Seed in the stony ground: It had no root in them, and so
in a short time came to nothing. We read in several places, that they could
speak of great matters that they would do, they would do all that the Lord
would have them to do, they would serve the Lord, etc. and you shall find that
when any new Calamity came upon them, they were full of repentance, they would
humble themselves, and never provoke God more: But all this notwithstanding
they soon forgot God: For as soon as deliverance from their present trouble
came, their goodness left them, they presently returned again to their former
folly. And in the fifth of John, John being (as our Savior here describes
him) a burning and shining light, their goodness held out in hearkening unto
him for a season, yea, and thus far they rejoiced in his light. But why did
they not continue and hold out so to do? John's light was as burning and
shining when they withdrew, and declined him, as before. How came it then to
pass that they did not continue to delight and rejoice in him? The word they
received from him had but little or no root in them: it lay but shallow in
their judgments and souls. It is said of the stony ground, that the seed which
fell upon it withered away, because it had no root: and the reason why it had
no root, or none to any purpose, was because it had not much earth upon it, (
Mark 4.5. and 6.16. compared) By which is signified, that the reason why the
Gospel, or Word of God, has no faster hold upon the judgments and consciences
of men than commonly it has, is, because when they have heard it preached unto
them, they do not (as it were) bury it under many serious thoughts, and much
meditation bestowed on it, but presently betake themselves to some worldly
business, or else fall upon some impertinent discourse; and so what they heard
is never thought of more. How then should it settle, or sink to any great depth
in their souls? And if men be not rooted and grounded in this knowledge of the
truth, they are not like to walk in the practice of it long: a little occasion
will turn them aside, they will soon lose their goodness. So then, this is the
case of those lustings against the flesh which sometimes appear in heathen men,
they are powerless, seldom victorious, or long lived: Reason and Conscience are
soon bribed to keep silence. It is likely we may have such cases and instances
among many Professors of Christianity amongst us, that may at times have
lustings against the flesh, and yet these soon vanish and wither, because they
have not any great root in themselves (as our Savior speaks) they did not make
a business of it to consider the weight, and worth, and important concernment
unto them to have their corruption and deeds of the flesh more and more
mortified. Now the truth is, there is no good action, nothing that does concern
men; there is no good disposition, no good principle in the soul, no lusting
against the flesh at any time, in any man, but that if men would take a course
accordingly, they might reduce the matter to such a pass that these good things
should never forsake them, but that they should take possession of them, and
enjoy them continually. For weak and faint they commonly are at first in the
best of men; but the reason why in good men they gather strength, remain and
hold out to the end, is, because they have much earth in such men, and
consequently they have good rooting: They have many serious thoughts bestowed
upon them, they are again and again considered and weighed in their minds: such
men digest businesses of this nature between God and themselves, contemplating,
and feeding heartily upon the worth, and high consequents of abounding in such
and such holy dispositions and practices, and continuing in them. When such a
practical resolution as this comes to be incorporated in the heart, then it
continues and abides in men: now they will not regard any voice behind them
from the flesh, to gratify themselves in any sinful or unworthy kind. But this
by the way.

Now the lustings against the flesh which the Spirit of God is wont to stir up
in holy men, that are filled with him, are potent and strong; they will not
(ordinarily) admit of parties, nor stand to dispute with temptations: No, but
will set them on fire to prosecute the flesh, and to pursue and follow the
victory against it, until it be brought low, and shall have little list or
heart to stir, or move, or be any further troublesome unto them. It is true,
there are very few that attain to any such lustings against the flesh as
these,; few whose lustings are so strong, and potent, and glorious. The reason
is, because there is not one of a thousand that grows up to the state or
stature of a perfect man in Christ; (I speak of that perfection which the
Scripture often ascribes unto men, and of which we are all capable.) But alas!
my Brethren, we are voluntary Dwarfs, and love to keep our selves babes in
Christ; we are loath to go to the price, to be at the cost and charges of any
thing that is spiritual, excellent, and glorious. Indeed, it is an unworthy
principle, and it is to be feared that there is a touch and tincture, if not
the whole body and element of it in the hearts of far the greater part of us,
viz. that if we can but possess our selves of so much Grace, and such a Faith,
which will be sufficient at last to save us, we need care for no more; as if
herein lay the high strain, and excellency of wisdom in men, not to do more to
be saved than is of absolute necessity to be done; or to enjoy as much of the
pleasures or profits of sin as is possible to be enjoyed without being damned,
and so to order, rank, and couple both Worlds together as to drive them both
before them: esteeming those, who trouble themselves, and labor more than they
themselves do, for the meat that endures to eternal life, no whit wiser than
those who over-by their Commodities, and to whom in that respect men are wont
to apply that Proverb of disparagement; A fool and his money are soon parted.
But (my Brethren) as it was said to the Jews in another case, If you will not
believe, you shall not be established, Isa. 7.9. So if men will not weigh, and
consider, and believe that it is better for them, that both their feet stand
upon the World to come, that their hearts, affections, and desires were wholly
removed from the Earth, and from this present World; they will never be able to
do any great things for God, or for their own souls; their hands will never be
steady in their liftings up unto those Commandments of God, in the keeping
whereof there is the greatest reward. Some pretend and plead, that whilst they
are men they must be subject to infirmities, and there will be miscarriages;
and therefore since it will be so, they care not how many they be: They think
it not worth the while to strive to reduce themselves into as narrow a compass
of sinning as flesh is able to keep or move in; but without much regret or care
divide themselves between Christ and Belial, between righteousness and
unrighteousness, between things present and things that are to come. And so the
truth is, they do enjoy only a kind of compounded life, living in an estate
wherein Heaven and Earth are (as it were) mingled together, and many times they
are stung and pierced through with troubles and sorrows in respect of both. For
first, they can attain unto no stability, or well-grounded comfort, or hope in
God; because their hearts are not entire and perfect with him. And secondly,
many times that which they do, or desire to do, in matters relating to
Salvation, is troublesome unto them; and incumbers them, because of their
concernments in this present World: And so between the one and the other they
enjoy themselves in neither. Whereas, if they would discharge their hearts from
all inordinate and impertinent lustings after the things of this present World,
and remove their joy and delight into the World which is to come, then they
would be (...), (as the Apostle James speaks, Jam. 1.4.) they would have (as
it were) their possession entire, they would have their inheritance round about
them on every side, and would be completely happy: Neither would they complain
in the least of any loss they sustained by withdrawing themselves from their
carnal interest, from the importune delights, and pleasures, and great things
of this present World. Thus you see upon a rational debate of the matter, that
it is impossible, without the Spirit of God, yea, without being filled with
this Spirit, that men should ever rise to any capacity of being filled with the
rich and lively Consolations of the Gospel.

CHAP. VI. The fifth (and last) Reason of the Doctrine argued: Men stand bound
in duty to put themselves into a capacity of the fullest, and highest rewards
which God has prepared for, and holds forth unto the Children of men.
Inequality of rewards in glory argued. The Parable of the Penny, Mat. 20.
considered. The advantages of late Converts. Inconveniences incident to the
early, which yet may be avoided. Dan. 12.3. in part opened. 1 Cor. 3.8.
Ephesians-6.8. Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 15.58. Romans 6.23. Psa. 138.2. Psa. 25.8, 10. Mat.
13.43. Phil. 3.21. 2 Timothy 4.8. Mat. 20.20, 21. Romans 9.15. Mat. 5.48. Number.
25.11, 12, 13. 2 These. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.23, 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 John 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Heb. 11.10, 17, 18, 19, 26. Heb. 12.2. Joh. 17.5. Luke 22.43.
THe fifth (and last) Reason; be filled with the Spirit of God; that so he may
be capable of the fullest and highest rewards that God holds forth to the
Sons and Daughters of men, to provoke them to ways and works of greatest
excellency and worth. In this Reason there are two things supposed, and one
affirmed; the two particulars supposed are these: First, That the rewards,
which God holds out to invite and encourage men unto holiness and worthiness of
Conversation, are different in their respective values and degrees. Or (if you
please) thus: As some may do well, and others do better (as the Apostle
supposes, 1 Cor. 7.38.) so may some men be well rewarded by God for
well-doing, and yet others be more graciously, or more bountifully rewarded by
him for doing better. The other thing supposed is this, That every man stands
bound in duty toward God to render himself capable of the richest and greatest
reward which God judges meet to confer upon any man. The thing affirmed in the
Reason is this; That without being filled with the Spirit men will never be
found in a capacity of being thus rewarded; (I mean with the highest and
richest rewards which God has in store for men) Let us with all the brevity
that may be show you all these from the Scriptures. For the first, That God
intends the Collation of greater rewards upon those, who shall abound in the
work of the Lord more than others, is clearly laid down in the Scriptures from
place to place. But this I say (says the Apostle to the Corinthians) 2 Cor.
9.6. He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he which sows
bountifully shall reap bountifully. Whether we understand this place of
temporal, or spiritual rewards, or both, of reaping in this life, or in that
which is to come, it is of the same import thus far: It plainly proves an
intent and purpose in God, to reward those more liberally than other men, who
shall quit themselves in well-doing accordingly. As he rewarded Phineas the Son
of Eleazer, for that zealous act of his in executing judgment upon Zimri and
Cozby, by which he turned away his wrath from the Children of Israel, ( Number.
25.10, 11, 12.) above the rate of other godly persons in the same Generation
with him. And if God put a difference between the different walkings and
services of men in matters of reward relating to this present life, Why should
we not conceive that he does the like, if not much more, in the life and world
to come, at least in respect of such persons, whose signal Faithfulness unto
him has not been signally recompensed before death? Which is the case
(generally) of those who are faithful unto death for righteousness sake, or for
the profession of the truth. The Saints of old, Heb. 11.35. are said not to
have accepted deliverance, when they were tortured (meaning when it was offered
them upon unworthy terms, or else not to have accepted it, that is, not much to
have desired or minded it) that they might obtain and receive the better
Resurrection; that is, the better state and condition in the Resurrection, that
they might rise again with so much the more glory. There is one glory (says
the Apostle) of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of
the Stars. For one star differs from another star in glory; So also is the
resurrection of the dead, etc. 1 Cor. 15.41. meaning, that there will be a
proportionable inequality in the glory and blessedness of the Saints in the
Resurrection. This exuberance, or redundance of reward that we speak of, is
clearly held forth in the Parable of the Talents delivered out by the Master
unto several Servants, Mat. 25. And there is this reason why it should be so,
as we have now presented the case unto you, why God should reward some above
the line of others, supposing (that which we all know to be true) an inequality
among the Saints in zeal, and service, and faithfulness unto God ( viz.)
because though the Collation, or bestowing of eternal life upon the Saints, be,
in one respect, an act of free grace and bounty in God; in which respect it is
said to be the gift of God, and that which is conferred in this kind upon them,
is sometimes termed a reward, which may be the same, where services have been
different, if the Donor pleases; yet in another respect, this Act of God we
speak of is an Act of justice, of distributive, or remunerative justice, and so
most frequently represented in the Scriptures; and consequently, must of
necessity proceed, and be carried according to all the variety, and diversity
of worth, and excellency that shall be found in the ways, and works, and
services of all those that shall be rewarded. How, and in what respect, that
Act of God, we speak of, is an Act of Free Grace, or Bounty, and in what
respect again, an Act of Justice, we shall not now stand to declare; because we
desire to hasten: upon which account also we shall (at present) forbear the
answering of such objections, or difficulties which seem to lie against, and to
incumber the Doctrine of inequality of rewards in glory.

Only we shall desire your patience to speak a word or two for the clearing of
the said Doctrine from having any thing in it contrary to the scope of our
Savior in that Parable, Mat. 20. where those that were hired at several hours
of the day to labor in the Vineyard, some early in the morning, some at the
third hour, some at the sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh, are
said notwithstanding to receive every man a Penny. This Parable is so
interpreted, and understood by some, as if it held forth such a Doctrine as
this, and implied, that all true Believers, and all true Servants of God shall
be equally rewarded by God: and as if this was the principle drift of it. For
answer hereunto:

First, I confess (and Interpreters generally acknowledge the same with me)
that the Parable is of a very difficult interpretation, and that it is hard to
draw all the parts and passages of it to a clear comportance or Coherence with
that which is expressed to be the drift, intent, and scope of it. But,
secondly, it is a true rule (and is delivered frequently by Expositors) That
though there be some reason, and some use of every clause and member of every
Scripture Parable, yet every clause and member is not necessarily or
essentially relative to that which is the main scope or drift of it, as if this
could not stand, or be made out without them, or as if every clause were to be
interpreted with a special accommodation to it. In most Parables there are some
passages that serve only as Emblemata, Embellishments, or Ornaments unto them,
which make them both more pleasant to read and consider; and besides, help the
memory the better to carry away the entire Series or Story of the Parable,
being much of the same use in Parabolical Discourses, which some kind of
Pictures, and antique works is in Maps. These do not concern the principle use
of the Map, which is to show the Forms, Compass, Situations, Climates, Names,
etc. of Countries and Places, but only to gratify the Fancy, and make the Map
seem more delightsome. And if they that use Maps thus beautified, and set out,
will needs draw Conclusions for their instruction from these byparts of their
Maps, as from the strange Forms of Fishes, and Mermaids, which they find
painted here and there in the vacant places thereof, they may very possibly
deceive themselves, and judge that to be meant by him, that made the Map, which
was never intended by him: In like manner there are, or may be Clauses in
Parabolical Narrations that serve to make up the Sentence, to make it an entire
Story and body of Discourse, when they have not any essential Connection with,
or relation to that which is the main end of the Parable. And it is a passage
of Calvin in his Explication of the Parable in hand, Siquis exact singulas
hujus Parabolae parts discutere velit, inepta erit ejus curi^sitas: If so be
any man will undertake to discuss and examine every part of this Parable, it
will be found to savor more of Curiosity, than of Sobriety or wisdom.

Thirdly, Calvin (doubtless) is in the right, both as to the Negative, and
Affirmative, in both which most likewise of the best Expositors agree with him,
though some few dissent; but for the Negative, he expresses himself thus,
Atquinec disputat Christus, vel de Coelestis gloriae aequalitate, vel de futuro
Piorum statu: But Christ in this Parable does not dispute, or discourse
concerning an equality or inequality of rewards of Saints in glory; nor does he
at all relate to the future condition of godly men after this life. And for the
Affirmative he says, Haec Parabola nihil aliud est, quam proximae sententiae
confirmatio; Erunt primi novissimi, and novissimi primi: This Parable is
nothing else but only a confirmation of that Sentence which did immediately
precede, contained in the last words of the foregoing Chapter. But many that
are last shall be first, and the first last. Therefore this Parable must be so
interpreted, that it may be a convenient proof, or a rational Explication of
this Conclusion or Saying, Many that are first shall be last, and the last
shall be first. Now, it is true, that Christ in this Saying (and so in the
Explication and Confirmation of it) had a further End than simply the assertion
of, or the possessing of his Disciples, or others, with the truth of that
Saying; viz. effectually to excite, stir up, and admonish both the one and the
other to hold on and persevere in the ways of righteousness and well-doing, if
at any time their feet were slipping; considering, that though they were, or
should be before others in the Profession of the truth, either in time, or
enjoyment of means, or in zeal and fervency of Profession, yet they might
through pride, carelessness, and security, be thrown back behind many, who were
at first, and for a time far behind them, and in whom, for a long time, nothing
of God, or of any goodness appeared. This (I say) was our Saviors drift in his
inculcating, and backing this Saying, with so much importunity, into the hearts
and consciences of his Apostles, and others; and consequently, the remote
intent of the Parable it self. But that which is the more immediate and proper
scope of it, is, to give some further light to that saying, Many that are first
shall be last: and the last shall be first. Now, that this is the proper and
immediate end of this Parable is evident, both from the beginning of the
Parable, and likewise from the Application and winding up, or end of it in
Verse 14. In the beginning of the Parable, that rationative Particle, For; For
the Kingdom of Heaven is like, etc. clearly shows that the Parable (in the
words following) does relate to that which went immediately before; and
(indeed) it was not so well considered by him (whoever he was) that made the
beginning of this Chapter here: For this Parable should have gone along with
the former words, being the Explication, or an account given of what was
delivered there, that the first shall be last, etc. Secondly, This appears from
the close, or winding up of this passage, which is (as it were) the Application
of it, Ver. 16. So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be
called, but few chosen. So that by all this discourse in this Parable you may
easily gather that it will come so to pass, that many, that are last, shall be
first: and the first, last. But thirdly (and lastly) the Question is, How the
main Current of the Parable can be drawn to run in this Channel; or in what
sense this Saying, The first shall be last, can be understood to make the
natural result of the Parable, or to make this Parable to be the confirmation,
or illustration of it?

First, It is to be considered, that this Saying, The first shall be last, and
the last first, was a Proverbial kind of Sentence frequently used amongst the
Jews. Grotius calls it, (...), tritam usu communi, in Mat. 19.30. a Sentence
worn with common usage. Many Sayings and Sentences of this kind (I mean, which
passed familiarly, and in the nature of Proverbs, amongst the Persons with whom
Christ conversed) were taken up by him, and upon occasion inserted into his
heavenly discoursings unto them, The Reason whereof we shall not here stand to
consider: but for the truth of the observation see Mat. 9.12. and 12.37. and
13.57. Joh. 4.37. (to omit others.)

Secondly, It is observed by many (and the observation is true and pertinent to
the present occasion) that Proverbial Sayings have (very frequently) different
senses, and may be, and are accordingly applied unto different cases.
Proverbium vulgar aptavit ad praesentem Causam, Christus vero ad sensum Paulo
diversum inflectit, etc. Calvin in Mat. 12.37. Solent Proverbiales Sententiae
variis modis aptari, Hugo Grotius in Mat. 20.16. Instances hereof might be
given. For,

Thirdly, This very saying, The first shall be last, and the last first, may be
understood either in a more general and comprehensive sense, as comprehending
all kinds, or any kind of priority; together with the persons possessed of, or
enjoying any priority in one kind or other; and so lastness, or worstness, in
estate, or condition, as well in one kind as another, together with the persons
reduced to any such condition; or else in a more particular and restrained
sense, viz. importing only a firstness, or precedence before others in matters
of Religion, and things appertaining unto God; together with the persons
invested at present with the privilege of such a precedence; and so a
lastness, opposite to such a priority, or precedence, together with the persons
either prevented with, or reduced to this lastness, or poorness of condition.
Again, admitting this restrained sense, yet the meaning of the Saying may be,
either that the first (in this sense) shall or will prove so secure, negligent,
and unworthy in their way, that they will be cast behind those that sometimes
were far behind them in their spiritual estate, yet not so as wholly to
Apostatize, or make shipwreck of Faith, or not to be saved in the end; and so
that they that were sometimes nothing, or worse than nothing, in things
relating unto God, shall before they die quit themselves at such a worthy rate
of wisdom, zeal, and diligence, in approving themselves unto God, that they
shall obtain a greater interest in his favor and love than those that had been
highly interessed in these long before they began to look after them; or else
(the meaning may be) that those that were at first, and for a time zealously
forward in good ways, will afterward suffer themselves to be so enticed away
from them by the World, and by the Flesh, as to make shipwreck of all, and of
Salvation it self at the last: Whereas many, who for a long time walked in the
paths of Death, and savoured not in the least the things of God, shall at last
lay hold (as it were) with both their hands on eternal life. Besides, the
Proverbial Saying we speak of may be understood of Nations, or greater
Communities of People, in their succeeding Ages, and Generations, as well as of
particular or individual persons, so as to import, that such Nations, Cities,
or Countries, who embraced the true Worship and Service of God before others,
or with greater zeal and vigor of Profession, many times after a while fall
from their first love, and suffer others, other Cities, or Countries, even
those who had been a long time without God in the World, to take away their
Crown. And in this sense we find it used by our Savior, Luke 13.30. and
applied to the National Apostasy, and rejection of the Jews, who alone, for
many Ages past, of all the Nations on the earth, had a zeal for the true God,
and professed his true Worship;) and to the gracious entertainment of the
Gentiles by God for his people upon their free and cordial entertainment of the
Gospel. But,

Fourthly (and lastly) in which of the senses mentioned the Parable of the
Penny (which our engagement is to reconcile with the Point in hand, the
different advancement of the Saints in glory by God) may be conceived to be the
confirmation, or illustration of it (as by the consent of almost all Expositors
it is, and by the express tenor of the Context must needs be, as has already
been proved) and how it may be interpreted so as not to favor that equality of
the Saints in glory, which some maintain has yet some difficulty in it. Yea,
those Expositors, who unanimously conclude that it holds no intelligence, or
correspondency with that opinion, are yet much divided in their judgments about
the carriage of it, and the sense of several passages in it. I shall not
trouble you with the variety of their notions in this kind; but briefly
acquaint you with mine own, and with what I judge most agreeable unto the truth.

First, Many that are first shall be last, etc. taken in the more restrained
sense of the two mentioned, and that the tendency of it is to declare and show,
that many, who in matters of Religion, and in privileges depending hereon,
were, (in one sense or other, viz. either in reality and truth, or in their own
opinion) before others, would yet be found at last far inferior in both unto
those, in respect of whom they had formerly a signal preheminency in both, and
that these, in the issue, would have the Crown of their pre-eminence, or
precedence, awarded, and given unto them. This (I presume) the express tenor
of the Parable makes manifest.

Secondly, It is not to be questioned but that our Savior in this Parable did
overture, and insinuate (at least) the rejection of the Jews (plainly enough
characterized by those that were first called into the Vineyard, who only are
said to have been hired by express Compact for a Penny a day, and to have
murmured against him that hired them for not valuing their work above theirs,
who were called into work after them, and labored not so long as they; both
symptoms of a Jewish temper) together with the receiving of the Gentiles into
grace and favor with God, signified by those that were called into the
Vineyard after the others (though not all at the same time, but some after
others, as we know the Gentiles in their respective Countries and Cities were
called) as likewise by their greater ingenuity and more Evangelical temper than
were found in the other, in that they did not indent with the Householder (God)
for any certain wages, or hire, but were content to refer themselves, for their
work and labor, unto his good will and pleasure. It was the manner of Christ
rather to insinuate somewhat darkly, and covertly, unto the Jews their
approaching rejection, together with the calling of the Gentiles, than to
declare it openly, or in plainness of words. In the following Chapter, Mat.
21.45. Luke 20.19. It is said, that when the chief Priests and Pharisees had
heard his Parables, they perceived that he spoke of them [meaning, of them and
their Nation.] They perceived, that is (as we use to say) they smelt fire; they
had a strong jealousy, and somewhat more, that the persons or people against
whom his Parables were bent were they and their Nation. Therefore,

Thirdly, Whereas it is said, that the first hired likewise received every man
a penny ( viz. as the others had done) it is not to be supposed, that those
signified by them received the same recompense of reward from God (especially
if by the Penny they received, we understand the Kingdom of Heaven) which the
other Laborers had received. For there is no murmuring against God, nor
envying of their Fellows amongst the Saints in their Heavenly Kingdom; a
Consideration strongly insisted on by Chrysostom among the Ancients, and
Musculus (with some others) amongst our modern Expositors to prove, that the
word Penny does not signify one and the same thing, that is, [materially, or
in the Letter] where ever it is used in the Parable, but the same thing in
proportion only, viz. such a recompense, or reward, which according to the
rules of equity answers the nature, quality, and proportion of every man's
work, whether it be good, and so rewardable with glory; or whether it be evil,
and so rewardable with shame and punishment: And again, whether it be more
considerably good, and so according to equity rewardable with more glory; or
more demeritoriously evil, and so upon the same account rewardable with the
greater punishment. This Notion of the word Penny is countenanced by the word
(...), Ver. 8. which properly signifies wages, being here used as parallel to
it, and explicative of it. When Even was come, the Lord of the Vineyard says
unto his Steward, Call the Laborers, (...), and give them their wages. Now, as
it is not unusual in the Scripture to express the punishment, which is due unto
sin, by the word (...), wages, recompense, or reward, as well as the glory,
honor, and peace which are due by Promise and Covenant from God unto
righteousness and well-doing. For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. So
again, Receiving, (...), that recompense [or wages] of their error which was
meet, Romans 1.27. And every transgression and disobedience received, (...), a
just rerecompense of reward, Heb. 2.2. (to omit other places.) That likewise is
further observable to our present purpose, that the Holy Ghost sometimes uses
the same word, not only in the same Contexture of Scripture, but even in the
same Sentence, to signify things that are only Analogically, or in proportion
the same, and not the same properly, or specifically, Neque novum est, ut idem
nomen, quem admodum hic (...), duobus sensibus serviat, Grotius, Mat. 26.29.
When Christ said, Let the dead bury their dead, (Luke 9.60.) By dead in the
latter place, he means such as were properly, and in a more common
acceptance of the word dead: But in the former place, such who were
Analogically, and by way of resemblance only, dead. So, by the water, of which
he speaks, Joh. 4.13. he means material or common water: but by the same word
in the next verse, he means water of a quite different nature, and that which
is such only by way of similitude, or proportion. It were easy to add more
instances of this character of speaking in the Scripture, if it were needful.
Therefore

Fourthly, When those that were first hired are said to have murmured against
the Lord of the Vineyard, not because he had punished them, but only because he
had made those that were hired after them (and therefore, as they thought, had
both labored less, and so deserved less than they) equal [in reward] unto
them; it is to be construed and understood only as an Hypotyposis, or lively
representation of the evil and malignant genius of the Jews [and in part, of
all Justiciaries like unto them who stand upon terms of Merit, or Works, with
God, for their justification] against the Gentiles, and their entertainment by
God for his people. This was a scourge in their sides, and a thorn in their
eyes; they looked upon it as a sore punishment inflicted upon them by God, or
at least, as very hard measure measured unto them; that People so unworthy, and
despicable in their eyes, yea, so hated and abominated by them, as the Gentiles
were, should be made equal unto them in their great and darling privilege, (I
mean) their being the People of God; a Privilege whereof they and their
Forefathers had been in possession for so many Generations. That this was as a
Sword passing through their Soul, and a burden next to insupportable unto
them, the Scripture witnesses in several places. God himself of old
prophesied, and described the Calling of the Gentiles, as a penal requital (and
this very sharp and sore) upon the Jews for their Idolatries, and other
contempt of him. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God,
they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a People; I will provoke them to anger with
a foolish Nation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 10.19. The like is observable from Mal.
1.10. compared with verse 11. The Holy Ghost likewise makes observation ( Acts
22.) that the Jews gave audience unto Paul (in his Apology) with some patience
unto these words, And he [God] said unto me, depart: for I will send thee far
hence unto the Gentiles; but that upon these words, They lift up their voices,
and said, Away with such a Fellow from the Earth; for it is not fit that he
should live. And as they cried out and cast off their Clothes, and threw dust
in the dir, etc. ver. 21, 22, 23. These deportments of theirs, the occasion
considered, plainly show, that Gods mercy and goodness toward the Gentiles in
making them equal unto them [the Jews] in their reception into grace and favor
with him, and making them his People, was interpreted and resented by them as a
just ground, or occasion of murmuring, or complaining even against God himself,
as a thing unequal, and unworthy of him, in case he should do it.

And if we should understand, or conceive, that because the first hired are
said to have received likewise every man a Penny, and so to have been made
equal unto those that were hired afterward, that therefore they received the
same Salvation with them, or were made equal to them in this, there will be
nothing at all found in the whole Parable to answer this Reason. For many are
called, but few chosen, given by Christ (in the Apodosis or Application of it)
of that Doctrinal Conclusion (intended, as has been said, to be declared or
illustrated by it) The last shall be first, and the first last.

For 1. Evident it is, that by the first, here said to become, or to be made
last, are meant those upon whom this punishment or misery should fall, by means
of their not being chosen [that is, approved by God as meet to be rewarded with
eternal life.]

2. It is not reasonable to suppose, that any of the after Called (in the
Parable) became last, through any such defect as this, or otherwise, but that
they were all chosen and approved by God, and graciously rewarded by him,
though not equally neither (as we shall show further presently.) Therefore by
the Penny, which the first hired received, cannot be meant the Kingdom of
Heaven, or Salvation, nor yet the same thing, or the same reward (materially
taken) with the Penny received by those that were called afterward.

Fifthly, If by the word Penny, by which is expressed that wages or
consideration which all the respective Laborers, at what time soever called,
are said to have received for their labor (respectively) should be meant the
Kingdom of Heaven, or the great reward of Salvation; yet neither will it follow
from hence, that therefore they were equally rewarded, or that they had equal
shares in this Kingdom. All the twelve Tribes were safely brought into the Land
of Canaan (the well-known Type of Heaven) and were planted, and dwelt in it:
yet had they not all equal proportions of the Land assigned unto them for their
(respective) Possessions or Inheritances: Yea, it is scarce questionable, but
that every one of their several allotments differed more or less in compass or
extent of Territory from all the rest. There is nothing more usual in the new
Testament than to promise the recompense of reward unto all that shall
persevere in Faith and Love unto the end, under the same terms, or expressions,
as sometimes of life, sometimes of everlasting life, sometimes of a Kingdom, of
a Kingdom that cannot be shaken (besides many the like) yet by other places
(some of which we shall consider ere long) it plainly appears, that there
shall be some greater, and some lesser in these heavenly enjoyments. Every
Labourer may receive his Penny: and yet the Penny received by one may have more
Silver in it, and be more weighty upon the Balance than that received by
another: although it is to be presumed that the lightest of all is full weight;
not only, or not so much, according to the standard of equity, but of the
greatest and most magnificent bounty. According to the rule or standard of
which bounty notwithstanding the great God judges it but equal, and meet for
him to reward the services done unto him by his Saints: And that by the Penny,
which he [as Lord of the Vineyard in the Parable] caused to be given to the
Laborers, called in at several times of the day unto his work, for their
labor, is not meant a Penny, or reward simply of the same value or worth, is
evident from his expressions to those hired at the third hour, and to those
hired at the eleventh hour, compared together. To the former he said, Go ye
also into the Vineyard, (...), and whatsoever is right [or just, meet, or
equal] I will give you. Upon the same terms, and with the same words he hired
those also that were called at the eleventh hour, Go ye also, etc. (...), etc.
Ver. 4.7. By these expressions it is manifest, that though in his expostulation
with those that murmured, he says, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
with mine own? etc. Ver. 15. Yet he did proceed by a rule of righteousness, or
equity in rewarding all those that wrought in his Vineyard. And proceeding by
this rule in rewarding, he did with his own what he willed, or pleased to do:
for his Will was to do that which is right, meet, or equitable in rewarding the
labors of his Servants. But now it is not equitable, right, or meet, that he
that labors more, with equal, and especially with greater faithfulness unto
his Master, should in his reward be reduced to the proportion of him that
labors less, or with less faithfulness. So that unless it shall be supposed
(which, I presume, is no man's supposal) that all the Saints are uniformly, or
equally diligent, and faithful, and zealous in their servings of God; it cannot
be supposed that God, who rewards them all by a rule of proportion, or
according to what is right or meet, should reward them all alike, and not
consider those that have abounded in his work above those that have been more
sparing and remiss in it. (...), God does all things by Geometrical
Proportions, was the Saying of an ancient Philosopher.

Sixthly (and lastly, to add this also) The reason why the Lord of the Vineyard
gives order unto his Steward to give the Laborers their hire, beginning from
the last unto the first ( v. 8.) may be to signify, that the heart of God is
more set upon those, who after long continuance and obduration in ways of sin
and wickedness, yet unfeignedly repent, and turn unto him at the last, than
upon those that have been trained from their youth up in his service, though
they have not declined from it. This disposition in God, our Savior seteth
forth by several Parables in the Gospel, as of the joy for the lost sheep that
was found, Luke 15.6. And so for the lost Groat, or piece of Silver being
found, ver. 9. And most Emphatically by the Parable of the Prodigal, whom,
whilst he was yet a great way off, in his return, his Father ran to meet, fell
on his neck, and kissed him, with several other expressions of great affection
and high contentment for his return, Ver. 20, 22, 23, etc. Upon this account it
is, that (as the Lord Christ, who perfectly understood the temper and
disposition of Heaven, informs us) there is more joy in Heaven over one
sinner that repents, than over ninety and nine just persons, that need no
repentance. And again, that there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that repents, (Luke 15.7.10.) Doubtless, the joy that is
before the Angels of God arises proportionably to that contentment, joy, or
satisfaction-which they observe in God himself, either upon his own, or his
Creatures acting, to his glory.

If it be any man's objection,

I answer; That such a disposition in God as this (with his actings suitable to
it) is no ways inconsistent with the strictest Rule of Equity in rewarding.
Only this is to be known, and considered by the way; that he does not always,
or in all cases without exception, walk according to it, but only for the most
part, or more generally. As any particular disposition in a person truly
prudent and wise, though never so strong, may by some extraordinary
circumstance intervening be sometimes overruled. Our Savior himself seems to
intimate some such caution, or restriction as that now hinted, in that method
of proceeding in God about the rewarding of his Saints, according to which he
makes; the last, first (and consequently, the first, last) or gives order to
have the last called, to be rewarded in the first place. For when he says,
Many that are first shall be last, he seems to suppose, that it will not
universally so prove, or that all (without exception) that are first shall be
last, but that for the most part it will be so. So again, where he says, There
are last that shall be first, and there are first that shall be last (Luke
13.30.) he implies, that there may be some last who shall not be first: and
so, that there may be some first that shall not be last. The reason hereof we
shall show presently. This caution premised, the equity of Gods proceedings in
making the last-called of his Saints the first in their reward (ordinarily) may
be demonstrated upon these four grounds.

First, Those that have been great sinners, and have stood out long in
rebellion against God, when their great evil is overcome by the goodness of God
in the Gospel, and they, notwithstanding all their wretched and fierce
Provocations, are received into grace and favor with him, only upon their
repentance and believing, commonly prove the greatest and most cordial friends
unto him amongst all his Saints, become most naturally and genuinely affected
toward him, are most free and willing to spend, and to be spent upon the
service of his name and glory: Whereas old disciples, and those that of a long
time, and from their youth have been accustomed to the yoke of Religion, are
apt, in process of time, to grow drowsy, and next unto formal and customary in
their performances: and seldom have that courage, that spirit and life in them,
to act any thing, or suffer any thing out of course, or upon any extraordinary
account, for the interest of God, and of Jesus Christ, in the World, which are
found in late Converts, and those that come off from many and great
abominations unto God. The longer, and harder the Earth has been bound by a
Frost, the mellower, and more tender and capable of any impression it is found
when a through thaw comes: No heart so pliable under the Word, Spirit, or
Interest of God as that which is made soft by him after the greatest hardness.
The Scripture bears witness unto this, as a truth, in many instances and
places. He, who by his own confession (1 Timothy 1.15.) was the greatest of
sinners, whilst unconverted, when the evil property of his heart was altered by
the Grace of God, Labored in his service more abundantly than they all (than
all his fellow Apostles) 1 Cor. 15.10. That which is recorded of Zacheus, Luke
19.7.8. and of Mary Magdalen (though her name be not mentioned) Luke 7. from
ver. 37, to 48. gives a lightsome evidence of truth in the Notion in hand, and
that Saying of Christ, To whom little is forgiven, he loves little, with his
discourse preceding, does abundantly confirm it.

Secondly, They who have long, and even unto weariness, and to the brink of
despair, walked in the vanity of their minds, and ways of wickedness, being
upon repentance received unto mercy, commonly prove more Evangelical in the
frame of their minds, and temper of their spirits, and cleave unto God with a
more pure and entire dependence upon his grace in Christ for their
Justification, and Salvation, than they that are Professors of a long standing,
and were early at work in the Vineyard. It is very incident unto these, after
some years continuance in a religious course, to be insensibly corrupted in
their minds from the simplicity of the Gospel, and to warp toward a spirit of
legality, associating (as it were) their own Righteousness with the Grace of
God in Christ to keep up their hearts in hope of Justification by him. This
difference between the one and the other, in the spirit of their minds, was
(doubtless) intimated by Christ in the different behaviors, or expressions of
the Prodigal or younger Brother, who personates the late Convert or the person
that after much wickedness returns unto God, and upon his Conversion, and of
the Elder Brother, who seems to represent the Genius and temper of those that
have been old servants in the House of God. The former (the younger) at his
return discovers the frame of his heart end Spirit, to his Father, thus:
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son, Luke 15.21. As he had no temptation upon him to plead any
thing he had done for his Father, to render him worthy in the least degree of
his favor, so was he far from looking this way with the least of his thoughts:
his hope of acceptance with his Father depended wholly upon his Fathers
goodness, and readiness to receive him upon his return; Whereas the Elder
Brother, in a Contest with his Father, claims a kind of right and title to more
of his love, than as he thought, he had yet at any time showed unto him. And he
answering, said unto his Father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither
transgressed I at any time thy Commandment, and yet thou never gave me a Kid,
that I might make merry with my friends. But, etc. Ver. 29. David has this
Saying, Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not your heart upon them: As it is
an hard matter for those that are rich in this present World to keep off their
hearts from trusting in their uncertain riches, or to keep them in trust or
dependence upon the living God (1 Timothy 6.17.) whereas afflicted and poor
people, and the widow that is desolate, do, as it were of course, and by a kind
of necessity, trust in the name of the Lord ( Zeph. 3.12. compared with 1 Timothy
5.5.) In like manner, when men have wrought righteousness for many years
together, and have heaped up Prayers upon Prayers, and hearings upon hearings,
with great constancy, intermixing (it may be) now and then Fasting with some
Alms-deeds, or other works of Charity, without making any scandalous digression
from the ways of God all their days, it requires more spiritual strength and
wisdom, than are found in ordinary Believers, for a man not to look upon so
much beauty with an adulterous eye, and not, in secret at least, to think that
God, in consideration of so much, such long and faithful service done unto him,
may well forgive him his sins and trespasses, and so not to wear somewhat flat
and superficial in their esteem of, and dependence upon the mere grace of God
in Christ: Whereas they whose course of life has been nothing but sin, and
wickedness, and enmity against God, when they are converted and reconciled unto
God, cannot (lightly) but be pure end chaste in their dependence upon his grace
and goodness, for all the good they expect from him, their conscience plainly
telling them that they have no self-righteousness, nor are in a capacity of
having any whereon to build, or wherewith to feed the least hope or expectation
in that kind. Now it is but reasonable, that God, who has designed the
Salvation of men according to the terms of that Gospel, which himself has
conceived, and communicated unto the World for that end, in the exact and
precise model whereof himself also is infinitely delighted, should be more
intent upon rewarding those with salvation, who expect it from him with the
greatest and strictest conformity to his own mind, and to the terms on which he
offers it, than those who are less observant of his counsel in this behalf,
and, to a degree, lingering and hankering after another Gospel.

Thirdly, Neither is it contrary to any Principle or Rule of Equity, that God
should order the rewarding of those in the first place, who have glorified him
most in the World. Now 1. to believe the truth and faithfulness of God in his
Promises, and his power, is to glorify him, or to give glory unto him, Romans
4.20. 2. From hence it follows By the mediation and authority of this known
principle in arguing (easy to be conceived in the Latin expression, but hard
to be Englished to ordinary apprehensions) Ut se habet simpliciter ad
simpliciter, ita magis ad magis.
, that to believe the truth and faithfulness of God in his Promises, and his
power to perform them, in such cases, wherein the performance is more rare, and
more difficult to be believed, is a greater glorifying of God, and in a higher
degree than to believe them in more ordinary cases only; and wherein the belief
is nothing so generous and noble, or so remote from the common Principles of
reason. The high commendation and strain of Abraham's Faith, by which (as we
lately heard) he is said to have given gl^ry unto God (meaning, in a very
signal and transcendent manner) is expressed in these words; Who against hope
believed in [or, under] hope, (...) ( Romans 4.18.) that he might become [or,
(...), so that he did become, or was made, viz. by God, as Ver 17.] the Father
of many Nations. The meaning is, that Abraham's Faith, breaking through those
strong oppositions, which the constant experience of the World, and the common
dictates of reason, or of nature made against it, was so highly pleasing unto
God for that abundance of glory, which in that respect it cast upon him, that
he judged it but a meet consideration for it, to make Abraham the Father of
many Nations; that is, to confer and settle this great dignity upon him, to be
for ever after reputed, and acknowledged the great Exemplar or Pattern of all
that to the end of the World should believe, who for their numbers should
equalize many Nations. Therefore that believing in God, which sympathizeth most
with this Faith of Abraham, has most of the spirit and power of it, and
lifts up it self in the soul against the stronger assaults or encounters,
must needs glorify God more, than that which has only the common impediments
and obstructions in the way of it, to oppose it. Now it is a plain case, that
he that has been an inveterate and obdurate sinner, and has the heavy burden
of the guilt of many thousand most enormous and hideous provocations upon his
conscience and soul, and of many years rebellion against God, when he
believes, has, in his Faith, much communion with Abraham in the excellency of
his Faith, believes against many fierce Lions and bears in his way, against
the strongest and most violent temptations to diffidence and despair (the
conscience, I mean, of many horrid perpetrations, and of enmity against God,
desperately persisted in for a long time together, etc.) whereas he that comes
unto God early, and believes in the morning of his years, not having debauched
his Conscience with any the bold and daring affronts, so frequently given unto
God, and his holy Commands by this miserable World, has no such mountains in
the way of his Faith to be leaped over, has no such armed fears, no such
imperious contradiction of sin to encounter: and consequently, his Faith,
though it holds good correspondency with the Faith of Abraham, in the nature
and truth of it, yet is it far beneath it in that Crowning property of it,
whereby it gave glory unto God so abundantly; I mean, the conception and birth
of it in the soul, in the very face and presence of many strong opposers, who
fought against it with an high hand, and sought to stifle it in the breaking
forth. This then is another reason to vindicate the equity of that disposition
in God according unto which he (ordinarily) makes the last first [and
consequently the first last in the sense often declared.]

Fourthly (and lastly) there is a principle, or disposition, found in the
nature of man, frequently (and almost constantly, upon the occasion) acted by
men, and this without the reasonable or just offense of any man, which does
justify that disposition in God, with his acting semblably to it, of which we
are now speaking; and which God himself pleads in the Scriptures, as well by
way of proof of the reality and truth, as of the righteousness, or equity of
this disposition in him being parallel to it. When any part of a man's
substance, which he valueth, or any person nearly related to him, to whom he
dearly wishes prosperity and peace, have been a long time missing, so that he
gives them (as we use to say) for little better than lost, if by the favor of
divine Providence, above his expectation and hope, he comes to re-enjoy both
the one and the other, he is cast into a kind of ecstasie of joy over them, and
takes more contentment in them, than in those in both kinds, for which he never
was in the like sorrow or heaviness. This disposition (I say) and behavior in
men God insisteth upon, partly to assure those that shall doubt that there is
such a principle or disposition in him (there being nothing in the nature of
man, but by way of extract from the nature of God, who created him in his own
Image, or likeness;) partly also, to justify the righteousness, or
reasonableness of such a disposition in him, unto those that shall question
this, in as much as the like is found in the generality of men without the
reproof, or censure of any man. The Lord Christ in those three Parables in the
same Chapter, ( Luke 15.) The first, of the lost Sheep; The second, of the lost
Piece of Silver; The third, of the Prodigal or lost Child, represents that
temper, or disposition in men, with their practice, or behavior, answerable to
it, which sembleth with that principle in God, out of which he so frequently
makes the last first (in the sense often explained.) When he that had lost one
of his hundred sheep, leaving the ninety and nine in the wilderness, to seek
after the one which was lost, having found it, he is said to have laid it upon
his shoulder, rejoicing: and coming home, to have called together his friends
and his neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my
sheep which was lost, ver. 4.5, 6. Read the other two Parables at your leisure,
especially the latter, wherein, not only the great contentment and joy of the
Father of the Prodigal, upon his return, is largely expressed; but his
affection also, and choice respects toward his Son himself, being now
reclaimed from his dissolute and destructive courses are emphatically
represented; ( ver. 20.22, 23, 24.) although he is said to have had another, an
elder Son, who had been regular, and well ordered all his days. Yea, when this
Son made himself agrieved that greater respects were showed by his Father to
his Brother, that had lately and for a long time together been a Son of Belial,
than unto him, who had always been observant of his Counsels and Commands, his
Father pleads, not simply the lawfulness, but the (...), the meetness, or
comeliness of that which he had done in that case, in these words: It was meet
[(...), oportebat, or it was as it should, or ought to be] that we should make
merry, and be glad: For this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again: and was
lost, and is found, Ver. 32. So that the way of God in making the last first,
and the first last (a way wherein he frequently walks) that is, his giving
the precedence of reward unto those who having lived long in a lost condition,
and whose repentance was against hope, and above expectation, yet unfeignedly
repent and turn with their whole heart unto him at the last, rather than unto
such, who, from the dawnings of their days, have plodded on in a regular
course, and profession of his Worship and Service, without any scandalous or
reproachful deviation at any time; this way of God (I say) is justifiable by
the like demeanours of the generality of men in like cases. But,

Notwithstanding this, or any thing formerly argued, or pleaded, last and his
first, his Evening and his Morning Converts, which have been mentioned, yet
nothing hinders but that they who began early, and were the first in service,
or of the first, may, if they quit themselves accordingly, keep their place of
priority unto the end, so as never to be cast behind, or come into the number
of those that shall be last in reward. For if they shall all along their
progress be diligent to stir up themselves daily, to be like unto those that
come late into the work and service of God, in their love, their zeal, their
humility, their self-denial, and chastity of dependence upon the grace of God
in Christ for their Justification and Salvation, and their other Christian
excellencies, and shall not grow drowsy or sleepy because the Bridegroom
tarrieth, nor wax weary of well doing, nor suffer their love to wax cold, nor
let their left hand know what their right hand does in works of righteousness,
nor stumble at any other of those stones which are commonly laid in the way of
a long profession by the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, doubtless they shall
have equal respects from God in their reward with the best of his late
Proselytes, or Converts. Nor is it impossible on the other hand, but that even
they, who have waxed old in the service of Sin and Satan, and so upon their
repentance have had much forgiven them, and withal, more reasonable advantages
and engagements than their Brethren early called to excel in holiness, and so
to approve themselves, toward, and in the close of their days, upon terms of
highest acceptance with God, and upon this account, to be of the first in
reward, may notwithstanding, before they die, through an unmanlike oscitancy,
and the allurements of the Flesh, and of the World, turn their backs upon all
the great advantages of their late Conversion, and either suffer themselves to
be overtaken with the usual drousiness, dullness, or formality of old
Professors, and so become last in reward in the better sense of the clause; or
(which is much more sad) cast in their lot with final Apostates, and so become
last, in the worst and hardest sense of all.

As it was no part of the intent or meaning of Christ in presenting the Lord of
the Vineyard (in the Parable yet in hand) giving order to his Steward to pay
the Laborers their wages in this order, beginning at the last unto the first
(in the sense so often, and at large declared) either to discourage men from
remembering their Creator in the days of their youth, and believing with the
first, but only to caution and admonish those, who shall thus believe, that
they take heed of those evils which are so incident to a long race of
Profession, and that they be careful so to grow in grace daily all along their
course, that every new day may seem to be the first day of their conversion
unto God; or to encourage men to defer their Repentance unto old age, and until
sin has abounded: but only to encourage those for whom Satan has been too
hard, all, or the greatest part of the best of their days, yet to repent at
the last, by assuring them, that though it be very late in the day of their
lives ere they repent and turn unto him, yet their repentance shall be most
acceptable, and their entertainment by him with more, or greater respects of
grace and favor than he is wont to vouchsafe unto their Brethren, who have
been of far more ancient standing in his service. As these (I say) were the
things intended, and not intended by Christ in the passage in hand, so neither
is there any other thing intended in all that explication that has now passed
on it. The gloss does all homage and reverence unto the Text, and trembles to
make it speak any thing which is not in the heart and inward parts of it: Yea,
and would not willingly conceal any of those gracious and comely things,
wherewith the heart of it is full even to the brim. And (for a cloze) I shall
here subjoyn this; that it is the sense of some good Expositors (and this so
probable, that I could with very little regret of Judgment espouse it, and make
it mine own) that the passage last insisted on, Give the Laborers their wages,
beginning from the last unto the first, is the Master vein in the Parable, and
that all the passages in it besides are subservient to it, and face toward it,
as well those in the rear of it, as those in the front, and that they were
framed by Christ, either only, or chiefly, to make way for a rational and
commodious introduction of it.

However by that narrow and large survey, that has been taken of the Parable,
it sufficiently (I presume) appears, that which way soever it be managed, or
the interpretation and sense of it carried, so it be with reason, and with due
respects to the ground or occasion, and so to the scope of it, or conclusion
intended by Christ to be illustrated by it, together with the proper import of
the principle clauses and passages in it, That there can nothing reasonably be
inferred from it, in favor of that opinion, which undertaketh to reduce all
the Crowns of righteousness, that shall be set upon the heads of the Saints, to
one and the same weight in glory.

We shall at present add a few Scriptures, viz. that God distributeth rewards
unto his Saints by different measures, and degrees. And they that be wise shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many unto
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Doubtless the Holy
Ghost would not particularize a special and eminent service, such as the
turning of many to righteousness is, as that they who have been diligent and
faithful in it should be signally rewarded by God in the Great Day; if all
services, or the most profitable kind of services otherwise, should be
rewarded, and recompensed by God upon equal terms with them. Consider the plain
tenor of the words; They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for ever
and ever. If so be that he had intended, or if this had been his sense, That
all Believers, or that all the Servants of God, all that fear God without
exception, should have been partakers of these rewards signified by the shining
of the stars for ever and ever; there can no reason be given, nor a color of
reason, why he should single out a certain vein of persons from amongst the
great Community of the Saints; namely such, as turn many to righteousness,
[that is, that have endeavored, and done that which was in their power to do,
to turn many unto righteousness] as if none should be rewarded at the
Resurrection with that peculiarity of reward but such. Nay, doubtless his
intent is to show, that whereas there shall be very many rewarded, and that
very graciously and bountifully at that day; yet there will be appropriate
rewards, Crowns (as it were) made on purpose, more weighty and massy in glory
than the rest for such persons as these. Then again, consider that passage of
our Savior to the Mother of Zebedeus children, Mat. 20. She came to him
desiring a certain thing of him, which was, that he would grant that her two
Sons might sit, the one on his right hand, and the other on his left hand in
his Kingdom. Now I suppose that here, by sitting on the right and on the left
hand of Jesus Christ in his Kingdom, are meant (and I think no man did ever
lift up a thought to the contrary) the chiefest and highest places of glory and
spiritual preferment in his Kingdom. Possibly she might look to an earthly
Kingdom, and direct her request in reference thereunto; but when Christ gave
his answer unto her, he does not deny but that there was a right hand, and a
left hand in his Kingdom; some more honorable, and richer manifestations, and
communications of the infinite blessedness of God than others. For thus says
he, Ye shall drink indeed of my Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism wherewith
I am baptized; but to sit on my right hand and left is not mine, etc. He here
supposes, and gives that to her for granted, that there was such a thing,
such Prerogative honor in his Kingdom, as sitting on his right hand, and left,
but withal informs her thus, that they were not his to give, save only to
such for whom they were prepared of his Father; implying, that God has
prepared these places for persons of the greatest worth and eminency in his
service, on whom only they shall be conferred. And so 1 Cor. 3.8. there is a
place that springs yet another Notion relating to the Point in hand. He that
planteth, and he that waters is one: and every man (the Translation is
somewhat dull, and takes off the edge of the Scripture much; it should not be,
and every man, but, but every man) shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor. The latter part of this verse seems clearly to imply thus much,
That every man has a Labor of his Own, [that is, a measure, or degree of
service so appropriately his, that the service of no other Saint shall be
precisely in worth or value commensurable to it] and consequently, that he
shall have a Reward of his Own (in the same sense) somewhat which does,
according to the standard of divine bounty, exactly answer his labor. So that
that which I conceive to be hinted here, is not simply this, that there are
either different, or indifferent rewards, reserved in the heavens by God to be
conferred upon different Saints, but that there will be no two Saints in heaven
whose rewards shall be equal. For though we cannot find a real difference
between the serviceableness, the faithfulness, and worthiness of every Saint
throughout the World, throughout the whole armies of them, yet God who weighs
with a more exact balance than men do; if so be there be never so little more,
if any Saint has but the advantage of an hairs breadth in any spiritual worth
above another, God (I say) is perfectly apprehensive of it, and will interpose
by his righteousness, that he shall have his own reward. Now if we shall
suppose that every one shall receive another reward, and so according to
another labor (which he must needs suppose that holds all rewards equal)
then shall no man (or no more than one) receive his own reward (in the sense
lately declared) or that which is exactly proportionable unto his own labor.
But in that adversative Particle, but, I suppose the Apostle secretly glances
at the neglect, and contempt, which the Corinthians cast upon him, preferring
(as we know) and highly prizing, and setting up in their esteem other teachers
above him: those that were not so sound in Doctrine, or beneficial in teaching,
or safe for them to hearken, or lean unto, being men that were eloquent, and
spoke fairly and smoothly, and carried themselves with a kind of stately
deportment; these kind of Teachers did insinuate apace and win ground of Paul
in the hearts and minds of the Corinthians. Now, the Apostle after that he had
in the former part of the Context propounded these questions: Who is Paul? And
who is Apollos? And further said, I have planted, and Apollos watered; he tells
them, that he that planteth and he that waters are one [meaning, in their end
and scope of their labor both the one and the other, seeking after and
endeavoring the peace, and comfort, and salvation of men; He that planteth,
that is, he that converteth men; and he that waters, that is, he that
edifieth and helps men to persevere unto the end, these are one, they meet
together in the same end.] But (says he) every one shall receive of the Lord
his own reward; as if he had said, Ye may judge of me as you please; you may
set me beneath the meanest of all your Teachers, and value my work in the
Ministry accordingly: but the best is, I shall not be considered, or rewarded
by God according to your estimate or opinion of me, but according to mine own
labor, diligence, and faithfulness in his service [that is, according to what
my labor, etc. shall by the standard of his grace and bounty amount unto.] If
I have labored more abundantly than they all, I shall be rewarded above them
all. So Ephesians. 6.8. (compared with Gal. 6.7.) Knowing this (speaking unto, and
encouraging Servants to show all faithfulness unto their Masters, to adorn the
Gospel of Jesus Christ) that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same he
shall receive, that is, shall be punctually and particularly considered by God
for it. And so Gal. 6.7. For whatsoever a man sows, the same shall he also
reap. It cannot reasonably be understood only of the sameness of the Seed, as
if his meaning was, that he should reap the same kind of seed with that which
he sows; as when (for instance) he that sows wheat reapeth wheat, so he
that sows the seed of Sanctification, or of good works, shall reap a harvest
of Sanctification or of good works; this cannot (I say) reasonably be judged to
be the meaning of the Apostle; but thus, whatever a man sows, that is, whatever
seed, either for quantity, or proportion, or of nature and quality any man
sows, as whether it be the seed of life and glory, or of shame and
punishment, he shall reap in life and glory, and so, in shame and punishment
accordingly. Whatsoever a man sows: it does not only import the species or
kind; but the degree also or the proportion of the goodness or badness of the
Seed that shall be sown in any kind. And so in the other place, Ephesians. 6.8.
knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free. The Particle whatsoever must needs be
comprehensive, and distributive, of all a man's good actions, whether they have
been hundreds or thousands, or millions of thousands, together with all the
degrees of their several goodnesses (respectively) which are all exactly known
unto, weighed, and estimated by God. Now these good actions of men, be they
never so many for number, or so excellent in worth and goodness, yet the doers
of them shall receive the same things of the Lord; that is, shall have in their
reward a particular and appropriate consideration, which shall answer not in
strictness of justice (for God does not reward according to such a Rule) but in
the most gracious and bountiful esteem of God, both every one of their said
actions, and every degree of goodness found in any of them, and in them all.
Suppose a person, who from his youth up until old age, and the hour of his
death, should continue diligent, and faithful, fervent in spirit serving the
Lord, should receive no better, or greater, reward from him than he who,
amongst Believers, shall have brought forth least fruit unto God, and been
coldest in his service; this person could not in this case be said to receive
whatsoever good thing he had done, but only some few of these things, viz. so
many of them as shall answer, in number and worth, the services of the other,
who is supposed to have done little unless we shall say that this other shall
receive of the Lord, not only whatsoever good thing himself has done, but
whatsoever any other has done in this kind.) But this word whatsoever, is (as
was said) comprehensive, and includes the whole body of a man's service, and
obedience, or laying out of a man's self for God, and for righteousness sake,
and implies so many particular services; so many particular rewards (upon the
matter) For that very reward, whatever it be which such a man shall receive,
will have all his worthy actions and services in it: there will be a Crown
calculated and framed by God (as it were) on purpose for him, and fitted to his
head, wherein every thing that he has done for God, and upon the account of
Jesus Christ, will be found in a suitable weight of glory. I shall insist only
upon one place more (at present) 1 Cor. 15.38. Therefore, my beloved Brethren,
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. You see he
enforces this point of advice or exhortation to them, always to abound in the
work of the Lord, upon this motive or ground; because they knew [namely, in
their continual abounding in the work of the Lord] that their labor should not
be in vain in the Lord. But if we shall suppose that they that abound most of
all in the labor and work of the Lord, shall receive no more upon the account
of such their abundant labor than they that should labor least of all, being
the most unprofitable of all Believers, and whose Faith should be little better
than an empty Vine; in this case their labor [namely, in the excellent degree,
or abundance of it] would be in vain: that is, it would turn to no account of
profit, or recompense of reward, to him that should undergo the burden of it.
For certainly the Apostle reminding them that their labor in the Lord, how
abundant soever, should not be in vain, does not speak of the fruit, or success
of such their labor in the world, as that they might or should do good unto,
or convert many by such their example, or the like, but of the bettering their
own accounts at the Great Day; giving them to understand, that if they should
nor slack their hand in so great and blessed a business, they should consult
honor and glory in abundance for themselves in the day of Christ. Now if you
please let us add to the Scriptures, opened and argued, a few reasons to
strengthen your Faith yet further in the Point in hand.

First, Such a dispensation of God, as his conferring of rewards with an equal
inequality, giving greater things to those that do more, and be more faithful:
Such a dispensation (I say) as this, being proclaimed in the midst of the
World, has more spirit and life in it to provoke and strengthen every man's
heart and hand unto Godliness, and this in the highest degree, than to declare,
that they that sow most sparingly shall notwithstanding reap as plentifully as
they who sow most liberally. For such a declaration as this, in effect, they
ascribe unto God who make him a distributor of rewards without any distinction
of the services rewarded by him. But (doubtless) such a Notion or Doctrine as
this, That all Believers shall fare alike, is of a dangerous and quashing
import to the spirit of all signal excellency, and of a destructive antipathy
to all heroic conceptions of Christianity. When men have an opportunity to
raise an estate, and get wealth for themselves, How will they rise early, and
go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulness? They will be more industrious
by far than when they work only for stinted wages, which they know they shall
have whether they work little or much: Alas working under such a Notion
weakeneth the hand, and enfeebleth the arm of any man. But on the contrary,
when there are rewards held forth, and promised according to that which any man
shall lift up his hand unto in working; Do more, and have more; Do more, and
receive more; this raises, incites, and quickens the spirit to its utmost
activity. Were it so that all should be equal, that they that wrought least
should have as much from God as they that labored most, such a disposition of
things as this must needs be of this tendency, namely, to debase the Spirit,
and unnoble the hearts of the Saints themselves: to plant the Lebanon of the
Church with shrubs instead of Cedars, to produce a generation of
Dwarf-Christians. We see many that pass for Christians, and possibly they may
be such indeed, that study, and cast about, and enquire as narrowly as they can
what is the lowest degree of Faith and obedience, under which it is possible
for men to be saved? because they desire to do as little of the will of God,
and as much of their own, as will any ways stand with the saving of the great
Stake of their Souls. Whether the minds of such men as these be touched with
the evil spirit of that Doctrine, which confounds infima cum summis, the lowest
and highest services together, in their reward, I know not: but certain I am,
that such a Doctrine as this is of a most clear and manifest tendency to work
the hearts, and spirits, and consciences of men to such a pass. For if there be
no more for the greatest Servants of God than for those of the least
faithfulness of all (alas) men (as we know) being apt to be guided (or rather
hurried on) in their way by principles suitable unto their flesh, they will
presently cast about, and reason with themselves after some such manner as
this: Since it is so, that our portion in the World to come is fixed, and we
cannot add to it, nor lay up any more treasure for our selves there, than only
that which will accrue to us merely upon our believing; therefore we will make
our selves as wise for this present World as we can; we will treasure up
riches, and live at ease, and take our comforts and contentments freely in the
World, and go as near the brink of hell and destruction as we can without
falling into it. And the truth is, that the conceit we speak of (I mean, of an
equality of reward) is a dangerous snare unto men, not simply to beat down (as
it were) the price of their salvation as low as they can, and to keep out of
the way of all excellency as far as they dare, but also never to advance so far
in a course of godliness and obedience as whereby, or wherein to be saved. My
Brethren, let me say this unto you, and consider it well, That he that will be
intent and wary of doing any thing more than what is simply necessary to
Salvation, it is ten thousand to one that he will never do so much. He is like
to shoot short of his mark that is afraid of over-shooting it: So he that is
loath to do any thing upon a religious account, or for Christ, or the Gospel,
without the doing of which he may be saved, is in eminent danger of not doing
that, without the doing of which he shall never be saved.

Secondly, Such a dispensation as that for which we plead excellently commends
and sets off unto the World the great love that God bears unto righteousness
and well-doing. For if he should recompense and reward the less excellent and
the more excellent ways of men alike, would it not argue that he did not bear
any great affection unto holiness or Christian worth, at least in their
exaltation, and where they advance flesh and blood to the nearest proximity
unto the holy Angels? Or would it not rather import some such thing as this
(which is very unworthy of him) namely, as if he did not care to have men
singularly holy, or that any man amongst his Saints should be more excellent
than another, or outshine him in good works? For if he does so highly approve
of, and take delight in those that strive to outrun their fellows in the ways
of his Commandments, why does he not encourage men of this strain and temper?
Or why does he not take a course to propagate such a Generation in the World?
Or is there any means so natural and proper to do it, as to distinguish and
sever persons of this honorable Character, from those of a more vulgar and
ordinary allay, by promises of greater and more honorable rewards to be
conferred on them? As Caleb, by that generous promise of giving Achsa his
daughter to Wife unto him that should smite Kiriath S^pher, and take it, sprang
valor and courage in the breast of Othniel to undertake the enterprise, and
perform it with success, Josh. 15.16, 17. In like manner, God by raising his
Promises higher unto those that shall quit themselves at an high and worthy
rate in his service, than unto persons that shall move in a more common Sphere
of Christianity, declares that he seeks a Generation of such as will excel
in holiness, and that he delights to be served with Prince-like strains of
zeal and faithfulness. Yea, if God did not regard righteousness and true
holiness, where they are found in greater perfection, more than where he
finds them in less only, he could not reasonably be thought to regard them at
all. For those degrees of the one, and of the other, which in persons highly
qualified with them, do super-exceed that measure, or degree of them which are
found in Christians of a lower pitch and stature, are true righteousness, and
true holiness as well as they. Therefore unless it be granted that God
regards them (I mean, those super-exceeding degrees of righteousness and
holiness, of which we speak) it cannot, in congruity of reason, be said that he
regards them (righteousness and holiness) at all.

Thirdly, Such a dispensation, or disposition as that for which we plead a
Collation of Rewards, an inequality answering the inequality of the services of
men, commends that manifoldness of the wisdom of God, of which the Scripture
speaks, which a contrary dispensation would not do, nor afford any
opportunity for the doing it. For if there be but one and the same degree of
glory, one and the same reward for all the Saints; here is no matter for
choiceness of wisdom to show it self in finding out, and setting forth every
man's reward in a true and exquisite proportion to his works and labor, to his
love and faithfulness. But now if we shall suppose this to be the case (as
doubtless it is) that God has an innumerable company of Saints to be rewarded
in glory; and to receive Crowns of blessedness from him, proportionable to the
endless variety and difference of their ways and doings in the World: Now for
him perfectly to understand, and compute the just and exact weight and worth of
every man's service, and to set out respectively unto the persons to be
rewarded; rewards exactly proportionable, must needs argue and declare a mighty
depth, a marvelous comprehensiveness and exquisiteness of wisdom in him. Christ
makes it a Point as well of wisdom, as of faithfulness, in a Steward being
made Ruler over an Household, to give them their portion [respectively] in due
season: Who is then that faithful and wise Steward? Who, etc. Luke 12.42. The
transcendent excellency of that wisdom and understanding, which God gave unto
Solomon, is thus expressed, And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the
Seashore, 1 Kings 4.29. So where we read. his understanding is infinite
(spoken of the understanding of God himself, Psalm. 147.5.) the Margent, out of
the original has it: Of his understanding there is no number. To accommodate a
great multiplicity of various and different occasions, so that none of them
suffers through any defective or undue management, requires an understanding
either very numerous, or rather without number. This is another reason to
prove, that God intends to walk by the Rule of proportion, not of an uniform
or absolute equality in rewarding of his servants.

Fourthly (and lastly) If God will punish differently more, or less, according
as men have sinned, more, or less, according to the different degrees of their
demerits; then there is little question to be made, but that he will
proportionably reward men, more or less, according to the different degrees of
their righteousness and faithfulness. Now the reason of this Consequence, viz.
That if God will punish sinners, more, or less, according as they have sinned
in greater or lesser measures; then is it reasonable to conceive, that he will
reward righteousness accordingly; the reason (I say) of this Consequence is,
because otherwise he would seem to be more intent upon the punishment of evil
doers than he is upon the rewarding of the righteous. We see that he is intent,
and resolved upon a course of Justice in the punishment of wicked men, both
according to the nature and measure of their wickedness: which shows, that he
hates sin with a perfect hatred. So that if he should not reward righteousness
where it is exalted to a greater degree, and shines with greater beauty
answerable to the line and luster of it, it would argue, that his affection of
love were but cold and dead to righteousness in her greatest advancements; in
comparison of what his affections of hatred and revenge are unto sin in the
high provocations of it. But it is a common saying among learned Divines (and
questionless not more common than true) that God always punishes all sin
citra condignum, short of the demerit and desert of it: Yet it is more
unquestionably and apparently true of the two, that he rewards all
righteousness ultra condignum, over and beyond the worth and desert thereof.
This, many expressions in the Scriptures, concerning the bounty of God in
rewarding his Saints, do fully manifest. That passage of Christ in the Parable
of the Talents, ( Mat. 25.) which he puts into the mouth of the Lord
(personating himself) as speaking to his good and faithful servants, one after
another sufficiently evinceth it: Well done, thou good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things: I will make thee Ruler over many
things, etc. ver. 21, 23. So again he confirms the same, where he says, And
whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water
only in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose
his reward [meaning, according to the notion and import of the figurative
expression, he shall be abundantly rewarded] Mat. 10.42. Those expressions
(...), verily I say unto you, and, (...), he shall in no wise lose, etc. show
both that Christ is very intent upon, and (as it were) taken up with thoughts
and purposes of rewarding even the meanest services of his Saints; and
likewise, that such services as these shall most assuredly be rewarded (the
redoubling of the Negative Particle in the Greek Tongue fortifying the
Negation.) And whereas the services performed unto God by sufferings for
righteousness sake are deservedly judged the greatest and highest of all
services, yet even of these the Apostle says, For our light affliction, which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. compared here with Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. But the truth of this
Point, That God in rewarding righteousness surmounts all merit thereof, needs
little proof, being (I suppose) acknowledged by all that are called Christians.
And as for that, which was the bottom and groundwork of the Argument in hand,
viz. That God does punish sin and sinners differently, the Scripture is yet
more manifest, Luke 12.47, 48. And that servant that knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. But he, etc. Nothing can be more plain, than that men that shall
sin against knowledge, and contrary unto knowledge, shall be punished more than
they that sin out of ignorance, especially if it be not voluntary or affected,
So again, Mat. 11.21, 22. It shall be easier for Tire and Sidon in the day of
judgment, etc. And so, easier for Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. which clearly
shows, That God does intend different punishments, proportionable to the
several degrees of sin and wickedness committed in the World; Rods, for lesser
and fewer, Scorpions, for greater and more sins. Nor shall we need to say more
for the clearing of this, the matter being so evident. And for the reason built
in the Consequential way upon this foundation it cannot reasonably be denied
(as was formerly argued) viz. That if God hates sin in all the degrees and
aggravations of it proportionably, and punishes it accordingly with greater
and lesser punishments, it can with no good congruity of his love unto
righteousness, in all the measures and advancements of it, be supposed but that
he intends to honor it with rewards answerable in proportion unto them all;
and so with greater, where he finds it in a greater clevation; as with lesser,
where it only reaches an inferior line.

Only against this Doctrine two or three things may be objected,

1. Eternal life is said to be the gift of God, Rom 6.23. If so, then must it
not be supposed that he gives it freely, and so may give it uniformly unto all
his Saints, and without any unequal distribution of it unto them, according to
their several seize in righteousness (respectively.)

I answer; 1. That Eternal life may be called the gift of God, because the
collation of it proceeds from the free purpose and good pleasure of God to
make a donation of it unto men upon any terms at all, upon any condition, or
conditions whatsoever, or without condition. He might have kept it without any
breach of Justice, had he so pleased, as an appropriate treasure to himself,
and his holy Angels for ever. 2. Because he is now pleased to confer it upon
them without any merit or desert of theirs, which in strictness of justice can
be so called. But

2. It does not follow from either of these senses, wherein Eternal life may be
called the gift of God, that therefore he divides it unto his Saints by a line
of equality. For supposing that this life may be enjoyed in several
proportions, or degrees of the glory and good things of it (as the Land of
Canaan was possessed and enjoyed by the Israelites, and their respective
Tribes, by unequal portions, and as Christ says, that in his Fathers House
there were many Mansions, Joh. 14.2.) the collation of it in any of these, may
properly be called the gift of God. Nay,

3. (And lastly, for this) Though God, simply considered, and as not having
made any disposal of what is his own, as either by promise, agreement, or the
like, may do with his own what he pleases (as it is in the Parable lately
opened at large, Mat. 20.25.) yet having once made a disposition of it in one
way or other, and ratified it by his word, he is not at liberty to do with it
any thing contrary hereunto: For he cannot, he is not at liberty to deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. And David, speaking of him, Psalm. 138.2. says, Thou have
magnified thy Word above all thy name; meaning, that his Word or Promise shall
have (as it were) and exercise a kind of Sovereignty over all his Prerogatives
and Attributes, Wisdom, Justice, Power, etc. So that men need not fear that any
of them shall at any time, or in any case whatsoever, move in the least
contrariety thereunto. So that as Peter said to Ananias concerning the money,
which he pretended to have brought to the Apostles, Whilst it remained, was it
not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? Meaning,
that he was not compelled to devote it unto the service of the Church; but
having done it, and declared it, he was not now at liberty to resume it, either
in whole, or in part: In like manner, God (I little question) might (at least
without being liable to any just imputation from any Creature for so doing)
have communicated Eternal life equally unto his Saints, had he not declared
himself by Promise that his purpose was to do otherwise (as has been formerly
showed) but now having spoken it, he will also bring it to pass: He has
purposed, he will also do it (as himself speaks in another case, Isa. 46.11.)
The word that has once passed his mouth returns not, but holds on its
course until it has passed his hand likewise. Only it may be some question,
whether such a dispensation, as that we now contend against (a levelling of all
Saints in their rewards) would not have been opposed by some of his Attributes,
as Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. in case he had kept himself free in respect of
any promise or declaration to the contrary? We touched somewhat upon this
lately.

A second Objection against our present Tenent may be made from those passages
in the Parable lately mentioned, Mat. 20. in which all the Laborers, called,
and coming in, some early, and some at the eleventh hour of the day, to work in
the Vineyard, are notwithstanding said to have received at even, every man a
Penny, ver. 9, 10.

I answer, That the sting of this Objection was formerly pulled out, where we
traversed the Parable at large, and argued upon several accounts, that though
all the said Laborers be said to have received every man a Penny: yet every
man's Penny which he received might be, or rather was of a different stamp and
value from that received by another. And this reasoning proceeded upon a
supposal, that not only the Laborers first, and last, called into the
Vineyard, but that those also called at the hours between, as at the third,
sixth, and ninth hour, received every man a Penny. But upon a more steady and
narrow view of the Parable, I find nothing at all mentioned concerning the
proportion or value of what those intermediate Laborers received: It is not
said of them, that they received every man a Penny, but only of the first, and
last. Concerning them, it only appears that the Steward had order from the Lord
of the Vineyard to give them their hire, or wages, as their turn came amongst
the rest of the Laborers: But most probable it is, that it was not a Penny, or
the same in value with the hire of the first and last. For if so, why should it
not be as expressly said to have been a Penny as theirs is? Besides (as was
formerly argued) it cannot reasonably be conceived that these received alike
amongst themselves, or that those of the third hours call received no more than
those of the sixth, or those of the sixth no more than those of the ninth; at
least supposing that they were all, third, and sixth, and ninth hour men alike
diligent and faithful in their labor: For they were by the Lord of the
Vineyard called in to labor upon these terms (respectively) whatsoever is
right [or just, (...),] I will give you. These words plainly point at rewards
answerable in Equity, Reason, or Justice, in one kind or other, unto what their
several labors should be. He does not say unto any of them, whatsoever I give
to the rest of the Laborers, whether they or you work more or less, I will
give unto you. So that nothing can be more evident, than that there is nothing
to be found in the said Parable that countenanceth in the least that equality
among the Saints in their rewards of blessedness and glory which some imagine.

If it be yet urged, and demanded, but why, or how should they that were called
at the eleventh hour, and labored but one hour only, be made equal in their
wages, or reward, unto those that were called early, and bare the heat and
burden of the day (for it is said expressly of both these that they received
every man a Penny) if God intended not equal rewards unto all his Saints?

I answer; 1. We have an English Proverb, Early up and never the nearer: They
that are longest at work do not always the most, or best service. Men may
busy themselves, and take pains (as we use to say) about lifting a feather.
And on the other hand, some in a short time are as much or more beneficial with
their endeavors, unto those that employ them, as some others that are doing
all the day long. The Apostle Paul says of himself, that he was born out of
due time (as our Translators render the word (...), though not so properly as I
conceive, 1 Cor. 15.8.) but certain it is that he was born an Apostle, and came
into the work of God some considerable space of time after all his fellows; yet
we know he labored more abundantly there than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. In like
manner, they that were called at the eleventh hour might do as much good and
acceptable service as those that were called early. And therefore no marvel if
they received equal consideration for their work with these.

Besides, God (represented by the Lord of the Vineyard) estimateth (as we know)
the frame of the heart and inward disposition of the mind into the outward
works and services of men. So that the body and bulk (as it were) of their
services may be fair and large, when as the spirit, of their value and
acceptance with God, may not answer by much, and yet their persons, nor
services, be wholly rejected neither: As on the other hand, where the hidden
man of the heart is beautiful and lovely in his sight, a performance or
service, which is but slender and ordinary in appearance, may be highly prized
and accepted of by him; and this according to the most exact Rules of Justice,
Reason, and Equity. Christ pronounced a just and true Sentence, when he said,
that the poor Widow, who cast in only two Mites into the Treasury, had cast in
more than all the rich men, who yet are said to have cast in much, Mar. 12.41,
43. Now it is not improbable, but that by the early-called into the Vineyard,
may be set forth such a kind of Christian, or Believer, who savours much of the
justiciary and legal spirit, and is commonly active and zealous enough in his
way for God, but inclined to a rugged, harsh, and peremptory temper: which
unpleasant complexion and frame of heart, though it does not make void their
Faith, nor exclude them from the saving love of God, yet it much abates and
brings down the value and esteem of their outward services and performances
with him. So that Believers of a more Evangelical, sweet, and Christian
constitution and frame of soul, may equalize them in acceptance with God,
although they have not had time, or opportunity, to equalize them in the one
half of their external services.

If it be yet urged, and said; But the Lord of the Vineyard does not allege
against the early-called, either any defect in them, or in their work or
labor, nor any thing more commendable in those called at the eleventh hour, as
any reason why he should make these equal in reward unto them, but only his
will and pleasure; I will give unto this last, even as unto thee, etc. ver. 14.
From whence it seems that the will and good pleasure of God is the only Rule,
by which the Saints are rewarded, and that by this Rule they shall be rewarded
equally, whether their works have been more or fewer, more or less excellent,
according to any computation.

I answer, These words from the Lord of the Vineyard to one of the first-called
(in the name of them all) I will give unto this last, even as unto thee, etc.
do not at all prove, either that the Will of God is the sole Rule by which the
Saints shall be rewarded, or that no consideration to the difference of their
works, whether they have been more, or fewer, more or less excellent, shall be
had therein. They only prove, that God (typified in the Lord of the Vineyard)
will not acquaint proud, quarrelsome, or high minded persons with the Counsels
of his Will, or Reasons of his Doings, especially with such as are more secret,
but will put them off with telling them what his peremptory Will is, and an
asserting the justness and lawfulness of it; even as men likewise are wont to
do by persons of a like evil temper whereas they are willing and free to give
account of matters unto those that are ingenuous, and of good spirits. And this
disposition is found in God himself, according to these sayings of David, The
meek he will guide in judgment [that is, he will acquaint him with the grounds
and reasons of all that he requires of him to do] the meek he will teach his
way [ viz. by showing him the goodness and desirableness of it.] Psalm. 25.9. So
again, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, ver. 14. And Prove.
3.32. His secret is with the righteous. God is most wont to communicate things
of a more spiritual and mysterious cognizance but only unto those that are of
meek and yielding spirits, and reverently affected toward him. So that it is
no marvel if the Lord of the Vineyard would give no other reason, but his will,
unto persons that were evil-spirited and contentious, of such a dispensation as
seemed hard unto them, although he was able and ready to give reason enough
thereof otherwise. This for answer to the second Objection.

The third (and last) Objection, Then shall the righteous shine forth as the
Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. So where it is said of Christ,
Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body, etc. Phil. 3.21. So again (to mention no more) where the Apostle Paul
having said, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that last day, and not to me only,
but unto them also that love his appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. All these Texts of
Scripture speak of the Saints in general, and without any differencing some
from others by way of greater excellency: and yet they promise unto them all
shining like the Sun in their Fathers Kingdom, and having their vile bodies
changed by Christ, and fashioned like unto his own glorious body, the receiving
Crowns of righteousness from God, as well as Paul himself: Which all seem to be
expressions of as great glory as the greatest of Saints are capable of.
Therefore it is not to be conceived that one Saint shall differ from another in
glory. But,

To this also I answer; That these, and the like places, only prove an
identity, or sameness, in the species, or kind of that glory whereof all the
Saints shall be partakers, not that they shall all partake of this glory in the
same degree. They shall all shine with a Sun-like luster and brightness, and
yet some outshine others. The Sun it self does not always shine forth with
the same luster and glory. Debora ( Judge. 5.31.) prays, that those that love
God may be as the Sun when he rises or goes forth in his might: which
supposes that sometimes he rises with a weaker and less glorious splendor.
Yea, it is said, that the face of the Lord Christ himself, in his
transfiguration on the Mount, did shine as the Sun (Mat. 17.2.) Yet I think it
is no man's Faith, that either the faces, or the bodies of the Saints shall
shine with equal glory unto his. For how should he then in all things have the
pre-eminence, which yet the Apostle affirms concerning him? Col. 1.18.
Therefore when it is also said, That he shall change the vile body of the
Saints, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body; the word like
does not import the quantity or degree, but only the quality, or nature of the
glory of the body of Christ, unto which their vile body shall be conformed (as
the word (...) signifies.) For otherwise the import would be, that the bodies
of all the Saints should be equal in glory unto the body of Christ himself:
which is a thing so little worthy belief, that (as was even now hinted)
Christians generally are either ashamed, or afraid to affirm it. So that the
meaning of the passage must needs be this, or to this effect: That Christ, by
the Almightiness of his power, will so alter the property and condition of the
bodies of the Saints, which now in the state of mortality are vile [that is, of
an abasing and humbling complexion and frame] as to invest them with an
heavenly splendor and brightness of the same kind with that wherewith his own
body is made most transcendently glorious; not but that he should be known
amongst them by the surpassing glory of his body above theirs, as readily as
the Sun may be known from the rest of the Stars, whose light nevertheless is of
the same kind with the light of the Sun, and derived from it. Nor yet as if all
the Saints, who shall all partake of this glory, should partake hereof in the
same measure or degree. As though all the Stars in the firmament of Heaven
(which to us are without number) shine with one and the same kind of light
(namely, that which is originally vested in the Sun, and is by and from him
communicated unto them) yet are they not equal among themselves in the
participation of this light, the Apostle himself attesting the judgment of our
sense in this, that one star differs from another in glory, (1 Cor. 15.41.)
meaning, not in respect of the nature or kind, but in the quantity, measure, or
degree of that light, which makes them all glorious. And if that notion of some
Philosophers, as well as of some learned Christians, be true (which many
thoughts bestowed upon the Contemplation, have made little questionable unto
me) that God has stamped the matters of the visible and invisible World, with
the same seal, and made the things that are seen in a rational correspondency
with the things that are not seen, that so by the one men might the more easily
ascend to the knowledge and belief of the other: I cannot but judge it a
probability of the first magnitude, that God, as the Author of Nature, has
created such Creatures, as the Sun on the one hand, and the rest of the Stars
(respectively) on the other, and so contrived dependencies, respects, and
relations between, and amongst them, not only (if so much) to serve the World
in those inferior accommodations of light, influence, distinction of seasons,
etc. (for, in reason, he might have as well provided for these, and all such
ends and purposes, by some other contrivance and ordering of them, at least in
some particulars) but that they might be a natural type or representation,
wherein he purposes to appear, in glorifying his Son Jesus Christ, on the one
hand, and his Saints (respectively) on the other. For he purposes to confer
and settle upon Christ such an heaped measure of glory, by which he shall be
known to be the only begotten of the Father (Joh. 1.14.) and be eminently
conspicuous amongst, and over all his Saints, and from which all these,
according to their different capacities, shall be furnished, and filled with
glory; even as all the stars, according to their several magnitudes and
receptivities, have their fill of light communicated unto them, by, and from
the Sun, whose superabounding light, by degrees without number, surmounteth
theirs.

So when the Apostle Paul promises, or declares, that Crowns of righteousness
shall be given to all the Saints by Christ (for these he means, by those that
love his appearance) as well as unto himself (although there will be found very
few or none of them equal in service unto him) his meaning only is, that they
shall be advanced to royal honor and dignity, and wear Crowns as well as he:
But amongst Kings themselves there is (we know) a great difference in respect
of riches, extent of Dominion, number of Subjects, strength for war, and
consequently, in Magnificence, Grandeur, Majesty; Yea, all Crowns are not of
equal weight or value. Nor does the Apostle (in the place in hand) give the
least intimation of an equality in worth or richness in all the Crowns that
shall be given by Christ unto his Saints in glory. The current of the Scripture
(as was lately showed unto you) runs another way. And thus we have at last (we
trust) made good the first of the two supposals in the reason last propounded:
Which was, that there is a variety of rewards, greater, and lesser, intended by
God to be counferred upon his Saints, according as his grace shall be found to
have wrought in them more or less effectually in this present World.

The second thing supposed in the Reason was, that every man, every person of
mankind stands bound in duty toward God (yea, Zebedees children, Mat. 20.20,
21. and so in the Children themselves, Mar. 10.35. Now the Mother sought for
the highest preferments in Heaven, signified by sitting on the right and left
hand of Christ in his Kingdom, she sought (I say) for this in the behalf of her
Sons, in the nature of a gratuity, hoping, that seeking in time, and before the
said places were disposed of, she might be gratified in her request, as if the
first desires were likest to speed. And so the Sons themselves sought it after
the like manner, or upon the same terms; if the honors, or high places in
Christ's Kingdom, were to be obtained by mere petitioning, or asking for them.
The meaning therefore of the supposition is, That it is every man's duty not
simply to ask, or only to desire, the most excellent things of the World to
come: but to put themselves into a regular capacity to attain them; that is, to
endeavor to make themselves such by a Christian worthiness of life and
conversation, and deporting of themselves in every kind, both toward God and
Man, as best becomes them. These high and choice preferments in Heaven must be
for whom they are prepared. It is not (says Christ being solicited by the
Mother for the Sons) it is not mine to give, but (says our Translation) it
shall be given unto them for whom it is prepared of my Father. Now these words
[it shall be given unto them] are not in the original, neither were they spoken
by Christ. The words of the Text are (...), etc. that is, It is not mine to
give, but unto those [or except it be unto those; or but only unto those: the
restrictive Particle, only, being frequently to be understood, as I have showed
by several instances upon another occasion] for whom it has been prepared.
Therefore his meaning (doubtless) is this, not to deny that they were his to
give, but that they were not his to give to any other, but only unto those,
that is, to that kind of person, or to such for whom they were prepared,
designed, or appointed by the Father. By the way, this Particle or Pronoun,
(...), translated for whom, does not point at any particular person or persons
by name, as if (for example) there were any two persons amongst the
universality of mankind, for whom in a personal consideration, or because they
were such and such individual persons, places were prepared, or intended by God
for them; but the said Particle is to be taken adjectively, as it is in several
other places, and not merely nominally or pronominally; that is, not as
signifying naked, or mere subjects, but subjects so and so qualified or
disposed. So you have it in other places of Scripture besides this, as in 2 Timothy 1.12. For I know whom I have believed; that is, what manner of one, what
manner of God, how great, how faithful, and how full of power he is in whom I
have believed. So that the Pronoune whom here does not merely signify the
Person or Essence of God, but God with his Attributes, as endued with those
excellencies and perfections which make him a God meet to be trusted in, and
relied upon. And so our Savior himself, Joh. 3.18. speaking unto the rest of
his Disciples of Judas and his treachery, I know (says he) whom I have chosen,
meaning, not how many, or what persons by name, but what manner, or what kind
of persons they are, how affected, how inclined, or disposed, whom I have made
choice of to be my Disciples; I know the frame of their heatts, and of their
spirits; I know the rest of you are true and faithful, and will not betray me;
I know likewise, concerning one of you, that he is unfaithful, and will prove a
Traitor unto me. And so Romans 9.15. God says to Moses, I will have mercy on
whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion, that is, on what kind of persons I please, or on persons qualified
to mine own mind and liking; and not on such whom men shall obtrude upon me, as
persons more meet and worthy in their eye, on whom I should have mercy [that
is, whom I should justify and save.] The meaning is not (although it be
frequently so carried and understood) that God will show mercy on whom, that
is, on what persons, or individuals, of mankind, personally and by name
considered, as he pleases; but by those on whom he so peremptorily, and
resolvedly asserteth and declares that he will have mercy, and that he will
not be altered in his purpose concerning them; he means, the whole Species of
Believers, whoever, or how many soever they shall be; these being persons
qualified to his mind on that behalf (I mean, judged meet by him to have the
mercy here spoken of showed on them) and the only persons thus qualified. For
by the mercy here specified, is not meant the mercy of Conversion, repentance,
regeneration, believing, or the like, but the mercy of justification, or
acceptance with God. For this (justification) was the subject of the Apostles
discourse, where he insisteth on the words before us, not any of the other. And
God may well express his justifying of men, or his pardoning their sins, by
showing mercy unto them, because whilst they lie under the guilt of sin, they
are in a state of greatest misery. But the sense of this Text of Scripture we
have diligently inquired after in our exposition on Romans 9. Page 150, 151, etc.
to the end of page 160. where (I trust) you may amply satisfy your selves
about it. The said Particle who, or whom, you may find used again (and this
twice together) in the same Concrete or adjective sense (as I call it) a little
after, viz. ver. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens; that is, he hardens what manner of persons, or
what kind of sinners or wicked men he pleases. Again, in these words of the
Jews unto Christ, Joh. 8.25. Whom make thou thy self to be? Their meaning
was, What manner of person, how great, how holy, how far above all other men
would thou make us to believe thee to be? To forbear more instances at
present; when David demands, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, etc? (
Psalm. 15.1.) his meaning is, what kind of persons, how qualified, or what lives
and conversations must they be? (as appears by the sequel of the Psalm, and the
description of the men here.) But this only by the way; and occasionally for
the clearing the place cited, Mat. 2.20. That which we have at present to show,
is, That it is not at every man's, nor (indeed) at any man's liberty or pleasure
whether he will live, or act so, or at such a rate of righteousness and
holiness, whilst he lives in the World, as simply to be saved, and no more;
but the whole World of mankind, jointly and severally stand charged, by him
that is the great King thereof, as with matter of duty, to design the greatest
and most desirable glory in the Kingdom of Heaven; the firstborn of that glory
which is competent to the Children of men; they stand bound to project mansions
for themselves, as near to the mansion of the Lord Christ as may be, where they
may have the richest Communication of the Great God unto them, which he judges
meet to make of himself unto men: they ought to strive (respectively) for the
wearing of the richest and weightiest Crown of glory, that is prepared and laid
up in heaven for those whose hearts will serve them with an holy and heavenly
ambition to aspire unto it.

Now, perfection; and consequently, to exercise themselves in such things which
are proper to invest them with such a capacity as we speak of, to qualify them
for the high places in the World to come, is of easy demonstration and proof
both from the Scripture, and otherwise. Be you therefore perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.48. It might be translated more
emphatically, you shall therefore be perfect; for so the Future Tense in the
Indicative Mood is many times used instead of the Imperative, only with the
greater seriousness and weight. As he that enjoyneth, or commands, when he
would signify and express his authority to the height, he does not simply say
unto him, that he would have him to do a thing; do this, or that; but he says
unto him, you shall do it, or you must do it. So here, You shall be perfect as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect; as if he should say, I impose it
upon you as a matter of sovereign concernment, both unto me and to your selves,
that you give out your selves to the utmost in striving to imitate the
perfection of your heavenly Father, and to be as absolute in all things
appertaining unto you to do, as he is in all things that are honorable and
proper for so great a Majesty to do; you must not indulge the Flesh, nor be
careless or loose hearted in observing this my charge which I lay upon you; but
endeavor with all your might to express all the goodness, and sweetness, and
excellency in every kind, which you see in your Heavenly Father: Your
conscientious submission unto this my Command will both honor me highly, as
you are my Disciples, and I your Lord and Master; and will make your faces also
to shine in glory above theirs who shall be more remiss or negligent in obeying
it. Therefore if you regard me, or your selves, you must remember it. And so of
Mar. 10.21. to the young man that came to him to know what he should do to
inherit eternal life, If (says Christ) thou will be perfect, go and sell all
that thou have, and give unto the poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven.
Surely, our Saviors meaning was not to leave the young man at liberty, whether
he would be perfect, yea or no, whether he would be a complete Christian and
Disciple of his own, but rather to impose this by way of Command upon him.
Certainly Christ did not tolerate or allow any man in any imperfection. He is
(indeed) very graciously and mercifully indulgent unto men in pardoning many
weaknesses and imperfections: but yet he never so hides them, as not to let
them understand that they fall short of what they ought to do, or to reprove
them for it. Again, 2 Cor. 13.4, 11. This also we wish, even your perfection.
So that perfection, that is compleatness in all the Will of God (as the Apostle
somewhere expresses it) is nothing but what is matter of duty imposed upon all
Saints. There is no fear in love: but perfect love (says the Apostle 1 John
4.18.) casts out fear. By the way, perfection in love, argues perfection in
every thing besides, for love is said to be the keeping or fulfilling of the
whole Law. But why should he say, there is no fear in love? The meaning
(questionless) is not, That there is no fear mingled with the affection of
Love; or that fear was not any part or ingredient in it. (These are too flat
Notions for the Holy Ghost) No: but there is no fear in Love, that is, with
Love The Preposition, (...), in, is frequently used for (...), with.
; so that where Love has place, proportionably to the degree of it, there is
no fear; that is, there is no reasonable occasion, much less any necessity of
fear [ viz. That God is a man's enemy] Love does not admit [I mean, if the
nature and genius of it be duly considered, and consulted, it incourageth all
those that have it not to admit] so much as a disposition of fear in the same
lodging with it. But (says he) perfect Love, that is, Love when it is sincere,
and comes to any perfection, to any considerable maturity and strength, that
it begins to fill the soul of a man, and commands all things to be done,
which the nature of Love requires, now it casts out, and discharges the heart
and soul of such a troublesome and fad Companion as Fear is; he speaks of
Fear that has torment or pain [or rather punishment, as the word (...)
signifies, meaning for sin] in it. It is a certain sign that he that fears,
that is, that fears wrath, and vengeance, and destruction from God, is not
perfect in Love toward God, but his Love is maimed, and weak, and acts at a
low rate. Now, when a man's Love is thus broken, it is not of sufficient
authority and power to do the execution we speak of, but Fears and Jealousies
of God's displeasure will keep possession in the same heart with it, and will
be ever and anon ^nsulting over it. But (says he) being made perfect, and
grown to any strength, that it fills the soul; now it throws off all such
fears. The reason (in a word) why, or the manner how, Love casts out the fear
specified, when perfect, may be thus conceived. A man when he loves God
perfectly, with an intireness and throughness of affection, he cannot (lightly)
but know that he does love him: A man can hardly carry fire in his besome and
not know it. But when his Love acts brokenly, and is at many defaults in the
course of it, as if it had a miscarrying womb, now a man is apt to suspect
whether indeed he does really and truly love him or not; because they that love
him not may now and then, by fits, and by starts (as we use to say) and in a
good mood, quit themselves, both in words and in deeds, like unto those who do
truly and unfeignedly love him. Yea, those many things, which Herod did at the
preaching of John, were such a kind of fruit which the true love of God
oft-times bears. Now, when a man comes to reflect upon himself, as one that
truly and unquestionably loves God, it is not likely that he should be jealous
whether God loves him or no; (only supposing that he certainly knows and
believes that God knows as well, nay, much better, than himself that he
loves him.) Men loving themselves, and their own welfare and peace, cannot so
far destroy nature out of them, as to seek the prejudice or ruin of those whom
they certainly know to be their fast and faithful Friends. Nor can the
Judgments or Consciences of persons, that know least of God, be so far
ignorant, or misprizant of him, as to think that he intends the misery, or
destruction of any of those whom he most infallibly knows to be with their
whole hearts and souls devoted in love unto him, and to his glory. But this by
the way, to give a little light to a Scripture of most rich and precious
importance, to those that either desire to love God in the highest, or else
love themselves to such an height, as to be willing to purchase their freedom
from all penal fears in a way of the greatest honor that can be imagined; I
mean, by giving their hearts whole and entire in Love unto God. That which we
look at in the passage as serving our purpose, is, that the Saints are therein
encouraged and provoked to perfection in Love; which (being interpreted, as was
lately hinted) is to all perfection. Now certainly, it is the duty of every
Creature to drink in all encouragements from God, as Fishes drink water,
naturally, constantly, and with delight, and to lift up their hearts and hands
unto whatsoever by them they are invited and quickened. And he that
encourages, or inviteth unto perfection, does by the same act, invite also,
and encourage unto the seeking after the greatest and best things that Heaven
will afford.

We might pursue the Point in hand yet further, by insisting on several other
veins of Scriptures in which the truth thereof beats quick and high: and more
especially on that large passage, Ephesians. 4. from ver. 11. to the end of v. 15.
together with Col. 1.28. In the former of which places the Apostle affirms,
that the great end projected by the Lord Christ in his magnificent bounty unto
the World at his Ascension into heaven when he gave gifts unto men, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, was
the perfecting of his Saints, the building up the body of Christ in all and
every the members of it unto a perfect man. In the latter the same Apostle
professes his comportment with the said great end of his great Lord and
Master, in these words (speaking of him) Whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. But enough (I suppose) has been already alleged, and argued
from the Scriptures to settle this in the judgments and consciences of men for
truth, that there is no person of mankind, at least not amongst the Saints, but
stands bound in duty to lay himself out with all his might, for the obtaining
of the highest Prize in glory.

If you shall now ask me a reason of this assertion (because it may seem
somewhat strange unto you that it should be matter of duty unto men and women
to desire and seek after the greatest excellency in glory; perfection in this
life, etc. for these two seem to be of a much differing consideration) I shall
endeavor to satisfy you with presenting you with two or three Considerations,
which (if you please) you may call so many Reasons of the Point.

First, It is the duty of every person amongst the Children of men (and much
more amongst those that believe) to consult and endeavor the clearest and
fullest manifestations of how high an esteem and value the services of his poor
Creature, man, are with God when they are performed upon the best terms, that
he enables them to perform them. This is a Consideration, unto the truth
whereof every man's judgment and conscience (I may well presume) will readily
subscribe: For there is nothing in God, but what being discovered and made
known makes for his glory. And the fuller and more convincing any discovery of
his things, is, his glory proportionably is so much the more advanced. Now it
cannot appear, at least not so manifestly, or with that demonstrative evidence,
by any lower investitures of men with glory, at how wonderful a rate he prizeth
righteousness and faithfulness found in their exaltation in men. But they who
shall strengthen the hand of God by their high actings in ways and works of
righteousness and true holiness, to bring forth the best Robe of glory to put
upon them, these are the men that will do their God that most worthy and
acceptable service, to give him an opportunity of declaring upon the most
unquestionable terms of satisfaction unto the World, of how sacred a repute and
esteem with him so poor and vile a Creature, as man is, may come to be, if he
quitteth and behaveth himself, only for the few days of his earthly Pilgrimage
accordingly. God delights in those Creatures most, that will draw him forth,
in his goodness and bounty, most freely and fully; as appears by his
extraordinary rejoicing over Phinehas, for the performance of such an act,
which gave him a regular opportunity to show the riches of his grace and mercy
in sparing the lives of his people, which otherwise his just severity against
their sins would not, as it seems, have permitted him to do. See and diligently
consider, Numb. 25.11, 12, 13. And certainly, it is the duty of every Creature,
and much more of the Saints, to seek to give the choicest pleasures they are
able to the soul of their Great Creator: and consequently, to set their hearts
upon drawing out of his hand the largest portion of that glory, and
blessedness, wherewith he has judged meet to reward the services of men.

Secondly, It is said (2 These. 1.10.) that Christ, in the end of the World,
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
believe. This is to be understood in respect of that glorious and blessed
estate and condition, whereunto it will then appear, that such a vast multitude
of poor and despicable Creatures, as his Saints sometimes were, are now, by his
Grace, and work of Mediation, advanced. In this respect, the body of Christ,
consisting of the whole number of his Saints and Believers, is said to be his
Fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all: Namely, because he will never be seen in the fullness of his glory, or
rather because he cannot be duly estimated in his heavenly worth and greatness,
but by the glorious happiness, unto which so many Millions of Creatures, lately
poor, vile, and sinful, have been orderly, aad honorably advanced by him. Now
certain it is, that if Christ shall be glorified (over and besides his own
personal glory) in, and by the glory of his Saints, and be admired in the
blessedness, wherewith all that believe shall be invested by him; the greater
the glory and felicity of any of them shall be, he must needs be the more
glorified and admired in them. And if it be the duty of all the Saints, not
only, or simply, to desire and seek after those things, whereby Christ may be
made glorious and wonderful, but rather after those, whereby he may be lift up
in glory and admirableness to the highest; evident it is from the Premises,
that it must be their Duty also to press with all their might after the
greatest Excellency in that glory which is intended and held forth by God unto
men.

Thirdly, Unless men shall stir up their hearts, and strengthen their hands, by
a desire and expectation of the greatest rewards assigned by God unto
righteousness, and Christian worth in any kind, their hearts will never serve
them to fly that high pitch of righteousness and true holiness which (without
controversy) they stand engaged in duty to do; nor yet to suffer those things
from the World, which their Christian Profession may very possibly require at
their hands. This I might clearly show you by the light of Nature, and grounds
of Reason: but I shall content my self to demonstrate it by the clearer light
of the Scriptures only.

First, It is evident from many passages here, Who planteth a Vineyard (says
the Apostle) and eats not of the fruit thereof? [Meaning, that no man would
be at the cost and trouble of planting a Vineyard, did he not desire and hope
to eat of the fruit thereof; that is, to accommodate himself in one kind or
other by it.] So again, Who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of the
Flock? 1 Cor. 9 7. Soon after, For our sakes no doubt this is written; that he
that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope (he
supposes that no man thresheth upon any other terms) should be partaker of his
hope. Afterward, toward the end of the same Chapter, And every man that
striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it for a
corruptible Crown, etc. meaning, out of a desire and hope to obtain such a
Crown. It is repugnant to the very nature and frame of a rational being, to be
drawn forth into action, in one kind or other, but by a desire and hope of
compassing some end. But of this there is little question.

Secondly, Men's engagements and actings are never like to rise higher than the
level of that good which is desired and hoped to be obtained by them; I mean,
if they understand the just value and worth of it. Men will not (as our common
Proverb is) buy Gold too dear: If they put themselves to any hardship, to
knowingly expose themselves to any danger, they must be inspired hereunto both
by a desire and hope of some purchase proportionably considerable in their eye.
They that strove for Masteries would not have been so districtly and austerely
abstemious, as the Apostle intimates (as we lately heard) they were, had it not
been for a Crown, which, however corruptible (as he there speaks) was
notwithstanding in their apprehensions highly valuable. David, indeed,
endeavoring to render himself as a person inconsiderable unto Saul, expressed
himself to him thus: For the King of Israel is come out to seek a Flea, as when
one hunteth a Partridge in the mountains, 1 Samuel 26.20. But if Saul had not
looked upon the suppressing of David as a matter of a thousand times greater
consequence unto him than the catching of many Fleas, or the taking of many
Partridges, he would not have put himself to the trouble and charge of coming
out with an Army of men to pursue him. And if the life of Sampson had not been
judged a great Prize by the Philistines of Azzah, they would not have lost
their sleep, and watched all night to have made themselves Masters of it: Yea,
God himself knowing that men would never take the Yoke of his Son Jesus Christ
upon them, nor submit unto the holy Discipline of the Gospel in the exercises
of Repentance, Mortification, Self-denial, etc. nor expose themselves to the
bloody hatred and malice of the World for righteousness sake, unless their
spirits were raised and heightened to such great engagements as these by hopes
of very signal and glorious recompenses and rewards; he applies himself unto,
and treats with them accordingly, giving them assured hopes of life and
immortality, and blessedness for evermore, upon their obedience. He (doubtless)
considered, that lesser or lighter encouragements, or retributions than these,
though in Conjunction with the most prevailing Arguments and Motives otherwise,
as Ingenuity, Goodness of Nature, Love of Righteousness, Love of God, etc. yet
would not do that holy and happy execution upon the hearts and spirits of men,
which must be done to make them Proselytes unto true godliness, and persons
after his own heart to fulfill all his pleasure. This the Holy Ghost himself
plainly teaches in several places: By which (says Peter, that is, by which
glory and power of God; or according to some Copies, which read not (...), but
(...), by whom, viz. Christ) are given unto us most great (for so the Original)
and precious promises; that by these you might be partakers of the Divine
Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet.
1.4. Clearly implying, that God had no other way [agreeable to his Wisdom, and
meet to be taken with such a Creature as man] to reduce men from their sensual,
vain, and wicked dispositions and practices, wherein they were deeply
habituated, and engaged with the rest of the World, unto a conformity to
himself in holiness, but only by promises, and these no whit less, for the
matter and good things contained in them, nor less precious [in respect of the
abundant assurance given for the performance of them] than those that he has
now given unto them in the Gospel. The express tenor of the words, if they be
diligently minded, give out this Notion: Men would never have been wooed from
Sin and Vanity, to espouse Righteousness, and true Holiness, by any other
means, motives, or persuasions whatsoever, without being invested with an hope,
and this pregnant and lively, of as great things as the Gospel promises to be
possessed and enjoyed in due time. Of the same import is this also of the
Apostle John, And every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself, even
as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. The Particle and Pronoun, this, is emphatical;
intimating, that it is the Prerogative, or signal privilege of that hope,
which he had immediately before mentioned, ver. 2. to set men on work to
purify themselves, according to that great Exemplar of all purity and
holiness, Jesus Christ; and that none other hope but this [either formally, or
materially] nor any, nor all other means, without it, are able to engage the
Sons or Daughters of men about so heroic and heavenly a work. Now, this hope,
of which he speaks, this glorious thing, that it puts every man, that has it,
upon purifying himself by the best pattern, and as near unto it as he is able
(humane infirmity considered) he signifies, to be an hope of being like, or of
being made like unto Christ himself in respect of his glorified and blessed
estate: which by a near-hand interpretation amounts to as much as is
contained in all those great and precious Promises of the Gospel lately spoken
of.

I shall, upon this account, touch only one place more (at present) though
there be very many consorting with it: Having therefore these Promises
[meaning, of that high and sacred consequence, as those now mentioned, ver. 16,
17, 18. of the preceding Chapter] let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
As if he should say; Had you only matters of lighter concernment, or less
desirableness promised, and proposed unto you, for your encouragement and
reward than those insured you by God in the Gospel, you might much more
reasonably demur upon the exhortation now given you, yea, or absolutely reject
it. I know it is a very tedious and uncouth thing unto you, and next unto death
(if not equal to it, yea, or above it) to abandon all Sensuality, to crucify
the Flesh with all the lusts and deeds thereof, and seriously to strive after
perfection of holiness both in Flesh and Spirit. But the things promised, and
confirmed unto you by God in the Gospel, are so above measure desirable, and
super-transcendently glorious, that for the enjoyment of them you shall offer
no violence at all to your reasons or judgments; but rather highly satisfy and
content them by hearkening and submitting unto all that the Exhortation
requires of you. Gospel Precepts are not to be reconciled with flesh and
blood, but only by the mediation of Gospel Promises; but these are proper to
make peace, yea, and more than peace, even mutual love and delight between
them. This for a second consideration.

Thirdly, Heb. 11. records many more instances in this kind than at present
we judge needful to insist upon: And the Chapter following one that is much
greater than all those. In the former of these Chapters: The reason of that
ready and signal obedience which Abraham yielded unto God, when he called him
to go out into a strange Country (he knew not whither) where he dwelt in
Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, is thus expressed, ver. 10. For he looked for
a City, which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. So that which
enabled him to another as great an act of submission unto God, if not a
greater; I mean, the offering up of his only Son Isaac in sacrifice unto him
upon his Command, is intimated to have been a certain expectation and hope,
that according to the import of this Declaration or Promise made unto him, In
Isaac shall thy Seed be called, God being able to do it, would raise him up
from the dead, in case he had been actually sacrificed, ver. 17, 18, 19. Those
most eminent and renouned strains of Self-denial in Moses, as that he refused
to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, that he chose rather to suffer
affliction with the People of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, that he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures in Egypt; all these high actings (I say) are ascribed unto the
influence, which the hope of the great things promised by God unto those that
should quit themselves with the like faithfulness had upon him. For (says the
Text) he had respect unto the recompense of reward (ver. 26.) as if it should
have been said, It is the less to be marvelled, that he should deny himself at
that most worthy and exemplary rate, considering that he was seriously intent
upon, and taken up with confident expectations, of those soul-ravishing
enjoyments, which he knew God had promised unto Self-denying men. Doubeless,
both Moses and Abraham were persons of as great ingenuity, of as gracious
spirits, as great lovers and friends of God, and of all righteousness and
goodness, as the ordinary, nay, the more choice and improved sort of Christians
are; yea, and (doubtless) these worthy Principles were not asleep in them, when
they acted those magnalia hominum, those stately things of men which have been
mentioned: Yet the Holy Ghost (as we have seen) attributes none of those great
things done by them unto any of these, neither unto the love of God, love of
righteousness, or the like, but only unto the inspirations of those desires,
and hopes of the excellent things, which God had set before them, as rewards of
their obedience, which wrought in them (respectively.) By the way then, that
Doctrine, which teaches it to be unlawful to serve God, or do the best
actions, with an eye to the reward promised unto them, cannot but seem very
uncouth and strange to considering men. Certainly, the express tendency of it,
is at once to destroy, if it were possible, both Nature and Grace out of men.
Yea, let me add (upon this occasion) that were it possible, yea, were it never
so probable, or likely, that men out of the mere love of God, or of goodness,
without any thought of, or respect had unto the recompense of reward, might or
would live holily, and quit themselves as worthy Christians, yet should they
sin in tempting God, and in spreading a snare in their own way, in case they
should neglect the great and sacred Encouragements which God has given them by
promise to strengthen their hand unto such ways. For when God has prescribed
and vouchsafes a plurality of means, for the enabling of men to the
performance of any duty, it is a sin, even a tempting both of God and a man's
self also, to despise or neglect the use of any one of them. But this
occasionally only. If you desire more instances, where the high services of the
Saints are imputed, as well sufferings as doings, unto their desires and hopes
of inheriting the great and precious Promises of God, you may at leisure
peruse, ver. 7, 15, 16, 35. of the late mentioned Chapter ( Heb. 11.) Paul
himself seems to profess himself (as it were) a debtor to that incorruptible
Crown he speaks of, for those high animations, by which he was acted to do, and
to suffer, at an (almost) incredible rate, for Christ, and for the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9. from 22, to the end. But the instance in this kind, and above all
others, is that of the Lord Christ (blessed for ever.) It is said of him also,
that for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, etc. Heb. 12.2. It was that high exaltation, which God the Father
had set in the eye of his Faith, that made that deep humiliation passable with
him, wherein he descended into the lower parts of the Earth (Ephesians. 4.9.) having
first made himself of no reputation, but took on him the form of a servant, and
became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7, 8. And
upon this account, when he was now ready to drink that Cup, which was of that
horrid taste unto the humane nature, we find him full of the meditation of that
glory which he fully believed would be conferred on him upon his sufferings,
praying unto his Father thus: And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the World was, Joh. 17.5.
The meaning of the Petition seems to be this: That whereas the glory of his
Godhead had now been veiled many years by his living in the form of a Servant,
and was now like to be veiled much more, by suffering as a Malefactor, that
ignominious and cruel death, which now attended him, his Father would please to
make it fully known unto the World, by such means, as he well knew how to do
it, that he was not the person, which hitherto, during his abode in the World,
he was judged to be, a mere man, but truly and really God, even the same God
with himself. For this (doubtless) is the glory (the glory of the Godhead)
which he had with the Father before the World was. This also by the way. But
pertinent to the Notion in hand (That it was the minding of his Exaltation to
ensue that supplied him with strength to be baptized with that bloody Baptism
which he endured) is that which we read concerning an Angel from Heaven
appearing to him, and strengthening him: When he was so earnest in Prayer with
his Father to remove the Cup of his Sufferings from him, and ready, upon the
thoughts of it, to fall into that most grievous Agony, in which he sweat (as it
were) drops of blood, Luke 22.43, 44. That which the Angel did to strengthen
him in this sad condition [that is, to support him in a willingness, and
contentedness of mind, to drink the said Cup from his Father's hand [was (say
some with probability enough) a vigorous and vivid representation to his mind
and thoughts of all that most superlative glory wherewith he was most assuredly
to be rewarded by God, for, and upon the drinking of it; according to the
Doctrine of the Apostle, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, etc. And therefore I cannot here but give notice (by the way) that
the Note upon the passage lately cited from Heb. 12.2. which is found in the
Margin of some of your larger Bibles of the former Translation, leading you to
a by-sense of the place, is no ways intended by the Holy Ghost, nor at all
comporting with the scope of the Apostles discourse. But to open the occasion
of the mistake in this Note (which seems to be a defect, either in the
knowledge, or in the memory of the Authors of it, that the Preposition (...),
is frequently used in a causal sense, signifying as much as (...), for, that
is, for the sake of, as well as in a local sense; in which it signifies, for,
that is, in the place, or, in the stead of another, whether thing or person)
together with the reasons evincing that there is a mistake in it, would
occasion too large a digression. This therefore for a third consideration
toward the demonstration intended.

Fourthly, Upon the same account it is yet further considerable, Joshuah to
view the City of Ai, returning, advised him thus: Let not all the people go up,
but let about two or three thousand men go up to smite Ai, and make not all the
people to labor thither: for they are but few, Josh. 7.3. It is observed, that
whilst the people were fewer, and so the Sacrifices fewer, and consequently,
the work of the Sanctuary so much the lighter, and more easy to be performed,
the Levites, and those that were to be employed about it, were taken into the
Service not until thirty years of age and upwards, Number. 4.3. whereas
afterward, in David's time, when the people were increased, and so the
Sacrifices more numerous, and in that respect required more to attend the
service about them, the persons of this charge were, by the order and
appoitment of God himself, taken into the work from twenty years old and
upwards, 1 Chronicles. 23.24, 27. compared with Chap. 28.13, 19. Let us now go
forward upon this ground. It is little (or rather not at all) questionable, but
that Salvation simply, or any the inferior degrees in glory, may be attained
at much lower rates of Sanctity, Zeal, Faithfulness, etc. than those that are
more sublime, and nearer unto Christ himself: This, besides that it is
rational, and worthy belief of it self, may be proved, above all contradiction,
from the answer which Christ gave unto the Sons of Zebedee, when they desired
of him to sit, the one, on his right hand, the other, on his left, in his
Kingdom; Ye know not (says he) what ye ask [meaning that they did not know, or
not consider upon how arduous and difficult terms or services those high places
were to be obtained; as appears by what follows] Are ye able to drink of the
Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am
baptized with? Evidently implying, that those great dignities, which they
desired, were not so much as to be thought of (with expectation) but only by
persons who were endued with a sufficient strength of Faith, and Love to
glorify God by the deepest sufferings. Yea, it appears from the words of his
reply to their Answer, wherein they had said unto him: They were able [ viz. to
drink of his Cup, etc.] that simple Martyrdom it self, without other
qualifications of Excellency and Worth, in conjunction with it, was not able to
reach the height of these places. For are not his words these? Ye shall drink
indeed of my Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with: But
to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but unto those for
whom it is prepared of my Father, Mat. 20.23. of the rendering, and meaning of
which latter words we spoke formerly in this Reason: Let us now advance a step
further upon the ground on which we stand. If Salvation simply, or an entrance
into the Kingdom of Glory may be obtained in the lower ways of Godliness, and
men in their desires design no more, nothing higher than these; certain it is,
from the unquestionable ground on which we now argue, that men will not
provoke, or strain themselves to walk in the upper or higher ways of Godliness
for the obtaining of them, at least, if they be satisfied in their Judgments
and Consciences, that the lower ways, we speak of, will carry them up to them.
And now upon the Premises let us gather up to our intended Conclusion. If it be
the duty of all the Saints and Servants of God to lift up their hearts and
hands to the highest, and holiest, and greatest of the Commandments of God, and
every one to strive to go before other in adorning their Profession, and
magnifying the Lord Jesus in the World (which I presume is no man's doubt or
question) then must it needs be their duty also to ascend up in their desires
unto those Mansions in Heaven; in which they shall be as near Neighbors unto
Christ himself as may be, and not content themselves with seeking merely to be
saved, and to escape hell fire. The Reason of this Consequence is evident from
the Premises, viz. because:

1. Men will not rise higher in their endeavors, or in the use of means for
obtaining the ends projected, and desired by them, than they judge necessary
for their attainment.

2. Because it cannot (lightly) but be known, and concluded, by the Saints,
that they must quit themselves at another manner of rate, in all Christian
Worth and Godliness, to be made capable of sitting at the right hand and left
of Christ in his Kingdom, or in any of the places near adjoining than is
necessary to give them a bare entrance into this Kingdom. Desires and hopes of
the lesser and lower enjoyments in Heaven, will not wind up their hearts to
that height of zeal and resolution for the glory of God, and Jesus Christ,
which the greater things there would do, were they ardently desired, and
accordingly hoped for and expected. It is somewhat more than probable unto me,
that the neglect of that duty, the face whereof we have now endeavored to
unveil (I mean, the duty of desiring, and designing, not the bare, but the
heaped up measure of Salvation) has occasioned and bred that dwarf generation
of Professing Christians, which I cannot suddenly resolve, whether I should
rather call the shame or the honor of the Churches of Christ in the World.

Fifthly (and lastly; For I shall propose only one consideration more (and this
very briefly) for the clearing up of that truth, which we are now pleading) The
desire, not simply of good, but of that which is the best for us, and so
apprehended by us, is planted by God himself in the frame of the nature of man.
This Assertion (I conceive) needs no proof, being, if not one of those common
Notions ((...)) with the knowledge or belief of which men are prompted by
nature, without discourse, yet very near of kin unto sundry of them. However
this Reason (in a word) evinceth it. If there were in men only a desire of that
which is simply and positively good, and not of that which is superlatively
good, or best of all; than whenever that which is only positively good, or
good in a lower degree, and that which is excellently good, are set together
before them, though they should apprehend the difference between them; yet
should they be necessitated in their choice, or desires, to that which is evil
(for so a lesser good is, in respect of a greater) and not at liberty to choose,
or desire that which is really and absolutely good for them. Therefore
(doubtless) there is in every man by nature from the God thereof an inclination
or desire unto that which they apprehend to be best for them, all circumstances
considered and weighed together. I remember a Saying of one of the Fathers,
somewhat to this purpose, Etiam perdita felicitate, voluntatem felicitatis non
perdidimus. Though we have lost our happiness, yet have we not lost our will,
or desire of being happy. Now all desires, or inclinations, which are in men
from God, ought to be cherished, strengthened, and improved by them: Nor are
they at liberty to neglect, or suffer them to languish, or to lose any thing of
their native force or vigor within them. For they are implanted in them by
God, to lead them into such ways, and unto such actions, whereby himself, as
the Author and Donor of them, may be glorified, and themselves, following their
conduct, be made meet to be rewarded by him. So then, the Saints, as they are
men, being invested by God, not with desires of things that are simply good,
but of the things that are of greatest and best concernment unto them, when
they may be had, stand bound in duty to nourish and maintain these desires, and
not to despise, or turn aside from them. From whence it clearly follows, That
it is not a matter of indifferency, or what they may do, or not do as they
please; but a matter of duty, and of obedience unto God, to awaken and stir up
desires in them after the greatest enjoyments in Heaven; knowing in themselves
that these may be obtained by ways and means both honorable, and such which
are, or may be, by seeking unto God accordingly, within their power to use.

But two things may be here said: 1. How then should they desire them? It being
a true Notion, as well in Divinity as Philosophy, that voluntas non vult
impossible: The will never wills that [with a settled, or deliberate act of
willing] the attainment whereof a man judges to be impossible unto him.

To this I answer; That if any of the Saints be ignorant of such a thing, it is
their sin, and such their ignorance is not justifiable: and therefore it cannot
excuse them under the omission of that which otherwise is their duty to do;
although the difficulty of overcoming it, being in some degree considerable,
may qualify, in part, the guilt of it; and so likewise of that other sin which
it occasioneth. For though I judge it too hard to call it an affected ignorance
in any of the Saints: Yet I fear, that in many of them it may, without any
breach of charity, be termed, a voluntary or willing ignorance; because it may,
by a diligent search into, and pondering and comparing of the Scriptures, be
clearly found (God being no respecter of persons, and standing declared that he
will judge, and reward every man according to his works) that any person of
mankind, that will advance, and lay out himself in ways and works of
righteousness, and true holiness, accordingly, may receive from him a Crown of
the greatest weight of glory.

Secondly, It may be said to the Argument last propounded, That the Saints, at
least a great part of them, do verily judge or think, that, all things
considered, as the weakness of their Faith, their undergrowth in knowledge, the
unruliness and unsubduedness of their flesh, and the intolerable burden it
would be unto it to be compelled to keep them company in the severe Exercises
of Mortification, and high acts of Self-denial, etc. (which must be performed
by those that look to lift up their heads in glory above other their Brethren,
the Saints in Heaven) and withal how full of joy and blessed contentment it
will be unto them, if they shall be counted meet to enjoy, be it the meanest
place amongst those that are saved; these things (I say, happily with many more)
considered, they may conclude, that it is best for them to content themselves
with designing nothing higher than Salvation simply; or the scantest entrance
into Heaven, and not to lift up their desires unto the heights of glory there.
Therefore the consideration mentioned does not put them to rebuke; although
they do not desire part and fellowship in the highest advancements in Heaven.

To this I answer; That it is an Objection, or Plea, savouring of the Flesh,
though it may express the case of persons (in some degree) spiriritual. It is
somewhat of kin to that award of the sluggard (who, as Solomon informs us, is
wont to be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.16.) between one handful, and two;
when one may be had with ease and quietness, but two not without labor and
trouble. Better (says the Wiseman, speaking of the spirit of such a fool, as
he here calls him) is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with
travel and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 4.6. For he that judges it best for him
to pitch his desires upon getting into Heaven only, and not to strain, or raise
them to the best and greatest of the enjoyments here; let this his judgment
proceed upon what Reasons or Considerations soever, yet will it be found
Erroneous, and therefore cannot acquit him from sin that shall build or act
upon it. For the Circumstances mentioned in the Objection, weakness in Faith,
under-growth in Knowledge, unsubduedness of the Flesh, etc. these being all
sinful defects and imperfections, cannot justify such an act which under due
Circumstances would be sinful.

But enough (if not more than so) has been argued, to evince it, not simply
lawful, but even necessary, as Duty makes Actions necessary for the Saints and
Servants of God, to kindle a spirit of this holy and heavenly Ambition: even to
desire to be as great in the Kingdom of Heaven as the greatest of them all; I
mean, of the greatest of those whom the Grace and Spirit of Jesus Christ shall
bring thither. And thus (I trust) we have made good the second thing supposed
in the fifth and last reason of our Doctrine, viz. That the Saints are under an
Obligation of Duty to put themselves into a capacity of the most sublime
investitures with glory, which God has prepared for the Children of men.

That which was assertively laid down, filled with the Spirit (in the sense
declared toward the beginning) they are never like to be in any capacity of
putting themselves into a capacity of such investitures, or of sitting in any
of the uppermost seats at that Table, at which the Saints shall eat bread with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. But for the proof and
confirmation of this, we shall not need to add any thing to what we have so
largely argued from the Scriptures in our demonstration of the fourth ground
and reason of the Doctrine. It must not be a sparing, or a thin, but a very
rich anointing with the Spirit, that will prepare and strengthen men so to
wrestle against principalities, against powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this World, against spiritual wickedness in high places [or,
heavenly things] yea, and against their own flesh and blood also (for th^se are
their enemies likewise in their spiritual warfare) that God may judge their
Victories and Conquest over them worthy the greatest Triumphs in Heaven, that
are designed and granted here to the chief of the Worthies of Christ. But for
your satisfaction in this (if you desire more than you have) you are desired to
repair with your minds and memories to what has been, upon the same or like
account, formerly delivered. We shall now proceed to the Use and Application of
the Doctrine. Only there are two or three Questions relating to the Doctrine
delivered, that being cleared will (I conceive) give some further light into it.

CHAP. VII. Three Questions propounded, to give further light into the
Doctrine; The first of them enquired into, namely, who, or what this Spirit
(mentioned in the Tex) is, viz. Whether he be an increated Spirit, even God
blessed for ever; or whether a created Spirit? Several Scriptures opened and
argued (both from the Old and New Testament) proving that the Spirit, spoken of
in the Text, is none other than Jehovah, or the most high God. The several
Pleas brought against these Scriptures, by persons contrary minded, taken off,
and rendered invalid. As also some Grounds in Reason propounded and argued to
prove that the Holy Ghost is very God.
THe first of these Questions (being occasioned by some unhappy importune
spirits of Error lately gotten abroad amongst us) shall be this: John says;
are one, 1 John 5.7. commonly known amongst us by the name of Three Persons
(some weaker Judgments do not like the expression.) Or whether he be some
excellent Creature, some highborn Angel, or the like; who is near unto God?
This is the first Question which we shall a little search into, Whether the
Spirit of God, sometimes, yea, often in Scripture called the Holy Ghost, be truly
God, or a Creature? The second shall be this, How, or in what respect, and when
a person, man or woman, may be said to be filled with the Spirit, and so may be
said to have obeyed the voice of the Exhortation of the Apostle? The third (and
last) shall be, How a man, or woman, that is indeed filled with the Spirit of
God may be known from a person which is filled with another spirit, viz. a
spirit of Vanity and Delusion? There is a fourth Question, every whit as
necessary and edifying as any of these, which we shall have occasion to speak
somewhat unto afterward, when we come to the Exhortation; The Tenor of which
Question will be this: How, and by what means, men and women may come to be
filled with the Spirit?

Concerning the Question first propounded: Who, or what this Spirit, or the
Spirit of God should be, whether God, an increated Spirit, or whether a created
Spirit? Many of you that are present (I suppose) know that there is an
Antitrinitarian Spirit that has broken prison of late, and gotten abroad
amongst as, very busy in making Proselytes: And as in the days of Old this
Spirit, labored to fill the World with this Doctrine: That only one of the
Three (which John, as you heard, says, are one) viz. He that is known unto us
by the name of the Father is truly God: And that the other two, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit, are but the Father's Creatures, receiving,
though very excellent, yet only finite, and limited Being from him. Wherefore,
as Moses said unto Aaron (Number. 16.46.) There is wrath gone out from the Lord,
the Plague is begun; and hereupon wishes him to go quickly unto the
Congregation to make atonement for them: Even so the Plague of this most
dangerous Error we speak of, being begun amongst us already, and several being
entangled, and ensnared by it; It therefore concerns those who are in a special
manner entrusted with the great concernments both of God, and men, and upon
whose shoulders it lies (more especially) to contend for the truth: I say, it
concerns them to lay about them with all wisdom and faithfulness in order to
the convincing gainsayers, or the Adversaries of this Truth.

We do not intend at present to speak any thing directly, and particularly for
the vindication of the Godhead of the Second Person: The Name by which he is
best known unto us, is Christ: But only to plead the cause of him, whom we
(with the ancient Christians) call the Third Person in the Trinity, or the Holy
Ghost: and briefly from the Scriptures to demonstrate him to be an infinite,
and uncreated Spirit, and truly God. Amongst very many passages, as well in the
Old as in the New Testament, which with greatest evidence demonstrate the Holy
Ghost to be God, we shall only insist upon some few, which we judge to be most
clear and convincing. Exodus 4.12. Jehovah (translated Lord) speaks thus to
Moses, Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou
shall say. From hence it appears, that it is only proper for Jehovah, or him
that is God, to be in the mouth of the Prophets, and to teach them what to say.
Add hereunto, that which we have, Number. 12.6. And he said, hear now my words, If
there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord (or, I Jehovah) will make my self
known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. Now most
evident it is from hence, that he who spoke by the Prophets, and other Holy men
of God, as the Apostles, was true Jehovah, true God. And hence it was, that
when the Prophets were about to deliver any Message to the People in the Name
of God, they commonly used this Preface, Thus says Jehovah, or the word of
Jehovah, that Jehovah spoke unto them, or appeared unto them; or the like
places, of this kind are without number in the Writings of the Prophets. And
the Apostle himself ( Heb. 1.1.) expressly says, That God in times past spoke
unto the Fathers by the Prophets. Now the Lord Christ himself affirms, That
it is the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost, that thus speaks in men, Take no
thought how, or what ye shall speak, for it is not ye that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father speaks in you, Mat. 10.19. Therefore now, if it, was
God that spoke by the Prophets then, and is interpreted by Christ to be the
Holy Ghost, then Jehovah, or the Lord in the Old Testament, is the Spirit, or
the Holy Ghost in the New. And the Apostle Peter expressly affirms, that it
was the Spirit of Christ that spoke in the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1.11. And elsewhere
he says, that Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2
Pet. 1.21. Thus David also a little before his departure, The Spirit of the
Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue; The God of Israel said, the
Rock of Israel spoke to me, 2 Samuel 23.2. And so Ezekiel. 2.2. And the Spirit
entered into me when he spoke unto me. So that evident it is from these
Scriptures, diligently compared and laid together, that the Holy Ghost, who is
from place to place said to have spoke unto the Prophets, and Holy men of God,
was none other but Jehovah, God himself. Another place may be Lev 19.1, 2.
where Jehovah is said to have spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy:
for I the Lord your God am holy. Now he that spoke these words unto Moses, and
ordered all these Ceremonies, is in the New Testament said to be the Holy
Ghost, Heb. 9.8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, etc. Yet again, Lev. 26.12.
And I will walk among you, and be your God, and ye shall be my people, compared
with 1 Cor. 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16. In all these places you shall find
that the Saints in their Holy Assemblies are said to be the Temple of God, and
that God is said to be there, and to walk amongst them. Know ye not that ye are
the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. So
again, ver. 17. For the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor.
6.19. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, etc? 2
Cor. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the
Temple of the living God, etc. Now these persons (you see) in whom God is said
to dwell, are said to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost: And that God that
dwells amongst them is the Holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 9.8. Also in Horeb ye provoked
the Lord, so that the Lord was angry with you, compared with Isa. 63.10. But
they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. That, which in the former place is
termed, a provoking the Lord unto wrath, so that he was angry, Is in the
latter, by the Evangelical Prophet, termed, a vexing of his holy Spirit, Psalm.
95.7, 8. The Psalm begins thus, Come let us rejoice unto Jehovah; And soon
after, ver. 7. To day if ye will hear his voice, etc. He that contested with,
and complained of the People in the Wilderness was true Jehovah, as appears
also from several other Scriptures: And they tempted God in the Desert, Psalm.
106.14. and Psalm. 78.18. Yet the Apostle, Heb. 3.7. plainly affirms, that it
was the Holy Ghost that was tempted; wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day
if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, etc. So that you see by
these, and many other such like, places (which might be readily produced, if
need were) that he, called Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts in the Old Testament, is
called the Holy Ghost in the New. Yet again, Isa. 6.9, 10. The Prophet in the
beginning of this Chapter sees in a Vision the Lord Jehovah sitting on a high
Throne, with Seraphims about it. Afterward, about the ninth and tenth verses,
he signifies unto them the obstinacy and obduration of the Jews, whereupon the
Prophet had a Message from the Lord Jehovah to declare unto this People, which
was this, Make the heart of this people fat, etc. Now the Apostle Paul plainly
affirms, ( Acts 28.25.) That it was the Holy Ghost, by the Prophet Isaiah, that
had foretold this their obstinacy and obduration. Yet once more, Isa. 48.16.
And now the Lord God, and his Spirit has sent me. He here clearly attributes
the same act of mission, or sending unto the Spirit of God, which he attributes
unto God the Father himself. He does not say, that God sent him with his
Spirit, or furnished, or filled with his Spirit: but his Spirit joined in the
same act of sending. Lastly, Jer. 31.31. Behold the days come (says the Lord
Jehovah) that I will make a new Covenant, etc. compared with Heb. 10.15.

Against these Testimonies produced from the Old Testament, viz. That though
the same things be ascribed in the New Testament to the Holy Ghost which are
attributed to Jehovah, or God himself in the Old (for this indeed is the common
sinew of these proofs;) yet (says this Spirit) this proves not that the Holy
Ghost is God, because the same things, the same actions, wherein God and the
Creature join, may be attributed either to the one or the other, and are (in
Scripture) sometimes attributed to the one, and sometimes to the other: For
instance, because the converting and saving of men are actions wherein God, and
the Creature man (as well the Minister of the Gospel as the person himself who
is converted) do cooperate, and act jointly; therefore these actions, or
effects, are ascribed sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other. As
conconversion, or turning of men is ascribed unto God, Jer. 31.18. Psalm. 85.4,
etc. To the Minister, and others instrumental in the conversion of men Dan.
12.3. Jam. 5.20. To the persons themselves converted, Ezekiel. 18.30. 2 Kings
23.25. So the act of saving is ascribed unto God, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 3.5. And yet
unto men also, 1 Timothy 4.16. Jam. 5.20, etc. So again (to give another instance)
Jehovah, or God himself is said to have brought the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, Exodus 20.2. and in very many places besides: Yet Moses also is said to
have brought them forth likewise, because he joined with God, and was
subservient unto him in the Action, Exodus 3.10. Number. 16.13. In like manner, say
they, who deny the Holy Ghost to be God; that the same things are ascribed to
Jehovah, God in the Old Testament, which are ascribed to the Holy Ghost in the
New, yet does it not prove the Holy Ghost to be God: but only that the Holy
Ghost is subservient unto God, or has part and fellowship in these actions,
which he may have though he be a creature. To all which I reply.

That though one and the same Action may be ascribed to several Agents really,
yea, and specifically distinct the one from the other, (as God and the Creature
are) when they have a joint Agency in the Action: yet it does not follow from
hence but that the same Action may be ascribed, in several places, to one and
the same Agent under different names, and appellations: or that because that
Action which in the Old Testament is expressly ascribed unto Jehovah, or God, is
ascribed to the Holy Ghost in the New, therefore the Holy Ghost must needs be a
Creature, and not the same Jehovah with him, to whom it is ascribed elsewhere:
As because he that is said to have reigned in Josiahs stead is called Jehoahaz,
2 Kings 23.30. So again, 2 Chronicles 36.2. it does not follow that therefore it was
not the same person who is called Shallum, Jer. 22.11. and here said to have
reigned in Josiahs stead also. So again, because the same act of arising and
following Christ upon his call, which is ascribed unto Matthew, Mat. 9.9. is
ascribed unto Levi, Mar. 2.14. it does not follow, that therefore Matthew and
Levi must needs be two distinct persons. In like manner it does not follow,
that because the the same things which are ascribed unto Jehovah, or God in the
Old Testament, are ascribed unto the Holy Ghost in the New; that therefore
Jehovah, and the Holy Ghost must needs be two distinct Agents.

If it be here replied and said, yea, but this Reply of yours does all this
while but only prove, that Jehovah in the Old Testament may be the same Agent
with the Holy Ghost in the New, notwithstanding the diversity of Names used in
the one, and in the other; but this does not prove that they are, or must of
necessity be the same. For the reason formerly mentioned, viz. because one and
the same Action may be, and often is in the Scripture attributed to two several
Agents specifically distinct. To this I reply.

First, If it be proved, and granted that the Holy Ghost (so called) in the New
Testament may be the same with Jehovah in the Old, this reaches so far (at
least) as to abate the confidence of that opinion, which denies them to be the
same, or that the Holy Ghost is truly God. For if it be true, that the Holy
Ghost may be Jehovah, or true God, then is not the contrary demonstrable by any
argument or proof whatsoever, viz. that he is not God. For that which is
demonstrably, so or so, such or such, there is no possibility that it should be
altered, or not so, or such, as it is demonstrated to be. So that though it
should be granted that the exception made against the proofs insisted upon, to
prove the Holy Ghost to be God, does so far take off the validity of them that
they do not conclude the Affirmative, viz. that the Holy Ghost is God; yet do
they remain in so much strength, this exception notwithstanding, as to conclude
that He may be God; and consequently, that the Negative, which says He is not
God, may be false. If it be here said, it is true, your reply wherein you prove
that the Scriptures sometimes ascribe the same action in several places to the
same Person or Agent, under several names; this proves that the Holy Ghost, in
the New Testament having the same things ascribed unto him which Jehovah in the
Old, may notwithstanding this variety of name, or appellation, be the same with
him: But this proves not but that upon some other account, and for other
reasons it may be impossible that they should be the same. As he that is in 2
Kings 23.30. called Jehoahas, and he that is in Jer. 22.11. called Shallum, may
notwithstanding this diversity of appellation be the same Person: But yet there
may be other considerations which make it evident that they are not, nor can be
the same. To this we reply: It is true, if there be any such consideration, or
ground by which it may be substantially proved, that the Holy Ghost is a
created Angel, and not Jehovah, then that diversity of appellation we speak of
will not evince so much as a may be, or a possibility of their being the same.
But that all the reasons that have been yet levied (so far as they are commonly
known, or have been heard of) to prove this impossibility, I mean, that they
should not be the same are defective, and fall short of any such proof shall
(God willing) be made appear in due time. but,

Secondly, That the said proofs, notwithstanding the said Answer, or exception
made to them, do sufficiently conclude the Jehovah of the Old Testament in the
Texts cited, and the Holy Ghost in the New, to be one and the same, appears by
the light of this consideration: Because it is the genius, or property of the
New Testament to enlighten the darkness of the Old, and still in mentioning the
transactions, or sayings thereof, to speak more plainly, fully, and
particularly, according to that common Saying; That the New Testament is
nothing else but the Old with the veil of obscurity taken off from the face of
it. As the Old is nothing but the New with the same veil spread upon it.
Instances of what we now affirm, viz. that the New Testament, speaking of the
passages of the Old, speaks more expressly, and particularly those things,
which the Old speaks more generally, and obscurely, are many, and every where
to be found. We shall at present only mention one which is of some affinity
with the business in hand; They who with stood Moses in his applications unto
Pharaoh by way of miracles and wonders to persuade him to suffer the Israelites
to depart out of his Land, are mentioned in the Old Testament but by the
general names of Sorcerers, Magicians, and Inchanters, Exodus 7.11. but the New
Testament, speaking of them, calls them, by their proper names, Jannes and
Jambres, 2 Timothy 3.8. Thus, He which the Old Testament, in all the Texts and
places cited, styles Jehovah, God, which is a general name common to all the
Three subsisting in the Divine Nature, or Essence; the New Testament, speaking
of him, terms him the Holy Ghost, which is the name appropriate to the third
Person there subsisting. And if we shall suppose that the Old Testament
ascribes such things plainly, expressly, and without Parable unto Jehovah, or
God himself, which the New Testament ascribes unto such a creature which no man
knows what to make of him, nor what kind of Creature he is (for such must the
Holy Ghost needs be supposed to be, if we make a Creature of him:) It is a
plain case, that the Old Testament shall be light, where the New is dark, and
what the Old speaks plainly the New shall speak obscurely, which is contrary
(as has been said) to the nature of it, and the Counsel of God in it; For that
the Holy Ghost is by them, who deny his Godhead, affirmed to be a created
Angel, one, or more, some Archangel, or the like, is but gratis dictum,
affirmed at peradventure, and cannot be proved, not so much as by one Argument
of any competent probability.

Besides, if the Holy Ghost shall be supposed to be a creature never so well
known, as suppose to be some great Angel; yet in case it should be supposed,
that what the Old Testament expressly ascribes unto God, the New Testament,
having occasion to speak of the same thing, should ascribe it to this Angel;
then the New Testament must be supposed to speak short of the Old, and with
loss and disadvantage as to matter of edification unto the World: For instance,
where the Apostle ( Heb. 10.15. a place formerly insisted on) makes the Holy
Ghost witness of this great Evangelical truth, or saying, viz. That Christ by
one offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; if we shall
suppose the Holy Ghost to be but a Creature, we must suppose withal that this
Apostle does diminish the weight, credit, and authority of that important
saying, in comparison of what the Old Testament gives unto it, where it makes
Jehovah, or God himself the Author and Assertor of it. For (as the Apostle John
says) if we receive the witness of men: So we say, If we receive the witness
of an Angel, the witness of God is greater, i.e. Is to be received, and
believed with far less scruple, or hesitancie of mind, or rather with far more
readiness of mind, with a far more raisedness, and enlargement of confidence
and assurance of truth than the witness of an Angel. So that if the Old
Testament shall be conceived to build the judgments and consciences of men
touching the truth of the Gospel upon the authority or testimony of Jehovah, or
God himself, and the New upon the credit only of an Angel; the Old Testament
shall give the good measure of peace and comfort, heaped up, pressed down, and
running over, and the New only that which is scant and bare.

Yet again, Heb. 9.8. insisted on likewise) shall be supposed to be an Angel,
or Creature, then it will follow.

1. That Angels had thorough insight into, and perfect knowledge of the
mysteries of Christ, and of the Gospel. Yea, 2. That they were the Authors and
Contrivers of all those Evangelical types and figures in the Old Testament, and
of their respective and mysterious significations and relations to the
spiritual things signified and pointed out by them. 3. (And lastly) The Tenor
of the Text it self will be low, and poor in comparison, and have nothing that
Majesty, which it must needs be conceived to have, if the Holy Ghost here shall
be apprehended to be Jehovah, or God himself: These things will plainly appear,
if the context be narrowly looked into.
The Apostle ( Heb. 9.1, 2, 3.) having in the beginning of the Chapter declared
some particulars of the Worldly Sanctuary (as he calls it) under the first
Covenant, viz. the Candlestick and Table for the Shewbread in the outer part
of the Tabernacle, called the Holy place as also the golden Censer, the Ark
overlaid with Gold, with the golden Pot wherein Manna was kept, and Aarons Rod
that budded, having over it Cherubims of Gold, etc. of all which (he says) he
could not at present speak particularly: He goes on thus, Ver. 6, 7, 8. Now
when these things were thus ordained (...), The Holy Ghost this signifying.

1. (As we said) If by the Holy Ghost here be meant an Angel, one or more, then
must the Angels be supposed to have understood the mystery of Christ, and all
the deep secrets of the Gospel, even from Moses his days at least, and this
very punctually and exactly: For to be able to read a Lecture upon, and to give
the spiritual sense and signification of all the Types and Figures under the
Levitical Law, argues an excellency of knowledge in the whole mystery of
Christ; Whereas the Apostle Paul, speaking of the Gospel in his days, calls it
a mystery, which from the beginning of the world had been hid in God, Ephesians. 3.9,
10. And that we should not interpret this concealment, or hiding of it in God,
with limitation unto men only, as if it had been revealed unto Angels long
before, though not unto men. He immediately adds (in the next verse) To the
intent that now unto the Principalities, and powers in heavenly places, might
be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God; therefore (questionless) no
Creature, nor Angel whatsoever, had any such particularity of knowledge of the
mystery of the Gospel, as the clear understanding of the Types of the Law
import, until the coming of Christ in the flesh, yea, until the coming down of
that golden shower of the the Holy Ghost in that visible manner upon the
Apostles in the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.1, 2. And that the Angels were little
other than strangers to the mysteries of the Gospel in Peter's days seems
clear from that Passage, 1 Pet. 1.12. where speaking of the great and excellent
mysteries of the Gospel he calls them things into which the Angels
themselves, (...), desire (by bowing or bending of themselves) to look or pry
into. Where (observe) it is very remarkable to our present purpose, that the
Apostle makes a plain opposition or distinction between the Holy Ghost and
Angels, Unto whom (says he) it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but
unto us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you, by them
that have preached the Gospel unto you, with [or by] the Holy Ghost sent down
from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. If the Holy Ghost,
which he here says was sent down from Heaven, had been an Angel, he would (in
reason) not have said which things the Angels desire to look into, but rather
into which the other Angels, or the rest of the Angels desire to look: This had
been an intimation (indeed) that the Holy Ghost had been an Angel.

If it be here pretended (by way of reply) that when the Holy Ghost is said to
have signified such and such Evangelical mysteries by such and such types and
shadows of the Law, it is not necessarily implied, that therefore he must needs
understand these significations, or relations between the type and the
spiritual thing typified; but only, and simply that he imparted unto Moses
these types and figures, by which were signified such and such mysteries, etc.
To this I answer,

Then according to this supposition it must be conceived that the Holy Ghost
learned his Lesson by rote from God, and received wisdom or instructions from
him to deliver unto Moses, the sense or meaning whereof he understood not:
whereas the Apostle Paul, speaking of the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of God,
says of him that he does, (...), search out all things, even the deep things
of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. i. e. qualify, or enable men to search out, and
understand even the deep things of God: as elsewhere he is said to cry, and
groan, and make intercession for men, Romans 8.26. Gal. 4.6. Psalm. 94.10. Now if
he enableth men to discover and understand the deep things of God, certainly he
must needs be conceived to know and understand them himself. He that teaches
man knowledge, shall not he know?

2. If the Holy Ghost (in the Scripture in hand) be a created Angel, and not
Jehovah, true, or truly God, then does it plainly follow from hence, that the
Angels, one or more, should be the Architects, Founders, and Framers of the
whole Mosaical Economy, and Levitical Dispensation: For he that gave these
types and figures these respective significations, and appointed that Ceremony
to signify one thing, and this another, was doubtless the Author and Founder
of them; as he that gives such properties, or parts unto things, that are
natural and essential to them, is certainly the Creator of them; As he that
gives such properties, and qualities, and parts to the natural bodies which are
intrinsical, and essential unto them, must be their Maker and Creator: In like
manner, he that gives types and shadows to their substance, must needs be their
Author and Founder.

If it be said, But might not Moses himself be said to signify such and such
things, by such and such Ordinances, Rites, and Ceremonies administered by him,
in case these Ordinances and Rites do indeed and in truth signify such things?
And if so, Why may not the Angel also that revealed or imparted these things
unto him? I reply.

Though the things, or Types themselves may (in a sense) be said to signify
such or such things, yet he, that only administers these Types by order from
another, cannot (in any tolerable construction) be said to signify such a
thing, especially, if it be supposed that he understand not their
signification. Now if the Holy Ghost were an Angel, then he did not understand
the signification, and substance, and relation between the Type, and the
Evangelical things typified, or imparted by them, and then in no tolerable
construction of words can be said to signify them.

3. (And lastly) If by the Holy Ghost (in the place before us) shall be meant
an Angel, the Tenor of the words will be low, uncouth, and poor in comparison
of that height and lip of excellency wherewith he spoke. To say that the Holy
Ghost should thus signify, whereas it was only an Angel that did thus
signify; this would not look like one of the Sayings of the living God,
therefore the sense of the place cannot be understood to be any other but
Jehovah, God himself.

Having evinced from several Testimonies in the Old Testament (whereunto many
more of like import might readily have been added) the Deity or Godhead of the
Holy Ghost:

The first place we shall insist upon for this purpose shall be that of the
Evangelist, Mat. 3.16. And Jesus, when he was baptized, went straightway out of
the water, and lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of
God descending, and lighting on him; and lo a voice from heaven, etc. In Mark
1.10. it is said, that he saw (...), the Heavens rent, or cloven, and the
Spirit, like a Dove, descending on him. Luke also mentions the opening of the
Heavens, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost in a bodily shape like a Dove
upon him, Chap. 3.21. From these passages compared together, the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, who is said to have come down upon Christ, upon his being
baptized, may be clearly evinced.

First the opening, renting, or cleaving of the Heavens, expressly mentioned in
all these places, plainly prove the Holy Ghost, that is said to have come down
upon Christ, to be no Creature, no created Angel, but true God. Let the
Scriptures be searched from first to last, we shall no where find the rending,
cleaving, opening, or bowing of the Heavens to be mentioned upon occasion of
any created Angel coming down, but very frequently upon any solemn, or more
than ordinary appearance, or coming down of God himself unto men: Bow the
Heavens, O Lord, and come down, Psalm. 144.5. 2 Samuel 22.10. (says David in his
affectionate addressment of himself by Prayer unto God) Bow the heavens, and
come down, i. e. Show some Majestic and Godlike token or sign of thy Presence;
show thy self like unto thy self, like a God indeed, in Umpiring the Affairs of
the World between upright and wicked men. In like manner, the Prophet Isaiah,
or the Church of God personated by him, Isa. 64.1. O that thou would rent
the Heavens, and come down. Doubtless, his meaning was not to desire of God
that he would display the Ensign of an Angel before him, and so come down to
help his Church, and People; no: but (as was said before) that he would appear
in his appropriate and God-like Majesty. It came to pass (says the Prophet
Ezekiel) that the Heavens were opened, and I saw Visions of God, Ezekiel. 1.1. The
Heavens are never said to open, or be opened, but upon the account of some
immediate or extraordinary appearance of God: as Steven is said to have seen
the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.56. As
for that of our Savior in John, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that hereafter
you shall see Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon
the Son of man, Joh. 1.51. Whether we understand the place Metaphorically (with
some) concerning more full and manifest discoveries of his Divinity, that
should shortly be made in the World by a more clear preaching of the Gospel by
the Apostles; or more literally (with others) of the Day of the general
Judgment of the World, when the Angels shall accompany him from Heaven, and
minister unto him during the continuance of the Judgment, it no ways
contradicts that Principle of truth, on which we build, viz. That the Heavens
are never said to be opened, rent, or bowed down, but upon some extraordinary
appearance of God. This is one consideration from the place cited to evince and
prove the Holy Ghost, coming down upon Christ, to have been truly God; viz.
That the Heavens are said to have been opened, rent, or cleft, at, or
immediately before his coming down.

2. Another thing in the same passage evidently evincing the same Truth, is,
that this Spirit of God is said to have descended and lighted upon him: John
adds, that this Spirit abode upon him, I saw (says John) the Spirit descending
from Heaven like a Dove, and it abode on him, Joh. 1.32, 33. First, if this
Spirit were but a mere Creature, a created Angel, he must be supposed to have
been locally and essentially absent from, or out of the World, some space (at
least) before his coming down upon Christ; for John says (as we heard)
expressly that he saw him, not simply descending, but descending (...), from, or
our of Heaven; therefore he was in Heaven some while (at least) immediately
before his coming down. If then he were a created Angel, he could not be, at
the same instant of time, in Heaven and in Earth too; and consequently the
World must needs Universally, and in all, and every the members of it, have
been utterly destitute of the Holy Ghost some while before Christ was baptized;
yea, the Lord Christ himself must be supposed to have been wholly without the
Holy Ghost until now, whereas the Scriptures make it an unquestionable
Character of an ungodly man, (...), not to have the Spirit, Jude v. 19. So that
it clearly follows, that in case the Spirit of God, which descended on Christ
upon his baptism, was but a mere Creature, or a created Angel, that there was
never a holy and good man in the World for some time before; no, nor that the
Lord Christ himself was such; which I know not how any man, that desires to be
counted a Christian, can own without trembling.

2. This Spirit is not only said to have descended, or come down upon Christ,
but also (as we beard from John) to have continued, or remained on him: Now, no
created Angel whatsoever is said, or reasonably can be said to remain upon him.
Created Angels are said to minister unto him, to stand by him, to ascend, and
descend upon him, are commanded to worship him, etc. but are no where said,
(...), to remain in him. By the way, this expression of the Holy Ghost's
remaining on Christ, signifies his uniform, and equitable presence with him in
the fullest, or highest measure, that he was capable of, and that he was not
subject to ebbing and flowing, to rising or falling, as he is in the best of
men; and besides, it may import, that this Spirit is not communicable unto any
other person of mankind but only from, through, or by means of Christ. Sed hoc
obiter.

Again, Were this Spirit of God a finite, or created Angel, in case he shall
rest or abide upon Christ, the rest of the World, and all mankind besides must
needs perpetually want him; For nothing that is finite, or that has bounds,
and limits of essence, and being, can be, or abide with one person in one
place, and yet be present with another person, though at never such a distance
form him.

3. When the Evangelists report, that Christ soon after his Baptism was led of
the Spirit to be tempted of the devil in the wilderness, they speak (doubtless)
of the same Spirit which came down from Heaven upon him immediately upon his
Baptizing: Now it is mavelous, improbable (at least) that He, whom all the
Angels of God are straightly commanded to worship, should be acted, and led by
one of them into the Wilderness, and this for such an end and purpose as to be
tempted by the devil. That Jesus Christ is God, is (I suppose) evident enough
from hence, not only that one, or some few, but that all the Angels of God,
without exception of any, are commanded to worship him, Heb. 1.6. Certainly,
God would not command one Creature to worship another; no, not the Inferior to
worship the Superior, much less the Superior to worship the Inseriour, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Luke 4.8. Now
then if Jesus Christ be the Lord of all the Angels, it is not like that he
should be led, or acted, or prevailed with by any of them, one or more,
especially into an engagement or undertaking of such a nature as to be tempted
of the Devil, to combat with his greatest and most potent Enemy. Masters are
not wont to be led, or acted by their Servants (especially such Masters who are
prudent and wise) into undertakings of a difficult nature.

4. (and lastly) If we look throughout the Scriptures, we shall not find any
Angel that ever appeared unto men in any other form, likeness, or shape of any
other Creature but only of a man; whereas we read of appearances of God himself
in the forms of several other Creatures besides men. He appears in a cloud of
fire upon mount Sinal, Exo. 24.16, 17. So again, in a cloud to the seventy
Elders, Number. 11.25. As for the Angel which is said to have appeared unto Moses
in a flame of fire out of the midst of the bush, Exodus 3.2. and so Acts 7.30.
It is evident from the fourth verse of that Chapter ( Exodus 3.) and so from
Mat. 22.31, 32. that it was not a created Angel, but he that is elsewhere
called the Angel of the Covenant, the Angel of the face and presence of God,
Christ himself, who is called an Angel very frequently, as Calvin and others
the best and soundest of Interpreters teach and prove. Evident it is, that the
Counsel and intent of God the Father, in sending down the Holy Ghost from
heaven in that bodily shape we heard upon his Son Jesus Christ, was for the
public, and solemn inauguration of him into his Prophetical Office, the Great
Office of preaching and publishing the Gospel unto the World. This appears from
that voice which was heard from Heaven, which was an Interpreter of the whole
Transaction, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. So
then, God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost did together inaugurate, solemnly
invest Jesus Christ into his Great Prophetical Office, wherein from henceforth
he was to minister unto the World, and immediately upon this inauguration he
began to execute it; That which the Father acted in the business, was in that
audible voice that came from Heaven. That which the Holy Ghost did, was by that
visible appearance, and lighting on him like a Dove: So that the interposure,
or action of the one and of the other were much alike; the one had little or no
pre-eminence above the other. Now, it being the proper Interest of God alone,
and not appertaining to the Creature, to raise up and send Prophets, one or
other: certainly, it was not proper for any Creature whatsoever to have a hand
in the sending that Prophet of Prophets, that Prophet of the World, Jesus
Christ.

A second place (from the New Testament) shall be that of our Savior himself,
Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Concerning this place I
suppose these two things:

1. It is spoken of that Baptism which is unto Remission of sins, i. e. which
was given, and appointed by God to secure or seal unto men the forgiveness of
their sins upon their repentance, whether they have already repented or no.

2. That He, into whose name any person is baptized with such a Baptism as
this, a Baptism of this import, must be in a capacity of forgiving sins upon
repentance. These two things supposed, I argue thus: If the Holy Ghost be such
a Person, in whose Name, together with the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
it is meet for men to be baptized, then is He truly God: But such a person He
is, etc. This latter Proposition is unquestionable from the words of the
Scripture before us; For doubtless the Lord Christ would not have commanded his
Apostles to baptize in his Name, were he not a Person meet in whose NameBaptism
should be administered. The other Proposition cannot reasonably be denied
neither; because He, in whose Name it is any ways meet for a person to be
baptized, for the Remission of sins upon Repentance, must in reason be in a
full capacity to give such a Remission, and this not Ministerially, or
declaratively only; (For then Paul might lawfully have baptized in his own
name, yea, every Minister of the Gospel may baptize in their own names, for in
this sense they are said to remit, or forgive sins, Joh. 20.23. Mat. 18.18.)
but Originally, and Authoritatively. For (questionless) it is the appropriate
Privilege or Prerogative of God thus to forgive sins; it being He against whom
all sin is committed, and to whom men become debtors by sinning. And as there
is no reason or equity in it, that one man should have power to forgive another
man's debt, especially, that the Inferior should have power to remit that
which is due to the Superior: So is there much less reason to conceive that
any mere Creature whatsoever has power to forgive another Creature what it
owes unto God. Upon this account it was, that when Christ said to the sick of
the Palsy, Son, thy fins be forgiven thee; the Scribes and Pharisees, not
believing him to be God, were startled at it, and demanded, Why does this man
speak blasphemies, who can forgive sins but God alone? Mar. 2.7. And the Lord
Christ, to justify himself against the horrid imputation of blasphemy, does
not contradict their sense in making it blaspemy for any but God to undertake
to forgive sins: Nor yet pleads, that he had a special Warrant or Commission
from God to forgive sins where he pleased: but only vindicates his Godhead,
saying to him that was sick, with Authority in his own Name, Arise, take up thy
bed and walk; and demanding of those who charged him with blasphemy, Whether it
is easier to say to the sick of the Palsy, Thy sins are fergiven thee, or to
say, Arise, take up thy bed and walk? Meaning, that they could not but well
enough understand and conceive, that he that could say the latter with
authority and effect, could be no less than God, and consequently might say the
former without contracting the sin of blasphemy.

Besides, it is altogether irrational to conceive, that He, that charged the
Jews, not to plow with an Ox and an Ass together, nor to wear a Garment made
of Linen and Woollen, should couple the Name of an infinite and
incomprehensible God and the name of a mear finite Creature together, to make
one and the same Name in, or into which the Creatures are to be baptized. For
it is not here said, Names, but Name, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which likewise implies, that all the
three here mentioned, have but one and the same Name, i.e. one and the same
power and authority amongst them.

A third place from the New Testament, Joh. 3.5. Jesus answered, verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. The work of Regeneration is here plainly
and in expressness of words attributed to the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God. So
Tit. 3.5. we are said to be saved by the washing of Regeneration, and by the
renewing of the Holy Ghost. And 1 Cor. 6, 11. we are said to be washed,
sanctified, and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of
God. The parts likewise of Regeneration, the several graces, or holy
dispositions, of which the body of Regeneration is made up, is attributed to
the Holy Ghost, Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, etc. From the Scripture then propounded, with the rest
consorting (as ye have heard) with it, I reason thus: If the work of
Regeneration be the appropriate work of God; appropriate, I mean, so that it
cannot be effected by any mere Creature without him; then must the Holy Ghost,
to whom this work is attributed, needs be God. But such is the work of
Regeneration. Ergo. This latter Proposition (I suppose) will not be denied,
because evident it is, both from the Scriptures, and from the consideration of
the nature of the work it self, which we call Regeneration, that it is not,
cannot be effected without the interposure of the hand and power of God. True
it is, God may use Creature instruments about the raising and production of it,
as he commonly uses men, his Ministers, and their gifts, together with his
Word (I mean his written Word) but yet all these without his interposure will
not do the deed, will not reach the blessed effect of Regeneration. The
Scripture is very express and clear in this, I have planted (says Paul) and
Apollo watered, but God gave the increase: So then neither is he that planteth
any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase, 1 Cor.
3.6, 7. When he says, that neither is he that planteth nor he that waters
any thing, he speaks not absolutely, as if their agency in the business were
simply nothing (for he had said of himself and Apollo a little before, that
they were Ministers by whom they believed) but he speaks this comparatively,
meaning, that that which they did in the work of their conversion to the Faith
was nothing in comparison of that which God did in it. God could have effected
it, if he had so pleased, without them: but all that they did, or were in a
capacity of doing, was nothing unless his hand had been with them. Elsewhere,
those that are regenerate, or born again, are said to be born of God, Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loves
him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5.1. And again,
ver. 4. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World, etc. (to omit many
other places.) So that evident it is from the Scriptures, that Regeneration is
a work which is appropriate unto God, and cannot take place without him. The
Minor Proposition then in the Argument last propounded is unquestionable.

But to the Major Proposition it is like it will be replied, that though the
work of Regeneration be attributed to the Holy Ghost, and withal, cannot be
effected but by God himself, yet it does not necessarily follow from hence that
the Holy Ghost should be God: because the Holy Ghost may have an agency, or
efficacy in it, in conjunction with, and subordination unto God, as Ministers
of the Gospel, and the Persons themselves, who are regenerated, have.

To this I reply: If the operation, or efficacy of the Holy Ghost, in and about
the work of Regeneration, were subordinate, or instrumental, we could not be
said to be begotten or born again, (...), of the spirit; but only, (...), by or
through the Spirit; as we are not said, nor can in any tolerable propriety of
speech be said to be begotten of men, as of the Ministers of God, though they
be instrumental in our Regeneration; but only by men, according to the Apostles
expression (lately mentioned) 1 Cor. 3.5. Who is Paul, who is Apollo, but
Ministers BY whom ye believed, (...). So as the Word of God is instrumental or
subordinate to our Regeneration, we are said to be begotten by it, 1 Pet. 1.23.
(...), etc. being born again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible,
(...), by, or through the Word of the living God. And elsewhere ( Jam. 1.18.)
God is said to have begotten us, (...), with, or through the Word of truth. The
Preposition (...) or (...) still notes either the principle efficient cause; or
else the material cause of things produced, but seldom or never the
instrumental efficient cause. Thus men are said to be begotten of their
Parents, You (says Christ to the wicked Jews) are of your Father the Devil,
Joh. 8.44. (...), So the Angel to Joseph concerning Mary, Mat. 1.20. That which
is begotten in her is (...), (to omit instances of this kind without number:)
Therefore there is little question but that in the same sense, wherein men are
said to be born, or born again of God, they are said to be regenerate, or born
again of the Spirit. It is true, sometimes the Spirit is spoken of as
instrumental, or subservient in the works of believing, mortification, etc.
Peter tells the Saints unto whom he writes, 1 Pet. 1.22. that they had purified
their souls in obeying the truth, (...), by the Spirit, i.e. by means, or by
the help of the Spirit. So Paul to the Romans, Romans 8.13. If ye through the
Spirit, (...), by, or through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live.

But first, it is to be considered, that that subserviency which in these, or
the like passages, seems to be attributed to the Holy Ghost, is attributed unto
him in reference unto men, not unto God; and the reason of the attribution is
not to imply that He (the Holy Ghost) is not the principal or prime cause both
of our believing, and so of our mortification; but only that with his agency,
or interposure about these works, he never effects them without the consent and
compliance of men themselves therewith: So that in this respect men are said to
purify their hearts in believing the Truth, through the Spirit: and so to
mortify the deeds of the flesh, through the Spirit; when they fall in, and
comport with the preventing motions of the Spirit in order to these great and
blessed works, which may well, and, with clearness of apprehension, stand with
the Spirits being the first Author of, yea, and the principal Actor in them;
only it implies, that He works none of these spiritual or heavenly things
within us irresistibly, or whether we will or no. And therefore,

Secondly, Such attributions of subserviency unto men, as these, do no ways
prove, or so much as intimate the Holy Ghosts not being truly God, but rather
assert and affirm it; Because the Apostle Paul teaches us, Phil. 2.12, 13.
that it is God, and not an Angel, that works in us to will and to do of his
good pleasure; and upon this account admonishes us to work out our Salvation
with fear and trembling; which admonition clearly implies these two things:

1. That that working of God in men to will and to do, does not make men
actually to will, and to do, but that over and besides that which God does in
this kind, men's own endeavors, to provoke them to comport with God in these
preventing interposures of his, are requisite and necessary: Otherwise the
Apostle need not to have admonished them to work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling: nor needs there more to be done by men for their Salvation, but
only to will, and to do.

2. The said admonition, considering the ground, and motive upon which it is
given and administered, clearly implies, that God's preventing grace vouchsafed
unto men, termed by the Apostle, His working in men to will and to do, is a
most dreadful engagement upon men to take the opportunity, and advantage
thereof, to bestir themselves about the great business of their Salvation. Now
he does not simply warn, and charge them to work out their Salvation, but to
work it out with fear and trembling, and that because it is God that works in
them. This clearly implies, that much of this engagement would be taken off; if
it should be a Creature only, as suppose an Angel, and not God himself that
should work in us to will and to do. Bat

Before we proceed to a fourth proof from the New Testament,

The first place insisted upon from the New Testament was Mat. 3.16. which
mentions the opening, or cleaving of the Heaven, and the descending of the
Spirit of God; from whence we argued several things. But because some of
contrary judgment importunely, and vainly boast, that this Scripture is for
them, and that they desire no better advantage of ground for their opinion than
what this passage affords (though they cannot reasonably object, or except
against any thing that was delivered against their opinion from it;) let us
here briefly weigh what their confidence in this kind amounts unto, or what
there is in that plea whereon they build themselves from any thing found in
this Scripture. The strength, which they pretend unto from the place, lies (it
seems) in that metaphorical expression of the Holy Ghosts descending upon
Christ. Their notion, or conceit is this, He that removes, and descends from
one place to another, cannot be God, or the most high God. But this is here and
elsewhere attributed to the Holy Ghost. Ergo.

To this I reply, First, To the Major, He that removes, or descends from place
to place, etc. 1. Simply to the principle of those men themselves who thus
argue, this Proposition, taken in the most literal sense or construction that
can be put upon it, is untrue; For they say and hold, that even their most high
God is bounded and limited in his Essence, contained and comprehended within
the Circle of the Heavens, and that he is not Omnipresent, unless (happily) it be
in respect of his knowledge and power. Though out of their bountiful respects
toward him they grant him to be Omniscient, and Omnipotent, yet their
liberality will not hold out to grant him an Immensity, or an Omnipresence in
respect of his Essence. So that in making a capacity of removing from one place
to another, a demonstrative Argument of a created Essence and Being, they
prevaricate with their own grounds and principles, and fall fowl upon their own
Tenets (which is a seldom failing Character of men entangled with error.) For
if God, the most high God (as they love to call him) be bounded in his Essence,
and his ordinary residence be circumscriptively in the Heavens, what should
hinder but that he may remove from place to place, and, as well as Angels, or
created Spirits do, ascend, and descend at his pleasure? Therefore they, that
reason so as we have heard, pull down with the right hand what they build up
with the left. But

1. As to the said Proposition, simply considered, and in it self, true it is,
that he that removes, descends, or ascends from one place to another [ viz.
literally, properly, and after the manner of Creatures, or finit beings] is
not, cannot be God, the most high God: But it follows not from hence, that he
that is figuratively, and in some particular respect only said to remove, or
descend from place to place, must needs be a Creature, or some finite being.
For it is well known, and generally acknowledged amongst Christians and men
learned in the Scriptures, that most of those things (if not the whole sum of
them) which are spoken of God, (I mean, the most High God) in the Scriptures
are spoken figuratively, and with the exclusion of such particularities
importing imperfection, which the same things spoken of men, or any other
Creature, do commonly imply and signify: So that God may in Scripture
Language, and (indeed) often is said to remove from his place, Psalm. 18.9.
without any breach made upon the infinity of his Essence, or without any
repugnancy thereunto. Thus Genesis 18.21. He is said to go down: So Exodus 19.18.
to descend or come down; Hos. 5.15. He is said to return to his place. Now God
may be said to descend, or remove from place to place; not because his Essence,
or substance of being, changes his place, or cease to be where it was
before, or begins to be where it was not: thus to descend argues finiteness
of being, and limitedness of Essence, and consequently imperfection, and so is
no ways attributeable unto God; but he (I say) is said to descend when he
makes any glorious, or more than ordinary appearance, or discovery of himself
in one kind or other in these sublunary parts, upon, or near unto the earth, or
amongst men; the ordinary place where he gives an interview of his face, glory,
and Majesty unto his Creature, being the Heavens above: Even as a person that
ordinarily makes his abode in the upper rooms of an house, when he desires to
show himself to those below; and who cannot with convenience go up to him,
descends, or goes down to them. And God is said to return unto his place (as in
the expression cited from Hosea) when having been graciously present with a
Person, or People for a time, as either by a more than ordinary protection over
them, or by a more than ordinary communication of his Counsels unto them, or
the like; when he shall now withdraw these signs of his gracious presence from
them: In such a case as this he is said to return to his place; because he does
like a Prince, who, in his Progress thorough some part of his Dominion, makes
his abode in some Country Town, and whilst he stays in it, much enricheth,
and graceth it; but upon some offense given unto him by the Inhabitants, leaves
them, and returns to his principal or chief City, where the standing place of
his residence is. These things (I presume) are no new or strange things unto
the most of you: And the truth is, that to frame an Argument against the Deity
or Godhead of the Holy Ghost, from the expressions of his descent, argues no
depth of insight in the Scriptures, nor great acquaintedness with their Dialect.

From that which has been said, a ready Reply may be shaped to the other, the
Minor Proposition in the Argument. This Proposition was, That to descend or
remove from place to place is in that third of Matthew ascribed unto the Holy
Ghost. The Reply is, That such a descent which has been described, and
avouched as competent unto God, and is frequently ascribed unto him in the
Scriptures, is indeed attributed unto him: But as for any other descent, and
particularly such as is appropriate unto the Creature, it neither has been,
nor ever will be proved to be either here, or any where else, ascribed unto him.

Concerning the second place ( Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc.) and what was argued for the Divinity of the Holy Ghost from hence,
our Adversaries (it seems) know not how to evade the manifest conviction
hereof, but by denying that, which (I suppose) all the Christian World besides
themselves, do, and ever did grant, viz. that the Baptizing, which our Savior
enjoyneth his Disciples to administer, together with their Preaching of the
Gospel, is the baptizing with water, so much spoken of in the New Teftament;
what account or reason they give of this their denial I understand not; but
certainly, the strongest and most demonstrative reason that the judgments and
understanding of men are capable of, had need be given to justify, or bear men
out in the denial of that which the whole World (in a manner) of the religious,
grave, and learned in the mysteries of Christian Religion do affirm.

But not to burden our Adversaries with the bare Authority of the whole
Christian World (this being a burden of that weight, that it ought to shake
any man's judgment and conscience where it lies, and cause them to look about;)
but waving this (I say) at present, I would gladly understand from them some
tolerable reason (at least) why that baptizing, which is here spoken of, should
not be that baptizing which the Gospel describes to be the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of sins: Or what other Baptism than that of water
for the Remission of fins, can reasonably be imagined that the Lord Christ
should enjoin the Administration of unto his Disciples. That Baptism, which is
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, is appropriate unto Christ himself, and
immediately administrable by him only, as all the Evangelists testify, Mat.
3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luke 3.16. Jeh. 1.26. Therefore this was not the Baptism here
prescribed. As for that which some call Baptisma Sanguinis, the Baptism of
Martyrdom, or Affliction, even that Baptism which our Savior mentions to the
Sons of Zebedeus, Mat. 20.22, 23. Are ye able to be baptized with the Baptism
that I am baptized with? etc. Meaning hereby, could they drink of such a Cup as
he was ready to drink of? The Baptism here spoken of, cannot in any tolerable
sense be conceived to be meant of that Baptism which Christ commanded his
Apostles; For certainly, Christ did not command them to make Martyrs where they
came, nor to subdue them by blood; they might teach men (indeed) to suffer
persecution, and animate, and instruct them that way; but who can reasonably
judge or conceive that such a thing as this should be intended in such a Phrase
as this, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
etc. Besides, the very name into which they baptized men makes it fully to
appear, that it was not any such kind of Baptism; and therefore if our
Adversaries can invent, or devise, or find out in the Scriptures any other
Baptism than that we speak of, which is likely that the Lord Christ should
commit to his Disciples to administer in the World, where they went to teach
the Gospel; then their Exception may have some color or show in it. But in the
mean season, there being that Baptism of water which is every where urged, and
imposed upon persons upon their believing, and which was administered to all
those that came to desire it of John; and this being the most famous Baptism,
and such a kind of Action which was very proper for the Apostles Ministry, or
at least to proffer the ministration of it where they preached the Gospel;
therefore in the eyes of all considering men it must needs be that Baptism
which is called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, Mar. 1.4.
And if so, then the Holy Ghost, in whose name this Baptism is to be
administied, is without all question and dispute truly God. But

It seems there is another evasion or shift, by which the Adversary thinks to
convey himself out of the dint of this Scripture before us, viz. That where the
Apostles are enjoined to baptize in the name of the Holy Ghost, the meaning
(says he) is to baptize men into the guidance and ducture of the Holy Ghost:
Not as if the Holy Ghost and the Father were one. And they seem in their own
eyes to give much strength to this Evasion by comparing it with 1 Cor. 10.2.
where all the Fathers (the Israelites) are said to be baptized unto Moses. It
is clear (say they) that being baptized unto [or into] Moses, here is nothing
else meant but a being baptized in Moses his conduct and guidance: And so (say
they) to be baptized into the Holy Ghost, or in the Holy Ghost, does not
signify any thing more, than being baptized into the Holy Ghost, so as to
follow, and give up our selves unto the Holy Ghost for our Teacher and director.

For Answer hereunto, First, by way of Concession, It is very true, that here
is somewhat of the Baptism here spoken of, somewhat of that nature, namely, an
engagement, and obligement upon the persons who are thus baptized to give up
themselves unto the guidance of the Holy Ghost.

But secondly, by way of Exception; 1. That which is somewhat more in this
Baptism, is, That they be baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, for the Remission of sins. Now, this is the intent of the message of
Baptism, viz. That upon their Repentance their sins are forgiven them; or in
case they have repented, their sins shall be forgiven: This is the mind and
counsel of God in Baptism.

But then in the second place it follows, That those persons that have been
baptized upon their Repentance, are enjoined by way of consequence to deliver
up themselves into the hands of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. So that
you see the instance of Moses is quite of another nature: For they were not
baptized with any such Baptism, as to relyeupon Moses for the remission of
sins, for Moses was not able to to give it: But that for which they were
baptized unto Moses, he was able to do for them. Therefore for any man to
argue, that because the Israelites were baptized unto Moses, in such a Baptism;
that therefore it follows from hence, That Baptism which is for the Remission
of sins was enjoined to be administered unto men upon the same terms (and no
other) is to reason at a very low rate of understanding. And the truth is, that
all that has been argued from the Scripture in hand is so plain, and full to
the business, that there is no rising up against it. But though things be never
so clear, yet there may be shifts and evasions, and such colors which persons
of light and desultory judgments are not able to see through. We know a silly
Fly is caught in a Spiders Web, even so men of light judgments, and who are
unstable, unballanced, and that are not grounded in the truth, will easily be
turned aside by things that have but a very slight and slender appearance, and
will be carried away with every puff of new Doctrine; whereas men whose
Judgments and Consciences are stable, will not easily be shaken or removed; and
therefore, the Premises considered, we ought greatly to take heed, and to look
over and over, again and again, such things as we do receive into our
Judgments; especially such things which are contrary to the Church of God, and
have been generally disowned by the generality of sober and learned men amongst
them. Now, howsoever though their owning of some particular truth be no
demonstrative proof of the truth thereof, and therefore cannot bind the
Conscience: Yet notwithstanding, whatsoever shall be opposed thereunto, men had
need have Argument upon Argument, yea, the most pregnant and clear grounds that
may be, before they give up their Judgments unto it. But this by the way.

A fourth Testimony upon the same account from the New Testament shall be those
words of our Savior, Joh. 14.26. compared with Joh. 15.26, But the Comforter,
(...), which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall
teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance what soever I
have said unto you. In the latter place thus: But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. Here are several
particulars considerable for the evincing of this truth, that the Holy Ghost is
God, and more especially these.

1. The very Name or Title (...), The Comforter, or as some, the Advocate, here
given to the Holy Ghost, is no light Argument that he is truly God. By the way
to give notice of this once for all in the managing of the Controversy, or
Question in hand; When we use the word God, or truly God, we do not mean any
Creature whatsoever; not any Angel, or other to whom the Name or Appellation of
God may by way of participation, or possibly in some particular respect be
found attributed in the Scriptures: but the only true God, and most high God,
or him that is God by Nature (as the Scripture distinguishes) We judge it meet
to give this Item for remembrance, because those that are contrary minded in
the business, affirm, and say, that whilst we simply or only prove the Holy
Ghost to be God, we prove no more than what they grant and say with us: For
they grant, and say also, that the Holy Ghost is, and may (in a sense) be truly
God, but that which they hold, and teach, is, That he is not the most high God;
therefore that we may not be thought to prevaricate with the cause we undertake
to plead, and to prove no more than only to accommodate our Adversaries, we
desire to give notice, that when we endeavored hitherto to prove the Holy
Ghost to be truly God; by his being truly God, we meant and intended his being
the most High God, not imagining that any person would have stumbled at such an
expression, or conceit that there should be any more true Gods than one, and he
the most High God. And we suppose, and this not upon light grounds, that our
proofs, at least some of them, held out accordingly, and reached home to such a
Conclusion. And we desire to be so understood likewise for the future, viz.
That when we use the expression of the true God, we intend none other but the
only God by nature, who is sometimes in Scripture termed the most High God. Sed
hoc obiter. To return to the Scripture before us.

1. We were saying unto you that the very Appellation of (...) the Comforter,
here attributed to the Holy Ghost, is some intimation that he is truly God:

1. We do not find this gracious Act, or Work of comforting, any where ascribed
unto Angels, but frequently unto God himself, as well as unto men, we shall not
need to instance places for this. It is indeed said, Luke 22.43. that when the
Lord Christ was in his Agony, there appeared unto him an Angel, (...),
strengthening, or in strengthening him, not (...), comforting him. And though
it should be granted, that there is but little, if any difference at all,
between comforting and strengthening, and that it is as proper a work for an
Angel to comfort as to strengthen; yet it is not improbable, but that the Holy
Ghost keeps to the word (...), to comfort, when it speaks of God, and of
his comforting; using some other word when he speaks of Angels, and of comforts
administered by them.

If it be replied, that even when God is said to comfort, it is not necessary
to conceive that he does it immediately by himself, but it may be done by
Angels ministerially; and by God only Originally and Authoritatively.

To this I answer; Though this be granted, yet will it not disable the Argument
in hand, taken from the Scripture before us; because that Office or work of
comforting is here in special manner attributed to the Holy Ghost, where he is
called (...), The Comforter. This implies, that how many ministerial, or
subordinate Comforters soever there are, whether Angels or men, yet there is
one supreme, who does praesidere, i. e. oversee, order, and direct the whole
negotiation of comforting all the world over: who issues forth Commissions
unto, and furnishes with abilities, and means for the work, all those that are
employed in a ministerial way about it. Now, he that is capable of such a high
and excellent dignity as this, that is able to stand under the weight of such
an important affair, which at one and the same time is to be expedited, and put
in execution in all the four winds of the Heaven, in places without number, and
these very far distant one from another, and to provide that the work should be
done regularly, and effectually in all these places at once, must in reason,
upon a diligent consideration of the business, be judged to be greater than any
Creature, to have an arm far more out stretched than any Angel in Heaven;
therefore cercainly our Saviors: (...), The Comforter here said to be the Holy
Ghost, must needs be greater than a finite Angel, and consequently God himself,
even the most High God.

Nor is it pertinent, or much to the purpose here to pretend, that the business
of temptation, of tempting men and women unto sin, is managed, and that very
effectually, and with too much success all the World over, at one and the same
time; and yet he that presideth in chief over the World is but a finite
Creature, and is styled in the Scripture (...), the Tempter, Mat. 4.3. 1 These.
3.5. therefore why may not the work of Consolation be managed, and carried on
all the World over by an Angel, or finite Spirit, etc.

To this I answer, 1. That there are many tempted and drawn away unto sin, who
are not tempted of the Devil; Let no man (says James) say when he is tempted,
I am tempted by God [no, let not every man when he is tempted, say, I am
tempted of the Devil] For God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any man. Nor does the Devil tempt every man, especially, as often as he
commits sin. But every man [ i.e. the generality, or far greater part of
men] is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed, Jam. 1.13,
14. And we know the Devil himself was tempted and drawn away with his own lust,
and enticed to the greatest impiety, whilst yet there was no Tempter; much more
may men be tempted and drawn away by their own lusts. So that the tempting of
men all the World over at one and the same time does not prove, that therefore
the Devil tempts all the World over at the same time. And the Devil himself
confesses in the Scriptures, Job. 1.7. that he compasses the earth two and
fre, and walks up and down in it. And elsewhere it is said of him that he
goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Therefore the Devil is not present all the World over at the same time, doing
one thing or other either by himself, or by inferior Devils his subservient
instruments. But now the Holy Ghost, whom our Savior calls (...), he must of
necessity be present all the World over, where there is any comfort
administered; because no inferior Comforter, whether men themselves, Ministers
of God, or others, whether Angels or men, can perform the work with effect, or
success without the presence and interposure of him that comfort in chief.
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that gives the increase:
So then neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Neither man nor Angel is any thing [
i. e. comparatively, or, able to effect any thing, of any Evangelical import,
without the immediate, or actual presence, or interposure of God:] therefore if
the Holy Ghost were not God he could not render the Word of God effectual in
the hearts of men, as to matter of spiritual Consolation; and that he should be
termed the Comforter, and not be able to comfort authoritatively, of and by
himself, or any otherwise than as men commissionated, or delegated from God
ministerially to comfort, is most irrational, and no ways worthy to be
believed.

But some, that are otherwise minded in the business in hand, except against
the English Translation for translating the word (...), the Comforter, when as
they should have translated it the Advoeate, as they have done, 1 John 2.1.

I reply, 1. That to him that is weak, the Grasshopper is a burden; and he that
is afraid of falling, is apt to catch hold of every twig in his way, though it
has little or nothing in it to keep him from falling: For what will be gained
to the adverse cause, in case the learning, and judgment of the Translators
should be made to bow down at the feet of him who thus excepteth? And if we
should condemn the Comforter to justify, and set up the Advocate, will the
Advocate plead his cause who stands so much for him with more strength than the
Comforter? Doubtless not at all; For if the Holy Ghost be an Advocate, in such
a sense of the word Advocate as Christ is (which it seems is the sense
contended for) he must mediate, and plead the cause of all the Saints on earth,
as he does with God the Father, and so must know the estates and conditions of
all the Saints on earth respectively, and particularly, and consequently must
be (...), the knower, or searcher of the heart, Acts 1.24. and Chap. 15.8.
(which is the incommunicable property of God:) Or if he does not know the
hearts of the Saints perfectly, how shall he be able to perform the part of a
worthy Advocate? He that is a man's Advocate had need understand his cause
perfectly. Or,

2. If he that excepteth against the said Translation would have the Holy Ghost
an Advocate in some other sense of the word, viz. because he pleads the cause
of the Saints at the Tribunal of their own hearts and consciences, and informs
these Judges (I mean, the consciences of the Saints respectively) such things
relating to his Clients, upon the account of which they ought to justify and
absolve them: or else because he pleads the cause of the truth and innocence of
their Christian Profession before the World, and the Rulers thereof, when they
are called before them, or questioned by them, according to that of our
Savior, It is not you that speak, but the Holy Ghost that speaks in you,
Mar. 10.20. Mar. 13.11. Luke 12.12. (namely, by way of Apology for the
Christian Profession which you make:) Take (I say) the word Advocate in either
of these significations (and I think there is hardly a third imaginable, except
that of Christ his being an Advocate) the Godhead of the Holy Ghost will be
every whit as much countenanced and asserted, either by the one, or by the
other, applied to him, as by being styled, the Comforter; Yea, the truth is,
that is cannot well be conceived how, or in what respect, other than in one or
both of these, the Holy Chost should be called, or understood a Comforter.
Therefore the Exceptor against the said Translation in seeking the change
thereof, is but like a sick man, who conceits if he changes either his Chamber,
or his Bed, he shall be better and find ease, whereas the change upon
experience turns to no account at all unto him in this kind. But

3. And lastly) his faulting of the Translation in the particular under debate,
does not at all commend his skill in the Original, or his acquaintance with the
frequent use and signification of the word (...), from whence the word (...) is
derived; For this word (almost constantly, at least very frequently) signifies
to comfort: sometimes to exhort (which is of near affinity with the other) but
never (at least to my present remembrance) to plead a cause, or to perform the
part of an Advocate. It is said of Rachel mourning for her children that (...),
she would not be comforted, Mat. 2.18. to translate it she would not be
Advocated, would be uncouth, and next to ridiculous. So our Savior ( Mat. 5.4)
speaking of those that mourn, pronounces them blessed, (...), because they
shall be comforted; not because they shall be Advocated. And (to pass by other
instances without number) the Verb (...), and the Verbal (...), are no less
than six times within the compass of three Verses, and four times in one verse,
used by the Apostle Paul in the sense of comforting, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Blessed be
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and God
(...), of all comfort (...), who comfort us in all our tribulation, so that
we are able [or that we may be able] (...), to comfort those in tribulation
(...), by, or through the comfort, (...), wherewith we are comforted by God,
because as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so through Christ our (...)
consolation abounds. It is thrice more used in the same signification in the
verse immediately following, and once again in the verse after that; so that
there is no ground, or just occasion to quarrel with the Translation we have of
the word (...), nor any thing gained to the cause of our Adversaries by the
change. But

2. (To the main objection) I answer, etc. which are done in the World in a
thousand different or distant places at one and the same time, are, or may be
attributed to Satan, or the Devil in the singular number; yet our Adversaries
themselves will confess, that all these actions are not done in one and the
same instant of time by one and the same Devil: but though they may be acted by
many subordinate Devils, yet (according to the Scripture Dialect) they are, or
may be ascribed to him that is the head, or chief of the Corporation. For that
is frequent in the Scriptures to attribute that unto one which is jointly
transacted by many, Number. 36.2, 5. There was but one of the Fachers of the
Children of Gilead that spoke unto Moses, yet that which this one said is
attributed also unto many of them. I might spend time in multiplying instances
in this kind, but they that desire satisfaction in this may receive it
abundantly by perusing a few lines in Mr. Ainsworth's Preface before his Notes
on Genesis (well toward the middle of the said Preface) where he has
collected many such passages, wherein that is ascribed unto one which yet is
done by many. Besides the word Devil or Satan may be understood specifically,
or (if you will) generally for the whole species, or kind of Devils, or
indefinitely for Devils, be they fewer or more. The Scripture likewise admits
this construction, Genesis 13.7. But we make have. Bat now those actions which are
appropriate to the Holy Ghost, and are done by him at one and the same time in
a thousand different places in the World; As the inspiring, inhabiting, and
comforting the Saints, etc. are not attributed unto him, as directing or
commissionating other subordinate Angels to assist him in the work, or as
performing of them, partly by them, he only owning the name of them; Bur (says
the Text) 1 Cor. 12.4, 13. they are performed (...), and (...), i.e. by the
self-same one Spirit. There are (says he) diversity of gifts, (...), but the
Spirit is the self-same. Now this Spirit (in the words immediately preceding)
he had called (...), the Holy Ghost. And ver. 13. For we have all been baptized
into one body (...), through one Spririt; and in the end of the verse, have
been all made to drink (...). And (in the Scripture elsewhere) he is more
particularly expressed, and his individuality circumscribed by our Savior (
Joh 15.26. and 11.26.) who styleth him (...). The Spirit of truth, which
proceeds from, or out of the Father. If our Adversaries could find the Devil,
who (as they say) performs one and the same Action at one and the same time in
a thousand different places in the World, to be thus individuated, as the Holy
Ghost from place to place is; and all the particulars of that Action, which is
supposed to be done at one and the same time in remote places, attributed unto
one particular Devil, so, or by any such Characters, or expressions
distinguished from all other Devils, as the Holy Ghost (as we have heard) is
from all other Spirits; there had been some color of an Evasion from the
Argument in hand: Otherwise they do but, like Jannes and Jambres, resist the
truth, as they did, by pretended likeness of Moses real Miracles. And as those
Sorceries and counterfeit Miracles, which Jannes and Jambres wrought, being the
same in appearance to the true Miracles wrought by Moses, prevailed over
Pharaoh and the Egyptians to the hardening of their hearts against God, and
this to their own destruction and ruin in the end: So it is much to be feared
that by such likenesses and Colors by which men do resist the Truth, setting
fair glosses upon foul faces, that this will harden the hearts of men, and
entangle, and corrupt their Judgments; and God grant that it be not to their
own destruction. But we must hasten, because the blasphemy of that error which
we now oppose, and which most presumptuously, daringly, and desperately, in the
face of God, Angels, and men strikes off the Crown of increated glory from the
head of the Holy Ghost (God blessed for ever) has been heretofore broken to
pieces, stamped, and ground to powder by the learning, zeal, and faithfulness
of many famous lights burning and shining in the Church of God of old, and by
some of latter times, and particularly, by a late Treatise published in the
English Tongue, by way of Answer to those twelve Arguments levied by him who
has of late revived the said Error. The Treatise is gravely, and with solidity
penned, and worthy the perusal of those whose feer are taken in the snare of
that Error; or others remaining in any measure dis-satisfied about the Point;
Though the truth is, they have as much reason to be dis-satisfied about their
Christianity it self, and whether Salvation is to be obtained by Jesus Christ,
and Faith in his blood, as to be dis-satisfied about the Holy Ghost being God.

We might argue the Deity of the Holy Ghost from other particulars observable,
proceeds from God the Father [(...)] I shall but only glance at them. First,
our Savior undertakes for the Holy Ghost, that when he comes he shall teach
his Disciples all truth. To be able to teach all truth, is a Royalty too rich
to be vested in any Creature, it is most worthy God himself, and meet only for
him. The ( Ephesians. 3.9, 10.) Angels learn many things from the Church, and from
the Min stry, and Dispensation of the Gospel there. And the Apostle Paul
himself professes of himself, and the rest of his fellow Apostles, 1 Cor.
13.9. who knew more than all the World besides of the mystery of Christ, and of
God, that they knew but in part; Therefore no Angel was in a capacity to teach
them all things, when as they themselves were in a condition to learn some
things of them.

If it be demanded, But how can these two stand together, 1. That Christ should
say unto the Apostles that the Holy Ghost should teach them all things, and
lead them into the way of all truth; And yet, 2. That Paul should say
notwithstanding, that they knew but in part: Can he be said to know but in
part, who has been taught all things, or led into the way of all Truth?

I answer, 1. That the all things, which the Holy Ghost (according to our
Saviors Promise here) was to teach the Disciples, is to be restrained to the
business in hand (which is very frequent in Scripture) and so such things as
were necessary and meet for them to know in order to the performance of their
Apostolical Office, as well in teaching, as in planting Churches, and ordering
the Government hereof. For it was not for them to know the times and seasons
which God had reserved in his own hand. Nor does it follow from hence, either
that the Holy Ghost was not able to teach them, that restrained all things, or
that the teaching of this restrained all things, should be no sufficient proof
of the Holy Ghosts being God. The former of these is evident enough from the
common principle in reason. God and Nature, as they are not defective in things
that be necessary, so neither do they abound in things that be superfluous. And
therefore if the Apostles had no need of any further knowledge of any thing
which did any ways conduce to the performance of their great Office, as they
were Apostles, It is not to be conceived that the Holy Ghost should impart such
things unto them which were not expedient for them to know. The latter, viz.
That the teaching of that limited all things we speak of (especially) taken
with that Clause that goes along with it, and bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you, Joh. 14.26. is an Argument no
ways defective in proof that the Holy Ghost, who was to do all these things,
is truly God; this (I say) is evident from hence.

For 1. He, that shall be able to teach all that was necessary for the Apostles
to know for the discharge of their great Office, must be supposed to know all
the heights and depths of the Scriptures, all things that are contained and
comprehended there: For doubtless, there is nothing in the Word of God but what
was fitting and necessary for the Apostles to know and understand: As namely,
the sitting and applying of all the Figures, Shadows, and Ceremonies under the
Law to and with the Gospel; and so likewise to know and understand all obscure
Prophesies; for otherwise they might have been foiled and entangled by their
Adversaries, which would have been matter of prejudice to them in the
fulfilling of their Office. Now then, to be able to do this certainly, does
prove sufficiently that he must needs be God. For (1 Cor. 2.1 1. says the
Apostle) what man knows the things of a man save the Spirit of a man which is
in him? It is the Spirit within a man who knows all the motions of the heart,
all the Purposes, Counsels, Hopes, Sorrows, etc. No man knows all these things
but the spirit of a man which is within him, which is intimous to him, and upon
the matter himself: Even so, after the same manner we may say, no man knows the
things of God but the spirit of God; The Spirit God searches the deep things
of God. As the Spirit of a man is privy to the most secret things of a man,
even so the Spirit of God is privy to the secrets of God: So there is no man,
and consequently no Spirit besides, no Creature, no Angel, though never so
great and near unto God in point of Office and Ministry, that is able to search
the deep things of God but only the Spirit of God, which is intimately
acquainted with the deep things of God.

2. He that was able to bring so the Apostles remembrance whatsoever Christ had
said unto them must neds be God, because he must know their hearts, and their
thoughts, and what of themselves they did remember without him, and withal to
know what was worn or blotted out of their memories. For (I suppose) the
meaning is not, that when the Spirit comes he should be a Remembrancer unto
them of such things which they remembered already; and therefore it supposes
that the Holy Ghost (of whom it is said he should remember them of all things
that Christ had formerly spoken unto them) did know the state of their minds
and inward parts, and that he knew what things they had, or did remember, and
what things they had forgotten and lost, and accordingly shouldsupply them.
Which is another consideration that does argue that certainly this Spirit of
God, this samje great Remembrancer of the Apostles, can be no other but God.

3. We might also argue from that other Clause where our Savior describes the
Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of God, (there being no plurality of Holy Ghosts) to
be one individual Spirit of Truth; And then denotes his Process; which proceeds
from, or out of the Father. For both words should be put in, from the Father,
and proceeds out of the Father (after an ineffable and inconceivable manner.)
Now, if any such Character as this, or any near to it, can be found to be given
of any Angel or Spirit; that he proceeds out, of, or from God the Father;
then (happily) this will not prove the Holy Ghost to be one and the same God with
the Father, that is the most high God.

For as for that word indeed our Adversaries do marvellously please and
gratify their weak Disciples with it; Modus or manner of that respective
Being; For there is nothing that has a simple Being but it has a Modus, or a
particular manner of Being according to which it is or has its subsistence.
Now, this Modus, or manner of Being, or subsistence, take it where you will, it
always follows the Being, as the shadow does the body or substance whose it
is: For Essence or Being is one thing, but the manner of its subsistence this
is another. If you cannot so well consent unto this at the first view, yet you
will find upon a diligent enquiry that the Notion is true, viz. That every
thing has a manner of Being as well as a Being it self, and that this Modus or
manner of Being is something which is distinct from the Essence or Being it
self. Now then look, as things are more excellent in their simple Essence and
Nature, so have they a more excellent Modus, or manner of Being, than such
things whose Nature and Essence are beneath, and less noble and excellent in
the order of Creatures. So now, if we shall carry up this Rule or Principle
unto God, and apply it unto his Essence and Being, it will be no manner of
offense to any man's Reason and Understanding that he should not be able to
comprehend how, or after what manner the Divine Nature and Essence does
subsist; Because his Essence is so infinitely above, and differing from all
created Essences or Beings. Otherwise we shall conceive rudely of God, and
pollute his Nature, and bring him down from what he is, and mingle him amongst
finite and limited Creatures, if we shall seek for any parallel or likeness of
his Being; And if so, then we must conceive that the manner of his Being is of
the same kind, and commensurable unto his Being it self: A peculiar and
appropriate manner of subsisting, which is not to be parallelled in the
subsistence of any finite Being whatsoever. And besides, we have the help and
light of Scriptures to help us in this, namely, to find out what manner of
subsistence this is, that is One in Three: This (I say) we have from the
Scriptures. And though some men do undertake to make it to be nothing but what
is very agreeable to the Principles of Reason and Understanding that is in man,
to cnceive that there should be such a subsistence in the Divine Nature: Yet
for this we shall not undertake, nor advance so high in such a mystery as this
is. Only this is clear, and the foundation is as a Rock under our feet, that
there must be a peculiar Modus, or manner of Tubsistence appropriate to the
Divine Essence or Being, which does not parallel, nor cannot be matched by the
whole Creation. And that it may be thus, as well as any otherwise, I think is
as clear as the other; For whatsoever you will imagine, or whatsoever your
Understandings should project unto you to be the peculiar manner of this
subsistence, most certain it is that it will be as hard to explain, and bring
it down to the capacity, and apprehension of men, as the Being it self, which
is infinite, or as the subsistence of Three in One.

I shall only add a few more Testimonies from the Scriptures wherein the Deity
or Godhead of the Holy Ghost shines as light at the noon day; and then proceed
to show the fallacies, and other weaknesses of those pretenses, wherein our
Adversaries rejoice so much as if they were Arguments above Answer, and so put
an end to our present debate.

The first Scripture shall be, Joh. 20.22. And when he had said this he
breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained. First, When Christ, breathing upon his Disciples, said unto
them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Is it tolerable to imagine that his meaning
should be, Receive ye an Angel, or the supreme Angel? That by the Holy Ghost
here he does not, cannot mean the gifts of the Holy Ghost (so called) but the
gift of the Holy Ghost himself, appears, 1. From the nature of the Symbol, or
outward sign, which Christ uses in communicating or giving the Holy Ghost unto
them, viz. That inflation, or breathing upon them. The Holy Ghost himself is
elsewhere compared unto the wind, which is a kind of breathing, or moving of
the air; and fitly so may be, partly, because his manner of proceeding from the
Father and the Son is by way of spiration or breathing [ i.e. The ineffable,
and inexplicable manner of his proceeding amongst all created things, or things
intelligible unto men, is best resembled by, or comes nearest unto a spiration
or breathing:] Partly also, because as the original or first cause, and so
likewise that which becomes of the wind, or that which is done by the wind, is
very secret unto men: So is the first spring, or original of the Spirits
entering, or coming into men, as likewise the end which the Spirit makes with
men, into whom he comes are great secrets, hidden mysteries unto the
generality of men; very hard, and dissicult, and of an abstruse definition and
demonstration. This our Savior ( Joh. 3.8.) describes by the nature of the
wind. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes: So is every one that
is born of the Spirit. It is very likely that God made this same material World
in such a shape as he has now done, and such and such Creatures, as now are
made; And so, such Laws for these Creatures to act, and move by, and furnished,
and endued them with such properties and qualities as now he has done: That so
there might be fit resemblances to train and nurture up the Minds,
Understandings, and Reasons of men in the knowledge and apprehension of the
mysteries of Christ, and the great things of Eternity. And I make no question
but that God in Nature has contrived, and ordered the matter so with that
Creature which we call the Wind, that it poseth and troubles all the
Philosophers, that though they hear the sound of it, yet not any one of them
can give an account of it, what it should be, and whence it should come, and
when once it is up in motion, why it should Fall. Nay, God has so ordered the
original of the wind, and things appertaining to it (at least, to the
Understandings of men, that they should not be able to give so steady an
account of the rising and falling of it, as they are to do of the rising and
setting of the Sun; that so there might be a kind of rising advantage
administered unto men to conceive the better of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of
God, and of his Transactions and manner in doing matters with the Creatures. So
that now we see the Holy Ghost himself is resembled with the wind, and very
aptly so may be; but the gifts of the Holy Ghost neither are in Scripture, nor
with any commodiousness of resemblance, can be resembled by breathing, or by
wind; therefore by the Holy Ghost (in the place in hand) cannot be meant the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, but the Person of the Holy Ghost himself. Again, this
might be made to appear further, by comparing herewith several other places of
Scripture, by which it is evident that it was the Holy Ghost himself that was
to be given unto the Apostles, and to be, and to abide with them, Mar. 13.11.
Joh. 14.16, 17. So grieve not the Spirit, quench not the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. 1
These. 5.19. besides other places. Now then, if Christ said unto them, Receive
ye the Holy Ghost, there is no question but they did receive him; they, I mean
all those to whom he thusspake: Now, if he were a created Angel, or mere
Creature, how could more than one receive him at once? Especially, how could he
be in, and remain with many at the same time, when these shall be dispersed,
and scattered up and down the World in Nations, and places far distant, as the
Apostles (we know) soon after were? We never read nor heard of any more than
one Holy Ghost (as was observed) therefore the Argument in hand cannot be put
off with common Evasions, viz. That the Holy Ghost might be in the Apostles,
though never so remote, at one and the same time by his Deputies, or
Vicegerents (other inferior Angels under his command, or the like.) For 1. we
have no ground in Scripture to conceive any such power given unto one Angel
over another as that any one should be at the command, or disposal of his
Fellows. Besides, when Christ said to his Disciples, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
if it be supposed that there is but only one Holy Ghost (and certain I am that
the Scripture supposes no more) and that this Holy Ghost could be but only in
one of them at the precise time of Christ's so speaking unto them (which must
likewise be supposed if the Holy Ghost be a finite and created Angel) then it
undeniably follows, that though Christ indifferently said to all his Disciples,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, and indifferently breathed upon them all, yet that
he gave him unto one only, and that the rest had some other Angel given unto
them, not the Holy Ghost.

We might likewise reinforce it from the words following, touching the power of
remitting, and retaining sin, conferred at the same time upon the Disciples
when they received the Holy Ghost; from hence, (I say) we might re-assert our
former Argument for the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, viz. His power to forgive
sins. For the power of forgiving, and retaining sins being given unto the
Apostles upon their receiving of the Holy Ghost, plainly shows, that
Primarily and Authoritatively it resideth in the Holy Ghost himself; and that
it was derived unto them only in a Ministerial way, and as they were to be
acted and guided by him in the administration and exercise of it. And if the
case were so with the Holy Ghost (as our Adversaries conceit it to be) viz. The
Holy Ghost himself should only have a power by way of Commission from God, and
ministerially to forgive sins; and that he is, or must be regulated and bound
up in the exercise of this power by his Commission, as well as the Disciples
were by theirs: Then why might not they baptize in their own Names as well as
his? Besides, if the Holy Ghost were Commissionated by God to forgive sins, he
had no power to give Commission either to the Apostles or any other to transact
the same work; it being a general and known Rule, and this very equitable, that
he that is Deputed, or Commissionated by another, having a lawful Authority so
to depute, to transact any business, has no power to depute or substitute
others in his stead for the transacting the business committed unto him.

Another Scripture, or pair of Scriptures evincing the same great Truth with
the former, that without controversy the Holy Ghost is truly God, is Acts
1.16. compared with Acts 4.24. In the former place Peter speakech thus, Men and
Brethren, this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost
by the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, etc. In the latter place
the Disciples express themselves thus: And when they heard that, they life up
their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God which have
made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is; Who by the mouth
of thy Servant David have said, Why did the Heathen rage, etc? He who in the
former place is termed the Holy Ghost, is styled (in the latter) Lord and God
who made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, etc? To say, that God may be said to
speak by the mouth of David because he gave order unto the Holy Ghost to move
David so, or so to speak, is to oppose the direct and clear Letter of the
Scripture, with a man's own thoughts, and these weak and groundless. If it had
been said, that God by the mediate, or intervening motions of the Holy Ghost
spoke so, or so by the mouth of David, it had been somewhat colorable for our
Adversaries purpose (and indeed no more) or if there were any such expression
to be found in all the Scripture, that God spoke so, or so, one thing or other
to any person by the mediation of the Holy Ghost, this had been somewhat,
though less than the other: But now, the constant tenor of the Scripture
speaking (as to the point in hand) being either that God spoke, or the Lord
spoke, or else that the Holy Ghost spoke so, or so, but never that God by the
Holy Ghost spoke either so, or so; it is a plain case that all these
Expressions are synonymous and equivalent, and that he that is in one place
called God, in another Lord, is the same God, and the same Lord with him that
in other places is called the Holy Ghost. It is indeed said of the Lord Christ,
in regard that he was man as well as God, that he gave Commandments unto his
Apostles by the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.2. to show, that though he spoke unto them
in the Humane Nature, and as a man, yet was directed by the Holy Ghost in what
he said: But if it should be supposed that the Holy Ghost, by whom he is said
to give Commands to his Apostles, were a Creature, or a created Angel, it had
rathet been a disparagement than any manner of reverence or advantage unto them
in this kind, that they should be given by him; and this according to the
Principles of our Adversaries themselves, who hold and teach that the Holy
Ghost is inferior howsoever unto Jesus Christ, be he man only, as they, or God
and man both, as we say. Now, for one that is superior in Gifts, Wisdom, and
Understanding, etc. to be acted, or directed in what he speaks, by him that
is beneath him in these abilities, is rather detractive from the weight and
worth of what he so speaks, than any ways adding thereunto. Thus we see that
the Scripture seldom has any occasion to mention or speak of the Holy Ghost,
but there is somewhat or other near at hand which bewrays him to be, that
which indeed he is, God blessed for ever.

We might further argue, Acts 5.3. compared with v. 4. and 9. But Peter said,
Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep
back, etc. That which he calls Lying to the Holy Ghost in this verse, he calls
lying unto God in the next, Why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart,
thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. The Adversary, finding himself
somewhat hard beset with this passage, after his wonted manner, casts about,
and bestirs himself to espy how he may break loose from hence also. So hard a
thing is it for a man, that has an opinion of his own to establish, to submit
unto the Word of God, though speaking plainly, and without Parable. One while
he cavils at the Translation, ver. 3. and tells us, that (...) should not be
translated, to lie to the Holy Ghost, but to counterfeit the Holy Ghost. I
think it not worthy your time to stand upon the exception, or to show the
lightness of it; especially, it having been done substantially already, in a
discourse published in English upon the Subject we are now upon, somewhile
since, entitled, (...), or A Treatise of the Holy Ghost, p. 3, 4, 5, 6. Only
by the way you may please to take notice of this, that there is nothing more
clear than that the Apostle Peter having charged Ananias, ver. 3. with
suffering Satan to fill his heart (...), whether we translate it to lie unto
the Holy Ghost, or to belie, or counterfeit, the Holy Ghost interprets his
meaning therein, ver. 4. Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. For there
is no color, or ground to think that here he charge him with a new sin. And
ver. 9. he expostulateth with Sapphira his Wife, Why have ye agreed together to
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Now to speak an untruth unto persons, in whom
there was so manifest and great a presence of the Holy Ghost, as was in Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles, was more properly a tempting him [ viz. whether
he were Omnipotent, or no, and could tell when, or whether men spoke untruth or
not, and again whether he were so severe to discover it in case he knew it,
etc.] in these respects (I say) to lie unto the Holy Ghost is more properly a
tempting him, than to pretend a motion from the Holy Ghost which was not from
him. Besides, it no ways appears, that either Ananias or Sapphira did (...),
in our Adversaries sense, i.e. counterfeit the Holy Ghost, or pretend that what
they did, in denying they sold their Possession for so much, they did it by
motion from the Holy Ghost; neither is there the least probability of such a
thing. Besides some Greek Copies have the Preposition (...) in the clause
contended about, reading it thus, Why has Satan filled your heart, (...),
which cuts off all Pretext against the Translation.

But the Adversary, as one while he pleases himself with signifying his
displeasure against the Translation; so otherwhile he attempts to come off from
the said Contexture of Scripture, which frowns so terribly upon his opinion by
that trivial and common shift, viz. That men may be said to lie unto God when
they lie unto his Messengers; and that upon this Principle, because that which
is done to an Ambassador or Messenger redounds to him that sent him. Therefore
that Ananias is said to lie unto God, because he lied unto the Holy Ghost,
proves no more (says he) but only this, that the Holy Ghost is the Messenger
of God, and sent by him, not that he is God himself. This Fig-leaf also might
easily be rent and torn, but that it has been done already by the former hand
we spoke of. For though that which is done to a Messenger, Ambassador, or the
like, whether in a way of honor or dishonor may be said to redound, or (in a
general sense and consideration) to be done to the King or Prince that sends
him; yet the particularity of what is done in this kind to a Messenger cannot
with truth, in custom of speaking, be said to be done unto any other but
himself. It is a common saying, that what measure is measured out unto
Ambassadors, it is done unto the Person himself that is the sender of them:
But now this is to be understood of the general nature of that which is done;
Be it good or evil which is measured to an Ambassador, it does (I say) redound
in a general way unto the King or Prince that sends him: But as for the
particularity of discredit which is done to the Ambassador, this cannot in
reason or in truth be attributed unto the Prince. If the Ambassador be killed,
it cannot be said that the Prince is killed, only that he had a very great
affront offered unto him: So if the Ambassador had a high reward, a Chain of
Gold, or the like, it cannot be said that the King had one, only that this was
done in honor to the King. Take an instance or two from the Scriptures: Hanun
(we read 2 Samuel 10.4.) shaved off the one half of the beards of David's
Messengers, and cut off their Garments to the middle, and so sent them away.
That which Hanun did in this case reflected upon David, and was an affront put
upon him; but the particular things done unto his Messengers cannot be truly
said to be done unto David; Hanun cannot be said to have shaved off the one
half of David's beard, or to have cut off David's Garment in the middle. Take
one instance more, Paul styles himself (2 Cor. 6.4.) and those who preach the
Gospel, the Ministers of God, and elsewhere (2 Cor. 5.20.) Ambassadors
[meaning of God] for Christ, i. e. for Christ's sake to procure acceptance for
him with men. Now in case these Ministers or Ambassadors of God be evil
entreated by men in the World in one kind or other, the evil that is done unto
them God accounts as done to himself: But however not in respect of the
specifical or particular nature of the evils done to them, but in the general
as being highly affronted. When men killed the Apostles (as our Savior
foretold they would) God does not look upon himself as killed by them, but
highly injured and despised. In like manner, in case the Holy Ghost in Peter,
or other holy men, were only a Messenger sent from God, and men should lie unto
him; yet they cannot in this respect, with any tolerable congruity, or truth of
speech, be said to lie unto God; but only in lying unto his Messenger, to have
dealt wickedly and unworthily by him. So that what our Adversary lays in, by
way of answer or reply to these passages of Scripture yet before us, when it
comes to be fifted, and narrowly searched into, vanishes into smoke.

Another Text of Scripture, Joh. 5.7. For there are three that bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three (...): You
see it is expressly said, that these three, the Father, together with the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, are one. If they be one, then one in Nature, one in
Essence, one in Subsistence, otherwise there could not be that unity in any
sense. Now this could not be expressed in more emphaticalness of words, and
which better bear such a Notion as this. Here again we have an evasion, as
indeed there is no end of these things. Satan is an old Fox, and has his
devices to keep men from the knowledge of all truths, but more especially such
which lie any whit remote from the common and ordinary thoughts of men; such
that men must take a long journey to come at, such are these which we are now
treating of. Now Satan takes the slightest occasion to color over and bedawb
them, knowing that there is not one man among many that will be willing to take
the pains, or undergo any hard travel to wipe off the colors that Satan puts
on them. And as in long journeys there are many bottoms, and hills, and
Wood-sides, and there you are in danger of Thieves and Robbers: So there are
some Doctrines, some matters in the Christian Religion where you are to expect
and hear of this great Destroyer of the Souls of men, lying in wait to rob them
of their spiritual Treasure, by laboring to confound the World, according to
the state of things there, for he well knows the state of it, and how it goes
from day to day: But

Now as to the business in hand, several exceptions there are, which being
searched into vanish into nothing but air. As one while the Adversary pretends
that these words are wanting in some Greek Copies. Now for that, when there was
no Printing in the World, and consequently, Copies of Books, especially, such
great Books as the Scripture, when it was written, and translated, they were
but few in comparison of what they are now; and if there were any Sect, or any
great Faction of men: As for instance, of the Arians (when they spread the
whole Christian World (in a manner) over like a Deluge:) Now during such a
time, the men of this Notion being very many, they very well might, and in all
probability they did corrupt and falsify Copies; and that is the ground that
you hear sometimes that one Copy reads it thus, and a second thus, and a third
thus, and a fourth different from all the former. And it is not likely but that
there should be such difference and variety of Copies. We know that the Papists
now have a great deal of the Christian World under their Jurisdiction; and how
they are wont, and that of latter times (the fruit is fresh in memory) to take
and to throw out what they thought good out of the Notes and Copies of the
Fathers; wherein we may see the very footsteps of the Pope. There are Books
extant, which they call Indices expurgatorii, which are Indexes or Tables of
what Sentences are left out, and what are put in; and these are great Books,
and there are two or three several kinds of them. Even so it might very well be
that men of this Opinion (I mean, the Arians) whilst it spread it self, might
expunge, and put out such passages, and such Texts of Scripture as these, which
they saw did bear so hard, and with so mighty and strong hand upon their
opinion; but this Clause is found in one of the ancientest of all Writers that
we know of, in Cyprian, who lived about two hundred and forty years after
Christ. Now then, seeing we find that in his writings, which are more ancient
than all those Copies where it is wanting, it is (at least) a very probable
Argument that it was in the original Copies.

Again, another Pretext he has against this, viz. in that the Apostle says in
ver. 8. that these three agree in one, meaning only, that they did testify and
assert the same truth: Not that they are one [in Essence] but (as I said) that
they agree, namely, in their Testimony they avouch one and the same truth: So
now says the Adversary, the other three which bear record in Heaven are only
one in their Testimony, joining together in asserting one and the same thing;
but it does not follow from hence that these three are one and the same in
Nature and Essence: For answer to this, we must know that the Apostle John does
make a very apparent and express difference in the expressing the one and the
other: As in the former verse, where he speaks of three that bear Record in
Heaven, He does not say, that these three agree in one, but that these are one;
but when he speaks of the three that bear witness on Earth, He does not say
that they are one, but that they agree in one. So that (as I said) here is a
signal and manifest difference between the expression of that unity or Oneness
which is attributed to the three former, and that which is ascribed unto the
three latter. Neither can the former union be understood of agreement and
consent only, unless he will grant the Holy Ghost to be God; because speaking
of the joint Testimony of the three together, the Apostle calls it the
Testimony of God, ver. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God
is greater. So that the witness of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is the Testimony
of God, and it is the Testimony of three which are one and the same God: One in
Essence and in Nature.

And whereas it is still further argued upon this ground, viz. That our Savior
( Joh. 17.11.) prays unto his Father that they (the Disciples) may be one, as
we are one; and this does imply a unity, or oneness in consent and agreement
only: but it does not imply a union or oneness in Essence; because Christ did
not pray, that they who believe in him should be one in the same Essence;
Christ could not pray that the Apostles should be one as they (namely, Christ
and his Father) were; for it was impossible that they that believe in Christ
should be one in Nature and in Essence, and distinct only in Person.

To this the Answer is, When Chirst laid this injunction upon his Disciples, Be
ye therefore perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect, Mat.
5.48. He did not intend to lay any such command upon them as this, namely, to
be infinitely perfect as God is, but that they should advance toward
perfection, and that he should be their Pattern; that they should be as perfect
for men as he is for God: So when Christ would lay a Pattern before his Father,
how he would desire that those who do believe should be entirely one, and most
absolutely knit together as pefect in unity as could be imagined; he (I say)
prescribes the most perfect and absolute Pattern of Unity. But he does not
imply, as if therefore the Disciples, or they that believe in him should be
one, after the same manner that Christ and his Father were one; but he prays
that they might be all one; that is, that God would so deal with the hearts of
Believers, and so direct them by his Spirit, and that he would provoke, and
stir them up, according unto his interest, until they did attain unto, and
grow up in the most absolute perfection of union and agreement that possibly
might be attained unto; that they might be of one heart, and of one soul, as it
is said of the Christians in the Acts: And in this God does hear the Prayer of
Christ, and does perform it as far as his interest is concerned in it.

There is another interpretation that might be given of the place that is far
more probable, and better prepared for the understandings and apprehensions of
men by far than that which our Adversary pretends: as namely, that God would
make them one as He and his Father is one: that is, that he would bring his
Saints to be one in Consent, to be one in the same Truth. But doubtless our
Saviors Prayer reached further than to a simple consent. In a word, the
meaning of the place is by some conceived to be this in effect; and it is a
very good interpretation, That God the Father would grant unto those who do
believe in Christ, that they might believe more and more, For as he that
believes more in Christ has a more and greater unity in him than he that
believes less; as a thing may cleave closer or faster to a thing, and where
the thing cleaves faster, there is a greater union: just so the meaning of the
place seems to these to be, That God would prevail with his Saints, and those
that believe in Jesus Christ, that they would strive to get further and
further, closer and closer, and more and more united to him, that so they might
be absolutely one as much as possible might be; and withal, that one Saint
might fortify and strengthen another more and more, and that Jesus Christ, who
is the stem and stock to whom all the branches were fastened, that he might
have so much the more honor and glory, by having his body reduced into one,
and so to have it more absolutely complete.

The last Scripture we shall insist upon assertively to prove the Holy Ghost to
be God shall be Isa. 6.2, 3. compared with some others; Above stood the
Scraphims, each one had six wings, etc. And one cried unto another, and said,
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory [or
according to the Hebrew reading in the Margent, his glory is fullness of the
whole earth.] Here it is evident, that the Angels worshipped the Lord of Hosts,
and we need not question but that the holy Angels did very well know and
understand whom they worshipped, and that they were not like the Samaritans who
(according to our Saviors Testimony concerning them) worshipped they knew not
what, Joh. 4.22. Go we forward to ver. 8. Also I heard (says the Prophet here)
the voice of the Lord (meaning the Lord of Hosts, whom the Angels worshipped)
saying, whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Where (obiter) we may
observe a plain intimation of the three persons (at least a plurality of
persons) in the unity of the Divine Essence; Whom shall I send, and who will go
for us? In the former Clause, where we have a Verb of the Singular number, the
unity of the Godhead, or Divine Essence is signified: In the latter, where we
have a Pronoune of the Plural number, the Plurality of Persons subsisting in
this Essence. But to pass this by; the Prophet to this demand of the Lord of
Hosts returns this answer (as himself reports.) Here am I, send me; upon
this the Lord said to him go, and tell this people, Here ye indeed, but
understand not: make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes, etc. So that comparing these passages together it is
evident, 1. That he whom the Angels worshipped was the Lord of Hosts, and
consequently, the true, yea, the most high God. And 2. That it was the same
Lord of Hosts, or the most High God who put the words mentioned into the mouth
of the Prophet, saying to him, Go tell this people, etc. Now that he, that put
the words of this Prophecy into the mouth of Isaiah, was the Holy Ghost (and
consequently, that the Holy Ghost is the Lord of Hosts, and he that was
worshipped by the Angels) is as evident as evidence it self can make it; and
this by the unquestionable Testimony of the Apostle Paul (Acts 28.25, 26.) And
when they agreed not among themselves, they departed after that Paul had spoken
one word, Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto our Fathers,
saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear and not understand,
and seeing ye shall see and not perceive. For the heart of this people is waxed
gross, etc. What can be more plain than that he who was worshipped by the
Seraphims, and is termed the Lord of Hosts by Isaiah, is by the Apostle Paul's
interpretation the Holy Ghost? And if he was worshipped by the Angels,
certainly he was no Angel, no created Angel himself, but truly God. Neither can
our Adversaries take Sanctuary under the wing of their common Evasion, viz. by
pretending that it might be the Lord of Hosts, or the most High God that put
the words specified into the mouth of Isaiah, and yet do it too by an Angel:
For 1. here is no ground at all, no touch or breathing of any circumstance to
build such a conceit or pretense upon. 2. That which the Lord of Hosts did unto
Isaiah by the Ministry of an Angel in his Vision is expressly ascribed to the
Angel who did minister unto him in this kind, Isa. 6.6, 7. Then flew one of the
Seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the
tongs from off the Altar; and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this has
touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged: What
God did by an Angel unto Isaiah is (as we hear) expressly attributed to the
Angel that did it. And if it had been an Angel that by order and Commission
from God dictated that Prophecy unto Isaiah which here he is commanded to
utter unto the People, why should not this have been mentioned, and the act of
dictation we speak of ascribed unto the Angel, as well as that other?
Especially considering that the Angel, which is pretended to have been
ministerial unto God, in the latter (I mean, in suggesting the words of the
Prophecy unto the Prophet) is supposed to be an Angel of far greater worth and
dignity than the other (for such the Holy Ghost is supposed to be by our
Adversaries, viz. the supreme Angel in dignity.) Now it is no ways reasonable
to suppose that the Act of an inferior Agent or Instrument should be recorded,
and the act of a far greater Instrument, in and about the same business, should
be buried in silence. Nay, 3. (And lastly for this) the Prophet Isaiah is
expressly said ( ver. 11.) to have called him Lord who had said unto him, Go
tell this people, etc. Then said I, Lord how long? If men had though but a
competent anointing with that wisdom which is from above (as James speaks,
Jam. 3.17.) and so were made (...), easy to be persuaded (indeed possible to
be persuaded) by the truth, or to the truth; these things might satisfy and
persuade them. For what greater proof or argument can there be to evince the
Holy Ghost to be truly God, or God by Nature (as the Apostle distinguishes)
than that he should be worshipped or adored by the Angels, who very well know
to whom worship belongs? Yea, as Christ the Son of God is directly prayed
unto by Stephen, Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; and again by John,
Rev. 22.20. Even so come Lord Jesus: So is the Holy Ghost by the Church or
Spouse of Christ, Cant. 4.16. Awake thou North wind, and come thou South, blow
upon my Garden that the Spices thereof may flow out; q.d. O Spirit of God
breath upon my heart and soul; be thou operative by thy grace and power upon
me, that so my Graces, my holy Dispositions and Affections may freely utter
themselves in the World with suitable actions and deportments. Some (I know)
understand this, as if it were rather spoken by Christ to the Holy Ghost in
reference to his Church, whom they conceive he calls his Garden, than by the
Spouse in respect of her self; but the words in the latter end of the verse
seem to evince the contrary, for they must needs be understood as spoken by the
Spouse, Let my Beloved come into his Garden and eat his pleasant fruits: Here
she styles her self his Garden, because of the pleasure and delight she knew he
took in her, and invites him into his Garden to eat his pleasant fruits: i. e.
Desires him to take contentment in her Graces and Services. We heard not long
since, that the Spirit of God is in the Scriptures resembled by the wind, and
why.

Yet more plainly than this, John prays for mercy and peace for the seven
Churches of Asia, not only from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, but also
from the Holy Ghost, Rev. 1.4. signified by the seven Spirits before the Throne
of the Father for the multiplicity of his distributions and gifts given unto
men. And here it may be noted, that the Holy Ghost is not only joined together
with the Father and the Son by John, as with them constituting one and the same
object of Divine Worship; but is likewise mentioned out of the order wherein
they are more usually named, when all three are mentioned together, viz. not in
the last place, but in the middle, between the Father and the Son; which is (I
suppose) occasioned from hence, because John had more to say in the immediate
sequel of the Context concerning Christ, and therefore (according to the usual
manner of the Scriptures in like case) reserved the last place in the
enumeration for him, though his proper place were before.

If any man shall here object, and say, That John does not properly, or
directly pray (in the passage mentioned) to the Holy Ghost, no, nor yet to the
Father, or the Son, but only wishes Grace and Peace unto the seven Churches
from them jointly.

To this I answer, 1. If it be conceived that John only wishes or desires
Grace and Peace unto the Churches; yet it is plain, that he wishes them
equally and indifferently from the Spirit of God as well as from the Father and
the Son; therefore he supposes him to be a joint Donour, with the other two,
of these Blessings. Doubtless he would not have wished or desired them from one
that had no power or right of interest to confer them; and if the Holy Ghost
has power to confer them, what can either God the Father or the Son have more?

If it be said, God the Father may have an original power, and the Holy Ghost a
derivative or communicated power only: I reply, 1. Here as not the least
intimation of any such difference between the power of the one, and of the
other (in the sense, at least, of him that objecteth:) For there is a sense
(indeed) wherein it may be admitted (without any prejudice to the Deity of the
Holy Ghost) that he has only a derived or communicated right or power to give
Grace and Peace, and the Father alone the power Original in this kind. As his
Personality or Subsistence in the Divine Nature or Essence is communicated unto
him by and from the Father, together with the Son; so may all Rights and Powers
belonging hereunto, and founded in such a Subsistence, be said to be derived
and communicated unto him also: But as he partakes of, or subsists in the same
Divine Essence with the Father and the Son; so his Right and Power is in every
kind the same with the Father and the Sons, and as Original as theirs. But

2. If the Holy Ghost has only a derived and communicated Power (in the Sense
of the Objection) to give Grace and Peace, i. e. a power depending on the Will
and Pleasure of God the Father limited by Instructions, Provisoes, or the like;
then John's wish or desire of Grace and Peace from him for the Churches was but
a Wish at Rovers, without substantial ground or bottom: For how should John
know whether the Holy Ghost had it in his Commission, or no, to confer Grace
and Peace upon those, on whose behalf he wished or desired it?

3. (And lastly for this) It is no ways probable that John should spread such
a snare of danger before men, as this; to join a Creature with his Creator
blessed for ever, in so great an Interest or Power as this, to confer Grace and
Peace upon his Fellow Creatures, and so minister an occasion unto them to adore
and worship him as God. And this seems yet much more improbable, if we consider
that John was guided and directed by the Holy Ghost himself in drawing up and
penning this Passage, as well as the rest of the Book of the Revelation. For it
can at no hand be imagined (within the limits or bounds of Reason) that the
Holy Ghost, in case he were a Creature, and not truly and completely God,
should be the Author of such representations of himself from place to place in
the Scriptures (and particularly in the Passage now before us) whereby men
should be so dangerously ensnared, and so effectually tempted to Idolatry: I
mean, to conceive and judge him to be God, and to worship him accordingly. The
Angels we find in sundry places (as likewise the Apostles and Holy men) to have
been so tender at this Point, so jealous of preserving the Rights and
Privileges of Heaven entire, that when Divine Honors or Worship were tendered
unto them, they presently rejected them; choosing rather to discover their
nakedness unto those that were about to worship them, and to profess and
acknowledge themselves their Fellow Creatures, than to accept of any thing from
them which was above their Line, and of right appertaining to God only. Several
Instances hereof we might produce, being near at hand: but because I presume
them sufficiently known unto you already I shall not insist upon them. So that
(questionless) if the Holy Ghost were not God, the first born of things, it is
incredible unto me (and I suppose will be so to any considering man) that such
things should by his order, motion, and direction be delivered unto the World
by the Penmen of the Scriptures, concerning him, which do so strongly, and with
such effectualness of persuasion, tempt the hearts and thoughts of men to
adore, reverence, and worship him as God. That a Reprobate Angel, or Devil, who
has nothing to lose, nor whereby to make himself more miserable or accursed
than he is, should seek and project the ruin and destruction of men; or out of
the pride of his heart should entice men to fall down before him and worship
him as a God, is no matter of wonder at all: But that the Holy Ghost, being (as
our Adversaries notion him) not only an Elect Angel, but the greatest and
highest of all Angels in Dignity, Honor, and Blessedness; that He should dash
his foot against such a stone as this, or should cast such a snare of death
upon the World, upon the poor and weak Generation of the Children of men, as to
turn himself into the similitude and likeness of the most High God himself (as
he has done from place to place in the Scriptures:) so inviting, tempting, and
alluring men to commit spiritual Fornication with him, to worship him as God,
is a Notion or Saying, that a man had need to borrow the Faith of such a man
who has abjured all Principles of Reason and Understanding, yea, and of common
sense it self, to believe it.

If it be pleaded and objected on the other hand, viz. That He should make, or
(which is the same) cause to be made, such obscure, dark, and imperfect
representations of himself, which tend only to keep the World in suspense
whether he be God or no; and to minister occasion of doubtful Disputations,
yea, and of troublesome and unchristian Contests and hearts amongst men: and
thus shall seem rather to envy the spiritual peace and prosperity of the Souls
of men, by hiding so great and important a truth from their eyes, than to
desire the promotion or advancement of it, etc. there being no express Text or
Testimony of Scripture which affirms him to be God.

To this I answer, 1. That it is proper to God, i. e. suitable to his Nature,
Interest, and Design, which he drives in the World, to conceal a thing (as
Solomon speaks:) but it is proper for a Creature, Angel, or Man, to search a
thing out, to make a secret thing plain and evident. The passage of Solomon is
this. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honor of a King is to
search out a matter, Prove. 25.2. Psalm. 111.2.

If it be demanded, How, in what cases or respects it is the glory of God to
conceal a thing?

I answer, 1. That concealing of a thing, which is here said to be the glory of
God, is not meant of such a concealing or hiding of a thing, whereby it becomes
absolutely impossible to be discovered or found out by men: The concealing of a
thing after such a manner, or upon such terms, cannot well be conceived how it
should turn to any account of glory unto God. For as David speaks of the
dead, Psalm. 88.10. Shall the dead arise and praise thee; or will thou show
wonders to or amongst the dead? So we may say, that things concealed after such
a manner are absolutely dead, and so cannot praise or glorify God; therefore
that concealing of a thing, of which Solomon speaks, is such a concealing which
removes it to a certain distance out of the way of the common or ordinary
thoughts or apprehensions of men; but yet disposes of it so, or puts it
into such a posture or condition, that men by stadious search, or diligent
enquiry may come to discover and find it out: as the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet.
3.16. speaking of the Writings of Paul, says, there were some things in them
(...), hard to be understood, but not (...), impossible to be understood: In
like manner there are things thus covered, scattered here and there up and down
the Scriptures. Now such a concealing, or hiding of a thing as this, is said to
be the glory of God, either because such a veil or covering as this preserves
the reverence and esteem of things that are covered.

Or else 2. Because it makes for his glory that the Creature should labor and
travel for the knowledge of divine mysteries and secrets; this argues the
exceeding worth of them. But whatsoever the particular reason be why the
concealing of a thing should be the glory of God; there is little question but,
it being his glory, that he practices it, and does conceal things, and makes
only some sparing discovery of them. And this is the condition of very many
Mysteries and divine Truths in the Scriptures, viz. to be concealed, and (as it
were) removed out of the way of men's ordinary thoughts and apprehensions: yea,
and to be so situate or disposed of in respect of their discovery or finding
out, that without much application unto God in ways of Righteousness, Love,
Humility, Prayer, etc. they should not be apprehended or discovered by any man.
This our Savior himself plainly signifies, Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his
will [ i.e. the will of God] he shall know of the Doctrine (meaning, which he
taught) whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self: Which saying
clearly supposes, that men who are negligent or remiss in doing the Will of
God [in living holily, righteously, and soberly] may very possibly never come
to see or understand many things contained and held forth in the Doctrine of
Christ, and of the Scriptures; For it would be a mere impertinency to limit the
attaining of such or such a thing to the performance of a certain condition, in
case the thing thus limited might be obtained without the performance of this
condition. So then it is no competent argument against the Holy Ghosts being
God to say that he is no where plainly and expressly called God, or affirmed to
be God. It is sufficient to prove him to be God, in that such things are spoken
of him, and attributed to him, which to a judgment or understanding spiritually
enlightened do by natural and clear consentience evince him to be God. We are
not to appoint or teach the Holy Ghost, how, or after what manner, or with what
words or Phrases he shall express the things of God, things of a spiritual
nature: But we are to be content with such expressions and discoveries of them
as himself pleases and judges meet to vouchsafe unto us; and to embrace for
Truth, not only that which lies in the Superficies and first face of the
Letter, but also that which lies deep down, yea, and whatsoever is
consequentially comprehended in the Letter. As when God himself said to Moses,
Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
here is no mention in the words, no jot or title in the Letter of any such
thing as the Resurrection of the dead, yet our Savior proves the Resurrection
of the dead from these words; yea, and blames the Sadduces that were so
perfunctory in reading and perusing the Scriptures as not to observe it, Mar.
12.26. Have ye not read (says he) in the Book of Moses, how in the bush God
spoke unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob; ye therefore do greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures: clearly
implying, that however the Resurrection of the dead was not in the Letter or
surface of the words; yet it lay deeper, and was within the reach of these
words, and might have been wrought out of them by consideration and strength of
discourse: And because they (the Sadduces) did not do this, they fell into a
most dangerous and horrid Error to deny the Resurrection of the dead, as if
there had been no such Doctrine taught in the Scriptures: whereas the Lord
Christ himself clearly and with evidence of deduction finds it in that one
passage of God to Moses.

2. That is further considerable, in reference to the business in hand, that
the Scriptures were indicted and drawn up in that frame of words and Phrases, in
which we now have them, by the Holy Ghost himself. This is confessed by our
Adversaries themselves: now then, in this respect, it is the less probable,
that he should broadly and plainly, and as it were in expressness of terms, any
where affirm himself to be God, or any otherwise inform the World of this great
Mystery or Secret than by secret intimations or insinuations from whence this
might be collected, or made out by the Reasons and Consciences of men; it is a
Rule prescribed by himself unto men, Prove. 27.2. Let another man praise thee,
and not thine own mouth: A stranger, and not thine own lips. It may be less
marvel unto us if we see this Law practiced and submitted unto by the Lawgiver
himself: yea, it may be observed (and worth our observation it is) how those
Three that are One (as John speaks) the three Persons in the Trinity (as
Christians have been wont hitherto to express themselves) are wont to express,
and with plainness of terms to give honor one unto another (as the Apostle
exhorts Christians to do one by another, Romans 12.10. and commonly either to
wave, or at most with some kind of obscurity and remoteness of expression to
assert or insist upon that which is their supreme glory respectively. Thus we
find the Lord Christ very frequently, plainly, and without Parable giving
Testimony unto the Godhead of the Father, and plainly enough too, unto the
Godhead of the Holy Ghost; as in some passages already insisted upon, so in
several others also: But speaking (at least ordinarily) at an under-rate
concerning himself and his own transcendent dignity, veiling this with such
words which must be narrowly looked into, and dexterously interpreted before
such a thing can be found in them. We know the common style which he observed,
speaking of himself, was, that he was the Son of Man, he no where expressly
calls himself the Son of God, but by consequence only; and so these words of
his are to be understood, Joh. 10.36. Say ye of him whom the Father has
sanctified and sent into the World, thou blasphemest, because I said I am the
Son of God? His meaning is not, that he had at any time in so many words said
unto them that he was the Son of God; but only that he had spoken such things
unto them, from which they gathered it (and that truly) in a like sense, the
charge of the High Priest is to be taken likewise, or otherwise it will be
found untrue: For (says he, Mat. 27.43.) he said I am the Son of God, but this
was true interpretatively and constructively only (as has been said:) Yet both
the Father and the Holy Ghost do expressly (and as we use to say) totidem
verbis, cast this honor upon him. This is my beloved Son (says the Father in
a voice from Heaven, Mat. 3.17.) in whom I am well pleased. So Acts 13.33. Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. The Holy Ghost does not only in
Psalm 110. (which we shall not need to mention) give this honorable Testimony
unto him, but in several places expressly calls him simply God, Romans 9.5. Of
whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all God blessed for
ever. Observe these words, as concerning the flesh: which words are
restrictive, plainly intimating, That Christ had another Nature than that of
the Flesh, or Humane Nature, and derived it also, or had it communicated unto
him from another, and not from those from whom his Humane Nature was derived.
So again, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without Controversy great is the mystery of Godliness,
God was manifest in the flesh, etc. Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed hope,
and glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Thus
then the Second Person of the Three, Jesus Christ, overshadowed his own supreme
honor and dignity, with such kind of words and expressions which did only
remotely or by consequence hold forth the same, never in plain terms calling
himself either God, or the Son of God. It is most reasonable to conceive, that
the Third Person also should do likewise; especially considering, that what
Christ did and spoke in this kind, he both did and spoke by the Holy Ghost. And
therefore it is an Objection without strength against the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost to pretend that he is no where called God in the Scriptures. But yet
thirdly (and lastly) These things which are delivered in the Scriptures by the
Holy Ghost, insinuating by way of Argument and Discourse his being God are
such, and so full of insinuation this way, that they no ways become a
Creature, or him that is not God: For though it well becomes God (as we lately
heard) to conceal a thing, and in some cases to make darkness his Pavilion
round about him (as the Psalmist speaks) I mean, to shroud or hide Divine
Majesty in such Expressions and Dispensations wherein he cannot be discovered
but by a diligent exercise of the Mind and Understanding of men; yet it no
ways becomes a Creature to conceal or hide his Creatureship, or his being a
Creature, under any such veil or covering of words which are far more apt and
likely to tempt the thoughts and reasons of men to think him to be God than a
Creature. It is indeed the property of that Creature, who is the firstborn Son
of Perdition the Devil, thus to do all that he is able, both by word and deed,
to entice the World into a consent, or opinion, that he is God; and we know
that he has prevailed upon the far greatest part of the World with his subtle
Enchantments in this kind, who to this day worship him as God: but that an
Angel of light, nay, the first born of this blessed Generation (for such our
Adversaries suppose the Holy Ghost to be) should lay wait, in Ambushments of
words and Phrases, to surprise and ravish the hearts and consciences of men
with adulterous persuasions of his being God; whereas he is conscious to
himself that he is of the same house and lineage of vanity, descended from the
same nothing with them, is at too great a distance with all Principles, as well
of Reason as Religion, for any confidering man to believe or once imagine: and
yet such things are from place to place in the Scriptures attributed unto, and
spoken of the Holy Ghost (and this must needs be by his own directions and
procurements, he being the Author of what is there delivered in this kind, as
has been said;) which are abundantly persuasive to the Judgments and
Consciences of men to apprehend and conceive him to be God; and this not only
the proper signification and direct import of the words and passages themselves
do sufficiently prove (as has in part, and might be further and in more
particulars yet argued:) But the experience also of all Ages since the days of
the Apostles, the whole Succession (in a manner) of Christians, yea, of the
most Learned, Grave, Pious, and considerate amongst them, having been drawn and
persuaded by the said expressions and passages of Scripture concerning the Holy
Ghost, to conceive him to be God, and to worship him accordingly.

Besides, if we consider the great jealousy of God over his Name, Honor, and
Glory which the Scriptures frequently speak of, and represent as very terrible
unto those who shall provoke it; it will appear altogether irrational and
unlikely that the Holy Ghosts, in case he were a Creature, and not God, should
cause such things to be spoken or thought of him, as the Scripture often
speaks and suggests unto the minds and thoughts of men. The nature of
jealousy is to be provoked and wrought upon, not only when the person or thing
beloved is accidentally seized upon, and unlawfully enjoyed by another
Competitor or Corrival, but when any thing is done that has a tendency such a
way, or which bewrays an affection or inclination in a man to injure him in
such a kind. An Husband that zealously loves his Wife cannot only not brook or
bear an Adulterer, but is highly provoked with any immodest, light, or wanton
behavior in any man toward her: In like manner, the Jealousy of God over his
name and glory is not only incensed and provoked by an express and right down
assuming or claiming divine honor by a Creature; but by any carriage or
behavior in a Creature, whether by word or deed, which contains any
semblance in it of such a thing, or which is apt or likely to draw divine
respects unto it self from any other Creature, one or more. Herod, Acts 12.22,
23. did not assame or claim divine honor, no, nor yet expressly own or accept
it when it was cast upon him by the people; only because he did not presently
and out of hand testify his abhorrency of the peoples act in that kind, he was
smitten by an Angel, and presently died an ignominious and loathsome kind of
death. Now most evident and unquestionable it is, that the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture, if he does not explicitly and directly attribute things proper unto
God to himself, and so claim divine honor; yet he does very little less. He
speaks such things of himself once and again, over and over, which according
to the ordinary (yea, and somewhat more than ordinary) apprehensions of men
amount unto as much as the assuming of such honor unto him; which (doubtless)
so well knowing the terror of the Jealousy of God as he does, he would never
do if he were conscious to himself of a Creature Parentage, and did not know
himself to be God indeed. Thus much for answer to this Objection. In the answer
we have found further Argument and proof both from the Scriptures themselves,
and from clear Principles of Reason, that the Holy Ghost is God.

Though for brevities sake I pass by sundry Texts of Scripture which are very
pregnant for the Deity or Godhead of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12.31. and 2 Cor.
13.14. (with others) yet before we pass on to answer those Arguments that our
Adversaries have levied, and trust unto, for the maintenance of their cause, I
desire to try their Doctrine and Opinion (in the Point in hand) whether it be
truth or no by that definition or description of the Gospel which the Apostle
delivers, 1 Timothy 6.3. and elsewhere, calling it a Doctrine according unto
Godliness; i.e. (as heretofore upon occasion we have interpreted) a Doctrine
every way, and in all the parts and veins of it, composed and framed for the
advancement of Godliness in the World, or for the making of men Godly: So that
every Doctrine or Opinion, the face whereof is set toward Godliness, and which
has a tendency in it to promote the interest thereof, not contradicting or
overthrowing another Doctrine which has a more express and potent tendency to
the same end, is undoubtedly a vein or branch of the Gospel, and consequently
from God; for that is to be considered (at this turn) that not every Opinion or
Doctrine which has some inferior and fainter tendency unto Godliness is
hereby evinced to be an Evangelical Truth, in case it opposes and rises up
against another Doctrine which is fuller of the same Spirit than it: but only
then when the Doctrine or Opinion contrary unto it has either no tendency at
all this way (I mean, to further Godliness) or else only such a tendency in
this kind which is weak in comparison of the other; As for Instance, that God
will save those that will live godlily from the wrath and vengeance which
ungodly men shall suffer by an utter annihilation of them, or by putting them
into such a condition as if they had never been born, is a Doctrine or Opinion
which has some kind or degree of a tendency unto Godliness, as is evident,
viz. It is better (says our Savior, speaking concerning Judas) that a man
should never have been born, than that he should suffer the vengeance of
Eternal fire: But because it contradicts another Doctrine which has a far
more potent and efficacious tendency unto Godliness than it, viz. that Doctrine
which encourages and provokes unto Godliness, not by a promise of escaping
the wrath which is to come by an utter Annihilation, but by the inheritance and
enjoyment of eternal blessedness and glory. That tendency which the former
Doctrine has unto Godliness is no Argument or Proof that therefore it is a
Truth, or any part of the Gospel. On the other hand, that Doctrine that the
Saints may lawfully converse in civil affairs with the Fornicators, and
Covetous, or Extortioners of this World (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6.10.)
although it has nothing? of that rich and powerful tendency unto Godliness
which many other Doctrines of the Gospel have; yet is that inferior tendency
that it has this way an Argument that it is an Evangelical truth, because it
contradicts no other Doctrine which has any superior tendency unto
Godliness than it self. Many more instances of both kinds might be given if it
were needful: any man remembering the Principle or Rule may at leisure, and with
a little consideration, furnish himself with Instances in abundance. So then
(to apply the Rule to the case in hand) if upon due consideration it shall
appear that that Doctrine which denying the Holy Ghost to be God (the most High
God) affirms him to be a Creature, opposes and contradicts a Doctrine
which is of a more express, pregnant, and potent tendency to the advancement of
Godliness than it self; certain it is, that it is no member of the Doctrine
which is according unto Godliness, and consequently, no truth of the Gospel;
therefore to make this appear, it is to be considered first, The greater and
more honorable the Agent is, that is sent and employed by God to negotiate his
Affairs with men, about the things of their eternal Peace and Salvation, his
Agency or Message is so much the more likely to be regarded by, and take place
with men themselves: As on the other hand, the less honorable or worthy the
Agent is, or is apprehended by men to be, who shall be thus employed, the
business he is to transact is so much the less likely to succeed or prosper in
his hand. This Principle is delivered unto us in the Scriptures themselves; in
the Parable of the Vineyard; our Savior presents the Husbandmen, to whom it
was let out, as misusing the Servants, or the Lord thereof, whilst he sent
only persons of this capacity to receive the Fruits of his Vineyard of them;
The Husbandmen took his Servants (says the Parable, Mat. 21.33.) and beat one,
and killed another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other Servants more (or
rather greater, or more honorable, for so the word (...) often signifies) and
they [the Husbandmen] did unto them likewise. Again secondly, He presents the
Lord of this Vineyard (by whom God himself according to all Expositors is
signified) as intending to send his own Son unto them, and that upon this
account, viz. Because he thought, that though they neglected, and evilly
entreated his Servants, being inferior persons (comparatively) yet they would
reverence his Son, being a more worthy and honorable person; meaning, that
they would hearken unto him, and yield to those terms that he should propound
to them: From whence it evidently appears, that there is so much the greater
likelihood, that whatsoever God has to do with men, or seeks to bring them
over unto, they will be the more easily won or prevailed with, by how much the
greater or more excellent his Agent or Minister is who shall be employed
herein. The same Principle is asserted also by the Apostle, Heb. 2.1. Therefore
we ought to give the more carnest heed, etc. The reason why there is the less
hope of escaping the severe judgment of God by those who should despise him
that speaks from heaven (as elsewhere he expresses it) the Lord Christ in
the Gospel, than was of their escaping who despised Moses (who notwithstanding
were most severely punished even for despising him;) the Reason (I say) hereof
is this, because Jesus Christ is a more honorable Person than Moses was; and
consequently, men were more engaged and bound to hearken unto God, and obey him
upon His Agency with them than they were in or upon the Agency of the other:
this reason is intimated in the Text it self, as also, Heb. 10.28. and 12.25.
Upon this ground it was that King Balak sent Princes and Nobles unto the false
Prophet Balaam, desiring him to come up, and to curse the Israelites, Number.
22.15. But when God came unto him in a Dream, and charged him not to do it:
Upon this Balak thought that the repulse, which he had received from the
Prophet, was because the Messengers which he had sent were not either great
enough in place of honor and dignity, or otherwise not competent in number;
therefore he sends more, and these more honorable, making account that these
great persons next unto himself would prevail. And upon this account it is, the
more holy, innocent, and righteous the Messengers and Ministers of the Gospel
are, who are sent unto us by God to preach the Gospel, it is so much the more
reasonable that we should hearken unto God in them; and we deserve, and have
cause accordingly to expect, to meet with so much the greater punishment from
God if we do it not: The reason hereof is, because the more holy the Messengers
which God sends unto us are, and the more they have of himself in them, so
much the nearer they are unto him, and proportionably so much the more
honorable. Hence it is, that our Savior insists upon it, as an aggravation of
the sin of the Scribes and Pharisees, that they did not repent and believe
under the Ministry of John, when as he came unto them in a way of
righteousness, Mat. 21.32. which also he mentions as contributing toward the
repentance and believing of the Publicans and Harlots upon his Preaching. Much
more might be added from the Scriptures for the confirmation of the Principle
and ground you are now upon. But let us work the business we have in hand by
the Rule we have now explained and found straight.

The Question is, (sent by God the Father abroad into the World unto, and into
the hearts and consciences of men, to negotiate with them about the great
business of Godliness) to be truly and substantially God, equal with God the
Father who sends him, is a Doctrine of a far richer, and of a more glorious
tendency, has ten times more spirit and life in it to promote and carry on the
cause and interest of Godliness in the World, than the contrary Doctrine has;
(I mean) that which denies the Holy Ghost to be God, and affirms him to be a
Creature only.

We might in the second place justify and make good the same tenor of the
comparison between the two Doctrines, by another Principle and ground also,
which upon such an Argument as this might be framed. That Doctrine which
renders the encouragement, countenance, or reward promised by God unto those
that shall live godly, greater and more desirable, is a Doctrine of a more
forceable and effectual tendency toward the promotion of Godliness, than that
which makes all these less, and less desirable: This Proposition (I suppose)
needs no further proof, or clearing, being built upon this unquestionable
Principle, That a great reward promised upon the same, or like terms of
security, is a greater encouragement, a more effectual motive unto action or
work than a lesser.

Therefore I go on and assume thus: But that Doctrine, which affirms the Holy
Ghost to be God, rendereth the encouragement, countenance, and reward promised
by God unto those that shall live godly much greater, and more desirable than
that which denies him to be God; therefore that is the Doctrine that has the
most effectual tendency for the advancement of Godliness. The Reason of this
latter Proposition is likewise near at hand, and is this, viz. Because God has
promised the gift of the Holy Ghost, or at least the increase or enlargement of
this gift (which is the same as to our purpose) by way of encouragement and
reward unto those that live godlily, or that shall believe, which we know is
the entrance upon, or the beginning of a godly life: This is evident from many
places of Scripture, which we shall not need upon this account at present to
insist upon. Now it is (I presume) no manner of doubt, but as the gift of Jesus
Christ, the natural Son of God unto men, was, and is a greater gift, a greater
encouragement unto men to believe in him for Justification than the gift of a
meaner person would have been; So likewise is the gift of such a Spirit to
quicken, enlighten, teach, comfort, and support the hearts and souls of men,
who is naturally and substantially God himself, a greater gift, a far higher
and greater encouragement to persuade men to believe, and live holily and
godlily than the gift of any inferior or created Spirit would have been: So
that it appears by the light shining in at this window also, that the
Doctrine maintained by us in the Question yet depending, and which asserteth
the Holy Ghost to be God, is far more sympathizing with the interest of
Godliness in the World, than the other. To this we might add a third Argument
to prove the Opinion, which denies the Holy Ghost to be God, not to be a
Doctrine according unto Godliness comparable with that which affirms it: And
that is this. That doctrine which rendereth the threatenings against
ungodliness, lighter, less considerable, or more easy to be born, is not a
Doctrine so effectual for the advancement of Godliness, as that which holds
forth these to be more terrible: but so does that Doctrine contended against.

CHAP. VIII. The most material Arguments that are generally insisted on, by
those who deny the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, are weighed in the balance of
the Sanctuary. Wherein also those Scriptures which are generally insisted on by
those who persuade themselves, and would also persuade others, that he that is
the Searcher of hearts is but of a finite extraction; Or the Holy Spirit of God
is but a Creature, are all discharged from bearing that burden which is laid
upon them. As also the great profitableness, yea, the great necessity of this
Discourse (though somewhat large) is asserted.
LEt us hear now what our Adversaries are wont to plead for the supporting of
their Cause;

First, To prove that the Holy Ghost is not truly God they argue thus: He that
is distinguished from God, is not God: but the Holy Ghost is distinguished from
God, therefore he is not God. To both these Propositions in order I reply,
first to the former, and then to the latter.

To the Major or former Proposition I reply, by distinguishing or explaining
it; there being a sense, whereof the words are capable, wherein it is to be
admitted; and a sense also wherein it is to be denied; and so it is an
ambiguous Proposition, and of an uncertain signification. Therefore when this
Proposition says, He that is distinguished from God, is not God: If his
meaning be this, that he that is distinguished [in Nature and Essence] from
God, is not God, the Proposition is most true; for that which is ^inite cannot
be infinite; that which is Created, and partaketh not of the increated Nature
and Essence of God, cannot be God: But in this sense of the word, distinguished
from God, the Minor is false; for the Holy Spirit is not thus distinguished
from God ( viz. in Essence and Nature) as we have formerly proved.

Secondly, The said Proposition, that which is distinguished from God, is not
God, may be understood in this sense, That that Person who is distinguished
from another person, who is truly and really God, is not God: but in this sense
it is false, and neither is, nor can be proved by the Proposers of it. For such
a person who is distinguished from another person who is God, may be God
likewise; yea, the same God with him, though not the same person: Otherwise it
would follow, that because the Lord Jesus Christ is often distinguished in the
Scriptures from the person of God the Father, as when he is called the Son of
God; and so when it is said that God sent him (with the like) and also where he
is called Jesus, it would follow (I say) that he should be truly God no more
than the Spirit or Holy Ghost; for these, and many such like expressions in the
Scriptures import a manifest distinction between him and God the Father: Nor
does it therefore prove, that because the Son is distinct from the Father, that
he is not God; yea, as the Scripture frequently distinguishes between God, and
the Father; therefore if the Proposition before us were true, in the latter
sense it would follow that neither should the Father be God; because (as I say)
the Scriptures distinguish him from God, as Romans 15.6. God even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ; You have the same expression, 2 Cor. 1.3. So also Ephesians.
1.3. Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. So likewise Ephesians.
5.20. Unto God and the Father, to omit others.

But the Author and Avoucher of the Argument now in hand cries ou^ upon that
distinction which is made between the Essence and Person of God; terming it a
wretched distinction, and an ignorant refuge.

What he means by a wretched distinction I do not well know or understand; if
he therefore terms it wretched because it is poor and destitute of means or
friends to support it, he had small reason so to defame it: For certain it is,
that it has both means and Friends in abundance to support it; it has the
whole glory (in a manner) of all the chief and choice Gifts, Parts, Wisdom,
Learning that has been found in the Christian World from the days of the
Apostles until now to stand by it and maintain it, which have ministered
Arguments and Proofs very bountifully unto it for its defense, therefore in
this sense it is not, it cannot be wretched; upon the same account he had small
reason to call it an ignorant refuge: That which had all the Wisdom, Knowledge,
and Learning (well nigh) of all the Christian World to erect and build it,
cannot reasonably be suspected for an ignorant refuge. If he calls it a
wretched distinction, because it is the object of his hatred; and he meant so
to handle it, so to bruise, batter, and deface it, by bending the force of his
Wit and Learning against it, that hereby it should become desolate and
miserable, his spirit of Prophecy has failed him at this point: For the
distinction is at this day notwithstanding all the contempt he has poured upon
it, all that he has done to misfigure it, it is in as much honor and esteem
with sober, learned, and understanding men as before; yea, his ignorant Zeal to
dishonor and disparage it has provoked the learned zeal of many to maintain
it, yea, and to add more beauty and strength unto it. But leaving his swelling
words of vanity against this distinction, let us hear and consider what his
more sober and express Arguments or Reasons are against it.

First, he says, That it is unheard of in Scriptures, and so to be rejected,
it being presumption to affirm any thing of the unsearchable Nature of God
which he has not first affirmed of himself in the Scriptures: (these are his
own words.) By the way, before we come to reply to this Reason it is not
unworthy observation, how directly he treads in the steps of those who have a
mind to oppose that which they fear they cannot solidly, and substantially
confute or overthrow. For, whereas those men, whom he would be thought to
oppose in his Doctrine against the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, are wont to
distinguish between God taken Personally, and Essentially; he represents them
as if they distinguished between the Essence and Person of God, which
distinction is of a much differing import from the former. I do not remember
any learned man that ever asserted a distinction (a real distinction of which
our Adversaries seem to speak) between the Essence of God and the Person of
God; as if the Essence or Nature of God were one thing, and the Person of God,
or any Person in the Godhead, another thing, differing really from it; yet the
distinction of God, taken Essentially and Personally, is frequent amongst those
who write about the Trinity. How the word God may be taken sometimes
Essentially, and otherwhile Personally, without supposing any real difference
between the Essence of God, and a Person in the Godhead, may be showed in due
time, or however may appear by what God shall enable us to speak upon the
subject matter in hand. But to the Reason or Argument propounded against the
distinction of God taken Personally and Essentially, (viz.) it is unheard of in
the Scriptures. I reply first, that if he means that these words Personally
and Essentially are not literally or formally found in the Scriptures, in this
sense the truth of his Argument is granted: But the pertinency and strength of
it in point of proof of that which he infers from it, viz. that therefore it is
to be rejected, is denied. For it does not follow, that every distinction, the
terms whereof are not, in expressness of words, of the same oneness of the
Letter, to be found in the Scripture, is therefore to be rejected; for when the
Notion or Substance of what is delivered in the Scriptures, either in a
plurality or greater number of words, or else in words whose signification is
more obscure or dark unto the generality of men, or else in some Principle or
Assertion which vertually contains and comprehends it; When this (I say) is put
into one, or fewer terms, or into words of a more ready and easier
signification, or is drawn out by clearness of deduction from such words or
sayings which vertually contain it, it is not therefore to be rejected because
it is not word for word found in the Scripture. For if the mind of God, which
has been more immediately delivered by him in such words which the Holy Ghost
(as Peter speaks) taught the Apostles, and other Penmen of the Scriptures,
shall be expressed and conveyed to the minds of men in other words than those
(and taught them it may be too by the Holy Ghost as well as they) it is not
therefore to be rejected, because it is not thus conveyed in those very Terms
or Phrases wherein it came immediately from God. For if such a thing should be,
there would be no place left for interpreting, opening, or expounding the
Scriptures, but only for reading of them; and this without conceiving or
forming any sense or meaning of them in one kind or other in the mind either of
him that reads them, or of him that hears them read: for a man cannot
lightly form the sense of any Phrase or passage of Scripture in his mind and
understanding but by the opportunity and advantage of some other words (though
only inwardly spoken) which are more familiar and better known to him. And
certain it is, that the Holy Ghost did not only reveal the substance and
subject matter of the Scriptures unto those whom he made choice of for his
Penmen; but also bound them up in such particular words and phrases as those
wherein they are now written, that so there might be the greater necessity of
the work and service of such Persons whom God should anoint with the gifts of
interpretation, and stir up accordingly to the work from time to time. For it
is no ways to be believed but that had God only given instruction unto the
Penmen of the Scriptures to deliver the substance, and matter, and notions of
what they have now delivered, if he had left them at liberty to have put it
into their own terms (I say) there is little question to be made, but that they
would have contrived and put it into such terms that they should have shut out,
and left no place nor opportunity for those gifts of interpretation, and of
that service and employment which God has now opened a door effectually unto,
and has laid a necessity upon men to seek after: in which kind of employment
the God of Heaven has a great stock of glory going, and great concernments
amongst men for the promoting of Godliness and growing in Grace (I say) all
this would have been cut off, and the necessity of it, if the Scripture had
been drawn up, or put into such words and terms, as men possibly may think had
been better to have been done. So that now, as the Eunuch ( Acts 8.31.)
demanded, when Philip asked him this question, viz. Whether he understood what
he read in the Scriptures? How (says he) can I understand unless some man
guide me? (meaning who is able to interpret the Scriptures:) in like manner may
the generality and far greater part of men and women say, How shall we
understand the Scriptures aright, unless, some such Interpreter as Job speaks
of, one of a thousand shall guide us? But not to insist upon this at present,
evident it is from that little which has been said, that the distinction of
God, taken Essentially and Personally, is not therefore to be rejected, because
the words or terms of it are not heard in the Scriptures, in case the notion,
sense, and substance of them be to be found there.

Secondly, Heb. 1.8, 9. which is quoted from Psalm. 45. But unto the Son he
says, (Ver. 8.) Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever: A Scepter of
righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom; thou have loved righteousness, and
hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God has anointed thee, etc. This
Clause therefore, God, even thy God has anointed thee, is rendered both by Beza
in the place cited in the New Testament, Heb. 1.9. And so by Junius and
Tremelius out of the original Hebrew in the Old Testament, Psalm. 45.6.
Therefore O God, thy God has anointed, etc. In the former verse, in that
Clause, Thy throne O God is for ever and ever; And likewise in the former place
of the clause mentioned in the latter verse, according to the Translation
specified, Therefore O God, thy God has, etc. the word God is to be understood
personally, and that of Christ the Second Person subsisting in the Godhead or
divine Essence, as in the latter place of this Clause, Therefore O God, thy God
has anointed thee, it is to be understood personally of the Father or First
Person. Now if Christ the Son be God, and the Father be God (both which are
plainly enough asserted in the passages mentioned) and yet notwithstanding be
not two Gods, but one and the same (our Adversaries themselves not granting a
plurality of Gods) then it undeniably follows, that the word God when it is
attributed unto them both thus, the Father and the Son are God, or are the same
God; evident (I say) it is, that that word God in such Propositions or Sayings
as these must of necessity be taken Essentially, not Personally, because it is
manifestly untrue to say, that the Father and the Son are one and the same
Person, and as manifestly true too it is, that they are one and the same God
(there being no more Gods than One. So that the word God in such Sayings as
these cannot be taken Personally, but of necessity must be taken Essentially,
viz. as signifying the Divine Nature or Essence, wherein both Persons, Father
and Son, do partake; so that the sense and meaning of this Proposition is, That
the Father and the Son do subsist, or are partakers of the same Divine Nature
and Essence, which Divine Nature or Essence is sometimes expressed by the word
God. So again, when God is said to be a Spirit, as Joh. 4.24. it is not to be
taken Personally, as if the meaning were, either that the Father, or the Son,
or the Spirit were a Spirit; for though it be true of every of them that they
are Spirits, the Father is a Spirit, and so the Son is a Spirit; yet that our
Savior should here affirm it determinately or particularly of any one of them
more than other, no sufficient Reason can be given; Therefore the meaning of
our Savior saying, God is a Spirit, must needs be this, That the Divine Nature
and Essence, which is communicated to the Three Persons, or wherein the Three
Persons subsist, and so are Essentially one and the same God, that th^s Nature
and Divine Essence is spiritual, immaterial, and invisible. And yet more
plainly, Romans 16.27. where God is termed only wise, To God only wise be Glory.
The word God is to be taken Essentially, because, if it should be here taken
Personally, viz. for God the Father (which our Adversary conceives and
contendeth for with might and main; affirming, That to take God otherwise than
Personally, is to take him otherwise than he is, and to mistake him, and that
there is no such acceptance of the word God in the Scriptures, with the like.)
But (I say) that in the place now before us, To God only wise be Glory, the
word God must needs be taken essentially, and not Personally, is evident from
hence; because otherwise the Apostle must suppose, that neither Christ nor the
Holy Ghost had any wisdom in them, or none considerable but God the Father
only: which how near or far off it is from Blasphemy, I leave to sober men to
determine. Other places there are without number, wherein the word God must
needs be taken Essentially; But these few produced and insisted on, are
sufficient for the proof thereof. Therefore the distinction of God taken
Personally, and Essentially, is not a distinction unheard of in Scriptures, as
our Adversary groundlesly affirms, unless (as we noted before) by being
unheard of, he means, in respect of the sound of words, not in respect of the
truth and substance of the matter; neither do they who speak of God according
to the sense and import of that distinction, Affirm any thing of the
unsearchable Nature of God which he has not first affirmed of himself in the
Scriptures, and so are free from all the guilt of presumption upon such an
account.

But the Adversary cannot be persuaded himself,

First, (says he) It is impossible for any man, if he would but endeavor to
conceive the thing, and not to delude himself and others with empty terms and
words without understanding to distinguish the Person from the Essence of God,
and not to frame two Beings, or things in his mind, and consequently two Gods.
This is his first Reason, to which we reply three things:

1. Whereas to persuade others into his own Judgment, or opinion, he would put
them upon endeavoring to conceive the thing [distinctly to mould, frame, and
fashion in their minds or imaginations the manner how a Divine Person should be
distinguished from the Divine Nature, or Essence;] Does he not put men upon a
direct course to make shipwreck of their Christianity, and all they believe
touching the Gospel and Christ Jesus? For whereas there are many things plainly
asserted, and partly clearly supposed of the main Pillars of that Religion and
Worship of God which the Gospel commends unto the World, the mode or distinct
manner. whereof cannot be conceived or understood by men; if so be men shall
reject or deny them upon this account (I mean) because they cannot distinctly
conceive, or satisfy their imaginations how they should be, they must together
with the rejection of these reject all that which is built or hangs upon them;
which is (as has been said) the main Fabric or body of Christianity. As to
give an instance: Because it is once and again plainly affirmed in the Gospel,
that a Virgin conceived and brought forth a Child; and upon this Conception and
Child thus brought forth we know that the whole projection and frame of the
Gospel depends; Yet who is able to conceive in his mind the distinct manner
how she should or did Conceive; or what the Holy Ghost particularly acted or
did in order to enable, or make her to Conceive; or what she her self likewise
did toward or about this Conception? For to Conceive as well as bring forth is
a Verb Active, and imports the doing of somewhat either per modum naturae, or
per modum voluntatis, or both by her who is said to Conceive. But that the
whole Transaction between the Holy Ghost and the Virgin, about the Conception
of the Lord Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, was mysterious and secret, and
the manner of it, in respect of particulars, purposely veiled by God, is
plainly enough intimated by the words or Phrases wherein the Holy Ghost himself
expresses the said business by the mouth of the Angel, who first brought
tidings from Heaven unto the Virgin of this high Favor intended by God toward
her. The Holy Ghost (says the Angel unto her) shall come upon thee, (...), and
the virtue or power of the most High shall overshadow thee, Luke 1.35. Shall
overshadow thee, i. e. shall secretly, and after a manner unknown, not fit to
be revealed unto men, negotiate this great business with thee. Now, if a man
should reason so, or speak thus unto us (about the Virgins Conception;) It is
impossible for any man, if he would but endeavor to conceive the things, and
not delude both himself and others with empty terms and words without
understanding, to understand or comprehend how a Virgin should Conceive; Should
he not attempt to persuade us out of the belief of the Gospel, and to abandon
our Christianity, only upon this account, because it requires us to believe
such a thing which we cannot conceive how it was or should be? And what does he
less, that argues after the same manner to draw us from believing that a
divine Person and the divine Essence can be distinguished, because we cannot
conceive the particular manner how they are, or may be distinguished?

Take another Instance of a thing often supposed in the Scriptures, and which is,
though in another kind, very Fundamental too to Christian Religion, at least to
our embracing and professing of it. The reasonable soul of a man is united unto
the body, and so the body is united likewise unto the Soul, so as to make one
and the same man or person: This the Scripture supposes in twenty places and
ten, we shall not need to cite any for the proof of it; But who is there that
is able distinctly to conceive, or shape in his mind, how, or after what
manner, by what Ligament or bonds the Soul is united and knit unto the Body,
and the Body to it: Or how, or by what virtue or property, inherent in the
Soul, it should enliven, strengthen, or give motion unto the Body? To omit many
particulars more relating to the state and condition of the Soul and Body in
their union. The things themselves being certain, though the distinct manner of
them, or of their being be inscrutable unto men, will a man charge him with
deluding himself and others, with empty terms, and words without understanding,
who himself believes, and would have others believe also, that the reasonable
soul in natural union, or conjunction with an humane body, makes one and the
same entire man or person of man, only because he cannot distinctly conceive
the manner how such a thing should be? Will a man go about to persuade himself
that he is not a man? Surely no, all the Philosophers in the World, and all the
Learned men, who have called up all their Learning and Principles to enquire
about it, were never able to reach the manner how such a thing should be. We
know not (as Solomon informs us, Eccles. 11.5.) what is the way of the
Spirit, or how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with Child: Shall
we therefore deny that there is any such thing as the growing of a Child in the
womb of her that bears it, because no man knows how they do grow? It is not a
more common than true saying, That many effects are visible, and certain, the
reason or causes whereof are hid from men: as the flowing and ebbing of the Sea
(that is a famous instance) and the saltness of the water; the Spots in the
Moon; the pointing of the Loadstone toward the North, with many the like in
Nature. And if the Reasons and Causes of things be so hard to be come at, so
inaccessible to the Capacities and Understandings of men, How much more are the
modes, the respective manner of the beings and subsistings of things; these
being many degrees more subtle and farther remote from the Understandings of
men than the Causes and Reasons of the other? And if the modi, the intrinsical
manner (as the Schoolmen term them) of created beings and their subsisting be
so difficult to be conceived and understood; it needs not seem strange to us,
that the manner of the infinite and increated being (which we call God) and of
his subsisting should be so far above our Apprehensions and capacities. So that
to put men upon endeavoring to conceive in their minds the particular manner
how every thing should be, or may be, which the Scriptures only affirm to be;
and in case they cannot thus conceive of them; to persuade them to deny their
beings; is (in effect) to persuade and bear them in hand, that if they cannot
he wise above that which is written, they had as good throw up or cast aside
that which is written as vanity and untruth. Most true it is, that we ought not
to believe any thing in matters of Religion, but what we have a sufficient and
substantial ground in Reason why we should believe it: i. e. unless we have the
Word of God for it, which is the most substantial ground in Reason of all
others why a thing should be believed. But the Word of God reveals many
things simply to be, the distinct manner of the being whereof it does not
reveal: in which respect we stand bound to believe the truth and being of many
things, the manner of whose beings we are no way bound to believe, because it
is not revealed. So that though we can not conceive, nor stand bound to
believe, how, or after what manner the divine Person differs from the divine
Essence; nor again this Essence from such a Person, yet we may and do stand
bound to believe that they are distinguished; the Scripture revealing this, and
not the other. This for reply to the Argument propounded in the first place.

Secondly, Whereas the Argument affirms; That it is impossible for any man to
distinguish the Person from the Essence of God, and not to frame two beings in
his mind, and consequently two Gods. We reply further, That this is manifestly
untrue, if by two beings he means two things completely? subsisting each a
part by it self; as for instance: In Intellectual created Beings I can conceive
a man, or the person of a man; and again, the humane Nature or Essence of a man
(which differs from his Person; for a man, as Thomas, or any other, is not the
Humane Nature, but only partakes of it, or subsists in it;) I say, I can
conceive in my mind the Person of Thomas, and the Nature of Thomas, and yet not
conceive two things completely and a part subsisting, and consequently not
conceive two Thomases: For the Nature of Thomas, I mean, the Humane Nature,
does not any where subsist in Thomas his person a part by it self, but only in
the several and respective persons of mankind: In like manner, I can very well
conceive in my mind a divine Person, for instance the Father, or the Son; and
likewise can conceive the divine Nature and Essence; and yet not necessarily
conceive or frame two beings, i.e. two things completely and apart subsisting
in my mind; for the Divine Nature or Essence does not really subsist apart
from, or out of the divine Persons, which partakes therein, be they one, or be
they more; as the Humane Nature does not any where subsist but in Thomas, John,
and the rest of the individual persons of mankind who partake of this nature.
But though the Divine Essence be one and the same thing really and
substantially with a divine Person, and with all the Three, yet does it differ
from it in consideration and respect; so that I may conceive a divine person in
my mind, and conceive the divine Essence also, and yet not necessarily conceive
two things really distinct (much less two Gods) but two things distinct only in
consideration, but really one and the same. As in the divine Attributes the
Justice of God and the Mercy of God (and so the Wisdom, Patience, Goodness,
etc.) they are really one and the same thing in God; but they differ in
consideration; for when I conceive or consider the Justice of God, the inward
conception of my mind differs much from that which I raise or conceive within
me when I consider of the Mercy or Wisdom of God, etc. And so again, Abraham
the Father of Isaac, and Abraham the Father of the Faithful are really but one
and the same thing, yet differ in consideration or respect; for when I conceive
of him, or consider him as the Father of Isaac, my consideration is differing
much from what it is when I conceive of him as the Father of the Faitful. I
might instance in those and many more particulars which are really one and the
same, and yet may truly be considered or conceived in my mind very differently;
so that it is but an illiterate and weak Allegation to affirm, That it is
impossible for a man to distinguish the Person from the Essence of God, and not
to frame two things or beings in my mind, and consequently two Gods. Why may I
not as well distinguish the Person from the Essence of God without framing in
my mind two Gods, as distinguish the Person of an Angel, as Gabriel, Michael,
or the like, from the common Essence or Nature of Angels, wherein both Gabriel,
Michael, and other Angels partake? That is to be taken along as a general Rule
in all disputes concerning God, and the divine Nature, that when we borrow
resemblances or notions from one kind or other, from the Creature to explain
matters relating unto God, it is not to be expected that these resemblances or
notions should hold in all particulars, nor necessarily in any more than in
that one only, unto which they are applied, viz. When we show and prove, that a
man may very well distinguish the Person from the Essence of God, without
framing any such thing in his mind which should imply two Gods; by showing that
a man may distinguish the person of an Angel or a man from the common Nature or
Essence of either, without framing in his mind either two Angels, or two men:
it cannot be excepted against this proof or resemblance, that it is not
pertinent, or that it reaches not the business for which it is brought,
because the person of an Angel (and so of a man) as well as the Nature or
Essence of both are finite beings; whereas a divine Person and the divine
Essence are both infinite, or the like. The notion or comparison is sufficient
for that end for which it is used and insisted upon, if by way of similitude it
shows and proves that a man may frame in his mind a distinct consideration
of a person subsisting in, or partaking of such or such a Nature or Essence;
and again, of this Nature or Essence, wherein they do partake, without framing
a conceit of two such things which should imply or include two persons of
either kind.

Thirdly (and lastly) For answer to our Adversaries first Reason against
distinguishing the Person of God from the Essence of God, viz. That there is a
divine Nature and Essence; and again, that there is a person (suppose one only,
as his erroneous supposition indeed is;) who partakes of the Nature; then
himself owns and grants the distinction which with so much clamor he falls
foul upon. When he says in his third and last Reason against the said
distinction, That to talk of God taken only essentially is ridiculous, he
clearly grants and supposes, that God may be taken Essentially (though not
Essentially only) and consequently, that there is a divine Essence as well as a
divine Person: if so, Why may I not conceive and consider in my mind as well
the one as the other? Or what is this but to distinguish the one from the
other? Or when himself acknowledged as well the one as the other, did he
acknowledge them under one and the same notion or inward conception of them in
his mind; so that when he acknowledged a divine Person, he had no other notion
and impression in his mind than he had when he acknowledged a divine Nature or
Essence? Now then this is that, I say, if he did thus acknowledge or thus
conceive of them, then is he himself guilty of that presumption, which he
charge upon his Adversaries (as we heard) viz. Of affirming that of the
unsearchable Nature of God, which he has not first affirmed of himself in the
Scriptures. For most certain it is, that God has affirmed no such thing of
himself here, viz. That the divine Person and his divine Nature or Essence are
to be apprehended and conceived by one and the self same notion or conception
in the minds of men, without any variation or distinction at all. So that the
Adversaries first Reason against the forementioned distinction of God taken
Personally and Essentially is very weak, and has nothing of weight or strength
in it; and what there is in it, it is every whit as much against himself, as
those whom he would seem to oppose.

His second Reason against the said Distinction he draws up in these words:
If the Person be distinct from the Essence of God, then it is either something,
or nothing; If nothing, How can it be distinguished, since nothing has no
accidents? If something, then either it is some finite or infinite thing: If
finite, then there will be something finite in God; and consequently, since by
the confession of the Adversaries themselves, every thing in God, is God
himself, God will be finite; which the Adversaries themselves will likewise
confess to be absurd: If infinite, then there will be two infinites in God, to
wit the Person and Essence of God, and consequently, two Gods, which is more
absurd than the former. This is the account of his second Reason against the
often mentioned distinction; but that this also is of the same calculation with
the former, and has as little in it as that; and that which it has is as much
against himself as his Adversaries, may be made readily to appear. For First,

Whereas he reasons thus: If the Person be distinguished from the Essence of
God, then it is either something or nothing; there is no great weight either of
Learning, or Understanding in the Proposition. For first, In the former part of
this Proposition, If the Person be distinct from the Essence of God, he
supposes the Person to be somewhat; otherwise the meaning of the clause should
be this, If nothing, or that which is nothing, be distinct from the Essence of
God, which is ridiculous. And yet having thus in the former part of the
Proposition supposed it to be somewhat; from this supposition in the latter
part of it he infers it to be either something or nothing. Who ever reasoned at
such a rate as this, If nothing be distinct from something, then is it either
something or nothing? They that can make sense of this must have sharper
understandings than mine. Secondly, Let the word Person in the Antecedent of
the Proposition be supposed to signify either something or nothing; either
that which is, or that which is not; yet it does not follow that it should be
determinately either something or nothing from hence, because it is distinct
from the Essence of God: so that the Major Proposition in this Syllogism
vanishes into a mere Nothing. Thirdly, Whereas in the process of his Argument
he reasons thus: If finite [meaning, if a Person be finite.] then there will
be something finite in God; if infinite, then there will be two infinites in
God, the Person and the Essence, both which (he presumes) are accounted absurd
by his Adversaries themselves. We reply, First, that whatsoever his Adversaries
do in the case, he himself holds, not only that there is something finite in
God, but that all things appertaining to him are finite: For holding the
Essence of God to be finite and locally circumscribed, he must consequently
hold and maintain, that all other things belonging to his Essence are finite
and circumscribed also; so that it is no absurdity with him to grant that there
is something finite in God: But he that grants Passions also properly and
formally so called in God, as Anger, Grief, Sorrow; and consequently, an
obnoxiousness or an exposedness unto Trouble, Pain, Torment, yea, and death it
self (for all this directly follows upon such a Tenent:) it is no marvel if
he holds all things finite in God. But secondly, I reply further, that it no
way follows, that if a person be infinite, and the Essence infinite, that there
should be two infinites in God; The Reason is plain, because the Person and the
Essence are not two things really distinct the one from the other, but in
consideration only. That is a common and true Saying amongst Divines, In
Trinitate omnia sunt unum ubi non obviat relationis oppositio: All things in
the Trinity are one, excepting only where the opposition of relation comes in
the way: viz. The Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost either, nor either the Holy Ghost; yet they are all one and the same
Essence, and consequently one and the same Infinite; yet does it not follow,
that because there are more persons, or a plurality of persons, that therefore
there is a plurality, or more than one Essence; for it is the Essence to which
properly or primarily the Attributes do belong, and not the Persons. I beseech
you mind this Rule, which will give a great light into this deep Mystery: It is
the Essence to which properly and primarily the Attributes do belong, and not
the person; they do belong indeed to the person but only in consideration of
the Essence whereof each Person partakes. As for instance, the Father is not
infinite (and so is not Omniscient and Omnipresent) because he is the Father,
but because he is God, i.e. because he partakes and subsists in the Divine
Essence: So likewise the Second Person, the Son, is not therefore infinite,
because he is a Person, or because he is the Son, but because he is God, i. e.
one and the same really with the Divine Essence; there is the same reason of
the Holy Ghost. So that though the Father be infinite, and the Son infinite,
and the Holy Ghost infinite, and the Divine Essence infinite; yet it does not
follow, that there should be three infinites, or any more than one, because the
Essence is but one to which the Attribute of Infinity belongs. And the
Persons, as they partake of the Divine Essence, which is but one, so they
partake of the Infinity belonging to this Essence, which is but one neither. As
it may be truly said that Sarahs Husband had a great Estate, and Isaac's Father
had a great Estate, and the Father of the Faithful had a great Estate, yet it
will not follow, that therefore here were three great Estates; the Reason is,
because all the Relations were really founded in one and the self-same person
called Abraham; and the Estate did not belong to him either as he was Sarahs
Husband, or Isaac's Father, or the Father of the Faithful, but as he was such a
person enriched by God. I might show you further how the divine Attributes (as
we call them) are founded, not in the Person, but in the Essence: But this
suffices for reply to the second Reason against the distinction of God taken
Essentially and Personally.

Thirdly (and lastly) The last Reason against the distinction of God taken
Personally and Essentially, take it in his own words: Thirdly to talk of God
taken only Essentially is ridiculous; not only because there is no Example
thereof in the Scripture, but because God is the name of a Person, and
signifies him that rules over others; and when it is put for the most High
God, it denotes him, who with sovereign and absolute Authority rules over
all: But none but a Person can rule over others, all actions being proper to
persons; wherefore to take God otherwise than Personally, is to take him
otherwise than he is, and indeed to mistake him. To this also we reply.

First, When he says, That to talk of God taken only Essentially is
ridiculous; how ridiculously himself speaks has been formerly showed in
part, and will further appear when we shall weigh the grounds of his windy
confidence in the balance of the Sanctuary. For first, Whereas he says, There
is no example in the Scripture, this saying of his has already been weighed
and found too light.

Secondly, When he says, That God is the name of a Person, and when it is, put
for the most High God, it denotes him, who with sovereign Authority rules
over all, etc. We reply, by denying that God is always the name of a Person.
For when we say that the Father is God, and again, that the Son is God, the
word God is not the name of a Person, nor does it signify a Person as such:
But rather the Divine Nature and Essence, wherein both the Father and the Son
equally partake (according to our sense, and the truth it self:) And in the
sense of our Adversary, who denies the Son to be the same God with the
Father, yet grants him to be God, it must needs signify or denote some
property, privilege, or the like, wherein they both partake. For certainly,
the Son can in no sense whatsoever be termed God, unless there be same
Agreement, Similitude, or Partnership in something or other with him that is
God indeed (or as our Adversaries love to speak) the most High God; so that
when (according to the same sense of our Adversaries) the Son is called God,
the word God does not denote the proper name of a person, but denotes, and is
a word importing something that is common to more persons than one.

Thirdly (and lastly) When he says, That when it is put for the most High God,
it signifies him that with sovereign Authority rules over all; and adds,
That all Actions are proper unto persons, etc. We reply, and grant all this to
be true, But add (by way of Explication of our sense in this grant) that though
the word God, when spoken of the most High God, denotes him that rules over
all; and consequently, a person, because Actions are proper unto Persons, and
not unto Natures or Essences: Yet it does not necessarily denote any one person
determinately, or with the exclusion of all others, but may signify either the
Father, or the Son, or the Holy Ghost: For it is true, that every one of them
jointly and severally has absolute authority over all: And (as we lately
heard) the Apostle, speaking particularly of the Second Person Christ, calls
him ( Romans 9.5.) (...), him who is God over all, God blessed for ever; which
supremacy of power the same Apostle in the very same expression of (...),
attributes unto God the Father also, Ephesians. 4.6. Doubtless, he that is over all
is the most High God; we do not hold or teach, that the Divine Nature, or
Essence, as such, rules over all, or performs any action; but only as
personally subsisting in, or communicated unto the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
And this for reply to this first Argument, by which he endeavors to prove
the Son to be a sack cloth, the Holy Ghost to be a Creature, and not God. His
second Argument is this:

If he, that gave the Holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, be God or
Jehovah alone, then the Holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God: but he that gave the
Holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them is Jehovah alone, therefore the
Holy Spirit is not God. The sequel of the Major is plain; for if he that gave
the Holy Spirit be Jehovah alone, and yet the Holy Spirit that was given be
Jehovah too; the same will be Jehovah alone, and not Jehovah alone, which
implies a contradiction. The Minor (he says) is evidenced by Neh. 9.6, 20. To
this we reply briefly, that the sequel of the Major Proposition, as plain as
the Author of it would suppose it to be, is reprovable, and to be denied;
though he that gave the Holy Spirit to the Israelites be Jehovah alone, yet may
the Holy Spirit, who is said to have been given, be Jehovah also: Nor does it
imply any contradiction that the same [that is, the same person, or the same
being] should be Jehovah alone, and not Jehovah alone, viz. in different
respects and considerations; as thus, the Father (and there is the same reason
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost) may be Jehovah alone, [ viz. the exclusive
Particle alone excludes all Creatures, or all Beings whatsoever, which are not
one and the same with his Being] and yet not be Jehovah alone, if by the
Particle alone we intend to exclude the Son and the H^ly Ghost, being one and
the same God, or Being with him. For the Son may be said to be Jehovah alone,
and the Holy Ghost Jehovah alone as well as the Father. It is a Rule in Logic,
Ezclusiva particula subjecti non excludit concomitantia: An exclusive Particle
annexed to the subject in a Proposition does not exclude such things as are
concomitant to the subject, or inseparable from it, but only these, whether
Things or Persons, that are of a foreign consideration, as when Christ says,
Mat. 11.27. No man knows the Son but the Father, which is equivalent to this,
only the Father knows the Son; the meaning is not to exclude the Holy Ghost
from this knowledge of the Son, because only the Father is said to know him;
the Reason is, because the Holy Ghost is one and the same God, and so one and
the same in knowledge with the Father. So likewise when the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 2.11. The things of God knows none (for so it is in the Original, not no
man) but the Spirit; his meaning is not to exclude the Son of God from knowing
these things as well as the Spirit himself; Because there being an (...) (as
the Greek Fathers term it) a reciprocal kind of in-being, or mutual
comprehension between the three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, every one of them
subsisting and being in the other; the Son must needs know the things of God as
well as the Spirit: And those that are excluded from part and fellowship with
the Spirit in this knowledge are only Creatures, and such as are not
Essentially one and the same with the Spirit. If a man should say, only
Abraham, Sarahs Husband, was a rich man in his days, it would not follow from
hence, that therefore Isaac's Father was not a rich man, or that the Father of
the Faithful was not a rich man. That he that gave the Holy Spirit unto the
Israelites, and the Spirit who was given, may well be, and are one and the self
same Jehovah, shall be showed when we come to the seventh Argument; In the mean
season, you may please only to take notice of that of our Savior in Joh.
10.30. I and my Father are one: We know the Father is said to have given his
Son as well as his Spirit, and yet we hear from Christ himself, that the giver
and the gift, or he that was given, are one; so that though God the Father be
he that gave the Son, the Son was he that was given, or the gift, yet
notwithstanding our Savior pronounces that he and his Father, i. e. the giver
and the gift, were one.

His third Argument is this; He that speaks not of himself, is not God; the
Holy Spirit speaks not of himself, therefore he is not God. The Minor he
says is clear from Joh. 16.13. For he shall not speak of himself. The Major he
proves thus; God speaks of himself, therefore if there be any one that
speaks not of himself, he is not God. This is the very strength and sinews of
this Argument; that which follows is but an explication of this, with a proof
and confirmation of it taken in his own sense and notion: Yet that he may not
complain that his Arguments are handled like David his Messengers to Hanun,
whose Garments were cut off by the middle^; I shall read you the remainder of
this present Argument from his own Pen and Paper. The Antecedent is of it self
apparent.

To this Argument and Discourse we answer; First, By distinguishing that Phrase
or Expression, speaking and not speaking of himself, used in both Propositions
of the first Syllogism. A person may be said not to speak of himself two ways,
or in two several considerations: First, (As our Adversary well informs us
from the several Texts of Scripture which he mentions in the close of his
Argument) when he speaks by the showing, teaching, commanding, authorizing,
or enabling of another, viz. that is extraessential to him, and this kind of
not speaking (...), of himself is indeed incompatible (as he truly says) with
God, or with him that is truly God; he that speaks not of himself, but by the
teaching, authorizing, or commanding of another, really distinct from him that
speaks, most certainly cannot be God:

Secondly, A person may be said not to speak of himself (the main strength,
subtilty, and fallacy of this Argument lies in that Phrase of himself) viz.
when he does not speak of himself alone, or without the co-speaking of another
person with him; for this you are to know and remember, that many times the
exclusive Particles only and alone are not expressed in the Scriptures when yet
(indeed) they are to be necessarily understood; thus, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and so again
10.20. where Moses speaks thus unto the people, Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him; the meaning is, Thou shall serve him only or alone, as our
Savior himself, citing the place in the New Testament, expounds it, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only or alone shall thou serve, Mat.
4.10. So Joh. 12.44. He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him
that sent me: Believes not on me, i.e. not on me only, or alone, he has not
only one string to his bow; for there is one besides me to support his Faith,
viz. my Father. And our Savior speaking of the branches of a Vine in that
Parable ( Joh. 15.) opposes this Phrase (...), not to that which is wholly
from another in one kind or other, much less from another differing in nature
and substance from the said branch, but to the solitariness, or sole virtue of
the branch being separate from the Vine: As the branch cannot bear fruit (...)
of it self except it abides in the Vine, ver. 4. And in the Application of the
Parable, ver. 5. he expresses the spiritual notion, or thing which answers
it by the word (...), which imports a separation from, or exclusion of
another, I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit (...), because without me, i. e. being
separated or divided from me [through unbelief] ye can do nothing. Now then in
this latter sense of the Phrase speaking (...) of himself, it is true the Holy
Ghost speaks not of himself, no more does God the Father: For God the Father
speaks not of himself alone without the Son, and without the Holy Ghost, for
both these speak together with him; i.e. join in the same Action of speaking,
or of revealing things unto men; which I suppose is that kind of speaking which
is attributed to the Holy Ghost in Joh. 16.13. (which is the grand Scripture
wherein our Adversaries put their strength) Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is
come he will guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever, he shall hear that will he speak. As the Lord Christ speaks, Joh.
5.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work; meaning, that he and the Father
wrought together; and hence it is, that as the speaking, i. e. the revealing of
spiritual things is here attributed unto the Holy Ghost, so elsewhere it is
ascribed unto the Father, Mat. 16.17. and 11.25. Joh. 6.45. And sometimes to
the Son, Mat. 11.27. Luke 10.22. and frequently, to God indefinitely taken,
i.e. for God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, considered as one and the same
God, Gal. 1.15. Phil. 3.15. and elsewhere; so that when Christ, for the
comforting and strengthening of the Faith of his Disciples, tells them, that
the Spirit when he comes shall not speak of himself; his meaning is, that the
Testimony of the Spirit (in revealing what he shall reveal unto them) shall not
be a single Testimony (which is less creditable) he shall speak and reveal
nothing unto them but wherein the Father and himself shall agree. We might add
for the further clearing of the Phrase of himself, that we find in Joh. 11.51.
where the Evangelist speaks concerning the speech of Caiaphas the High
Priest, that it was expedient that one man should die for the People, and not
the whole Nation to perish: This (says the Holy Ghost here of him) spoke he
not of himself, but as being High Priest. Now the meaning hereof is not as if
that Caiaphas had this saying dictated unto him, or as if he were any way
authorized, or countenanced, or had the saying suggested unto him from another;
or that there was another that did overruled, and guide, and govern his lips or
his tongue in bringing forth such a saying: For the meaning cannot be, that he
spoke it from the Holy Ghost, for certainly the Holy Ghost could not be the
Author of any such Counsel of putting the Lord of Life to death, nor any way
encouraging or aiding to such a work as this; but yet the Holy Ghost had a hand
in the business, not in suggesting the Notion or wicked Counsel into the High
Priest; but he did overruled and cause his Tongue to issue such words and
sayings, which having another Principle in his heart, it is like, if he had
been left unto himself, he would have brought out some other kind of way, and
said something which would have tended to the destroying or taking away the
life of Christ; but that it was brought out in that form of words, which had a
Prophetical face in them, there was some kind of interposure of the Holy Ghost,
as there is in many Actions and sinful Sayings of men; many times their tongues
are overruled, though the substance of what they say is evil, yet there are
some strains in it which are from a Principle Superior unto themselves. Now (I
say) apply we the distinction of the Phrase (speaking not of himself) to the
Argument, and you will readily find the weakness and insufficiency of it: And
that there are four terms, which always make a fallacious Syllogism; that is,
if the same words be taken in one sense in one Proposition, and in another
sense in the other Proposition, this now makes four terms, and so makes the
Syllogism void and inconclusive of any thing: So much for this Argument, He
that speaks not of himself is not God, the Holy Ghost speaks not of
himself, therefore he is not God. If we take the Phrase speaking not of
himself, in the latter sense explained, so the Major Proposition is false; for
he may be, yea, and truly is God, who (in this sense) speaks not of himself,
i.e. who speaks not but in conjunction with others. If you take the said
words in the former sense, so the Major Proposition is true, but the Minor is
false; For the Holy Spirit does speak of himself in this sense, i. e. he
speaks the same thing with the Father and the Son, and does not speak by the
motion or direction of any person or being separated from him.

The fourth Argument is of affinity with the former, He that hears from
another what he shall speak, is not God; the Holy Ghost does so, therefore he
is not God.

This Argument is drawn up in many swelling words, after the manner of some of
the rest, but the sinews and strength of it lies in this; that the Holy Ghost
in the Scripture is said to hear from another that which he speaks or reveals
unto men, or which he did reveal unto the Apostles; and that from hence it
follows (according to our Saviors supposition, Joh. 8.26. compared with ver.
28.) that he is taught by another, and consequently cannot be God. The life and
soul of this Argument is bound up in this small bundle of words, therefore we
reply briefly to it.

First, That the very bottom and foundation upon which this Argument stands
is crasie and loose, viz. That he that hears from another what he should
speak, is taught, if by being taught, he means the receiving of new knowledge,
or of the knowledge of things which we knew not of before (which he must mean,
if he means any thing with sense:) For many may hear from another what they
are, or ought to speak, without being taught (in such a sense) as when a Jury
of men give in a Verdict upon Oath, it does not follow, that he that speaks or
gives in his Testimony in the second or third place is taught by him that
speaks the same thing before him in his hearing, for he may speak the same
thing out of his own Judgment and Conscience, and which he was otherwise
resolved to speak, though he had not heard it spoken by another before he
utters it; and so they who spend their time in the study of the Scriptures, and
in the searching after truth, may find that spoken or written (which is
equivalent to hearing, and is hearing in a sense) by another, which yet falls
in with their own thoughts and apprehensions formerly conceived in this case,
they may be said to hear that from another which they speak, and yet not be
taught. Therefore,

Secondly, Whereas he labors to prove the truth of that assertion from these
two passages of the Scriptures, Joh. 8.26, and 28. compared together, his
labor is in vain, for his proof is notoriously defective and weak, and this
upon a double account: For first, he takes that for granted which he should
have proved, as being no ways evident in it self. And secondly, He supposes,
that if it be true in one case, that he that hears from another what he shall
speak, is taught; that therefore it must be true in all cases, which is very
ridiculous. First, That which he takes for granted in his proof from these
passages is, That our Savior in the latter of the places, expounds himself
in the former, or that he speaks one and the same thing for substance of
Notion in them both: This (I say) no way appears, nor (indeed) is much
probable. For when in the former place he speaks thus, But he that sent me is
true, and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him; very
probable it is, that he speaks of the ineffable and unconceivable hearing,
whereby all the three Persons hear one another speaking the same things,
according to that of the same Apostle, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one. If they all bear record in Heaven, doubtless they hear one another, or one
from another. Or else our Savior (in the words mentioned) may be conceived to
speak of the Eternal hearing from the Father, which is appropriate to him as
being his Son by Eternal Generation; for the Father, communicating one and the
same Divine Nature or Essence with himself unto the Son by Eternal Generation,
must needs communicate all the Divine Attributes and Perfections together with
it, being (indeed) but one and the same thing with it: and amongst the rest,
that infinite knowledge and understanding which is proper to it; which
communication of knowledge may properly enough be termed Christ's hearing of
the Father. Again, When he says in the latter place, Joh. 8.28. he says,
According as the Father has taught me these things I speak; He speaks of his
teaching, or being taught as man, or as Mediator, in which respect he is
elsewhere ^ermed the servant of God, and his Father said to be greater than he.
And consequently, he must be inferior to the Father, and so may properly
enough be said to be taught by him. And that (indeed) he speaks here of his
being taught as man, appears from the next Verse, but that we must not stand
to scan all things. Thus you see our Adversary in the main proof of his
Argument takes that for granted which is not only questionable, and uncertain,
but improbable also in the highest. Again,

Secondly, Suppose that which he takes for granted without proof, or
probability in the case before us should be granted unto him, viz. That our
Savior by hearing of the Father, and by being taught by the Father, means
one and the same thing; or explaineth the one by the other; yet it no way
follows, that therefore all hearing and all teaching should be the same; or
that every one that hears of another what he shall speak should be taught by
him: We gave a sufficient account of this lately, it is a weak kind of arguing
to reason thus; Such and such words or Phrases are to be taken in such and such
a sense in this, or in that place of Scripture, therefore they are to be so
taken in all others. So that this Argument also is of the same House and Lineage
with the former; only before we dismiss it, it may not be unworthy of your
observation, how strangely God blinds the eyes of him that composed the
Argument, when toward the beginning of it, to prove that the Holy Spirit is
taught, and hears from another what he shall speak, he refers us to Isa.
40.13, 14. which place expressly teaches the quite contrary, viz. That the
Spirit of God has none to teach or direct him, the tenor of the place is
this, Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has
taught him? With whom took he counsel, or who instructed him, and taught him in
the path of Judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of
understanding? I know not what words can with more pregnant and express
emphaticalness assert the undeceivedness of the wisdom and knowledge of the
Holy Ghost than these. The Prophet David makes this an Argument or sign of the
departure of men from the Tents of such persons who are secret Enemies unto
God, viz. making their Tongues to fall upon themselves, that is, their uttering
and speaking such things which apparently make against their own interest and
designs, Psalm. 64.8. So they shall make their own Tongues to fall upon
themselves, all that see them [ viz. thus ensnared and entangled] shall fly
away: that is, shall forsake their party, shall no longer be confederate with
them. This for his fourth Argument.

The fifth Argument follows: He that receives of another is not God; the
Holy Spirit does so [ i. e. receives of another] therefore he is not God. The
Minor is witnessed from Joh. 16.14. The Major is proved thus; God is he that
gives all things unto all, wherefore if there be any one that receives of
another, he cannot be God. The Antecedent is plain from Acts 17.25. Romans 11.35,
36. The Consequence is undeniable, because he that is deficient is not God, he
that receives from another is deficient, therefore he is not God. The Major is
unquestionable, for to say one is deficient (which implies imperfection) and
yet is God, is in effect to say, that he is God and not God. This is the
compass likewise of the fifth Argument; the strength of this Argument, such as
it is, is easy enough to be discerned: the stress of it rests upon these
words of Christ (as you may perceive) concerning the Spirit ( Joh. 16.14.) He
shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you: because he is here said to be a
Receiver, therefore our Adversary cannot allow him to be God; because (says
he) God is he that gives all things unto all, and it implies a contradiction,
that he that gives all things unto all should receive any thing from any; but
amongst all his Arguments this is the first born amongst the poor. For,

I reply first, Though God in a sense be said to give all things unto all, yet
withal he is said also in a sense proper enough to receive several things. and
this without any contradiction at all: He is said to receive the Prayers of his
Saints, Psalm. 6.9. To receive the Saints themselves, Psalm. 49.15. and 73.24. To
receive comfort, Isa. 57.6. And so to receive glory, and honor, and power,
Rev. 4.11. Therefore this Proposition is most untrue, He that receives of
another is not God; yea, he may be, and is God, who receives something from
another (as we have heard.) Nor is it the proper notion of dependency to
receive of another, these things are very loosely and unduly affirmed. God is
sometimes (in Scriptures) said to give all things unto all, because he gives
unto all all things which they stand possessed of; He gives them Faculties,
Principles, Strength, and means to do all things which they do; and in this
sense he may be said to give them all the actions, motions, and workings also,
which they act and work, and consequently those very Praises and
acknowledgements which yet he receives from them too: As for example, He that
gives a man money wherewith to buy such a commodity, he may very properly be
said to give him the things which are purchased with the money; (And so the
Scripture Phrase runs, for he is thy money, speaking of the Servant:) So
when God e^dneth a Creature with strength and power to get wealth, he may be
said to give him wealth it self, which he did allow him by means of that power
and understanding infused into him. God's giving all things unto all in this
sense does not hinder but that he may receive also many of these very things
which he gives in the sense declared: therefore it is no infallible Character
of a true God not to receive from another. The Apostle himself in that very
Scripture which the Argument cites, Acts 17.25. saying, That God is not to be
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, clearly implies,
that God may receive things from his Creatures: but not upon any such account
as this; viz. As if he needed any thing; meaning, for he bettering of his own
condition, or completing of his happiness; and unless our Adversary can prove
that the Holy Ghost received what was Christ's, for his own necessities and
supplies; The simple receiving of it does no way incumber the plea of his
Godhead. 2. When our Savior, speaking of the Holy Ghost, says, He shall
receive, or shall take (as the word signifies, and is accordingly translated
in the next verse) of mine, and shall show it unto you, he does not imply as if
the Holy Ghost had not then, when Christ thus spoke, received or taken that, or
those things of his: for it is certain that he had taken these things of Christ
under the Old Testament; and had revealed them unto the Prophets of God, and
other holy men, and by these unto the World, as is very evident from many
Scriptures; yea, certain it is that he had received them from Eternity: but our
Savior's meaning in the Clause or Phrase (...), He shall take of that which is
mine, seems to be this; That whereas the Holy Ghost had, ( viz. in his mind or
understanding) both at present, and ever before, abundance of that which was
Christ's, even his whole Treasury, his relation to his Father, his Godhead, his
Incarnation, his Infinite Grace, Love, Sweetness, Holiness, etc. together with
all his Counsels, Purposes, and Intentions concerning the World, etc. He should
(when he should visibly be given, and come unto them) take not simply this, or
all this: But he should take ( viz. of himself, and out of the Treasury of his
own understanding) so much, or such particulars concerning Christ to reveal
unto them which should be necessary for them to know, either for their own
comfort, or to furnish or accomplish them for the great Office and work of
Apostles in the World. So that the word take in this place, The Holy Ghost
shall take of mine, is used in some such sense as when a man is said to take a
thing which is already his own, or in his own possession, only in order to the
doing of something with it; in this sense God says, ( Zach. 11.10.) I took my
staff, even beauty, and cut it asunder; The staff he speaks of was in his
possession before, only he is said to have taken it, in order to cutting it
asunder. So again, The Kingdom of Heaven (Mat. 13.33.) is like unto Leaven,
which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal; to name no more places in
this kind, ver. 31. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of Mustard Seed,
which a man took and sowed in his Field (...). So in the words before us, The
Spirit shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you, i. e. From amongst many
other things which he knows concerning me; he shall take such and such which
shall be needful for you to know, and shall reveal them unto you. Even as a
prudent Minister, or Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, (As our
Savior speaks) out of the rich and full treasure of his understanding takes
and chooses such and such particular notions, and veins of spiritual truth,
relating unto God and Jesus Christ, which he judges meet to be delivered and
imparted to such and such a people. The words, taken in such a sense as this,
do no way favor the dangerous conceit of our Adversaries, that the Holy Ghost
is not God. There is another sense likewise wherein the Holy Ghost may be said
to receive that which is Christ's, which is so far from impairing his Divinity,
or Godhead, that it fully asserts and confirms it: But this being somewhat
mysterious, and requiring some larger Explication, we shall not (at present)
dive into it: that which has been given is more obvious and agreeable to the
words and scope of the place, and sufficient to detect the vanity of the
Argument built upon it, in opposition to the Deity or Godhead of the Holy
Ghost. And this for the fifth Argument.

The sixth Argument rises thus: He that is sent by another is not God; the
Holy Spirit is sent by another, therefore He is not God. The Minor is proved
from Joh. 16.26. The Major, he that ministers is not God; this is the whole
compass of the sixth Argument. The substance and strength of this Argument is,
That to be sent forth by another to minister and to receive commands are things
incompatible to the Sovereign Majesty of God; and that these are in Scripture
affirmed of the Holy Ghost, therefore he cannot be God. To this we reply:

First, That the man being a perfect Anthropomorphite, notioning and conceiving
that all those things which are attributed unto God in the Scriptures, after
the manner of men, as bodily members, humane passions, a circumscriptiveness
unto place, etc. are in the litteral and proper nature and formality of them to
be found in him, builds his Arguments upon this sandy and rotten foundation:
And because it is so with men, that he that is sent, or sent forth by another
is inferior to him that sends him (though this be not always so neither as we
shall see presently) he therefore conceives, that when these things are spoken
of Christ, or of the Holy Ghost, they must be understood literally and
formally of them also; whereas, if we do but own and acknowledge the infinity
and incomprehensibleness of God, we must of necessity admit of, and own that
Rule delivered long since by Austin, and the ancient Fathers, and ever and anon
remembered by all learned men that have written of these things, Quando humana
transferuntur ad Deum, etc. When things properly belonging unto men, are
transferred over unto God, they are to be understood, so that no dishonor nor
disparagement be offered unto the Divine Nature, and whatsoever in them imports
imperfection is to be separated and left behind, and only that to be conceived
to be meant of God which implies perfection; for whatsoever proceeds from God,
so far as it comes from him, has no imperfection in it; therefore nothing
which includes imperfection in it, so far as it includes it, can be with truth
attributed unto him.

Secondly, When the Holy Ghost (and there is the same consideration of the Son
in this respect) is in Scripture said to be sent, whether by the Son, as Joh.
16.26. or by the Father, as Joh. 14.26. it does not imply either subjection or
inferiority to either of the Persons sending, because subjection savoureth of
imperfection. Nor secondly does it imply any removal from place to place, for
this also savoureth of Creature-like imperfection not to be present every where
at once, Nor thirdly does it imply Ministry or Service properly so called, i.
e. The doing of any thing, in the fruit and benefit whereof he that is sent
has not an equal interest or share with him that sends him; For this also
implies some kind of imperfection. If you ask me, What then does it imply?

I answer first, It implies the plurality of beings or subsistencies which we
call persons in the Divine Essence; for the sender and he that is sent must
needs be more than one.

Secondly, It implies another thing, as namely, the order of the persons
between themselves; For he that is sent must in order, though not in nature or
dignity, be after him that sends. Though there be not a superiority and
inferiority, one to command, and another to be subject: Yet notwithstanding
there is an order amongst them, and the order is this; the Father is, as the
Schoolmens Expression frequently is, Fons Deitatis, the Fountain of the
Godhead; because the Son though he does partake of the same Divine Nature and
Essence with him, and is every way God with him, yet he has the Sonship or
Divine Person communicated unto him by God the Father. So the third Person has
a divine Nature and Essence communicated unto him by a joint spiration (as they
express it) or by way of Procession he has it jointly from the Father and the
Son. And hence it is, that you never find in Scripture that the Father is said
to be sent either by the Son, or by the Holy Ghost: But you find concerning
both the Son and the Holy Spirit; sometimes the Son is said to be sent into the
World by the Father; and so the Spirit is said to be sent. This therefore
shows indeed the Plurality of Persons in the Divine Essence; and so likewise
the order of subsistence between them, that there is one as it were before, who
has a priority of order, though not of excellency, or dignity, nor of
greatness, nor any such thing. And then again, that (which I suppose) is the
principle thing meant by it, viz. the Phrase of sending, is, that the work,
mode, or manner of working which is proper for the Holy Ghost; that this is to
be performed by him according to the order that we lately showed; First, the
Father, then the Son, then the Holy Ghost; So that now every one of these,
though as indeed they have one and the same Essence and Nature; so they always
join in one and the same operation and working ad extra (without:) yet
notwithstanding they have every one of them a peculiar and an appropriate and
distinct manner of working answerable to that order wherein they subsist among
themselves. As for example, The Father begins the work which is proper for
the Original Author of the Work; and then the Son, he does something, but in a
mediate kind of way, between the beginning, and consummation or finishing of
it; and the Holy Ghost according to his place in his order being the third and
last, He works after the manner of him that perfecteth, or finisheth, or
consummates the work. The Father he has laid the Counsel and Platform of
Salvation for men: The Son he has carried on the work, so far as to make the
atonement for them: And yet there remains something to be done for the
Salvation of the World and that is the reducing and bringing men to believe in
this Savior, and to accept of that Atonement which he has made for them; and
this being the consummating work about the salvation of the World; although the
Father and the Son both have a hand in it, and it is doubtless their work as
well as his; yet the manner of the accomplishing of it, concluding wise, this
is appropriate unto the Holy Spirit. And now, because his work imports such a
thing as this is, therefore he is said to be sent sometimes by the Father,
sometimes by the Son. And yet the same sending (as I said before) does not
imply (as the Argument would have it) as if he changed his place, because he is
said to be sent from heaven, as if he were not resident and present there
still: But he is said to come from Heaven, to show that the work which he does
accomplish and bring to pass from day to day is a divine work. And it is the
manner of the Hebrew Dialect and Language to say, that that is spoken from
heaven, or revealed from Heaven, which is done with a high hand, and in a
wonderful and more than ordinary manner: As when there is the unbared Arm of
God, then the work is said to be done from Heaven. The Holy Ghost, when he was
sent down upon the Apostles, was as much in heaven as before. So much for
answer to this Argument, we will, God willing, be briefer in the rest.

The seventh Argument, He that is the gift of God, is not God; the Holy Ghost
is the gift of God, therefore he is not God. The sum and substance of this
Argument being contracted is this; The Holy Ghost cannot be God because he is
given; God being himself the giver of all things, and so not capable of being
given: and a gift, or that which is given, being at the disposal of him that
gives: which is unworthy to conceive of God, viz. that he should be at the
disposal of another. These three Propositions laid before us in this Argument
(which are Pillars and supporters of it) are all weak and unsound: As first,
That he that is the gift of God is not God, or cannot be God. Secondly, That he
that is the gift of God cannot be the giver of all things. Thirdly (and lastly)
That a gift is in the power and at the disposal of another. For,

To the first of these, God being sui Juris, at the absolute disposal of
himself (for who shall deny him this liberty) may give himself unto whom he
pleases; so that God may be both the Gift, and the Giver: As when the Husband
or Bridegroom gives himself to his Bride, he is both Gift and Giver. And thus
Christ gave himself to his Church; in respect of which Act of Donation he is
both the Giver and the Gift. And the truth is that God in giving his Spirit
unto us (yea, though we should grant the Adversary his blasphemous Supposition,
viz. That the Spirit is not truly God) may yet be said to give himself unto us;
how much more when we (according to the Scriptures, which teach us that the
Spirit of the Lord, and the Lord the Spirit are all one, 2 Cor. 1.11.) do
believe this Spirit is God, and consequently gives himself? For what is it for
God to give himself unto men, but by a free and voluntary disposing himself by
Covenant or Promise to become theirs? Did he not establish his Covenant between
himself and Abraham, and his seed after him for an everlasting Covenant to be a
God unto him, and to his seed after him, Genesis 17.7. And so afterward unto
Israel (this Seed of Abraham) did he not say by the mouth of David, Hear oh my
People, etc. I am God, even thy God? Psalm. 50.7. What is that which is given us
more than ours? Or what can it be more? So that the first Proposition mentioned
is notoriously untrue. He that is the gift of God is not God, or cannot be God.

From the error of this Proposition thus evicted (as you have heard) the
weakness of the second fully appears; many words I shall not need for
confutation of it. The Proposition was this, He that is the gift of God, is
not, cannot be the giver of all things. If God be the giver of all things
(which our Adversary with the Scriptures grants and affirms) and withal be
his own gift; It is a clear case, that he that is the gift of God, may be, yea,
and is the giver of all things. And concerning the Spirit of God it is expressly
said, (1 Cor. 12.11.) But all these things works one and the self same
Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will: these words, as he will,
clearly prove, that those Administrations and gifts of the Holy Ghost there
spoken of, are not only distributed and given immediately by him, but that he
is (...), at full liberty of and from himself to order and make this
distribution as he pleases; which is a Character, not of a derived and
commissionated power, but of that which is sovereign and absolute, which in
this case must needs be divine and appropriate unto God; for it is not only
said that he works all these things, and gives all these gifts, but that he
gives and makes distribution even as himself pleases. Certainly, there was
no Commission so large as this ever given out by God for any Creature
whatsoever, to do by the great things of Jesus Christ, and such as concern the
Salvation of men, to dispose and distribute of them to whom, and where, and to
what degree he pleases. And accordingly, he that in the place last cited is
termed, the Spirit, but all these things works one and the self same Spirit;
He is in the sixth verse expressly said to be God. And there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God that works all in all; therefore certainly
the Spirit of God and God himself they are one and the same; these things duly
considered, they are impregnably express for the proof of the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost.

For the third (and last) Proposition of the three specified, viz. That a gift
is in the power, and at the disposal of another; neither is this necessary and
universally true. For God (as we have proved) is a gift, viz. of his own
giving, and yet is not hereby proved to be at the disposal of another, but only
and solely of himself; so that this Argument is crazie and loose all over. As
for that which he adds (toward the close of it) it is altogether as
inconsiderable as the rest, viz. That if the Person of the Holy Ghost be given
unto certain men, then he was not Personally with them before, and consequently
cannot be God, by the concession of his Adversaries themselves, who deny not
that God is always personally present with all alike. For the Holy Ghost is
noted to be given unto some certain men in respect not simply of his Personal
presence with them, but in respect of the fruition and enjoyment of his
Personal presence, or in respect of such a presence of his Person with them
which sheddeth or pours out the love of God abroad in their hearts [ i. e.
persuades men effectually, and with power to believe the love of God toward
them:] stirs up many holy thoughts and motions in them from time to time. We do
acknowledge (indeed) such a personal presence of his with all men alike, which
produces the same effects in, and about, and with relation unto all men, viz.
their sustentation or continuation of their Beings: but where he works
variously, or differently we hold a proportional difference of his personal
presence with men; so that our Adversary is quite besides his business at this
turn also.

His Eighth Argument appears in the World with this face, He that changes
place is not God, the Holy Spirit changes place, therefore he is not God. To
prove this he sends us to the third of Luke, where it is said, that the Holy
Ghost descended like a Dove upon Christ at the time of his Baptism; From this
motion or descending ascribed unto the Holy Ghost he would needs infer and
conclude, that certainly, the Holy Ghost cannot be God. And why? Because (says
he) God cannot change his place by reason of his Immensity, which the
Adversaries themselves do hold (though the truth is, he himself does not hold
it.) Now, who can be said to change and alter his place (says he) such a
person, whoever he be, or such a thing cannot be God. The Breviate of his
Argument comes only to this: That the Holy Ghost changes his place (I suppose
he would have said, that he is capable of changing his place) and therefore
cannot be God; because changing of place is repugnant to the Omnipresence of
God, which is God himself. To this therefore we briefly reply.

That the Holy Ghost changes not his place, nor is capable of changing it: nor
does his proof from Luke 3.21, 22. hold out with his Conclusion, For the
descending of the Holy Ghost, upon Christ in a bodily shape like a Dove, does
no ways prove any local motion, or shifting of place by the Holy Ghost; but
only the Doves changing place, by the visible symbol whereof the Holy Ghost
gave Testimony unto Christ, or sealed him for the great Office of Mediatorship,
which he was now ready to enter upon; even as God the Father gave testimony
unto him of being his beloved Son, by a voice from Heaven. But whereas he
says, that (in the place cited) We have the Holy Spirit in a bodily shape
descending from heaven, which is termi^^^ a quo; he affirms that which is not.
Here is no mention made of the Holy Ghost's descending from heaven in a bodily
shape; but only of the Holy Ghost descending upon Christ in a bodily shape,
like unto a Dove, without any terminus a quo at all, of which he speaks. It
is indeed said, concerning the voice that was now heard, that this came from
Heaven: but as this Phrase of coming from heaven, spoken of the voice, does not
suppose the voice was first in the Heaven, and then by a change of place came
so near the earth as where it was heard, but only as if he that spoke it had
been in the air above those who heard it: In like manner, if it had been said,
that the Holy Ghost had descended from heaven in the visible shape of a Dove,
it would not have implied that therefore the Holy Ghost was in heaven before,
and now by a local motion or remove came unto Christ; but only that the Dove in
which he is said to have descended, came for some space down through the air.
And as touching the Metaphor of the Holy Ghost descending, it imports nothing
but what the Scriptures very frequently speak concerning God himself;
expressing this variation, or change of dispensation, or acting, by such
Phrases which in the Letter of them import change of place: Nor do those Texts
of Scripture, which he cites to prove, that it was not God himself, but an
Angel who is said ( Genesis 18.21.) to have gone down either divisim, or
conjunctim, prove any such thing. As for the rest of those places, Acts 7.53.
Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2, 3. Heb. 2.13. these have not so much as a color of such
proof: nor indeed have these Texts themselves (which are likeliest to serve his
turn of all other) Acts 7.30, 35, 38. much more. For what? though he that
appeared in the Bush unto Moses be termed sometimes an Angel, or the Angel of
the Lord: or otherwise the Lord God himself. Yet,

First, Neither follows it, that therefore he was a created Angel, as because
Angels are sometimes termed men, as Genesis 18.22. (besides other places without
number) it does not follow that therefore they were natural and true men; But
only that they then appeared in the shapes of men, they were men by
dispensation, and for a time only. Neither,

Secondly, Does it follow, That in case it be granted, that an Angel in one
place is therefore termed Jehovah, Lord, or God, because he sustaines the
Person, or speaks in the name of God; that therefore where any thing is
attributed unto God, as spoken in the name of God, it must needs be meant of an
Angel, these are wild kind of Inferences or Proofs. By the way, I do not
conceive that any Angel, properly so called, i.e. any created Angel, ever
styled himself by the name Jehovah, or God: but that when he that thus styles
himself is any where called an Angel, it is meant of that increated Angel who
is called Angelus foederis, the Angel of the Covenant; and in respect of his
frequent: appearances unto men, and transactings of things aftter the manner of
Angels, may properly enough be termed the Angel of the Lord. But suppose we
should cast in that Text, Genesis 18.21. into the Treasury of our Adversaries
demands, and grant that the Lord, who then said that he would go down,
signifies a created Angel, and not Jehovah himself, yet this would not much
enrich him. For there are other places of Scripture, where local motion, and
change of place is (upon the account mentioned) ascribed unto God, see 2 Chronicles.
30.6. Jer. 12.15. Joel. 2.14. Mal. 3.7. Acts 15.16. Zach. 1.16. and 8.3. (and
possibly in many other places besides all these.) God is said to return, which
as plainly imports local motion, as descending does. Yea, who knows not that
coming, and coming forth, coming out of his place, are frequently attributed
unth God? see Isa. 26.21. Mic. 1.3. (where the very expression, now contended
about, viz. descending, or coming down) is expressly affirmed of God; as it is
likewise, Exodus 19.20. Number. 11.25. Psalm. 18 9. And who knows how often besides?
So that from the Holy Ghost's descending; an Argument levied against his
Godhead is but a vapor or smoke.

His Ninth Argument is not made of much better materials, He that prays unto
Christ to come to Judgment, is not God; the Holy Spirit does so, Ergo, etc. The
Fabric of this Argument is built (as you may see) upon this foundation: that
the Spirit of God cannot be God, because (says he) that he prays unto Christ
to come to Judgment, which he proves from Rev. 22.17.

I reply, That Text, Rev. 22.17. does no way prove, that the Holy Ghost prays
unto Christ to come to Judgment, so that this is an error in the foundation.
For first, Though it be here said, And the Spirit and the Bride say come; yet
it is not said that the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Spirit (so called (...)) and
the bride say come. It is the sense of some learned men, that by the Spirit in
this place is not meant the Holy Ghost, but the Angel or Spirit which Christ is
said ( Chap. 1.1.) to have sent, to signify this Revelation unto John, and who
conversed with him all along hitherto. Angels (we know) are of a spiritual
nature, and frequently in Scriptures termed Spirits. Now to reason either a
genere, or a specie ad individuum, from a general to a particular affirmatively
is an Argument fitter for a child than for a man: As thus, It was a man that
did such or such a thing, therefore it was William or Thomas that did it; such
a reasoning as this is that before us; The Spirit says come, therefore such or
such a Spirit by name as the holiest Spirit of all says come. But grant we the
Adversary that which his Argument demands, that by the Spirit here is meant the
Holy Ghost.

Yet Secondly, It is not necessary to conceive, that the Holy Ghost spoke thus;
( says unto Christ come) as being without the Bride, but as speaking in and by
the Bride: Nay, it cannot reasonably be conceived otherwise. For if the Holy
Ghost, separated from and without the Bride, shall say come, then the Bride
must be supposed to say come of her self, and without the presence and
assistance of the Holy Ghost: In which case were she able to conceive such a
Prayer as this of her self, (which yet she is not;) yet would it not be
acceptable unto God; no Prayer being accepted with him but that which is prayed
in, or by the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, Though here be two Agents, or two Speakers (I beseech you mind it)
mentioned, the Spirit and the Bride, yet here is but one Action or speaking
asserted to them both: here is but one Come, And the Spirit and the Bride say
come; it is not, and the Spirit says come, and again, the Bride says come:
No, but the Spirit and the Bride together make one lip, as it were between
them, and together they say, as it were with one voice, come. So that this
passage or expression wherein the Spirit of God and the Spouse are made joint
Agents or joint Speakers in one and the same Action or Speech, perfectly
agrees with that Notion which runs throughout the Scriptures from place to
place, according unto which God and the Creature are made Co-workers, or joint
Agents, in all that the Creature does worthily and according to the will of
God; in which respect also the Act produced between them, is sometimes ascribed
to the one, and otherwhile to the other. Many Instances hereof we have
heretofore given you from the Scriptures: if you please let us touch one
instead of many at present in this kind (not formerly observed) and which has
a special affinity with the place in hand, Acts 15.28. The Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren assembled at Jerusalem write thus (among other things) to the
Church of the Gentiles: For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and unto us, to
lay no other, etc. Here the Apostles, and the rest with them, ascribe that Act
of apprehension unto themselves as well as unto the Holy Ghost (though to the
Holy Ghost in the first place) which was raised in them by the assistance and
motion of the Holy Ghost, though not without the joint concurrence of their
Understandings and Wills also; the meaning is not, that the things spoken of
seemed good unto the Apostles, and the rest, apart from the Holy Ghost, or
without the dictating of the Notion or apprehension by the Holy Ghost, nor
again, that it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost simply considered or apart, and
extrinsical unto them; For how then could they have told them that it seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost and them? But it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost, and
us; the meaning is, that the Holy Ghost did enlighten and reveal the thing unto
them, and gave them directions, and put them upon it to send this Counsel unto
the Gentiles: Namely, to impose upon them by way of burden and charge no other
thing, but that they abstain from such and such things; so that here the Holy
Ghost and the Apostles are joined together in the same Act of apprehension; so
in the place (in hand) the Spirit and the Bride they make one and the same
voice together; the Spirit he dictates, and the Bride she utters.

Thirdly, suppose it had been so expressed, And the Spirit says come, and the
Bride says come: That there had been two distinct Actions mentioned; the one
ascribed unto the Holy Ghost; the other unto the Bride or Church of Christ; yet
neither would it have followed from hence, that therefore the Holy Ghost had
prayed unto Christ to come to Judgment. When a Judge prescribes or dictates the
form of an Oath to be taken by a Jury, or any Person thereof, he does not swear
or take an Oath; though the other that speaks the same words after him does
formally and properly swear: In like manner, the Holy Ghost may teach the Bride
what she should say, and put words into her mouth, and say thus within the
Conscience and Soul of the Church, Come Lord Jesus come quickly. Now, though
the Holy Ghost spoke these words, and dictated unto the Bride what she should
say and pray, it does not follow, that therefore he should pray himself. When
Christ taught his Disciples to pray, Our Father, etc. it does not follow, that
therefore he himself did pray; but he did put words into the mouths of his
Disciples, which when they came to utter, would be a Prayer properly and truly
so called, etc. Mr Brightman understands the place thus.

The Tenth Argument levied against the Deity of the Holy Ghost is this. He in
whom men have not believed, and yet have been Disciples and Believers, is not
God; Men have not believed in the Holy Spirit, and yet have been so (viz.
Disciples, Believers:) Ergo. The sum and substance of this Argument (which
spreads much Paper in the Author's words) is this; because we read in the
Scriptures of some called Disciples, who yet did not believe in the Holy Ghost:
Nor had so much as heard or known whether there were any Holy Ghost or no; and
withal that the Apostle Paul did not take any occasion thereupon to declare the
Holy Ghost to be God: Therefore certainly he is not God.

To this I answer (and affirm by the way) that from the Crown of the head unto
the sole of the Foot of this Argument there is no sound part in it. For first,

The Major Proposition, which is the head of this Argument, He in whom men have
not believed, and yet have been Disciples and Believers, is not God: This
Proposition, I say, is unsound, because it is ambiguous, and so is apt to abuse
men's Judgments, and deceive them, and not to instruct them. For however there
is a sense wherein it is good, and will hold: yet there is another sense which
lies more obnoxious to men's apprehensions, which is not true. For he may be
God, the word God taken Personally, on whom though men have not believed, viz.
Explicitly, yet they may be Disciples and Believers: Though it be true also on
the other hand, that he that believes not in God Essentially taken cannot be a
Disciple, or a Believer. He that believes not that there is one God cannot be
a Disciple, or true Believer as the case may be: But he that believes not the
distinct manner of the subsistence of this one God, viz. that he subsists in
three (which we call Persons:) Or that does not believe, especially
explicitly, and by name, and under relation of any of all the three; such an
one may notwithstanding be a Disciple, and Believer in the Scripture sense. I
would be loath to pronounce the hard Sentence of non-Disciple, or non-Believer,
against all those that professedly deny the Godhead of Christ, or of the Holy
Ghost (though there are many that are not at all tender in doing it:) because
though explicitly and in terms they deny him, yet believing there is one God,
and this one God being Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they do implicitly,
virtually, and constructively own and acknowledge them. As he that carries a
Box sealed up about him, wherein he thinks there is but one Jewel, he knows
of no more; yet in case there be three more, he carries them all by carrying
the Box or Case wherein they are contained: In like manner, he that believes
one God, does virtually believe in the Three Persons; though I would not by
this extenuate the greatness of the sin, and dangerousness of the error of
those who in words profess against the Godhead of the Holy Ghost (and so of
Christ) though implicitly, and by way of consequence they acknowledge it. The
ancient Jews (such I mean who were Abraham's Seed) were true Disciples and
Believers; yet did not they, at least all of them, explicitly believe Christ
to have been, or that he was the Son of God; but the Proposition we are now
upon is not (indeed) worthy the labor already bestowed upon the examination of
it, Vanitate sua translucet, A man may see through it.

Secondly, That which is the Basis and main Foundation of the whole discourse
of the Argument is an absolute mistake and misapprehension. For the meaning of
the words spoken by those who are called Disciples, Acts 19.2. We have not so
much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, is not, that they had never
heard of the name, or simple being of the Holy Ghost (we shall manifest the
contrary hereunto presently) but that they had not as yet heard whether the
Holy Ghost was in actu secundo (as the Schoolmen speak;) i.e. whether he was
abroad again in the World, as formerly he was in the days of their
Forefathers and Prophets. This to be the true and plain meaning of the words
appears by several considerations: First, The Verb Substantive here used
(...), which properly signifies the simple and absolute being or existence of a
thing, is often used in the Scriptures for the being of a thing in Act, Exercise,
or Manifestation; in this sense it is used more than once by our Savior
himself. The Evangelist John uses it concerning the Holy Ghost himself, Joh.
7.39. This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet, [the word given, inserted in our
English Translation, is not in the Original] the Holy Ghost was not yet,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified; was not yet, i.e. was not yet abroad
in the World amongst Believers, in the discovery of himself by those miraculous
and extraordinary gifts, which afterward he conferred upon many; so when these
Disciples the Argument speaks of said, that they had not so much as heard
(...), whether the Holy Ghost be, The meaning is, that they had not heard
whether he had been yet given or no; [ viz. upon a new account, the ancient
account, upon which, as they conceived, He was formerly given, being expired
and out of date long since.] Our English Translators might as well have
inserted the word given in this place as in that of John mentioned; and then
the Clause would have run thus, We have not so much as heard whether the Holy
Ghost be given. We have heretofore given you many instances from the Scriptures
of such an Adjective sense of the Verb Substantive (...), as that is now
contended for, viz. From Mat. 5.45. Romans 7.13, etc. This sense (in the second
place) is confirmed against that given, or supposed by our Adversaries in the
Argument before us, from hence, because these Disciples had certainly heard of
the being of the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit. For first, Being Jews (which
appears by their having been baptized by John's, or some of his Disciples
Baptism in those days, not having been carried out amongst the Gentiles, and
after it was come abroad unto other Gentiles, they in Asia where Ephesus stood
were for a time denied it, Acts 16.6.) being Jews (I say) they could not but
have heard of the being of the Holy Ghost, or of the Spirit of God, mention
hereof being so plainly and frequently made in the Scriptures. I need not (I
suppose) to cite places for this, but whether they were Jews or Gentiles having
been baptized with the Baptism of John, it cannot be imagined, but that they
had heard of the being of the Holy Ghost: For John, when he baptized men with
water, admonished them to believe on him ( Mat. 3.11.) that should come after
him, who, he told them, should baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire.
And there is little question to be made, but that John's Disciples taught the
same Doctrine in this Point with their Master.

Again thirdly, That sense of the words, which we have given, makes the answer
of the Disciples every whit as congruous and pertinent to Paul's question put
to them, if not more than that sense which the Argument supposes; Paul said
unto them, or demanded of them, have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed? They answer him (according to the sense we plead) We have not so much
as heard whether there be any receiving of him, or no, or whether any other
Believers have received him. And fourthly (and lastly for this) there is this
reason why these Disciples being Jews (as we argued) might probably say or mean
than they had not so much as heard whether the Holy Ghost were now abroad in
the World, or no; because, from the time of Antiochus, who miserably afflicted
and wasted their Church and State, the Jews were wont greatly to mourn and
lament, as if, together with their last Prophets, who Prophesied in Ezra's and
Nehemiah's times, under, and a while after the building of their second Temple,
they were wont (I say) to mourn (as the generality of them, or at least some of
the learned amongst them do at this day) as if with those their Prophets the
Holy Ghost had forsaken them, and refused to manifest his presence amongst them
any more, according to that in Psalm. 74 9. We see not our signs, there is no
more any Prophet; neither is there any amongst us that knows how long.
According to this Notion the Disciples, we are now speaking of, might say to
Paul, that they had not so much as heard the least inkling of those blessed
tidings that the Holy Ghost was again returned unto the World. But then again,

Thirdly (as to the Argument it self) Whereas the Author of it says, That to
take the Holy Spirit, not for his Person, but for his Gifts, is to speak
without example; he most palpably contradicts himself, within two or three
lines after, where he grants that Paul's question to them, Whether they had
received the Holy Ghost or no, might be understood of the gifts of the Holy
Ghost.

Fourthly (and lastly) Because I would not stand any longer upon this Argument,
whereas he would infer, that the Holy Ghost should not be God, from hence, that
the Apostle, upon the occasion here offered, did not declare him to be so,
whereas upon a lesser occasion he instructed the Heathen at Athens in the
nature of the true God. We reply.

First, It is not unreasonable to demand of him who thus reasons, What Oracle
he consults with, which informs him that Paul did not do that which he thinks
fit he should have done, in case the Holy Ghost be God, viz. Inform these
Disciples accordingly? And certain I am, here is not the least ground
administered unto him to judge the contrary. It is said in the progress of the
story, that for three Months together publicly, and afterward for two years
together more privately, he argued and disputed things appertaining to the
Kingdom of God. It is an old rule and a true, that Argumentum ab Authoritate
ductum negativa non valet: That Arguments drawn from Authority negatively have
no force nor value in them.

Secondly, Whether the Apostle formally, Totidens verbis, taught the Disciples
that the Holy Ghost was God or no; certainly, he did that which was as good, or
better for them than such a Doctrine formally delivered would have been; yea,
and happily that which being interpreted amounted to as much, as a declaring of
him to have been God, and so may be said eminently, though not formally to have
declared him to be God; For by laying his hands upon them, he obtained the gift
of the Holy Ghost for them, by whom they were miraculously acted, speaking with
strange Tongues, and Prophesying; which motions and actings of the Holy Ghost,
at one and the same time in them all, with the like in other Christians up and
down the World, might be to them a convincing Argument of his Godhead; though
it be not such unto him who opposes in the question in hand. However that
which the Apostle did for these Disciples in procuring the Holy Ghost to be
given them, argues every whit as much, or more care and zeal for their
spiritual accommodation, as his preaching that God to the Athenians, whom they
ignorantly worshipped, did toward theirs; So that this Act of the Apostle was
very impertinently insisted upon for such a purpose as that pleaded here. This
for reply to this Argument.

Concerning his Eleventh Argument,

This eleventh Argument then proceeds thus; He that has any understanding
distinct from God, is not God; the holy Spirit has an understanding distinct
from God, Ergo, etc. The two passages of Scripture which are the strength and
sinews of this Argument, viz. Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. and Joh. 8.26. compared with
ver. 28. We have formerly had in consideration, and found nothing there to
support that cause for which they were produced; and if there was nothing in
them then for such a purpose, certainly there is nothing since added unto them;
nor is there the least jot or title in either of these places that the Holy
Ghost hears from God that, whereof he was ignorant before. In what sense he
is said not to speak of himself, to take of the things of Christ to reveal them
unto men, has been formerly opened; and whatever there appears in the said
passages to prove, that the understanding or learning of the Holy Ghost is
distinct from the understanding of God teaching, relates only unto the humane
understanding of Christ, not of the Holy Ghost. But of these things formerly.

Concerning that new place, 1 Cor. 2.10. From whence he seeks to evince the
understanding of the Holy Ghost to be another distinct from the understanding
of God, because it is here said, that the Spirit searches all things, even the
deep things of God; and the same understanding cannot be conceived, or said to
search it self, or its own deep things. We reply briefly and plainly.

First, That the Spirit is said to search the deep things of God, because he is
able to guide or lead the understandings of men in a rational and discoursive
way into the knowledge or discerning of the deep things of God. It being a
method proper and natural unto this kind of understanding (I mean, the
understanding of men) by certain steps and degrees to be led on to the
knowledge of things that be more mysterious and remote. It is a thing familiar
and frequent in Scripture, to ascribe an Action as well unto that which
assists, qualifies, or enables unto it; whether it be person, or thing, as unto
the immediate and Proper Agent himself, when the Action is such that the proper
Agent who does it could not have done it without such an assistance; yea,
sometimes (which is yet more) in such case as we speak of, the Action is denied
to be done by the Agent, who yet properly does it, and is attributed unto that
whether person, or thing, which only assisteth or enableth to it, Mat. 10.20.
Mar. 13.11.

Our Savior encourages his Disciples not to be troubled when they should be
called before Rulers for his sake; For (says he) it is not you that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you. Now we know it was not the Holy
Ghost that uttered these words; but because the Apostles had not wisdom enough
of themselves to make such Apologies without the assistance of the Holy Ghost;
here is nothing ascribed to the proper or immediate Agents the Apostles
themselves, but it is ascribed to the Holy Ghost. And so again, 1 Cor. 15.10.
But I labor more abundantly than they all (says the Apostle) yet not I, but
the grace of God which is in me. But how does the grace of God labor more than
they All? Not properly, for it is not capable of speaking or journeying: But
because it did enable and strengthen Paul, and raised his spirit, and enlarged
his heart and understanding to labor and fill the World with the knowledge of
the Gospel, therefore he says he labored more abundantly than they all. The
like Expression you have Gal. 2. the latter end, I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ, etc. It was Paul certainly that
lived; and it is true likewise, that the life he speaks of Christ literally
or properly did not live in him: But it was Christ, the knowledge of whom, and
the belief of whom was Paul's life; because that filled him with so much peace,
and comfort, and joy, which is that he means by life. Therefore that life
which he lived he disclaimeth it as to himself, and ascribes it unto him who
did enable him thus to do. Like instances you have heard, where that which is
acted and done is ascribed not to the proper or immediate Agent, but to that
which qualifieth or enableth for the doing of it. 1 Cor. 13.4, 7. Charity
suffers long, etc. not that Charity does this or that, for the truth is, that
Charity does none of these things: It is not the proper or immediate Agent of
these actions; but only it does dispose, enable, and incline the hearts of men
and women to do them. And so Jam. 1.20. is of a like character or form of
speech, The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God: The meaning is,
that the wrath of man does hinder or indispose men for acting that which is
agreeable unto the righteous, holy, and just Commands of God. Men by reason of
their wrath, if they be surprised by it, are not in any good capacity to do the
will or to work the righteousness of God. So likewise when men work out their
Salvation with fear and trembling, God is said to work in them both to will and
to do, Phil. 2.13. because he assists and enables. So in the Scripture before
us the Spirit ^s said to search the deep things of God, not because he himself
reasons or argues himself into the knowledge of these things; But because he
assists, guides, and leads the minds and understandings of men into the
knowledge of these things. This to be the clear and express sense of the place
is evident from verse 12. Now we have received not the Spirit of the World, but
the Spirit which is of God, that we might know [ i.e. that by him we might be
directed and enabled to know] the things which are freely given unto us of God.
Which also agrees with that of our Saviors, Joh. 16.13. When he is come he
will lead you into all truth; so that there is little question (or rather none
at all) but that that is the true sense of the place in hand, which has been
given. I desire the Rule delivered, with the several Instances that have been
given for the confirmation of it, may be the rather remembered and observed,
because the answer of the next (and last Argument) depends upon it. But
secondly, If the understanding of the Spirit were distinct from the
understanding of God, he could not search the deep things of God, because the
understanding of God is infinite; and how can a finite understanding reach or
comprehend that which is infinite? Even as the things of a man, or of the
understanding of a man, no understanding or faculty that is beneath it, or
inferior to it, is able to dive into or comprehend.

Thirdly, The sense given must needs be the true meaning of the place, viz.
that the Spirit is therefore said to search the deep things of God; because he
enableth men to search so far as is necessary for them to know; because himself
by his own Act, in reference to himself, cannot be said to search the things of
God, whether deep, or other; because searching properly implies study, or
labor, and diligence of enquiry; and this supposes a want of knowledge of the
things searched after until by searching they are found out; but neither of
these are attributable to the Spirit of God as is evident. For first, it is not
proper to the Spirit to search, and study, and to come unto the knowledge of
things by diligence and enquiry; neither is it any way meet to be spoken of the
Holy Ghost that he is destitute, or ignorant of the things of God, and that by
labor, diligence, and study he searches them out; so that this passage of
Scripture is utterly a stranger to the Argument in hand. Some other things are
affirmed in the Argument, which being weighed in the balance would be found too
light. But enough has been said for the uncovering of the nakedness, and to
discover the inability of it to perform the device which is imagined.

The twelfth and last Argument, we have to encounter with, (upon the matter)
received answer already; notwithstanding being the last, let us hear what it
has to say. He that has a will distinct in number from that of God, is not
God; the Holy Spirit has a will distinct in number from that of God: Ergo. The
sum of this Argument is drawn up thus: The Holy Ghost is said, First, to
intercede with God, or to pray unto God for the Saints.

Secondly, He is said to do it according to the will of God, Romans 8.26, 27.
Therefore in respect of the latter, He must needs have a will distinct from the
Will of God, and so cannot be God: In respect of the former, he must be
inferior unto God (because he prays unto him) and in this respect also
cannot be God. But to this Argument we reply.

First, That whereas the Spirit is said to help our infirmities; which
infirmities are mentioned as lying in this, That we know not what we should
pray for as we ought, viz. of our selves, and by our own strength. If the Holy
Ghost should pray for us apart by himself, he should not at all help our
infirmities in this kind: For we should, or might, remain under such
Infirmities such Intercessions for us by the Spirit notwithstanding. If it be
said, that the Spirit may intercede for us that our infirmities in this kind
may be healed; then it follows, that if our infirmities still remain, as
(questionless) they do, and will do to our lives end, (and Paul himself was not
exempted in this kind) It follows (I say) if so be the intercession of the
Holy Ghost be that those infirmities of the Saints should be healed, in case
they be not healed, then the Intercession of the Holy Ghost is not regarded and
accepted for us with God, and then what kind of help should we receive from
him? But then,

Secondly, The Spirit is said to make intercession for us with groans which
cannot be uttered. Now, though we should grant that groaning may in a
metaphorical sense, and unproperly be attributed unto the Spirit, yet how any
groans or groaning of his should be unutterable unto him who is the Lord of all
Language and Speech is not easy to conceive.

Thirdly, Whereas the Argument insisteth so rigidly upon these words in the end
of ver. 27. The Spirit it self makes intercession for us according to the will
of God: As if they argued a distinct will of the Spirit from the will of God.

I reply, that the words do not signify according to the Will of God (here is
no word which signifies Will:) But according unto God, and they answer these
words by way of Antithesis in the former verse (...), as we ought. Thus the
Apostle had there granted that the Saints did not indeed of themselves know how
to pray as they ought: here he tells them for their comfort that the Spirit
will enable them to pray as they ought, i. e. (...), according unto God, or the
mind or will of God, i. e. as they ought, and as it becomes them to pray. And
here is a direct answer, relating to those infirmities which our Apostle had
expressly affirmed to be in the Saints.

Fourthly, That the work of the Spirit on the behalf of the Saints, does not
lie in this, to pray for the Saints a part in heaven (which is the sense of the
Author of this Argument) is evident from Joh. 14.16. where our Savior says,
that when he should go away, he would pray the Father, and he will give you
another Comforter that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
truth, etc. So that the work which the Spirit has to do for the Saints is not
in heaven since the Ascension of Christ into Heaven; Heaven is not the Stage or
Theater where the Holy Ghost acts and bestirs himself on the behalf of the
Saints; but now he is come down upon the earth, and his great business which he
has to do lies in the earth, even with the hearts, minds, understandings, and
wills of men, stirring and moving there. But

Fifthly (and lastly) Remember the Rule that we delivered unto you in the
former Argument, which will fully give you the sense wherein the Holy Ghost is
said to intercede with groans: we gave you many instances, when we delivered
this for a Rule, that in many places Actions are ascribed unto him that does
assist, and direct, and help men in the performance of them, and not unto him
that is the formal and immediate Agent.

So here the Holy Ghost does intercede with groans, because he does fill the
Saints with his Wisdom and Power, and so puts them into a posture to
conceive inward groans, and secret motions and desires in the Soul, which the
Creature (indeed) is not able to utter, or come to God withal in his lips: the
Creature cannot utter it self, when the heart is full of the Spirit of God; yet
such persons are acted beyond their own ability; and very well may be, because
the Spirit is directing, guiding, and strengthening unto this work. And this is
the property of an Intercessor. To intercede does not always signify to plead
for us, but sometimes to plead with us against any Enemy, (...), this word in
the rigor of the Grammatical signification of it is not always used for
interceding for another (which he seems to catch at, as I judge from the
Latin word, which signifies to go between two) but sometimes to go in
opposition to an Enemy, and sometimes it signifies, to expostulate and debate
things with another, Acts 25. So that all things being considered it is a clear
case, that this Argument is wholly defective. And it may be seen further, Romans
8.15. it is expressly said, that by means of the Spirit we cry Abba, Father;
meaning, that by the assistance and impulse of the Spirit, we are able to call
God Father: which implies the whole duty and management of this great service
of Prayer and Invocation on the name of God. And in the last place, Jam. 16.
speaking of the Prayer of the righteous man, we translate it the effectual
Prayer; but the word properly signifies that which is acted within a person by
a power which is superior to that which is natural in it. We call those
persons, (...), who are acted by an unclean Spirit; as when any person is made
to speak a Language which he never understood, we use to say, such a person is
inspired, acted, and carried out by a power superior to his own. And so that
Prayer which can do so much with God; The effectual, fervent prayer of the
Righteous, it properly signifies such a Prayer which is full of the Holy
Ghost, which is inspired into man, or whereunto a man is carried out, and
thrust forward by a Divine Power, greater than his own. So that these things
considered, it is a clear case, that the true sense and meaning of the place is
only this, That the Spirit of God relieveth our infirmities in Prayer; that
when as we know not how to pray as we ought, and when the flesh sometimes
comes in, and directs, and leads into such a method of Prayer which we
ought not; the Spirit now interposing, and directing, and leading us to such a
method and way, that now we pray according to the mind and will of God.

Now concerning the business it self, viz. That the Holy Ghost is God, truly
God. In this Doctrine, and in the Arguments, by which it is proved, there is
spirit and life, there is as it were great strength which comes forth from it,
which bears upon the Judgments and Consciences of men; It rules like a King
upon his Throne: Whereas those other Doctrines, viz. that deny the Spirit, and
so likewise Christ to be God, are but of a dull and flat import, there is no
manner of spiritual power and vigor in them. It may possibly be the sense of
some, that the time wherein we have been arguing of this great Controversy
might have been better spent in arguing other things; they suppose that these
kind of notions are not so affecting unto the hearts of men, neither do they
tend unto the establishing of them, nor are so proper for the building of men
up in their most holy Faith, nor so powerful to excite unto Action. But the
truth is (my Brethren) though such discourses as these, and the laying out of
such things for substance as these are, though they do not so much stir the
heart as some other subjects may and might have done, yet nevertheless these
have somewhat which will make you unmovable in the ways of Christ. And if this
be but duly cast up by you, you will find it every way as profitable unto you,
it will amount to every whit as great a sum of comfort and of peace, as those
Sermons whose property is to quicken and work upon men at present.

For what will it avail you, if you should be carried up into the Heavens one
day by a Sermon full of affection, and another day a deceiver comes and lays
a stumbling block in the way, and should make you call in question, and drive
you quite off from these great Truths of the Godhead of Christ, and of the Holy
Ghost? I am very confident, that few of you that have heard me in this question
but know, that there are many young men that are able to puzle you, and to put
you to such a stand in these great Principles of Religion, that you would not
otherwise be able to vindicate your selves, nor your credit, nor deliver your
Judgments from their snares and entanglements.

And whereas it is objected and supposed by some, viz. That from time to time
the first rudiments only of Religion should still be discussed in your hearing;
do but consider this one place, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3. Therefore leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, the Doctrine of Baptisms, etc. And this
will we do if God permit (What is that?) Go on to perfection: That is, carry on
your Judgments to the most mysterious things of God. But mark now upon what
ground it is, that he resolves upon this, that this he would do, and desires
them to go along with him: For (says he) it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened, etc. How does this Motive hang upon this Exhortation or
Admonition? Doubtless thus, that when Christians shall come to this pass, that
this shall be the temper, and state, and present frame of their hearts, that
they care to go no further, nor to understand no more in the Mystery of their
Profession; this is a certain (or at least a dangerous) sign that they are in a
condition near to that of falling away, and relapsing from those very
principles and foundations themselves, which they had embraced. And if you will
but consider how it is in the course of nature, you shall observe that it is
the nature of every Creature to advance and go on still, to move and to wax:
But whenever this Creature comes to a stand, and goes no further, evermore
the next motion is to relapse. The Sun in the Firmament of Heaven, when he
comes to his Meridian, and can rise no higher, begins immediately to decline
toward his setting. The Waters wax, and flow, and increase; but ever when it
is standing water, then is the reflux in a short time, it alters its course
backwards from whence it came. Just thus is it in this great and important
business of your Souls, and of your Eternal Peace; it is well with you so long
as you are growing and gathering, so long you are in a safe condition, and out
of danger of falling away: But when you come once to such a pass that you
desire to rise no higher, it is a thousand to one but that the next news, that
will be heard, will be that you will begin to decline and lose ground, and to
fall back again into your former ignorance, and unto the love of the World, and
something which is of an utter inconsistency with your Salvation.

CHAP. IX. The Second Question propounded, namely, How, or by what means a
Believer, or any other Person, may be filled with the Spirit of God. Some
difficulties removed, with one direction propounded, and largely discoursed,
whereby men and women may understand the intent of the Exhortation, and what it
is that is required of them when they are commanded to be filled with the
Spirit. Wherein also the Grace of God, and the free working of his Spirit is
clearly vindicated and asserted.
HAving formerly finished the Demonstration and proof of the truth of the
Doctrine, for the clearer understanding it,

First, Who, or what kind, or manner of Spirit it is of whom both the Text and
Doctrine speaks, and particularly, whether a finite and created Spirit, or an
infinite and uncreated Spirit, God himself?

We have stood somewhat the longer upon the debate and arguing of this
Question, partly, because of the great weight and importance of the truth,
lying either on the one hand of it, or on the other; partly also, because there
is a Spirit lately, after a long banishmen, and silence, come forth again into
the World, and is now at work amongst us, which opposes with might and main
that part of this Question where the truth heth (as I trust we have made
manifests) and denies the Spirit, the Holy Spirit (so much spoken of in the
Scriptures) to be God. The debate of this Question we have already finished.
Another of the three Questions was, How, or what course a Christian, or any
other Person, Man, or Woman, may, and ought to take to be filled with the
Spirit? i.e. How, or after what manner the Exhortation imposed in the Text is
to be obeyed or put in execution?

The third (and last) Question was, How a man or woman may either come to
discern and know themselves, or how others may come to the like knowledge of
them, whether they be filled with the Spirit, I mean, the Spirit of God, or
some other Spirit of another nature, and contrary to it? I suppose much light
will be given by the examination of the truth in the Former of the two
Questions for the decision of the Latter, so that we may be somewhat the
briefer here.

To begin then with the former of these Questions,

What it is to be filled with the Spirit, has been formerly declared in the
opening of the Doctrine; notwithstanding I conceive it is necessary for the
resolution of the Question in hand, that we briefly remind you of what we
delivered in that kind; we signified unto you, that to be filled with the
Spirit, does not note and import an absolute and precise fullness; that is a
having of the Spirit in such a precise fullness and height that there is no
capacity left of having more of him. No: but as in Scripture Phrase a Vessel is
said to be full when there is a good and sufficient and competent proportion in
it; and so in ordinary discourse we say, a Cup is full of drink, not when it is
full to the brim, but if there be a good quantity and proportion in it; just so
a fullness with the Spirit does not suppose or imply such a uniform kind of
fullness, as if no man could be said to be full of the Spirit, but only he that
is fullest of all: But if any person be acted by the Spirit, or does quit
himself like unto a man; he in whom the Spirit has any considerable power of
command may be truly said to be filled with the Spirit; as David had many
Worthies in his Army, and yet they did not reach or attain unto the three
first, though they were worthy in their way; so there may be many Christians,
of several sizes and degrees, who yet may be said to be filled with the Spirit
of God: So that in propriety of Phrase it signifies to have an actuous,
vigorous, and operative presence of the Holy Ghost in you, to enjoy his grace,
love, and favor upon such terms, as to receive from him, and from the glory of
his power, ever and anon, upon all occasions, excellent quicknings,
incitements, impulses, enlargements, strengthnings of heart and soul unto every
worthy way, and every good work; to have all contrary workings, motions, and
risings of the flesh borne down with a strong hand, and swallowed up in
victory, so that a man or woman shall find no great, no considerable opposition
or turmoile (as formerly) from any weakness or corruption within him in his way
of well-doing, but only such which he shall be enabled, and this at a very good
rate to overcome. I say, when this is found to be the case and condition of any
Christian, it is a sign of such a presence or fullness of the Spirit of God. I
here describe unto you only that kind of filling with the Spirit, which is the
duty of all Christians (as of other persons also in their way) to mind, look
after, and be industriously careful to obtain, and which only (I conceive) is
intended by the Apostle in the Text. For I do not conceive that he does
admonish and exhort the Ephesians to be filled with the Spirit; as if his
meaning should be, that he would have them be filled with such a kind of
filling, by which some were enabled to work miracles, or reveal things secret
and unrevealed in the Scriptures, being yet future and to come. Although I can
easily believe, that even such a filling with the Spirit as this (at least to a
considerable degree) was within the reach of Christians in the Apostles days;
yea, and that the Apostle did exhort the Corinthians (1 Cor. 12.31.) to seek
after some such kind of filling as this in these words, but covet earnestly
after the best gifts. Doubtless he would not have had them to lay out
themselves with any desire after these extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as
speaking with Tongues, and Prophesying, but that there was a means for the
attaining of them. But that filling with the Spirit which he commends to the
Ephesians by way of duty in the words before us, is only, or at least
principally, such a filling as we have both formerly, and even now described
unto you, which respects the effectual stirring up, and strengthening of the
hearts and souls of men unto ways and works of righteousness, and these of the
worthiest and most excellent kind and strain. And yet it is not unlike but
that, if men and women should quit themselves worthily, and with faithfulness
in this Race; I mean, in their endeavors to be filled with the Spirit in that
kind or sense we speak of, there would be cast in unto them, by way of heaped
measure, somewhat of that kind of filling also; they should have a kind of
first fruits of those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit also, as of healing of
the sick, declaring things to come, etc. I could give an account of my
apprehension in this kind, and this in more particulars than one, were it not
for fear of lengthening out this Discourse in hand beyond what you are willing
to bear.

Notwithstanding, i.e. into his heart and soul, such a rich or glorious
presence of the Spirit as that wherein our being filled with him consists? Or
whether in this case the Spirit may not be conceived to be obnoxious unto, or
in the power of man? I am the rather desirous to remove this stumbling block
out of the way, before we go forward to give reply to the principal Question
propounded; because I conceive it must needs be an encumbrance upon the mind
and spirit of a man, and so an hindrance unto him from attending cheerfully to
any thing given by way of satisfaction touching the manner and means of
obtaining a thing, when the thought of his heart is, that the thing is
impossible to be obtained. Therefore, as to the Question propounded about this,
how such a thing can be, or is likely to be, that the Holy Ghost, and much more
a fullness with the Holy Ghost should be obtained by the endeavors of men? I
reply,

First, That he is not to be obtained by the endeavors of men upon any such
terms, as if men were stronger than he, or could compel, or necessitate him by
any force or strength (properly so called) to turn in unto them, or the like;
but this (I suppose) is the thought of no man's heart, Are we stronger than he
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.22.) therefore certainly it is not to be obtained
upon any such terms.

Secondly, Neither is the Holy Ghost, nor a fullness with him to be obtained by
the endeavors of men, upon any such terms, or in any such consideration, as if
there were any thing of any worth, goodness, or the like in the endeavors of
men, in one kind or other, which might in a way of merit challenge the gift of
the Holy Ghost from God, much less such a measure of the Spirit, as the being
filled with him imports; No: the obtaining of the gift of the Holy Ghost upon
such terms as these, is like the redeeming of the Life or Soul of a man's
Brother from the Grave, Psalm. 49.7. which (as the Prophet says) must cease for
ever; and such a thought of heart in any man is not much better than that of
Simon Magus, when (as Peter charge him) he thought the gift of the Holy Ghost
might be purchased with money. Therefore there is no such thing as this any
ways implied in the Doctrine in hand.

Thirdly, Neither is the Holy Ghost, or any fullness with him to be obtained by
any endeavors of men, which originally spring from themselves, or whereof they
are the Authors: Not (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.5.) that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing (or to reason any thing, as the word signifies,
meaning, in the Ministry of the Gospel) as of our selves, i. e. as originally,
or radically of our selves. He does not deny, but plainly supposes and
grants, that in a sense, and in some consideration we are sufficient of our
selves, [ viz. by virtue of those abilities which are properly our own, being
given us by God] to reason or think, after such a manner as he speaks of:
Only he denies, that in such a sense or consideration as this, we have any
sufficiency in this kind, viz. As if we our selves were the Authors of that
sufficiency that is in us, either by way of nature, or of any meritorious
procurement; because (as he immediately adds) our sufficiency is of God;
namely, originally, fundamentally, and radically; not only by way of Creation,
as he that raises or works it in us; but also, as he that works it
graciously, or freely, without any meritorious engagement laid upon him by us
to work it in us, or give it unto us. For that (in Scripture Phrase) is said
properly, and precisely to be of God, not simply which he acts, or works,
but that which he acts or works freely without any either meritorious or
demeritorious engagement laid upon him by the Creature. As for example, in case
either Adam, or Abraham, or any other person, had continued in all things that
are written in the Law to do them; I mean, had perfectly fulfilled the Law, God
would have justified them, or declared them righteous upon it, yet had not this
their justification (in strictness or propriety of Scripture Phrase) been of
God, but of themselves, though he had justified them; because they had wrought
for it, and God in strictness and rigor of justice could not have denied it
them. And so that of our Apostle, concerning Abraham, is (I conceive) to be
understood, Romans 4.2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof
to glory, (...), It should not be translated, but not before God (as we have
it) but thus rather, he has whereof to glory, but not concerning God,
concerning any grace or favor received from God in his Justification. If his
Justification had been by works, it had not been from God, but from himself:
Upon the account of that Principle, which we now plead, the condemnation and
destruction of wicked and impenitent men, though the execution be done by God,
yet in emphaticalness of Scripture Phrase, it is said to be procured from
themselves, and is disowned by God, viz. because there is a demeritorious
engagement laid upon God by the Creature to inflict it, Hos. 13.9. O Israel,
thou have destroyed thy self: So that neither in this respect or sense is it a
truth, that the Holy Ghost, or a being filled with him is procured by the
endeavors of men, in a meritorious way, or as if any thing that men can do did
any ways oblige God, in way of justice, to fill any man with the Spirit.
Therefore,

Fourthly, When we teach and affirm, that men may take a course, or use means
to be filled with the Spirit, we do not make the Spirit obnoxious unto men, or
unto their endeavors; but unto his own most gracious and free promise, unto
his infinite goodness unto poor Creatures, only lead and guided by his infinite
wisdom. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name, Psalm. 138.2. that is,
he had subjected all his Attributes unto his Promise, and unto the Word that is
gone out of his mouth, so that they shall serve the World, and bless the Sons
and daughters of men, according to what he has declared in his Word.

So that the reason why any man, by taking such or such a course, which we
speak of is little other than Sacramental. Now such causes which work and
contribute toward their effects Sacramentally only, are in respect of that
which is litteral, or natural in them, the poorest and lowest of all causes
being of that kind of causes, which Logicians call Causa sine qua non; the
cause without which the effect is not, cannot be produced, which because it
contributeth little or nothing at all to the effect, unless it be its bare
presence, therefore they call it Causa fatua, the foolish cause, or the fools
cause; I suppose for this reason, because none but weak and simple Persons will
insist upon this kind of cause, in reasoning about effects, and the Causes and
Reasons of them, viz. if a Question were moved, Why such a man runs so swiftly?
He that should answer, Because his head stands on his shoulders, or because his
heart is in his body, or the like, should show himself very weak; because
though these be causes Sine quibus non, such causes, as without which the
effect of running would not, or could not be performed, A man could not run
unless his head stood on his shoulders; yet his head standing on his shoulders,
contributes nothing, unless it be in a very remote and inconsiderable manner
toward it; and besides takes place in many, in whom no such effect as
swiftness of running is to be found. If a man should ask the reason why the
Waters of the red Sea were divided when time was, and stood upon heaps like a
Wall, on the right hand, and on the left hand of the Children of Israel, as
they passed through? He that shall say, this was the reason or cause of it,
Moses smote these waters with the Rod in his hand, should quit himself very
weakly in so saying; though it be probable, that without this, without Moses
his so smiting them they would not have been so divided. There is the like
consideration of the falling down of the Walls of Jericho upon the Israelites
compassing them about seven days, and blowing with Trumpets made of Rams
horns; of Naaman's cleansing from his Leprosy by washing seven times in
Jordan. This is an Essential or distinguishing property or Character of
Sacramental causes; that though there be very little, or nothing in them (I
mean, in that which is litteral, natural, and external in them) any ways apt
or likely to produce their effects, as there is in natural causes to produce
theirs; yet notwithstanding they produce their effects most vigorously, most
powerfully, and with an high hand. The reason is, because the power of God is
pleased to interpose, and mingle it self with these more constantly, and with a
higher advance (for the most part) than with natural causes. The reason of this
good pleasure of his (probably) may be, not because Sacraments, or Sacramental
causes are more appropriate and peculiar Institutions or Ordinances of his than
Nature, or natural Causes are; But because they are weak, and of no strength in
themselves to do that which they have to do. Upon this account, as he has
taught men by the light of Nature, in ordering the habit of their bodies, Upon
their uncomely parts to put more comeliness; according to that of the Apostle,
2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels that the power might [
i.e. might clearly appear to] be of God, and not of us: So because Sacraments
and Sacramental Causes are in themselves weak; and without honor (in respect
of what Natural Causes have) therefore God honors them so much the more
abundantly with his strength and presence in them. Sed hoc obiter. Now to draw
the substance of this Discourse close to the business in hand, when we teach
that men by hearkening unto the Counsel of God, and doing that which he has
commanded, in order to the obtaining of such a blessedness as a being filled
with his Spirit, may obtain it, we neither make the Spirit obnoxious unto men,
but unto himself, and unto his own good pleasure; Nor do we attribute any thing
more unto those Actions or Endeavors of men, by which they obtain a being
filled with him, than a kind of Sacramental Efficacy, and this depending only
upon the gracious will and good pleasure of God; God having instituted such and
such means in order to this blessed end, upon occasion hereof he stands
engaged to his truth and faithfulness in giving out his abundance of Grace.

Fifthly (and lastly) When we do affirm, that the Spirit (and so a fullness with
him) is attainable by men in the use of means; as we do exclude all things by
way of merit, and likewise all such endeavors in this kind which are
originally in men themselves: So we do suppose, that without the Spirit, that
is, without a being prevented, and without some measure of the Spirit already
given, no man is able to put forth his hand unto any of those works or actions,
whereby this same filling with the Spirit is to be obtained. So that if we
search the spring of these actions and ways of men, whereby we affirm that the
Spirit may be attained, we do not find the Root in man, but in something that
is Extrinsical. For though it be in a man, yet is it not of the heart and soul
of a man, co-substantial with it; but the root of these actions, by which men
are capable of filling themselves with the Spirit of God, is not in themselves,
nor in their nature, but it is in an External Agent, who is God, or rather
indeed the Spirit of God himself; as we shall show you in the traversing of
this great business. For it is likely we shall have occasion to dive into that
Question, Whether all the men and women in the World are not prevented
according to the general course of the Providence of God in governing of the
World, and setting forth men and women upon the Theater of the Earth? Whether
they be not all prevented without asking, or without any means used, with so
much of the Spirit of God, and with such a presence of his, as that thereby
they are enabled to have more of him, and to be filled more with him?

Having thus with as much brevity and plainness, of God we were able to do,
removed that stumbling stone (as we called it) out of the way: A conceit
incident (as we conceived) unto some, that there is no possibility for men or
women to be filled with the Spirit of God by any course they can take, by any
means they can use; We proceed now to enquire into the Scriptures, what course
it is that men ought to take to possess themselves of such a blessedness, as a
being filled with the Spirit of God imports: yea, and which they must take if
ever they desire to be made great in the sight of God or men by being filled
with the Spirit of God.

The first thing to be done by us, in order to a being filled with the Spirit
(it being supposed we are clear and thoroughly satisfied about the possibility
of the thing; for otherwise this Cornerstone were to be laid for the building)
but this (I say) supposed, the first thing to be done, in direct order to a
being filled with the Spirit, is, (in the Apostle's words in a like case, 1
Cor. 12.31.) (...) i. e. zealously to cover or desire it, to have a man's soul
break within him (as David's expression is) with a longing desire after it,
(...), we translate, the best gifts [the better gifts says the Original;] the
word (...), translated, covet earnestly, signifies, to desire with a zeal or
emulation, i. e. to desire after such a manner, or upon such terms, that we
resolve that nothing shall interpose (as far as we are able to prevent and
hinder it) between our desire and the thing desired, viz. so as to bereave our
desires of their object, or cause them to cease from it. Now evident it is,
that the Apostle (in the place now cited) prescribes this same (...), This
earnest or zealous coveting after the better gifts, in order to the obtaining
of them at the hand of God; otherwise, To what end or purpose should he enjoin
such a thing? It is not to be imagined that he should exhort them, zealously to
covet such things which were not possible for them to obtain and enjoy. No: nor
yet such things the enjoyment whereof were not to be obtained or procured by
such their earnest coveting. Now if this earnest or zealous coveting of those
gifts of the Spirit, which the Apostle there means (and of which he had
particularly spoken immediately before) were a means, either in whole, or in
part to attain them; doubtless the same course, the like zealous coveting, is a
proper means also, though not an adequate or complete means for the obtaining
of such a fullness of the Spirit of which we speak. For if God be inclined to
hearken unto, to accommodate the earnest desires of men, when they are lifted
up unto such objects, such things that are of a perishing nature, be they never
so well used or managed (for of this kind were those gifts of the Spirit, of
which the Apostle speaks in the place mentioned, as himself also expressly
testifies and confesses, 1 Cor. 13.8.) And consequently are of affinity with
the outward perishable things of this World, as Silver, Gold, Meats, Drinks,
etc. if then (I say) God were so far indulgent, or respectful to the zealous
desires of men after the transient gifts of the Spirit, such whereof Persons
who did not truly love God were capable, that he was very propense to gratify
them; much more have we reason to judge that he will look toward such desires
of men, especially, if they be raised to any fervency, or height, when they are
bent upon such a filling with the Spirit that will commend them in his sight,
and which being maintained and persevered in, will make them great in the
Kingdom of Heaven for ever. Our Savior, speaking of things of a transient
nature, in reference to men's seeking of things that are permanent and enduring,
expressly informs the world, that if men shall be diligent in seeking these
latter, those other shall collaterally, and (as it were) on the by, be cast
upon them, Mat. 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of God, etc. Indeed, men and women
generally go so to work, as if the tenor of our Saviors Counsel ran counter,
and was quite contrary to what now it is. That in case men would seek in the
first place the things of this World, and the conveniences thereof, what they
should eat, or what they should drink, or wherewith they should be clothed,
that then all things appertaining to the Kingdom of God should be cast in unto
them. For there is an high seeking after these things (almost) on every hand;
as if God were so far from casting them in unto men, upon the account our
Savior speaks of, that men must deny themselves in the things of God, and of
their eternal peace to lay out themselves whole and entire with all their
might, and all their strength for the wresting of them out of his hand. But
whatsoever men think or do in this kind, the word of the faithful Witness of
Heaven remains firm and steadfast; nor has God made the least tittle or iota
of any promise or overture of casting in spiritual things unto men upon their
desires or endeavors after outward things, but ever and anon labors to reduce
men to sobriety and moderation in both these, that so they may be found in a
better capacity to receive spiritual things from him.

If you ask me,

To this I reply, first Negatively, the reason is not precisely because the
former desires are commanded by him (I mean, zealous desires after spiritual
things;) and the latter not commanded, but forbidden. The commanding of the
former by God in conjunction, with a prohibition of the latter is sufficient
proof that he does indeed accept the one, and not the other, but it is not the
reason, at least not the Adequate, nor the principal reason why he does so
accept them. A man may do that which is commanded by God, and yet have little
thank for his labor for doing it, viz. when he knows not that it is
commanded by him. A stumbling (as it were) at unawares upon the Letter of
commands, is of no great acceptance with God, which yet it would and must be,
if it were simply the Command of God, that rendered an Act, done according to
the tenor of the Letter of it, acceptable unto him. Again, some things
commanded by God, may accidentally fall in with men's carnal ends and desires;
and upon such an account as this they may do them: As Children that have rich
Parents, from whom they expect great matters at their death, or otherwise, in
the mean time to accommodate their hopes and expectations in this kind, they
may honor and obey them; many the like cases might be readily put. But now,
that which Children do in such cases, though it be commanded (at least in the
Letter) by God, yet this renders it of a very slender acceptance with him.
Therefore most certain it is, that the primary reason (at least) why any man's
doing the Command of God is accepted with him is not this: because he does that
which God has commanded; for then in what case soever men should do that which
God has commanded there would be acceptance, which we have showed is not true.
Therefore,

Secondly, in the Affirmative, the true reason (or reasons, for they are rather
two than one) why men's zealous desires after spiritual things, and especially
after a being filled with the Spirit are of such a high and sovereign
acceptance with God, as has been signified; whereas the like zealous desires
in them, after things appertaining to this life are offensive unto him, are
these:

First, Because they willingly and knowingly submit unto his Commands, he
commands and requires of men to be zealously affected toward spiritual
things, whereas he prohibiteth the like toward earthly things. And

Secondly, Because it is reasonable for men to be zealously bent for the
obtaining of the former, as being far more profitable and advantageous unto
them; whereas the like zeal toward the latter is very irrational, has no
savor of true or sound reason in it; as being (indeed) clearly repugnant to
their supreme good and real benefit. For this is a true Rule in general, that
God is well pleased with all such Counsels, Actions, and ways of men, which
are in their nature, and according to a true estimate and judgment of them,
profitable and advantageous: and he is the more and better pleased with the
Counsels, Actions, and ways of men, the richer and fuller connection they have
with their peace and happiness. So that when men do upon a good account,
willingly, knowingly, and deliberately subject themselves unto his will and
pleasure, and do the things which he commands, he is well pleased with what
they do: but the original and grand reason why he is so well pleased with what
they do in this case, is not because they do what he has commanded, but
because in doing what he has commanded, they follow the clear ducture and
guidance of the light of Reason, Judgment, and Understanding, which he has
planted in them to direct them to the things of their peace. For,

First, It is most rational to do that which God commands men, whereas it is
contrary to reason, and that in the highest degree, to do that which he
prohibits.

Secondly, Because the things themselves which God commands, as they are in
themselves, and in their own nature suited unto the heart of God; so likewise is
it most agreeable unto reason that men should do them, as being most commodious
for themselves. And this is the true reason why God accepts men hereupon, it
being most agreeable to the highest Principles of Reason in the World, that the
Creature should be subject unto God. When men shall obey him, he is not so much
delighted with them simply because they do obey him, as because they quit
themselves likemen of Wisdom and sound Understanding therein, and steer a
course to advance their own happiness; as is evident from hence, because he is
willing and content, that if men could find out a better God than he, a God
from whom they might tolerably expect better and greater things than they have
ground upon their obedience to expect from him; he is willing and content (I
say) upon such terms, to disoblige them from himself, and where ever they can
find him, to give them leave to turn Proselyte to such a God, though he should
lose their service thereby. This is evident from that saying of his great
Prophet Elijah, 1 Kings 18.21. How long halt you between two? etc. As if he had
said, never destroy your selves, do not sometime go to the true God and worship
him, and otherwhile unto Baal; for (says he) if Baal be-he, if you can
satisfy your selves, or come at any substantial reason to prove, that Baal is
he that can bless you, and make you great, and save you, and make you Kings and
Princes for ever; If Baal be-he, then serve him. As if he should say, God does
not desire the service, nor the application of his Creature to him in any way
of obedience or service, but only in reference to the Creatures good; and he
does desire it on such terms, that if they knew better to bestead themselves,
or to find out a God of more grace and power, they have free leave from heaven
to follow him.

And besides, the main end why God has given Precepts and Laws unto men,
himself has declared to be, not that he might be served simply, or be obeyed
by them; but rather indeed that he might serve them, or (as himself expresses
it) that he might do them good in their latter end, Dent. 8.16. and 6.24. and
10.13. implying, that God cannot come at the Creature to make him such in
happiness and in glory, as his heart and soul desires, unless he be in a meet
capacity, having quitted himself like unto a man. And the reason, why God
making Oath unto Abraham for the confirmation of the great Promise which he had
given him, swear by himself, is said to be this, viz. That he had no greater to
swear by, Heb. 6.13. implying, that if there had been any God above him, any
that could have been a ground of greater assurance unto them, it had been given
them: In like manner it may be said, if there could be any way wherein the
Creature could speed better, that was like to be more beneficial unto it, he
would not have them hang their hope, confidence, and expectation upon himself,
but he would have transmitted them unto that God. Sed hac obiter.

In the mean time, by the light of this Discourse we clearly see, why God so
highly prizeth zealous covetings, and desires in men after spiritual things,
viz. because such covetings as these are most reasonable to be found in men,
and have an excellent connection with their supreme good and happiness. If this
be questioned or doubted, there is this reason near at hand (over and besides
the consideration of God's Commands) to make it evident, viz. that such
covetings and desires never fail to raise endeavors suitable unto themselves
for the obtaining of things so coveted and desired.

If you here say,

To this I reply, That the goodness, excellency, and desirableness of the thing
it self (I mean, your being filled with the Spirit) if you will but give ^a
narrow and intense beholding with the eyes of your minds and understandings,
and feed a while upon the beauty and glory of it; this will furnish you, will
raise in you these covetings and desires we prescribe in order to the obtaining
of it. And indeed it is a general Rule, that all objects whatsoever, whether
good or evil, will beget or raise affections in men, answerable to that degree,
either of good or evil, that is apprehended in them, if men will narrowly and
frequently mind and confider them. Yea, if men apprehend either more good, or
more evil in any thing than is really and in truth to be found in them, and
will feed upon such apprehensions, and often repeat and renew them, they will
soon love and hate them proportionably above that which they ought to do. For
this reason it is, that Solomon forbad men to look upon Wine when it is red,
and gives its color in the Cup (or glass) when it moves it self upright, [
i. e. when it springs or sparkles] Prove. 23.31. Look not on it when it is red,
etc. i.e. do not fix thine eye upon it, do not continue looking on it (for so
the word looking often imports) his meaning is not, that a man should not simply
see, or cast his eye upon it, as if there would be danger in such a case; for
then he could not tell when, or how to observe this Precept: but his meaning
is, if a man will fix his eye upon it, there is danger of being inflamed with
inordinate love unto it. So our Savior, Mat. 5.28. Whosoever shall look on a
woman to lust after her [ i. e. until he lusts after her, or after any such
manner that he comes to lust after her] has committed adultery with her in his
heart. Now this shows when, and how this lusting comes to be propagated in
the heart; if there be any loveliness in the Creature, this may draw our hearts
forth as it were of course unto such covetings. The reason why men and women
hate not sin with a more vehement, vigorous, and perfect hatred, than generally
they do, is partly because they do not frequently, and with intenseness of
mind, consider the abundance of evil that is in it, that violent and virulent
Antipathy or contrariety that is in it to their comfort and peace in many
kinds. For certain it is, that sin has enough in it to set all the World on
fire with enmity to it. Yea, as the Devil when he had sinned, had that in him,
and upon him, which being looked upon by God was sufficient to throw him down
from Heaven into the bottom of Hell: So likewise has sin, that in it which
being clearly seen, and diligently considered by men, is sufficient to cast it
down out of the heavens of men's love and desires into the deepest hell of their
hatred and indignation. So on the other hand, it is as true concerning
righteousness in general, (which Plato the Philosopher had a glimmering of.)
And as it is with Righteousness in general, so it is with and also concerning
that excellent piece or member of it, whereof we speak, (A being filled with
the Spirit.) This is such a Masterpeece of humane felicity, it has so much
worth, and goodness, and desirableness in it, that was it thoroughly known, and
frequently whetted upon the thoughts and minds of men and women, they need take
no further care how to come by such covetings after it, as those now prescribed
unto you as a means (in the first place) to obtain it: (unless happily it be to
satisfy themselves in this; that it is nothing but what is attainable: For if
(indeed) you shall look upon it as a thing absolutely out of your reach, your
souls will hardly put forth in coveting or desiring after it.) But this scruple
being removed, you would soon find your hearts full of those covetings and
desires; so full that they would not be long able to contain themselves, but
that they would break forth and utter themselves in such other ways and means
which they shall understand to be proper and likely to obtain it.

If you ask me, But what is there so excellent,

I reply first in the general, the desirableness of it is such, so exceeding
great, that neither the Tongue of men or Angels are sufficient to express it;
it is of kin to the peace of God, and partakes herewith in that property that
it passes all understanding: so that when we shall travel many dales, yea,
many years, with our minds and understandings, to search out and discover the
riches of it, we shall leave much hereof undiscovered and unknown. But more
particulary.

First, Such a filling with the Spirit as we speak of, will leave no place for
foolish and hurtful lusts in one kind or other, to play their parts within us,
which (as Peter says) 1 Pet. 2.11. Fight against the soul; that is, against
the peace, comfort, and prosperity of it. As upon the bringing in of the Ark
into the Tabernacle, the Tabernacle was filled with smoke, Exodus 40.34. And so
in the Dedication of the Temple the Priests could not enter, because of the
glory there, 1 Kings 8.10, 11. even so, when the soul, when the inner Temple of
the heart of a man or woman shall be filled with the Spirit of God, there will
be such a glory of holiness there, that there will be no standing or abode for
those base Companions, unclean, impure, carnal and sensual desires and
inclinations. No: but they will all be scattered, as the Mist is scattered
before the Sun when it arises in its might. These Companions (which have
haunted your souls and inner man hitherto) Pride, Envy, and Malice, and
inordinate love of the World, Pleasure, Ease, and all such kind of things as
these, they will be sensible of the glorious presence of this Spirit of God in
you, they will not be able to abide it: his presence will fright away all those
Aliens and strangers that are contrary to him.

It is true, the greatest filling with the Spirit, that flesh and blood is (at
l^ast ordinarily) capable of obtaining, will not wholly overwhelm, or drown the
flesh, as to extinguish the motions or stirrings of it in men. This is clear
from many Scriptures, and particularly from that of the Apostle, Gal. 5.17..
For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit. When by reason of the contrary
lustings between the Flesh and the Spirit, he says they cannot do the things
they would; he speaks not so much (indeed not at all) of the species, kind, or
substance of the Action, but of the spiritual and exact manner of performing
it. Yea, cannot do the things ye would; his meaning is not, that though they
were willing to pray, yet because of the lusting of the flesh they could not
pray; or though they were willing to hear the word, yet they could not hear:
but thus, ye cannot pray, ye cannot hear, or ye cannot give Alms as ye would;
that is, with as much Faith, with as much Fervency, with as much Freedom, and
enlargement of Heart and Soul as ye desire: The Flesh will be still
interrupting, and mingling it self with your actions; and in preciseness and
strictness of speech, that which a servant of God, or spiritual man properly
would do, is not simply to pray or simply to hear, or to give Alms, or the
like; But to do these, and all other services and actions after the best and
purest manner, without any reluctance, or gainsayingness, or interruption: so
that when men pray and do not pray thus, when they hear, and give Alms, and do
not both the one and the other upon such terms as these, they cannot properly
be said to do the things they would. For that kind of Prayer which they would
pray is one thing, and the prayer which they do make, or pray is another: the
Prayer which they would pray is such a prayer, which in all points answers
the holiness and perfection of the Commandment given by God in that behalf;
that Prayer which they do pray is a Prayer many ways defective, having many
infirmities cleaving unto it; so likewise the hearing, and the giving Alms,
etc. And in this sense it is most true, that the best of men and women cannot
do the things they would. And in this sense also the Apostle is to be
understood speaking of himself, Romans 7.18, 19. How to perform that which is
good I find not: And again, The good that I would I do not: How to perform that
which is good I find not, i. e. I cannot find any course, way, or means how I
may be enabled to perform that which is simply and perfectly good, that which
in all points answers the holiness and spiritualness of the Law of God, which
is the good that I would do; the object of my will and desire is not to do any
thing weakly and defectively, but all things after the most perfect manner; and
such things as these I find not, ( i.e. by all the care that I can take, nor by
all the diligence that I can use I cannot find) how to perform. By the way, the
Apostle saying unto the Galatians, So that ye cannot do the things that ye
would, is as a Sword passing through the soul of those who are called
perfectionists amongst us, casting down the Crown of their conceit of
perfection to the ground; unless they dally with the word, and by perfection
mean that which all understanding and sober Christians admit of, and hold as
well as themselves: such a perfection as sometimes passes in the Scriptures
under that name, and is ascribed unto the Saints, viz. A comparative
perfection, i. e. such an excellency, whether in faith, or knowledge, or
manners, or tenor of life and conversation, which is in persons termed
spiritual above what is found in those termed Babes in Christ, and carnal;
there is no man that understands any thing in the Scriptures, but
acknowledges thus much very attainable in this life: but if by perfection they
mean that which is strictly and properly such, viz. such a state wherein men
and women sin not, offend not at all, the Scripture has given express Sentence
against them, and their conceit of perfection over and over; saying in one
place, Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all. In another, Ye cannot do the
thing ye would. In a third, Who lives and sins not? In a fourth, Prove.
20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? (To omit
other places as full of enmity against the Doctrine of perfection as these) but
this only by the way. But

To the Point before us: when we affirm, woman for any unclean, worldly, or
sinful lusts, to stand and act their parts there; Our meaning is, that such
lusts as these will have no opportunity to magnify themselves there, to make
head, or gather strength, whereby to be much troublesome unto us: they will not
be able to conceive (as James speaks, Jam. 1.15.) Lust when it has conceived
brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death. As you
have some Plants and Trees that with much a do will grow and live for a while
in the Earth, or Soil, or Air, but will not thrive, or flourish, or bear fruit
according to their kind, but may be resembled to the Widow the Apostle speaks
of, living in pleasure, They are dead even whilst they live: So likewise when
ye are filled with the Spirit, though the flesh will be flesh still, and be
ever and anon attempting, and putting forth, yet there will be no great heart
or strength in these attempts, they will be but faint and weak, as despairing
of any gratification or fulfilling: this is evident from the Scriptures, and
particularly from that Gal. 5. from whence we even now heard, that by reason of
the contrary lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit men cannot do the things
they would (in the sense lately opened) by reason of the interruption and
opposition of the Flesh to the Spirit; yet says the Apostle in the next
preceding verse, Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; or as the original has it somewhat more
emphatically, ye shall at no hand, or in no wise fulfill the lusts of the Flesh,
(...), (with a double negation.) Now to walk in the Spirit, or by the Spirit is
the same thing which the Apostle calls (elsewhere) a being led by the Spirit,
i. e. an uniform subjecting himself to the motions and holy suggestions or
overtures of the Spirit of God in him. And to walk in the Spirit, or to be led
by the Spirit supposes some degree (at least) of being filled with the Spirit;
because if the Spirit do not bear and beat somewhat strong in the Souls and
Consciences of men, they will not be led uniformly by him: because where he (I
mean the Spirit) does not bear to some considerable degree of strength, the
Flesh will overbear his motions: even as a strong Tide or stream will carry a
Ship down against the Wind, unless it blow a stiff Gale. But if men be filled
with the Spirit, so that the exhibitings and quicknings thereof be pregnant and
lively, and the impulses and bearings thereof upon the Conscience and Soul be
stiff, and strong, and with power, the inclinations, motions, and lustings of
the Flesh will be overborne and stifled: even as a Vessel upon the water,
meeting a stout Ship running before a strong gale of wind, is easily overset
and run under water by her. If you be full of the Spirit, these lusts
themselves will fly from you, and there will be no abiding for them in you;
they will take no pleasure at all in such a soul, neither will such a Soul find
much to do with them; there will be an agreement on both Parties to divide and
separate; they are contrary one unto another, and they cannot dwell together,
because they are not agreed, and in this case the strong must keep possession,
and the weaker must give place. And he that is in you (says John, speaking of
the Spirit of God) is greater than he that is against you. Now the World and
the things of it are the Devils black Retinue and Regiment that attend upon
him, that promote the Affairs of his Kingdom; and when the case is come to
this, that the Soul must be possessed, and inhabited by one Spirit, either by him
that is greater, or him that is lesser, and his Retinue; in this case, if you
bring in the Spirit of God into your Soul, you shall by one and the same Act,
as it were, expel and drive out all that Retinue: Even as Christ coming into
the Temple drove out those that bought and sold, and the Money Changers; just
thus will be the coming of the Spirit of God in Power, and in Glory in your
Souls; he will chase away from before his face all that rabble of evil doers,
your unclean lusts and desires, your foolish, froward, and proud dispositions
and distempers of Soul. Now consider a little of how great and sacred a
consequence such a thing as this is, to have the Temples of your hearts, of
your inner man, thus purged and rid of such Polluters and Prophaners of their
dignity, excellency, and peace. My Brethren, Men and women live, as it were, by
the fulfilling and satisfying of their lusts and unclean desires, they are
afraid that they should not make a life of their continuance in the World, and
being in the body, unless they take pleasure in such things, and in such ways;
unless they satisfy such and such desires: whereas (alas) were they but free
from the inordinacy of their desires, their satisfying and gratifications would
be rather matter of burden, trouble, and cumber to them than any otherwise. As
persons that have the itch, it is a pleasure to them to scratch, but when the
distemper in the skin is taken away, no man complains that he wants his
former pleasure of scratching: Even so whilst men and women are laden with
Lusts, Pride, Covetousness, Uncleaness, and given to pleasure, it is little
less than a death to them to be kept from the fulfilling and gratifying these
lusts and distempers; but if these lusts were but healed and separated, as they
may be (for they are not of the Essence of their souls) they are no part of
their Nature or Being; no, they are but strangers and aliens unto their souls;
If these, I say, were but separated from them, if they were but mortified and
gone, these kind of ways, whereby they were to be gratified, would be
altogether unsatisfying unto them, and would have no tafte or relish at all:
The truth is, they would not only find no relish, nor any savor in them, but
they would be troublesome, they would be matter of shame and confusion unto
them. And therefore it must needs be conceived as a matter of excellent, high,
and blessed concernment unto men and women, to be invested with such a heavenly
privilege as this is, to have the inner man healed of all that unclean Retinue
of Lusts and sinful distempers, to have these removed and thrown out of the
Soul. There is a great deal more to be said to make these things very desirable
in your eyes, but we may have occasion to speak of this Point in the Progress
of this Discourse.

Thus then you see, that where men are filled with the Spirit of God, the lusts
of the flesh are like to have but small trading; they are there but as if they
were not; they have no joy in such souls, nor these souls much sorrow and
trouble with them: and the serious consideration of this we teach to be a very
effectual means to raise such Covetings, such earnest Desires, such Longings
and Breathings of heart after it as have been mentioned. So great and excellent
is that heavenly accommodation of being delivered from the troublesome and
dangerous impotunity of fleshly and worldly lusts by being filled with the
Spirit.

Secondly, viz. That a man hereby will become little sensible of impressions of
Sorrow, Grief, and Trouble from the World, and the cross workings and dealings
of things unto him there: His soul, by means of being filled with the Spirit,
will be able to dwell amongst Lions (even as Daniel did) without fear or danger
of being destroyed and devoured with them: Those Afflictions, Pressures, and
Trials, which will grind the faces and break the bones of other men, will not
create any Grief, Pain, or Trouble unto him. For to be filled with the Spirit
is a kind of spiritual drunkenness (as the Apostle implies in the Text) and
indeed has effects in its kind, in a spiritual way, answerable unto those of
drunkenness, literally, and proprerly so called; such as those mentioned by
Solomon, Prove. 23.34, 35. Thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of
the Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast. They have stricken me
shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not:
Meaning, that in fits of Drunkenness men are not sensible, either of any
danger, though never so imminent and threatening, whereunto they are exposed,
nor of pain or smart by blows or wounds given them; In like manner, when men or
women are filled with the Spirit of God, and so are in an intimous, serious,
and affectionate converse with those glorious overtures of Comfort, Peace, and
Joy, and with those strong and high impulses and bearings upon their hearts and
spirits unto ways and actions that are truly honorable and excellent, and
which take hold of Eternal Life, which must be the portion of those that are
filled with the Spirit; they are not so much sensible of, nor liable to much
sorrow or trouble from the sad or hard occurrences of the World. For when the
strength of the heart, and mind, and soul of a man are drunk up with matters of
a more sublime and glorious nature and consequence, there is nothing left of
him wherewith to become much capable or sensible of other things; especially of
those, that are but of an inferior concernment unto him. For that Principle in
man, which renders him sensible or apprehensive of any thing relating unto him,
whether on the right hand or on the left, whether good or evil, is the native
vigor of his mind and understanding. Now then, if this be entirely or intensly
drawn forth, busied, and taken up with minding and considering things of one
kind, (especially such whereon the mind is much set and delighted with) a man
is as it were in a Trance, or half dead, in respect of things of another
nature; and though they be of a very troublesome and afflicting nature in
themselves, yet do they little affect such a man. As it was with our Savior,
Joh. 4.8, 31, 32, etc. His mind and soul being intensly bent, and set upon the
work he came about into the World, which he calls the doing of his Fathers
Will (meaning, his Preaching of the Gospel;) he was not sensible of his
corporal hunger or want of natural sustenance, under which he was: as appears
verse 8. and 31. compared. So the Apostle Paul being full of the Spirit, though
he was in sufferings abundantly; yea (I presume) one of the greatest sufferers
in the World for a long time together, yet the things that he suffered took
little hold of him; (I mean) they made very little breach upon his comfort, or
peace: he was upon the matter as well apaid in himself, even when the pains of
hell (as David speaks) i. e. fear, or apprehensions of Death or the Grave
compassed him about, as when the Sun of outward peace and prosperity shone with
the greatest brightness upon him. This might be made to appear from the many
passages in his own writings, as 2 Cor. 4.16. and 6.10.

Now how lovely, and above measure desirable a privilege is it, to have an
heart that cannot be pierced, that cannot be wounded by the sharpest Arrows
that can be drawn out of the Quiver of this World, I shall not need to teach or
inform you. I make no question, but that you have a very vigorous and lively
notion or impression of it within you; however something may be added to this
Point hereafter. So then you see another thing very considerable in a being
filled with the Spirit, the diligent working of which upon your hearts and
souls must needs make you covetous after it.

Thirdly, Your being filled with the Spirit, entrance in abundance into the
Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (as the Apostle Peter
speaks) 2 Pet. 1.11. And this in these three respects highly desirable.
First, In respect of an excellent measure and degree of righteousness and true
holiness. Secondly, In respect of a like measure or degree of inward and sound
peace. Thirdly (and lastly) in respect of that measure of joy also wherewith
the heart and soul must needs be filled thereby. The Apostle Paul (we know,
Romans 14.17.) places the Kingdom of God in these three: Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy, in [or through] the Holy Ghost. The Kingdom of God (says he) is not
meat and drink, but Righteousness, etc. By the Kingdom of God he means nothing
else, but the same thing, the same Kingdom which Peter calls the Everlasting
Kingdom, etc. Only Paul seems to speak as well of it in respect of the manner
and behavior, as of the Privileges and Happiness of the Subjects thereof: the
Apostle Peter either only or chiefly mentions it in respect of the latter. This
then is that we say, that in respect of both, as well in respect of that
heavenly deportment or behavior which is Universally used and practiced in
this Kingdom, expressed by the Apostle Paul in the word Righteousness, as in
respect of the Privileges and great Felicity signified in the other two words,
Joy, and Peace in the Holy Ghost: In respect, I say, of both, your being filled
with the Spirit will give you an entrance in abundance into this Kingdom, i. e.
will put you into such a state and condition, wherein you shall have a rich
taste, or (rather) plentiful first Fruits of the glory and blessedness of that
Kingdom. This entrance in abundance, which we speak of, into the Everlasting
Kingdom shall, by your being filled with the Spirit, be given unto you.

First, In respect of that Righteousness, or Excellency of Conversation,
whereby the Subjects of this Kingdom maintain themselves in the felicity and
enjoyment of it, and whereby they are discernable from other persons. For when,
and whilst the Spirit of God dwells richly and plentifully in you, he will
kindle and raise up strong and excellent Inclinations, Potent and Prince like
Resolutions, within you, unto ways and works of Righteousness and true
Holiness; Inclinations and Resolutions in this kind that will not be baffled,
or turned out of the way by every gust of Temptation; as the Purposes and
Resolutions of the same Denomination in the generality of Professors in whom
the Spirit dwells in a lower degree only are subject to be; but will hold on
their course in ways of Righteousness. As a good Ship running with all her
Sails displayed, before a stiff Gale of Wind, will cut through the waves and
troublesome workings of the Seas, taking no notice of them: Even so, when a man
is filled with the Spirit, he is, as it were, tied and bound hand and foot,
that he cannot lightly move or stir out of the ways which the Spirit it self
commends unto him; and seeks to guide his feet unto. As Paul being filled
with the Spirit, Acts 20.22. Behold (says he) I now go bound in the Spirit
unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there. I go bound
in the Spirit: That is, the Spirit of God has wrought such a mighty Desire,
and Resolution in me to go to Jerusalem, that my Mind and Conscience will not
serve me so much as to deliberate, or argue the case within me, whether I had
best to go, or no. As a man that is bound hand and foot, where and in what
posture you leave him, there you shall find him; especially, if his bands be
strong, and close drawn, and fast tied, they will keep him from motion. In like
manner, he that is filled with the Spirit is much in the same case or condition
spiritually; he cannot act or move, but only as the Spirit acts and moves
him. When the Apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost (as they were in the day
of Pentecost, Acts 2.4.) they could not speak what they pleased or listed: but
(says the Text) they began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance, they were bound in the Spirit from speaking, viz. from speaking
any thing but what the Spirit pleased. As Paul was not bound in the Spirit from
doing any thing, or going any where at all, but from going any whither but to
Jerusalem, which was the place the Spirit moved him to go unto: In like manner,
when men and women are filled with the Spirit (in the sense of the Text in
hand) they are inwardly bound and straightened from walking or moving in all other
ways, save only those wherein they are guided by himself, which are only ways
of Rigteousness and Holiness. Now then, to walk in ways of Righteousness, to
walk uniformly, constantly, and only in these ways (I mean, without any
scandalous or self-allowed deviation) this must needs be conceived to be an
entrance in abundance into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, in respect of the Righteousness of it. Now to be at this pass
that we shall not only walk in ways of Righteousness, but to do it without any
manner of regret; nay, without much noise, striving, or reluctance from our
hearts, or from our flesh within us. This is one of the first born of
Privileges; and, my Brethren, if there were nothing else in being filled with
the Spirit but this only, viz. that you shall be enabled hereby to walk after
an excellent rate, to keep the very Battlements of Heaven, to walk holily, and
humbly with your God by excellency of righteousness, and to shine in the beauty
of Holiness whilst you live, is a matter that would make it worthy your labor,
and of all that can be required of you to possess your souls with it.

Secondly, Abundance of Peace (says David, speaking of this Kingdom) Psalm.
72.7. As long as the Moon endures there shall be abundance of Peace, i. e.
there shall be no interruption, no breaches at all, greater or lesser, made
upon the tranquillity and peace of the Subjects of this Kingdom; according to
that Prophecy, Isa. 65.25. They shall not hurt nor destroy [ i. e none shall
hurt, neither men, nor any other Creature shall so much as hurt, or offer the
least disturbance unto any, much less shall they destroy] in all my holy
mountain (he speaks of that Mountain which shall fill the whole earth when the
time comes, Dan. 2.35.) This is that everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Now
that abundance of peace which David Prophesied should be enjoyed in this
Kingdom, comprehends as well, yea, and chiefly that inward peace which shall
be established, ratified, and confirmed between God and them, and enjoyed
accordingly by them, as also the external peace which they shall enjoy too. So
then when we undertake to say unto you, that if you shall be filled with the
Spirit, you shall have by this means an entrance in abundance into the
everlasting Kingdom of the Lord Christ, in respect of the peace hereof; our
meaning is, that you shall enjoy an excellent degree of heavenly and inward
tranquillity; you shall be delivered from those secret wringings, and gripings,
and gnawings of Conscience, for fear of the wrath that is to come, whereunto
they who neglect to steer this course we speak of, to be filled with the
Spirit, and whose enjoyments in this kind are but low, are ever and anon
subject unto; you shall not lie under any Jealousy of God, as if his heart and
soul were not perfect with you, or as if there were some Item given of
displeasure against you. The peace of God (as the Apostle says) passes all
understanding: that is, the worth and value, the riches of it amounts to more
in the true nature and estimate of it than any man's understanding is able to
sum or cast up, or to comprehend or conceive. A man's understanding can go a
great way, and what it can conceive is of a vast extension; yet, says he,
peace with God is such a thing, the richness of it is so unsearchable, that the
understanding of a man cannot value it; though it should strain it self, and
make a work of it, yet this peace of God cannot be conceived by it. Now, I say,
this peace of God shall be vested in your souls; and though this peace will not
(it may be) so reconcile the World unto you, but that you may have wars and
troubles from it; yet it will do that which will be (upon the matter)
equivalent hereunto; it will bring it so to pass with you, that (as Paul says,
2 Cor. 12.9, 10. you shall be able to rejoice in your infirmities, i. e. in
such things which you shall suffer from the World; and to do as James advises
Christians, To count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations, Jam.
1.2. Now wars and troubles upon these terms are every whit as good, as
desirable as peace it self; but we spoke more largely in the former particular.
But now that by being filled with the Spirit, your peace with God must needs
advance and become glorious, may be made to appear from these two
Considerations (both of them near at hand.) First, By this means, by being
filled with the Spirit, those things which are apt and likely to interrupt and
disturb your peace with God, yea, which only (according to ordinary
experience) are able to bring this inconveniency or misery upon you, will be
taken out of the way.

Secondly, Those things which are apt and proper to nourish, to add growth and
strength to your peace with God, will abundantly succeed in their place, and by
both these you shall have your peace with God in abundance. First (I say) by
your being filled with the Spirit, those things which are like to interrupt, or
make any breach upon your peace with God will be cut off; and taken out of the
way; this we know is sin, and unworthiness of Life and Conversation; There is
no peace says my God to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. and 48.22. And again, Your
iniquities have separated between you nnd your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you. When God says, There is no peace to the wicked: And again, That
men's Iniquities separate between him and them, he plainly enough implies, that
there is peace to all that are not wicked; and that there is nothing of a
separating and dividing nature between God and his Creature Man but Iniquity;
that nothing will cause God to hide his face from man but sin.

The reason hereof is plain, viz. because there is nothing that has any
contrariety to the nature of God, nothing that is provoking to him but Iniquity
only: All other things have a perfect sympathy and agreement with his nature,
as being made by him. Therefore there is nothing in the World that can provoke
God unto Anger, or that can make him to come out in any warlike manner against
his Creature but only sin. Who will make War with his Friends? Or will suffer
it to come into all his thoughts to have any hard or cruel device against them?
Will a man quarrel and fight with his own Child whilst he is dutiful to him,
and gives him no cause of trouble?

So then those things which cause Iniquity to cease from the Creature, that
which separates between sin and it, must needs cause all that to be taken out
of the way which is any ways interruptive of our peace with God. It has been
been formerly showed, and proved in the management of this Doctrine, and was
even now briefly hinted (repetitionwise) that a being filled with the Spirit
will leave no place in the heart or soul of a man for the Lusts of the Flesh,
for vile and sinful Lusts to lodge there: And if these be dissolved, and
abolished out of the soul, the fruits of them, i.e. sinful and wicked actions
and ways must needs be cut off also; because as the rush cannot grow without
water: So neither can the fruits of the flesh grow, but from the Lusts of the
flesh. So that this will be the consequence of being filled with the Spirit,
That all those things which make any breach between God and you shall be
removed. Where no fuel is, the fire goes out: So where there is no
talebearer, strife cease. Now that which fuel is to the fire, and a
talebearer to cause strife; the same is sinfulness in the Creature, it is
obstructive to its peace with God, and kindles the fire of his displeasure
against it: Withdraw the fuel from the fire, and it will go out of it self;
Even so, do but remove sin from the sight of God, and the fire of his
Displeasure and Anger will go out, and extinguish of themselves. Where sin and
unrighteousness tell no tales unto God, and make no complaint in his ears,
there strife cease, and all his thoughts toward you will be love and peace.

Secondly, By your being filled with the Spirit, as all things hereby will be
taken out of the way which are likely to obstruct your peace with God; So
likewise all those things which are most proper to nourish and advance your
peace with him will abound in you. If you shall ask me, What are these? I
answer, They are the fruits of righteousness and true holiness, especially when
they shall abound, and advance in the Lives and Conversations of men. Like the
Waves of the Sea, when one Wave drives on another; So when one Act of
righteousness and holiness shall follow in the neck of another, and when they
shall increase, and rise higher and higher, there will be all things in being
that are apt and proper to feed, nourish, and maintain the most solid peace in
the breast of men toward God. And these things are most apt and proper to
create peace, perfect peace for men in the breast of God, and suffer no touch
or tincture of any displeasure to rest there; For as the Apostle says, 1 John
4.18. that perfect love casts out fear [namely, out of the hearts of men:] So
does an excellent strein of righteousness, or perfection in men, cast all
thoughts of War, Enmity, or Opposition unto men out of the heart of God. In the
second place, As these things being in men, viz. ways and works of
righteousness, especially (as was even now said) when they abound, clear and
rid the heart and soul of God from all Enmity, and hard intentions toward his
Creatures, men or women; So does the sense and consciousness of these things in
men themselves introduce and bring into their souls the sense and fruits of
this blessed posture of soul toward them. This creates a clear and strong
apprehension in them that things are so, and so according to their hearts
desire, they know there is no touch of any fire of displeasure against them.
The clear, pregnant, and lively testimony of a man's Conscience that he does
work righteousness, especially, that he abounds therein, cannot (lightly) but
make him to be a man of a serene Spirit, and one that fears no colors from
heaven. And if one strein of righteousness only, viz. Mercy (as James says,
Chap. 2.13.) rejoices against Judgment, i. e. magnifieth it self, does not
fear, is not subject to fear that God should set himself at any time against
the merciful man; the very nature of this Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Now
then, if it be so, that one vein of righteousness has such a mighty Spirit in
this kind to enable a man to rejoice against judgment; How much more when there
shall be a confluence, or meeting together of all the ways and streins of
righteousness in the whole course of a man's life and conversation? If
righteousness with the little finger be able to do so much, how much more can
the whole body do when it is in all its strength and glory? This must needs
advance the Soul of a man in assurance that all is well between God and him,
(as John says in the place even now hinted at upon a like occasion) Perfect
love casts out fear; because Love is of that nature, that a man cannot, when
he does love another, and withal knows that such a man knows that he loves
him, be under any fear of receiving any hurt from him. Upon this ground it is
that the Apostle says, that perfect love casts out fear, because a man knows
that God is privy to the state of his heart, and knows whether he love him,
or no. If I know certainly that I love such, or such a man, and withal know,
that he knows that I do love him, and wish well unto him, it is impossible that
I should be afraid of this man, in as much as I know that he has a full
assurance of my good, real, and cordial affection unto him. Now how can I fear,
or be jealous that he should seek my hurt or ruin? A man's Friend is part of
himself, and a man cannot but seek his own good and peace. As no man ever hated
his own flesh: So certainly no man ever yet hated his Friend, whom he certainly
knew to be his Friend, for (as I said) he is even as himself. In like manner,
it is impossible but that a lively sense and consciousness of that love which a
man bears unto God must needs raise a mighty, glorious, and triumphant
confidence in the soul that all things are right and straight between God and
him; that his interest is perfect, whole and entire with him, and that there
remains not so much as the least spark of the fire of anger there.

Thirdly (and lastly) by being filled with the Spirit, an entrance also in
abundance into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in
respect of the joy thereof. Peace imports freedom, or exemption from troubles
and disturbances: But joy imports the inward, and high satisfaction,
pleasure, or contentment of mind, which is created, or raised in the Soul by
the apprehension and consideration of the excellent goodness of this peace,
together with the sweet Privileges and Enjoyments of this Kingdom. Now this
joy we speak of, the joy of the Everlasting Kingdom of Christ, must needs be
(according to that Character which the Apostle Peter gives of it, which is a
taste, or first fruits of that Kingdom) unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet.
1.8. The reason hereof is, because there shall be such a mighty, and such an
incredible abundance of all desirable and precious things, both to raise and to
maintain this joy, which will certainly meet together, in this Kingdom, in that
state and condition which the Saints shall be brought unto, when the Kingdom of
Christ shall be set up in the World. All Lebanon (says the Prophet Isaiah,
Isa. 40.16.) is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt offering. If all the wood that grew in Lebanon (at least that did grow in
his days) were cut down; and one fire made of it all, How exceeding great
above measure would this fire, and flame, and burning be? Now God will summon
(as it were) the whole Creation together; He will call to the Heavens, to the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the Hosts of them; He will call to the North, and
to the South, to the East, and to the West; He will call to the Seas, and to
the deep places; He will call to the Beasts of the Field, and to the Fowls of
Heaven to bring in whatsoever they have in their Treasure or keeping, and which
will contribute any thing toward the making of the joy of the Kingdom we speak
of like unto a joy prepared by the infinite magnificence and bounty of the God
of Heaven, on purpose to show his glory and power for his Sons and Daughters,
and those that have served him. How exceeding great then above measure must
this joy needs be? That he will do no less, but rather much more than yet has
been spoken of for the persons mentioned, He has given a sufficient assurance
in the gift of his Son Jesus Christ unto them, according to the express tenor
of the Apostles reasoning, Rom, 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? The strength of the Apostles arguing lies in some such Principle, or
Notion as this, viz. That no man of understanding, and that is Master of his
Engagements or undertakings, will lay a foundation larger, or wider, or richer
than the nature of what he intends by way of superstructure does require: Such
a thing as this would render his work or building dishonorable and uncomely,
and indeed ridiculous, if the Foundation do palpably and notoriously exceed the
proportion and scantling of his Building. From this Principle we may (with the
Apostle) with the greatest confidence and assurance of heart and soul under
Heaven conclude, That in as much as God has laid the foundation of the joy and
happiness of those who shall love, and believe on him, so large and rich as he
has done in the gift of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ to die for them,
that he will build upon it answerably, and consequently raise the Fabric of
their blessedness and glory to the greatest height, and and magnificence by all
means, by any thing that any where can be procured to advance it: otherwise his
Alpha and Omega would not agree. So then this is that we say, That if you shall
be filled with the Spirit, you shall have an entrance in abundance into this
abundant joy we speak of, The joy of the Everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
There is an entrance, and an entrance in abundance, as into the two former of
those vast Privileges of this Kingdom, viz. Righteousness, and Peace, so also
into this third Privilege of the Joy thereof. An entrance simply into this
joy, implies only some kind of lighter taste thereof, less affecting the soul.
An entrance in abundance notes such a state or condition wherein a man or woman
shall be possessed of a good or Rich Proportion of this Joy, viz. of a third or
fourth part of it; by means of which he shall find, and feel, and enjoy within
himself, to his own content, and in his own sight as good and happy an estate
and condition (upon the matter) as he would judge himself to be in, in case he
were actually invested with such a Kingdom, and with the felicity and joy
thereof; the joy we speak of being of the same kind with that of the
Everlasting Kingdom of Christ, but only short in some degrees of it. As a man
whose estate is worth one thousand pounds by the year has somewhat of the same
satisfaction and contentment of him that has four or five thousand pounds; I
mean, when as well the one as the other knows how to take satisfaction in
their estates (respectively) and neither more or less than what they are
competent, and proper to afford unto them.

Now that your being filled with the Spirit must needs give you such an
entrance in abundance (as has been described) into the joy of the everlasting
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, may be well conceived (by what has already been
delivered) after such a manner as this; the joy of this Kingdom is, the highest
and most contentful result in the soul of all those particular blessings, and
vouchsafements, in the possession and enjoyment whereof the happiness of it
consists: The sense of the rich goodness, and commodiousness of those things,
being enjoyed upon such terms as they will be in that Kingdom, and known so to
be, is either formally, or efficiently the joy thereof. So then, whatsoever
creates a lively sense in the heart and soul of a man of the transcendent
goodness and sweetness of those enjoyments must needs give an entrance in
abundance into the joy thereof: This, a being filled with the Spirit, must
needs do, because it cannot but fill you with a confident hope and earnest
expectation to enjoy them in due time. In this I ^imply one thing, and affirm
another: The thing I plainly affirm lies naked, or open in the words
themselves, viz. that a being filled with the Spirit must needs fill men with a
confident hope and expectation to enjoy these things in due time: The thing I
suppose is, That a confident hope, and rich expectation to enjoy these things
in due time must needs give men an entrance in abundance into that joy which we
are speaking of, such an entrance in this kind as has been described.

The first of these is evident from what was argued when we showed, and proved
unto you, That your being filled with the Spirit will not suffer you to be idle
and unprofitable in the Knowledge and Profession of Jesus Christ, but will
cause you to abound in the fruits of righteousness and true holiness: And
secondly, that such an abounding as this must needs raise an abundant
confidence or assurance in the love and favor of God; and consequently, an
assurance of enjoying all that is to be enjoyed in the Everlasting Kingdom of
his dear Son: So that we shall not need to insist upon the proof hereof any
further. Therefore secondly, whereas I suppose that an abundant confidence, or
assurance and expectation of enjoying the great things of Christ's Kingdom in
due time must needs amount to as much as this, or produce at present such an
entrance in abundance into the joy of this Ringdom as that lately described:
The truth hereof may be conceived upon this account. The confident hope, and
earnest expectation of enjoying things in time, which when they come to be
actually enjoyed will be found to be exceeding great, and yielding much
satifaction, and joy, and are known to be such, whilst they are yet only
hoped, and expected, is, and must needs be such an entrance into them as Peter
calls abundant (in the sense we have given.) Such an hope, and expectation as
we speak of, is a kind or degree of enjoyment of the things themselves, and may
(in propriety of speech, and with truth enough) be simply termed an enjoyment
of them. As she that is betro^hed or espoused to an Husband may truly and
properly enough be termed a Wife: So, he that is under a pregnant and lively
hope of enjoying such and such things may be said, by means of such his hope,
to enjoy them. Now you shall see that the Scripture uses thus to speak, Romans
8.24. For we are saved by hope; that is, that hope which we have of being
saved, it is so full that we are already saved by it. And so, Heb. 11.1. Faith
is the substance [or rather the subsistence, for so Hypostasis signifies] of
things hoped for. Faith is said to be the subsistence or existence of things
hoped for, because the belief of those grounds, or of those Promises of God, or
declarations that come from Heaven, That These and these things shall be given
to those that believe, this (I say) does give a kind of existency, and
presentiality unto the things themselves in the minds, and spirits, and souls
of men. For it is Faith that is the ground work, or that which gives a
subsistence to these things in the soul; for Hope flows from Faith, and by it
the heart is carried out to the expectation of them: Hope does dilate and open
the heart, as a man does his hand to receive that which is ready to be given
unto him. But that which gives life, breath, and being unto Hope, that is
Faith: It is Faith that gives Being unto the Truth and Faithfulness of God in
his Promises and Declarations, by which they are settled, and secured that they
are all valid; and that God will make them good unto his Sons and Daughters
(those who shall believe.) And in this respect the Language or manner of the
Scripture speaking is very remarkable, That they who are enabled by God (by
being anointed with a Spirit of Revelation) to put men into a steady and
substantial hope of possessing and enjoying such and such things, are said to
give them the things themselves. So Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord God
is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the
meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, etc. So again, ver. 3. To
give them beauty for ashes, the Oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise
for the spirit of heaviness, etc. So that (according to this manner of
Scripture speaking) because the Prophet offered, by a spirit of Prophecy, to
fill these hearts with the hope and expectations of these things, he is said to
give them the things themselves. So again, he that shall be an instrument in
the hand of God, to preach the Word of God with such evidence of truth and
demonstration as that he fills the hearts of men full of the hope of Salvation,
is said actually to save them. Take heed unto thy self (says Paul to Timothy)
and unto the Doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both
save thy self, and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4.16.

Fourthly, filled with the Spirit will cause God to take a holy pleasure and
delight in you, and to employ you about many actions and services of his, which
will be very honorable unto you, and turn to a bleffed account in due time in
his Kingdom. Wherefore (says the Apostle to the Church at Jerusalem) look ye
out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, etc. Which
does imply, that the men that God seeks, for the acting and doing his
business here in the World, are such who are full of the Holy Ghost, such who
have a rich anointing of the Spirit of God. Men that are filled with the Spirit
will be vigorous, active, and free in their work; they will do what they do
with all their might. As men delight to be served by such Servants who are
diligent, and will go through stitch with their business, that will not be
baffled, or turned out of their way by every toy or trivial occasion that shall
present it self, but will go on with their business not with trifling: Even so
it is a special Principle in the living God to desire servants that will be
faithful, and fervent in their business. This (indeed) is the very Nature and
Being of God, and therefore he puts that Character of his Being upon men
which he judges meet to be chosen as instruments to serve him, and which are
(as I may say) made for him fitly qualified for any work or employment that
shall be put into their hands. Who counted me faithful (says Paul) putting me
into the Ministry. If Paul had not been the man he was, a man of mettle,
courage, and resolution, God would not have delighted in his service, so as to
have put him into the Ministry. Now where we do not see men that are in the
Ministry of the same Spirit, it is a sign they are not put here by God; for God
takes no delight or pleasure but only in such who are fitted for his work. We
read (2 Timothy 2.21.) of Vessels prepared, and made fit for the Masters use; so
that there is a certain fitness, as well in Persons as in Vessels, which makes
them meet for such or such respective uses. Now that Generation of men in the
World that are filled with the Spirit are only meet for the Masters use, viz.
the Great Master of the World, the Lord of Hosts: Such men as these, men who
are through-hearted, zealous, and lovers of his Work, and that take delight in
being employed in his Service, are Vessels of pleasure and delight unto him.
See thou a man (says Solomon) diligent in his business, he shall stand
before Kings, Prove. 22.29. Shall stand before Kings, [namely, to minister unto
them:] Men of this Character are only meet for their Service: Even so none are
fit for the Service of the Great God of Heaven and Earth but such men who are
of active and vigorous spirits, and that know how to manage his Affairs with
diligence, and faithfulness for his interest in the World. These men shall not
stand idle, but God will take delight to make use of them in his Service:
Whereas men that are unqualified for his Service to any confiderable degree (as
all men are who art not filled with the Spirit) who have no activity, nor edge
in them, are unto God as a bottle in the smoke. And as men do not love to put
what they drink into bottles that are smoaky, because that will destroy all the
goodness and pleasantness of the taste of that which shall be put into them:
Even so (as was but now hinted) men that are unqualified, that have no
dexterity for his business, these are persons in whom God takes no pleasure,
but are unto him as a bottle in the smoke, because the management of his
Affairs by such men as these will rather be a disparagement unto him, than any
matter of glory, by rendering his Sacred Things common, and consequently
rendering them despicable in the eyes of men. But on the contrary, men that are
richly anointed, and filled with his Spirit, these are Agents and Instruments
for him; as the Sword of Goliath was unto David, there was none like unto it.
There is no Generation of men under Heaven that he takes such pleasure in, to
commit and entrust his Affairs withal, as with these who are filled with the
Spirit. Who makes his Angels Spirits [or wind] and his Ministers a flame of
fire. Heb. 1.7. Some (by the way) understand the meaning of the place to be
only this, That the Apostle would hereby show, or prove, that there is no great
matter in the name of an Angel, because that God sometimes calls the wind by
the name of an Angel; and that the Argument in hand was not to prove the
transcendent excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, above the Angels, and their
dignity, but because that the name of Angel is a term of no great dignity,
because sometimes God calls the Wind Angel or Minister. Whether this their
Notion will stand or no it is not much material, as to that which I shall
commend unto you for our purpose: For if God call the Wind by name of Angel, or
the Fire his Angel, it is a sign that he does delight to make those his
Messengers that are most active, and full of Spirit in their way, for so are
the Winds, and Flames of Fire. And so are Angels, strong and swift like unto
the Wind, and zealous in their way like Fire, and consequently every way meet,
and accommodated for the Service of the Great God. In like manner, by your
being filled with the Spirit this high Privilege will certainly accrue unto
you, That your standing on Earth will be much like the standing of the Angels
in Heaven, who continually stand before God, and attend upon him for a beck to
be appointed to their several services, and to be sent, one one way, and
another another way; and happy are they to whom the favor is vouchsafed to
have the first charge and direction from God about his business. And such shall
be your posture and standing before the God of all the Earth, if you be men and
women filled with the Spirit: It will not be long ere you shall have some great
and high employment put into your hands, that will be very beneficial, and
honorable unto you, and in which you will take abundance of pleasure and
satisfaction.

Fifthly, Services of God, and of men, and that which seems hard and
troublesome to the flesh in them to cease: It will reconcile the disproportion
between your hearts and such services and employments both for God and men. We
all know that there is a kind of natural averseness, and indisposedness in the
flesh of men, unto many Services of God, especially, unto those which are most
honorable, and most worthy of Christians; I say, there is a kind of
listlessness, and hanging back of the Flesh unto such duties as these we are
speaking of, which is occasioned by nothing else but only by their
disproportion which they have with men. There is something in the heart of a
man which does not answer to something in the Work and Service. Now then, by
your being filled with the Spirit, this disproportion which lies between your
hearts and this Service of God will be taken out of the way. You know the
saying of the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh, etc. so that ye cannot do the things that ye
would (in the Original it is, that ye may not do the things that ye would. The
Spirit lusts, and by means of the Spirits lusting you are put into a strait,
so that now ye cannot [or ye may not] do what ye would. This lusting of the
Spirit against the Flesh will be a means to weaken the Lustings of the Flesh,
so that you will have no desire to do those things which you are naturally
inclined unto. And if the Spirit be strong in the soul of a man, these Lustings
of the Spirit will be strong also; yea, they will (if they be not obstructed in
their way) advance, and grow stronger, until all the Lustings of the flesh be
subdued, and all dispositions, and inclinations unto sin (upon the matter)
wholly cut off; so that you will not find your selves under any Obligations to
walk in any such ways wherein the flesh may be gratified. Your being filled
with the Spirit will free you from all encumbrances in the ways of holiness.
And you shall come forth unto such ways as these, Like the Sun, which (as
David says) is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a
strong man to run a Race, Psalm. 19.5. Why is the Sun said to rejoice, and to
come forth as a Bridegroom, and as a Giant to run his course, but because
(though his Course be long, above what, will easily be believed, should be
accomplished by him in the space of twenty four hours) he is, if I may so
speak, naturally conscious that he has abundantly wherewich to perform it?
Such a Course or Race to him is natural and delightsome. If another Creature
not so qualified either with figure, swiftness, Propensity unto Circular
motion, or the like, were to run, I mean, appointed or commanded by God, as the
Sun is, to run the same Course, and were to set forth out of the same Chamber
with the Sun; this Creature would not come forth to his work like a Bridegroom,
but rather like unto him that mourns, and whose Countenance is cast down unto
the Earth. In like manner, when men and women are filled with the Holy Ghost,
they come forth unto the greatest actions, or highest Services, whether for
God, or men, like unto so many Bride-grooms out of their Chambers, full of
alacrity, and with an heavenly pleasantness of heart and face; as it is said of
Stephen, who is noted to have been a man filled with the Spirit, that all the
Council that looked steadfastly, or narrowly on him, saw his face as it had been
the face of an Angel, Acts 6.25. i.e. did discern a more than ordinary, a kind
of supernatural Visage, or composure of Countenance in him, wherein an awful
gravity, with an heavenly kind of Luster or pleasantness were in conjunction;
and by the light of this his Angelical and heavenly Countenance, a like
heavenly complexion or constitution of heart and soul within might easily have
been discerned also. Stephen had a great piece of work, a difficult service
upon his hand; he was to give Testimony unto Jesus Christ before the Powers of
this World, a great Council of men that were desperate Opposers of him, and
maliciously bent against all those that professed him, and to abide all hazards
and dangers likely to attend such an engagement: But being filled with the Holy
Ghost his heart sweetly and readily comported with the work, as if it had been
but like the going to a Feast. So also the Apostle Paul, Acts 20.22, 23, 24.
and 21.11. and 13. compared. In the former, And now behold, I go bound in the
Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: Save
that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and
afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life
dear unto my self, etc. Now do but compare the latter, And when he (Agabus) was
come unto us, he took Paul's Girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and
said, Thus says the Holy Ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man
that owes this Girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
Upon the hearing of these things they besought him not to go up to Jerusalem,
and ver. 13. Then answered Paul, what mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart?
For I am not only ready to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name
of the Lord Jesus: As who should say, Are you aware how blessed a business I
have in hand, and of how evil a tendency this your advice, and this your
weeping is? Why (says he) do ye break my heart? I am all thoughts made in my
felf, I have no regret within me as to this service of going to Jerusalem; and
therefore why do you by your weeping, as you do, go about to dissolve and
scatter that blessed and composed frame of heart which I have wrought my self
unto? For (says he) I have not only a light willingness, but I am set upon the
work whatever it cost me; I am not only ready to suffer such things as Bonds,
Imprisonment, etc. but I am even ready to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the
Lord Jesus; I have reasons in abundance to balance against all the
counter-arguings of my Flesh, my Friends, and Relations; I have trampled them
all under my feet, so that I have no more to think of, or to debate what to do
in this case, but am in an actual readiness, as to this business. So then, you
see that being filled with the Spirit of God how it removes all obstructions
out of the way of men and women in the Service of God: It causes every thing
to cease from being burdensome or hard unto them. It is with a man or woman
that is filled with the Spirit of God in respect of their natural
indispositions, or aversness to the high and difficult Services of God, as it
is between the inferior Orbs, or Spheres in the Heavens and that utmost Sphere
which Philosophers call Primum Mobile, the First Mover; the motion of this
Sphere (according to the notion they have of it, and probable it is true in
reason, however, it is very apt and proper to represent the business which we
desire to possess you with) is so incredible swift, and strong, that it carries
about all the other with it, notwithstanding their propensions, and these very
strong too in their kind, unto different, yea, contrary motions; but that same
Primum Mobile carries them along with it in its own motion and course, taking
no notice, viz. of any repugnancy in them to such a motion or comportance with
it, but carries them about as if they were all agreed, and naturally consenting
to go along with it: Much after the same manner it is between a great presence
or fullness of the Holy Ghost in the soul and that natural indisposition or
averseness of the Flesh to ways and services of a difficult and excellent
import. The Holy Ghost, being gloriously potent, and mighty in his motions and
way, overbears and oversets the natural Propensions, and the repugnant and
cross inclinations of the Flesh to such services and works, and carries these
along with him in his course, by reason whereof they seem willing also, and
consenting to what is done, or to be done in that kind. Or look, as it is
between the Tide, or flowing in of the Sea, and the course of the River or
fresh waters upon which it comes; we know the natural course of the River, and
the waters thereof, is contrary to the course of the Sea, and the waters
thereof, when it flows; yet because the Sea moves with more authority, viz.
with more strength and irresistibleness of motion than the River does, it takes
along the waters of the River with it in its course, and these seem to be as
willing with the motion as the Sea it self and the waters thereof; nor is there
any contrariety, or averseness, or reluctance to the motion discerned in these
fresh waters whilst they are under the authority and conduct of the Salt: After
such a manner it is between the flesh of a man and the averseness that is there
unto things that are of a spiritual nature. When a man is filled with the
Spirit of God, this carries all down before him, and that after such a manner,
as that the Flesh forgets all hardness and difficulty that is in its way in
the Service of God, and so forbears all swelling, or rising up against it. This
then in the fifth place is another worthy Privilege that does attend your
being filled with the Spirit.

Sixthly, Your being filled with the Spirit will enlarge your hearts mightily
unto ways and works that are excellent: like unto Jesus Christ in true
Nobleness, and Prince-like disposition of Spirit; and cause you to fall in
travel with the World until the peace, comfort, and prosperity of it be
provided for, and established round about you. This accommodation and benefit
differs from the former, and carries somewhat in it above that. That consisted
in a reconciling, or healing the disproportion which commonly is between the
hearts, or natural dispositions of men and the ways (especially, the more high
and excellent ways) of God: This consists in an effectual drawing out of the
heart and soul unto such ways and services, in setting an edge of zeal upon
the Spirits of men, to be like unto the Vine in Jotham's Parable, Judge. 9.13.
which is there said to cheer both God and man. A man may (possibly) be free
from any great averseness or indisposedness to such or such an action or
course, and yet be but of a kind of neutral and indifferent frame of heart,
have no great or zealous propension toward them: But he that is zealous of
good works (as the Scripture speaks) has not only the contrariety and
averseness of his nature unto such works subdued and broken within him; but
has an inclination unto them stirred up and wrought in him, so that (as a
strong Bias in a Boule) his heart leans and longs that way. So then, this
is that which I hold forth unto you in the particular now in hand, If you shall
be filled with the Spirit, you will hereby be enriched with many noble,
excellent, and worthy dispositions of heart and soul, which will lead and carry
you forth with a strong hand upon all occasions to works and actions of an high
and sacred import: It will relieve you against the natural scantness and
narrowness of your hearts in this kind; and cause you (with Abraham) to be
numbered amongst the Friends of God, and Benefactors to the World, and no
opportunity of doing good shall escape you: It will cause you to look upon your
selves (with Paul) as Debtors to the Greeks and Barbarians, to the wise, and to
the unwise, Romans 1.14. ( i.e. unto all persons of mankind without exception)
and will give you no rest in your Spirits but only whilst you are paying what
you owe in this kind, or at least preparing and putting your selves into a
condition to pay accordingly. I began to say unto you, that it would make you
like unto Jesus Christ himself in Prince-likeness and true greatness of Spirit:
it will draw you into part and fellowship (and this in abundance) in the same
design, and prevail with you to make one purse, and to cast in your lot with
him; It will give you the considence and courage to say unto him as Jehosaphat
said to King Ahab, 1 Kings 22.4. I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my
horses as thy horses; you will join with him with all the strength you have,
and all the friends and power you can make in the World in that great and
blessed work and engagement which is now upon his hand, and which he is
carrying on day and night; I mean, the advancement of the peace and happiness
of the World. For though particular men and women, and these not many, enjoy
the rich benefit and fruit of his most gracious interposures and actings in
that kind we speak of, yet the compass of his design, to do good, and bless,
and save, and the nature and proper tendency of his actings are as large as the
World, or generality of mankind. Hence it is, that in Scripture Language things
of general and public concernment are called the things of Jesus Christ, in
opposition to the concernments of particular men: All seek their own, not the
things that are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21. meaning, that generally men's hearts
were straight and narrow, extending themselves only to their own particular
interest and concernments, not caring for things of a general and public
concernment; which are properly the Affairs and Concernment of Jesus Christ,
who is the Great Providor for the World, who does good, and blesses
particulars as they are members of the Universal, and come in his way, i. e. as
they walk in those wares of Righteousness and true Holiness, whereunto his
Desires and Endeavors are to bring the World, and this in order to their Peace
and Happiness. Now, this great and glorious design of blessing the World from
the one end of it unto the other was raised in the soul of Jesus Christ by his
being filled with the Spirit. His anointing in this kind was not by measure:
Hence it came to pass, that the complexion of his heart and soul for doing good
was so large and comprehensive to go round about the whole Creation, as is
witnessed of him ( Acts 10.38.) that God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the
Holy Ghost, and with power, who went thout doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the Devil: For God was with him. Look then, to what degree
you shall be filled with the same Spirit w^^ (...) Christ was filled withal,
your hearts will be proportionably filled (...) the same resolution as Jesus
Christ was; You will be enlarged in t^^^ kind, your endeavors and engagements
to do good will be very vast and comprehensive; You will not endure to see the
miserable and deplorable condition of men and women in the World in one kind or
other, but that you will find or feel something or other in you that will
provoke you, yea, and after a manner will compel you to minister unto them of
what you have in your hand. As whilst Paul staid at Athens waiting for Silas
and Timotheus, His spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City wholly given
to Idolatry, Acts 17.16. How, or unto what was his spirit stirred within him?
Doubtless, it was to relieve them, by endeavoring to break asunder (if it were
possible) that snare of death, this humor of Idolatry, wherewith these poor
people were taken, and so to deliver them; as appears by that which follows
in verse. 17. Therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the
devout persons, and in the Market daily with them that met with him. Thus then
you see, here is another great and worthy accommodation which a being filled
with the Spirit is accompanied with, which will make you like unto Princes,
yea, like unto Jesus Christ himself: You will be willing to go along with him,
and not so much mind, or manage your own things as the things of his interest
and glory: You will be willing to take Christ's design along with you, and
still watch over that great business which he is carrying on with an high hand
in the World. Now who is able to estimate or compute the blessedness of such a
state and frame of heart and soul as this is which we now speak of; and which
with the Scripture, and evidence of reason otherwise, we ascribe to a being
filled with the Spirit? The loud rejoicing of Conscience, which does accrue
unto men, is the natural result of such a frame of heart so enlarged, and
endeavors suitable unto it. This great and mighty Testimony of a man's
Conscience is sweeter and more desirable than life it self. And we shall find
the Apostle Paul make an estimate or value of it accordingly: For it were
better for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void, 1 Cor.
9.15. From whence this glorying of his did spring we are particularly informed
from his hand, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God we have had our Conversation in the World, etc. He had
tasted of that sweetness and incomparable satisfaction which did flow in unto
him, upon the account of the enlargedness of his heart and soul in the great
concernments of the Gospel; which made him conclude, that it were better for
him to die than that any man should make void his glorying in this kind. How
mightily did he magnify and glory in this great Treasure, viz. his rejoicing
in the Testimony of his Conscience, that he had served God and men with all
sincerity and simplicity? This he thought was enough to make the World go and
do likewise.

Seventhly, Romans 8.26, 27.) Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities:
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self
makes Intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. If this be proper to
the Spirit simply, and where he is in a lower and lesser degree; then
certainly, where there is a greater presence of God, and where he fills the
hearts and souls of men with his presence, there he rises and advances in a
more excellent manner, with greater accommodations, teaching them how to pray,
meaning, the manner how they should pray. Now, in that he is said to relieve
our infirmities, and to help our ignorances when we pray; and so to teach the
Saints to pray as they ought, by making Intercession for them; the meaning is,
that he teaches them a prayer of a more excellent, and of a more spiritual
import, and teaches them how to present this Prayer of theirs upon terms of a
richer and more high acceptance unto God. And Gal. 4.6. it is said, God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Alba, Father. This
is a Phrase or Figure of speakking, wherein Actions are ascribed unto those who
are the means or cause of them, and not to the Actors themselves: As for
instance, Charity is said to believe all things, and to hope all things,
because it does qualify and dispose the Person where it is found thus to
believe all things, and to hope all things: So here the Spirit is said to cry
Abba Father, and so to make intercession for the Saints, because he does teach,
enable, and dispose them both to the one and to the other. You had a taste of
that formerly in Jude ver. 20. praying in the Holy Ghost; that is, by, or
through the help and assistance of the Holy Ghost. According to the same figure
our Savior's Saying unto his Apostles is to be understood, Mar. 10.20. For it
is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. When
they should come before Rulers and Governors, he says it was not they that
should speak, but the Holy Ghost that was within them; his meaning is, not that
the Holy Ghost did speak the words, but only because the Holy Ghost did furnish
them with such and such things which they should speak: So now, they that be
filled with the Spirit of God, there is (as it were) a characteristical
difference between the same kind of actions in them, and that which proceeds
from other men, who have not the same edge of spirit and life in them; these
are full of power, and authority, and heavenly luster and beauty in their
actions and doings; whereas the like actions and performances of persons that
do them without the Spirit have nothing of excellency in them. Now, of how
great and blessed a consequence is it unto you to be enabled to pray
effectually, to carry things in Heaven richly, and upon terms of highest
acceptance? If we could but weigh this one privilege or advantage alone in
the balance, we should find it to weigh more than all the Silver and Gold in
the World. What? To be able to pray, yea, to pray unto God with acceptance; to
pray so as to be able to prevail with God, and that about great matters, for
States and Kingdoms; as they may that have an interest in Heaven; (as such
persons we speak of have.) Such men might carry the World before them, they
might pluck up States and Kingdoms, they might be as great in Heaven, as
N^buchadnezzar was here upon Earth, whom he would he set up, and whom he would
he pulled down; so had we interest in Heaven, as we might have, we might do
likewise? It is like we are at such a pass as the Disciples were at, when it is
said, that they believed not for joy when Christ came first amongst them; the
consideration of his being rose again from the dead was a business of such a
mighty consequence, such a matter of joy, that it became a stumbling block in
the way of their faith: They believed not for joy, i. e. they were not capable
of the most demonstrative Arguments and Convictions as when he showed them his
hands and his feet, and talked with them: This is the case of this great
Privilege I speak of, viz. of carrying matters in Heaven; we are conscious to
our selves that we are poor and weak men and women, whom the men of this World
are generally ready to to be treading and trampling under foot, and to despise.
Oh, my Brethren, the things we speak of, How incredible above measure are they?
Yet it is a most certain, and an undoubted truth, that if we be filled with the
Spirit of God, we might pray at such a rate, and after such a manner, that we
might carry our Petitions in Heaven, and even whatsoever we should ask in the
Name of Jesus Christ according to the will of God. And we need have no larger
Rule than this, we need not desire a larger Commission than the compass of the
Will of God; For all things are according to the Will of God which are
necessary for the comforts and accommodation of men and women in the World
round about, J^m. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much; The word (...), as all Greek Authors give out the proper
signification of it is this; It notes a Person that is possessed or acted by a
supernatural power, whether it be of an holy or an unclean Spirit, above their
Sphere; so now that prayer, viz. the effectual fervent prayer, etc. (...), is
acted, wrought, and raised by a Spirit which is greater than the spirit of man,
and therefore of necessity by no other than the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost
himself, who thus raised and lifted up himself in might and power to enable
them hereunto.

Eighthly (and lastly) By being filled with the Spirit of God, Heb. 11. where
the Author, speaking of the Servants of God, says, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection; where the Antecedent is put for the Consequent, a better
Resurrection, for a better State in the Resurrection. There are other ways and
practices (or at least may be) upon which men may obtain the fatness of Heaven,
the best of the glory and great things of the World to come: But there is none
so certain or regular, none within the reach of the Wisdom or Providence of
men, that a man may rely and reckon upon, whereby to consult to himself a
better Heaven, but only that we speak of, A being filled with the Spirit of
God. If you be made great in the Kingdom of Heaven in any other way, or by any
other means than that we speak of, you must as well be beholding to the sin and
wickedness of other men, as to your own worth, grace, or faithfulness; and
there must be more than an ordinary hand in the Providence of God to bring it
to pass: For what other ways or means are there of obtaining a greater
preeminence in glory than the generality of the Saints will enjoy (besides that
of being filled with the Spirit of God, and being drawn out accordingly into
ways and works of excellency and well-doing) unless it be by suffering
Persecution for the Gospels sake; although it might be doubted too, whether
some good degree of being filled with the Spirit be not requisite, even to put
men into this capacity also; For they who have not some competent anointing in
this kind will hardly hold out in suffering: That which makes men constant and
persevering under temptations and great tribulations to the end, is a certain
hope and expectation of a great recompense of reward from God, as the
Scriptures witness in many places which we shall not now insist upon. Now, such
a hope which will make a man stand upright under great Afflictions cannot be
raised and gotten up into the soul but by the reflection of a man's Conscience
upon him, and witnessing unto him that he has walked in ways of a worthy
life, and excellent deportment in the World; if then there shall be no place
for such things as these in the soul without a being filled with the Spirit of
God, which has been formerly and largely proved, then evident it is, that
neither men nor women are likely to be capable of that best Resurrection; and
consequently, not of the best Eternity, upon one account or other, without
being filled with the Spirit of God. But be it granted, or supposed, that men
may be able deeply to be baptized into suffering for righteousness sake, and so
become capable of a greater reward in Heaven (as our Savior speaks) without
being filled with the Spirit of God: Yet, as I was saying unto you, this method
or way to obtain an eternal greatness is more uncertain as to any particular
person, one or other, and less within his liberty or power than by an abundant
fruitfulness in well-doing; which (as has been showed) will not be found in
any man without a being filled with the Spirit; nor any man found to be filled
with the Spirit without that: For to be called forth and strengthened by God to
suffer for Christ's, or the Gospels sake, is matter of peculiar Grace and gift
from God; and so not in the power of any man himself to choose; according to
that of the Apostle to the Philippians, Phil. 1.29. For unto you it is given in
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his
sake. This Argumentative Particle, also, clearly implies, that to suffer for
Christ's sake is not so generally granted unto men, as to believe on him is, I
mean, is not granted unto all those unto whom it is granted to believe. By
suffering in this place, I suppose is meant a suffering deeply, and to a more
than ordinary degree: Nor is that of the same Apostle 2 Timothy 3.12. contrary
hereunto: Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, i. e. shall be obnoxious and liable to suffer persecution, or to
some degree or other actually suffer.

So then, there being no way, at least no way of certainty to heap up these
Treasures in Heaven, to lift up your heads on high, and that to Eternity,
amongst those that shall be partakers of the same glory with you, to enlarge
your capacities (respectively) for blessedness and glory, but by being filled
with the Spirit; ^^is must needs highly commend such a qualification or
privilege (...) this unto you, and cause your hearts to burn in longing
desires ^^^er it. The two Sons of Zebedeus, James and John, made this re^^est
unto Christ, that the one of them might sit at the right hand, etc. Mar. 10.35.
that they might be next unto him in greatness and in glory: The motion our
Savior seems to have distasted, as in considerately made, and accordingly
gave the makers of it this check, You know not what you ask; meaning, that they
did not understand nor consider how great and excellent, how transcendent above
measure the matter or privilege was, which they desired; nor yet considered
upon what terms, and on what kind of persons, according to the righteous
purpose and intent of God, it was to be conferred; It is not mine to give, but
to those, or those only, for whom it is prepared. But now, though he checked
them in respect of their inconsiderateness in making the motion, because they
understood not what they asked, nor knew upon what terms they asked it; for
they asked it upon the account of favor and partiality in God, because related
unto him as Friends and Followers: Yet otherwise he does not blame them simply
for desiring it, but for desiring it after such a manner, viz. carnally. But
when he says, ver. 40. it is for them for whom it is prepared: He does imply,
that it is not for two persons only, but for such persons that are so and so
qualified. As if Christ should have said this on purpose, to draw and wind up
the hearts of his Creatures men and women to ways of excellent righteousness
and holiness: There shall be some places of glory higher than other, and they
whose hearts will serve them to come up to my Fathers terms, and quit
themselves like men, in what he expects from them, in righteousness,
faithfulness, and holiness, these shall be the persons. He does not blame them
simply for desiring these high accommodations in heaven, but rather enciteth
and encourages them to quit themselves at such a rate of worth and excellency
whilst they lived, that they might be found those persons indeed for whom they
were prepared, and so be invested with them. My Brethren, the right hand and
the left hand of Jesus Christ in his Kingdom, of all desirable things they are
most desirable. The Ministration of the Law, the Apostle plainly informs us,
was glorious, and yet affirms withal the Ministration of the Gospel to be much
more glorious: Yea, though the former Ministration of the Law in simple
consideration be glorious, yet comparatively it was not glorious: So my
Brethren, we might very well have some such kind of notion, that all Believers
are blessed, all are glorious; yet nevertheless in respect of those that shall
be superabundantly blessed and glorious, the others glory shall be but little
in comparison. There is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon,
and another glory of the Stars, and these differ one from another in glory;
even so shall it be in respect of the glory of the Saints.

Now, Who is there but would be willing, especially, by ways that be
honorable and worthy, and withal are not difficult, to better his estate and
condition in the World that now is, though what improvement soever he shall
make in this kind, he is not like to enjoy but for a short season, here being
no enduring substance? Suppose he be in a competent way of subsistence at
present; as suppose he be worth a hundred pounds, or two, or three per Annum,
if there were a way opened to double, or treble it, will he not do it? If this
be counted wisdom to advance a perishing and contemptible state, who would not
amongst us all labor to advance in such a glorious and durable state as we
speak of? This then is the first thing requisite to be done in order to your
being filled with the Spirit of God; namely, to fill your Judgments and
Understandings with the knowledge of all the excellent and desirable things of
it, together with a frequent and an effectual consideration of these most
worthy and rich accommodations, which must needs accrue or grow unto you by
your being filled with the Spirit of God.

CHAP. X. The Resolution of the Second Question further prosecuted: And six
Directions more given to show how men and women may come to be filled with the
Spirit of God; and what is to be done by them in order hereunto.
A Second thing to be done, viz. Prayer, Mortification, understanding great
Mysteries, and keeping in mind these things, etc. The Scriptures do plainly
hold forth the use and necessity of the Spirits being employed in all these,
chiefly, and more especially than in other spiritual Services.

But here three Questions may be propounded; First, Whether we can, or whether
it be in our power to engage the Spirit of God in this kind? Whether it be in
the reach or power of a man to draw him into part or fellowship with us in such
spiritual works as lie upon our hands to do?

Secondly, How, or by what means, we may engage him?

Thirdly (and lastly) In case we shall be able to engage him, and shall
actually do it; how the things that shall be thus done by the Spirit in us, so
engaged, can be attributed unto us, or we looked upon as the doers of them?

For the first of these, Whether it be in our power thus to draw in the Spirit
of God to stand by us, to stand at our right hand, and to be helpful unto us in
our spiritual Services? To this we answer in the Affirmative: We are able, and
may do it, otherwise himself would not so frequently have admonished and called
upon us to do it; I mean, to engage him, or to do things of several kinds by
him, Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. This Clause (but
if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body) contains and
implies more than an Exhortation or Charge to set the Spirit on work to
mortify the deeds of the body. For it contains a Reason to press such an
Exhortation, drawn from the excellent benefit and advantage that does attend
it, Life Eternal; you shall live if you do it. Seneca has a Saying, Rogat and
quidem efficacissime, qui profert rogandi causas: He asks, and that most
effectually, who expresses reasons why he should ask; so we may truly and
pertinently say, when the Holy Chost delivers unto us reasons or motives,
whether one or more, why we should be exhorted to such and such duties, he does
inclusively exhort us hereunto, and this after the most peircing and effectual
manner. Telling and promising us, that if we shall mortify the deeds of the
flesh we shall live, does he not most affectionately excite and stir us up to
mortify them accordingly? Now we cannot mortify them by the Spirit, but by
prevailing with the Spirit in one kind or other to mortify them. Thus also
Jude ver. 20. But ye, Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy Faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost; that is, in, or by, or through the help and
assistance of the Holy Ghost; meaning, that they should do that which they well
enough understood and knew would prevail with the Holy Ghost to assist and help
them in praying. So again, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was committed
unto thee (speaking of that Pattern of wholesome words and sayings of the
Doctrine of the Gospel) keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. He adds
these last words, which dwells in us, to put Timothy in mind that the Holy
Ghost was near at hand ready and offering himself to be employed by Christians
in all the great, difficult, and worthy occasions of their souls; and
consequently, to encourage him to address himself unto him (I mean, the Holy
Ghost) that he would enable him to keep, i. e. to preserve in memory and mind
the good things he speaks of. To these places I shall only add Gal. 5.16.
This I say then, walk in the Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. Walk in the Spirit, I suppose his meaning is not in this Phrase, that
they should walk according to the direction and guidance of the Spirit, which
in ver. 18, and elsewhere he calls a being led by the Spirit; but that they
should walk thus by the strength, or by the excitations, and quicknings, or
actuations of the Spirit; that they should walk (as it were) on the Legs of the
Spirit, so that he may carry them out to all they do, and so interpose likewise
in their doing it, that the burden and stress of the work may lie chiefly upon
him, and that men themselves may taste little of the difficulty, bardness, or
offensiveness, if any such thing be in it: This, or some such thing as this,
the Apostle (I suppose) means by walking in the Spirit; and by putting
Christians upon it, to walk in, or by the Spirit he supposes such a thing that
may be done or attained by them if they will take a course thereafter.

But then it may be objected, If we may engage the Spirit,

To this I reply, no: First, Because when any man does awaken the Spirit, and
engage him to his assistance, he is first awakened by the Spirit hereunto, yea,
and engaged too; by which the Spirit himself becomes engaged by himself; for
we are thus, or after some such manner as this, to conceive of the spiritual
treaty or intercourse, and of the state of affairs between the Holy Ghost and
the soul of a Christian in whom he dwells, in reference to the business now
in hand: First, the Spirit of God was in men before they believed; for
otherwise they neither could or would ever have believed; yea, and a long time
before they believed, otherwise there would have been no workings of
Conscience, or movings unto things either morally or spiritually good. When men
are prevailed with by him to believe, he advances his presence in their souls,
and now moves them to things, Actions, and ways of a more worthy and blessed
consequence and import, and of a nearer and stronger Connection with their
supreme good and happiness; as to love God with all their hearts, with all
their souls, to embrace ways of Excellency, ways of Righteousness, and true
Holiness, to mortify the deeds of the Flesh, etc. By the way, When, I say,
that the Spirit of God moves the hearts of men when they believe; I do not
say, or suppose withal, that Believers always are prevailed with by these
movings of the Spirit to do the things, or effectually to consent to the doing
of the things whereunto they are thus moved: For though the Spirit be
Omnipotent, yet he is a voluntary Agent, and so can exert or put forth his
Omnipotency in what degree or manner of efficacy himself pleases; and we have
heretofore (I remember) upon occasion showed and proved unto you, that the
Spirit of God is not pleased to work, either compulsively or necessitatingly,
upon the hearts and wills of men, but only so, as to leave them at liberty, at
least a possibility of going their own way contrary to that whereunto he
moves. To plead that God is Omnipotent, and from hence to conclude, that
therefore he should not fail of any, or all things which he intends to do, it
clearly shows, that men do not understand the true nature of God; For though
God be Omnipotent, yet God uses his Omnipotency according to Rules of Wisdom
and Counsel. Now therefore he puts forth his Omnipotency, only in putting
men into a capacity of doing such things upon which he will reward them; which
capacity would be utterly destroyed in case men should be necessitated to do
any thing pleasing unto God. Only this by the way. Now this is one thing why
the Spirit of God is not an under Agent, because that men covld never have
called for, nor sought for his assistance, did not the Spirit first move them
thereunto: Therefore hence it is evident, that he is the principal Agent, and
yet this notwithstanding he may truly and properly be said to be drawn into our
assistance by us.

Secondly, This is by God himself Enacted and established for a Law between his
Spirit and his Saints: That when they having any spiritual Work, services, or
Exercise to perform, shall apply themselves unto the Spirit, now at hand, and
dwelling in them, after such a manner, and upon such terms, as we shall
presently declare unto you; If they shall seek for his help and assistance
herein; that then he will aid and assist accordingly, he will not deny them,
but will condescend graciously unto them, and assist them. Now, by the
knowledge and consideration of this Law, and confidence that there will be no
failing on the Spirits part (all which too are preventing wise wrought in men
by the Spirit) they are encouraged to make their recourse unto him, and to
depend upon him for his assistance at all times of need: In this case the
application of the Creature to the Spirit of God, being submissive and
obediential and not authoritative, there is no reason or ground to judge or
call the Creature the principal Actor or Mover in what is done by the
assistance of the Spirit; though the Creature may properly enough be said to
engage the Spirit to assist in such and such Actions. As when David being to
encounter with his Enemies, calling upon God for his help and his presence with
him in the Battle, may properly and truly enough be said hereby (by his Prayer)
to engage God to him in his Battle; yet it does not follow from hence, that
David was the principal, chief, or first Actor in the Battle; Because first, It
is God that freely makes that gracious Covenant with David (as with other
Saints) that if they call upon him in time of trouble ( Psalm. 50.15.) or
danger, he will hear and deliver.

Secondly, Because that it was God that put it into David's heart, and stirred
up David's spirit to go and apply himself by Prayer for his help in such a case.

Thirdly (and lastly) That which David did in this case to draw in God to his
assistance, he-did it in subordination to the will and good pleasure of God in
that kind, who had encouraged him to call upon him in a day of trouble. There
is a like consideration in Believers engaging the Spirit of God, and his aid in
all our spiritual occasions, works, and employments. For first, the Spirit of
God has made a Law, that if we will call upon him (upon the Spirit) in the
time of our need, he will be present with us and help us.

But then secondly, Because we are engaged hereunto (I mean to call upon him
for his assistance) by his instigation hereunto.

Thirdly (and lastly) All that you do in this kind it is in subjection to his
will and pleasure. These things being considered, it is clear that the Creature
Man, though he have a power to obtain the Spirit, yet he is not principal
Actor, but the Spirit of God is the principal Agent. Thus much for answer to
the first Question.

A second Question was, How,

To this I answer, This may and ought to be done by these four means:

First, By disclaiming (when we go about any thing, any spiritual duty or
service) our own strength and sufficiency, as to the performance of it in an
holy and acceptable manner, as of our selves without the presence and
assistance of God; I say, when men and women shall present themselves in all
their works and services as weak and impotent, unless they be endued with
strength from on high; this is one special strain that does marvelously comport
with the Spirit, and that which is in the first place to be done by us if we
desire to do any thing; if we desire his help and assistance at any time. Now,
to present our selves altogether weak, without some such presence and
assistance we speak of, this is that which will awaken us to do things by the
Spirit: For the way to do things by the Spirit, is not to forbear the doing of
things, or duties our selves; or not to perform any services: I say, it is not
to forbear the doing of things until we find the Spirit of Grace, and feel it
to work upon us: But to go about that which is our duty to do, in the season of
it, with a serious and humble acknowledgment, and deep sense of our own
inability for this work we are about. 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise (says David to his
Son Solomon) therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee: He does not
say, stay until the Lord does come unto thee, but arise and be doing. So that
this is the first thing to be done, we must lay all thoughts of Confidence
aside of any sufficiency as of our selves.

Secondly, We must turn our selves toward the Holy Ghost with the like
serious, and thorough, and unfeigned acknowledgment of a sufficiency in him:
that strength which we disclaimed in our selves we must ascribe unto him. We
know that the Lord Christ still requires this acknowledgment from those who
obtain any great Request as to any great matters: Believe ye that I am able to
do this? Says he to the blind men that came to him to be healed, Mat. 9.28. So
again, Mar. 9.23, 24. If thou can believe, all these things are possible,
etc. The Father of the Child answered, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. So
then here is another thing whereby to interest the Holy Ghost in what we go
about; namely, that we do acknowledge a sufficiency in the Holy Ghost.

But then Thirdly, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities,
etc. There is a very rich and compassionate inclination in the Holy Ghost
toward the Saints, in respect of the great infirmities which he discerns in
them, to assist, stand by, and relieve them in their holy endeavors; To help
them to perform things in an holy and humble manner upon terms of acceptance.

It is a usual Dialect in Scripture, when the Act is expressed by the means or
course that usually is taken to effect it: As Joh. 1.9. Christ is said to
enlighten every man that comes into the World, because he affords them such
means, and takes such a course with them which is proper to enlighten them:
Even so the Spirit helps our infirmities; that is, he is ready to help our
infirmities, toties quoties, as often as ever he is sought unto; as if he should
say, The Spirit knows how unable men are for such Actions and Services; and
therefore out of a kind of compassion and Sympathy, in respect of their
weakness, he is ready to help them. These gracious inclinations in him are apt
to advance, and express themselves in their might and power, when the Creature
is under a full knowledge and sense of its own weakness, and a full
acknowledgement of this readiness and willingness of the Spirit of God to help
and to relieve. The poor commits himself unto thee: Thou art the helper of
the Fatherless, Psalm. 10.14. Meaning, that when the poor do commit themselves
unto God, then he is ready to help them, there is a Synechdoche of the Species
for the Genius. By Fatherless he does mean, those that be not in any capacity
to help themselves. Now they that are under a sense that they are not able to
help themselves, by reason of their Poverty, God is wont to come in to their
relief and succor. So when a man or a woman is smitten with the sense of their
weakness in being not able to hold out in these services; if they shall have
recourse to the Spirit of God, as their helper; this is a Signal given unto the
Spirit, and he takes the Alarm, and he comes and shows himself in his
strength unto the Creature. All these three means for the interessing of the
Spirit in our Services I conceive our Savior himself ( Joh. 14.16, 17.)
chiefly points at and asserteth. I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter; that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
truth, whom the World cannot receive because it sees him not, neither knows
him, etc. The World cannot receive the Holy Ghost because it sees him not,
neither knows him; that is, because they have no manner of sense or
discerning of him in any such property wherein he desires to be known. For we
should have given notice of that, though there be a presence of the Spirit of
God in men in the state of Nature or Unregeneracy; yet the Scriptures do nor
speak of the Spirits dwelling in men, nor of a man's receiving the Spirit until
they receive him in a greater measure, or after the manner in which Believers
receive him, and as he is when he does advance his presence in an excellent
degree in them to put them upon Actions of an excellent concernment. But that
only by the way. The World cannot receive the Holy Ghost, because it sees him
not, neither knows him; that is, because it has no manner of discerning of
him, or at least no distinct or clear knowledge of him. A man may have the
sight of a Person, but that deserves not the name of the knowledge of him: But
when a man comes to understand of what temper or frame he is; either in
respect of wisdom, or goodness, or as to matter of Estate, or the like, then he
is properly said to know a man when he knows such things as these of him. It
is the manner of the Scripture to express Gradations after such a manner as
this; so He that keeps Israel neither slumbereth nor sleeps; so here, the
World neither sees him, nor knows him; that is, they have not seen him, much
less have they any considerate knowledge of him. And when our Savior gives
the true reason why the World did not, or cannot receive him, meaning, that
they cannot according to that Principle by which the Spirit of God is resolved
to give out himself, i. e. they cannot go beyond God's Declaration; they cannot
break the Bars of Gods Decree, nor the Method by which he is purposed to
dispose of his own Spirit. This deep ignorance which the men of the World have
concerning the Holy Ghost, is the reason why they cannot receive him in any
supernatural, or in any saving manner; they cannot receive the indwellings, or
the inhabitation of him so, as to receive strength, to perform services in any
spiritual or acceptable manner before God; for otherwise they are capable of
receiving of the Spirit in a way of common illumination: They are capable of
receiving of him in another sense, though they are not capable of receiving him
in such a manner as he is to be received, so as to be led by him into the ways
of life. By the light of this Discourse we see that they who are not convinced
of the necessity, both of the presence of the Spirit of God to help them, and
likewise of his sufficiency, and readiness, and willingness to afford his
presence with them, are under a kind of incapacity to receive the Spirit: But
on the other hand, those who have the knowledge of him they are in a capacity
of receiving him upon the most desirable terms, and are capable of making use
of him, as has been in effect said unto you.

In the fourth place you must pray unto God, viz. that men should pray for the
gift of the Spirit, and that in the lowest measure; then there is no question
to be made, but that Prayer is as profitable means to effect it in the highest
in the one as well as the other; and that there is no more unlawfulness in the
one than in other. This then in the fourth place, by way of direction how you
may engage the Spirit, and set him on work within you to perform what you are
not like to perform by your own strength, without such a presence of him to
assist in your work.

The third and last Question was, to bring in the Spirit to his assistance, the
great work we speak of would not be done; therefore there is no great
difficulty in the question; only that is to be remembered (as we pass from it)
that they who make the Creature either merely Passive, in such Works or
Services, or (which little eases the business) willing (as we say) by, or from
a necessitation, they despoile the Creature of all capacity of being rewarded
by God for such services. and thus whilst they importunely pretend to be the
great Magnifiers of the Grace of God, they do indeed and in truth reduce it to
a morsel of bread (as the Scriptures speak) and make nothing of it; so that in
them the Latin Proverb is fulfilled, Stultorum gratia ingrata: The grace or
favor of inconsiderate persons is unacceptable, or such as there is no reason
why they should be thanked for it. But this only by the way.

If you ask, But why should the employing of the Spirit of God,

I answer, That such an employing of the Spirit, as that we have described unto
you, is a regular use of that great Gift of the Spirit given unto us by God;
for the Spirit is given of God unto the Saints, for this end and purpose, viz.
that by him, and by his assistance, they should do all their works which he
commands them to do. I do not say, that it is the sole end; but that this is
one great and material end why the Holy Ghost is given unto men, and why he
dwells in the Saints, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received (says the Apostle)
not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God; that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God: That is for this end (amongst
others) and for others depending upon this; that by his help duly sought and
obtained by us, we might be able to know and rightly to conceive, apprehend,
and understand, and likewise firmly to believe the Gospel, i. e. the particular
things revealed in the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ, and the mind and
Counsels of God concerning our salvation: which things are said to be given, or
freely given unto us by God, beeause they are there exhibited, and lie in a
readiness for all men to receive and know, that are willing to take the course
which God has prescribed unto them for such an end. There is the same
consideration of other spiritual Actions and Services as these, Mortification,
Prayer, etc. The Holy Ghost is given for this end and purpose, that by his
assistance and strength they may be able to perform these things after a worthy
manner, and with highest acceptance unto God. If so, then to answer the
gracious intentions of God in giving him (which is by employing him as we have
heard;) This must need be a direct and proper means to abound with him, to have
an anointing more rich and full of his presence. For it is a Principle in
Reason and Equity, that they who make a regular and worthy use of a less
proportion of any good thing entrusted with them, or bestowed upon them, that
these should (no other circumstance hindering) be entrusted with a greater.
Upon this Foundation are these, and the like Sayings in Scripture built, Mat.
13.12. for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: But whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he
has. So again, Luke 16 10. He that is faithful in that which is least, is
faithful also in much: Meaning, it is meet that such a person who has approved
himself faithful in a less proportion of any good thing committed unto him,
should upon the account of his approved faithfulness therein be entrusted with
more. for God (as has been observed upon the like occasion) usually walks
with men, in the Scripture and Gospel, by such Principles and Rules which are
written in the Tables of their hearts by the Finger of Nature, and which they
are wont to observe and walk by in their common and Civil Affairs. Thus because
amongst men an Oath is the end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. Therefore God will
swear too, and treat with men by the mediation of an Oath; and so in abundance
of other particulars, God still applies himself unto men, and treats with
them by the same Rules and Principles which men walk by in transactions amongst
themselves. Now because one man is ignorant of what is in the heart of another,
and knows not how they will prove, whether diligent or negligent, faithful or
unfaithful in matters of trust committed unto them; therefore those whom they
have occasion to trust, they will first try them with a little, that in case
they should miscarry and prove unfaithful, the loss may be the less, and easier
to be born; if they approve themselves with wisdom and faithfulness in managing
that little, then they are encouraged to trust them yet deeper. And as men are
wont sometimes to try Casks or Vessels that are new made, and never had Liquor
put into them, whether they be tight or leaky; not by putting Wine, or Liquor
of value, but water into them: if they will hold water, men have so much the
better ground to trust them with Wine also. In like manner, though God (as is
said of Christ, Joh. 2.25.) needed not that any man should testify of man:
Because he knew what was in man; and consequently, what would come out from
him, and what he would do: So (I say) though God knows before hand how men
will prove, whether faithful or unfaithful in any thing committed unto them,
and in this respect needs make no experiment and trial of them, in reference
to any trust; yet because it is the manner, and according to the Principles of
wisdom in men to take such a course; he also will do it, though he has other
ends and reasons likewise for the doing of it, which it is not necessary now to
speak of. Thus also it is in matters of reward (more properly and commonly so
called;) though he knows from the beginning the uprightness integrity of men's
hearts, and what such men in time will do all the good work, all that
righteousness, and suffer all those things for righteousness sake, which
afterward they do and suffer; yet until they have given an account, both unto
himself, Angels, and men, of that their integrity, by ways of righteousness
and well-doing, he will do no great things for them; he will reward men only
according to their works, according to what they shall do or suffer, nor
according to what they purposed to do or suffer; unless happily they be
prevented of an opportunity; for that by the way, least there should be
mistake, not as if God should have no consideration or regard of any man's
faithful intentions; that is not the meaning of it; as many times you may find
persons whose hearts are full of fruitfulness; that notwithstanding are taken
away by death. Now it is not imaginable that God should deprive them of the
reward of such services, when as God himself denies men the opportunity to do
them, it is not reasonable, nor like unto the ways of God, or his proceedings,
that he should deprive them of their reward, in such a case, or under such
circumstances: But the meaning is, that the good things which men have done,
whether they be few or more, these shall be rewarded accordingly: So that men
and women who have given testimony unto the World of their own integrity,
uprightness, and faithfulness unto God, God will give them rewards answerable
hereunto.

We speak this for this end, to show that God's manner is, not to reward, nor
to take knowledge of the righteousness of men, until the World have taken
knowledge of it, until that they have given an account unto men that they are
persons fearing God: I say, God will not take any knowledge of them, until they
having given some Testimony unto the World of the integrity and uprightness of
their hearts; a Testimony of the truth of their Faith, and of the soundness of
their Love, that the World cannot deny but that certainly these are very worthy
men; then (as in Scripture Phrase) God is not ashamed of them, but they are in
an immediate capacity for him to own, and to reward, and do great things for.
As it is said of Enoch, he was translated, Heb. 11.6. of whom it was reported
that he walked with God, Genesis 6.22. Now God could suffer no disparagement, in
point of honor, by owning of him. And so 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your
faith being much more precious than of Gold, etc. might be found unto Praise,
and Honor, and Glory: It is not said, that your Faith being more precious than
Gold; but that the trial of your Faith, this is that which will turn to an
account of Praise, and Honor, and Glory unto men in the great day, etc. That
the trial of your Faith might be a Testimony in abundance given unto men, yea,
unto God himself; namely, when their Faith shall have been tried; whether it be
by their constant sufferings for righteousness take, or whether it has been by
a holy and blameless Conversation, it is not much material; if this trial of it
be the making of it known, and bringing it to light in the World, that so it
may be known and observed by men: In such a case it is a thing but equal, and
just, and well becoming God to be found rewarding of them with great and
wonderful things.

Thirdly, Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption: But he that sows unto the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
Everlasting Life. If the Question be, What is it to sow to the Spirit?

I answer, according to the usual import of that Metaphorical Expression of
sowing, to sow to the Spirit is to do such things which will redound to the
praise of the Spirit of God; to manage Actions so, that the benefit of them may
accrue to another. This the Apostle calls a sowing to others, If we have sown
unto you in spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal
things? 1 Cor. 9.11. To sow unto the Spirit, is to employ a man's self about
such things, such ways and works, whereby the Spirit may receive honor and
praise, which is all the harvest which the Spirit of God, and so God himself,
is capable of receiving from men. Only we may add this, That when men do such
things which are for the honor and praise of the Spirit, they must do them
with an intent that they may turn to his praise; we must not do such things
only which may accidentally turn to the praise of the Spirit: But we must do
them with a desire and purpose of heart that they may be to his praise. So that
to sow to the Spirit denotes fruitfulness in good works, especially in such
good works wherein more particularly the glorious goodness and power, etc. of
the Spirit may be discovered unto the World; and when men are addicted unto
such ways, and such works which have a proper and clear tendency to discover
the goodness, bounty, power, and excellency, etc. of the Spirit of God; then
they may be said to sow unto the Spirit; especially, when they do these things
with an intention to commend his goodness and power unto the World. So to sow
to the Flesh is to do that which tends to please the sensual part of man; and
this with an intent to gratify the Flesh: whether we understand it in respect
of the outward Actions of the body, or the corrupt workings of the mind, it is
clear that men in either of them do sow to the Flesh. Only this is to be
minded, that the taking care of the outward man, and the doing of such things
which in a regular way tend to the maintenance and comfortable subsistence
thereof, are never said to be a sowing to the Flesh, in opposition to the
Spirit, but only when men are inordinate in the use of these things, then, and
only then does the Interest of the Flesh come in. For whilst men and women are
providing for the comfortable being of the outward man, they all this while
walk by the Rule of the Word of God, and comport with the Spirit of God. These
kind of doings are not properly the works of the Flesh, but may be more truly
said to be the works of the Spirit; For the Spirit of God requires that all
things should be done in a regular manner, that the outward man may not be
disadvantaged unto spiritual Services, therefore the Spirit of God does charge
men with particular care and circumspection over their Bodies, that by this
means he may rejoice with so much the greater Joy where he finds men manage
themselves so that they may be in a good capacity to do such things which are
holy, just, and good, and that are righteous, and of a good report. Now the
reason why such things as these must needs be matter of praise unto the Spirit
of God is, because the hearts of men cannot lightly, when they see men full of
good works, but acknowledge that these things do come from the Spirit of God;
because such works as these, being in goodness and glory above the Line of men,
plainly assert their Original to be Divine; and plainly inform the World that
God by his Spirit vouchsafes to dwell and to act in men and women, from whom
such excellent works as these proceed. But more particularly such ways and
works which outstrip the generality of men (yea, of Christians) and which they
are not at present able to understand, nor to see the reason of them; such were
some of the actions and ways of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5.13. For whether we
be besides our selves it is for God, or whether we be sober it is for your
cause. For the love of Christ constrains us, etc. Paul seemed in some of his
Actions as a man half-witted or besides himself, and as a man bereaved of his
senses; yet this doubtless was of the best and choicest seed, the best kind of
sowing unto the Spirit of God; it is true, that at the first performance of
them the World did not understand (no nor Christians neither, of an ordinary
anointing, as was even now hinted) nor could-resolve them into their proper
Principles; so as to say, that this was the Spirit of God that moved and
stirred him up. As the Seed for a while lies buried in the ground, and
afterward springs up: Even so when the reasons of such actions should be
manifest unto them, then they should confess, that he had a great and mighty
assistance of the Spirit of God with him. There are some things which are above
the ordinary reach of natural and moral men, though the truth is, there has
been here and there a Son of Nature ( Philosophers, and such like men) that
have gone very far, and as high (it is likely) as many of the Sons and
Daughters of God have done, or do; as, in that great work and strain of
excellency in forgetting and forgiving of injuries, and passing by all matters
of unkindness, disparagement, and contempt which they have met withal from the
hands of men. Now, for men and women to take no knowledge of such things from
any, nor to draw back from them, or to withhold the hand of their goodness,
bounty, or good will in any kind from them, upon the account of any such hard
measure received, this is one of the highest, and one of the most spiritual
strains that can be, that the nature of man is likely to partake of. To be able
to do good in the presence of all these discouragements, does argue, even to
the generality of men, that such a man is of an excellent spirit, and that he
has a great presence of the Spirit of God with him. And doubtless, though
there may be excellent things written in this kind concerning those that have
not been seasoned with the Gospel of Jesus Christ (at least in so explicit a
manner;) yet is there a more peculiar and a more rich presence of the Spirit
vouchsafed unto those who enjoy the Gospel, and which moves them more strongly
to spiritual actions, and which have a more immediate and strong connection with
their present joy and comfort, and also with their Eternal life and good of
their souls. But besides this, there are other things of an excellent import,
Let your moderation (says the Apostle, Phil. 4.5.) be known unto all men: The
word signifies, let your yieldingness, or comportance, and compliance be known
unto all men: he means, sweetness and gentleness of disposition; a readiness
in men ever and anon to give away their own right, to deny themselves in many
things, which, according to strict terms, and the rigor of the Law, they might
stand upon. When ever there is danger that upon their account the Gospel is
like to suffer in the hearts and consciences of men, in case they should stand
stiffly upon their own rights, then the opportunity is before a man, then has
he a call to practice that moderation, and that yieldingness, and gentleness of
Spirit which the Apostle calls for at the hands of Christians. We might
instance in many more particulars of this nature, but you see by that little
which we have insisted upon what we mean by sowing to the Spirit.

But if you ask, How should such a thing as this be any way or means to help us
forwards in this, viz. A being filled with the Spirit, or any ways promote
such an end?

I answer, This is clear from the Principle insisted upon in the former Point,
That to him that has shall be given: He that is willing to sow to the Spirit,
it is a sign that he (in the sense of this Scripture) is a man that has
received the Grace of God. Now they that declare that they have, i. e. that
take a course to make the World acknowledge that they have; they that have in
this sense, shall have more abundantly; and yet still the more they have, the
more they shall have; and the faster and the thicker that men shall sow to the
Spirit, they shall still have more seed. As God gives natural Seed unto the
Sower, so does he give spiritual Seed unto him that sows unto the Spirit; he
shall have more strength, and vigor, and stronger Propensions to do well and
worthily, yea, to abound in well doing. This is a third means to be made use of
in order to a being filled with the Spirit of God.

Fourthly, Another means for the same end, I mean, of being filled with the
Sprit, is to feed and cherish, to nourish and strengthen the motions of the
Spirit: when at any time he begins to burn or rise up in a little flame in
the soul; then (toties quoties) to be ready to cast spiritual oil upon the
flame, that so he may advance the motions which he has begun, is another
excellent and pregnant way and means to be filled with the Spirit. To open this
means or direction unto you, it is to be supposed, that the Spirit where he
inhabiteth and dwells will ever and anon be heaving and putting forth in the
hearts and souls of men; he will be secretly inciting, and gently moving and
persuading men and women unto good ways and actions, unto ways of Justice,
Righteousness, and Goodness, and the like, sometimes in one kind, and sometimes
in another; yea, many times (it is likely) he will be moving men, and
persuading them to actions, not simply and positively good, but unto such ways
and actions that are higher and more excellent, and more worthy than any of
those wherein they yet walk, or have been accustomed, or have lift up their
hearts or hands unto. This then is that we advise you, in this means or
direction, that whenever you perceive or feel the Spirit rising or moving
within you unto any thing that is good, worthy, or meet to be done, as (if you
live inwardly, and have much and close communion and converse with your hearts
and souls) you may frequently find that he is: When (I say) at any time you are
sensible of any good motion conceived and raised in you, that then, presently,
you provide spiritual milk and honey to feed, strengthen, and nourish the
tenderness of it; for when these motions come from the Spirit they are at first
but weak, and tender, and faint; but you may take a course, by nourishing of
them, that of soft and tender motions you may make them strong, if you take
unto you such and such considerations which are apt and proper both to continue
on foot and keep alive the said motions within you, and likewise to fortify
and encourage them. Gentle and soft motions, bearing upon your hearts and
consciences, are but like a soft Air or breathing of wind upon a Ships sails,
which help her not much on her way: So the breathings of the Spirit, the first
rise of them are but soft and gentle, but there is a proper kind of nourishment
to be administered unto them which will enlarge and strengthen them. Let the
motions be what they will (as indeed there may be a thousand motions of this
kind) the Scripture does afford wherewithal to nourish them all. As the Earth
brings forth all kind of of Herbs, Trees, etc. So the Scriptures yield a
proper and peculiar kind of Nourishment, a peculiar kind of consideration of
truth, which will fortify and strengthen all those motions, and raise them up
in growth and stature. As suppose it be a motion unto a more constant,
frequent, and conscientious attendance upon the Ordinances of God's House, and
the Affairs there; the Scriptures will fill you with motives and considerations
which are apt and proper to nourish, fortify, and strengthen you in this
service. So again, suppose that the motion be to works of Charity, to a more
open handedness unto works of Mercy; the Scripture will furnish you with
nourishment for such motions also. Or if the motions of the Spirit be to
abandon or cast off idle and unprofitable company, who are good for nothing but
to waste our precious time; I say, the Scriptures will nourish these motions
also: You shall find meditations there, and such words and considerations that
are proper nourishment for all such motions of the Spirit as these mentioned,
with their fellows, which will cause them to wax, and grow, and gather strength
until it be too hard for the contrary corruptions and infirmities to hinder
them. My Brethren, there be many choice motions from the Spirit of God which
may die, and never bring forth. As there are many Children that die in their
Infancy, and never grow up unto men: Even so the truth is, that where there is
one Motion that does grow and come to any maturity, it is to be feared that
there are many thousands which for want of nourishment (and because they are
not propagated and increased by adding further strength unto them) die, and
come to nothing. As it is with the Seed of Mankind in their Infancy and tender
years, we know that they are capable of living and growing up unto men, yet are
they not capable of propagating in their kind till they are grown up to some
maturity: Even so, motions to good, take them in their beginning, though they
are capable of growing unto their full strength, yet they are not presently
capable of action until they be trained and fed up, until they come to
maturity: Then they will beget in their own likeness, then they will produce in
their kind. Thus we see, if we desire to be filled with the Spirit of God, we
must do as we use to do with our newborn Infants, make much of them, and not
despise them because they are weak: No, but we are to be very tender of them,
and to nourish them, and to cherish them, to minister such food unto them that
will strengthen them unto, or at least until they are grown to Maturity. A
motion which at first has little or no strength, and so cannot go abroad into
any Action or Service, by that time you have nourished and carefully tendered
it in your hearts and souls, though it was but like a grain of Mustardseed at
the beginning; yet being nourished and fed in your hearts, after a while it
will be full of strength and vigor; and whereas at first it might easily have
been quenched, after it comes to maturity it will be able to nourish it self.
Now the reason of this direction, in order to a being filled with the Spirit,
runs upon the former Principle which we lately mentioned, viz. To him that
has shall be given. Man who shall nourish and cherish the motions of the
Spirit of God when they are in him (as it were) in swaddling clothes, and
little, and shall be a good Foster-Father unto them, shall certainly have a
greater and greater presence of this Spirit, until it shall enable him to do
great and glorious things; and so shall delight in him daily more and more, and
stir and raise up other and more excellent motions which never came into his
mind, or heart before.

Fifthly, led by the Spirit, Romans 8.14. You know there are some Horses will not
be led, but a man must pull and haule them after him; but there are other
Horses that are obedient and tractable in your hand: So where there is a
tractableness and teachableness in men, that the Spirit of God leads them, as
it were, by the hand this way and that way, when men are easy to be taught by
him, this is another ready and pregnant means whereby to be filled with the
Spirit. My Brethren, you may be said to be led by the Spirit when you go along
with him, or are willing to go that way wherein he would lead you by every good
motion. The Spirit does take (as it were) every man and woman by the hand, and
does upon the matter desire them to be willing to be lead: Now when men and
women are willing to accept of the Spirit of God for their Leader and Guider in
such ways and courses as he does like to lead them unto, these are they that
are led by the Spirit of God. It is no great difficulty, no great Masterpiece
to know when, and in what cases we are led by the Spirit of God, and when not;
for if we know but so much, as to be able to distinguish between good and evil;
if we can but distinguish such motions that be good from those that be evil, we
may know by this alone when we are led by the Spirit of God, and when not: For
most certain it is, that all motions to good, which are either mediate or
immediate, are from the Spirit of God; therefore, if it be a good motion, it is
easy to know what Parent it has, namely, God. So now, if by any motions,
which are at any time stirring or working within us, we find our hearts drawn
out unto such and such a good way and work; in this case, if we shall seek for,
or consult with the dark part of our souls to find out Arguments to disparage
them, as if they were not the motions of God, or of the Spirit of God, but were
from some other Principle, there may be much danger in it: But if men shall not
seek to draw back upon any such pretenses as these (only because they would not
go along with the motion, it being contrary to some unruly lust, or unworthy
design which they are carrying on in the World) but shall be willing to be led
by the Spirit: If they need not to be pulled and hauled, but shall come on
freely and readily, and shall be willing to go along with the motions of the
Spirit, without asking any question for conscience sake, or rather for lusts
sake; this is another great advantage that will turn to an happy account in
order to a completing this great design of your being filled with the Spirit
of God. For there is nothing that gives a more demonstrative proof that a man
is a true born Son of God than that he is willing to be led by the Spirit, in
the sense declared. It was a saying amongst the Romans, He is an ill Soldier
that follows his Captain groaning and sighing: Even so, he is not a
reconciled person with his own peace and comfort who studies and casts about,
and would fain be excused from the service of God. By the way, that we may not
discourage any to comply at any time with the motions of the Spirit, when any
person, man or woman, shall make a long work of finding out pretenses before
they will go along with these motions; nevertheless if they do comply and go
along with them at last, though it be late, yet better so than wholly to reject
and cast them off; but this is not the way of wisdom, there is a far better and
more excellent way than this, in order to the great blessedness (we speak of)
of being filled with the Spirit, which is, to be freely willing to go along
with the Spirit of God in his leading and guidance. And so we have briefly done
with this means also; Only the reason or ground of this direction we shall
illustrate a little further, viz.

He that has shall have more abundantly; Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy
Spirit of God, etc. Then certainly he may be pleased and delighted; he may be
so used and entreated by men, so that he will take pleasure and delight in
them. We have opened this Metaphor unto you heretofore, therefore we shall only
touch it by the way. Grief, when it is applied unto the Spirit of God, does not
suppose or imply any such thing as if the Holy Ghost may be grieved in a true
or proper sense: No, but the meaning is this, that such a course may be taken
by men that the Spirit of God may be provoked to do as men use to do under
grief. As for instance, when men are under the Passion of grief they are
indisposed unto action, they are listless unto any expression of themselves in
one kind or other; grief and sorrow straitens and contracts the hearts of men,
that they become half dead, having no life, no lust, no spirit to any thing out
of themselves: So likewise, the Spirit may be said to be grieved when he
keeps silence in men, and does not act as he was wont to do. When there is a
deadness in the Soul, when there are no lustings therein unto that which is
good, it is a sign that the Spirit is grieved; because he stirs not, he
moves not, he comes not forth as he was wont to do, but leaves the soul
solitary and to it self: And when there is such a calm, no breathing of the
Spirit upon the soul, there will be no lust, no motion, nor desire to do any
thing that is spiritual or heavenly; and then it is with the soul as it is with
a quantity of Wine, when the Spirits are extracted out of it, that which
remains is but as a little water: Just so are the Spirits, and hearts and
souls of men when the Spirit of God is grieved within them, when he
withdraws; Their very life, and all that vigor of spirit which at other
times is found in them, all is under hatches and does not appear: On the
contrary, when the Spirit of God is pleased and delighted in men, he is like
unto men when they are under greatest contentment and satisfaction of mind,
they are now in a posture and readiness to do all the good they can, to please
and gratify every man. This we have opened unto you formerly, and have showed
you how the Scriptures run much upon it; As says Mephibosheth to David, Let
him take all forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace, 2 Samuel
19.30. And so Gal. 4.15. Where is then the blessedness you speak of? For I bear
you record, that if it had been possible you would have plucked out your own
eyes, etc. And so again, Bless, and curse not; bless I say, for thereunto you
are called; as who should say, Christians by means of that rich portion of
contentment and joy which they are interessed in by the Gospel are in a posture
to do good unto the World, under all the cursings and prosecutings of it: Even
so it is with the Spirit of God when he takes delight and pleasure in a man,
then is he enlarged toward him, he is then active, stirring, and vigorous in
the heart and soul. These motions, quicknings, and encitements unto ways that
are good, these beat strong upon a man. Now the Spirit of God, the more he is
pleased, the more he does enlarge and give out himself unto men. So then, if we
desire to be filled with the Spirit, here is another means proper to obtain it,
namely, if you will be led by the Spirit. There is nothing more pleasing unto a
man, especially unto a man of wisdom, than to see his Counsel followed: This
very impression being found in the hearts of men, argues, that there is a like
strain of this in the nature of God; for we have often signified unto you, that
God made man after his own Image, endued him with the same Principles of Wisdom
and Understanding (namely, for nature or kind) which were in himself; he drew a
kind of Copy of his own Wisdom in the Nature of man. And this by the way is the
reason of another thing also, viz. That in his Treaties with men about the
great and important business of their everlasting Peace, he still goes by such
Rules which men go by, and manage the things of their highest concernments. But
now the reason why God does deal with men in very many cases by their own
Principles, is not simply because he will thus fall in with them, but because
these are the Rules of God himself, according to the excellency of his Nature,
by which he rules and governs the World.

Sixthly, Gal. 5.17. that the Spirit and the Flesh are contrary one to the
other, and lust one against the other; one lusts after that, or after the
doing of that, i.e. secretly inclines and persuades men and women to the
doing of that, which being done, is contrary to the interest of the other; it
discourageth, weakens, and disableth the force or moving power of the other in
the soul. Therefore a course is to be taken, and something done that may
restrain the motions of the Flesh, or at least break the heart or strength of
it. It is not like the Spirit will advance to the filling of the soul with his
presence so long as lust remains in heart and strength in men; for this is to
be remembered and taken along by way of caution at this turn, that though there
be a contrariety in all the lusts of the Flesh unto the Spirit, yet all kinds
or degrees of these lustings are not so, or upon such terms repugnant and
contrary to the Spirit and his growth in men, but that this may proceed and go
forward some of them notwithstanding. For as it is in the comings in of the
Tide and flowings of the waters, whilst the Waters are increasing, and the
banks filling, there are some smaller refluxes or fallings back of the water,
which are presently recovered, and this with advantage by the next reflux and
bearing up of the Tide, so that the Tide holds on its way, makes good its
course until it comes to its height and fullness, these lesser refluxes
notwithstanding: In like manner, though there be at times some lesser yieldings
and givings back of the Spirit in the soul, meeting with the current or stream
of the Flesh, yet he may be brought on again, toties quoties, and that with
power, to the over-bearing and breaking the motions and current of the Flesh,
and so keep still upon the advance, and be filling of his channels and banks
daily.

There are two kinds or degrees of the lustings of the Flesh, significant term,
wherein to express them, calling them (...), sudden rushing or inconsiderate
risings or startings up of nature, or the natural faculties in the soul,
which-they compare to the winking or shutting of the eyelids when any thing
threatens the eye; or so to the lifting up of the hands to the head for
safeguard, when a blow is coming upon the head; these are Natures motions by
instinct, and they do not depend upon the consent of the will, or discourse of
reason. The latter kind of these lustings are such which have gained or gotten
the consent of the will unto them, and hereby they conceive (as James speaks,
Jam. 1.15.) i. e. are made pregnant, like a woman that is with Child; so have
such lustings as these, the Act or Deed it self of sin in their womb or bowels,
Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished [ i.e. actually or externally perpetrated or committed] brings forth
death. Then when lust has conceived, etc. This clearly supposes that there
is, or may be, a lust or lusting, which (in this respect) is Virgin like, has
no corruption of the act of sin in it; wherein the act of sin is not formed or
shaped. This kind of lust, we speak of, is (...), (as the Greek word expresses
it) the first motion or moving of nature in a man which is exerted or put forth
before a man intends, thinks, or knows any thing of it. This kind of lust may
be troublesome unto a man, and find him inward exercise and work, more than
enough, to suppress it as it rises, that so the will and consent may not touch
it, or come at it; yet this is not the lusting of the Flesh which does much
obstruct the Spirit in his way, or prejudice the souls being filled with him.
Paul was a man that was abundantly filled with the Spirit; and yet he says,
that he knew that in him (that is in his Flesh, as he interprets) dwells no
good thing, Romans 7.18. And that he saw ver. 23. [ i. e. discerned, felt, or
perceived] another Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind, and
bringing him into captivity [ i. e. endeavoring to bring him into captivity]
to the Law of sin which was in his members [meaning unto it self by an Hebrew
kind of Dialect, which many times uses and repeats the Antecedent for the
Relative.] I thank my God (says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 1.4.) always on your
behalf for the grace of God (not for his grace) which is given unto you, etc.
So again, Ephesians. 4.16. From whom the whole body makes increase of the body
[meaning, of it self.] See also Luke 3.19. Now the Apostle saying, That in him
[i.e. in his flesh] there dwelt no good thing [meaning but abundance of that
which is naught or dangerous (according to the Rule (often upon occasion)
delivered unto you) viz. That Adverbs of denying signify the contrary of these
words with which they are joyned] implies and signifies that the fleshly part
of him, which he calls his members [ ver. 23.] i. e. his body was ever and
anon occasioning his spirit or soul (being so near in conjunction with it) to
bubble, or put forth in some vain, foolish, or sinful desire or other, which
made him work without end; partly, in lamenting over himself, by reason of
them, and their mingling themselves with all his services and spiritual actings
and doings: Partly, in a solicitousness and careful watching over his heart or
will, lest they came to be confederate with them in respect of this turmoil he
still had with his flesh and body, ver. 24. He cries out, O wretched (or
miserable) man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body [or from a body]
of death? i.e. From a body that works or creates all sorrow, trouble, and
care to me. I thank God (says he) through Jesus Christ our Lord; meaning, that
that deliverance from that body of death he speaks of, which was procured unto
him by Jesus Christ, and which he had in his eye as coming apace toward him,
provoked him to a signal thankfulness unto God for his grace toward him in
such a deliverance, and so concludes the Chapter; So then with my mind I my
self, (...), the same person, I, or he, or that man, that is, I serve the Law
of God: but with my flesh the Law of sin. With my mind I my self serve the Law
of God; that is, yield obedience unto it, with an intent and desire hereby to
honor it, with my mind I my self thus serve it. In this Discourse Paul makes
a plain opposition between (...) and (...), I and my self, or between him and
himself; affirming, that he did many things which he himself did not, and was
resolved not to do. I man may be said (in the general and common language) to
do whatsoever he does upon any terms whatsoever, viz. what he does causelessly,
what he does contrary to the desire of his soul, and which he does thorough
violence of temptations, etc. But a man himself cannot (in emphaticalness of
expression) be said to do any thing but what he does with his heart and soul,
with a full and free consent of his will, etc. And so our Apostle, who was very
far from flattering himself, yet acquits himself from that which was done by
him, contrary to the bent and frame of his heart, and without consent of his
will, by casting it upon sin that dwelt in him, i. e. that sinful weakness
which kept possession of his Flesh; Now if I do that which I would not, it is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. It is no more I; meaning,
that all the while he did that which was evil, and sinful for him to do, with
his entire will and full consent, it was he himself that did it, and not the
sin, or sinful weakness that dwelt in him; but now (says he) since the frame
of my heart and bent of my will stands against that which I do in this kind;
from hencesorth I may truly (speaking Evangelically) discharge my self from the
doing of it, and arraign that weakness which inseparably hangs upon me as the
Author and Actor of it. I have stood somewhat the longer upon the opening of
this passage of the Apostle, because I desire, with as much evidence and
satisfaction as may be, to make out this unto you, that so you need not be
discouraged in the course or way of your endeavors to be filled with the
Spirit, by such kind of lustings of the flesh within you as these we have
spoken so much of, though they should still haunt and follow you, in as much as
you have heard that he that was filled (almost to the brim) with the Spirit was
notwithstanding obnoxious to such a lusting. Such Lusts as these do not
intoxicate, bewitch, or drink up your Reason, Judgments, or Understandings; but
they may remain whole and entire unto you (them notwithstanding) for any
spiritual work or service, and consequently for comporting with the Spirit of
God, in order to his filling you with himself. But

Secondly, Those words of James, Then, when Lust has conceived, it brings
forth sin, etc. as plainly show, that Lust also may be so entreated and dealt
with, as to be made pregnant and big with the external Act it self of sin. This
is done when the heart or will of man or woman falls in with the Lust, and
takes her to Wife, and couple themselves with her, i. e. when men approve and
like of the Lust or Desire we speak of, and begin to take care (as the Apostle
elsewhere speaks) to make provision for it, or to bethink themselves how they
may gratify it, and fulfill it. By the way, when James says (as we have heard)
Then, when Lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; The meaning is not, as
if this always proved so, viz. that every Lust consented unto produces the
external or complete Act of sinning; there are many times Conceptions where
there are no Births or bringing forth of Children; many things may interpose to
occasion an abortion, or a consumption of that which is conceived in the womb:
And thus it may be, and often is in the case of Lusts in their conceptions;
many men have for a time intended and purposed to do many things that are evil,
whose purposes and intentions notwithstanding have been dissolved or turned out
of their way; so that they never come to be put in execution. This is apparent
in David's case, when by Abigail's wise behavior and advice he was taken off
from his hard and bloody intentions against Nabal and his House. Therefore the
Apostles meaning, in saying, that when lust has conceived it brings forth
sin, is not to show what is always done in the case he speaks of, but what is
frequently done, and always likely, or probable to be done, of which kind of
sayings there are very many in the Scriptures, Joh. 11.9, 10. If any man walk
in the day (says our Savior) he stumbleth not: but if a man walk in the night
he stumbleth; his meaning is, neither to affirm that no man that walks in the
day ever stumbleth, nor that every man that walks in the night does stumble,
but only, that there is a probability both of the one, and of the other, and
that they are likely either to stumble, or not to stumble: So likewise (the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33. The unmarried cares for the things of the Lord,
etc. But this only by the way. The business we have in hand is to give you to
understand and know, that that kind of lusting, which hinders your being
filled with the Spirit, yea, and will hinder it, until it be taken away, is
that which is owned, accepted, and approved of by the will and judgment of a
man or woman, and for the gratifying and fulfilling whereof care is taken by
men. Such lusts as these are they which grieve and quench the Spirit, and
consequently hinder his progress, motion, or advance in the soul. When (with
the Scriptures) we say the Spirit is grieved, we do not mean, nor does the Holy
Ghost in this expression mean any thing else, but only that he is turned out of
the way; he does retire himself, and is quiet and still, men shall hear but
very little from him, so that there will be but very weak and faint motions and
suggestions from him.

But we were saying unto you that all fleshly lusts in the general are
obstructive to the course of the Spirit,

A second property, which the Scriptures attribute unto the Spirit of God, is,
Grace, or a gracious disposition, Heb. 10.29. He is termed, The Spirit of
grace. And God is termed, The God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10.

A third property taken notice of in the Holy Ghost by the Scriptures is his
heavenliness; he is said in 1 Pet. 1.12. to have been sent down from heaven,
which implies that his coming, or sending into the World, is about the affairs
of heaven, and that he only minds these; so elsewhere he is said to be the
Spirit which is of God, 1 Cor. 2.12, 14. So also in Joh. 15.26. Christ
promises to send him from the Father, all which imply him to be an heavenly,
and heavenly minded Spirit.

A fourth property, and the last we shall now take notice of, which the
Scriptures mind in the Holy Ghost, is, a disposition and propensness of mind in
him to be communicating and revealing the Counsels and secret things of God
unto the minds and consciences of men. This property of the Spirit of God
(which is of some assinity with the last named, and gives testimony unto it) is
often mentioned in the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things: yea, the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man save the Spirit of man
which is in him? etc. So again, ver. 12, 13. Now we have not received the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know ( viz.
by his discovering it unto our Judgments and Consciences) the things that are
freely given to us of God; which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches. And so in Joh. 16.13.
Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come (speaking of the Comforter) he will
guide you into all truth, etc. and he will show you things to come, etc. This
is another heavenly property of him who comes from the Father to communicate
and acquaint men with the great mysteries of the Counsels of God, so far as it
does concern the souls of men to know them. Now all such lusts and sinful
dispositions (being indulged and nourished) which are contrary to, and fight
against these properties and dispositions of the Spirit, are (and must in
reason needs be) most distasteful unto him, and consequently most obstructive
to him in his way of advancing his blessed presence in the souls of men.

The first of the four Particulars attributed unto the Holy Ghost in Scripture
was holiness; For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, 1
These. 4.7. And so Romans 6.19. 1 Cor. 7.14. And very frequently in the Scriptures
you shall find a great opposition made between holiness and that uncleanness,
whose fulfilling polluteth and defiles the Temples of men's bodies; as the lust
of Adultery, Fornication, Incest, and all impurities of such a kind, which
being consented unto, and harbored in the souls of men and women, are
obstructive with an high hand to that great felicity and happiness of their
being filled with the Spirit. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.29. compared with ver. 30.
plainly intimates such an Antipathy between such lusts of uncleanness as these,
with their fruits: and the Spirit of God, that they are a grief unto him, and
consequenly (as we lately opened the Metaphor unto you:) that his hand is
weakened by them to that good work of filling men with his presence; which
otherwise was in his heart to have been wrought for them; Let no corrupt
communication proceed cut of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, and grieve not the holy Spirit, etc. Let no corrupt communication,
(...), putrified or rotten speech; such as is wont to proceed from these impure
Fountains we speak of in the hearts of men and women. For even as those sents
and smells which are wont to breath from Laistoffs and Dunghils are noisome and
offensive unto men who have their senses quick and good: So are unclean
Communication and rotten speech unto men who have their spiritual senses about
them. Now lascivious, wanton, unchaste, or unclean communication is therefore
termed (...), corrupt or rotten; because unto them that have their senses
(their spiritual senses) sound and in a good temper and habit, exercised in
distinguishing things that differ; such Communication and Discourse is such a
kind of annoyance or offense which answers that annoyance to the bodily senses,
which is occasioned (as was said) by the fumes and smells of Laistoffs,
Dunghills, and putrified bodies, which are not simply unpleasant and offensive,
but of dangerous consequence also to dissolve, stifle, or destroy nature; for
otherwise there may be sents that are offensive and unpleasant, and yet not
Enemies unto nature, nor yet of any tendency to her dissolution, but for her
preservation and health: In like manner, wanton communication and discourses
are not only or simply noisome or unpleasant unto men and women, that have
their spiritual senses about them, but have a dangerous influence also to
destroy their spiritual being, and that work of grace which is begun in their
souls; according to that of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil words corrupt
good manners; not that they do always do it, but they have a property so to
do; they are of a destroying nature, and if these destroy good manners, then
have they a property to do this also, viz. to destroy all those good Principles
out of which good manners are produced. And whereas to this Exhortation, that
no corrupt or rotten communication should proceed out of their mouths; he
immediately subjoyneth, And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption; he does it by way of motive, clearly
implying, that such communication will grieve the Spirit of God. Now this
connective Particle, and, sometimes implies a motive enforcing the precedent
Exhortation, Do this and live, Genesis 42.18. i. e. for you shall live by doing
this. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, Prove. 4.8. i. e. for she shall
promote thee: I give thee this for thy encouragement, that she shall promote
thee. So that the meaning of the place in hand is, that such a kind of rotten
communication will grieve the Spirit of God: That is, has a direct tendency in
it to cause the Spirit of God to do as men usually do when they are grieved (as
we formerly showed) withdraw themselves from those who so grieve them, and grow
listless unto action, and have no lust to go forth in their way; but retire
themselves, and mourn, and grow solitary. In like manner, rotten Communication
will cause the Spirit to withdraw his presence in his wonted influences, he
will have no desire to exert, or put forth himself (at least with any strength
or vigor) in motions or encitements to holiness, etc. by means whereof the
Flesh will gather more and more strength, and the lusts thereof increase daily.
This shows that there is a spiritual opposition between rotten Communication,
or any other lusts of the Flesh and the Spirit of God. So Jude, ver. 19. These
be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit; Implying, that
they who are given over to sensual and voluptuous courses are persons who have
no the Spirit. I conceive this distinguishing Character that they separate
themselves, viz. from the Bodies and Societies of the Saints, and from the
Ordinances of God. The Apostle would signify this unto us, that such persons
as these did it under pretense of a greater measure of the Spirit; some special
discovery of somewhat more than had been made known unto other men: As if they
were of too tall a stature and growth to assemble themselves with others; as
men think not themselves fit company for Children; so these men, upon pretense
of a more excellent inspiration from the Spirit of God, separated themselves
from other men. But (says he) there is this in the bottom, they are sensual:
this separation does not proceed from the Spirit of God, nor from any further
Communion more than others which they have with him: But they are sensual,
sensual pleasures and courses have bewitched and taken away their heart: And
now, that they may enjoy themselves in this course, they must pretend to
Revelation, and some extraordinary Knowledge (for the Saints in their Communion
know no such thing, but that which they know is of another nature) and
therefore that they might not be troubled and checked in their way, they must
give ear to an unclean Spirit; and this they call the Spirit of God, and that
in opposition unto others.

Secondly, A second Property of the Spirit mentioned was his grace. We read
Heb. 10.29. of despighting the Spirit of grace. And so God is called 1 Pet.
5.10. The God of all grace; meaning, that he is a gracious Spirit. Now grace
(as we have formerly opened the nature of it unto you) imports a readiness,
or great propenseness in the will and soul of a man, to show kindness, or to do
good where no engagement is from without from him unto whom kindness is shown,
it differs from mercy. For the object of mercy always is misery, or persons
in misery: But the object of grace may as well be persons in a good condition,
and free from misery, as those that are in misery; for Grace only respects, as
it were, an absence of all motives or engagements, from those to whom we intend
good, and reaches no further. So then, when the Spirit is called the Spirit of
grace, it does import a freeness, a readiness, a willingness, and propenseness
of mind to do good unto such persons who never laid any engagement upon him, to
whom he is no ways Debtor by one Law or other. When there is a propenseness in
any person thus freely without engagement to deal courteously or kindly with
others, this is Grace truly so called. Now the Spirit is said to be a gracious
Spirit, because he vouchsafes to come unto men, and to dwell with them, and to
couple and join himself with men, whilst they are strangers unto him, even
whilst as yet he has received to no kindness from them, he is pleased to come
unto them, and to invite them. Nay, the truth is, there is a more excellent
degree of grace than this in the Spirits dealing with men; when kindness is
showed not only where no engagement has gone before, but contrary to
engagements on the other hand. This is grace in abundance, and in its
exaltation, when a person has done us wrong, or disgraced us unjustly, and
offered us injury, and we, notwithstanding such hard measure received from him,
shall yet be ready to stand by him, and accommodate him, then are we gracious
in an excellent and eminent degree. Now, such lusts and sinful dispositions in
men, which are contrary to this Character or property of Grace in the Spirit
are very distasteful unto him, apt to grieve and obstruct him in his course as
well as the former, viz. uncleanness, etc. In that former place, Ephesians. 4.30.
where the Apostle had added, And greive not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed unto the day of Redemption (meaning, by corrupt communication:) He
immediately adds, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice, etc. The motive lies in
the middle between the two Exhortations, and it enforces them both; it is a
motive both to that which went before, Let no corrupt Communication proceed out
of your mouth; and unto that which follows, namely, that all wrath, and
malice, and the like should be put away. Therefore this clearly shows, that
these kind of corruptions, and distempers, bitterness, and malice, etc. are
contrary to the Spirit of Grace, and those gracious dispositions and
inclinations of his to do good, and to show kindness and love where there is no
merit; yea, even unto those men who have rather merited sorrow and hard measure
from him. But much more when men, without any provocations, shall be in
bitterness of Spirit, and full of wrath and anger, and shall entertain and
admit malice evil thoughts, and intentions of hardness, cruelty, and blood into
their hearts, this being so extremely contrary to that gracious and sweet
property of the Spirit of God, in reason must needs be signally obstructive
unto him in his way of filling men with himself.

A third Property was the heavenliness of the Spirit of God, Joh. 3.31. He that
is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth; He that comes from
heaven, is above all: Therefore that Lust that is contrary to this property in
the Spirit of God (heavenliness, or heavenly mindedness) this must in a way of
reason be offensive unto the Spirit of God. Of this kind are all lusts of
Covetonsness, inordinate Love unto this present World, earthly mindedness, when
men's hearts savor the things of the earth only, or mainly; when the matters of
this life eat out the very heart and sinews of a Man. Such Lusting as these
must needs likewise be of a very offensive nature unto the Spirit of God. When
the Holy Ghost shall come unto men, and offer them life, and shall be ready to
lead them into the Faith, Knowledge, and Love of God; when he shall talk and
discourse with men and women about heavenly things, and they answer him with
their carnal and their sensual things; when he discourses unto them of Faith
and Holiness, and the things of their Eternal Peace and blessedness, and they
shall have cars only to hear of Silver, and Gold, and Wealth, and Grandeur, and
Power, and Honor, and the like; certainly, if lusts of this nature be made
much of, and harbored in the soul of a man, there can be no expectation that
ever the Spirit of God should take pleasure or delight to put forth, or to give
out himself in his glory in such a soul.

A fourth and last particular was a disposition, aptness, viz. such lusts by
which men are invited, tempted, and carried away from the Ministry of the
Spirit, and those ways whereby the Spirit is wont to utter himself, which are
the Ordinances of God, and especially that of the Ministry of the Gospel, and
more especially, such a kind of Ministry which is prepared, as it were by God
on purpose, to bring forth the mind of God unto men. For as God of old
appointed Moses and the People to meet at the door of the Tabernacle: So now
has he appointed the World, the Sons and Daughters of men, to meet with him in
these Ministrations of his House, and to treat with him there about the great
business and things of their peace. If men and women therefore shall suffer the
great Enemy of their peace so to bewitch them, that they fall in their esteem
of these appointments of his; and look upon them as if there were no great
matter in them; this is another thing which has a direct opposition unto, and
is a ready way to quench the Spirit of God. Mind and compare these two verses
together, 1 These. 5.19, 20. Quench not the Spirit. But how, or which way should
they prevent it? Ver. 20. he informs them, Despise not Prophesying. As fire,
by laying on, and throwing combustible matter upon it, may be made greater and
greater, and the flame to wax and grow more and more: So the Spirit of God is
like a fire in the Spirits of men; he may be nourished after such a manner that
he will flame out, as fire does when more wood is laid on it; but as fire will
go out if you withdraw the Fuel, or throw Water upon it: So (says the Apostle)
you will quench the Spirit, if you shall despise Prophesying; for that is the
fuel or nourishment by which the Spirit of God is fed, therished, and
maintained in the soul, and conscience, and heart of a man; if you will
withdraw this fuel, and despise Prophecy, neglect the Ordinances of God, and
Ministrations of his House, he will soon be gone and leave his place: He cannot
live in the soul without this kind of nourishment and food administered unto him
from day to day, and time to time. And thus you see as all kind of fleshly
Lusts in general fight against the soul, and are obstructive unto the peace
thereof, being as so many bars in the way of the Spirit; so there are some
Lusts which do more appropriately, and in a more particular manner oppose his
progress. So that if you desire to be Possessours of such an invaluable
Treasure, as a being filled with the Spirit of God, you must not make a light
matter of it, so as to suffer such words and directions as tend thereunto to
come in at one ear and go out at the other; No, but you must make Treasure of
them, and be very serious in a business of this nature. And if you will prosper
in this design, you must be sure to remove out of the way, as these four kinds
especially, so also all other Lusts of the flesh, which else will hinder you in
so blessed an enjoyment.

But it may be you will say,

To this I answer, and say; You may do it; yea, the doing of it may, without
any presumption, be attributed unto you, as done by you (especially in their
first rise, and before they are grown to any great strength, or maturity within
you) without any special presence of the Spirit of God (I mean, a full and rich
presence of him.) For there is a kind of standing presence of the Spirit of God
with every man, which we call his preventing Grace, which every man has (if he
has not consumed it, and made a^spoyl of it) which will keep men from these
kinds of Lusts, in case men shall but comply with it. For (my Brethren) these
kind of Lusts have no power in them to compel or to necessitate any man or
woman unto subjection to them; No, they do but only offer or present themselves
to see if you will entertain, or own them, and nourish and bring them up. If
you will take pleasure in them, and go with them whither they will lead you,
you may: otherwise they have no inssuence of power and authority over you,
neither have they any Commission from God; and Satan can give them none, any
way to compel you to open the door of your hearts unto them, to give them room
and entertainment there. No, but if you shall be true and faithful unto your
own souls and their itnerest, and be in love with that blessedness of being
filled with the Spirit, you may keep your selves free from vanity, and fleshly
lusts. For to abstain from them, is but to let them alone, to let them go as
they come; do but you keep on your course, and follow the light which is set up
within you; do but abstain and keep from an inward converse and communion with
them, and they shall never do you any harm, nor ever prejudice you, in the
carrying on your work, and in the prospering of your souls, as to your being
filled with the Spirit. There is only one means or direction more.

The seventh and last means which I shall prescribe unto you, Mat. 7.7, 8.
compared with Luke 11.9, 10. And I say unto you, ask and it shall be given you;
seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one
that asks, receives; he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened. First, these words ( And I say unto you, etc.) seem to imply,
that what he was now about to say unto them, concerning the marvelous efficacy
and acceptance of Prayer with God, if another one should have said it, it
might reasonably seem doubtful or questionable in point of truth unto you: But
I would have you to take knowledge, that it is I that say it, you may believe
it upon the account of my authority, though it be, indeed, a great and strange
saying, and has a world of grace in it: yet says he, this is enough
sufficiently to balance this, I say it. Now, by asking, seeking, knocking, our
Savior (questionless) means all kinds, or variety of Prayer; intending to
declare and signify some such thing as this unto us, that if men be sincere
and upright hearted in their praying unto God, whether the manner or form of
their Prayer be of this kind, or of that; whether it be asking, socking, or
knocking, it shall be of like acceptance with God, and shall obtain what is
desired. If any man will please to adventure upon any narrow distinguishing, of
asking, seeking, and knocking, he may do it after some such manner as this is;
though I would not have too much to be given to the Notion. Asking very
probably may be such a kind of Prayer which is right down, where there is
little or no Argument, or little or no Scripture Rhetoric, but only a right
down, and direct, and immediate asking, signifying unto God what it is that a
man would have without any more ado. And secondly, Seeking seems to be a more
exact or enlarged kind of Prayer, wherein a man goes about to fortify his
heart to believe that he shall receive the things that he prays for,, by
considering such and such Arguments and Grounds in Scripture; so that it notes
a kind of diligence, and such an engagement of a man which takes up much of
his time. And thirdly, to knock, that may seem to signify a kind of Prayer
with importunity. As some men are right down, and cannot use many words, nor
form and fashion a Prayer with that dexterity and commendableness, which others
can; so there are some that are importunate, and with a kind of less curiosity
than others are. Now the Promise is not made jointly unto them thus; If you
ask, and if you seek, and if you knock, you shall receive, find, and it shall
be opened unto you. No: But there is the same Promise in effect and substance
made unto every one of them apart, Seek and you shall find, Ask and you shall
receive, and knock and it shall be opened unto you, etc. Now, to secure and
establish them to whom he spoke (who were his Disciples, Luke 11.12. that they,
howsoever, should obtain their desire of God in Prayer, in what form or manner
soever they should pray, he delivers this general Rule or gracious
Declaration in the name of God, That every one that asks, receives; and he,
i. e. every one that seeks, finds; and to every one that knocks, it shall
be opened unto him; for every one that asks, etc. As if he should say, you
that are my Disciples, and believe in me, you may be confident that what good
thing soever you shall ask of God in Prayer, it shall be done; for, or because
every one that asks, receives, etc. Meaning, that Gods will and gracious
good pleasure is, not only that you, and such as you are, should have
whatsoever you ask of him, always supposed that you ask things meet for him to
give, and things that are good and meet for your selves to receive, as it is
explained, Mat. 7.11. But whosoever should ask any thing of him upon such
terms, shall receive it from him likewise, therefore you much more. To make the
truth and certainty of the performance of this Promise more easy of belief
unto them he uses this Argument, A minori ad majus (as the Logicians term it)
an Argument which proceeds and rises from a less probability unto that which
is greater, Luke 11.11, 12. If a Son ask Bread of any of you that is a Father,
will he give him a Stone? Or if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? Or
if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? If ye then being evil [a
Generation hard hearted, and indisposed unto Acts of bounty] know how to give
good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the holy Spirit to them that ask him? That which Matthew expresses in the
general by good things or good gifts, Luke (as we see) expresses in
particular, viz. the gift of the Holy Ghost; clearly implying, that of all
other gifts which God has in his power, and in his will too to give unto men;
he is most free, ready, and willing to give his holy Spirit upon their making
known by Prayer their desire unto him on this behalf. Now then, it is a Rule or
Principle in Reason, which heretofore (I remember) upon like occasion I have
sometimes mentioned unto you; Vt se habet simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis
ad magis. If a thing may simply, or to a lower and lesser degree, be obtained
by the use of such or such means simply, or in an ordinary degree, then by
doubling or trebling the means, the thing or end desired (being capable of
being obtained either more fully or more sparingly) may be obtained more amply
or fully. As if fire simply, or in a lesser quantity, will warm a man, then a
greater fire will warm him yet more. And as the Prophet Elisha told the King of
Israel, when with his Bow and Arrows he had smote the ground only thrice, and
there staid, a Kings 13.18. Thou should (says he) have smitten five or six
times, then had thou smitten Syria until thou had consumed it; whereas now
thou shall smite Syria but thrice. In like manner, if Prayer simply, or praying
once, twice, or thrice, or praying with such or such a degree of giving out of
the heart and soul in Prayer, will obtain the gift of the Spirit of God simply,
or to such a degree, then certainly praying yet more, more frequently, and more
fervently must needs obtain this gift in an higher and richer degree, and
consequently by advancing still, and rising higher and higher in Prayer, we may
obtain to a being filled with the Spirit.

If it be here demanded, unwilling to give him: but because the transcendent
excellency or infiniteness of his wisdom requires such a thing as this of him;
Judging it meet to enact such a Law whereby he should subject his Creature Man
to the condition of Prayer for the obtaining of such a donation or gift as this
is from him, and that he should not give it unto him in any other way. And this
meetness we our selves are capable in part to conceive and apprehend: For upon
a like ground or account it is that we nurture our Children (at least many
discreet Parents do) submissively to ask of us such things as are necessary and
meet for them before we give them unto them. As our Savior himself also
seems to intimate in those passages lately mentioned: If a Son asks bread
of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish,
etc. By these Expressions it seems it was the manner amongst the Jews in our
Saviors days, to ask their Parents such things as they desired, or stood in
need of, before they gave them unto them. And as God shows no unwillingness (as
has been said) to give his holy Spirit unto men; but rather a readiness and
propenseness in him in this kind (to give him) by enjoining men to pray for
him: So neither does his requiring righteousness and holiness in men to render
them capable of happiness and blessedness from him any ways prove, or intimate
in the least, any unwillingness in him to make them blessed, but the contrary
rather; I mean, a great desire in him to make them blessed, according to that
of the Prophet David, Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15. Oh that my people would have
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have
subdued their Enemies, etc. We see evidently in this place, that God had an
ardent, and even a longing desire in him to make Israel an happy and blessed
people; and that in order to the obtaining of his desire herein he had
prescribed unto them Laws and ways of righteousness for them to observe and
walk in. For that is to be considered, and taken knowledge of, that the great
and ardent desire of God, here expressed, was not so much that Israel should
have hearkened unto his voice, that they should be a holy people: But he would
have them a holy, righteous, and worthy people, in order to their being a happy
people; it is still the end, not the means that is principally desired. Now the
end, which God principally desired and projected in his giving righteous Laws
and Statutes unto Israel to observe and do, was not their obedience unto these
Laws, but the making of them a happy people, by means of this their obedience,
in such a way which might not be repugnant to his infinite wisdom. This Moses
had clearly informed them of long before (says he, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16.) I have
set before thee life and death, good and evil, etc. You shall find that God
does expressly profess unto them ( Deuteronomy. 10.13. Chap. 12.25, 28. Chap. 26.18,
19.) that all that he does require of them in rendering such obedience unto him
was for their own comfort, and for the comfort of their Posterity, that they
might live and possess that good Land, and that they might enjoy it. And as
Gods requiring of men Faith, Love, and Obedience unto his Commands to put them
into a capacity of Salvation; and as his threatening them with the loss of
Salvation, unless these things should be found in them, do not argue any the
least degree of unwillingness in God that men should not be saved; but the
contrary, even the great desire of his soul that way: In like manner Gods
requiring men to pray unto him for his holy Spirit, to make them capable of
receiving him, does not at all prove, or so much as intimate the least
unwillingness in him to give him unto men, but rather the longing desire of his
soul to give him. This for Reply to the first thing in the difficulty
propounded. But

Secondly, Whereas it was demanded,

First, By Concession, that no man (doubtless) can pray for the Spirit, so as
to obtain what he prays for, but he that has the Spirit; [ viz. in some
degree and measure or other,] for it is the Spirit of God in men, that
enlightneth them to see and discern things that are just, and good, and meet
for them to do, and so likewise which admonishes and exciteth them to do them.
Now therefore if any persons do pray unto God for his Spirit, such persons are
quickened, moved, and stirred up hereunto by the Spirit of God himself.

Secondly, I answer by way of Exception two things:

First, The Spirit is in some measure or degree graciously vouchsafed unto
every man coming into the World, in as much as every man is enlightened (at
least to some degree) to see and discern the things mentioned; and so likewise
is secretly minded, and put upon it to do things that are apprehended just, and
good, and meet to be done; for that which men's Consciences do, or are said to
do in this kind, they do by the help and motion of the Spirit of God within
them. Therefore from hence it follows:

Secondly, That whosoever shall pray for the Spirit, does not pray for it
simply, without the Spirit, though (possibly) he may pray for it without any
such presence or assistance of the Spirit, which is found in true Believers (I
mean) in those who believe to Justification.

If it be here replied and said, That without faith it is impossible to please
God; therefore no presence of the Spirit without Faith can enable men to pray
any Prayer unto ^od with acceptance, and consequently not any Prayer upon
which the Holy Ghost can be attained. I Reply.

First, That as the Apostle affirms it, to be in the case of contributing to
good works; That if there be first a willing mind it is accepted [or rather he,
or the man is accepted] according to that which he has, and not according to
that which he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Meaning, that if he be willing in his way,
and does that which he is well able to do, God does accept him, and does not
reject him, or disapprove him, because he does not more than he is able to do:
So it is in any other kind of endeavors or engagements of a man whatsoever;
for there is the same reason of others which there is of this. If a man does
that, or be willing to do that which he is able to do (I mean, well able,
humane infirmities considered) this is accepted with God, though it comes not
up to the perfection, or degree of worth, which is found in the same kind of
action performed by other men. Therefore he that prays unto God, suppose it
be for the Holy Ghost, according to the ability of praying which God has given
him, he is accepted with him.

Secondly, Concerning that saying of the Apostle, Without Faith it is
impossible to please God. I Reply, If we understand him to speak of Justifying
Faith, then we must understand him likewise to speak of pleasing God unto
Salvation; and thus the meaning of the saying will be only this: It is
impossible without a true Faith, such a Faith which works by love, for any
man to please God, so as to be saved by him: But otherwise that God may be
pleased in a sense, or to an inferior degree without that Faith which is
justifying and saving, is evident from many places in Scripture. Ahab pleased
God to a degree, and to the obtaining of the removal of a sore Judgment both
from himself and his House, 1 Kings 21.29. Yet evident it is by the tenor of
the place, that he was far from being a person truly believing, or a person
justified in the sight of God.

In like manner, John was not a man endued with Justifying Faith, as appears by
the Character which the Holy Ghost gives of him, 2 Kings 10.29, 30. yet was God
well pleased with him, not only to do as great matters for him (as he did for
Ahab) viz. To establish the Kingdom to him, But likewise to continue this
Kingdom unto his Posterity for four Generations; howbeit from the sins of
Jeroboam Jehu did not depart. This is Character enough to show that he was not
a true Believe; and yet the Lord said unto him, Because thou have done well,
etc. Men may do well, though they may be without justifying Faith. It is no way
probable that all of the Family of the Rechabites were Persons so justified in
the sight of God, and in favor with him, yet was God well pleased with them,
Jer. 35.14, 18.19. So the men of Niniveh were not all and every one of them in
the favor and love of God, they were not in the state of Justification. The
like may be said of the young man in the Gospel, Mar. 10.21, 22. It appears
from that sad parting between the Lord Christ and him, when he went away
sorrowful from him (you know upon what words speaking) that he was not in the
state of Justification in the sight of God; yet nevertheless he did many things
well, and was in very great favor with Christ as man, for it is said, that
Jesus beholding him loved him. So then, men that pray unto God for the gift of
his Spirit may be accepted with God, as to the obtaining of what they pray for,
though they be not in an estate of Justification.

Again secondly, If we understand the Saying of the Apostle mentioned, Without
Faith it is impossible to please God; of such a Faith which only imports a
knowledge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of what we do, or intend to do, in
which sense the word is sometimes used in the Scriptures: And particularly thus
it is twice used, Romans 14.23. He eats not of Faith; here the word Faith is
taken for knowledge of the lawfulness of what a man does. I say, if we
understand such a kind of Faith as this, then it imports no more but this; that
without a belief or knowledge of the lawfulness of what a man does, he cannot
please God in the doing of it. Now, that men may know the lawfulness of praying
unto God for his Spirit without Justifying Faith, and consequently, please God
in the Action, so far as to obtain what is prayed for, needs (I suppose) be
no man's question, at least if we grant or suppose, that a man may believe, or
know, and that without Justifying Faith, that God has a Spirit to give unto
them that ask him. Now, though it be somewhat hard to conceive, how a man
without Justifying Faith (yea, and somewhat more) should distinctly know or
believe, that God has a Spirit to give coessential, or of the same infinite
being with himself; yea, possibly many that have Justifying Faith may be
ignorant or doubtful of this (as we read of some in Acts 19. that they did not
know, as they professed, whether there were any Holy Ghost or no) yet that God
is able inwardly to enlighten, quicken, stir up, and strengthen to that which
is good, men may know and believe without such a Faith which justifies: and to
know this (I mean, that God is able to enlighten, etc.) is interpretatively, or
constructively to know that he has a Spirit to give, because these things are
proper for him to do by his Spirit; and (doubtless) God, out of his abundant
Grace and Condescension unto his Creature Man, will construe his Prayer as a
Prayer made unto him for his Spirit, who shall pray for illumination and
quickening unto ways and works of well doing. This for the seventh and last
means we shall insist upon (at present) by which men and women may be filled
with the Spirit of God, viz. Prayer. And thus much likewise for resolution of
the Second Question propounded, viz. How men and women may come to be filled
with the Spirit, and what is to be done by them in order hereunto?

CHAP. XI. A third Question propounded, viz. How a man or woman may know
whether himself or others are filled with the Spirit of God, or with some other
Spirit that pretends to be the Spirit of God, but is (indeed) a Spirit
contrary to it. Wherein are several Rules laid down in order to a clear
understanding thereof. Prove. 6.9, 10. 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. Jam. 3.17. Prove 2.22.
Chap. 9.6. Romans 8.13. Psalm. 145, 17. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. in part opened.
THe Third (and last) Question was this,

First, That there are a Generation of men and women in the World who cannot
properly be said to be filled with any Spirit at all, in one kind or other,
unless (happily) it be with that which the Scripture calls (in Romans 11.8.) a
spirit of slumber, or rather a spirit of sloth; such as the Wiseman
describes, Prove. 6.9, 10. How long will thou sleep O sluggard? When will thou
arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding
of the arms together. Some there are, that are of a dull, heavy, and of a
stupefied temper, little active or stirring in one kind or other; somewhat like
unto the men of Laish, Judges 18.7. who are said to have been quiet and secure,
and to have had no business with any man. We know there are some such in the
World, who seem to have little sense, either of the one World, or of the other;
yea, scarce to know whether they be alive, or in being or no. Now, though these
kind of persons, we speak of, be as good as dead unto all manner of activeness;
yet if this be come upon them by any Judgment of God, by reason of any
preceding sin or provocation, they may truly and properly enough be said to be
filled with the Spirit of slumber, drowsiness, or floth; because God has left
them in the hand, and to the power of some evil spirit or other, who dismantles
and bereavs their nature, bodies, and souls of that activeness, or disposition
unto Action, in one kind or other, which is natural unto them, and otherwise
would be found in them. But if that such a kind of temper be found in any
person simply, by way of Nature, and not by a just recompense of reward, for
some former sinful miscarriages, then the case is far differing; I cannot say
that this is a spirit of slumber or sloth that is upon them: But if it be upon
some other account; if it come upon them in a way of Judgment from God, for
some sinful abuse of mercies, then they may be said to be filled with a spirit
of slumber: and this heavy temper, that renders them thus unactive every way,
and in all respects, seems to be the effect of some evil spirit, unto which God
has given Commission or Permission thus to punish or abase the Creature for
his sin. For it is very probable (to add this only by the way) that as in
Commonwealths, or Kingdoms Politic, the Inhabitants, for the accommodation
and convenience of the whole, betake themselves to several Callings,
Occupations, or Trades; some are Husbandmen, some Carpenters, some Chirurgions,
etc. For the body of a Commonwealth (as it was the saying of a Philosopher)
does not consist of a Husbandman, and a Husbandman, but of variety of Trades;
wherein respectively by means of an Appropriation or Confinement of themselves,
to one and the same employment, they become more expert and dexterous, every
man in his way, and so the whole is the better accommodated and provided for.
In like manner (I say) it is very probable, that these wicked and unclean
Spirits, the Devils (who have a Polity, such as it is, to manage and uphold)
for the accommodation of their affairs, and the advantage of their Kingdom, and
the greatness thereof, that they do betake themselves to several Trades and
Occupations in their way; and that some of them apply themselves to one kind of
Action or employment, for the better managing and maintaining of their Kingdom,
and some unto another. All the variety of employments which are practiced
amongst them, or is (indeed) any ways necessary for the welfare (such as it is
capable of) of their Kingdom, being reduceable to these two general Heads:

First, The tempting men unto sin.

Secondly, The troubling and tormenting them, when he has overcome them by
temptation.

Now, under these two Heads may be reduced all that they have to do. And in
both these there is a kind of Appropriation or Assignment of Methods and things
suitable unto particular Spirits. We know there are several kinds and great
varieties of sins which the Sons and Daughters of men may act, and perpetrate,
and are subject to be tempted unto. And so again, there are great varieties of
Punishments and Judgments which are inflicted by God upon Men. Now as there are
great varieties of sins whereunto men and women may be tempted, as sins of
Uncleanness, Adultery, Covetousness, Idolatry, and the like: So is it very
probable (from the Scriptures) that there are several Devils that do attend
upon all these sins; there is one kind of Devil that attends upon this kind of
sin, another upon that; some, that do tempt men unto Uncleanness; others, to
Covetousness; another, to Murder: another sort of them tempt to Pride; for
there are Devils in abundance, and whole troops that do manage one kind of sin.
And so likewise in matters of Judgments and Punishments, there are some that
God makes use of (as men are wont, in their way, to use and employ men
according to their Capacities) to afflict in one kind; and then he sets other
Devils on work who are of another Occupation, and who know how to afflict men
and women (such persons who have offended, whom he judges worthy to be
chastised) in another kind. Methinks the Scriptures give a little hint of this,
where we read of some Devils that were dumb and deaf, Mar. 9.17, 25, 26. Mat.
9.32. compared with Luke 11.14.

The Devil may be called dumb, because he does inflict that kind of punishment,
or affliction, which we call dumbness; and so likewise of others.

If then any persons be reduced to such a kind of Lethargy, that they neither
feel the one World, or the other; nor are inclined to labor after the
concernments of the one, nor of the other. Such persons as these may be said to
be filled with the spirit of heaviness, flumber, or drowsiness. This by the
way. In the first place then take notice that there are a Generation of men and
women which we can hardly say that they be filled with any Spirit, unless it be
a spirit of drowsiness or flumber.

A second thing to be taken knowledge of by the way, Paul's case:) but even
under one and the same state and condition of Regeneration; yea, and possibly
of Unregeneracy also. A good man, that is full of the Spirit of God, if we
speak of him in his habitual estate and condition ordinarily, may yet at
sometimes be filled with the spirit of Satan. From this last particular it
follows, that there are two kinds of being filled with the spirit of God, and
proportionably two kinds of being filled with an unclean Spirit, the one
actual, and for a time only; the other habitual and standing. Now, though it be
this habitual and standing fullness of the Spirit of God that we chiefly intend
to enquire after, and to propound some Characters of, yet something may fall
in, relating to the other also. He then that is filled with the Spirit of God
ordinarily, and this in the standing course of his life, yet is it very
possible, that at some time Satan may get into him, and fill him with himself,
with a lusting of his Spirit: And so on the contrary, A person, that is filled
with an unclean spirit ordinarily, may at several times be prevented with the
Spirit of God; that is, God may do by him as sometimes he did by Balaam, the
Spirit of God did so fill him that he spoke and prophesied of great and
excellent things; yet the truth is, that the habitual frame of Balaam was a
being filled with the spirit of the Devil: He had familiar converse with the
Devil, yet nevertheless at that turn he was filled with the Spirit of God,
which put to silence that spirit of the Devil. So is it likewise possible, that
upon him that is filled with the Spirit of God, the Devil may break in with a
gust of temptation; as (doubtless) Peter himself was a regenerate man, and a
Disciple of Christ, yet when he denied his Lord and Master Christ, and not only
so, but forswore him, with an Oath of Execration upon himself, that he knew him
not, certainly Satan was in him. For what could he have done more if he had
been filled with that unclean spirit? Yea, and after that, when he dissembled
at Antioch, when he complied with the Jews, and so endangered the truth of the
Gospel, and that liberty which was now brought unto the World, here also he was
touched at least with this unclean spirit. This is a second thing by the way.

Thirdly, We may add that likewise (by the way) that in reference to many
persons, the question now under consideration is, Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not,
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived,
neither Idolaters, nor Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Railers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God (meaning, if they
continue such:) But you are washed, etc. Some of these, with a clause of
enlargement which takes in more than are here named, we have elsewhere
mentioned by the same Apostle, Ephesians. 5 5, 6. For this ye know, that no
Whoremonger, nor Unclean person, nor the Covetous man, who is an Idolater, has
any, etc. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. It seems that
there was in the Apostles days such a Generation of men, like unto which we
have in these days, who are called Rantors; who bear men in hand (being first
deceived themselves, they labor to deceive others also) that for such things
as these are, even all manner of abominations, though they commit them, yet
there is no such thing as the wrath of God coming upon them: no; but they can
follow these wicked practices with the greatest liberty; and that they
understand their liberty to be such, that they may do such things as these
without any regret. So that concerning such persons as these, we need not spend
time in debating the case, whether they be filled with the Spirit of God, or
with some other Spirit contrary unto him: The case is evident enough without
debate. As a man needs not a touchstone for a Chip, or a piece of brown Paper,
to try whether these be good Gold or no; these plainly enough discover
themselves to be no Gold without the Touchstone, every man's sense will inform
him of it. So that the Question propounded lately, is, chiefly or only to be
managed between persons that have some colorable or plausible pretense to a
being filled with the Spirit of God, and such who have a real and substantial
ground for such a claim.

Fourthly,

Fifthly (and lastly) This also would be taken along with us, Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, to another the word of
Knowledge, by the same Spirit, etc. Here we may clearly see, that one and the
self same Spirit of God is able to fill several men with variety of gifts, with
several kinds of filling: One may be filled with the Spirit of God in respect
of Knowledge; another may be filled with the Spirit of God in respect of
Wisdom, and yet may not be filled with him in some other consideration. But if
you ask me the difference between Wisdom and Knowledge, you may conceive it
thus; Wisdom implies, a heavenly dexterity; a faculty and ability to apply
general Rules or Sayings to particular Cases; to be able to find out Rules
whereby to resolve Questions and Cases which another man, who wants the
Spirit of Wisdom, will not be able to see. As for instance, Our Savior, when
he was put to it by the Scribes and Pharisees to justify the Fact of his
Disciples in plucking the Ears of Corn against their unjust Clamours, if he had
not had a rich anointing of this gift of the Spirit of Wisdom, he would not
have been able to find out a passage of Scripture to have justified this
Practice of theirs (but you know where he finds it) and to prove the
lawfulness of what his Disciples did. Have ye not read (says he, Mat. 12.3,
4.) what David did, and those with him when they were hungry, how that they
went to the House of God, and eat the Shewbread, which was not lawful for them
to do? And so he gives another instance of the Priests Circumcising on the
Sabbath day, and yet they pollute not the Sabbath. Here he, by the Spirit of
Wisdom, finds the grounds that are contained in these passages of Scriptures,
laid up somewhat close out of the way of the ordinary thoughts of men. It is
like not any of the Apostles had been able to make use of these to plead their
own cause; but the Lord Jesus Christ, by reason of that Spirit of Wisdom, did
it effectually. There is the like gift of the Spirit to a degree which is
discernable to those that have eyes to discern. Men that are but of competent
Judgments may clearly see that in some men the Spirit of God does put forth
himself in this great and happy gift of Wisdom, making them able to find out
grounds and passages of Scripture for the clearing and unfolding of such
questions and difficulties, which other men (and men that are more excellent,
in their way, in some other gifts of the Spirit) are not able to do.

Now Knowledge notes an understanding of the general Rules themselves, and the
things themselves which are delivered and asserted in the Scriptures. A man may
have all Knowledge (as the Scriptures speak) he may be able to repeat the whole
Scriptures, from first to last, by heart, and give an account of the sense and
meaning of every obscure and knotty passage. Such a man as can do this, is an
excellent man too, and full of the Spirit of God, in respect of Knowledge; and
yet this man (possibly) may not be able or dexterous to apply or bring those
things and general Principles that he knows, and suit them with particular
cases and questions which are brought to him, and laid before him; whereas
another that has not half his knowledge may be able to do it, and to give a
plainer and fuller satisfaction unto him that shall propound a Case or
difficulty unto him. So that this we would have you take notice of by the way,
that the Spirit of God has variety of gifts; and therefore we are not to
estimate a man as not filled with the Spirit, because he is not dexterous at
every turn. These things being premised, we now proceed to the Question.

Now then, whether a person, man or woman,

First, When a man is of a cool, calm, and yielding temper, and deportment in
his own matters, his own proper and personal concernments in the World, and
upon occasion shall be apt to be raised and stirred in his spirit about the
things of God: this is a sign of very great probability (at least) that such a
person is full of the Spirit of God. For,

First, The genius and property of the Spirit of God may be discerned and
judged of by the nature and property of that Wisdom which (as James says, Jam.
3.17.) is from above; and this, as he informs us, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated full of mercy, etc. meaning, that
it disposes men and women to those worthy properties; that where it is
received, it works their hearts and souls to these gracious dispositions; it
makes men first pure, it disposes and enclines men and women to avoid all
pollution with sin, above any other thing whatsoever; it persuades men not to
meddle, not to have to do with sin upon any terms, whether of Pleasure, Profit,
Honor, or whatsoever: And then next to this, it teaches men to be peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, etc. which is to be understood chiefly in a man's
own Affairs and Concernments, and in his ordinary Converse with men; for
otherwise, this Wisdom teaches men to be as stiff and resolute, in the Affairs
of Jesus Christ and the Gospel, as Paul was ( Gal. 2.5.) when he yielded not,
gave not place, no, not for an hour (as he says) to certain false Brethren,
who went about to incumber the Gospel with matters of Judaism. And again, when
he withstood another to his face who was not a false Brother, but equal to
himself, a great Apostle (I mean Peter) in a business of the Gospel, wherein
(as he says) he was to be blamed, Verse 11. and yet again, when he fought with
beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, 1 Cor. 15.32. Now then, as it is the
genius and property of that Wisdom we speak of, that Wisdom which is from
above, thus to mould and fashion the minds and manners of men: So is it the
property of the Spirit of God also to do the like; because this Spirit works
not upon men but by the mediation of this Wisdom, and works only such
dispositions and inclinations which this Wisdom works. This then is that we
say, that when men and women are very peaceably disposed, and of a yielding and
quiet spirit in their own worldly Affairs, and yet when occasions require are
apt to quit themselves like men of courage and resolution; this argues that
they have a very rich anointing of the Spirit of God. I add this latter
particular, viz. That they are apt to be zealous and stirred in Spirit, in and
about the things of God, because otherwise a softness or quietness of
disposition about their own Affairs may be rather the result of their own
natural complexion or constitution than any effect of the Wisdom from above, or
of the Spirit of God working in and by this Wisdom. For though peaceableness of
spirit, gentleness, easiness to be entreated, etc. be the fruits or effects of
the wisdom from above, [ viz. in the most of those in whom they are found] yet
it does not follow from thence, but that there may be, in some persons,
impressions or qualities like unto these from another original or cause. The
Woods, Pastures, and Fields produce of their own accord some kind of Herbs and
Fruits like unto those, and of the same name or denomination with those which
grow in our Gardens by sowing, setting, and planting; yet are they but of a
wild kind and nature, neither so fair nor fit for use as these, every palate
will be able to distinguish between the one and the other. As it is between
those two sorts of of Eunuchs, which our Savior distingusheth in the Gospel
thus, that some are such from their mothers wombs, others have made themselves
such (Eunuchs) for the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.12. Meaning, that they have
been persuaded and prevailed with by the Gospel to embrace a single life, that
so they might with more freedom of mind, and with less distraction and
encumbrance of secular Affairs, attend the Service of God and of his Gospel;
intimating withal, that the former kind of Eunuch was little considerable with
God, little set by in comparison of this latter. In like manner, some have a
kind of goodness, and facileness of disposition, with some other impressions of
morality, commendable in their kind, and commodious to a degree, both unto the
persons themselves who are endued with them, and unto others, which yet spring
naturally in them; but these are not like unto those of the same name or
denomination that are begotten and planted in the hearts and inward parts of
men and women by the Gospel and Ministry of it. The Gospel is termed the
incorruptible Seed of the Word, which lives for evermore. There is a kind of
excellency and glory which goes along with the Word of God, which leaves a
lively Impression or Character of it self upon those holy dispositions and
qualifications which are planted or begotten by it in the hearts and souls of
men, which does distinguish them from those moral qualifications, planted in
men and women by the hand of Nature. But this only by the way. The sum of what
we laid down in the Character or Rule of Dijudication (now in hand) whereby to
judge of men and women that be filled with the Spirit of God, is this; He that
is as a weaned Child in his own Matters, but is strong and active as a Giant in
the Affairs of Jesus Christ and of the Gospel, he (I say) is like to be a
person so filled with the Holy Ghost: But if a man be forward, and full of heat
in the matters of Religion, and the same also, of the same hot temper in his
own private Concernments, his heat in matters of Religion may be but of the
same account with other men's coldness; I mean, may be nothing else but his
natural temper, and so argue no fullness of the Spirit of God. I confess, it is
possible, that he that is somewhat warm, and somewhat apt to be stirred in his
spirit about his Worldly Affairs, and withal is zealously affected with and
about the things of God, may be filled with the Spirit of God. But however the
Judgment of this latter heat is taken away by the former: though such a man's
zeal in the things of God may proceed from a fullness of the Spirit of God in
him, yet his heat otherwise drowns the Argument of it: This heat we speak of,
in his Worldly Affairs, though it does not contradict the reality or truth of
his being filled with the Spirit, yet it contradicts and destroys the
evidence, proof, or manifestation of it. The reason why I conceive that some
fervor of spirit, in a man's own occasions, may possibly consist with a fullness
of the Spirit of God (in which case a man's zeal for God must needs proceed from
such a fullness) is, because the Spirit of God, even when the heart and soul is
to a good degree filled with him, does not always dissolve the natural frame
of the heart in such dispositions which are not sinful, or not apprehended to
be sinful. And many times we find men who are flames of fire in their own
occasions, yet like so many dull clods of earth in the things of Jesus Christ;
yea, this is the ordinary temper of the generality of men, even of Professors
themselves, according to that of the Apostle, Phil. 2.21. All men seek their
own, not the things of Jesus Christ. In this case, when he that seeks, or
hitherto has sought his own things with zeal and diligence, but has been
remiss and cold in the things of Jesus Christ, shall be reduced to greater zeal
for the things of Jesus Christ than for his own, this change in him must needs
proceed from the Spirit of God, yea, from a great work of this Spirit in him;
and consequently, such a Person, continuing thus zealous for Christ, may well
be conceived to be full of the Spirit of Christ, notwithstanding he be somewhat
zealous of his own Cause and Affairs also. Now the reason hereof is, because
his heat in his own Affairs is but somewhat of the natural frame of his heart,
which is not dissolved by the Spirit of God, it not being apprehended to be
sinful. I confess, there is a kind of zeal in a man's secular and worldly
Affairs, which is found in too many, which is hardly, if at all consistent with
a being filled with the Spirit; this is that which the Apostle calls, A
warring after the flesh. Now, What is this same warring after the flesh? It is
to be importunely troublesome unto the World, to quarrel almost with every man
that comes in our way, and with whom we have to do, about these outward things
and accommodations. When men fight, they lay out their strength, and all they
have, as Soldiers, they do it with all their might and power: So when men are
zealous to such a degree, for their own Affairs, that the managing and
providing for them is a kind of Warfare, wherein they are acted by the flesh,
and by the desires, lusts, and unreasonable motions of it, so as to quarrel and
contend with every man that stands in their way; such a kind of zeal in men
(which appears in thus warring according to the flesh) testifies unto their
Faces, that certainly they are not filled with the Spirit of God. There is
(indeed) another kind of zeal, which you may conceive better of, and this is a
kind of diligence in your Affairs, which is worthy of commendation: For men,
being diligent in their Callings, by this means declare themselves to be Loyal
Servants of Jesus Christ: if he set them about their own work, then they will
serve him there; if he set them on work for himself, there they will serve him
also: In such a kind of heat as this there is somewhat that answers unto, and
is consistent with a fullness of the Spirit of God. But when men are hot, fiery,
and fierce in their own things, and likewise fierce in the things of God; their
being hot in the things of God is an Argument of no weight, no way convincing,
that they are filled with the Spirit.

A second Rule for discovery of those who are filled with the Spirit of God,
from those who are not filled with him, but with a contrary Spirit, And incline
their heart to understanding, etc. ( Prove. 2.2. compared with ver 9.) That they
shall understand righteousness and judgment, etc. by understanding of judgment,
etc. I conceive he means these two things: First, A discerning and
understanding what is meet and worthy to be done upon all occasions, according
to the regular and due exigency and requirements of every of them respectively;
And secondly, An heart and inward disposition to do every thing accordingly.
Now, when men and women thus, and in this sense, understand judgment; that is,
know how to rise and fall in their spirits, how to change and temper their
behavior and speech; when to be authoritative, stout, and resolute; and again
familiar, gentle, and submissive, according as the persons are with whom, and
according to the nature of the occasions and affairs, wherein they have to do;
and this in order to the glorifying of God, and the justifying of his Wisdom;
it is an Argument of much weight to prove that they have a rich anointing of
the Spirit of God. We find Paul a man very excellent and active in all the
variety of these spiritual postures we speak of, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, etc. For
though (says he) I be free from all men, yet have I made my self a Servant
unto all: To the Jew I became a Jew, unto them that are under the Law as under
the Law, to them that are without the Law as without the Law; to the weak I
became weak; I became all things to all that by all means I might win some.
Paul had gone so to work with himself, that he had brought himself to a
conformity to all occasions and kinds of services, and could comply with all
for their benefit. When men shall see the carriage and deportment of a man, and
shall not be able to see what the natural temper and genius of the man is; when
they shall see him in such variety of action, and all that which he does to
become him, to have beauty and reason in it; this is a sign that the man thus
endued has a very rich and glorious anointing of the Spirit of God in him: But
when men's natural tempers do increase in them, so as that these will have part
and share in their actings, it is a sign that Nature is not thoroughly broken,
nor wholly subdued, but that there is somewhat yet more for the Spirit of God
to do. Elsewhere he demands of these Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.21. What will you?
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the Spirit of meekness?
From whence it appears, that Paul could upon occasion both use the rod of
Apostolical Authority, where he saw cause, and take vengeance on disobedience
(as he speaks elsewhere:) And could likewise demean himself with gentleness
toward Christians, even as a Nurse cherishes, and is tender over her Children
(as he speaks of himself) 1 These. 2.7. In matters of outward estate, he knew
(as he says) both how to be abased, i. e. to want, and how to abound, Phil.
4.12. Meaning, that he was able and knew how to manage both estates, Adversity,
and Prosperity, according to such Rules by which these conditions ought to be
managed respectively; yea, and may be managed to the glory of God, and likewise
to the comfort and contentment of men that partake in either. And, as he says,
he knew how to be abased, and how to abound; so likewise in his deportment he
knew how to stoop to the ground, and to sit upon a Dunghill with those that were
Poor, and weak, and of Low degree in the Church of Christ: And he knew likewise
how to be a Companion for Princes, and to stand up with the highest and
greatest of all, with persons of greatest esteem. Paul (we know) had a spirit
that was able to resist even Peter himself, one of the greatest Pillars of the
Christian Faith then in the World, and to withstand him to his face when there
was just occasion so to do. My Brethren, He that knew how to do this, must
needs have a mighty command of himself: For take him at another turn, when the
state of businesses was altered, and when he was in the presence of poor and
weak Saints, he could act another part, and quit himself like a poor and weak
man, as if he had nothing of the carriage or of the resolution of a man in him.
Thus Jesus Christ himself, to whom the Spirit was given not by measure (as John
speaks, Joh. 3.34.) is compared in Scripture as well to a Lamb as to a Lion,
and is presented unto the World under both these Denominations; one while he is
called the Lamb of God; another while he is called The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; to show, that he knows how to act the properties of both, according as
he judges seasonable and meet. When he comes to those who are poor in Spirit,
he blesses, and speaks in a still voice unto them; and when he has to do
with the Scribes and Pharisees, then he pronounces with a loud voice, Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, hyppocrites. Now his Spirit was up on high, and full
of courage and undaunted resolution: Yea, now he is in heaven, and ascended to
the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. Yet does he still retain the
same qualifications or dispositions. To many Persons he does behave himself
like a Lamb, with much sweetness and great condescension; and otherwhile he can
roar like a Lion upon others, and appear in judgment when he sees his time,
and when the exigencies of the business which is before him requires it.

Now the reason, Solomon's; which the Scriptures compare to the sands that are
upon the Seashore, 1 Kings 4.29. Now the heart of Solomon is said to be large,
like unto the sands of the Seashore, which are not to be numbered, because he
had a world of notions and apprehensions in his mind or understanding, by
reason whereof he was able to understand most exactly how he ought to behave
himself upon all occasions, and how to suit himself with the Exigency of every
affair; he had all circumstances before him, and he turned them and weighed
them in his hand, and therefore (says he, Eccl. 3.1, 2, etc.) There is a time
for every purpose under the Sun; A time to plant, and a time to pluck up what
is planted, a time to build and a time to break down, a time to weep and a time
to rejoice, a time to cast away stones and a time to gather, etc. Now, he must
be a wise man indeed (as he speaks, Chap. 8.5, 6.) Whose heart discerns
time and judgment, i. e. that is able to discern the time and season for one
Action, or one kind of deportment from that which is proper for another; to
know with what Persons, and in what Cases to deal in a spirit of Meekness and
Sweetness, and when to deal with men in Fire, Earthquake, and Thunder; and when
to hold a course between both, and to know how proportionably to measure out by
drams and scruples a behavior suitable to all cases, such as will make a man
harmonious with himself, and not to be over-bearing when that which is less
will best become him, and so not be light where a greater weight is necessary.

Secondly, If ye know these things (says Christ) happy are ye if ye do them.
As it requires a rich anointing of the Spirit of God to discern times and
seasons, so does it no less to have a man's heart thoroughly broken and subdued
under him, to comply with them. Doubtless many persons know the necessity of
duties, yea, of many highly acceptable and beneficial things, which yet their
hearts will not serve them to come up unto: Their eyes are generally better
than their hearts, their apprehensions are more raised and full, and their
affections more slow and heavy within them: And therefore secondly, For men to
have all things that may render them apt to all due and regular compliance with
all services incumbent on them, this does require a marvelous degree of
self-denial and mortification; for the heart of a man is exceeding st^ff, and
will not bend nor bow, unless it be in such and such cases that fall in with
the natural frame and temper of it: But for a man to be universally comportant
and complying with all those spiritual occasions and affairs of God that come
in his way, this will never be done, a man's heart will never stand upon such
terms, until it be mightily broken, until the Spirit of God have pulled down
that building of the Old man, and have not left one stone thereof upon another.
It is true, the heart of a man requires much hammering before this building of
the Old man will fall, before the flesh and lusts thereof will be subdued: But
would men be faithful unto the interest of their own souls, this blessed work
might be accomplished. For the Word of God is abundantly furnished, there is
enough in it wherewithal to subdue that (or those lusts) which are most
disturbing, enough quite to change and alter the property and constitution of a
man, and to reduce those that are most froward to the greatest gentleness, and
those that are most fiery and turbulent in their Spirits to the greatest
Meekness and Patience. I say, If men would but set that Wisdom which is from
above on work upon their hearts and Spirits, this would fill up all the
Valleys, and bring down all the Mountains, and reduce the frame of the heart
and soul of such a man who thus imployeth it into a conformity with it self,
viz. in Purity, Peaceableness, Gentleness, and an easiness to be entreated. My
Brethren, we do admire (and we have cause so to do) at that excellent temper of
the Apostle Paul, how active he was, he could stop the Flesh (as it were) with
a curb in the midst of its Career; like a Horse that is excellently taught,
that will stop in the midst of his way with the least check of the Bit or
Bridle: So Paul's heart being broken and disciplined by means of the Gospel,
and by his own care and industry was brought to that same pass. And doubtless
we have the same Word and Gospel that he had, and if we had but the same mind,
we might be as excellent even as he himself was; if we did but love that same
more excellent way as he did, what hinders, or what is there in the way
between him and the poorest Christian of all? He says he labored more
abundantly than they all, and therefore no marvel that he got so far before
them in the Race. But if we respect our selves and the generality of Christians
in these days, no marvel if we lie in the very Center of the Earth, and have
made so little advance in ways of excellency; and that on the other hand, we
are not descended so much as one degree lower from that height and pride of
spirit which we first began withal, and which we found in our selves when we
set upon the work of Mortification: I say, it is no marvel, if we consider how
exceedingly indisposed Christians (generally) are to spiritual labor, without
which these things cannot be attained. This for the second particular. But then,

The third (and last) is this. viz. a being filled with the Spirit, and
therefore sit down and content themselves without striving after it. I make no
question but the Spirit of God is abroad in the world, and that he dwells in
many of your hearts and souls. But though I would be indulgent unto your
spiritual credit and repute to the utmost that I am able, yet I cannot believe
any such thing concerning you, that all of you are what you ought to be, and
what you might very well be. The commodity indeed is rich, but it is very
costly; yet if you would go to the price of it, it is to be had at the hand of
Jesus Christ: But according to the present size and state of Christianity, and
the Professors thereof in the World, there are very few to be found of that
excellent Character we speak of; but that their natural Temper, Humor, and
Disposition will be found in their actions; they will be stiff, and not fall
in, nor comply gently, nor sweetly with many occasions; when they should quit
themselves like men of courage, not regarding the faces of men, their hearts
will not serve them, but they are meal-mouthed, they dare not speak, they are
afraid to offend such and such a man. Otherwhile, when they have occasion to
treat about any business, with those that are low and mean, then you shall have
them high, and surly, and over-bearing; Now in these cases, this same unworthy
Principle of their Nature (as we may call it) shows it self. I cannot (by the
way) brook that term, for there is nothing simply unworthy in nature, but what
sin and the unworthiness of the hearts of men have put into it. It is hard and
exceeding rare to find persons so filled with the Spirit of God, that they do
not give some such sign or testimony, as now we speak of; something to discover
their temper, humor, and such kind of Principles within them, that make them
stiff that they cannot bow nor comply. Their Iron Sinew is not yet broken, they
have not taken the course, they have not dealt effectually with their hearts to
bring them into subjection; they have not chastened their Souls every morning
(as David did) who had disciplined and nurtured his heart to some kind of order
and compliance with God in all his occasions and affairs. And so much for this
Direction, or the second Rule given, by which we may know whether men be filled
with the Spirit of God; namely, if they understand judgment (as the Scriptures
speak) and then be ready in their hearts and affections to concur and to
measure out to every case and business according to the exigency, and
requirements of it: this now does declare an excellent degree of the fullness of
the Spirit of God with them. And

Thirdly, For if ye live after the flesh (says the Apostle) ye shall die; but
if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans
8.13. If you ask me, But why does the Apostle place the great work of
Mortification in the deeds of the body, in having these mortified, and not
rather in those sinful affections and inward dispositions from whence they
proceed? I reply; That he places it here in the deeds of the body, because it
is principally seen, and the reality and truth of it found there: though the
work it self lies most in the heart and inward man, yet the energy and force
chiefly appears in the abolishing or cessation of the deeds of the flesh, or
of the body. When such sinful and unworthy actions cease to be found in men and
women, whereunto others are tempted by the flesh, or by the occasions of the
flesh, and ever and anon are practicing of them, it is a sign that the work of
Mortification is real and in truth; yet elsewhere the same Apostle places it
in the affections and lusts of the flesh, in having these crucified or
mo^tified, Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with
the affections and lusts, i.e. they that are Christ's, i. e. that are his
Disciples, or, that have resigned up themselves unto him, or are subject unto
him have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, i.e. have pierced
the flesh [or outer man] thorough and thorough, with such sharp and effectual
considerations, that the strength and vigor of it, as to sinful demands, or
actions, is much spent and wasted; and as the natural strength and vigor of a
man, that is nailed to a Cross, breaths out by degrees in that blood that
comes from him by his wounds; so have ye crucified the flesh with the
affections [or passions (...)] and lusts thereof, (...), with the passions i.
e. with all those affections which belong to the irascible part of the soul (as
both Philosophers and Divines call it) Anger, Wrath, Hatred, Envy, Revenge,
etc. they have crucified these, i.e. they have taken a course to break the
strength, and to suppress the motions and breakings out of these; And the
lusts, i.e. all those affections also which belong to the other part of the
soul, which they call the Concupiscible, such as are Fornication, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Covetousness, etc. So then (we say) that when the Flesh,
with the Affections, and Lusts, and Deeds thereof are so crucified or
mortified, so handled that men and women are become Meek, Patient, Humble,
Gentle, long-suffering, etc. And again, Chaste, Pure, Sober, Temperate, free
from Covetousness, and all this to an excellent degree, it is a sign that they
are full of the Spirit of God; the reason is, because,

First, If these things be in any weak and imperfect degree in men, like; or
else they are given to Pleasures, Ease, Voluptuousness of life, desires of
Riches, Honor, Power (the great things of the World.) And though many keep
within some tolerable compass, in respect of the breaking out of these, and
such like unmortified affections, whilst the Tempter keeps at a distance from
them, and some few (it may be) whilst the Temptations runs somewhat low, and
are but ordinary; yet the greatest part of the persons we speak of (Professors
I mean) are apt to be overcome, and led away Captive unto Sin by every touch of
Temptation; any Temptation (almost) that will may serve it self upon them: Even
as some men's Judgments are so weak, that they are apt to be carried about with
every wind of Doctrine (as the Apostle speaks) apt to take impressions of any
thing that is presented unto them with the lightest appearance of truth; but to
find a man or woman that is able to stand their ground of innocence, when any
strong temptations bear hard upon them, is exceeding rare: which argues the
work of Mortification to be very imperfect and slight in the greatest part of
men, and consequently, that they are far from being filled with the Spirit of
God.

If it be here demanded,

I reply, The perfection of a work may be estimated, or considered two ways:
First, Absolutely, or in reference only to it self. Or else secondly,
Relatively; I mean, in reference to other things, to certain ends or purposes,
which are not essential unto the work. In the former consideration or sense, a
work is said to be perfect when it is so well and perfectly performed, that no
degrees of perfection are wanting, or can be added to it. In the latter sense,
a work is said to be perfect when it is wrought after such a manner, or upon
such terms, that it accommodates some ends and purposes of greater weight and
moment than a sudden or present perfection of the work it self. To explain this
distinction a little, and then briefly to apply it. God (we know) in the course
of Nature, though (as the Apostle says) he gives to every Seed its own body,
yet he does this gradually. As our Savior in his Parable ( Mar. 4.28.)
expresses it concerning the Seed or Grain of Corn, First, the blade, then the
ear, and then the ripe or full corn in the Ear. Now the work of Providence, in
bringing the Seed that is sown thus by degrees to perfection, is in this
respect at first, and for a time after, viz. until the ripe Corn in the Ear,
imperfect; because after the springing up of the Blade, and after the Ear,
there remains somewhat further to be done to bring there to their natural and
due perfection, i.e. to be ripe Corn in the Ear. But now look upon this work of
Providence in another consideration, viz. as it is subservient to such ends and
purposes as God projecteth to bring to pass by it, viz. to exercise the Faith
and Patience of the Husbandman in waiting upon him a convenient space for the
receiving the fruit of his Labor; and so to display his own Wisdom in the
orderly Progression of Nature, or second causes; and so it is perfect all along
from first to last, and under every degree or advance of it, and would have
been less perfect in case it had been carried on and wrought otherwise; I mean,
in case the Seed that is sown should presently upon the sowing be brought to
perfection, or full Corn in the Ear. Though this had been perfect in the former
consideration, yet in the latter it would have been imperfect, and so would not
have accommodated the Husbandman in his waiting with patience.

Now to apply the distinction; All the works of the Spirit in men, the work of
Faith, the work of Repentance, or Mortification, etc. They are all perfect in
the latter sense, but not in the former. We read in the Scripture as well of a
little Faith as of a great Faith; and a little Faith is the work of the Spirit
as well as that which is great: Yet a little Faith, simply considered, is an
imperfect work, because many degrees remain to be added to it, to perfect or
complete it; but, in the latter consideration, the work of a little Faith in
men, and so of a lower degree of Mortification, is as perfect a work as a
greater.

The Reason is, because the Spirit in working a work of little Faith, and not
of greater accommodates the righteous and wise Counsel or Design of God; viz.
in rewarding men's Labor, Diligence, and Faithfulness proportionably to their
degrees; not making those who have been less diligent and faithful (though both
in some degree) equal unto those who have abounded in these above their
Fellows. Now we know the Wisdom and the Holiness of God have in consultation
the promotion of Godliness in the World upon the highest and best terms that
may be. And among many ways and means wherein the God of Grace does intend to
express himself for the promoting this great Design of his, there is no means
more effectual than this way, viz. That those who will be more diligent, and
more laborious, and more faithful, and shall more and more apply themselves to
the use of such and such means; that they shall be invested with such and such
Privileges in a greater measure. Whereas if God should do that upon any use of
means, viz. if they shall pray once a month, or hear the Word once a month; if
God shall give as much; and as rich a presence of himself unto such a person as
unto him who shall be diligent in the use of means: Then, or by means of such a
procedure, God should pull down that with one hand which he endeavors to
build up with the other; and would by such a course take men off from the use
of means; for, Who would give double or treble to procure that which he might
have at a lower rate? This for a third sign or means of discerning who are
filled with the Spirit; a deep and effectual work of Mortification.

Fourthly, viz. a gracious impression or propension, enclining the heart and
soul where it resideth unto ways and actions eminently righteous and just,
with a real abhorrency of the contrary, or of whatsoever is sinful. Indeed,
that holiness which we now speak of seems chiefly to consist in the latter; A
real loathing, abhorring, and detesting what is sinful and unclean, Psalm.
145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
Righteous in all his ways, i. e. All his ways, and works, and dispensations,
all his interposures in the World with every Creature are all righteous and
just: He means just in such a sense as men are able to call just; for else to
what purpose was it to inform the World that God was just and righteous, and
then to mean it to be such a kind of Justice and Righteousness which men cannot
understand? And holy in all his works; I suppose it is according to the manner
of the Scriptures, where usually in the latter Clause of the Verse there is
some Explication made of the former. And so here, the Holy Ghost having said,
The Lord is righteous in all his ways (he adds) and he is holy in all his
works: As if he had said, He is not simply in all that he does just and
regular: No, but he does abhor with a perfect hatred all things that are
contrary. We know, a man may do a thing out of such or such an affection or
disposition, or in reference to such an end that he would provide for and
accomplish; and yet possibly he may do the contrary: But now (says David)
concerning God, there is such a mighty propensity, and going out of his heart
and soul to holiness in all his works that he cannot do otherwise; he has the
greatest abhorrency in his nature to do otherwise. As the Wiseman says in the
Proverbs, It is joy to the upright to do justly; that is, the Propensions of
their heart and soul stand for such actions. Now all Actions which are suitable
to a strong Propensity in a man are actions of joy and great delight unto him;
so that to do justly and righteously when the heart is full of this disposition
must needs be matter of joy and of high contentment; it must needs ease the
heart and soul that is filled with this fullness. And so God takes a pleasure
in mercy; mercy is his delight, because he is full of mercy, his Nature and
Essence is full of these gracious Principles, these sweet and blessed
affections, and so likewise Righeousness is his delight; as on the contrary,
because there is planted in his Nature a deep and unspeakable detestation and
abhorrence of that which is sinful and unrighteous, therefore he cannot come
near any such Action.

Now the reason why I make a worthy or considerable degree in holiness an
Argument or sign of a man's being filled with the Spirit of God, is, because the
Spirit of God is a Spirit of Holiness. And according to the common Maxim in
Reason and in Natural Philosophy. Omne Agens assimilat sibi patiens, etc. Every
Agent endeavors to make the Patient like himself, as fire would make all hot.

So water does moysten and soften all that does come near unto it, and that
will mingle with it. The Spirit (we know) is from place to place in the
Scriptures styled the Holy Spirit; this is his proper Name or Character by
which he is distinguished, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom [or by whom] also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise. He is here
distinguished from all other Spirits, and termed the holy Spirit, In whom
(says he) after that ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
Promise: that is, the Spirit promised by God, or by Jesus Christ unto
Believers. Only this is to be remembered by way of Caution, when any person is
wont to appear in the Form of holiness, in respect of any great and solemn
detestation of some things or ways that are evil (as it is observable in some,
that they have a great fierceness, and, as it were, a fierce keen edge of
Spirit against some kind of sins) but are remiss, lukewarm, and neutral in
respect of others, being manifest and generally known or acknowledged to be
sins: This is no Argument of persons being filled with the Spirit of God, Romans
2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? So when men shall
abhor one kind of sin, or abomination, but yet either practice or pass by, or
connive at, and are not troubled at the practice of another, this is a sign
that it is not from the Spirit of God, or from any fullness with this Spirit
that that abhorrence and detestation of that particular sin does proceed; and
consequently, this is no Argument of any great worth or value to prove that a
man is filled with the Spirit of God. And thus you have many great pretenders
unto holiness, and consequently, to a being filled with the Spirit, by this
touchstone of truth discovered to be nothing so. There may be (indeed) other
reasons and other motives that may put them forth in a detestation of some
sins; but if there be other sins that they can suffer without any trouble or
regret of soul, certainly, this is not the Spirit of God that works. For he
never teaches men to put any such difference between abomination and
abomination.

A fifth Particular, i. e. if they be all really and in good earnest solicitous
and careful that their ways and actions may have a direct, clear, and proper
tendency to the glorifying or manifesting of God in the World; when men without
much regret or reluctance, or much pain unto the Flesh, can accommodate all
their occasions and affairs to the interest of God and his glory. This is a
great sign of their being filled with the Spirit of God. For as we have
formerly showed unto you that as the heaviness of a Stone carries it downwards
to its Center, just so Godliness makes the Soul hang Godward, and
consequently, disposes a man to a kind of solicitousness in all his ways,
that these may all lead in a strait Line unto the magnifying of God, and the
advancing of his glory.

The reason why we deliver this as a Property or Character of a man's being
filled with the Spirit, is, first, because the Spirit who is said to be of God,
or from God, cannot but be conceived to be for God also, i. e. persuade and
incline men to make God and his Glory their Sovereign end, and to set him up
and his Interest here as the highest and supreme end of all their undertakings,
and of all their Counsels and dealings in the World. And secondly, The motions
and workings of the Spirit in the hearts and souls of men, being every way
concurrent with the Gospel (for the Spirit moves not, stirs not, does not
incline any man's heart or soul but in consort, and in a full and express
concurrence with the Gospel, with the Sayings, Precepts, and Exhortations
hereof.) And the Gospel being calculated, as it were on purpose, with the most
exact and best Skill, and Wisdom, and Understanding to promote Godliness; being
a Doctrine according unto Godliness, i. e. a Doctrine framed and made on
purpose to promote Godliness in the World; a Doctrine of such a nature and
import, as if God had a desire by means hereof to set up himself, and to draw
men unto himself: Now then (I say) the Spirit never working but with a full
concurrence with the Gospel, and the Gospel being set for Godliness, and for
the advancement of it in the World; it cannot be but that the Spirit of God
must set the heart on work in order to the same end also; and therefore when it
appears that men are to a considerable degree industrious and earnest for the
advancing of Godliness, it is an indubitable sign or Character that the Spirit
of God is present, that he is there with a great presence with an abundance of
himself and of his power.

Sixthly, of this is, because the Spirit of God came down from heaven on
purpose to make men heavenly minded, and to negotiate the interest and affairs
of his own Country, much after the manner of Agents and Ambassadors, who come
to treat about the things of their own Country: So the Spirit does come down
from heaven; he is the great Prince that does negotiate the affairs thereof
with men, 1 Pet. 1.12. By them that have preached the Gospel unto you with the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. The Holy Ghost is come to preach the Gospel,
and the effect he desires may be produced by it, is, that of earthly and
carnal he might transform persons into heavenly and spiritual. Now in
whomsoever this is carried on to any sensible and notable degree, insomuch that
it is perceived by those that have to do with them, that their minds are
questionless much taken up, much set upon the things of the World which is to
come, the things of heaven; and that in comparison thereof the things of this
World, and the concernments hereof are undervalued, and made to stand by when
the other are in place; that these are made to give way when the interest of
the other requires it; I say, when any man is discerned by those with whom he
converseth to be of such a frame and temper of spirit as this is, it is a very
promising sign and Character that this person is full of the Spirit of God.

Seventhly, If we sow plentifully to the Spirit, i. e. from whence the Spirit
of God may have acknowledgement, honor, and praise amongst men in the world.
In the same phrase of speech the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 9.11.) calls the
preaching of the Gospel unto men, the sowing of spiritual things unto them: If
we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter for us to reap
your carnal things? The faithful Ministers of the Gospel are said to sow
spiritual things unto men when they preach the Gospel truly and effectually
unto them; because they may reap spiritual benefit and advantage from what they
sow, it being the proper tendency of those things which they preach unto men to
yield an increase and harvest according to the nature and excellency of the
Seed. In like manner, men may be said to sow unto the Spirit of God when they
walk in such ways, and in the performance of such Actions which are like to
turn to an account of praise, and glory, or contentment unto the Spirit of God:
As on the contrary, when men and women go so to work, behave themselves so
unworthily in the World that the Spirit is like to suffer prejudice or
disparagement by them, viz. when men shall be occasioned or tempted to think or
say that the Spirit of God never regarded, never looked graciously upon such a
person that walks and acts so unworthily, so wickedly, in such cases as
this men are said to grieve the Spirit of God; they sow the seeds of Gall and
Wormwood unto him. If you ask me, What are these ways or actions more
particularly by which men and women may be said to sow unto the Spirit?

I reply, They are such which give testimony both of the presence of the Spirit
of God in them, and likewise of the goodness of this Spirit. Such as are ways
of Righteousness, Love, Humility, Patience, Mercy, Bounty, etc. such ways and
actions as these may therefore be said to give testimony both of the presence
of the Spirit in men, and likewise of the goodness of this Spirit: because,
first, If he were not in men persuading unto, aiding, and assisting in such
ways and actions as these, they would never proceed from them, but on the
contrary the Flesh would prevail and bring forth fruits in its kind. Again
secondly, If this Spirit were not a Spirit of Goodness he would not move and
stir up men and women to such good and worthy ways and actions as these, but
to the contrary, as the unclean Spirit (Satan) stirs up many in his kind.
Now it is a worthy Testimony given to the Spirit, not only when men testify or
assert his goodness unto the World, but also when they assert his presence with
men, or in men; this argues the exceeding graciousness and condescension of his
nature.

So then, etc. bears any proportion, though never so small, of the fruit that
is proper to it; this argues that there is a lively sap and moisture in the
Tree in some degree or other, but if this Tree shall be seen with boughs laden
with Fruit, and that of the largest and goodliest that is to be found, this is
a sign not simply that the Tree has sap and moisture in it: But that it is
full of sap, as the Psalmist speaks of the trees of the Lord, Psalm. 104.16. [
i. e. according to the Hebrew Dialect, Trees that are excellently thriving and
flourishing in their kind.] In like manner, when men and women shall sow
plentifully unto the Spirit (in the sense declared;) especially, if the Seed
which they sow in this kind shall be goodly, fair, and large, this is an
unquestionable demonstration that they are filled with the Spirit of God. When
men and women shall quit themselves above the ordinary rate of Professors and
Believers, in works of Love, Faith, Humility, and Self-denial, etc. shall
truly, and without any tincture of ill will, or hard thoughts, forgive and pass
by some great injury done unto them by men. If thou be able to pass by an
eminent wrong, and if thou can upon the next opportunity, as the next day, or
the like, kindly entreat him that has done it; If thou can deal freely and
lovingly with him, and this injury has not at all weakened or enfeebled thine
hand; now this does argue a rich presence of the Spirit of God, especially in
conjunction with the other things mentioned. And so again, when the fruits and
expressions of their love to Jesus Christ, or his Saints and Followers, shall
be very large and fair, such as shall be found in none but themselves, and
perhaps in here one, and there one besides; as when either with the poor Widow
in the Gospel, they shall cast in their whole substance or livelihood into the
Treasury of God, or else shall sacrifice some great and notable opportunity of
worldly advantage upon the Service of God, and of the People of God,
especially, if they shall do this once and again, and as often as any
opportunity affords it self unto them; this cannot but argue an excellent
fullness of the Spirit of God. The Tree (says our Savior) is known by the
Fruit, and this not only in respect of the kind or property of it (which is the
knowledge spoken of by our Savior:) But likewise in the degree of it; not only
good in the kind, and of the same nature, but also the best of the kind for
goodness.

Eighthly, Patience to have its perfect work (as James speaks) i. e. shall be
content cheerfully, and without muttering or complaint, to suffer all that God
shall call him to suffer, though the Iniquity of those who persecute (in one
kind or other) abound never so much, yet he will not so much as stoop or step
out of the way for it; but shall keep strait course in the ways of God in the
view of the World; there cannot be a more promising sign or symptom of a
person being filled with the Spirit of God than this.

The reason of this is, because all kinds of sufferings are contrary to the
Flesh, and destructive to the interest thereof; and unless it be to accommodate
the Flesh at some other turn, and in some other way, no man that can decline
them will expose himself unto them, but only such who are strengthened by the
Spirit of God in the inward man. The Apostle Paul in laying down the signs of
his Apostleship, 2 Cor. 12.12. presents patience under trouble, a willingness
to suffer all, and all manner of afflictions for the Gospels sake: For one
among the rest. If a man have a proportionable aid and assistance of the Spirit
of God, though he do put his shoulder under the burden of affliction, yet
being acted and assisted by this Spirit, the Flesh will not feel any bitterness
or trouble in it, Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his
glorious power unto all long suffering and patience with joyfulness. 1 These.
3.3. That no man should be moved by their afflictions. He acquaints them in the
precedent Verse, that he had sent Timothy unto them to confirm and establish
them in the Faith, and in the things which they now had believed: And that for
this end, that no man should be moved by any of those things which they
suffered; Therefore (says the Apostle) I sent him unto you to hear of your
faith, lest that by any means you should be tempted; implying, that persecution
is a sore kind of temptation: this is like the Axe that is laid to the root of
the Tree. This he knew would put them to it, and be a means even to endanger
the shaking of their Faith, and to tell the World that they did only make a
show of believing, but were not established in the truth. So again, 1 These.
1.3, 5, 6. Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love,
and your patience of hope, etc. For our Gospel came not unto you in word only,
but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, etc. As ye know what manner of men we
were among you for your sake, having received the Word in much affliction with
joy of the Holy Ghost. Now this is that I say, had they not had the Holy Ghost
to stand by them, as they would never have received the Gospel, so neither
without a rich presence of him would they ever have persevered therein in a day
of persecution. This then is the reason of the Character or sign in the eighth
place.

Ninthly (and lastly) A fullness with the Spirit of God is discernable by a rich
and inward acquaintance with the mind and will of God and of Jesus Christ in
the Scriptures:

First, That for men and women to pretend to a knowledge of the mind of God in
the Scriptures above other persons, and to be confident of their own
apprehensions and conceits in this kind is nothing, is no Argument or proof at
all that therefore they do know the mind of Christ in the Scriptures, more or
better than other men, or consequently, that they are persons filled with the
Spirit of God: For all this may be, men and women may see the Visions of their
own hearts (as the Scripture speaks) and be as confident, as confidence it
self can make them, that they are Visions of God, and verily think (as Paul
himself sometimes did in like case) that they see the Visions of God. The false
Prophets of old, who walked in the Spirit of falsehood (or, as some read the
words, in the wind of falsehood, Mic. 2.11.) These were as confident of their
Visions as the Prophets of God could be: See an instance in Zedekiah the Son of
Chenaanah, 1 Kings 22.11. He was so confident that he would needs make himself
two Iron horns to push the Syrians withal until they were consumed. Michaiah,
the true Prophet of God, was not more confident of the Vision which he had
seen. And so the Pharisees in the Gospel, Joh. 9.40. Are we blind also? As who
should say, If any men in all the World does see, and know, and understand the
mind of God, we do; we can well bear that thou should look upon the rest of
the World, the ordinary sort of people, as blind, but we pray thee do not make
us blind also; clearly implying, and that with the greatest indignation, that
whatsoever he should speak that should intimate in the least that they should
not know the mind of God, that that must be most false. And in these days, how
many pretenders have we to little less than a Prophetic Unction, to mystical
discoveries, to a deep and further insight into the mind of God in the
Scriptures, and to the understanding of things there; whose Notions
(notwithstanding the pretended fruits of such their high Anointings and
Revelations) being weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, are found light,
and to have nothing of the mind of God or of Christ in them? Therefore (in the
first place) unless these discoveries, which are pretended unto, and held forth
with the greatest confidence, shall commend themselves for truth unto the
judgments and understandings of sober and judicious men, much versed and
exercised in the Scriptures, either from their own light or evidence, or else
shall be made out by light of Argument and Demonstation, Whether from the
Scriptures, or clear Principles in reason to be real truths, and such things
that are every ways worthy the Wisdom, Righteousness, and Holiness of God,
they are not to be looked upon as proceeding from any fullness of the Spirit in
their Authors, but as the exertions and puttings forth of a Spirit of vanity
and delusion in men: For certainly, God would not have sent Christ Jesus in the
end of the World to seal up Revelations and Prophesies, and to set bounds unto
the Children of men, and afterward send these men to gather up what Jesus
Christ has scattered, and to make perfect what he has left imperfect. Wko
knows not that the New Testament is sealed with a Curse, with dread and
terror unto the man or woman that shall either make any breach upon that which
is there delivered by diminishing ought thereof, and so likewise unto any that
shall bring any new or further Revelation, than what is already brought in
there?

Secondly, In case by the opportunity and advantage of Education, any man shall
attain unto a greater dexterity or ability to unfold the Scriptures, and to
bring many of the secrets thereof to light which have been hidden from the eyes
of others; this does not necessarily argue a fullness of, or a being filled with
the Spirit (at least in the sense wherein we have prosecuted the Doctrine
hitherto, i. e. a filling with the Spirit as sanctifying) unless it shall
appear by their lives and ways that they are really and thoroughly persuaded of
the truth and certainty of these things which they hold forth from the
Scriptures. It is true, many men may do great Services for the Christian World,
and for the Saints, and that by opening the great Deeps or Fountains of the
Scriptures, and may cause many beams of light and Spiritual understanding to
break forth, and many ways of Wisdom there to appear, and yet may not believe.
As it is with a fained Story, though there may be some kind of rationality in
it, yet the rationality of it does not therefore argue its truth and verity;
just so, men may maintain the reasonableness of the Scriptures, and
consequently, many great truths therein contained; they may argue excellently,
and show how one thing gives light unto another; and yet nevertheless at the
bottom there may be nothing else but uncertainties and doubtings of the truth
of all the Story; and this hollowness and defection at the bottom, and core,
and root of the heart is like to break out and bewray it self, in such a kind
of life and conversation, which is unsuitable unto the tenor of Scripture, and
unto the Genius, Nature, and light of the glorious Gospel which they declare or
preach unto men.

The Reason of the Character or sign last mentioned, Scripture that has never
seen the Sun, that has never been so generally understood or known by men as
in the present Generation; so that it being the proper work of the Spirit of
God to take away the vail and covering which has been upon the Scriptures,
when he finds some person whom he does much delight in, he will single him
out for this service, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, etc. But God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of
God: That is, according to Scripture Language, teaches men to search, and to
find out by searching the deep things of God, i. e. such Counsels of his which
do not lie in the surface of the Scriptures; such things which cannot be seen
at the first cast of a man's eye: For what man knows the things of a man save
the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so, the things of God knows no man,
but the Spirit of God. Now the Notions which are bred in the Mind and in the
Nature of God, are of another sort, of a quite different nature from those
which are engendered and conceived in the mind of men; even as those impressions
in bruit beasts are of a far other nature and kind from those which are in men;
and being of another nature and kind (and also inferior to those Notions or
Impressions which are in man) they cannot understand or comprehend those
Notions, or Impressions, and those Principles of Action that are in men, and by
which they order and steer their course: The Reason is, because these Notions
or Impressions that are in Men are of a superior kind to those in Beasts, and
out of the reach of them, or any other created being (especially) beneath
themselves: So that though it should be supposed, that the Creature man, by
reason of the excellency of his Nature above other Creatures, were able
perfectly to understand those several Impressions, etc. that are in their
beings respectively; yet could they never comprehend those in man, for the
reason even now hinted: In like manner, though God be able to comprehend all
the Notions and Principles, and all the Projections that are incident to the
hearts and spirits of men; yet men are not able, without the Spirit to
apprehend and conceive what his Thoughts, Notions, Counsels, and Projections
are. But now (says he) the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things
of God; otherwise, without this Spirit, no man knows what are the things of
God, and thoughts of his heart, no more than any other Creature knows, or is
able to comprehend what is in the hearts of men. So again, ver. 12. Now we have
received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given unto us of God: Meaning, the things
of the Gospel, those terms and conditions upon which life and salvation is
promised and secured unto the World. This shows, that where there is any
considerable degree of the knowledge of the things of God, especially of the
deep things of God, that have been kept secret from Age to Age. This argues an
excellent presence of the Spirit of God, ver. 13. Which things we also speak,
not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, etc. for the natural man receives
not the things of God, etc. By the natural man in this place is not meant the
unregenerate, or the carnal man, but the Babe in Christ. I could not speak unto
you (says that Apostle, Chap. 3. ver. 1. of the same Epistle) as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, even babes in Christ. So that evident it is from
this Scripture, that these natural men, who could not receive the things of
God, were not unregenerate men, or carnal in the sense which we generally take
the word carnal, but babes in Christ. Now these could not understand any thing
but what was plain; the things here spoken of, the deep things of God, such
things which lie above the apprehensions of ordinary men, these things are too
strong for such men's stomachs, they cannot bear them, they cannot see how they
should be agreeable to the Goodness, Wisdom, and Love of God, neither can they
receive them, viz. whilst they are Babes, or Children: Yea, though in their
state of Childhood they are not capable of them, they are capable of growing
and coming to manhood. A man that has not had to do with Jewels, he knows them
not, nor of what value or worth they are: Even so it is with the deep and
excellent things of the Gospel, if these be set before those that are weak in
judgment, and Children in understanding; alas! they know not what to make of
them; they can make no nourishment of them: but in time they may grow to such a
capacity, that such meat as this will be the most desirable unto them, and they
will say as the Jews, Lord, evermore give us this bread. Men that are grown
will call for strong meat, such as will sort and suit with their stomachs. And
thus much for this Character: And so we have done with our Reply to the third
(and last) of the three Questions long since propounded for the further
clearing and opening of the Doctrine; we are now come to the Use and
Application. This Doctrine is useful three several ways: For Instruction, for
Reproof, and for Exhortation.

CHAP. XII. The first Use of the Doctrine, by way of Instruction, in four main
Points; First, Showing how comely a thing it is for men and women to be found
obedient to the Commands of God in general; and particularly, how beautiful and
honorable a thhing it is for men and women to be filled with the Spirit of
God, and to be found acting accordingly. Secondly, An account given what
strangers the Saints themselves are unto many great Duties, and more especially
unto this great Duty of being filled with the Spirit, insomuch that even this
Generation are (as it were) asleep thereunto. Thirdly, That this great
blessedness of being filled with the Spirit is no impossible thing, but is
attainable by the endeavors and engagements of men. Fourthly, and lastly, That
it is the will and design of God that Believers should be a Royal Generation of
Kings and Priests unto himself, and that they should live accordingly.
FIrst, For Instruction; be filled with the Spirit, and to act and declare
themselves accordingly; I mean, so to behave and demean themselves in all
things, that it may be known to the World that they are filled with the Spirit:
their Actions and Ways should be all Heroic and Princelike, and have a
luster, and beauty, and brightness in them above the Actions, Ways, and
Conversations of other men. Even as the Lord Christ was known to be the only
begotten Son of God ( Joh. 1.14.) by that excellent glory wherein he appeared;
We saw (says the Evangelist) his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son
of God; meaning, that his glory, whatsoever it was, was so glorious, and so
excellent for the kind of it, that they that saw it could not but conceive and
judge that it was too full and too Majestic for any Creature whatsoever; too
excellent for any of the Angels themselves, and much more for man; and by this
they perceived him to be the only begotten of God; those Robes of glory were
too rich for any Creature to be attired and adorned withal, though they did
(indeed) become the glory and dignity of his Person: In like manner, it would
be exceeding comely for the Sons and Daughters of God to have such a glory of
life and conversation still to accompany them as they walk up and down the
World, and wherever they become, which may distinguish them from all others
to be persons of that rank, and such a Generation that are filled with the
Spirit of God. My Brethren, there is a strain of Action and Conversation that
is apt and able to convince the World even against their minds and wills, and
will make them confess and acknowledge that these are a Generation of men and
women by themselves; for God enjoins nothing by any of his Precepts or Laws
unto men but what is comely, grateful, and lovely for them to do, and that
which will commend them both in his eyes, and in the eyes of all his Angels,
yea, of all truly judicious and understanding men. Even as Parents are wont to
teach their Children a good carriage of themselves, and comeliness of behavior
that may render them acceptable on all hands: So does God by his Precepts and
Exhortations teach the Sons and Daughters of men such a deportment and
demeanor of themselves in all cases, and under all circumstances that will set
them off with the best and highest acceptance with men; for every Command and
Precept of his has a kind of pleasant correspondence with the frame and
condition of man: and when men and women neglect the performance of any of them
in their season, or shall do any thing contrary unto them, they render
themselves so much the less lovely and desirable. No man ever neglected any of
the Commands of God, but that by every such neglect, ipso facto, they stain and
spot the dignity and excellency of their glory; whereas if they had been true
to themselves, and to their own interest, in yielding obedience to those
Commands of God, they would have been more lovely, comely, and pleasant, and
more highly accepted both with God and amongst men. The Holy Ghost himself very
frequently commends obedience and subjection unto the Laws of God under this
very Notion we now speak of unto men. My Son (says Solomon, Prove. 1.8, 9.)
hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother: For
they shall be an Ornament of grace upon thy head, and Chains upon thy neck;
meaning, that Instructions from the Word of God, administered unto us by our
Parents, and those that be over us, being regarded and submitted unto by us,
will render us lovely, and respected both of God and men. So again, Prove. 3.22.
So shall she (meaning, Wisdom submitted unto) be life unto thy soul, and grace
unto thy neck. She shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy head, etc. So again,
1 Timothy 2.9, 10. The Apostle in this Contexture of Scripture shows how women,
professing Godliness, ought to behave themselves in all Modesty,
Shamefacedness, and Sobriety, accompanied with good works; these (namely, good
works) are comely Ornaments as well for men as for women. And it is the
property of good works, and all manner of conforming to the Will of God to make
a kind of noise in the World, and to provoke men to look upon them who are
found, fruitful in them: Even as rich Jewels do make and beget by their Luster
a kind of high esteem and reverence in men to persons who wear them: In like
manner, they who shall adorn themselves with works of righteousness, by
submitting to the Commands of God, shall by such ways be known to be the Sons
of God; even by the richness of those Ornaments and Jewels which hang about
their necks. Mat. 3.15. It becomes us (says our Lord Christ) to fulfill all
Righteousness; as who should say, This is the way that would advance and adorn
him, and make him more comely in the sight of God his Father, and of Angels,
and of Men. And so, Romans 16.2. That ye receive her in the Lord (speaking of
Phebe) as becomes Saints, and that ye assist her, etc. My Brethren, there is
no occasion, no business, nothing to be done either abroad, or at home, when a
man is sitting in his house, or speaking to his Servants, or any other persons,
but there is an opportunity for such a kind of behavior which will well become
us, and which will set us off with a kind of comeliness or loveliness in the
eyes of those which are about us. This then is the first thing which we commend
unto you by way of Instruction; That if it be a Duty imposed by God upon all
men, especially Believers, to be filled with the Spirit, then is it a comely and
honorable thing for men and women to be filled with the Spirit, and to walk
accordingly, by means whereof they shall find acceptance both in Heaven and in
Earth.

Secondly,

For first, That this Precept of God which enjoins a being filled with the
Spirit of God, directed more particularly unto the Saints, is a Precept of very
high concernment unto them has been made to appear formerly, and particularly
when we gave directions how to raise an ardent desire in your souls unto it, by
setting before you the various and most rich accommodations which do always
accompany such a fullness.

Secondly, That this Precept, notwithstanding the excellency of it, is little
in the thoughts of Believers themselves, and that their Consciences are little
better than dead unto it, is too too evident from the general neglect that is
found amongst them of the use of the means which are proper to fill them
accordingly, without the diligent use whereof it is impossible they should be
obedient unto the Precept (as we have heretofore opened the business unto you;)
and besides, the little regard of this Precept, even amongst Believers
themselves, is apparent more than enough from the general tenor of their
actions and ways, which are nothing like the actions and ways of men filled
with the Spirit. And as it is with this Precept of being filled with the Spirit
in being so generally neglected and forgotten by Believers; So is it with
several other also, which share in the same disrespect at the hand of Believers
with it, viz. as That of walking circumspectly [or exactly, as the word
signifies] That of redeeming the time in respect of the evil of the days
wherein we live: That of bearing one another burdens: That of not respecting
persons for their wealth and costly clothes: That which enjoins rich men to be
rich in good works: These with some others; as generally all such which grate
hard upon the flesh, and require a spiritual Heroickness and true greatness of
spirit to submit unto them, and which are not sanctioned or backed with an
express threatening of exclusion from the Kingdom of God, and of Salvation, in
case of disobedience. Most of the Precepts of any of these Characters are like
some absolute and antiquated Laws or Statutes in a State or Commonwealth, which
through a long, customary, and general disuse and neglect are no more minded or
regarded than if they were not; nor persons any ways challenged, charged, or
thought the worse of for not conforming themselves unto them: So are such
Precepts of Christianity, which respect excellency of walking, and have not the
vengeance of hell fire attending them to awaken the Consciences of men to the
observance. They seem to be no otherwise looked upon by Professors than as if
they were given by the Lord Christ only to be gazed on, and looked at; and not
with any intent that they should be obeyed by men, or with any expectation that
they should submit unto them. The Reason hereof has been lately intimated (in
part) viz. because they have not a sanction like that of the Law given upon
Mount Sinai; they are not given or enjoined with Thunder, Earthquakes, or Fire,
but as with a still voice. And the Children of God themselves (as we lately had
occasion to observe) having much servility of Spirit hanging on them, and so
being more intent and taken up in their thoughts about escaping hell and
damnation, and not so much upon obtaining Heaven and Salvation, but only in a
collateral and and consequential way: hence it comes to pass, that they
chiefly and mainly set their hearts and minds upon such Precepts, the
disobedience and neglect whereof is threatened with the vengeance of Hell fire,
or with exclusion of the Kingdom of Heaven; and think that those which have not
this Iron Rod in their hand to over-aw the Consciences of men into obedience
unto them are less considerable.

For this is much to be minded (which I do not remember that I have had
occasion heretofore to offer unto you) viz. like terms, by such Principles and
Rules of Wisdom and Equity, according unto which, prudent Lawmakers amongst
men are wont to compile and frame the body of those Civil or Politic Laws
which they make for the benefit or use of their States or Communities
respectively; and very probably (nay, the thing is very little, or not at all
questionable) God has imprinted that Principle of Reason and Equity we now
speak of in the hearts of men in conformity to the Original Copy in himself.
Now it is generally found in the Systeme of all Politic Laws and
Constitutions, that though there be rewards in several kinds and degrees
assigned and decreed by Law unto persons that shall do any eminent or worthy
service unto their State or Country; yet there is no penalty or punishment
enacted against those who shall not quit themselves thus worthily, and
honorably for the benefit of this state: Penal Laws and Statutes are not made
for those, or against those that are not eminently virtuous, eminently valiant,
liberal, bountiful, wise, or the like: But only against those who are eminently
vicious; and shall act to the detriment, prejudice, or hurt of the Community of
which they are Members. Thus the Romans had Laws for the rewarding of the high
Services of their Soldiers; he that first sealed the Walls of a City or Town
besieged had his Corona muralis, i.e. A certain Garland or Crown, which was a
Badge of honor appropriate to that Service; so he that first entered the
Trenches of the Enemies had his Corona vallaris; so he that preserved the life
of any Citizen or free Denizon of Rome had his Corona civica; But they had no
Laws that inflicted any punishment upon those that did not perform those
Services, or had not valor or courage sufficient to atchieve them. Anciently
in our own Land there was by Law a reward appointed unto him that should kill a
Wolf and bring forth his head. So, Josh. 15.16. Caleb made a Law or Decree,
that he that shall smite Kiriath-Sephar and take it should have his Daughter to
Wife. Now as the Romans did not enact any penalty to be inflicted upon any that
did not attain any of those excellent Achievements; neither did the Law in
this Land inflict any punishment upon those who could not kill a Wolf: In like
manner, God has so contrived and tempered the frame and Systeme of his Laws in
the Scriptures, which are made for the orderly regulation and benefit of the
great Community, or Body Politic of the World, that though there be rewards
and encouragements Enacted and Decreed in them, for those that shall excel in
virtue, and quit themselves above the ordinary rate of men, either for the
honor and glory of God, or for the public benefit or service of men, yet
there is no threatening of punishment, in one kind or other, against those who
shall not attain to that excellent strain above their Fellows; unless (happily)
it be that they shall not partake in the signal reward of the other, which (to
speak properly) is no punishment: But the threatenings in the Law of God are
bent against those who shall be wicked, that shall live and act to the
dishonor of his name, or to the damage, prejudice, or trouble of the Community
of men amongst whom they should have their being. We shall see in the course of
the Scriptures how the threatenings of God lie against that kind of sin or
sinners that are directly set and bent against the holy and righteous Law of
God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, etc. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor
Covetous man who is an Idolater, etc. Let no man deceive you with vain words,
etc. and compare Rev. 21.8, 27. But the Fearful; and Unbelieving, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, etc. shall have their portion in the Lake, etc. As
Civil Constitutions, and Politic Laws of men do provide for the peace, safety,
and comfort of those that shall live in subjection to them, prohibiting and
punishing all ways and actions that are prejudicial and hurtful to the
public, yet not enacting or inflicting any punishment on those that do no rare
or excellent service, as though they be not eminent defenders of the State,
etc. In like manner, God by his Laws has provided for the safety, for the
Eternal Salvation of those that shall live in subjection unto such Laws and
Commands of his, by which men are restrained from ways and actions signally
dishonorable unto him, or disturbing and mischievous to those amongst whom
they live and converse, although they do not attain unto the eminent Services
of Noah, Daniel, and Job, nor deserve to be numbered amongst the Worthies of the
Christian World; yet for those who shall rise up to the Line of those famous
men we speak of, and serve God and men at such a worthy rate as they served
them in their Generation, he has in his Law provided better and greater things
than simply safety and salvation, viz. salvation with an Emphasis or
Superlative weight of glory.

To this purpose (I conceive) the two Parables of our Savior (both recorded by
Luke, Chap. 12.36, 37. the other in Chap. 17.7, 8, etc.) are very considerable:
The former of these, And ye your selves, like men that wait for their Lord when
he will return from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks they may open
unto him immediately; blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes
shall find watching. Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. Compare this
Parable with that Luke 17.7.8. Which of you, having a Servant plowing or
feeding Cattle, will say to him by and by, when he is came from the Field, go
and sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, make ready wherewith I
may sup, and gird thy self and serve me till I have eaten and drunken, and
afterward thou shall eat and drink. Does he thank that Servant because he did
the things that were commanded him? I trow not. So likewise, Ye when ye shall
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
Servants. Now compare that which was delivered and taught in the former Parable
(how the Lord Christ will gird himself and come forth and serve them) with that
which is promised here, namely, that when they had girded themselves, and
administered unto him (the Master) while he shall eat and drink, then they shall
sit down and eat and drink. And withal, Does he thank such a Servant because he
has done thus? I trow not (says he:) I suppose his meaning is, that it is not
the manner of men, when Servants do but that which commanded them to do, the
Master does not think himself beholding to them, neither does he thank them by
the bestowing any signal or particular reward upon them. But now there is a
kind of Servant upon whom the Master does intend to bestow very great and
worthy things: For it is said in the other Parable expressly, he will gird
himself, and come forth and serve them; He will do it in the sight of Heaven
and Earth; all the World shall take notice that he will account those Servants,
there spoken of, worthy of double honor, he himself will honor them. But if
the Question be, But what is it that makes the difference between these two
kinds of services, in point of Reward, both of them were good Servants and
typifies such persons who should be saved? The business is this, if you will
but consider the nature of these Commands, you will find a difference of these
Servants; They that do the things in the latter Parable which are commanded
them; that is, which are properly, and positively, and strictly commanded them,
viz. when God shall pitch determinately, that either they must do them, or else
suffer for it, and be destroyed with the vengeance of Eternal fire. Now, they
that go forth in their obedience in this kind, so far as that they may escape
these dangers, they shall sit down when their Lord and Master has eat and
drank, that is, they shall receive the common reward of Salvation. But there
are another kind of Servants (in another consideration very proper and passable
too) that serve not as Servants, but rather as Sons; namely, those that shall
set themselves, and stir up their hearts to obedience unto God in these high
Commands of his, which are not things commanded after such a manner, or with
such a kind of Command as was mentioned formerly, with threatenings of hell fire
unto those who shall disobey them: They who shall perform these high services
and commands of his, which are calculated on purpose for the spirits of those
men who are Children, who are of a filial spirit, and ingenuous temper, and who
desire to communicate in the greatest and highest of the affairs and blessings
of God; they who shall not content themselves with the observation of the
former kind of Laws, but shall rise up in their obedience to the observation of
the other, these are they whom their great Lord and Master Jesus will gird
himself, and come forth and serve them: That is, will show them signal and
special grace and favor by themselves. But that by the way. The truth is, that
the performance of the latter kind of services, viz. those that be not drawn
out by the means of threatening of damnation, are of the most noble and genuine
kind, and of highest acceptance with God, yet notwithstanding there is no Law
made against such persons who shall not be holy and exact, as Noah, Daniel, and
Job; that shall not be as worthy, excellent, and heavenly as these were, or as
serviceable in their Generation; but yet these are they whom their Lord and
Master will gird himself and come forth and serve, but will not do so by the
other: So that the Servants or Believers, which are expressed in the Parable,
that shall eat and drink when their Lord and Master has eaten and drank, are
these, who do only the things which are expressly and particularly enjoined, and
that upon such terms, that except they do them they shall neither eat nor
drink: That is, they shall never be saved. And these (compared with the others)
may well be termed unprofitable Servants, Mat. 25.30. or rather, as the word
signifies (and so is translated, ver. 26.) slothful or undiligent Servants;
Servants that will do no more, nor stir one Inch beyond their prescribed task.
Now such kind of Servants the Holy Ghost calls idle or sluggish, who will not
bestir themselves in their Masters business as they ought to do. This is that
which I was saying unto you, that it is the observation of this latter kind of
Commands which are not threatened with destruction; this is that which does
beget in men that Child-like Spirit, and that confidence and boldness toward
God; whereas the observation of that inferior kind of Commands does rise no
higher than deliverance from destruction, but does not advance them to use it
to any special interest in the favor and love of God; it rises no higher, nor
begets nothing else in them, but a kind of fear, or servile spirit, full of
doubts, and diffidence, and distrustfulness; and these are the proper and
different effects of the obedience unto these two kinds of Commands. To clear
this a little further; there are Instances in the Scriptures where we may
observe both the one and the other, and likewise the mind and intent of God in
them. Such Precepts without conformity unto which, men cannot be saved, either
they are such which the Law of Nature does impose upon men, and condemn and
judge them if they break and transgress them; or else they are such Commands,
which by reason of some circumstances of time and place, and some necessity, do
so bear upon the Consciences of men, that a man cannot neglect them without a
manifest contempt of the Divine Authority and Majesty of God; As for example,
when God spoke to Abraham, and commanded him to go out of his own Country; and
so to Moses, to go to Pharaoh; or to Paul, to go to preach the Gospel; now
disobedience in this kind would argue a great affront to the Majesty of God:
But there are other Commands (though perperly enough Commands) wherein men are
much left at liberty and freedom, viz. after what manner, and with what hearts
and affections they do perform these; when men shall not only do simply and
barely the thing that is expressly commanded, but likewise shall give out their
hearts to it, and shall observe this after the best manner. This is that kind
of service which shall receive grace and thanks from the hands of God; For God
estimateth the works of men much after the manner that men do the services of
their Children: if they perform such services after the manner of Sons, not as
if they were a burden unto them, they shall not simply have the reward of a
Servant, but they shall have a further reward, the reward of a Son. The
Parable, Luke 12. implies, that Christ did thank such a Servant; Why? Because,
though in a simple consideration, he did not act above what he was commanded;
yet he did more, and above what he was commanded upon the penalty of Damnation.
We read ( Luke 17.12.) of Ten Lepers that were cleansed, and we know that there
was an express Injunction in the Law, that when they were healed they should
show themselves to the Priest; and probable it is that all the Ten did
according to the Law in this case; only here is mention of one that did return
and give the Lord Christ thanks. Now, though this person did no more, in that
Act of Thanksgiving, than was a duty lying upon him in a special consideration
to do; and though the Nine did fulfill the Letter of the Law, and so did that
whereby they might escape punishment, yet they did not rise up to that grace
and acceptance which the other person did; who did not only go to the High
Priest, but returned and gave thanks to his Physician also, and did hereby
obtain favor, and high acceptance from the hands of God and Jesus Christ;
upon the account of such a behavior he was as a Son, of a Son-like and
ingenuous frame of heart.

Consider that passage of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 9.16. For though I preach
the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of: For a necessity is laid upon me, and
woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. For though I preach the Gospel, etc.
Meaning, that this is nothing by way of special acceptance at the hands of
God, because he had a necessity lying upon him in respect of the Command of
God, yea, under the Penalty of a Woe, Woe is unto me, etc. But if I preach the
Gospel willingly, and with freeness of heart and soul, so, as if there were no
express and particular Law lying upon me to necessitate me thereunto, then I
have somewhat to boast of; for this Service I know my Lord and Master will give
me a peculiarity of reward. The Apostle in this place clearly distinguishes
the preaching of the Gospel, when necessitated thereunto by a Command of God,
from the preaching of it willingly. If I preach the Gospel I have nothing
whereof to boast, for a necessity is laid upon me, etc. A man that has nothing
to engage him to an Action or Service but merely to be delivered from
punishment has nothing to boast of: But (says he) if I do this thing
willingly I have my reward, etc. Therefore to preach the Gospel, and to preach
it willingly, are two different Services; by doing the one, a man shall escape
punishment, it being obedience to a necessity lying upon him: But if I preach
it willingly, then (says he) I know I shall have consideration in abundance
from the hand of my great Lord and Master. It follows, ver. 18. What is my
reward then? The word is taken two ways, sometimes more largely, sometimes
more strictly; It is sometimes translated Wages, sometimes Reward, or that
consideration which does precisely answer in value to the work which is done,
and for which it is given. But sometimes a reward, as when it exceeds in value
the work done, and does in a transcendent degree rise above the strict
worthiness of the Service; so then, What is my reward? That is, How must I go
to work in this great Commission which is given unto me to preach the Gospel to
make my self capable of my reward? Why, (thus says he) when I preach the
Gospel, that I make it without charge: This noble, excellent, and worthy strain
of the Apostle in performing the Service which was committed to him; this was
the groundwork of his rejoicing, and that which filled him with so much
confidence and boldness in the presence of God; and this you will all find, if
you will but stir up your hearts, and be ingenuous and noble toward God, and
not stand picking and huckstering with your hearts to know how you must do to
escape hell fire; under such a frame of heart you shall still be full of fears
and doubtings, you will not be like those that are genuine, and noble, and high
spirited in the Service of God. My Brethren, we shall all find, if we stir up
our hearts, and strengthen our hands to those excellent Commands which are apt
when they are obeyed to enoble our Spirits, the obedience unto them is that
which will give us confidence and boldness before God: When as your obedience
to the other will possibly give you some kind of faint hope that you shall be
saved, and that you shall escape the wrath and vengeance that is to come, but
will hardly carry you up further; but that your confidence will ever and anon
be full of stands, and your Enemy the Devil will be ready to triumph over you:
Whereas those that have given up themselves to obey their heavenly Father in
those great Commands, these are the men who are likely to have the Spirit of
Adoption, to be able to come with boldness unto God, and to call God Father
with a good courage.

Thirdly, out themselves for that which can never be had, or enjoyed? Surely,
he does not, because it is not a thing that does any ways answer the infinite
grace and wisdom of God. Some men indeed strive to persuade themselves, and
others, that God commands many things which he intends not that any man
should perform; yea, and which he knows are impossible for any man to
perform: But I trust none of us know these depths of Satan; I mean, are
spiritually adulterous with them in our minds or thoughts, or practically know
them. To be persuaded to think that God intends not, desires not our obedience
unto whatsoever he demands of us, what is it but to break the very heart, and
to cut in sunder the very sinews of our obedience, and weaken the hand of our
preparations that way, and to tempt our selves to a neglect of the Commandments
of God; yea, and to dishearten, and discourage men from so much as the
knowledge of what is commanded them of God? For if they shall know their
Masters Will, and yet not do it (and do it they cannot, if the intention of God
stand in opposition hereunto, or if they want ability to do it:) I say, to know
the Will of God, and not to do it, is to incur the danger of being beaten with
many stripes, and to bring the sorer condemnation upon themselves: Therefore we
need not demur upon this Point, or doubt, but that whatsoever God has
commanded us to do; yea, or shall exhort us unto, he has put us into a
capacity of doing it, at least, into a mediate or remote capacity from which we
may thorough the grace of God, that is never wanting unto us in this kind,
advance unto that which is immediate, and within reach of the duty or
performance it self. Let us therefore comfort our selves over this gracious
Advice and Exhortation given unto us by God of being filled with the Spirit;
and know, that though it be an Estate or Privilege very high and glorious (as
we have declared formerly) yet it lies within the reach of our faithful and
zealous endeavors for the obtaining it; there is nothing that can hinder us
from the obtaining of it but our voluntary neglect, and our slothfulness; which
as it is the impoverishing and beggaring many thousand in the World in respect
of outward things; so is it universally the spiritual beggary and poverty of
Christians. There is no man suffers the want of any thing for his peace, and
for the accommodation of his soul but his own slothfulness, and his own
carelessness in this kind is accessory unto, and the occasion of it.

Fourthly (and lastly) for Instruction; If the Doctrine be true, filled with
the Spirit (as we have formerly at large made known unto you when we set before
you the transcendent Privileges and great glory of such a state or
accomplishment:) How rich and blessed a Contemplation is it to feed upon, and
to nourish our hearts withal, that God would not have us live at any low,
under, or pedling rate, as not of Action, Service, or Employment, so neither of
Contentment, Joy, or Satisfaction? But his mind and desire is, to make us to
live like Princes for the greatness and nobleness of our Employments on the one
hand; and like Princes also, for the desirableness of our state and condition
on the other hand. It is said of Chirst, that he has made us Kings and Priests
unto God and his Father, Rev. 1.6. First, Kings, then Priests; Kings in order
to their Priesthood; for the truth is, there is none fit or meet to be Priests
unto God but those that are Kings, i.e. that enjoy themselves upon the richest
and highest terms of contentment and joy that may be. Those that minister unto
him in his holy things, do not answer the nature and dignity of the Service, or
of the things about which, and wherein they minister, but especially they do
not answer the infinite goodness and bounty of him whom they serve, who
minister unto him either with dejected and sad hearts and spirits on the one
hand; or with remiss or indifferent hearts on the other hand. Priests of a
right Consecration had need partake of the anointing of the great High Priest
himself; I mean, they had need be anointed with the oil of joy and gladness
above their Fellows, above other men. Now, that the Heart of God is with the
Sons and Daughters of men, to put them into the honorable capacity we speak
of, as far as is meet for him to promote the thing, appears (as has been said)
by that most gracious advice he gives them, in requiring them to be filled with
the Spirit: This is that which will make them Kings indeed, and Priests indeed.
He that is filled with the Spirit is fit to stand before the God of all the
Earth, and to minister unto him; so that if any person be not a King, and so in
the fullest capacity of being a Priest unto God, the reason of his
defectiveness in this kind is not God: The reason why he is not a King or
Priest of this Royal Consecration, is not because God would not have him to be
such, or because he is unwilling to confer such things upon him, such an
anointing which would make him a Priest of this Consecration. We see that God
would have us all filled with the Spirit, which (being interpreted as we have
heard) is to make us a Royal or Kingly Priesthood: But the reason of every man's
defectiveness or falling short in this kind is his own Oscitancy, willing
negligence, and unworthiness of spirit. We cannot say as Balak the King said
unto Balaam the Prophet, Number. 24.11. Now the Lord has kept the back from
honor; No, it is not the Lord who has kept us from this honor, but we our
selves; He is so far from keeping us from it, that he calls upon us, and
counsels us, and tells us what we have to do in order to the obtaining of it.
And as I said before, it is not meet for him to go on any farther in this work,
his Spirit is free unto it, his Spirit is near unto you, it would fill your
heart and soul, it would make you all Princes, and make you all a Royal
Priesthood unto God; but it is not meet for God to force such a thing as this
upon you, to make you do it whether you will or no, to make you Kings and
Priets whether you will or no: But now, that you might do this, he delivers out
himself unto you, and he expects that there should be a consent on both
hands; though otherwise there is as much importunity and force to incline and
carry you that way as can be in a way of Argument; yea, and as much force, in
respect of secret Impulse and Excitation by the Spirit of God, as may be, only
reserving unto you the Liberty of consenting unto it. So that this is another
Instruction of rich concernment unto your souls, even to consider that there is
nothing between us and such an unspeakable dignity of being Kings and Priests
unto the Eternal God: There is nothing on Gods part wanting, the Heavens are
open, they bow down themselves unto you on this behalf. If any man does fall
short, let him know that there is nothing but only his Unworthiness of spirit,
which whilst he does harbor, and does nor overcome, he cannot lay out his
heart and soul so free in the consideration of those Motives, which, were he
intent upon, would do the deed, would amount to such a holy and sacred
anointing, as now we speak of, your being filled with the Spirit of God,
whereby you would be made Priests of the Living God. So much for the First Use
of the Doctrine, the Use of Instruction.

CHAP. XIII. A Second Use of the Doctrine being a Use of Reproof unto all those
who are Enemies unto this heavenly Exhortation and Counsel of the Holy Ghost
administered unto men, namely, to be filled with the Spirit, and who by any
means obstruct the course of it. A first sort are such who scoff at such a
thing as a being filled with the Spirit of God. A second sort of Offenders are
such who persuade men that the Spirit, which they are exhorted to be filled
with, is but a finite Spirit, an Angel, and not God. Wherein many things are
further argued, proving the Holy Ghost to be the most High God.
THe second Use was a Use of Reproof, Satan;) who, instead of being full of
the Spirit of God, laugh at all Discourses of men's being filled with him (yea,
or of so much as having the Spirit of God in them) to scorn; hearing from the
mouths of faithful Ministers of God sometimes, and it may be from the discourse
of other Christians, that the Saints and Servants of God, such who truly
believe in Jesus Christ, are led by the Spirit of God, and taught by him how to
pray, how to walk holily, and soberly, and righteously in the World; they make
a mock at it, as some of the more ignorant and profane Jews did at the
Apostles being filled with the Spirit we speak of, Acts 2.13. When they spoke
with strange Tongues, Others mocking (says the Text) said, these men are full
of New-wine. When any thing of God, or of the Spirit of God more than ordinary,
in one kind or other, appears in any of the Saints or Servants of God, they
that are ignorant of God and of his ways, will never own or acknowledge the
procedure of it to be from God; if they can but imagine any other cause, though
with never so slight appearance, from whence there is the least probability
that it may proceed; yea, if they can imagine any cause in this case which is
worse than other, and which is more disparaging unto the persons in whom that
grace and power of God, we speak of, does appear, this shall be the cause unto
which the excellent work of God in his Saints shall be imputed and ascribed.
How little reason, or color of reason was there to pretend or think that New
Wine over-freely drank or taken by men should put them into a capacity of
speaking with Tongues, strange Tongues, such as they never understood, or were
able to speak before? They knew well enough many of the Company that were
there, or amongst them, that every one that spoke had a distinct knowledge of
the Tongue of their own Nation; We hear them speak all in our own Language
(said they.) Now (I say) let any sober and considering man think but a little
of the business, how impossible a thing it is that New Wine should invest men
with a capacity, and an ability to speak with strange Tongues, in a strange
language; yet rather than they would acknowledge that the Spirit was the Author
thereof, they attribute it to New Wine. New Wine may cause them to speak freely
and at random, but not in other Tongues; they may, indeed, speak nonesense, and
not distinctly, or else that which no man can understand; but that it should
enable and qualify men for the speaking in strange Tongues distinctly, and
sensibly to the understanding of other men, there is not the least color, or
the lightest pretense thus to argue: But ignorant persons, and such as are
profane, what will they not do to harden themselves, though in the most
irrational and senseless manner that may be? And besides, the things which the
Apostles here spoke and uttered, and which were understood by those who so
imputed the speaking of them in variety of Languages, were (...), the Magnalia,
the great and wonderful things of God. If New Wine had been the inspirer, these
could not have been the great things of God that they had spoken, but the great
things of the Devil, and of the World. So when the Lord Christ cast out the
unclean Spirit out of him that was possessed, Mat. 12.24. it is said, that the
Pharisees presently charged this upon Satan, and upon his having to do with
him; because the Devil is a supernatural Agent in that sense which we usually
take supernatural: That is, he is able to do things which are strange, and out
of the course of Nature, therefore he is a kind of reserve for ignorant and
wicked men; when they meet with any thing of God, and of the Spirit of God in
the Saints, they have the Devil in readiness to impute all these things unto.
As I remember I have read in the Story of Martyrs, when any of the Martyrs
showed any invincible courage or patience, in the midst of their torments, the
Priests that stood by would still persuade the People that the Devil had
bereaved them of their senses, and had distracted them before the fire came at
them; and by this kind of color and feigned pretense they thought to way-lay,
and to stop the course of the apprehension of the common sort of People, lest
they should think that there was any great appearance of God in them.

So when the Lord Christ taught the People with so much wisdom and
understanding that they were astonished, and the greatest part of them began to
admire, how he that had not known a Letter should speak at such a rate as he
did; it is said they were offended at him, Mat. 13.57. implying, they thought
that he came not by it lawfully, but by the help of the Devil; they could not
make it out that he was a good man, because they were ignorant of his gifts,
therefore they fall foul upon the Lord Christ. So Paul in those high strains,
whether in teaching, or rather in practice, or acting in the World, which the
Corinthians could not comprehend nor reconcile with such Principles as they
were acted by, was by the generality of them thought to be little better than
crazed in his brain, 2 Cor. 5.13. or head-shaken, and that too much Learning
had made him mad; Whether we be beside our selves, it is to God, or whether we
be sober it is for your sakes. Now when he says, whether we be besides our
selves, he does not mean, that he acted any thing out of madness or distemper;
nay, certainly he was never himself more than when he did act these things, for
which they thought him besides himself, and a man singular, and engaged with
some odd kind of Speculations and Notions: and therefore says the Apostle, as
for such things as these, if we be besides our selves, and like men
distempered, we are this unto God, we have our eyes upon, and approve our
selves unto him in these things; we easily believe you cannot tell what to make
of them, you cannot make wisdom, nor obedience, nor subjection unto God in
them; you do not understand nor comprehend those Laws, nor those Rules nor
Principles by which we act and move in such ways; but (says he) we look unto
God, and he understands it; though we speak (as it were) in an unknown Tongue
unto you, yet in a Language which God well knows and understands. But now
(says he) if we be sober it is for your sakes: in these things he had respect
unto them, for their Edification. In like manner, when persons are carried and
lifted up by the power of the Spirit of God above the ordinary Line of men,
either in speaking or acting for the glory of God, or advantage of the Gospel:
Men that do not know and believe that there is any such Spirit, at least acting
or working in men, are ready to blaspheme him in his Saints, and to impute the
things that are wrought by the power of his Presence in men to some
dishonorable and untoward Principle or other: as that they pretend to be led
by the Spirit of God, whereas they do such things upon their own fancy, and
upon some such suggestion which Satan has put into them. As the Roman
Historian, speaking of Nero the Monster of men, reports his conceit to be,
which he did express publicly, that there was no man in the World but was as
vicious as himself; only, herein was the difference between him and them, he
was open and would act above board. and other men were more afraid: But he did
not believe that there was any such thing as Temperance and Sobriety: Even so,
this is the very strain, and temper, and inward thoughts of ignorant persons in
the World, that have no heart nor spirit for God, nor for ways of excellency
that are lovely, and honorable. When they see that there are other men and
women of their Rank that do such things which they cannot do: They cannot go
along with them, they cannot fast and pray, they cannot follow such and such
Religious Duties, or Exercises; they think that these men do but dissemble,
they love their money as well as we, they love their ease as well as we, only
the Devil tempts them and puts them upon these ways, that so they may
have credit and repute, and be thought more holy and greater lovers of God than
other men; and by this means they judge themselves better, because they know
they are plain, and have no reserves in their breasts, but what they are in the
frame of their hearts, and spirits, and affections, they act and utter
themselves accordingly: Whereas those persons that are externally so godly, and
would be so judged, are every whit as bad or worse than we, because they seek
to cover, and hide, and to dissemble those wicked and vile thoughts which are
in them by an external show of holiness; they can take their turns privately,
and secretly, to do the very self same thing, or things that are worse and more
sinful than any that we do. This is (I say) an express strain of the Spirit of
that Monster Nero; This is the reason that such persons fall foul upon the
Saints, especially, when the Spirit shall draw them forth unto ways that are
so excellent in their kind. Now, they that shall thus impute this to Satan, or
unto the vile hearts of men, these are they who do obstruct the force of this
Exhortation, of men's being filled with the Spirit of God; and do what in them
lie to make men's hearts to sink, and to discourage them from seeking after such
a Royal Privilege.

A second sort to be reproved upon the former account, viz. as Enemies unto the
heavenly. Exhortation of being filled with the Spirit; discouraging men's hearts
from pursuing the blessed Counsel given unto them by God himself in it; are
they, who labor to persuade men that the Spirit, wherewith God exhorts men
to be filled, is but a Finite, a Created Spirit, an Angel, and not God. Evil
words (says the Apostle) corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. So do erroneous
and lying conceits and imaginations, infused into the minds of men, obstruct
many holy and worthy endeavors, and layings out of men's selves, which
otherwise, in all likelihood, they would not refrain, and which undertaken and
put forth by them, would turn to a blessed account unto them. Instances might
readily be given in many particulars in this kind, we shall consider the truth
of the Observation (at present) only in the Point in hand: For what does such a
Doctrine or Notion as this, That the Spirit, the Holy Ghost is not God, but
only a finite Spirit, being interpreted, signify, but that it is but in vain
for men and women so much as to think of ever being filled with him, and
consequently, of ever being excellent? For fust, the Created Spirits, the good
Angels, are Ministers and Servants (even all of them, without exception of any)
unto the Saints, as they are Members of that body, whereof their Lord and
Master Christ is the head. We know that place, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation? So then, Angels, however, in respect of the excellency and dignity
of their natures, they be superior unto men, yet in respect of that Ministry
and Service unto men, whereunto they are deputed and set forth by God, they are
inferior unto them. Now the heart and soul of man cannot frame and bring it
self to expect or look for from its fellow Creatures (especially, such a
Creature which God, in respect of Ministry and Service, has subjected unto it)
any thing so excellent, or so desirable, as it reasonably may work and prevail
with its self, to expect or promise unto it self, from its Creator, from a
Spirit that is infinite in his being, and an inexhaust Abyss of all excellency.
My Brethren, it is repugnant to the inbred nature, and innate Principles of the
heart and soul of a man, to go forth with a like courage, alacrity, or
confidence to seek its desires or supplies, where either he knows not whether
they are to be found and had or no, or at the best knows for a certain that
they are but sparingly, and with a kind of malignity and scantness to be found;
and to go forth upon this account, where he certainly knows, that what he
desires, and what his soul longs for, is lodged, and is to be had in the
greatest plenty and abundance. He spoke as a man that thoroughly understood the
natural frame and propension of the heart of a man (in that particular we now
speak of) who said, Dulce est de magno tollere Acervo: It is a thing
marvellously satisfactory and pleasing to the heart of a man to be still taking
from a great heap; and upon this ground are those Proverbial Sayings; There is
no fishing like to a fishing in the sea, no service like the Service of a King;
because in one there is the greatest plenty and abundance of that kind of
pleasure that Fishers look after: And for them that serve, and must live by
their service, there is none like that of Princes, because they have abundance
of reward, and of opportunity whereby to recompense the Services of those that
do wait and attend upon them: and that is the reason why our Savior in the
tenth of John, to render and make men so much the more free and willing to come
unto him for the life that they stand in need of, does inform them, that he
has not a competency, or a sufficiency only of this life, but that he has
plenty and abundance of it. Speaking of his Sheep (says he) I am come that
they might have life, and not simply that they might have life, but that they
might have it in abundance [or more abundantly;] as who should say, If there
were only life in Jesus Christ, or if it were there in measure only, and in a
scanty proportion, this would be some kind of regret, and men would make a
stand in their coming; but since he is come upon such terms, that all that come
to him might have it in abundance; this is a motive that does accommodate, and
fall in with the Natures and with the Principles of the heart and soul of men.
And upon the same ground it is that the Scriptures, in several places, do not
only assert and testify that God is merciful and gracious, but abundant in
mercy, and full of Grace; and not simply that there is Redemption in him, but
plentiousness of Redemption, Psalm. 86.5.15. 103.8. and 130.7. Isa. 55.7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, etc. let him return unto the Lord and he will have
mercy, and unto our God for he will abundantly pardon. The Commodity which we
stand in need of is mercy, and the pardon of our sins, in case we have been
unholy and ungodly Creatures; this commodity is abundantly in God: There it is
treasured up as waters are in the Storehouse of the Sea; There is no end of
the Treasures of his Grace, Mercy, Pardon, and Compassion. There is no man
being in want, but had ten times rather go to a rich man's door to be relieved,
than to the door of a poor man, if he knows the rich man to be as liberal and
as bountifully disposed as the poor man can be. These Proverbial Sayings
amongst us, Better leave than lack; Where more is, more is to be had; are of a
consonant import unto the former, and they all jointly and severally declare
this, that men generally love to seek their desires where they are in the
greatest abundance likely to be found. Now then, they who go about to send men,
for a filling, to such a Spirit that can but fill them in measure, and with a
straightened and malign quantity, in comparison of what an increated Spirit is
able to do, certainly they do as much as such an error can do to obstruct and
prejudice the way of men in such a course as this; What do they else but cool,
if not wholly quench, the desires, and together with these, the endeavors of
such who are obedient unto the Doctrine, who are in a way of being filled with
the Spirit?

We formerly mentioned a Touchstone to try whether any Doctrine (which is
presented to us) be an Evangelical truth or no; or rises up against the
Interest thereof, and causes men to look off and aside from it; this is a most
certain sign and proof against it that it is no part or branch of the Gospel,
but an imagination and lying conceit, which has been engendered and begotten
in the dark thoughts of the hearts of men, or perhaps rather by a worse hand; I
mean, Satan, who does nothing else but study and invent Opinions, and
Conceits, and Imaginations, which may have some color of truth, that so they
may fall in with the Judgments of men: He does invent, and mint, and set such
Opinions abroad in the World, and then his next work is, as far as possibly he
can, to find out Agents and Instruments, the best he can prevail withal, and
which are fitted and prepared to promote his design in the World: And the
better men are, the more learned, and the more innocent in their lives and
conversations (can they be prevailed withal) these are the chosen vessels for
him, and fitted for his turn. Herein the Devil imitateth the Great God: for as
God, when he has a design to make manifest his most spiritual truths, and most
holy things, makes choice of the worthiest and holiest men, men that are of
the best acceptance with the people round about them, because they are
likeliest to take so much the better: So does the greatest Enemy of the Peace
and Salvation of the World, he follows God as near at the heels as he can come;
if he finds any man better than others, he shall do his work; and if he cannot
find any many of such qualifications (as we speak of) then he must be content
with others; for he has a desire that his Opinion should be promoted, though
never so unreasonable. There is great reason (by the way) why Satan should set
abroad, all the ways he can, such Opinions in the World which are derogatory
from the honor of the Son of God, and from the Spirit of God; partly, because
by this means that he has the more advantage to derogate from either of these
in their esteem and honor amongst men: And partly, because the works of
Creation being appropriate unto God the Father principally, and not the work of
Redemption, Satan's chief work lies to undermine the Godhead of those persons
to whom that work is most appropriate, and who are most engaged therein. For
the Son of God is his great Enemy, and the Person who threateneth his undoing,
and the Ruin of all that he has gotten, by drawing men aside from God. And
then likewise, the Holy Ghost has put to his supreme hand, all his work being
bent against the Devil and his Temptations. Now in reason it cannot be thought,
but that he (Satan) will be more engaged against these, to bring their Godhead
(if it be possible) into question, and to destroy the belief of it out of the
World. He that does but know the nature of him, as that he is full of malice,
mischief, and blood, and that he is ready to rise up against God himself, as
far as he is able, I say, they that do but know the Devil so far, cannot wonder
at it, or think it strange that he should labor to fill the World, in all the
quarters of it, with such kind of Notions and Opinions, that shall make the
greatest breaches upon the honor and reverence that is gotten up into the
hearts of men, both toward the Lord Christ, God blessed for ever, and the Holy
Ghost, that Spirit of God by whom the Children of God are sealed to the day of
their Redemption.

But as the Prophet Jeremiah, in a case not much unlike, demands, What is the
Chaff to the Wheat? So may we say, What is finite to that which is infinite?
What is a Creature for the carrying on of the Salvation of the World in
comparison of the great Creator?

Secondly, Whereas there are a thousand thousands, and ten thousand times ten
thousands Saints upon the Earth, and these in places far distant from one
another, to be filled at the same time with the Spirit of God, or that may be
engaged with their hearts and souls in ways and means to be thus filled with
the Spirit; if the Spirit which should fill them in this kind be a created, a
finite Spirit, limited and confined to one and the same place, at one and the
same time (for this must be his condition if he be finite;) How can these be
raised to any ground of hope that ever they should be filled with the Spirit?
For if he be a finite Spirit it is impossible that he should fill any more than
one person at a time, and so must depart and withdraw thence to fill another.
And

As Andrew said ( Joh. 6.9.) of that slender provision which was to be had in
comparison of the great multitude that were to be fed, There is (says he) a
Lad here which has five barley Loaves, and two small Fishes; but what are
these amongst so many? So may we well demand and ask, in the case before us,
there being such vast numbers and multitudes to be filled with the Spirit, What
is a limited, a finite, a created Spirit to fill them all? What is such a
Spirit as this amongst so many thousands, such an infinite number of men and
women, who all are laboring to be filled with the Spirit? How is it possible
he should accommodate such a numberless number of Saints, so as to make them
all glad? Therefore they who teach men, that the Holy Ghost, the Spirit that
shall fill them, is but a Creature like unto themselves, in limitedness and
fu^iteness of being, do by these whom it concerns to be filled with the Spirit,
and in order hereunto, advance in their endeavors accordingly, much as those
Spies of old did by the Israelites, Number. 13.32. who by bringing an evil report
upon the good Land of Canaan, and telling them that it was a Land that did eat
up the Inhabitants of it discouraged the hearts of the People from attempting
the Conquest, and possession of it, if it had not been for Caleb and Joshuah;
whose hearts were more upright: In like manner, they that bring up such a
report as this upon the Spirit, as that he is but a finite Spirit, a created
Spirit, a straightened Spirit, what do they do else but discourage the hearts and
weaken the hands of those who have given out themselves, and have their hands
lifted up to such an exercise, and make Treasure of such an heavenly advice and
piece of Counsel as this is of being filled with the Spirit of the ever blessed
God? And besides, if the Spirit we speak of, with which the Saints are to be
filled, be a finite Spirit, suppose he could at any time mind and attend them
all, all over the World from the East to the West, and from the North to the
South in their several applications of themselves to obtain such a filling; yet
he could actually fill but one person, one heart, or one soul at once, and
therefore when he has filled one, he must empty him again by withdrawing
himself from him before he can fill another; because it is impossible that he
should fill them all with himself at one and the same time.

If it be replied, viz. by leaving strong impressions of himself, his grace and
power upon their hearts and spirits, though in person he be withdrawn from
them:) as those Saints or Christians, amongst whom Paul had been preaching the
Gospel, and had not only prevailed with them to believe, but had put them into
a zealous posture of profession, and made them like unto himself, these may be
said to be filled with Paul, or with Paul's spirit.

I reply, That holy and zealous impressions upon the hearts and spirits of men
may be declarative of their being filled with the Spirit of God, but they are
not properly and formally their filling, or their being filled with this
Spirit; they are but the suites, symptoms, or signs of their being filled
therewith, as the Grapes that grow upon the Vine are not the Vine it self. A
being filled with the Spirit implies an actual residence, or abode of the
Spirit himself in men, according to that of our Savior, Joh. 14.16, 17. And I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, he, in person, not in his gifts or operations only. So
in the next verse, And he shall be in you. And the Apostle makes a plain and
express difference between the Person of the Spirit, and the Gifts of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.5. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit:
So verse 11. But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit. And the
Scripture from place to place speaks of the Holy Ghost as personally
inhabiting or residing in the Saints, as in these and the like expressions and
passages, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was committed unto thee (says
Paul to Timothy) keep by the Holy Ghost which [or who] dwells in us; the
gifts or operations of the Holy Ghost, though they may in a metaphorical and
improper sense be said to dwell in men (as Timothies Faith is said first to
have dwelt in his Grandmother Lois, and in his Mother Eunice, ver. 5.) yet in
a direct or proper sense it cannot so be said of them. Now where there is no
necessity enforcing a Metaphorical sense, a proper sense is still to be
preferred: besides an unproper sense here, viz. by the Holy Ghost to understand
the gifts or operations of the Holy Ghost, would be very incongruous and hard;
as thus, The good thing committed unto thee, keep, by the gifts of the Holy
Ghost which dwell in us, or by the Holy Ghost which in or by his gifts dwells
in us. So again, Grieve not the Spirit of God, whereby you are sealed unto the
day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. So Isa. 63.10. So it is said of the Jews of old,
that they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, Luke 12.12. and Acts 2.3, 4. and
10.44. and 19.6. It would be very incongruous and harsh, to understand these
Scriptures, and many others of the like Character and import, only of the gifts
of the Holy Ghost.

Nor will it at all relieve that most dangerous Notion and Conceit which we now
oppose, to pretend and say, Beelzebub, and Prince of the Devils; therefore all
that is done, all the temptations that are managed in the World, by all that
are amongst them, are in Scripture ascribed unto Satan, or unto the Devil
indefinitely, and in the Singular number; and if the Devil, who is confessed on
all hands to be a created and finite Spirit, be said in Scripture to tempt men,
though in never so remote places one from another at the same time; why may not
the Holy Ghost be said to fill men with himself upon the like terms, viz. in
all the places of the Earth at the same time, though he be supposed to be a
finite Spirit also? If we had time we should plainly show unto you that this is
nothing but a piece of Sackcloath spun on purpose, and devized to spread over
the face of the Sun; It is nothing but a vain flourish to hide this great and
worthy truth of God from the eyes of the World; to take off the minds and
hearts of men from looking after such a worthy and blessed enjoyment, as a
being filled with the Spirit of God.

For first, We shall show you that there is not any ground in Scripture or
Reason to suppose that any one Angel should have the superintendency or
disposing of all the rest of the Angels to order them to their several
Employments, Works, or Actions; I say, there is no word, nor the least
breathing or whisper of any such thing as this; but the Scriptures rather look
another way, namely, to show that all the good and holy Angels (who are
employed on the behalf of the Saints) receive their Commission immediately from
God himself, or from the Lord Christ, who is represented in the Scripture as
their great Lord and Master: They stand charged there with Loyalty and Homage
to him, Heb. 1.6. When he brings in the first begotten in the World, he
says, and Tet all the Angels of God worship him. And ver. 14. Are they not all
Ministering Spirits sent forth, etc? They are sent forth by him (whose Angels
they are) about their several Ministries. And that is the reason too (I
suppose) of that Expression of our Savior, Mat. 18.10. who speaking of the
little ones, who did believe in him, says, I say unto you that in Heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven; Meaning,
that they do stand continually in the presence of God, and there behold his
face, looking and waiting to receive some Commission or other, longing for
service and employment from him; it is their life, it is their glory and
felicity to attend the services that shall be commanded them by God; and
therefore they do stand as Servants of a King, who says to one, do this; and
to another, do that; to one, go this way; and to another, go that way: So do
all the Angels in heaven stand round about the Throne of the Great God, every
one of them being greedy of Service, to have some Message and Intimation from
God what to do. This therefore argues, that they do not receive their
Commissien from any created Angel, as they themselves are, but that they have
it directly and immediately from God himself, or from Jesus Christ; as Joh.
1.51. And he says unto him, verily verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall
see the heavens open, and the Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the
Son of man; they do not ascend and descend upon one of themselves, the
Inferior upon the Superior Angels; no, but on the Son of man; (meaning
himself) as they did, and were to be seen soon after; for they did attend upon
him at his Resurrection, they removed the Stone off from the Grave, and they
went to give notice of his rising again unto those who came to seek after him;
and so in his Ascension, he went up with a mighty noise, and is to descend
again with the sound of a Trumpet. Now, this he calls the opening of Heaven,
viz. the full discovery of those heavenly things, which as yet had not been
made known or manifested unto the World; as namely, that he is the great
orderer, or great Lord and Master of the Angels, and that they were all his
Servants; so that this very Notion of one Angel having the superior command
and dominion over all the rest of the Angels, is contrary to Scriptures, and
cannot be proved from them. There is no ground to conceive, that whatever the
Angels do, throughout their whole body, and in all places of the earth, should
be ascribed to such an Angel. Satan (indeed) has a Kingdom ascribed (in the
Scriptures) unto him, Mat. 12.26. and he is said to be the Prince of the Devils
(as we heard) but the Angels are no where said to be a Kingdom, neither have
they any head or chief. Angel amongst them, nor can it be proved that any one
Angel, has a superiority over another; the reason (I conceive) of this
difference may be, because the holy Angels continuing in their obedience and
loyalty unto God, are all of them great Officers and Ministers of State in his
Kingdom, and have not a Kingdom by themselves, or apart from his: Whereas
Satan with his Accomplices, not keeping and maintaining their obedience and
loyalty unto God, and so not keeping their standing in his love and favor, but
being cast out thereof they become a Kingdom by themselves, and have one in
chief over them.

It is very probable that there are several ranks and degrees of Angels, Romans
8.38. and again, from Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16. Ephesians. 6.12. and some other places in
Scriptures do seem to give this kind of overture, viz. that there are several
ranks and orders of Angels; and it is not much improbable but that there is a
subordination amongst them, and that some are of a Superior Order, and some of
an Inferior; and that every rank has one that is the principal or
superintendent over the rest of the same rank (though this be but conjectural
too.) We read indeed of Archangels in the Scriptures, 1 These. 4.16. So Jude
ver. 9. in this latter place the Archangel spoken off, is called by his proper
name Michael, which rather imports a Species, or order of such Angels, than
that there is only one Archangel, and his name Michael; for if there had been
but one Archangel, it had been more proper to have said the Archangel,
without calling him by his proper name, which ordinarily serves to distinguish
one person from another of the same Species; and Dan. 10.13. Michael is called
one of the chief Princes (which imports that there are more of the same
order) i. e. one of the Archangels, though perhaps the first of them (as the
Margin gives you the liberty of reading it.) Though for good order they have
one that does precede or go before, yet that there should be any one that
should have the sovereign power, or rule, and ordering of all the rest of all
ranks and orders, is contrary to reason, and has no footing in Scripture.
Concerning the other place mentioned, 1 These. 4.16. where we have it
translated, with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, as if there
were one such Angel and no more; the truth is, according to the original Greek,
it may rather be read, With the voice of an Archangel, for it is (...), not
with an Article, but without, and so does signify one of a great number.

Secondly, The Schoolmen, who have (many of them) addicted themselves to the
study and contemplation of these things which are held forth in the Scriptures
concerning the Angels (whose Notions in these speculations are less to be
suspected of partiality, seeing they relate not to any difference and
controversy between them; nor yet to the establishment of the Papal Chair; and
therefore they in their determinations and conceptions are not like to be any
whit prejudiced herein.) Now then they generally hold, not only that there is
an Order, and distinct Band, or Regiment of Archangels, but that there are
many other Orders of Celestial Spirits above them, as Cherubins, Seraphins,
Dominions, Thrones, etc. yea, and that they are the lowest of all others,
except those that have the common name of Angels appropriate unto them; and
they give an account of this opinion, and have their Scriptures for all these
things, though it may be they may not all hold weight if they be examined, yet
they have an appearance of reason for what they say.

Thirdly, The Jewish Rabbis hold and teach, that there are more Archangels
than one, and they undertake to call them by their names, One, they call be the
name Vriel; a second, Raphael; a third, Gabriel; a fourth, Michael; a fifth,
Nuriel: But it is also the sense of some that are more sober and considerate,
that there are more Archangels though we meet with this name but in one or two
places in the Scriptures.

Fourthly, The Scriptures seem to imply and teach, that all the Angels that are
employed at any time about the Saints, and for their benefit, are immediately
commissioned and sent forth about their respective Ministrations by God
himself, or by Jesus Christ to whom they stand charged with fealty and homage,
Heb. 1.6. (a place lately insisted on, upon another occasion) Let all the
Angels worship him.

Fifthly, Cor. 12. with whom (in the Scripture before us) we are all exhorted
to be filled. This is no where to be found in the Scriptures, neither has it
foundation, nor piece of foundation there. If it could (I say) be supposed and
granted, for Arguments sake, that there should be an Angel in chief over all
the rest, yet this does not follow that this Spirit in our Text is an Angel,
and not the Holy Ghost, i. e. God.

Sixthly, Though it be supposed and taken for granted that men and women are
tempted unto sin and wickedness at one and the same time all the World over;
yet it cannot be proved that they are tempted by the Devil, whether Beelzebub,
or any under him: But every one (says James, Jam. 1.14.) is tempted when he is
drawn away (or being drawn away) of his own lust and enticed; meaning, that
there are Lusts found in every man, which perform the Work or Office of a
Tempter, secretly persuading and enclining them unto ways and Actions which
are sinful, and which many times prevail in this kind, when there is no other
Tempter at all that has to do with them: So that the tempting of men and women
unto evil, in never such numbers or multitudes at one and the same time in the
World, does not argue that the Devil, the Prince of Devils, either immediately
by himself, or mediately by any under-Devil tempts them: But certain it is,
that when ever the Saints stir or move in any good way, pray, meditate, hear,
and attend the good Word of God in any part of the World, that the Spirit of
God is with them, quickening and exciting them to these things, and
strengthening them in the performance thereof; because there is no disposition
in men unto that which is good, but that which is raised and drawn forth by the
Spirit of God in them. Hence you see, that that which is supposed, or taken for
granted in the Objection in hand, viz. that the Devil is said to tempt, all the
World over, at one and the same time, is an airy and loose supposition, and
has no stable Basis or Foundation to support it: neither does it hold parallel
with the Holy Ghost, because it is possible that men and women may be tempted,
and yet not by the Devil. It is true the Devil does compass the Earth to and
fro: but we see it cannot be concluded, that every temptation to sin and
wickedness is from the Devil, because the Apostle James says expressly, that a
man when he is tempted, he is drawn away with his own Lust and enticed; so that
if there were no Devils, men might be drawn away with their own Lusts.

Seventhly, Concerning those that are tempted, Cor. 12.4. Now there are
diversities of gifts (says the Apostle) but the same Spirit. It is no where
said, that there are varieties of temptations, but the same Tempter, or the
same tempting Spirit. Again, To one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom,
to another the word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit: to another Faith by the
same Spirit; to another working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another
discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the
interpretation of Tongues, but all these works that one and the self-same
Spirit, Ver. 8, 9, 10, 11. A man would think by these expressions, especially
by the last, but all these works one and the self-same Spirit; that the
Apostle had foreseen that there would in time rise up such a Generation of men
in the Christian World, whom he meant to way-lay in their error, viz. such who
would deny the Divinity of the Spirit; yea, and would pretend and plead, by way
of countenance for their error, that there are many Spirits, and that these
amongst them perform all those operations, dispense all those gifts, the
performance, and dispensation whereof are the peculiar and appropriate praise
of one and the self-same Spirit, viz. that Spirit which is infinite, increated,
and God himself.

Eighthly, The Apostle (a little before the passages now cited, viz. ver. 4, 5.
compared) plainly enough teaches or supposes, that as there are no more Lords
than one, notwithstanding the variety of Administrations; so there are no more
Spirits but one, notwithstanding the great variety and diversity of gifts: Now
there are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord; the same Spirit, and the same Lord. Is it
not rational to infer from hence, that the Apostle did, not own or acknowledge
any more Spirits interessed in giving or bestowing the great multiplicity and
diversity of spiritual gifts (which in these times (especially) of which the
Apostle here speaks did abound in all Christian Churches) Than he did
acknowledge Lords in the disposing of the several Administrations of those
gifts? Now those Enemies of the Spirit of God (I mean, to the Divinity of this
Spirit) with whom we have now to do, do confess and acknowledge, that there is
but one Lord [ i. e. but one Jesus Christ] though they count it no Sacrilege
to rob him also of his equality with God; they confess him indeed to be God
(the Scriptures in plain and express words affirming this:) but what manner or
kind of God they would make him, neither do I, nor (I suppose) themselves well
know. For they deny him to be the most High God, and so they seem to make him
some demy-God. But this only by the way. By the consideration, now insisted
upon, and suggested by the Apostle, it plainly appears, that however there be
Legions of Tempters, or of Devils who may tempt at the same time in several
places of the World, and all these temptations be ascribed to the Devil, or to
the Prince of Devils, because of their subordination unto him in such actions;
yet there is no such number of these holy Spirits, who fill the Saints with
their presence all over the World at the same time. No, But that this is one
and the same Spirit, who upon this account must needs be God.

Ninthly, Whereas the Apostle ( verse 11 of the late mentioned Chapter)
ascribes such a liberty to the Spirit as to divide to every man as he pleases
(But all these works that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will;) Is not this also of like pregnant intimation, that he
looked upon him as God? For has God vested any such Prerogative in any Angel,
or created Spirit, to govern the World, to Umpire, or administer the Affairs of
the Children of men after their own will and pleasure? Or is not the disposing
and bestowing of those excellent gifts and endowments, of which the Apostle
speaks so much in that Contexture of Scripture mentioned, a considerable vein
and piece of the Government of the World? For what other thing (almost) can we
look upon, that is so considerable in the Government and Ministration of the
Affairs of the World as the disposing of those excellent gifts and endowments?
Now then, he that gives out and dispenses these as he will and pleases, is no
Creature: No Creature has the Government of these Master dispensations in his
own hand, and at his own disposure: none but God himself.

10ly. Comparing the said ver. 11. now cited, with ver. 6. Verse 6. He had
said, There are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works
all in all: And ver. 11. He says thus, But all these things works that one
and the self-same Spirit. Therefore the same God, of which he spoke in the
former verse, and the same Spirit, of which he speaks in the latter verse, are
one and the same God; the working of the same things being, respectively,
ascribed to him. Nor can it, with any color of reason here be pretended, that
the same actions may be, and frequently are in Scripture ascribed unto God, and
unto the Creature. God is often said to save men, and so Timothy is said to
save men, 1 Timothy 4.16. So here God may be said to work all these things, and
the Spirit may be said to work all these things also; although it be supposed
that the Spirit is a Creature. The reason why this pretense will not serve here
is.

First, Because though the same attribution here in the same Contexture of
Scripture, he made unto God, and then unto the Spirit of God; yet there is not
the least intimation given of any different consideration, wherein the action
is ascribed unto God, and wherein it is ascribed unto the Holy Ghost; whereas
for all those other Scriptures the very tenor of the words, and many of the
Phrases do give light sufficient whereby to discern when God is said to do such
and such a thing, and when the same action is attributed to the Creature; and
in what sense it is ascribed unto the one, and unto the other.

Secondly, The clause formerly taken notice of, dividing unto every man as he
will (speaking of the Spirit) plainly shows, that the Spirit in working and
giving the gifts here spoken of, acts in the capacity of God, or of an
independent being, who has power to order and manage all things according to
the counsel of his will: and not as a Creature; for it is the Character of
every Creature and second Agent or instrument not to act any thing according to
his own will, but according to the will of the Principal Agent.

11ly. That Spirit which is to fill all the Saints, had need to be (...), a
searcher of the reins, or knower of the herds of the Children of men;
otherwise how should he know when, and upon what account to fill them with his
presence, and how to fall in with such a creature as man is in order to such an
end? Now we know, that this Prerogative of searching the hearts, and trying the
reins, the Scripture appropriates unto God; yea, and all Interpreters have
acknowledged it as one of his incommunicable properties. To make this therefore
a universal and standing Privilege to any created being whatsoever; What is
this but to rob God of that which is incommunicable, and to transfer upon the
Creature that which is beyond its Line, a privilege only commensurable unto
him that is God himself, and appropriate unto his own transcendent glory?

12ly.

For it is matter of ready observation, that when men take up any new or by
opinion, which they desire for the honor of their names, and glory of their
parts and abilities to propagate in the World; and being not furnished to their
minds with grounds and reasons otherwise to convince and satisfy the judgments
of men about them, they are still wont to attempt the amusing and stumbling the
Consciences and Judgments of men by a confident and importune bearing them in
hand that the opinion which they commend unto them is no less than matter of
eternal Life, and eternal Death. Thus the Jewish Doctors, in the Apostles
times, would bear the Christians in hand ( Acts 15.1.) That except they were
circumcized after the Law of Moses they could not be saved: We see here they
made Circumcision a matter of life and death; and that not Circumcision only,
or simply; but Circumcision after that manner and mode. But the Apostle knew
better what did belong unto Circumcision, and taught them a contrary Doctrine;
I Paul (says he) say unto you, if you be circumcized Christ shall profit you
nothing. And the truth is, that such Notions and Doctrines for the most part,
which are thrust upon men, or violently urged upon their Judgments and
Consciences, upon such an account as this, as they stand charged, as they love
their Souls, or desire Salvation to entertain this, or that for truth, these
are more contrary and destructive than other to the salvation of the Promoters
and Abettors of them. As particularly, I believe, with the consent of all the
ancient Fathers, that this Opinion, or Notion, which denies the Holy Ghost to
be God, is destructive unto the salvation of men; destructive certainly it is,
whether destruction always follows actually or no: The tendency and course of
it, if it be not otherwise hindered, will lead men to destruction; but it may
be hampered with other cross Doctrines in Christian Religion, and so eternal
ruin, happily, may be prevented. The Christian Learning that was in the World in
those Fathers days could not tell how to frame and build up the body of
Christian Religion, nor how to make head or foot of the Gospel without this
Doctrine, that the Holy Ghost was one and the same God with the Father, and
with the Son; and yet now we have a quite contrary commended unto us, and
thrust upon us, and that upon such terms, as that we hazard the loss of
salvation, unless we be of the same mind with them that deny the Deity of the
Holy Ghost. But to let you see how inconsistent men of this mind are with
themselves, there is another that is full of the same opinion, denying both the
Godhead of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that yet find faults with those that
are opposite unto him for handling and writing so particularly and fully
concerning the great Mystery of the Trinity, and he makes this his pretense:
That however the case be, if it should be so sure as we say, yet we trouble and
entangle the thoughts and minds of the Common people: And the reason is,
because the Doctrine of the Trinity is no ways necessary unto salvation. This
is the sense of another, as great a Master in his way, and one who was able to
say as much or more to this Opinion than they that are troublesome to us herein.

13ly. (and lastly) For this, suppose we that there be some yet unsatisfied,
some such person, what is best to be done in the case, Whether it be better and
safer to Neutralize between these two Opinions, and hang in suspense, like a
Meteor in the air, between Heaven and Earth, or else to fall in and close in
his Judgment either with the one Opinion, or with the other? To this I reply:

First, Though there be some kind of Opinions and Tenants in matters
appertaining to Religion, wherein a modesty and tenderness in Judgment do well
become the gravest and best-grown Christians, viz. such, wherein either the
Arguments on both sides have much probability and strength of reason, (at least
seeming strength of reason) in them; or else where there is little can be
produced on either side for the satisfying of the Judgment, or eviction of the
truth: Although (I say) in doubts and questions of this nature a modest
tenderness of Judgment is not unworthy a sober and sound Christian; yet an
absolute Skepticism, or mere Neutrality of Judgment, in these or any other
questions, does not answer the state and dignity of a Christian, one who
desires to be thought a man in understanding, The Reason is, because there are
hardly any Positions or Opinions, whether truth or error, but have somewhat
either in themselves, in their own constitution and frame, or else in some
consideration or other relating to them, and this accessible enough, which is
sufficient to found or build some lighter estimate (at least) upon their
agreement either with error, or with truth. Now to be ignorant in this case,
or not apprehensive of such things, the knowledge of which is proper to incline
(at least) the Judgment, and withal may with competent search and consideration
be obtained, is not honorable for him who is esteemed spiritual or skilful in
the word of Righteousness. But

Secondly, Concerning the Question before us, viz. about the Deity or Godhead
of the Holy Ghost, the nature and condition of it is such, that there is no
place or possibility for a mere Neutrality or suspension of Judgment about it:
Men and women must of necessity take either the right hand or the left, and go
along with the one Opinion or the other. The reason is, because the Question,
as well in the Affirmative part of it as in the Negative, relates unto
Practice; yea, it relates unto two such Practices which (in the Language of
Logicians) are contraria immediata, such contraries which admit no Mediums
between them. He that denies the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and holds that he is
not God, cannot honor him with that honor which is proper unto God only; but
at most with such a kind of honor which is competent to an excellent Creature:
As on the other hand, he that believes the Holy Ghost to be very God, cannot
but worship him as God, Now it is impossible, but that a man or woman must
either honor the Holy Ghost as God, or not as God; for if he judges him to be
a Creature, or created Spirit, now he does not honor him as God: If he judges
him to be an increated Spirit, and God himself, now he honors him (at least
in this his Judgment of him) as God. So that if a man or woman shall think to
say and hold thus; I will neither judge or think him to be either a finite and
created Spirit, on the one hand; nor yet an infinite or increated Spirit, on
the other hand: This is a kind of inconsistency, and it plainly enough
supposes, that such a person does not judge or think him to be God, and
refuses, or neglects to exhibit divine honor unto him; which, being
interpreted, is a denial of his Godhead: So that evident it is, that in the
Question about the Holy Ghost's being God, there is no place nor possibility
for a neutrality of judgment or Opinion; but we must of necessity, at least in
our practice or behavior toward him conclude him either to be God, or not God.

Well then, this being supposed, Christian like to be done in such a case as
this? I reply,

There being two kinds of Arguments or Reasons (as Logicians distinguish them)
whereby Positions or Tenants are wont to be proved, Artificial and
Inartificial; by Artificial, the meaning is, those that are levied and wrought
out by the light and strength of the understanding from general Principles: By
Inartificial, the testimony or consent of Judgment amongst men about a matter;
when a man can make no earnings of the former (those that are Artificial) but
these on both sides seem to balance the one the other, or (it may be) are
demonstrative, or satisfactory on neither hand; then the best and safest way is
to have recourse unto the latter; the Authority, Testimony, or Consent of
Judgment amongst men, especially men who are most competent to be heard and
regarded in such cases. When satisfaction (I say) cannot be had touching the
mind of God, or the true sense and meaning of such and such Texts of Scripture,
which are wont to be insisted on for the proof of such or such a Doctrine, or
Tenent, one or more, neither from other Scriptures, nor yet from any clear or
undoubted Principle in Reason; The safest course in this case, especially where
there is no place for a Neutrality in Judgment (which we have showed to be the
case in the Point in hand) is to have recourse to the sense and Judgment of the
Churches of Christ in all Ages, or to the Judgments of those whom God has
raised up from time to time to be Teachers and Instructers of his People. We
find that the Apostle Paul himself did attribute much to the Authority and
Judgment of the Churches of Christ in such cases, wherein a clear and
satisfactory issue was hard to come at, either by Scriptures or Argument
otherwise. As in the Question about men's Prophesying with their heads
uncovered; But (says he) if any man seem contentious we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. Meaning, that if any person remained
yet unsatisfied, or unconvinced, touching the meetness of such an habit, both
for men and women in the Church, during the time of the public Worship of God,
whether by Prayer or by Prophesying, as he had now commended unto them, and
pleaded for; but would still pretend dissatisfaction, and contradict, and be
contentious; such ought to know and consider (for their satisfaction) that
neither they (the Apostles) nor yet the Churches of God, far or near, had, in
the case mentioned, any such custom, which was contrary unto, and differing
from that which now they had commended unto them. So the great Prophet David,
long before, judged it an absurdity, a thing unworthy of him, to act any thing
wherein he should offend against, or condemn the generation of the Righteous,
Psalm. 73.15. meaning, the generality of Saints, or persons fearing God. So that
the Authority, Testimony, and Consent of Christians, in their several
Generations, in matters concerning their Profession and Religion, ought to be
(and always has been amongst the best and soundest Christians) of very great
esteem, especially when matters in question between themselves could not be
cleared, issued, or determined otherwise. And they that in such cases would not
be satisfied herewith, were still looked upon by sober Christians as men of
proud turbulent and unpeaceable spirits, according to the saying of an ancient
Writer. Contra rationem, nemo sobrius; Contra Scripturas, nemo Christianus;
Contra Ecclesiam, nemo pacificus.

And it is a saying of a learned Countryman of our own (Doctor White) Hominem
Christianum nunquam eum arbitrabor, qui judicium Ecclesiae nihili fecerit.

Another late Writer of great note and worth has this saying: Quod per omnem
Ecclesiam receptum est, disputando velle in cotroversiam vocare (...) est.

Now then for the swaying and ordering of our Judgments in the Question in
hand, in case we be at a loss, or at a stand, in respect of all artificial
Arguments and Proofs from the Scriptures; certainly the Judgment of the
Christian Churches, and of the learned Teachers thereof, in all Ages, is of the
most and safest concernment unto us. What their sense in the case, more
generally is, and from the Apostles time has been, we shall show presently.

Secondly, persons, who have traveled to the same place whither we are going,
and were careful in their Journey to find out the right way, went that way (for
example) which lies on the right hand; and that very few, and these little
considerable otherwise, went the other way that lies on the left hand: Is it
not then much more reasonable, that, in this uncertainty, we should take that
way which has been most occupied and beaten by the feet of so many discreet
and wary Travelers; who we have the greatest grounds of confidence to believe
are safely arrived at the place whither they intended their Journey, and we
intend ours also, than to adventure our selves in the other way, concerning
which we know not whether ever any person traveling in it came in peace to his
Journeys end? This is the case between the two Opinions before us, that which
denies the Holy Ghost to be God, the same God in Essence or Substance with the
Father; and that which confesses or believes him to be God equal with the
Father. Now then, there is on the right hand way those who say that the Holy
Ghost is God, the most high God: And there are on the left hand those also who
deny him to be the most High God. But those that went on the right hand way
were the generality of Christians, which were most sober, and most learned, and
fullest of Piety and Zeal, who believed the Holy Ghost to be God indeed, one
and the same God with the Father; and concerning these, viz. the generality of
ancient Fathers, and Christian Martyrs of old, and Confessors in the Primitive
times, and the great body of Christians taught and instructed by them, we have
the greatest assurance that lightly can be that these are safely arrived at the
place whereunto they traveled, which is the Kingdom of Heaven: Whereas
concerning those who have gone the other way, which says the Holy Ghost is not
God, but a created and finite Spirit, as they are very inconsiderable (as I
said) being compared with those that have gone the other way, so were they (
viz. the greatest number of those few) the greatest Persecutors that ever the
Christian Churches met withal. For it is generally acknowledged, that the Arian
Persecution was the greatest that ever was, and that it rose from out of them:
And for the course of their lives, they are not therein comparable to the
generality of those that are gone the other way. So that in such a case as
this, it is easy to determine what is best becoming Christians to do if they
should be strangers to both the Opinions. If they do not know but that the one
may be as good as the other, yet inasmuch as the generality, and best sort of
Travelers, those who are of the best credit, and most judicious have gone that
way which we are contending for, it is most safe, and most acceptable in the
eyes of God (who loves that men should act according to Principles of Reason)
for men in their judgment to go along with such. For certainly, after a
conscientious search and enquiry about the truth, in any matter of question in
Christian Religion, if we cannot come by the light of any Argument, from the
Scriptures, to satisfy our selves touching the truth therein, God himself does
send us for our resolution to the footsteps of the Flock, and to the Shepherds
Tents; I mean, to the Authority and Judgment of the Churches of Christ in their
Generation.

Thirdly, Exodus 23.2. prohibiteth men to follow a multitude to do evil, what
multitude soever it be, and consequently to join with a multitude in receiving
or taking up an Error; yet of the two, it is better (I mean, it is far the
lesser sin, and less provoking in the sight of God) to follow a multitude of
grave, wise, and conscientious persons, upon the terms specified, though it be
(as to matter of issue and event) to take up an erroneous Persuasion, or
Opinion, than it is to forsake such a multitude, as we speak, of grave, wise,
etc. though a man should peradventure embrace the truth: it is more safe for a
man to take up an error with such a Multitude than to go alone, or with some
few or inconsiderate or inconsiderable ones only.

The reason is, because it is much more reasonable to expect the truth amongst
a multitude of grave, sober, and conscientious persons, who are studious of the
truth, than to expect it amongst a few inconsiderable persons (comparatively)
concerning whose integrity, or unfeigned love to the truth there is much more
doubt and question. Now this also is the case before us; The Fathers generally,
of greatest esteem in this Generation for Piety, Holiness, Learning, and
Faithfulness in the Work of Christ, and of the Gospel; and consequently, we may
conclude, the generality of Christians, who were taught by them; and so the
Martyrs and Confessors, in the purest times of the Church, were of this opinion
and belief, that the Holy Ghost was an Increated Spirit, and truly God. I might
detain you many hours, yea, many days, in presenting you with passages and
sayings of this nature; I shall insist upon some few only for the present.
Austin is known to be a most studious and diligent enquirer into that Faith (I
mean, those Doctrines and Tenants) which had been generally held and maintained
in the Christian Churches a long time before, and from the Apostles days till
his time, and to have had means and opportunity to attain to a perfect
knowledge of this Faith; and withal is known to have been defensor acerrimus, a
most zealous defender of it. He then, in his First Book de Trinit. Cap. 6.
having occasion to mention that of the Apostle, Romans 11.36. And reading the
words thus, For of him, and through him, and in him are all things, to whom be
glory for ever; He glosseth them thus: Ex ipso, i. e. ex Patre; per ipsum, i.e.
per Filium; in ipso, i.e. in Spiritu Sancto; manifestum quod Pater, Filius, and
Spiritus Sanctus unus Deus est, quando singulariter intulit, Ipsi gloria in
sacula saeculorum. Of him, i.e. the Father; (says he) By him, that is, by the
Son; In him, that is, in the Holy Ghost; it is manifest that the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost is one God, inasmuch as he (the Apostle) infers in the Singular
number, To him be glory for ever and ever. And in his Fifth Book, of the same
Subject (I mean, de Trinitate) Sed sicut Pater and Filius unus Deus, and ad
Creaturam relative unus Creator and unus Dominus; sic relative ad Spiritum
Sanctum, unum Principium. Ad Creaturam vero Pater Filius and Spiritus Sanctus
unum Principium, sicut unus Creator and unus Dominus. And not long after,
Similiter and de Spiritu Sancto, collecta sunt testimonia, quibus ante nos qui
haec disputaverunt abundantius usi sunt. quia and ipse Deus and non Creatura:
Quod si non Creatura, non tantum Deus (nam and homines dicti sunt Dii) sed and
verus Deus, ergo Patri and Filio prorsus aequalis and in Trinitatis unitate
consubstantialis and coaeternus.

Athanasius lived well nigh an hundred years before Austin, and he in that
Symbol or Creed (which bears his name) is so punctual and precise in this
business, touching the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, that, having asserted it, he
uses these words: This, says he, is the Catholic Faith, which except a man
believe undoubtedly he cannot be saved; so that he was quite contrary to that
Spirit which now stands up against the Godhead of the Holy Ghost; yea, these
very Fathers, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Jerome, Tertullian, Lactantius, Hilary,
etc. whom our Adversaries profess to stand by them as if if they spoke on their
side, and against the Deity of the Holy Ghost; when, the very truth is, they
are so express, and so significant to the contrary, that I cannot but account
it a little strange that such a claim (though I believe it is not without much
regret) should be laid unto them. But our Adversaries (perhaps) taking some
words from these Fathers, wherein they do not so fully declare themselves, as
having declared themselves elsewhere, and not minding, or at least not well
heeding their fuller explication of themselves; they will needs bear men in
hand that they were of their Opinion. Ignatius was the most ancient of them
all; in a Religious Epistle written to the Christians in Antioch, his words are
these, (...).
Therefore every one who Pr^^heth or professes one only God, to the taking
away or denying of the Godhead of Christ, he is a Devil, or a Slanderer, and an
Enemy of all Righteousness. Now, for the most part, they that deny the Deity
and Divinity of Christ, they do the like concerning the Holy Ghost. But they
who desire farther satisfaction in this kind, and to know the full, clear, and
unquestionable Judgment of the ancient Doctors and Churches from the Apostles
times may without much trouble satisfy themselves; for there are many learned
Writers that have taken pains herein.

If it be objected; But is it not a thing of dangerous consequence, of his; or
to introduce a plurality of Gods into the World? Therefore had not men need to
consider narrowly, and to bethink themselves over and over how they give up
their Judgments and Consciences to such an opinion which makes the Holy Ghost
to be truly God? I reply:

First, That as it is a dangerous consequence, and no less than horrid Idolatry
to give the glory of the Godhead of him who is God indeed, the true God, unto
another, unto any Creature, in which respect men and women had need be careful,
above all care, that their feet be not taken in such a snare; so on the other
hand it is altogether as dangerous, and Idolatry of as vile a nature, and
threatening consequence, not to acknowledge and reverence him as God, who is God
indeed. And in this respect men and women had need be abundantly solicitous and
cautious how they entertain and admit of that Doctrine which denies the Holy
Ghost to be God. For in case it shall prove that he is God, all they who shall
deny him to be God will be found fighters against God, which will be worse than
simple Idolatry, and a sin as threatening, and of as dangerous a consequence as
the other.

Secondly, Not to acknowledge, not to glorify God as God, or as himself:
especially as he has revealed himself in his Word, is, if not plain and
express Idolatry, yet a very high misdemeanour against God; therefore, in case
God has revealed himself in his Word to be Three in One, and One in Three,
which is, and has been the sense, in a manner, (some few persons only excepted
inconsiderable both in their number, and otherwise comparatively) of the whole
Christian World, Fathers, Martyrs, Confessors, Pastors, Teachers, Bodies of
Christian Churches, ever since the Apostles days (as was lately showed.) They
who do not thus acknowledge, worship, and glorify him, and consequently do not
acknowledge and own him as God, contract the guilt, and expose themselves to
the punishment of such a Crime. Therefore men and women had need take heed how
they reject or deny the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, lest by so doing they make a
God unto themselves, according to their own fancy, and worship him after their
own imaginations.

Thirdly, The House of the living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. (...), The pillar and
ground or stay of truth, in the midst whereof Jesus Christ himself delights to
be continually walking and making himself known, should ever since the Apostles
times now for 1600 years and upwards lie wallowing in the horrid pollutions of
so foul and gross an Error, as to judge him who is a Creature to be God. Can
any man (lightly) be so simple, as to think or imagine a snuff of a Candle to
be the Sun? And is there not a far greater difference between the ever blessed
and incomprehensible God, and any Creature of the greatest perfection that is
imaginable, than there is between the snuff of a Candle and the Sun? Or is it
worthy the belief or thoughts of any sober Christian, that Jesus Christ, for so
many hundred of years together, should not have awakened his Beloved out of
such a Lethargy, or sleep of death as was fallen upon her whilst she said, in
effect, to a Stock, thou art my Maker, and to a Stone, thou art my Redeemer? Or
what is it less, or less unworthy than this, to say unto a Creature, thou art
my God? They who have but any tolerable thoughts of Jesus Christ his love and
care over his Church, cannot have such hard thoughts of him.

Fourthly, Nor can it reasonably be imagined, that the Holy Ghost would have
received with so much patience, and with so much silence, nay, with so much
acceptance, from the hand of the Christian World, the acknowledgements of a
Deity, had he not been conscious to himself that they were his due, and that he
neither did either God the Father, or the Son, the least injury or wrong, in
receiving them at the hands of men: But were he not, or had he not been God, he
had trespassed after a very provoking and high manner against him, who is God
indeed, in accepting his appropriate Royalties, and suffering himself to be
admired and adored amongst the Churches as God. Doubtless, the sin of receiving
any acclamation from men, or any thing else which is appropriate unto God
alone, is a sin of a very exasperating nature. As it was with Herod, who was
struck with an Angel, Acts 12.22. And we read, Rev. 19.10. and 22.9. when John
made a tender of Divine Worship to the Angel, though he did not call him by the
name of God, yet when he did but exhibit that which was appropriate unto God,
the Angel would not suffer him, nor admit it: The Angel seemed to be exceeding
tender and jealous of receiving so much as the hint, or the first fruits of
divine honor. John thought that he that had revealed unto him such heavenly
Mysteries was worthy of all honor; therefore rather than not to show himself
thankful and respectful unto him for that unspeakable kindness of the
Revelation, he would needs give him something; and having nothing at hand to
repuite this high courtesy from the Angel, that revealed such hidden mysteries
to him, but Divine Worship and honor, he would bestow that upon him; but the
Angel would by no means suffer him to do it. The truth is, our Adversaries
themselves at this turn do not make much scruple of this, namely, that Divine
Honor should be given both to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and that they
may, and ought of duty to accept it; though in the mean time they do deny the
Godhead both of the One and of the Other: But into the secrets of such a Notion
my soul knows not the way how to enter; nor can I comprehend or understand
how they can either make Reason or truth of such a conceit to deny the Persons
to be God by Nature, and yet notwithstanding to judge it lawful and meet that
Divine Honor should be exhibited and tendered unto them. Upon what ground they
can satisfy themselves in bringing together this East and West, their strange
opinion on the one hand; and their practice, which seems to affront it on the
other hand: How they can make peace between two that are at so great an enmity
and distance between themselves I am not able to comprehend; unless they mean
by Divine Worship only something that is more Sacred or more August than the
Reverence that is due unto man. Bat this will not however salve the Opinion
though it be formed and put into never so artificial and handsome terms: Yea,
though it might be salved with such a sense and interpretation put upon it, yet
it is not worthy a Christian, and especially a Teacher of others, to put the
mind of God, or any Notion of Truth into ambiguous terms, which need more
unfolding than needs must; for it is good to cloth the Truth in such a manner
that it may be most familiar and nearest at hand to be received by the
Judgments and Understandings of men. But to the business in hand. May the
greatest Subject in a Kingdom lawfully go up into his Sovereigns Bed, or
require of his fellow Subjects that they swear Loyalty and Homage unto him as
unto their Sovereign? Or does not the Scriptures from place to place make it
Fornication, Whoredom, Adultery, when that Worship which is appropriately due
unto God is given unto any other?

Fifthly, Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21 8. So that they who deny the Holy Ghost to be
God, do hereby, First, Make the whole Christian World (in a manner, or
comparatively, as has been said) Fathers, Martyrs, Confessors and whole
Christian Churches to be Idolaters. Secondly, By a Scripture consequence
(pregnant and undeniable) they do adjudge them all to the vengeance of hell
fire. But it is a small thing, with persons of a proud and peremptory spirit,
to sacrifice not only the names, honor, and reputations of the worthiest men
under heaven, but even their souls and salvation also, upon the service of
their own opinions and conceits. The Lord Christ himself must be a Samaritan,
and have a Devil, that the Scribes and Pharisees may be presumed to be in the
truth: And so holy and worthy men who above all the World besides have had most
acquaintance with God, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Epiphanius, Basil,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Jerome, Austin, and who not, of all those great and
famous lights of the Christian World in their days, must be all Idolaters, and
sent down into Hell, that a Crown of glory may be set upon the head of a fond
Opinion, little less, or rather not at all less than Blasphemy, and to make way
that they who deny the Godhead of the Spirit may be saved. For though it be
hard peremptorily to deny a possibility of salvation unto persons of both
opinions, whose ways otherwise are worthy the Gospel and Profession thereof,
yet the truth is, that partly the nature, and partly the consequence of the two
Opinions, compared together, their distance being so great as it is, and they
so contrary one unto the other; it is not a matter of easy conception how they
both should be saved, unless with the men against whom we now argue, and have
under reproof, who are (in this respect) the offspring of the old Heretics
called the Origenlans, who hold that after a certain time, all men without
exception, as well bad as good, shall be saved: yea, the very truth is, that
the entire Systeme and body of that Religion and Doctrine (some few, common,
and general Principles only excepted, and these also corruptly understood)
which the men we now speak of own, is scarce any thing else but a Rapsody or
Fardle of old abhorrid Errors and Heresies of the Anthropomorphits, Arians,
Macedonians, Origenists, with several others, who were the greatest troublers
of the Gospel in the course of it, and Enemies and Opposers of the Truth in
their times.

Sixthly (and lastly) All the premised particulars duly weighed, Christ was the
Son of God, who (as our Savior himself told the Nobleman at Capernaum, Joh.
4.48.) were at such a distance from believing it, that exept they saw signs and
wonders, they would not believe; they were resolved not to believe it upon any
inferior or lower account. In like manner, considering what the Scriptures
speak in way of oppesition, and how matters have gone all along from Age to Age
in the Christian Churches, in reference to this Doctrine and Opinion (that the
Holy Ghost is a Creature, and not God.) It is strange to me, that any sober or
well advised persons, professing Christianity, should entertain it upon terms
of any weak or less convincing demonstration than of Miracles, and Signs, and
Wonders, or of the Testimony of an Angel from heaven to assert it; and
therefore they that do subject unto it are of that Generation of men which the
Wiseman speaks of, Pro. 14.15. They are of the House and Lineage of that
simple man who will believe every thing, any thing, let the nature of it be
never so inconsistent, and the connection between things never so loose and
groundless. I had not insisted upon this branch of our Use of Reproof so
largely, but that the delinquent spirit is so rampant in the World, and busily
acting his part near unto us, and amongst us; and the Apostles direction to
Titus is, ( Tit. 1.9, 10.) That a Bishop or Pastor of a Church should hold fast
the faithful Word as he has been taught ( viz. by the Apostles) that he may be
able by sound Doctrine to exhort and convince the gain-sayer, for there are
many unruly and vain talkers, especially they of the Circumcision, whose mouths
must be stopped: There are men, and still have been, whose mouths must be
stopped; but not as some would interpret it, by Prisons, or by Sword: No, but
stopped they must be, i. e. waylaid in their Judgments, Consciences, and
Understandings by the Scriptures. This is that which the Apostle requires in a
Bishop, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince. And
by the way, take notice of this, that he must exhort by sound Doctrine; the
truth is, that many Bishops in the World do exhort many times very soundly, but
not by sound Doctrine. For their Doctrine stands at West, and their
Exhortation stands South. Now a faithful Bishop, every man in that Office and
Place, must exhort with sound Doctrine; his Exhortation must be comportant with
the spirit, and soul, and tendency of his Doctrine, the one must not be a
Samaritan, and the other a Jew. But this by the way. I shall leave this sort of
Offenders at present, only with reminding them of that passage of our Savior,
Mat. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of heaven. My Brethren, to break any of the least of the Commands of
Christ knowingly, when a man does understand and is convinced that it is the
Command of Christ, is a sin of high provocation unto God; but especially to
teach men so to do, i. e. to teach such a Doctrine which may strengthen any
man's hand to despise, neglect, and disregard any Commandment of Christ; this is
provoking in the sight of God, and that in the highest, and of such a demerit,
that such a man deserves no place in the Kingdom of God. Therefore whosoever
they be who shall first weaken their own hands before they weaken another;
they that teach themselves to break the Commands of God, and then shall spread
abroad such Opinions and Notions that shall animate and encourage men so to do,
they shall be least in the Kingdom of God, they shall have no respect there,
they shall not be numbered amongst the Servants of Jesus Christ: therefore such
persons as these, who bring in, and set on foot any such Doctrine which does
break and quench the endeavors of the spirit of men from following any piece
or strain of that heavenly Counsel which the Holy Ghost has given unto men,
certainly they fall under this heavy Sentence and Censure of Jesus Christ, to
be least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. XIV. A third sort of Offenders reproved are such who, instead of
following the Exhortation of being filled with the Spirit, take a course to be
emptied of the Spirit of God: Who make it matter of Conscience to turn their
backs upon the Ministry of the Gospel (which is called the Ministry of the
Spirit.) Wherein the several Scriptures and Reasons by which they strengthen
themselves, in their evil way, are examined, and found bent against them. And
likewise the necessity of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the great benefit
thereof, largely asserted, and vindicated.
A Third sort of Offenders to be reproved upon the former general account, viz.
as Enemies to that subjection, filled with the Spirit, are such who take a
course rather to be emptied of the Spirit of God than to be filled with him
(and of losing all that presence and Communion with the Spirit, which sometimes
they had received, and yet may partake of to some degree) and that by falling
upon such practices, and engaging in such courses which are of a direct
tendency to dispossess them of all Communion with him, and to make an absolute
separation of the Spirit of God from them. These are of two sorts:

The first are those who make it matter of Conscience to turn their backs upon
the Ministry of the Gospel, which (as the Apostle calls it) is the
Ministration of the Spirit.

Secondly, They, who though they do not make it matter of Conscience to neglect
or despise this Ministry, yet make it no matter of Couscience diligently to
attend upon it, when they know otherwise how to bestow their time, whether in
the pursuit of their pleasures, or recreation, or in the service of Mammon, and
attending upon the World: between these we might insert a third sort, viz.
such, who though they have not turned their backs upon the Ministry and
preaching of the Gospel, but seem to make it some matter of Conscience to
attend upon it, yet have itching ears, and cannot long together endure wholesome
and sound Doctrine, but run from Mountain to Hill, from one Minister to another.

For the first, We all know that of late years there is a strange spirit of
Error and Ungodliness gone out into the World, and walks up and down the
Streets of your City, and has taken the heads (or hearts rather) of many, who
sometimes greatly loved (or at least) seemed thus to love) the Assemblies of
the Saints, and those discoveries of himself which God is wont by his Word, and
the Ministry thereof, to make from day to day unto them. The Spirit we now
speak of is a Spirit which teaches men to say, that the Tabernacles of the
Lord of Hosts are vile; and for the Ministry of the Gospel, and the opening the
Mysteries thereof by those that have an Anointing from heaven to do it, Wherein
is it to be esteemed? This Spirit also reaches, and persuades those men to
fortify, and strengthen, or harden themselves in their way, not only by
Reasons and Arguments, such as they are, but by the Scriptures themselves also,
as if they were divided in themselves, and destroyed with one hand what they
build up with the other. Do not men who suffer themselves to be lead by this
superordinancing Spirit, rather consult the emptying of themselves of the
Spirit of God than their filling with him, and take a course by degrees wholly
to bereave and dispossess themselves of that presence of his in them, which at
present they do enjoy, or have enjoyed formerly? Where no wood is (says
Solomon) or (as the Hebrew has it, Prove. 26.20.) without wood, the fire goes
out: In like manner, except the Spirit of God in men be fed and nourished with
the fresh and new comings in of the light of the knowledge of God, and of
Christ, his presence will languish, and sink, and die in a manner. Hence it is,
that the Apostle, having admonished the Thessalonians not to quench the Spirit,
1 These. 5.19. He immediately subjoyneth, by way of caution ( ver. 20.) and
presignification how they might, and must prevent it; Despise not Prophesying,
[or as our last Translation with more agreeableness to the Original renders
it] Despise not Prophesyings (in the plural number); Prophesyings, i.e. the
opening and interpreting the Word of God by a proper gift of the Spirit for the
work; if this be despised, i. e. made nothing of (as the word signifies) then
the Spirit in men and women will be quenched, i. e. the vigor and activeness
of his presence in men will abate, and if the neglect and disesteem be long
continued in, will by degrees wholly cease. The word Prophesyings, in the
Plural number seems to imply, that not only, or simply, to despise Prophesying,
[ i. e. the Work or Ordinance it self in the general of Preaching, or opening
the Scriptures] is the ready way to quench the Spirit, but to despise the
frequency of the opportunities vouchsafed by God in that kind, viz. when the
bountiful providence of God affords unto men and women frequent opportunities
of attending upon the Spirit of God in the exercise of Prophesyings; and when
they may be diligence and wise ordering and disposing of their secular and
worldly occasions, without any considerable inconveniency, frequently attend
the openings of the mouth of God which we spoke of; and yet they shall
frequently neglect to do it, pleasing themselves with a conceit that to attend
on Prophesying, on the Lord's day only is sufficient.

If the persons with whom we have to do in the reproof in hand,

First, Suppose we could give no other reason of the thing, now enquired into,
but only the Will and pleasure of God, and could say no more in the case but
this, that it is the Counsel of the Will of God to make the attendance of the
Creature man upon the Ministry of the Gospel, where he vouchsafes it, the
condition of the Spirits presence or abiding with him; so that in case he does
neglect it, his Spirit shall withdraw from him: If there were nothing else but
this, Were not this enough to satisfy any man of Conscience? But now the truth
is, that the reasons of this Counsel of the Will of God, that the attendence
upon the Ministry of the Gospel should be a standing means to preserve and
maintain the presence of the Spirit of God; the reasons (I say) are not so hard
to come at in this case, but that if the Minds, Judgments, and Understandings
of men were impartially engaged in the enquiry after what the Scriptures speak,
as to matters of this nature, they might be clearly discerned. The reasons
therefore, why God has made such a Connection, between the attending upon the
Ministry of the Word, and the presence of his Spirit, are, first, because the
word of God is (as it were) the materials or proper matter for the Holy Ghost
to work on: to work all his excellent and heavenly works in the hearts and
souls of men: As for example, to work Faith, Peace, Joy, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Love, etc. The Holy Ghost produces all these excellent works in
the hearts of men by the truths of God in the Gospel. As an Artificer works
upon his materials, and by his Art and Skill produces his Artificial piece, as
a Carpenter upon his Timber, or a Goldsmith upon his Metal; so that if you do
not furnish them with these materials they can do nothing. As the Carpenter
cannot work when he has no Timber; the Holy Ghost, in like manner, if there be
no Vision, no Truth, no New Light coming in for him to work on, he will take no
pleasure nor delight to inhabit or continue there. He shall (says our Savior,
speaking to his Disciples of the Holy Ghost) He shall receive, or take of mine,
and shall show it unto you, Joh. 16.14. What things of his does our Savior
mean the Holy shall take and show? Doubtless, they are such things of his, or
relating unto him, which are contained and asserted in the Gospel: As his
Divine Nature, Humane Nature, his Incarnation, Conception, Birth, Holiness of
Life, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, ascension, with all the Ends, and great
Purposes and Intentions of God in this whole Dispensation of him, etc. Now our
Saviors meaning is, that the Holy Ghost should take all these, and show them
unto them, i.e. should declare, open, and interpret them unto them; and cause
them to understand and consider the weight, worth, and beneficial tendencies of
them unto men and women. And indeed this is the proper work of the Holy Ghost
to show unto men and women the things that are Jesus Christ's, and to cause
them to understand them, to draw out the hearts and Judgments of men, and raise
in them holy Purposes and Resolutions; and so likewise, to draw out from them
holy Practices and Actions (for this is the gracious and heavenly work of the
Holy Ghost too), so that where he is not furnished with these things of Jesus
Christ, where he has no opportunity of showing these things unto men he has
little to do; he takes no pleasure to abide there: as Artificers or Workmen
care not to be, or dwell in such places where their proper materials are either
scarce, or not at all to be had.

If it be here said,

First, By way of Concession; It is true, if we speak of his absolute power, he
is able to do either the one or the other; either to take the things of Christ
out of his own Treasury, and bring them forth and show them unto men; or else
he can take the Letter of the Gospel, and teach them, and hereby make
discoveries of Jesus Christ, and draw out men's hearts by means of it. But,

Secondly (I reply further, by way of Exception) It is one thing what God, and
so what the Holy Ghost is able to do, by the absoluteness and unlimitedness of
his power; and another thing, what he judges agreeable to his Wisdom, and the
other Attributes of his Nature and Being. The Rule of Gods Will, or what he
does, or purposes to do, is not his power (at least his power alone) but his
Wisdom principally, and then his Goodness, and Righteousness, and all his other
Attributes. He does not do, nor intend to do the thousandth part of what he is
able by his power, absolutely and apart considered, to do, but only what in
wisdom he judges meet and convenient for him to do. Now then, the Wisdom of
God has judged it meet (and the meetness of the thing in it self is
discernable enough by the minds and reasons of men, if they were impartially,
and narrowly engaged in the consideration of it; that men who desire the
gracious presence and assistance of the Holy Ghost, in showing, opening,
interpreting, and applying the things of Jesus Christ unto them shall receive
the things themselves from such Persons, and by such Messengers who are fit for
such a purpose, viz. to build them up in grace, and make them meet for glory.
It would occasion too large a digression (and perhaps unseasonable) to enter
upon a thorough demonstration of the Wisdom of God, in ordering the Contents of
the Gospel, the things of Jesus Christ, to be communicated and imparted unto
the generality of men, by men like unto themselves, not by the immediate and
sole interposure and acting of the Holy Ghost, nor yet of the written Records
of the Gospel it self, and therefore we shall forbear it; only these
considerations in reference to the business are near at hand.

First, By the course we speak of, God multiplies the dependencies of men upon
himself, which is a kindly and proper nurture to train them up in humility, As
he does also by multiplying their dependencies upon himself in so many means
for the preservation of their healths and lives, and well-being in the World,
as he has made requisite hereunto; as by imposing on them a necessity to eat
and drink, and consequently, to make use of the skill, and labor, and
faithfulness of those who must prepare these necessaries for them; and so upon
the earth which must yield the matter whereof their meat and drink must be
made. And so upon the seasons and temperature of the year, etc. Look how many
Creatures and means we are debtors unto, or dependent upon, for our health, and
strength, and well-being in the World, our condition is so much the more
servile and encumbred; and consequently, is just matter of a proportionable
humility unto us; for if any of these necessaries should miscarry in that which
is proper for them to do, or contribute toward the life, health, and
preservation of men, then are they in danger of trouble, sickness, etc. Now the
proper tendencies of these things are apt to humble the proud hearts of men and
women, and to keep low and underfoot their haughtiness: and they that do not
consider it, do not understand the design of God, nor are they acquainted with
his mind herein. For (as the Scriptures speak) The Borrower is Servant to the
Lender, Prove. 22.7. For men and women then to borrow things from such poor
Creatures, and to go to this Servant, and that Servant; and to this Trade, and
to that Trade; this shows that our life is very servile, and as it is the
saying, That he that has the greatest body is the fairest mark to shoot at: So
he that has the greatest number of helpers, and multiplicity of dependencies
to maintain and make good his comfort and well-being, this man certainly is
exposed so much the more to miscarry, and to be interrupted in his comforts.
Therefore when God intends to perfect the state and condition of man, and to
exalt him unto the highest felicity and pitch of blessedness of which he is
capable, he will dis^^^umber his estate and condition from all, and all manner
of dependencies whatsoever, as far as is possible, and make him like unto him,
as is possible for a Creature to be made in his independency, i. e. he will
make him dependent only and solely upon himself, according to that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.28. (which we have heretofore I remember upon occasion
opened more at large unto you) that when Christ has delivered up his Kingdom
unto his Father, then God shall be all in all. God does now veil or cover
himself, he is now in meats and in drinks, in clothes, in sleep, in every thing
wherein there is any influence or blessing; But then he shall be all in all,
that is, there shall be nothing in meats and drinks, nothing in this Creature,
nothing in that Creature, no: but he will (as it were) contract, and withdraw
life out of all these, and he will give out and utter himself entirely in and
by himself only: He will be the life, and joy, and blessedness; his infinite
fullness shall be the felicity of his Creature. So that this is one reason, why
it is agreeable to the Wisdom of God to put men upon it, that they should
depend upon such persons as he shall have prepared for them from time to time
to furnish them with the knowledge of his Will: and (indeed) the very Method
and Contrivance of the Gospel is such, that if things be narrowly viewed,
weighed, and considered by men, they cannot but perceive that God has made the
Gospel, and put it into such Phrases that the things of it should not be
understood but by the interposure of some such person whom he shall raise up,
and invest with abilities to be (according to that of Job, Job 33.23. an
Interpreter one among a thousand. Now it is an easy matter to find difference
between men: Those men who are called Preachers, and those who are Preachers
indeed; for Ministers there be many, and Preachers many, but there are but few
who are Teachers indeed. We may see, by the very Inditing of the Scriptures in
such words and Phrases, wherein they are conveyed unto us, that the state and
condition of the generality of men and women considered, and their occasions
otherwise to lay out the strength of their understandings, it is not lightly
possible that without an Interpreter they should come to understand them.

Secondly,

1. By ministering an opportunity unto those who are endowed with gifts and
abilities for the work of the Ministry, to show how they will behave themselves
in the exercise of the variety of gifts and graces wherewith they are enriched;
and how they will manage a Work of such a nature as this of the Ministry is,
with what care, and faithfulness, and labor of mind, and laying out of
themselves for the discharging of that trust that is reposed in them.

2. To try the people also, How they will behave themselves in their attendance
upon this great Ordinance of God; and whether they will submit unto the
Counsel, and good Pleasure of God toward them, in such a way as this is, by
attending diligently upon him, in this appointment of his, and whether they
will be faithful, and careful in their attendance hereupon; And it is a
competent trial to the spirit of some men to be put upon the attending upon
(especially with diligence) and a giving reverence unto such an Ordinance of
God, which wise and prudent men of this World call foolishness: For the Apostle
(we know) borrowing the Dialect of the thoughts, and speeches of the World,
calls it, The foolishness of Preaching. This in the second place.

Thirdly (and lastly, for the present) There would be one (or rather several)
Administrations lost in the World, if the Holy Ghost should furnish men and
women immediately by, or from himself, with the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
the things of their Eternal Peace; whereas by setting on foot such an Ordinance
as that of the Ministry of the Gospel, he affords the World a great variety of
Administrations, which as it is a means of much good unto them, so does it tend
to the beautifying and adorning the World; and it is a thing marvelously
declaring the Wisdom, the manifold Wisdom of God, that he knows how to furnish
it with such (almost) incredible variety in every kind. For instance, If we
look to the Flowers of the Field, Herbs, Plants, and all kind of Vegetables,
what great variety is there amongst them? Now what does this but declare the
infinite Wisdom of God, in that he gives such variety of shapes, and colors,
etc. unto them; and withal, has given men wisdom and skill how to order them
for their good, according to their several and respective Natures and
Operations? So if we look into the Sea, What an infinite number and various
kinds are there both of great and small Fishes? So on the Earth, What great
variety of Creatures are there? And of Fouls in the Air there is the like.
Again, If we look into the Firmament, What an infinite number of Stars are
there also, and that of several Magnitudes? And in all these Creatures, What
various Natures, Motions, Colors, and Properties are there amongst them? So
likewise; in the great business of Salvation, God, by erecting a Ministry
amongst men, and putting them upon it, to have recourse unto this Ordinance to
come by the knowledge of the things of their eternal peace, does (as it were)
beautify the World in this great Ordinance of Preaching the Gospel, with many
dispensations, wherein there are many strains of his Wisdom to be seen, which
if any one of these should be wanting, or missing, it would occasion an Hiatus,
or empty place in the Dispensations of God. And as one compared the taking away
the Ministry of the Gospel out of the World unto the taking the Sun out of the
Firmament of Heaven, which would cause a vacuity or emptiness, in respect of
light, and consequently render the whole Creation of God less lovely or
desirable: In like manner, the taking away of this Ordinance of the Ministry of
the Gospel would cause a great darkness, in respect of all other the
Dispensations of God and there would be an empty place in the World. As it is
said of David when he was absent, that his place was empty at Saul's Table: Even
so it would be in this case, if this great Ordinance of the Ministry should be
laid aside there would be a great separation of space between the rest of the
Members, which would occasion a great disparagement and unpleasantness in the
World, and in the rest of the Ministrations of God, and would render them
uncomely, and less desirable.

Thus then we plainly see, that to despise Prophesying, to turn the back upon
the Ministry of the Gospel, and other Ordinances (Appendixes thereof) must be a
direct means for men and women to empty themselves of the Holy Ghost, instead
of filling themselves with him. The knowledge of Jesus Christ, and of the
Gospel rightly understood, is that upon which the Spirit does as it were feed
in the souls of men; as the flame of fire does upon oil cast upon it. And this
knowledge is not, according to the Ordinary Providence and Dispensation of God
in the World, to be otherwise had than by attending upon the Ministry of the
Spirit, which is the Preaching of the Gospel.

What those Quenchers of the Spirit in themselves, Despise ye Prophesying;
never regard the Preaching of the Gospel, especially of those that are the
Ministers thereof; For wherein is it to be esteemed? This fond and most
destructive Error (I say) claims acquaintance and confederacy with the
Scriptures; as if it were a strain of that Wisdom which is revealed from heaven
to make men wise unto Salvation; whereas indeed and in truth it is as opposite
to it as the East is to the West, as the Heaven is to the Earth. Two Scriptures
especially there are which are presumed to countenance that most unchristian
and profane practice; The former is, Heb. 8.10, 11. The latter is, 1 John
2.27. Both these places we formerly (I remember) examined somewhat at large
(though now some while since) and found nothing at all in either of them
complying with such a practice; but somewhat in both strongly opposing it, For
this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, etc.

First, It is evident, that this passage contains a promise appropriate unto
the Nation of the Jews, which does not appertain unto the Gentiles; this is
evident from these words, The house of Israel, This is the Covenant I will make
with the House of Israel. Now though the word Israel put alone may sometimes be
found to signify the whole Church, as consisting of Jews and Gentiles, who
together are called, The Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. yet the house of Israel is
never found, but to signify this Nation and People by themselves, and as
distinct from others. It is needless to cite all the Texts in the Old
Testament, where the Phrase is used in that appropriate sense we speak of,
Ezekiel. 3. only it is used four or five times in this sense, viz. 1.4, 5, 7, 17.
besides, that in the place in hand it is to be understood in that peculiar
sense is evident from the Context all along from ver. 6, 7, etc. So that by
these words in the passage, And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor,
it is evident that God speaks to this people, touching this Covenant, with whom
he had made the former Covenant, which must be the Jews, and contains no
promise made unto the Gentiles.

If it be objected,

I Reply; If by partaking of this Promise be meant, receiving benefit and
spiritual accommodation by it, it may be granted that they shall be made
partakers of it, viz. in such a sense, as the World did partake of the
extraordinary gifts of the Apostles; these gifts were not formally, or in the
Letter of them granted unto any but unto the Apostles themselves, though
thousands did reap benefit or blessings by them: In like manner, I suppose the
words we speak of are to be taken literally, and shall literally and according
to the preciseness of their signification be made good unto the Jews; and that
things shall be at that pass amongst this people, that no man shall need to
teach his Neighbor; yet it does not follow, that therefore things shall be at
the same pass amongst the Gentiles, though it shall be much better for the
Gentiles, that knowledge shall thus abound among the Jews; they shall drink of
the over-flowings of their Cup: for the Scriptures seem to hold forth such an
high Prerogative to the Jewish Nation, to be conferred upon them in the latter
times, which are yet to come, viz. That the knowledge of God should so
wonderfully abound amongst them, that the Nations of the Earth should repair
unto them by their Agents and Ministers, to learn of them, and to receive
increase of light in the things of God from them. As the Queen of Sheba came to
Solomon, to see and learn from him: So shall the Nations of the Gentiles repair
unto Jerusalem, to receive knowledge of God, and to increase in the
understanding of the Truth. The Scriptures of the Old Testament are full of
such Predictions as these, wherein such a grace as this is peculiarly intended
by God for the firstborn Nation, that their Mountain shall be lifted up above
all the Mountains of the Earth, and that all Nations shall repair to them for
knowledge. Not to insist on many more places at present (but leaving them to
your own observation in reading) only that of Zech. 8.20, 21, 22. Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, it shall yet come to pass that there shall come People, and
Inhabitants of many Cities; and the Inhabitants of one City shall go to
another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts; I will go also; yea, many People and strong Nations shall come
to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. It is
principally (I conceive) in respect of that advance in the knowledge of God
which the Gentiles shall gain by the Jews when that Day we speak of shall dawn
upon them, that the Nations shall whet on, and stir up one another to go to
Jerusalem to enquire, So Isa. 60.3. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising, ten men shall take hold (out of all
Languages of the Nations) of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go
with you, for we have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8.23. He was known in
Jury, other Nations had not the like knowledge of him: But this will be also
after a more rich and glorious manner; He shall put on more beautiful Apparel
to visit that Nation of the Jews (when the day comes) than ever he was seen
and enjoyed by any Nation under heaven before. And we know that their receiving
and entertainment by God into grace and favor, is by the Apostle styled. Romans
11.15. In reference to the Gentiles, A Resurrection from the dead, and that
which somewhat more particularly answers those words in the Scripture before
us, which have the most appearance in them for the practice under reproof, is
that Jer. 31.33. And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every
one his Brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the
greatest to the least: As to the clearing (I say) of this Passage it is to be
considered, that the Scripture does not Predict, that the knowledge of God
shall simply, or in the general abound amongst the Jews when the time of their
Restoration shall be; or that there shall be some, or some considerable
numbers of them, to whom this excellency of knowledge shall be vouchsafed by
God: But that the generality of this People, or the common sort of them, shall
be thus enriched by him. The earth (says the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the
Land of Judeah, and the Inhabitants of it, when the time spoken of shall come)
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isa.
11.9. There shall be an universal deluge, or overflowing of the knowledge of
God over all the Land. And elsewhere, Thy people also shall be all righteous,
Isa. 60.21. So then, the Promise of the abundance of knowledge in the Scripture
before us respects the Jews only in the sense which has been declared, there
is no thing can be inferred from it by those that are not of this Nation, but
Gentiles, as that they shall have the like abundance of knowledge given unto
them. But

Secondly, Suppose it should not be appropriable only to the Jews, but equally
appliable unto the Gentiles also; yet neither upon this supposition will it
follow, that the time of the accomplishment of it either to the Jews or to the
Gentiles is yet come. First, That the Jews have not yet attained the blessing
promised therein, who yet in all reason shall be first served (though it should
be supposed that the Gentiles shall sit down at the same Table with them) is
evident, in that the generality of that Nation remains to this day in that
blindness and ignorance which the Apostle Paul bewailed in them, in his days.
Secondly, For the Gentiles, the said Promises neither have been, nor are
performed as yet unto them, is altogether as evident as the former; the
generality of these being so far from such a knowledge (that they have no need
that any should teach them) that we know they stand in need to be taught the
very first Principles or Foundations of Christian Religion.

Nor can it reasonably be here replied or said,

1. As you heard lately, that the Promise is not made to the Gentiles, but to
the Jews.

2. It has not been made good, no not in the sense now pleaded for, unto the
Jews themselves, not so much as to a handful of them, they generally remaining
still in the hardness of th^^ hearts, and in that blindness of their minds,
wherein they were in the Apostles days; they are so far from the knowledge of
God, and of the Gospel of his Son as ever they were, and yet all, or the most
part of them will be first served, and have the preeminency and first fruits of
this glory.

3. The Scriptures intimate as if this Promise were to be fulfilled suddenly,
and at once when it begins to be fulfilled. Isa. 66.7, 8. It is made matter
of high admiration, Before she traveled she brought forth, etc. Shall the
Earth be made to bring forth in one day? Or shall a Nation be born at once?
etc. The travel of Sion seems to note some such change and alteration in her
condition, which withal intimates a strange and unexpected expedition, and
that she shall be raised and built up in a very short time unto a very glorious
State and Nation; and therefore the Prophet calls it, the bringing forth of a
Nation in one day. So again, Isa. 60.22. I the Lord will hasten it in his time;
meaning, that when the time should come, then he would hasten it, and would
bring it into perfection very suddenly.

4. If a few men's excelling in knowledge were the fulfilling of the said
Prophecy and Promise, then was it fulfilled in the Apostles days, for there
were many (1 Cor. 1.5.) That in every thing ye are enriched by him in all
utterance, and in all knowledge. It seems, that in this one Church there was
a great flood of light, insomuch that they had nothing now to learn, but did
wait for the full appearance of the Lord Christ; and yet that these Promises of
Christ were not fulfilled in those days (in the sense declared) is evident,
because the Apostle pressed the duty of Preaching upon others, and lays a
heavy curse upon himself, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. How many
passages may we find in his Epistles of the same import?

5. And lastly, The persons themselves, who do pretend this Promise, and
passage of Scripture to justify them in their way, do make use of somewhat
like the Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel; they have certain Methods, which
they pretend to edify themselves by; so that they do offer an affront to
themselves, and do condemn themselves in those things which they do allow. And
if they judge themselves capable of any benefit by these their meetings;
certainly, there is a thousand times more reason, why we should expect and look
for more from the public Ministry of the Gospel, by such who have a competent
anointing of the Spirit of God. If they do interpret, and give a sense of what
they speak, or affirm, and produce from the Scriptures, then as I say, why
should we not rather hearken unto the judgment and sense of them that attend
upon the Word and Prayer (as the Apostle speaks) who are set apart as it were,
and who do separate themselves unto God, and to his Service, and of the
Tabernacle? That they should be likely to give out the mind and sense of the
Holy Ghost, in the Scriptures, above others is reasonable to conceive. The
Eunuch was in all likelihood a great man, and surely a man of more than
ordinary parts and abilities; and yet he professes plainly unto Philip, Acts
8.31. when he asked him if he understood what he read, How (says he) can I
except some man should guide me? [or I have some one to interpret.] It is true,
it is one thing, what the Spirit of God is able to do for men; but it is
another, what he himself judges meet for him to do. And certainly he does not
judge it meet to build with one hand, and to pull down with the other hand;
which yet he should do, having erected an Ordinance, as he has done, giving
some to be Pastors and Teachers for the work of the Ministry; if these things
might be gained otherwise, (I mean) in an ordinary way; and where the Ministry
which Christ has set on foot may be had and enjoyed. But

Thirdly (and lastly) To the Scripture before us, although it should be granted
to be already fulfilled, yet it is not necessary to understand these
Expressions (They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother) literally, but figuratively, by an Hyperbole (A figure wherein the
Holy Ghost much delights) as Isa. 60.6, 22.

For the other Scripture mentioned, Joh. 2.27. But the anointing which ye have
received of him, remains (or abides) in you, and ye need not that any man
should teach you, but as the anointing teaches you, etc. implying that the
former things which he had written to them concerning those that seduced them,
(that is, those men who went about to seduce them) according to the Language of
the Scripture, wherein when any Impostor persuades, or uses means to seduce,
he is said to seduce, though the persons thus persuaded are not actually
seduced: As these Christians were not actually seduced; and yet he writes to
them concerning those that seduced them; and then he closes his Admonition
thus, But (says he) the anointing which ye have received of him (meaning
Christ) abides in you. As if he had said, it is true, that which I have
written is in order to fortify, and to strengthen you against those who go
about to ensnare and entangle you; but (says he) you have another means and
help in your selves, by which to preserve your selves from them, and from their
snares. Now by this anointing, I suppose, he means not properly the Holy Ghost,
though he was in them, and according to Scripture Phrase may be very properly
said to abide in them: But by anointing (I conceive) he rather means the work
of the Spirit which he had wrought in them; that is, the impressions of
Holiness, Righteousness, and Goodness, their love to God and Men. This is that
anointing which they had received, and (says he) you need not that any man
teach you, but as this anointing teaches you; meaning, that they needed not
that any thing should be offered unto them, but that whereof they might be
competent Judges, by means of those holy Principles of Righteousness and Love,
which the Holy Ghost had wrought and raised in them. For the Gospel, in the
whole compass or circumference of it, being a Doctrine according unto
godliness, men that have a Principle of Godliness, rich, and full, and any whit
raised, may sent any Doctrine, and if they will but consult with the Oracles in
their own breasts they may find out and come to understand whether it be
according unto Godliness, yea, or no. If it carries any repugnancy unto
Godliness, or unto Holiness, then (says he) you have no need of it, you are
better without it. This anointing is truth, and it is no lie; As if he had
said, they themselves could not but know it; for Godliness is a real Propensity
of heart and soul unto that which is Good, Just, and Righteous, and which
makes for the glory of God, and well-being of men; these are the Royal things
of God, not liable to any dispute whether they be true, or whether they be
false delusions; therefore (says he) having such an anointing within you, you
need not that any man should teach you any thing lying above the reach of this:
For let any Doctrine or Practice whatsoever come to you, if it comport and fall
in with this Principle, then you may receive it. And he plainly implies here,
that though the same anointing teaches all things; yet they that had this
anointing had need that men should teach them, according as this teaches them.
And the truth is, that men and women, that are godly, and have this anointing
in the fullest measure, have need to be taught those things which are consonant
and agreeable to this anointing, and which will nourish, enlarge, quicken, and
revive it. So that this place is so far from countenancing that Notion or
Practice by which men turn aside from the Ministry of the Gospel, that it
proves, and that very clear, that they indeed ought to attend upon it.

The persons now under reproof,

One thing they pretend, why they should not attend upon the Ministry of the
Gospel, is, that the Ministers in these days are not infallible. We cannot
safely depend upon them in what they teach us; they may lead us into error as
well as truth. Is not this a Consideration sufficient to justify us in our
taking our selves off from hearing them? To this I reply:

First, By putting the question to them, Whether they judge themselves to be
infallible or no? If they answer Affirmatively, that they do judge themselves
infallible (which I suppose they will not) then Why should not the Ministers of
the Gospel be as infallible as they? Besides, if they be infallible, What need
they fear of being led aside into Error by the Ministers of the Gospel? But it
is like they will reply Negatively, and grant that they are not infallible: If
so, why then do they depend upon themselves, or upon their own Notions, or
Apprehensions, or upon their own senses and interpretations of Scripture? May
they not as well be mistaken and deceived by leaning unto these as unto such
things which shall be by the Ministers of the Gospel delivered unto them? Or
will these persons themselves be only Sceptiques, and profess that they are
absolute Neutralists in all manner of Tenants and Opinions in matters of
Religion; or that they doubt of every thing, and firmly believe nothing? If
they profess this, they are more degenerate from men than the generality of the
Heathen: They firmly believe that there is one God, and that he is good, etc.
yea, they are worse than the devils, of whom James says, That they believe
there is one God and tremble. Besides, such a Profession as this, that men
believe nothing in matters of Religion, interfeers with it self; for he that
says he believes nothing, certainly pretends herein to know certainly that all
things are doubtful, yea, and to know certainly that it is best for him to be
of this Judgment, that all things are uncertain, and therefore nothing for him
to believe. Otherwise, Why is he thus minded, why does he not rather submit to
the contrary? But this last Skepticism is a strain of folly not worth the
contending against.

But to the Reason propounded,

Secondly, That the Scribes and Pharisees were (doubtless) every whit as far
from being infallible, as the Ministers of the Gospel now are; yet our Savior
himself ( Mat. 23.2, 3.) counseled the people, and his own Disciples too, to
hear them, yea, and to do, and observe whatsoever they shall teach them to
observe. Therefore certainly it is lawful, yea, and more than lawful, expedient
and necessary to attend upon the Ministry of men that are fallible, if there be
no other bar in the way but their being fallible (especially, if there be no
opportunity to attend upon men that be infallible) whilst they keep within the
compass of Moses Chair, that is, that they open unto us the mind of God in
Moses Law.

Thirdly, When Christ admonished the people, Luke 8.18. To take heed how, or
what they heard; And the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.21. To
try or prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good; Both the one and
the other clearly implied that it is lawful, yea, and necessary too, to hear
such men who are obnoxious unto error and mistake; otherwise, what need was
there for men to take heed what it was they should hear (meaning, that they
should narrowly consider whether it was Error, or whether it was truth) if they
who were to teach them were infallible? If Christ had been of their minds with
whom we have to do, he would rather have admonished the people to take heed
they heard not at all, than (as he does) to take heed what they heard: Nor
would the Apostle have advised the Thessalonians to prove all things, and hold
fast that which is Good, if he had not presumed that they should or were to
hear men that were fallible, and who might possibly deliver unto them some
things that were not meet to be received.

Fourthly, Though it be supposed that the Apostles themselves were infallible,
yet other Pastors and Teachers in those times were not such: yet the chief of
chose who were infallible, the Apostles, but Paul and Peter, advised those
Christians, with whom they had to do, to honor and obey those Teachers, 1
These. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you Brethren, know them which labor amongst
you, and are over you in the Lord, etc. And so, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be had in double honor, etc. And so
Peter charge the Pastors to feed the Flock of God amongst them, and
consequently enjoins the Flock to depend upon them for their food.

Fifthly, Neither was Timothy, to whom Paul writes two Epistles, infallible
(and there is the same consideration of Titus) yet he tells him, That by taking
heed to himself, and to his Doctrine and continuing in them, he should not only
save himself, but them also that heard him, 1 Timothy 4.16. meaning, that partly
by the exemplariness of his life; partly also, by his care and diligence in
teaching, he should be an Instrument in the hand of God to save those that
should attend upon his Ministry. By the way, in saying he should save those
that heard him, he plainly implies, that they that did not hear him (having
opportunity to do it) nor yet any other of like Function and Ministry with him
were not like to be saved. That he was not infallible appears, First, by that
Item and Admonition the Apostle gives unto him in the place now mentioned, viz.
To take heed to his Doctrine, as well as to himself. To take heed unto a man's
Doctrine at least imports that a man very possibly may build Wood, Hay, and
Stubble, instead of Silver, Gold, and Precious Stones; yea, that without
narrowly examining and weighing what he does teach, he is very apt to do it; so
that this clearly supposes that Timothy was in danger of miscarrying. So again
secondly, When he admonishes him to remember, 2 Timothy 2.8. That Jesus Christ of
the Seed of David, was raised from the dead according to his Gospel; he clearly
implies, that he was far from being infallible, and that Exhorration likewise
unto him to hold fast the form of sound words which he had heard from him is of
like import. So that evident it is, that Ministers, or men who are not
infallible may notwithstanding be a rich blessing unto those that shall hear
them, and accommodate them at no lower rate than with Salvation it self.

Sixthly, When the Apostle, both in his former Epistle to Timothy, Cha. 3. and
so again, in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 1. describes and prescribes certain
Characters and Properties that ought to be minded and found in those who were
meet to be chosen in the places of Pastors and Teachers, amongst them all he
does not mention infallibility; Indeed he requires in such persons that they
should be (...), apt to teach, or of a teaching faculty, 1 Timothy 3.2. And again,
that they should be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the
gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. And thus he that is not infallible may be able to teach,
but infallibility is not required.

Seventhly, Peter himself, the great Apostle of the Circumcision ( i.e. the
Jews) when Paul says, He withstood him to the face, because he was to be
blamed or condemned in that act of his, in withdrawing himself from the
Gentiles, and communion with them, to gratify and please the Jews. The Apostle
calls it, A not walking uprightly or with a straight foot, according to the
truth of the Gospel, i. e. either as the Gospel, truly or aright understood,
required of him and Barnabas; or rather as the truth of the Gospel for its own
advantage and propagation in the World required of them; so though this Error
in Peter was not formally and directly a miscarriage in Doctrine, yet
interpretatively and equivalently it was; for it was a kind of implicit and
constructive teaching of men, that the Partition Wall between the Jews and the
Gentiles was not broken down, and that the M^saical Ceremonies were yet in
force; and consequently the Messiah was not yet come, or however had not yet
suffered; which are all errors, and this of very ill consequence. So that we
see the Apostles themselves as infallible as they were, yet without a serious,
close, and conscientious minding of what they had received from the Holy Ghost
might mistake. And truly Ministers of the Gospel in these days, by such an
engagement of themselves as this is. I mean, by a diligent and conscientious
attending unto what the Holy Ghost has delivered unto them in the Scriptures,
may in their Doctrines and Teachings serve the World well near upon as good and
happy terms, as if they were infallible. For,

Eighthly, Nortwithstanding that infallibility which was vested in the
Apostles, yet those that heard them were to examine and search into the
Scriptures, to find whether the Doctrines taught by them were agreeable unto
them or no; and their belief of what the Apostles taught them was not solid or
complete until they had thus cast their Doctrine into the fire of the
Scriptures to try whether it would not burn: And when they found that the
Scriptures gave the right hand of Fellowship unto it, then it was their own;
now they were satisfied with it, and full of peace by it. You know that passage
of the Bereans, Acts 17.11, 12. Though the Doctrine which was preached unto
them by Paul had not only the Authority of so great an Apostle as he was to
attest it, but the mouth of another very considerable witness (I mean Silas;)
yet they would not receive it until they had searched the Scriptures. Now
then, if the Doctrines which the Apostles themselves did preach were and ought
to be tried by those that heard them, and upon such a trial as this they were
to give entertainment unto them and believe them; then it lay upon them, the
hearers of the Apostles themselves, by way of duty to examine such Doctrines as
were delivered unto them. There is the same reason now, and Christians are in
the same capacity, to enquire into, and examine, by the Touchstone of the
Scriptures, whatever Doctrine shall be delivered unto them; and it lies upon
them as a duty to search the Scriptures accordingly, etc. If this course were
but taken by men, there would be no more danger of their being mistaken now
than there was in the Apostles days.

Ninthly, the ways of Righteousness and Holiness would be. This may safely be
presumed from that essential connection and relation, which is between such
Practices and Principles, such thoughts, imaginations, and actions; And by this
means the Ministers of the Gospel may be capable enough to declare such
thoughts and imaginations unto men which lie deep in their hearts. And then
again, as touching such truths of the Gospel, by which such imaginations are to
be overthrown and pulled down, they are so clear, and so agreeable with the
light of reason, and common understandings planted in men, that there is little
fear or matter of doubt that they should be deceived or entangled with any
error herein; or howsoever, if the things which shall be delivered be proper to
demolish and throw down these vile thoughts, lying conceits and imaginations,
be they what they will, the very opposition which shall be found in them unto
those corruptions is ground sufficient, and testimony in abundance on their
behalf that they are truths, yea, and that they are the truths of God. And
therefore as to the greatest matters and main work of the Gospel and Ministry
thereof, although the Ministers should be men as subject unto error as other
men, and as weak this way, as the Apostle says of himself, and other
Christians in his days, that they knew but in part: Even so, if we that are
Ministers shall but Prophecy in part; nay, though we should mingle with our
Prophesying some mistakes and misprisions, yet through the grace of God, and
that blessing annexed by promise unto this erection and establishment of the
Ministry for the building up of men in holiness, and in the love of God, and in
the faith of Jesus Christ, these great and blessed ends may go on with an high
hand, and men and women may be promoted into the love and favor of God, and
thereby made meet for the heavenly Kingdom, notwithstanding the great pretense
of fallibility.

Another pretense,

This Pretext has less in it than either of the former: For where does the
Scripture make the want of a gift of working Miracles in them that preach the
Gospel a ground or reason why men should not hear them? It is expressly said,
Joh. 10.41. of John the Baptist that he wrought no Miracles; yet the Lord
Christ said of him, Joh. 5.35. That he was a burning and a shining light; and
it was prophesyed of him by an Angel from heaven, That he should turn many of
the Children of Israel unto the Lord their God; and that he should be filled
with the Holy Ghost even from his mothers womb, Luke 1.15. Nor do we read that
Timothy had the gift of working Miracles; yet Paul charge him before God, and
the Lord Jesus, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearance and
Kingdom, That he should preach the Word, that he be instant in season, and out
of season, that he should reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and
Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. And (as we lately heard) assures him that by taking
heed unto himself, and to his Doctrine, by a continuing therein, he should both
save himself and those who should hear him, 1 Timothy 4.16. Again, the men with
whom we have to do are not willing to be looked upon as Infidels or
Unbelievers; if not, then what have they to do with Miracles or Miracles wiht
them? Prophesying or Preaching, without Miracles, is for them who do believe;
wherefore Tongues (says the Apostle speaking of Tongues extraordinarily and
miraculously given) are for a sign, not to them that do believe, but to them
that believe not; but Prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but
for them which believe, 1 Cor. 14.22. So that men and women, who own the Gospel
to be a truth, and to come from God, need no Sign or Miracle, but an effectual
opening and applying this Gospel in the several parts and branches of it unto
them. By the way, when the Apostle says, that Tongues are not for a sign to
those that believe, but to those that believe not, he does not mean, as if
those who do believe could receive no benefit or edification by Signs or
Miracles, but only mere Infidels. For (doubtless) they who do believe may
receive a confirmation and increase of their Faith from Signs: As the Disciples
of Christ themselves are said to have believed on him (with a new Faith, or a
Faith renewed and increased, for they did believe on him before) upon his first
Miracle of turning Water into Wine, Joh. 2.11. But the Apostles meaning is,
that Miracles, or Signs, are not so necessary for those who do already believe,
though but in part: As for those who are wholly unbelieving; the reason is,
because they who are wholly Infidels and unbelieving, are Neglecters or
Despisers, if not professed Enemies and Opposers of the Gospel, and therefore
they stand in need of more than ordinary means for their awakening and
conviction; and it would be in vain to open or apply any part of the Gospel
unto them who peremptorily reject the whole. Whereas when a man so far
believes, that he owneth the Gospel in general as from God, the rational
unfolding and effectual applying of particulars unto him cannot but conduce
much to his edification.

Again, Whereas it is said, that Prophesying serves not for those that believe
not, but for those that do believe; the meaning is not, as if Prophesying or
Preaching of the Gospel, even where Signs and Miracles are wanting, might not
work upon those who are wholly unbelieving to their conversion; (The Apostle
himself plainly enough supposes the contrary two or three verses after) but
Prophesying serves not, or is not for those who do not believe, i.e. serves
not so effectually the necessities and spiritual exigences of professed
Infidels, as it does the interest and occasions of them who do in part believe.

Comparative senses or meanings are frequently in Scripture expressed in
absolute and positive terms (as heretofore upon like occasion we have from time
to time signified unto you, and given you several instances;) I shall only add
two or three things more briefly by way of further answer to te pretense,
concerning the necessity of working Miracles by Ministers in these days.

First, That Miracles, Joh. 12.37. For though he had done so many Miracles
before them, yet they believed not on him. We see here that not simply
Miracles, but that Miracle upon Miracle, many Miracles, abundance of Miracles
sometimes will not do the deed, will not so far convince men, as to prevail with
them to believe. So again, Mat. 11.20, 21, etc. Then began he to upbraid the
Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not.
Woe unto thee Corazin, etc. Here we read of several Cities which had the help
and advantage, not of Miracles simply, but of mighty Miracles, mighty works;
yea, and of great variety of these [wherein he had done most of his mighty
works;] yea, of sundry mighty Miracles wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, who (questionless) wrought them upon terms of all possible advantage
to make them effectual for the ends for which they were wrought; in which
respect (I conceive) it is, that they amongst whom they were wrought are said
to be lifted up to heaven: Yet, I say, there was not so much as any one of all
these Cities, that were thus filled with great Miracles, with mighty Works,
that repented, or were brought over to believe in Christ by means of them. If
the men therefore now under reproof were gratified in their importune desire,
as the murmuring Israelites sometimes were in theirs, when God gave them flesh
till it came out again at their nostrils: So if these men had their fill of
miracles from the Ministers of the Gospel, it is a question whether these would
have any saving influence upon them or no. And the reason (to add this by the
way, because we are upon a point that we seldom have occasion to handle) why
Miracles may very possibly do little good, where there is a strong Antipathy
against the Gospel may be this, viz. because when men are greatly averse from
believing or repenting they are not like to bestow any serious or intense
consideration upon the means by which they should be brought to do either, but
rather to pass lightly and slightly by them; especially, if they can find out
any color or pretense to disparage them, and so to arm their Judgments and
Consciences against them. This was the reason (doubtless) why none of the
Cities in which Christ had wrought most of his Miracles and mighty Works were
drawn to repentance hereby; And so likewise, why so few of the Scribes and
Pharisees believed in him, notwithstanding so many Miracles wrought before
their eyes; it was the marvelous averseness both to his Doctrine and Person,
that quickly took off their minds and thoughts from such things, whether words
or works, which they found meddling or dealing with their Consciences that way;
I mean, which they found in any degree enclining them to believe on him; so
that these means could not have their perfect work upon their souls. For
whether words or works they must be kept for some time upon the mind and
intellectual faculties of the soul before they can accomplish any transmutation
or change there. It is a common Maxim in Philosophy, that no motion is
effected or brought to pass in an instant.

There must be time for the strongest Physic to work, for there is some
averseness in the body against it: So before there can be any such repentance
and believing in the soul, the means by which this must be effected must have
some time to work upon the understanding; and therefore if they be thrown by so
soon as they begin to work the blessed change will never succeed or take place.
Or else because there are lying and false Miracles as well as true; and very
strange things are sometimes done by Magic, Sorcery, and by the help of
Devils, and the like; therefore they satisfy themelves with a like conceit,
that the great works of Christ were of this bastard kind of Miracles, and so
maintained and hardened themselves in their Unbelief, all his great Works and
Miracles notwithstanding. And I remember it was the opinion of one of the
Ancient Fathers, that Judas thought that his Lord and Master wrought all his
great Cures and Works only by the Art of Magic, and the Jews have such a
conceit of him at this day. So then, Miracles, if the Ministers of the Gospel
in these days had the gift of them, might possibly little accommodate the men
who under a pretense (it is to be feared) so impatiently call for them.

Secondly, Joh. 4.48. Except ye see Signs and Wonders ye will not believe. It
is evident that these words are objurgatory, striking at such a spirit or frame
of heart (in the persons to whom they were spoken, Except yet see signs, etc.
As if he had said, ye (Jews) are of such an ill spirit and frame of heart that
such means which are in themselves sufficient to persuade or bring men to
believe, sufficient to prevail in this kind with persons of any tolerable
disposition Godward, as such heavenly and authoritative teachings from holy and
worthy men are, these will do no execution, will not convince you; but you must
have such means used and applied to work upon you to do you any good, which are
sufficient to break the Iron sinews of the most profane stiff-necked, and
obdurate Infidel under heaven; you must see Signs, yea, Wonders, or Prodigies
of Signs. Men that are in any degree ingenuous, and willing to walk up to these
lower and more common principles of truth, which are by nature planted in them,
or desirous in the least to understand and submit to the truth, they stand in
no need of Signs and Wonders to satisfy and convince them of the truth (I
mean, of the truth of a more spiritual and sublime nature) but only of a
lightsome and rational discovery of such truth. As the wood that is dry will
readily take the fire and burn only by putting coals of fire to it; whereas
that which is green requires much puffing and blowing, and many times will not
burn at last, though all this means he used to it. Therefore the persons that
must have Miracles, and say they cannot edify, they cannot profit by the
Ministers of the Gospel in these days, because they cannot work Miracles,
their own tongues fall upon them (as David's Expression is:) by such sayings
they plainly declare themselves to be persons much estranged from God, to bear
little love to the truth. Our Savior in the Gospel calls the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 12.39. and 16.4. An evil and adulterous Generation, for seeking
after a Sign or Miracle for their satisfaction about the truth of his Doctrine:
having occasion to speak upon the same account unto the generality of people,
He leaves out the word Adulterous, only styling them, Luke 11.29. An evil
Generation for seeking after a sign. Why does our Savior call the Scribes and
Pharisees, and so the Sadduces, not simply an evil, but an adulterous
Generation also upon occasion of their seeking after a Sign? We know an
adulterous disposition imports the departure and estrangedness of heart and
affection from the person whom we ought, by reason of our Conjugal Engagement,
to love and affect above all others, together with the bestowing of them upon
some other person whom we ought not to affect in any such way: Now then, our
Savior calling the Scribes and Pharisees an Adulterous Generation, charge
them that their hearts and souls were wickedly and basely alienated and
estranged from God, unto whom they were married by Covenant, and should have
cleaved with their whole heart and soul, and have been of one heart and spirit
with him; whereas now they had coupled themselves with this present World, with
the honors, riches, and pleasures thereof; and thereby they did plainly bewray
their nakedness, in this kind, in that the voice and word of God, which should
have been familiar unto them, as the voice of a Husband should be to a Wife,
which they should have known without any Dispute or Argument to make them know
it, was become so strange unto them, that they were as far to seek whether it
was his Word or no, as they who never knew him, nor scarce had heard of him;
and that they required as much satisfaction to be assured thereof, as might
serve to satisfy the greatest stranger under heaven. So that they who call for
Miracles upon the account mentioned declare themselves to be of the race of the
Scribes and Pharisees who are an adulterous Generation.

Thirdly (and lastly) The holy and exemplary lives, Tim. 3.14. Acts 28.31. And
as we lately heard, that our Savior severely taxed those that would not
believe except they saw Signs and Wonders; so the Holy Ghost himself represents
such persons, as worse than Harlots who did believe without Signs and Wonders,
Mat. 21.32. John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him
not: but the Publicans and Harlots believed him. So likewise elsewhere the Holy
Ghost adjudgeth such to be persons more degenerate from the nature and property
of men than ordinary, to be signally wicked and perverse, that would not
hearken to the Doctrine of such Teachers who were excellently righteous and
holy.

And to add this as a close of this particular; it is probable that the
Apostles themselves wrought not Miracles, but at their first coming to a place,
and that they did not make use of them in those places after any long stay in
them. The reason may be, because at their first coming to a place Miracles
might be an effectual means to awaken men; whereas if they staid but any
considerable time, then they had the means and opportunities to observe their
lives and conversations. NOw this would do the same service in regard of the
truth, and for the confirmation of what they preached that Miracles could do.
The Apostle Paul when he came to Rome, where he continued three years in
preaching the things of God; there is no mention of any Miracles that he
wrought there; because he had opportunity to give an account and sufficient
confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine by the holiness and heavenliness of
his life and conversation. So that it is but a vain and empty pretense to talk
of signs and Miracles now for the confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel;
for indeed in speaking such things, and making such demands, they demonstrate
themselves to be (as was even now said) of the race of those that are called an
Adulterous Generation by the Lord Christ, who was not wont to slander men.

Another Pretense or Plea insisted upon by the persons under censure,

I reply first, Though (happily) it be not meet to charge all those who are in
the condemantion we speak of, with alleging that which they do not only know
is not truth, but what they know to be contrary unto the truth, as a ground of
their practice; Yet is it much to be feared that some of them pick the quarrel
against the Ministry of the Gospel, on a quite contrary ground, because it has
too much savor, and bites, and gnaws, and bears hard upon their Consciences:
This (I say) is much to be feared is the true cause why many of them withdraw
from it, and are not able to bear the dread and terror of it. We (says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16.) are unto those that perish the savor of death unto
death. The Gospel is so severe against those whose heart will not yield unto
it, that it kindles the savor and smell (as it were) of the fire and brimstone
of hell in their Consciences, it makes them to know that they are a most cursed
Generation of men and women; the words thereof to wicked men are like the words
of Michaiah unto Ahab, 1 Kings 22.8. who hated him because he never prophesyed
good unto him. It suffers them to have no peace nor pleasure in their great
Estates here in this present World. So that it is much to be feared that many
upon this account have turned their backs upon it, that so they may be free
from those gnawings, and those kind of fiery doings which are ever and anon
kindled in their inward parts by the means of it.

Secondly, That the Ministry of the Gospel is not so effectual, so mighty in
operation upon those who take up this disparaging complaint against it, does
not at all prove, that either it is not effectual in it self, or that it is not
so unto others; no nor yet that it is ineffectual unto them upon any such
terms: but that if they would remove that out of the way which makes it
ineffectual, and which hinders the efficacy of it (which they might remove by
the grace of God vouchsafed unto them) it might become as effectual unto them
as it is in it self, and in its own nature, and as it is unto many men in the
World.

First, That the Gospel is effectual in it self (I think) we need not question
(and more especially when opened like unto it self) it is called, The power of
God, or the Arm of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.12. The Word is said
to be quick and powerful in operation, it is a discerner of the thoughts and
intentions of the hearts of men: This, my Brethren, is the property of the
Gospel, and of the Ministry thereof, when it is handled like it self, and when
it deserves the name of the Ministry of the Gospel. But, I confess, the Word of
God may be so handled that the edge and spiritfulness of it may be blunted and
flatted; as when they that preach it, and undertake to open it, know not how to
bring forth the mind of God in it, but substitute their own thoughts and
apprehensions instead thereof. The truth is, that in such cases as these the
Word of God is but like the word of men. It is the Spirit of the Word that is
so piercing and searching, and which is the discerner of the thoughts and
intentions of the hearts of men, it is not the Letter of it: though we should
preach the jots and tittles of the Word, but then put a false sense and
interpretation on it, that will not do that great and lively execution which is
proper to it; it will not rouse the Conscience, nor awake the spirits of men;
but it is the mind of God, the true sense and meaning of the Word conveyed and
brought home to the Conciences and Understandings of men; this is all spirit
and all life. The words which I speak (says Christ) they are spirit and life,
meaning, in their true sense and meaning. So that it is a clear case, that the
Ministry of the Gospel is in it self a thing exceeding lively, and penetrative,
and effectual; it will take men's hearts out of their bodies, and give them into
their hands to see all that is within them; many times it pours out it self
like a great flash of lightning, and makes men to see hideous shapes of
thoughts, conceits, opinions, and apprehensions on the one hand; and allureth
on the other hand to ways of holiness and virtue by strong and potent
Arguments or Motives.

Secondly, Abraham: This needs no other proof but only the Testimony of so many
thousands that do acknowledge themselves to be brought into Captivity unto
Jesus Christ by the Ministry. The Trophies of the Gospel are hung up in the
sight of the World in all the parts and quarters of it; it has cast down in
men and women many a strong hold, many high thoughts have been thrown down by
the efficacy and power of it; it is of an undermining nature; and of the Wisdom
of the Flesh, and of the World, which are the Enemies that it meets with, and
has to encounter, in the course of it, (alas) it makes straw, and stubble,
and rotten wood; it does detect and demonstrate the vanity and emptiness of
this Wisdom, and makes it evident to the Consciences of men, that if they will
follow such and such Principles, Notions, and Apprehensions as they bring with
them to the Gospel they are lost men; they mistake the way of life and peace,
and shall most certainly come to the Chambers of death, and Eternal destruction
in the end. And as for such things which it commends for truth, it does so
fortify the truth of them upon such terms of excellent demonstration,
conviction, and power, that except men be desperately bent and set upon their
own ruin and destruction they cannot but give place to it, and fall down
before it, and say of a truth, this is indeed no other but the wisdom of God.

Thirdly, That it might have been, or yet may be as effectual unto the men we
speak of, if they would but remove that which obstructeth the efficacy and
power of it, is evident from many places, Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another? As if he had said, that if they had not resolved
that they would retain, and not cast out from them that wicked and crooked
humor and disposition of theirs, viz. to seek honor one of another, to seek
the great things of this World, and so to strengthen themselves in their
fleshly interest this way, they might have believed as others did. This
therefore was the only thing that stood in the way of these people, and was as
walls and bars in the way of believing; they did divide and give out their
strength, in seeking after honor, and wealth, etc. and as Theives use to do,
divide parts amongst themselves. Now, so long as they were thus resolved to
stick together, they kept one another in their way and course upon such terms
that they could not believe: For by this means (as the Artificers said of their
Craft) they had their living, much of their wealth and honor came in upon the
account of the credit and opinion men had of them. Now when Jesus Christ did
preach Doctrines contrary to the ways and policies of these men, which did
detect their nakedness, and discover their wickedness, and unworthiness, they
resolved to stand one by another, and defend one another, so that it was all
one what he should say unto them, they were bent upon their course. For there
is nothing but if men will be wilful, they may withstand even the efficacy of
the Gospel it self.

If it be here demanded,

First, That the Ministry of the Gospel cannot be conceived to be more
effectual than the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God; now that the Holy Ghost may
be, and is resisted by men, appears Acts 7.51. where it is said, that they
had always resisted the Holy Ghost; therefore it is very clear that the
Ministry of the Gospel may be resisted, we know that the Arm of Christ was the
mighty Arm of God, his outstretched Arm, yet the Scripture says, that the
unworthiness of the people was such that he could do there (namely, in his own
Country) no mighty works, Mat. 13.58. Mar. 6.5. And the reason of this again
was, because they did not set their hearts upon the consideration of such
things as he did, nor upon the words which he spoke. therefore he could do no
great works; that is, he had no mind or will to do them. Now when a man is
unwilling to do a thing, he may (according to Scripture Dialect, and manner of
speaking, Genesis 39.9. 2 Cor. 13.8. 1 John 3.9.) be said to be unable to do it.
That Christ could not do any great work there, was, because it did
(circumstances being as they were) not stand with the Wisdom by which his Will
was steered, nor with those Rules of Righteousness, Holiness, Justice, and
Mercy by which he was acted in his whole course: So it is in the Ministry of
the Gospel; if men shall behave themselves at any such desperate rate of
unworthiness, or of slothfulness, and oscitancy, or (especially) stubbornness,
and stoutness of spirit, that they still take hold of any pretense to oppose
the truth that is coming upon them like an Armed man; if men (I say) do suffer
themselves in any such strain of Impiety and opposition against God, the
Ministry of the Gospel is not like to have its effect upon them, in respect of
the beneficial end of it: it is true, the Holy Ghost, even when he was
resisted, was full of power, and did vindicate himself very gloriously in the
Consciences of those that did resist him; and yet it is said he was resisted,
because he was put by from that blessed work, those saving effects, which
otherwise he was purposed to have done, and to have accomplished: Even so the
Ministry of the Gospel, let men oppose it, and let men seek Pleas and Pretenses
to decline it, yet nevertheless it is full of power and authority, even over
those who shall rebel with the highest hand against it; it does act with
terrible power and conviction even upon the hearts, and souls, and consciences
of them, and leaves deep impressions of the power and glory of it.

Secondly, The efficacy of the Ministry of the Gospel does not stand in the
actual conversion of men, or in the actual edification of men, nor in making of
men actually willing to be converted or turned unto God; for if it were to be
estimated or measured by this Rule, it might rather be judged powerless and
weak than powerful and glorious in efficacy and might; because the greatest
part of those who do partake of it are not effectually and savingly wrought
upon by it, nor made actually willing to be converted. Take it in the time of
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and in the times of the Apostles, when the
Ministry of the Gospel was in the height of its glory, the greatest part of
them that stood by, and were under it, remained still unsubdued unto it; so
that the efficacy of it is not to be estimated by the actual conversion, no,
nor by the actual edification of men. But

Thirdly,

First, The mighty efficacy of the Ministry we speak of stands in those
stupendous, formidable, potent, and mighty Arguments, by which it urges, and
presses, and adjureth the Consciences of men to accept of those Articles or
Terms of Peace and Reconciliation which the Gospel holds forth, and calls
men unto. They who attempt to persuade unto other Studies, Practices, or
Engagements of themselves in one kind or other; as some endeavor to persuade
men to the study of Natural, some of Moral Philosophy; others to the study of
the Mathematics; others to the studies of others Sciences; some persuade men
to good Husbandry, some to Marry, some to one Calling, some to another; but
what Subject soever it be, about which men treat or deal with men, or seek to
persuade men unto, they have no such Motives or Grounds of Persuasion to make
the hearts and minds of those with whom they have to do to embrace their
Motions or advice: The Weapons of their Warfare are but Stubble, or Straw, or
rotten wood in comparison; the nature of the Subjects does not admit of any
great Motives, or any considerable Arguments to persuade unto them: Whereas the
Weapons of that Warfare which the Ministry of the Gospel manageth are sharp as
a two edged Sword; these are Arrows and Spears pointed with fire, that will cut
thorough, and conquer the Souls and Consciences of men; these will lie upon the
Spirits of men, like a great mountain of Lead, that they shall not be able to
get from under them. The Ministry of the Gospel adjureth and charge by the
love, and by the tender mercies of God, by the glory of the great things of the
World to come, by the saving of their Souls from the Wrath and Vengeance of
Eternal fire; these are mighty in operation, they are high and terrible, like
fire in the bosom; nor can men decline the force of them, unless they will be
Companions with the Horse and Mule, and with the bruit Beast of the Field,
which have no understanding. This is one things wherein the glorious efficacy
of the Ministry of the Gospel consists, and commends it self; it has
mighty Engines and Screws whereby to manage and command the hearts and
consciences of men, and to lift them up to those practices and ways whereunto
it exhorts and persuades them. In respect of the mighty efficacy and force
of those great Engines, Motives, and Arguments we speak of, the Ministers of
the Gospel, who are employed herein, by a dexterous and faithful application,
or setting them home to the hearts and consciences of men, are said to compel
men to come in, Luke 14.23. Not that all persons, to whom these Engines are
faithfully applied, are removed from the World, and carried home unto God: Not
that they should bring them in by head and shoulders, whether they will or no
(as some interpret:) but they should compel, i. e. they should make use of
these kind of Arguments until they had by an high hand of power and persuasion
prevailed with them to believe, and to come unto Christ,

Secondly, viz. of bringing men from sin, and from the World unto God. For
though these were such realities, though they had as substantial and true
existence and being as wither the Angels in Heaven or God himself, yet if this
their existence and being could not be demonstrated and made out unto men; if
the Ministry, we speak of, were not accomplished with light to convince and
satisfy the Judgments and Consciences of men that the great things mentioned
are no devised Fables, or vain Speculations and Notions, but are as real and
certain in their being as things that may be seen, heard, or handled: I say, if
the Ministry of the Gospel did bear it self upon no better terms than these,
and were not able to make good the reality and certainty of the things which it
has asserted, the Consciences of men would very easily despise it (as well
they might do) and cast it behind their backs. But when it shall prove that
there is such a misery and extremity that does abide wicked and ungodly men,
that there is a fire that never goes out, and a worm that never dies; and
that there are such things laid up in the Heavens for those that fear God; that
there is an equality with the holy Angels, and eating of bread with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and a thousand expressions more of the same kind: I say, when
the Ministry of the Gospel shall be able to fill the Judgments and Consciences
of men with a certain knowledge and conviction of the reality and existency of
such things as these, this is that which furnishes them with an executive
power, and makes them Motives and Arguments of such a nature, that men must be
very desperate, and turn-head upon nature, and act contrary to their own peace,
safety, and happiness, otherwise they cannot withstand them, nor go from them,
nor rise up against them; these Chords are too strong, and bind too fast, and
close, so that unless men cease to be men they cannot burst them in sunder. It
is a saying in the Metaphysics, That which is not has no manner of operation;
there is the same reason in Moralities, or Moral Actions, That which is not
known and apprehended has no influence, no operation or work upon the mind or
consciences of men. And indeed, if the Ministry of the Gospel were unprovided
at this Point; if it were not furnished with weight to make the great Engines
move with which it is appointed to Umpire in the hearts and consciences of men;
if it were not able to make good those things which it threatens and
promises; that they are Realities, and not only Notions and faint
Speculations, it would do no great things, it would be but a powerless and
faint thing: As we see all the devised and fained Stories that are abroad in
the World, though they may please the fancies of some that hear them, yet they
have no great work upon them, they do not move or incline them to any great
undertaking. And as no man will go to the charge of building a Ship to travel
to the Lands of Vtopia, because it is only a fained Land of pleasure and
delight, but no man was ever able to make good the being thereof: So for the
glorious and great things of the World to come which are spoken of in the
Gospel; unless you can get it into men's hearts to believe that these things are
really so, you may treat with them by this, and adjure them by that, and yet
the Conscience not move at all upon any such account: but when it shall be made
known to them demonstratively that these great things are not words only, nor
fancies or devised Fables, but that they are the same in nature and reality
which they are in terms and names; now the Consciences of men and women are
overawed and overcome at this point, there is no standing out, but only in
such cases wherein men are bewitched, and have their eyes blinded by the God of
this World.

Thirdly (and lastly) The efficacy of the Ministry we speak of is seen in that,
viz. the giving forth of the Spirit into the Consciences and Souls of men, 2
cor. 3.6. Who also has made us Ministers, etc. not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit. Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the
hearing of Faith? So that this is unquestionably true, that the Ministry of the
Gospel is erected by God for the communication of the Spirit into the hearts
and souls of men. Even as a Conduit Pipe is a means to convey the water into
our Cisterns which before were empty: so the hearts, souls, and inward parts of
the Sons and Daughters of men being to a great degree empty of the Spirit of
God, God has, as it were, made and framed these golden Pipes of the Ministry
of the Gospel to convey the Holy Ghost into the hearts and souls of men, that
so together with him there may be life, and power, and strength, and all manner
of divine excellencies. This the Ministry of the Gospel will certainly do when
it is managed like it self, and where the Wisdom and gracious Counsel of God is
embraced and entertained, and men have done homage, and have bowed the knee of
their Understanding and Judgment unto it, and have owned the things contained
in it as from God. And meet it is, that such a service and subjection of the
Creature unto God as this is should be immediately and out of hand rewarded by
him with so great a gift as his own Spirit. As if God should say; Where my
Advice is received, and where my Counsel goes, there shall my Spirit go also.
This (says the Evangelist, Joh. 7.39.) He spoke of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive.

We have done (at present) with the first of the second sort of Offenders, who
were lately designed to Reproof, upon the account of this general Delinquency
against the said Doctrine, viz. That instead of being filled with the Spirit
they take a direct course to be emptied of the Spirit altogether. The
particular Delinquency of these Persons is, that they wholly withdraw
themselves from the Ministration of the Gospel, which according to the intent
and declaration of the Great Founder of it, God, is the Ministration of the
Spirit, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by
the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? We have taken away the
Weapons from them wherein they trust, and have evinced those Texts and places
of Scripture, upon which they bear themselves for the justification of their
practice to have no manner of compliance herewith; but rather being rightly
understood to stand bent a contrary way. We have likewise detected the
insufficiency and impertinency of such other Grounds and Reasons for their
Practice, on which they chiefly insist, and wherein their foot is taken and
held in a snare of Death. The Lord break the snare in sunder, and deliver their
souls, and show mercy to those that are yet at liberty, that they be not led
aside into the same Error.

CHAP. XV. Five sorts of Offenders more under the Second Head reproved: First,
Such who are chill and cool in their respects unto the Ministry of the Gospel.
An account of the Causes thereof: The danger of false Notions concerning God. A
second sort reproved for withdrawing from a lively and powerful Ministry:
Reasons of such miscarriages. Legal and Evangelical Ministry distinguished.
What renders Persons duly fitted for the Ministry of the Gospel. The third
sort, justly reprovable, are such who neglect to be led by the Spirit of God.
How, and when the Spirit of God is neglected. A fourth sort justly reprovable
also are such that do resist the Holy Ghost or Spirit of God. The fifth and
last sort of Offenders are such who refuse to sow unto the Spirit of God.
WE proceed to a second sort (under this Head) of Offenders against our
Doctrine,

First, Such, who though they do not, with the former, make it matter of
conscience wholly to desert the Ministry of the Gospel, nor rise up to plead in
words against the blessing of it; yet are they chill and cool in their respect
unto it; they do not esteem it as their appointed food, they are not zealous in
their attendance on it, their hearts are not perfect with it; when they come to
it, they come as if they came not, or cared not much whether they came or no,
and so they hear as if they heard not: Satan with a very slender and slight
temptation may interpose at any time, and separate between them and their
attendance upon it. We know there are many thousands amongst us of that
lukewarm and unworthy temper we speak of, who think it enough to wait upon God
when he is speaking the words of Eternal life by his Messengers, his Servants
sent unto them, when they know not well where else to be, or what to do; they
will offer Sacrifice of that which cost them nothing, or else no Sacrifice at
all. Now men of this Character and frame, whose spirits sit thus loose to the
Ministry of the Spirit are in this respect in the same condemnation with the
former; they also are so far from obeying the voice of this heavenly
Exhortation, Be ye filled with the Spirit, that they seem to hearken to a quite
contrary suggestion, Be ye emptied of the Spirit; at least to a degree. For
they that are thus neutral in their attendance upon the Ministry of the Gospel,
and only hear now and then, as if they were afraid to hear too often, and seem
to think that they have somewhat too much of God, or of the Spirit of God in
them at the present, or more than is expedient to accommodate them upon the
best terms for the enjoyment of themselves in the pleasures and contentments of
the World. And therefore, as men are wont to do when there is too much fire in
the Room where they are, for the season, and the heat begins to be a little
troublesome or offensive to them, they lessen the fire by taking off some of
the wood that is upon it, and so reduce the Air in the Room to a convenient
temper: In like manner, that Generation of men and women, now under censure,
seem to moderate, stint, and limit themselves in their attendance upon the
Ministry; they will hear but now and then lest the Spirit of God should come in
too fast upon them, and they should grow too hot in their spirits, too full of
Heavenly Heat to comport with the Pleasures, and Profits, with the Principles
and ways of the World round about them, without interruption or check from
their Consciences; and yet they would not be counted or seem to be profane
neither, but would willingly keep some fair correspondency with God and Christ,
though at a distance: that if there be such things, as the Worm that never
dies, or the Fire that never goes our; I mean, hell and damnation on the one
hand, or if there be happiness and glory, heaven and salvation on the other
hand, they may have somewhat to depend upon for an escape of the one, and an
obtainiug of the other. And the truth is, this seems to be the secret policy,
the deep and profound reach of the Religion of the generality, or far greater
part of Professors amongst us; they project and design to yoke the two Worlds,
that which is present, and that which is to come, and to make them draw
together. As if Solomon had spoken of the two Worlds when he gave that Advice,
Eccles. 7.18. (as our former Translators read the place) It is good that thou
lay hold on this: but yet withdraw not thy hand from that; and his meaning had
been, that men should do wifely and well to keep sure and fast hold of this
present World, and yet not wholly to withdraw their minds and thoughts from
that which is to come; though he speaks of quite another thing (of which we
shall not enquire at present:) but the Counsels and Designs of the hearts of
men and women, in that kind we speak of, are legible in the tenor of their
ways and practices, and in the distribution they make of themselves between
the one World and the other. To make earnings of the World that now is, men and
women labor in the very fire, they rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat
the bread of much carefulness day after day; They that are addicted to
pleasures, and given up to voluptuous living; they forecast too to make
provision for the flesh, they waylay opportunities and means for the gratifying
of themselves in this kind; yet there is neither the one nor the other of them
but will keep an eye upon that World which is to come; they will be doing
somewhat this way though it be to little purpose. If Jesus Christ teaches in
their Streets, when the World and their ease and pleasures will give them leave
they will give him the hearing. On the Lords day, when the World that now is
stands still, and the World that is to come moves and stirs, these persons we
speak of will give some formal attendance upon the Ministry of the Gospel, they
will hear a Sermon, or perhaps two; and they think that by steering such a
course as this they shall make the Port of Heaven and Salvation, if there be
any such thing; or however that they shall escape the Wrath and Vengeance which
is to come, in case there be any such thing, which indeed is that which runs
most in their thoughts. Now, they think the lowest and smallest degree of
Righteousness and Obedience will keep them from hell; and indeed it is true, a
lesser care will keep men from the penalty of the Law, whereas it requires a
greater engagement to do such things upon which a man shall receive a great
reward: This is only the portion of noble and excellent enterprises.

But (I say) men generally do not so much look upon the glory which is to come,
Genius of the World to come, according to his Pourtraiture or Description, is
far the stiffer of the two, and harder to be entreated; and the Genius of this
present World more facile and pliable. First (says he to his Disciples, and in
them to all men, Mat. 6.33.) seek ye the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be cast in unto you. The Kindgom of God; i. e.
Heaven, and the salvation of the soul, these require seeking, or else they will
not be found; yea, they require seeking in the first place [ i. e. seeking with
the many and principal intentions of the heart, mind, and soul] or else they
will not be had: whereas these things, i. e. the conveniences of the World
shall upon the seeking of the former be freely, and by way of gratuity, cast in
by God unto men; as that which we call the in-bread, is given into the Dozen,
there is nothing properly paid or given for it, bat only for the Dozen: The
Kingdom of God, the salvation of the soul, the World which is to come, are like
the Dozen, he that will have this must pay for it, I mean, in labor and
endeavors, and in looking after it: Whereas this present World is like unto
the in-bread which will be given in by God to better the bargain. So likewise,
when our Savior advises thus, Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life; he plainly gives us
to understand, that the World which is to come requires labor of men to come
by. Now, our Savior was not of a light and unsavory Spirit, he did not jest
with men, he did not exhort men to strain and toil at the lifting of a Feather,
no, he was most grave, and most sober, and serious, and weighty in all his
Counsels; therefore when he counsels men not to labor for that which
perishes, but for that which endures for ever, he does consequently intimate
unto them, that unless there be industry used, and much solicitousness of mind,
things of this nature will not be obtained: The Son of man, who has these
things to give, will not give them unto men who look not after them. And withal
our Savior does plainly and clearly imply, that this World does not require a
like labor and diligence (at least comparatively) Labor not for the meat
which perishes; as if he should say, You may have such meat which will suffice
you, if you will but labor for the other. Therefore that Generation of men and
women we speak of greatly err in their thoughts about the terms of the two
Worlds, judging the World which is to come to be like the Fig Trees (spoken of
by the Prophet Nahum, c. 3.12.) with their first-ripe Figs, which if they be
but a little shaken fall into the mouth of the Eater: So these conceit that the
Golden Gates of Heaven, if they be but touched with the least of a man's
fingers, will fly open and give him entrance; that the great things of Eternity
will come upon them before they be aware; that a little time spent, now and
then, when their ease and their profits will give way, will cause heaven and
happiness to bow down unto them; whereas their Judgment of this present World
is, that both the inner and outer man, with their highest contendings,
sweatings, and strainings of themselves are all little enough, or rather too
little to prevail with it to bless them, or give out its strength unto them. It
is not unlike but that the conceit we now speak of within them may be sed with
another Notion or Conceit, viz. that the World which is to come goes by an
unchangeable Decree of Predestination and Election; and that Heaven is
conferred upon men by virtue of a Deed of Gift, of as ancient a Date as
Eternity; upon which account they act with a remiss and cool spirit for the
obtaining of this; expecting that the Decree of God from Eternity shall bring
Salvation, and the blessedness of the World to come upon them, with an high
hand, though they themselves should do nothing; whereas they have a contrary
conceit, as if God had made no Decree concerning men's being wealthy and great
in this World; but that all these things do come about by diligence and
industry, and by a wise contrivement of their own in this behalf: it is very
likely that there is some touch or other of such a poison that lies near the
root of the hearts of some.

But to the Persons now under reproof we shall (at present) say no more but
this; That if Mary chose the better part in choosing to sit at the feet of Jesus
Christ, to hear the words of Eternal Life from his lips, in comparison of
Martha's choice, which was to be employed about other things (though otherwise,
as appears, a worthy woman:) Certainly, such persons who neglect the opening of
the Heavens, and the Visions of the Almighty, when they descend upon the World,
to gratify the Flesh with ease, pleasure, getting of money, etc. choose the far
worser part, which will in the end turn to a portion of everlasting shame and
contempt unto them if they perish in their choice. Mary chose a being filled
with the Spirit; this was a blessed choice indeed; these men chose a being
emptied of the Spirit of God: The Day is coming like an armed man upon them,
when the words which are now spoken in their ears will become a Sword, which
will pass through their souls.

A second sort of Persons against whom the face of the Doctrine delivered is
set, to reprove them, are such, who though they have not, as yet, Col. 2.18.
Vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds; or irregularly puffed up: Even as it is
with some bodies that seem to be very fat, and full, and fair, and yet their
fat is but a loose kind of flesh, or it may be, it is nothing else but some
dropsical humors, which any kind of sickness will quite cancel; and commonly
such persons fall into the most desperate Consumptions of all, when that loose
fat forsakes them: Even so there are many loose Professors amongst us (and
have been in all Ages) who have swollen in their minds and conceits into a
great bul^. They judge themselves to be like the Children of Anack in spiritual
matters, and other Professors about them, but as Grasshoppers, as men and women
of low, and weak, and inconsiderable stature in respect of themselves. Now
there is and (for the most part) always has been such a Ministry of the
Gospel (so called) which is apt to work this way: Though (to speak properly) it
is no Ministry of the Gospel, but only a kind of counterfeit of it, which seeks
to commend it self unto the World for such; yea, and to disparage that which is
truly and indeed such in comparison of it self: But of that Generation of men
and women which forsake such a Ministry of the Gospel which is savoury,
wholesome, and sound, where the Mind and Counsel of God, concerning the peace
and salvation of their souls, is effectually declared and held forth, and
betake themselves unto that which will feed their fancies with vain and windy
speculations and conceits, and let their Lusts be quiet and not disturb them.
The great Apostle Paul Prophesyed long ago, 2 Timothy 4.2, 3, 4. where having most
solemnly charged and adjured Timothy before God and the Lord Jesus Christ
(reminding him that it was he that should judge both the quick and the dead at
his appearing and Kingdom) That he preach the Word, that he be instant in
season, and out of season, that he rebuke, reprove, exhort with all long
suffering and Doctrine. He subjoyneth this as his reason why he did thus deeply
adjure and importune him to lay about him in the work of the Ministry, For
(says he) the time will come when they [ i e. men and women] will not endure
sound Doctrine, but after their own [or according to their proper or private]
Lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears; and they shall
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto Fables; the time
will come that they will not endure (...), Doctrine that is healthful and
sound, i. e. such a Ministry which is likely and proper to keep them
spiritually healthful and sound, free from lusts and from sinful dispositions
and desires, from erroneous and fond conceits and imaginations, which do
corrupt and endanger the spiritual constitution and frame of the soul as well
as lusts and inordinate desires themselves do. Such a Ministry as this (says
the Apostle) (...), they will not bear or endure; it will be after a time
irksome, wearisome, and burdensome unto them, as a burden is to a tender or
crazie shoulder when it has lain upon it long, and been carried any
considerable way; he that bears it will as soon as he can ease himself of it:
Now, the persons of whom he thus Prophesyeth, that the time would come that
they would not endure wholesome Doctrine, are not only the Professors of
Christianity in that Generation wherein he wrote this, but he speaks here of
a sad distemper which he knew would be incident to Professors in succeeding
Ages also. For there is no reason that Christians or Professors of the Gospel
in Paul's time should be worse, or weaker at this turn, more apt (I mean) in
time to grow weary and impatient of sound Doctrine, and to heap up Teachers
according to their own humors and lusts than in after Generations: Nay, of the
two it is more like that Professors generally in his time should be less
obnoxious or exposed unto danger in this kind than in after Ages; because the
Ministry of the Gospel now reigned in greater power and glory than afterward,
and so was more efficacious and likely to engage men and women unto it, and to
the love of the truth delivered and asserted in it with constancy and
perseverance. Therefore if Professors under this Ministry were like to
miscarry and expose themselves to ruin, in such a way as we speak of, much
more now.

The reason why Professors of Religion, etc. the reason, I say, or reasons why
men and women are apt to exchange Ministry for Ministry in this kind, are, or
probably may be these.

First, The nature of man, especially when it falls in conjunction with
opportunity and time, apt either to awaken or feed such a disposition or
humor, is apt to be tempted with curiosity. I do not say, that in such a
conjunction it is always overcome with this sinful vanity; no, nor yet that it
is actually so much as tempted by it; but this I say, That in such a
conjunction of Circumstances as I speak of, it is apt or obnoxious to be thus
tempted, and by means of the temptation to be overcome. Now, that which is
incident to the nature a man in such or such cases, though it be not found in
all men, whose case is so or so, yet it is very like to be found in many: and
this is that which we now assign for a reason why many Professors, who have
for a time, and this (it may be) with approbation and delight, sat under a
fruitful and worthy Ministry; yet may grow after a while out of love and liking
of this Ministry, when a Ministry of another kind, which vaunteth things above
what is written, and which (happily) has (as the Apostle speaks in a like case)
a show of wisdom in it, and no more, comes in their way. Curiosity is such a
distemper in the heart or soul of a man or women, which disposes it to linger
and lust after things that are rare, and which we know are enjoyed but by few;
and withal are unnecessary, and yield no benefit unto those that know and enjoy
them, but rather are prejudicial and hurtful unto them; for if the knowledge
and enjoyment of things be really necessary and profitable, all things
considered, the desire of knowing or enjoying them is no ways sinful, and
consequently not favoring of Curiosity, but regular, and approved by God: But
when men and women, in matters of Religion, and things appertaining to God,
shall by degrees decline and wither in their affections toward the hearing of
such things which are wholesome, and sound, and edifying in faith and love; and
shall affect a knowing of spiritual things, higher, and more mysterious and
secret than those which are written and communicated by God unto the World in
and by the Scriptures; and shall delight in the discourses of such men, who as
the Apostle describes them, Col. 2.18. (...), intruding themselves into those
things they had not seen, i. e. boldly thrusting themselves forward to teach
and affirm such things, of the truth and certainty whereof they have no
substantial ground or bottom; this savours strongly of that sinful distemper of
the soul which we call Curiosity.

Secondly, Jews as rejoicing ( Joh. 5.35.) for a reason (or some short time
only) in the Ministry of John, notwithstanding he was a light both (...),
burning and shining, He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing
to rejoice in his light. John is here by our Savior described, or commended by
two properties, which in a Minister are most like to retain and keep, as well
as to procure and gain the affections and approbations of men. The first is,
That he was a burning light, secondly, That he was a shining light: Zeal
accompanied with an excellency of knowledge are two most excellent and worthy
qualifications in the Ministers of the Gospel; and a man would think a
Minister, who is provided with these, should so endear the hearts of men and
women whom he serves in the work of the Ministry, that he should so captivate
their hearts and affections, that neither life nor death, nor things present,
nor things to come should be able to separate, or to estrange such a man from
the affections of his people. Yet nevertheless this (we see) was John's case
with the Jews: he was a burning and shining light; he had all the advantages
that lightly could be found in a man to retain what he had gotten in the hearts
and affections of his people; and yet, they who did mightly rejoice in him for
a season, after a while saw no such matter in him. John, who was as an Angel of
God for a season, was but like another man soon after; not that there was any
alteration or change in John, for doubtless he did not decline, neither in his
burning, nor in his shining, until the very day and hour of his death: And
therefore that there was such a change in the minds of the Jews toward him, it
proceeded from the levity of spirit and affection which was so incident unto
them. Ye were willing to rejoice (says our Savior) the word ((...),)
signifies an excellent degree of rejoicing, to dance and leap, or spring for
joy; he does not simply say, that they did rejoice, but that they were willing
to do it; that they did it freely, and of their own accord, they were not
importuned by any persuasion or prompting by any other man: yet they had enough
of John in a short time, when once they had gone round about him, and saw his
gifts and abilities, and what he was able to do; when they had tasted
thoroughly of his Doctrine, they could as freely turn their backs upon him as
upon any other man; they would see whether there were any other Teacher that
was of another spirit, or of another method of Teaching, or whose Doctrine or
matter was of a higher and more sublime nature or consideration than his. And
so likewise it fared with the great Apostle Paul amongst the Corinthians, and
especially amongst the Galathians; to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.2. He says,
that though it were supposed that unto others he was not an Apostle, yet to
them he was; meaning, that however they might think that he did not acquit or
approve himself as an Apostle amongst other people, where he preached the
Gospel, as either by working signs or miracles amongst them, or by the efficacy
and success of his Doctrine in the Consciences of many; yet certainly, he had
approved himself both these ways, and every other way an Apostle unto them.
For (says he in the latter part of the verse) the seal of mine Apostleship are
ye in the Lord: meaning, that their being in Christ, their conversion to the
Faith was a seal, i. e. a sure testimony and confirmation unto them that he had
the Commission of an Apostle from Christ. And elsewhere he says, 2 Cor. 12.12.
that the signs of an Apostle were wrought amongst them [meaning by himself] As
in all patience, so in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds. Elsewhere he
says, 1 Cor. 4.15. That in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the
Gospel. In another place, 2 Cor. 11.2. That he had espoused them to one
Husband, to present them a chaste Virgin unto Christ. (To pass by much more of
like import.) Such things as these, by which this people could not but be
lifted up unto heaven (as our Savior speaks in the like case) were sufficient
(in all likelihood of reason) so to have endeared this Apostle unto them, and
to have engaged them unto him, that he should have been in their hearts, as he
professes they were in his, even to die and to live together; notwithstanding,
How soon was this Son of the Morning, this glorious Apostle, and heavenly
Benefactor of this people fallen in their hearts and respects? Other teachers,
who were not worthy to loose the lachets of his shoes, coming in the way,
carried away the prize of their affections and esteem from him, these were the
men that were all in all with them, Paul was but an underling in their
thoughts, a sorry fellow in comparison. After all the Signs, annd Wonders, and
mighty Works that he had wrought amongst them, after all those gifts and
heavenly endowments, as of Wisdom, Knowledge, Utterance, Tongues; yet they
sought a proof of Christ speaking in him, 1 Cor. 13.3. They could not tell
whether he was so much as a true Minister of Christ, or no, unless he should
give them a good account of it. It is somewhat strange to think how the
generality of this People, having such rational foundations to build themselves
stable and steady upon, should yet sink so low in their esteem of him. But
neither did this most worthy Person, and Apostle, speed any whit better amongst
the Galatians than he had done amongst the Cerinthians; he gained high respects
and large affections; he tells them that at his first coming amongst them he
was received by them as an Angel of God, and as Jesus Christ; they had such
strong impressions upon them, that they could have plucked out their eyes for
him, Gal. 4.14, 15. but very quickly he became out of credit with them, and his
reputation was fallen in the dust; they cared not; they were Kings and reigned
without Paul; they knew how to want his Ministry, and his counsel, and
direction; they had found out men that pleased them better, they had heaped up
Teachers according to their humors; they had itching ears, and therefore they
must have some that would scratch them, and fall in with them, and please their
fancies: and thus, when they had met with such Preachers and Doctors, Gal. 1.6.
which were commensurable to their Notions, or unto that Spirit which had now
taken them, these were the men now, and the Heirs of Paul's Inheritance in
their affections, and in the respects which he received from them. Yea, the
Lord Christ, notwithstanding that (as his Adversaries themselves bear him
witness) he spoke as never man spoke; yea, though for a time he so marvelously
affected the People, partly, with his Miracles; partly, with his Doctrine, that
they were about to take him by force and make him a King, Joh. 6.15. yet was he
in a short time forsaken by all the great multitude of his Hearers and
Followers, none continuing with him but the Twelve only, ver. 66, 67. the rest
of them forsook the Fountain of Living Waters to drink out of narrow maddy
Cisterns; they left him who had grace powered into his Lips, who taught with
authority, whose words were Spirit and Life, and went to these foolish blind
Guides (as Christ terms them) the Scribes and Pharisees, to be built up unto
ruin and destruction by them: Even as many Professors amongst us in these
days, after they have rejoiced for a time in the light and lively Ministry of
some able and worthy Teachers, raised up, and sent to them by God, they wax
weary, and grow wanton, and they must have change of Teachers; although those
they leave and turn their backs upon be as shining Stars, and those they betake
themselves unto are but as snuffs of Candles in Comparison. This then is
another reason of this unworthy and unwise practice of many Professors (which
often times sorts to a sad issue) an affection of Noveley, or an itching ear, as
the Apostle calls it.

A third Reason of the same inconsiderateness and miscarrying is insinuated by
the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.3. For the time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but will heap up Teachers according to their own lusts; It is
somewhat more significant in the Original, (...), i.e. according to those lusts
which are proper and peculiar unto them. The manner of the Expression intimates
a variety or diversity of fond humors and sinful distempers that will be found
amongst Professors, one man's conceit running one way, another man's another
way; and that every man according to his own proper humor and distemper [ i.
e. to gratify, please, and feed his own particular lust or humor, whatever it
should be] would heap up Teachers to themselves; i. e. (I conceive) would taste
the Spirit or Doctrine of all the Teachers they could come at, until they
could meet with such who were for their purpose; the tenor of whose teachings
and preachings they should find to be such, which would not disturb them in
their sinful way: Or else, heap up Teachers, etc. i. e. to cover their
impatience or dislike of sound Doctrine, which will give no quarter to their
Lusts; and that it may not be thought but that notwithstanding they give over
hearing of such or such men, yet they are devout and good Christians, and love
the Ministry of the Word of God; they will commend and follow heaps, i. e.
multitudes of other Teachers, whose Doctrines are more plausible, less
penetrating and searching, under which they can enjoy their lusts, whatever
they be, in peace. The passage clearly implies yet further, that there has
been, is, and always will be an heap of Teachers found amongst Christians
whose Doctrine and Ministry will accommodate men's Lusts, what ever they be;
they will put a bridle of some gloss or interpretation or other into the lips
of such passages of the Gospel which frown with severity upon their lusts, that
they should not fall upon them: These are of that sort of Teachers of whom the
Apostle Peter likewise Prophesyeth, Who (he says to these to whom he writes,
and in them to all other Christians) thorough covetousness should (...), with
fained words make merchandise of them. It is not so properly translated, fained
words, as formed or fashioned words; meaning, with words chosen on purpose to
comport, or comply with you in all your exorbitant humors and practices; such
as will persuade and make you believe that you are all holy and good men, and
accepted with God, although you indulge your selves in such courses: As Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram would persuade the People that they were all the whole
Congregation of them, every one of them holy, Number. 16.3. The word (...),
translated feigned, being an Adjective, comes of the Verb (...), which properly
signifies the act of the Potter forming or fashioning the Vessel under his
hand, according to the requirement of that use or service for which he
intends it: So many Teachers do form and fashion their words, in proportion
to such unworthy ends as they propose to themselves in their work of Teaching;
which (as the Apostle in the passage before us implies) is ordinarily matter of
profit or gain from their hearers. Thorough Covetousness with fained words they
shall make merchandise of you; i.e. out of a desire and design to get money or
matter of advantage out of you they will preach smooth and pleasing things unto
you, though never so dangerous and destructive unto your souls. Baals Priests,
who eat bread at Jezebels Table, 1 Kings 18.19. always (as it seems)
Prophesyed good unto Ahab (and Jezebel;) whereas (as he complains) Micaiah, the
true Prophet of the Lord, never Prophesied good, but evil to, or concerning
him, Chap. 22.8. If they had not Prophesied good to Ahab and Jezebel, there had
been no bread on Jezebels Table for them to eat. And the truth is, that the
generality of Professors are not like to be so bountiful or free in any other
case, for any other kind of service done unto them, as in the strengthening
their hand in the way of their lusts and sinful humors by a Ministry of the
Gospel; this they look upon as an encouragement (or dispensation at least) from
God himself to hold on their way: On the other hand, they are not more
unwilling or loath to part so much as with their old Shoes, or with a morsel of
bread unto any sort of men, than unto such Ministers whose Doctrine they either
know, or suspect to be at a strong or irreconcilable defiance with their
Lusts, always troublesome unto, and fighting against those Principles and
Imaginations within them, upon which they bear themselves with peace and
comfort in their evil ways. They look upon such Ministers as these with such
an eye as Ahab looked upon Elijah, 1 Kings 21.20. when he judged him his Enemy,
Have thou found me O mine Enemy? And men are not apt to be liberal to their
Enemies, nor unto those whom they judge their Enemies.

By this Argument the Apostle Paul vindicated himself from that aspersion which
some false Teachers laid to his charge, viz. That he was a man that warred
after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. i. e. sought himself with all his might in
carnal or fleshly accommodations: From this charge he vindicateth himself (as I
say) by this Argument, viz. That his Weapons, or the Weapons of his Warfare
were not carnal. What does he mean by the Weapons of his Warfare? Doubtless, he
means those Principles, as well intellectual as moral, by the active management
and use whereof he kept that stir in the World wherever he came. These
Weapons (says he) of his Warfare were not carnal, i. e. were not of such a
nature, property, or kind, were not formed of such a Warfare, whereby the flesh
is like to be promoted. But how does he prove this? By an Argument drawn from
Contraries thus: They are so far from being carnal (in the sense declared) that
they are mighty through God, or unto God, (...), to the pulling down of strong
holds, and casting down imaginations, [meaning, in the minds, and hearts, and
judgments of men] and every high thing, etc. clearly implying, by way of
Antithesis, or Opposition, between Carnal Weapons and the Weapons of his
Warfare, that he that goes upon any such Warfare, where he is to cast down the
imaginations of men, upon which they bear themselves high in all their evil,
and carnal, and sinful ways, is not like to be accommodated by them in the
flesh; no, he will rather be looked upon as the greatest disturber of them in
their darling Notions and Conceits. Ahab (we heard but now) sometime looked
upon Elijah, when he called him his Enemy, Have thou found me O mine Enemy? If
the Prophets of Baal had not Prophesied good both to Ahab and Jezebel,
certainly they had not eat bread at her Table (as the Scriptures say they did:)
they had done by them as they did by Michaiah, who always Prophesied evil. Now
whosoever shall Prophecy evil unto men, as all they do who tell them plainly
that if they will maintain such and such Principles, and hold such and such
Notions, and walk accordingly, they cannot be in the favor of God, nor in the
way of salvation; Certainly, these men shall eat no bread at any man's Table
whom they will not let alone in their Notions and Conceits which are their
strong holds, by which they fence themselves against the fear and apprehension
of the Wrath of God. All which shows, that there is a humor in men to
gratify and reward all such Ministers that will show mercy unto them, and will
not deal clearly with them in such things. But the Apostles Warfare was not
after the flesh, as his and their Enemies was, who setting up a contrary way of
Preaching unto him, and seeking to bring him and his Ministry out of credit,
told the People, that Paul was a man that warred according to the flesh, that
fought himself here in the World, that did comply with men, to make an
advantage of the Gospel, and to ingratiate himself in their affections and good
wills. Now the Apostle, to vindicate himself from such an imputation as this,
does it upon this ground: Alas (says he) I war not after the flesh, I have no
Weapon for any such Battle; the Weapons of my Warfare are these Principles, and
these Notions, and Truths, which I labor to press wherever I come, and to
set the World on fire with: These are not carnal, but mighty unto God, or
through God to cast down strong holds; his meaning is, that the proper use and
tendency of his Weapons were to encounter, and beat down, and to demolish those
thoughts and imaginations which he met withal in the minds, and in the
judgments, and in the hearts of men: Wherever he came he found them as it
were drunken with the Wisdom of this World, with apprehensions bent against the
Gospel, and against the Counsel of God therein concerning the Salvation of the
World. The World was furnished with other Notions, and with other Doctrines,
some pleasing their fancies in one kind, some in another; some said there were
many Gods, some said there was none. Now Paul was provided with Weapons (God
standing by him, and aiding and assisting him) to combat with all these
conceits and imaginations of men, which were built (as they thought) as sure
as a House founded upon a great Rock; so sure, that they did, as it were, laugh
to scorn any other Doctrine, or any other Principles that should be brought in
opposition unto them: But (says he) the Weapons of my Warfare are mighty, even
to the casting down of such things, such high things as these. When I come
amongst Philosophers and wise men, that think themselves great in Wisdom and
Understanding, I batter and take them down from the height they are lifted up
unto in their own thoughts and imaginations. The Weapons which I level against
the faces of those desperate Counsels and lying Imaginations which were exalted
within them, subdued them, and brought them down; yea, brought them into
Captivity unto Jesus Christ. Now this is that which we observe here, that such
Truths and Doctrines which are bent against the thoughts and conceits of men,
by which they are supported in their evil, sensual, and sinful ways, are no
weapons to fight the battles of the flesh: but such Doctrines, such Notions and
Imaginations which qualify the Scriptures, and bring them down from the height
of that holiness and purity which is natural unto them, and make them to temper
with men of low Spirits, and of false Principles; these are the Weapons that
will fight the battles of the flesh; and men will give large wages unto them,
that by such Doctrines will strengthen their hands in evil ways: but they have
nothing at all to reward those with, that will disturb them in their way,
which refie and ransack their Consciences, which take from them those Weapons
wherein they have trusted all the days of their lives, and in which they have
had so much solace and content. Which shows that there is an inclination and
longing desire in men to be boulstered up in their evil Notions and Practices,
and to have their Consciences fortified against any fear or apprehension of the
wrath or displeasure of God. So then, this is another Reason of that declining
and falling off from such a Ministry of the Gospel which is burning and
shining, which is full of Authority and Power, to a Ministry of quite another
kind, which is airy, and stands partly in uncouth and empty Notions,
Speculations, and Conceits which the Scripture knows not, partly in
affectate and odd Phrases and Expressions. This is another Reason (I say) of
that aptness in men and women to fall from the former Ministry to the latter;
it is some lust, some inordinacy of heart or mind, one or other, which they are
not willing to part with, nor yet to be in continual fear and danger of
suffering reproof for othem. It is true, the men of that solly and weakness we
speak of are wont to pretend other Reasons and Grounds of that unworthy
exchange they make in the case mentioned, and will not own the Reasons now
specified: But as the saying of the Poet was, Ut verae lateant causae,
finguntur inanes. It is frequent with men, in such cases, to pretend that which
is not, and to conceal and hide from the knowledge of men that which is, to
make a fair covering of Reasons that are warrantable and just, to veil these
that are reproachful and unworthy, being (indeed) the true Reasons and Grounds
of their Action. This was Rachels Practice, Genesis 31.3, 4. the true reason why
she sat upon the Camels Litter, or Furniture, was, that her Father Laban might
not find his Images that she had stolen; but not being willing that this Reason
of her Posture should be known, she pretends another, viz. That the Custom of
women was upon her. So the Scribes and Pharisees, though the devouring of
Widows houses was the real and true end they proposed in making long Prayers,
yet being loath to own this, being so foul and so unworthy, they pretended
Zeal, and largeness of Devotion in its stead. Thus the Persons we speak of,
being ashamed to own the Reason we last discovered and opened from the
Scriptures, for the ground or reason of their shifting Ministries (upon the
terms mentioned) are wont to pretend others of a more fair and Christian
import, viz. That the Ministry which they give over, is legal and low, (at
least comparatively) less spiritual, and less edifying (at least to them:) Or
else, that some Doctrines or Opinions are held forth, and maintained in this
Ministry, which are contrary to their Judgments and Consciences; and therefore
they judge themselves bound both in Wisdom and Conscience to withdraw from it,
and attend upon that which is both more edifying and raising men up nearer unto
God, and also more Orthodox and sound. These are common colors and pretenses
that are frequently alleged by men and women when their hearts tempt them away
from a worthy Ministry to that which is unworthy. To speak somewhat to them
both.

For the first, Whereas they impute legalness (as they call it) lowness,
Salvation; together with all the secret strains, and all the turnings and
windings, and carriages of his Wisdom in the Gospel, as far as they are
ordinarily reached and discovered by men, whereas this is the most Evangelical
Ministry, and most likely to bring men to a true faith and belief of the
Gospel. If you would know what a legal Ministry is; to speak properly, it is
such which teaches Justification by the Law; and such is the Doctrine of the
Papists: But to charge, and to press the Commandments of Jesus Christ, and to
call upon men with the greatest affection and zeal, and withal to handle such
great and glorious motives and encouragements, which the Gospel affords unto
men to strengthen their hands in the ways of holiness; and withal to lay
before men the heavy Judgments which shall abide those who shall be
disobedient, this is far from being legal; for it has more of the Spirit of
the Gospel in it than any other. On the other hand, they call that a spiritual
Ministry, which seldom or never charge the Souls or Consciences of men with
any Moral duty; nor threatens these with exclusion out of the Kingdom of God,
who either are Thieves, Adulterers, Covetous, etc. But spends it self, from
time to time, in venting certain airy and windy Notions, and Speculations, such
as have no sufficient footing or foundation either in the Scripture, or in good
Reason; And these (for the most part) clothed with a kind of uncouth, and
antique Language and Expression. This Ministry, when it has entertained those
that repair unto it, for an hour or two, may, for the most part, truly say unto
them, concerning what has been delivered by it, as Aristotle is reported to
have said, when some blamed him for publishing and making common his
Philosophical Notions and Secrets; Edidi, (says he) and non edidi; meaning, I
have, and I have not; so may it be truly said of such a Ministry as we speak
of, it preaches, and it preaches not; it teaches, and it teaches not; for
it preaches and teaches after such a manner, that they who have heard are
little the wiser, can give no reasonable account of any thing they hear to any
sober or intelligent man. And it is an unworthy humor or property in some,
both men and women, to have only such teachings in admiration, and in high
esteem, which they understand not, and to undervalue that, as low and ordinary,
which they are able to make any thing of with sense and understanding. On the
other hand, It is a property, of the opposite extreme, in some others, not to
value or regard any Ministry which requires the use and exercise of their
understandings to make them thorougly capable or apprehensive of the things
delivered; but that only which yields nothing but milk, meet only for Babes
in Christ, or such things which they knew before, and have heard ten times
over. Some care for nothing that is new, though it be never so agreeable to
their old things, I mean, to what they knew already and believed; and some
again care for nothing but what is new, whether it be consonant and consistent
with their old things or no: Novelty and strangeness, in one kind or other, are
sufficient commendations of a Ministry in the eyes of some.

That passage of our Savior is very considerable, Then said he unto them,
Therefore every Scribe which is instructed unto [or for] the Kingdom of heaven,
is like unto a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of his
Treasury things new and old, Mat. 13.52. Note the occasion, upon which Christ
spoke thus unto his Disciples, which is expressed, ver. 51. (immediately
preceding) when he had delivered himself in several Parables unto them he
demands of them, whether they had understood all that he had spoken; they say
unto him, yea Lord, Therefore (says he again unto them) every Scribe which is
instructed, etc. As if he had said, look, as I have done, so must ye; As I have
made you to understand things which are new, and which you understood not
before, by means of those things which ye did know before (for all acquired
knowledge is obtained by the advantage and help of things formerly known:) In
like manner, every Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, i.e.
every Minister, or Teacher, or Preacher of the Gospel (as the Scribes were
Teachers and Ministers of the Law) which is instructed, i.e. which is duly
accomplished and furnished with knowledge and understanding for the Kingdom of
heaven, i.e. to promote and advance the interest and affairs of the Kingdom of
heaven in the World, to propagate the Gospel, is like an Householder, which
brings forth out of his Treasury, or place of store for his Provisions, viz.
for the furnishing of his Table upon all occasions and for the entertainment of
those that come to it, things both new and old, i.e. meats that have been
formerly dished and made ready, and kept in store, together with other made
ready upon the present occasion. But how, or wherein does the Scribe, or
Teacher spoken of, who is accomplished for the work of the Gospel, resemble the
Householder here described, by bringing out of his Treasury things both new and
old? Our Savior's meaning I conceive to be this, that it is required in a
worthy and well accomplished Minister of the Gospel that he be able to bring
forth, or to discover unto the People new things, new truths (I do not mean
simply new, for so there is no truth new: but new unto them, or new unto the
Age and Times wherein he lives) and not only to do this, to bring forth new
provisions of truth, but old things, or old truths also, i.e. such as they have
already received and believed, to insist upon these also; and that for this end
and purpose, that he may cause the people to understand and see that the new
truths which he brings and holds forth unto them correspond with their old,
with what they know and believe already, and have in them no repugnancy or
contrariety unto those, but are rather arguitively, or consequentially
contained or comprehended in them: for this properly is to edify, or build up,
the frequent Metaphor by which the Holy Ghost expresses the growth or encrcase
of men and women in spiritual and saving knowledge: To build up, I say,
properly imports a carrying on, or carrying up that part of the edifice or
house which is wrought or built al^eady, toward the completing of it, by
adding or laying on, according to Art, more materials fit for the building: In
like manner, spiritual edification does not properly stand in a Ministers
simple delivering new things, though truths, unto a people, or in their
receiving or understanding them: But in a rational and clear connecting and
close joynting of these new truths with the old, formerly laid in their
Judgments, so that people may perfectly and satisfyingly perceive the perfect
harmony and consent between what they hear anew, and what they have been
grounded upon before: So that that which is newly added unto them may not stand
off from, or stand awry by the former part of their building; but every way
correspond with it, yea, be supported and maintained by it. When a house is
part built, and part unbuilt (which is the case of all Christians in this life)
to throw down an heap of new brick, or stones, or pieces of timber, though
never so fit for building, by the sides of the Wall that is a building, is not
to build, or carry on the building of the house, but a regular disposing of
these unto, and upon that which is already built, that so they may be
incorporated together, and one receive strength and firmness from the other,
this is in order toward the completing of the building: In like manner, for a
Minister, or Teacher, only to teach new matter to a people, though it be
nothing but truth, and to neglect their old things; I mean, not to show them,
and to make them see and understand the perfect coherence of this new matter
with, and dependence upon what they know already, and firmly believe, is not
the part of a Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven, nor properly to
edify men in their most holy Faith. The truth is, that they that have but a
little knowledge, and actually understand or apprehend only a few Principles of
truth, and these of the easiest and plainest kind, have yet virtually, and as
contained in these a great variety and excellency of knowledge; and it is a
special part of the work of a Ministry, by the light of the Scriptures, to
unfold these Principles unto men, and to make them see how that all that God
requires of them in his Word, either to do, or to believe, was written, though
with a small Character, and this much defaced, and so hardly legible without
help in the Tables of their own hearts and consciences. But this only by the
way.

The thing we drive at, is, to make known unto you, that that Generation of men
now under reproof for forsaking the Ministry where it is solid and fruitful,
for such a Ministry which fetches all the Notions and Doctrines of it from
terra incognita: From beyond, or above the Scriptures under a pretense that the
former Ministry is low, and they cannot edify by it; they, I say; plainly show
by this pretense, that they do not know what belongs to true and solid
edification. This does not consist (as we have showed) in having new things
taught us, much less such new things, which are empty Speculations, and have no
substance or weight of truth in them: but in having new things so taught us,
that their agreement and good accord with our old things, being truths, may be
evidenced unto us; in which respect our old things must be insisted upon, and
made use of, more or less, in order to our edification. Several instances are
near at hand, and might readily be given, if I judged it needful, that God is
just, infinitely just, that he is infinitely gracious, merciful, wise,
powerful, faithful, etc. are (I suppose) old things with us, that we have often
heard preached unto us; and few (I presume) there are amongst us but believe
them: Now, that Ministry that shall edify us must not teach us things
inconsistent with, or opposite unto these, or any of these, but such which have
a rational and kindly sympathy and agreement with these, and their fellows.
Moreover, he that will edify a people must not only teach things that are
consequential unto these, but he must also make it evident unto them how they
are consistent, and how they do correspond with their old truths. Whosoever
does thus may be said truly and properly to build up men and women. As the
laying on brick or timber upon that which is already built is properly to build
up: Even so, when persons are shown, and it is made evident unto them that
these new truths are no other than what they have already received, and what
they have already believed, when they can reduce them, though never so
spiritual, to those old things, and see how consistent these are with them,
then are these persons properly said to be edified. For, my Brethren, this is
most certain, that even in those old things. viz. that God is Merciful,
Gracious, and Good, and Just, etc. are all high Notions contained as in the
bowels of them; and that Ministry is most edifying that can draw out things
that are most mysterious, and that are most heavenly; and yet can draw them out
so, as that the hearers may see and perceive, upon the minding and narrow
considerations of them, that surely these things are so and so because they
have so clear and happy a consistency with those things which they do believe
already.

But what may be the Reason why the men and women we speak of,

First, The reason why they think they edify by their new Ministry, is, either
because they meet with new and strange terms, uncouth phrases, and expressions
which they had not learned or heard of before; or else for want of skill, but
chiefly for want of will, care, and desire to compare the substance of the
matter which is delivered unto them in such new and strange Phrases and antique
kind of Language, with what they had learned before, they conceive that,
behold, now all things are become new; now we are enlightened, now we see and
understand things that never entered into our thoughts or minds before; whereas
the truth is, the matter that many times lies under these new and uncouth
Phrases and Expressions is but one and the self-same thing with that which they
did understand and know before: and they themselves might discover as much if
they did but weigh and compare the words and phrases, and what is imported in
them. As for instance, the plain Doctrine of Mortification and Self-denial; it
is very strange to hear how, and in what kind of habit they do adorn these
Doctrines which are plain, and wholesome, and sound. They put them into a new
kind of expression that was not seen nor heard of before, nor declared by those
Ministers who are sound and sincere in their teaching of the Gospel. It is in
this case only as if a man should meet an old friend of his with a new Suite on
his back of an antique and uncouth fashion, which he was never seen or known to
be in before, in such a case as this one would think him to be a new man, and
some stranger: So these men if they have but their old matter put into a new
garb of expression, they are pleased, and think they have heard excellent
Notions, and such things as they never did hear before.

The second Reason hereof seems to be this, because they received distaste
and dislike upon the account formerly mentioned; namely, that this Ministry is
not for their turn, it will not serve their lusts, and the ways wherein they
desire to walk. Now upon such an occasion as this is, beginning to conceive a
distaste, thenceforth they do gather from day to day, and from time to time,
all matters which have any color of dislike in them; and if they can put any
unworthy sense, and interpretation upon any Passage or Doctrine that is
delivered by such Teachers, all this is put to that account; namely, to
strengthen their own hands and hearts to forsake them, and to quit themselves
of them; as it is with a side of a house which begins to settle, all the weight
of the house comes that way: So if the credit or authority of a Ministry do
but begin a little to fall, in the minds of men, then all the weight of their
infirmities who manage it, or any thing in them that can be conceived to look
like weakness or miscarriage will be laid upon it: and so in a short time men
will work themselves to a perfect liberty, and thoughts will be made that this
is not a Ministry for them; and that their soul is not like to prosper under
it, and therefore they will seek where it may be better with them.

Again,

That (I verily believe) that they who thus pretend either know not, or
consider not what they speak herein; for I would gladly know of them what they
mean by a legal Ministry. Is not their sense and notion of a legal Ministry
this, viz. to be frequent and zealous in pressing men to keep the Law, to obey
the Will and Commands of God, and to threaten with wrath and the vengeance of
hell fire, the Children of disobedience, and those that shall walk after the
flesh, and to promise the love and favor of God to the exact observers of his
Law? But if such a Ministry as this be legal, what Ministry can be more legal
than that exercised by the Lord Christ himself, and his greatest Apostles, both
Peter and Paul, etc? What Minister did ever press holiness, or the duties
required of men in the Law more strictly, more zealously, with greater
authority and power than he? Whoever threatened Transgressors with greater
severity and dread than he in that most excellent discourse (a Sermon of his,
as it is called) upon the Mount? ( Mat. 5.) How does he all along command and
press the observation of the Law, and the things contained in it? The eight
Beatitudes (as they are commonly called) what are they but a pressing by
motives of weight certain duties contained in the Law? As blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth; blessed are the merciful, etc. Now all these
are express duties contained in the Law, and yet we see our Savior commends
them unto his Hearers by the great motives of blessedness which shall attend
those who shall perform them. And in ver. 17. and many passages of that
Chapter, we find that the Lord Christ is very full and high in calling upon men
for the duties of the Law; Think not that I am come to destroy the Law and the
Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill; meaning, in his own Person
first, and then to fulfill them likewise by his Doctrine, and by the charge
which he would leave with his Apostles, and by them derive to all his Ministers
and Agents to the worlds end. So in ver. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break
one of the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so to do, he shall
be accounted least in the Kingdom of Heaven. But toward the end and conclusion
of this Sermon, Chap. 7.21. see with what mighty authority and force does he
impose upon men the keeping of the Law, Not every one that says unto me Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the Will of my
Father which is in heaven; which holy and perfect will of God is comprehended
and laid down in the Law, ver. 22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord,
have we not Prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? etc. Yet
(says he ver. 23.) I will profess unto them I never knew them; depart from me
ye that work iniquity. So that from this, and many such like Passages it is
evident, that the Lord Jesus Christ was a great Exacter and Perswader, a
constant Urger and Presser of the Consciences of men unto holiness, and unto
the observation of the Law. And Chap. 16.27. he declares that he will reward
every man according to his works. And Chap. 23. he pronounces woe upon woe,
and heaps of woes against the Scribes and Pharisees for their misdemeanors,
and transgression of the Law in their Places and Calling. Yea, after his
Resurrection, being now ready to leave the World, and to ascend up into heaven,
when he delivered the sum and substance of the Gospel unto the Apostles, as
that which was to be the subject matter of their Preaching; one part of it was
Minatory, and answering the Curse of the Law; yea, it contains a sorer and
far more grievous curse than that which the Law denounces, He that believes
not (says he) shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. This damnation of the Gospel is a
thousand times more dreadful than the Curse or damnation of the Law, and this
in two respects:

First, It is irreversible when once it has seized upon a person, whereas the
Curse of the Law, when a man has incurred it, may be taken from him by the
grace of the Gospel. Every man that does not at present believe, is under the
Curse of the Law; but under the Curse of the Gospel he only is that dies in
his unbelief: For when it is said, But he that believes not shall be damned;
The meaning cannot be, that whosoever is not at present an actual believer
shall be damned, but he that dies in unbelief.

Again secondly, The Curse of the Gospel is much more grievous than the Curse
of the Law, in respect of the great weight or degree of misery which
accompanies it when it falls upon the Creature. The Curse of the Law where it
falls it will break in pieces: but the Curse of the Gospel will grind all to
powder. The Apostle implies such a difference as this, Heb. 2.3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? etc.

And as the Ministry of the Lord Christ was most purely and exemplarily
Evangelical, Paul also: How frequent and fervent is he in all his Epistles in
persuading, and pressing, and urging men unto every good way and work? Yea, how
district and terrible is he in his threatenings of the loss of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and Salvation it self? 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. (We see there how close he
binds the duties of the Law,) Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, etc, My Brethren, what Minister
(if you call that legal in a Minister) did ever urge and press the duties of
the Law upon higher terms than this Apostle did? If you make but observation
you shall find throughout all his Writings this was a frequent vein of his
Ministry, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, etc. So Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. But Fornication, and
all Uncleanness; etc. let it not be so much as once named amongst you; know you
not that no Whoremonger, nor Idolater, nor Adulterer, nor Unclean person shall
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? Let no man deceive you with vain words, making
you believe that you shall come off at last; Why? For, or because of these
things comes the wrath of God, i. e. comes in the Present Tense, as if it
were ready to fall on them the same hour and moment. And again the like place,
Phil. 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
even weeping, that they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ, etc. So that it is
evident, from these Passages out of this Apostle, that his Writings are full of
this Spirit; namely, to press the duties of the Law of God upon the Consciences
of men, to fill, if it were possible, their hearts, and so their lives, with
the observation of them. The Ministry of the Apostle Peter also was of the same
strain with the two former, strongly bent to fill the hearts and lives of men
with righteousness and true holiness, and this by threatening Judgments and
Wrath against the Disobedient, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. If Judgment begin at the House
of God; What shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? And if
the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? It
is a very terrible kind of expression, and represents the state of the
ungodly and wicked to be such as that no wit of man, no, nor all the Angels of
Heaven were capable of casting up all the horror or terror which will befall
them. And so again, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. For if God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness,
etc. and made them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly. If
God had only threatened these, namely, the Angels, and those wicked men, the
Inhabitants of the Old World, etc. but had never done execution according to
the tenor of his threatenings, men might have thought that he had only
threatened men to keep them in awe, and no more. But such examples as these,
show, that when God does threaten, he doubtless does it not in vain, only to
threaten; but will do execution according to his threatening, in case men
continue in their sinful ways. So that there is no ground to judge and
determine a Ministry to be legal because the bent and face of it is set, as it
were, to press men to the keeping of the Commands of God contained in the Moral
Law; nor because it threatens with the greatest severity, and with the
vengeance of hell fire, them that shall neglect any of his Commands; it may be
excellent and highly Evangelical notwithstanding. That which is pretended, that
it (namely, the Law) should not be pressed upon men, because they are not under
the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. and 8.2. is of no force. For the natural
conscience in men does dictate unto them, and urge upon them the performance of
those very duties which the Law of God does require; and therefore it is not
material to insist here upon this question, Whether Believers are bound to
observe the Moral Law, as it was delivered unto the Jews? for it is
unquestionable, that the things contained in this Law are binding upon them
otherwise (as the Apostle does distinguish very accurately and carefully in
that case, Romans 2.14, 15.) He does not say, that the Gentiles did subject
themselves to Moses Law, as it was delivered unto the Jews; but they did the
things contained in the Law: So if Believers be bound to do those duties in
every respect which the Law requires. This we may call a subjection to the Law.

Nor yet again is it any Character or property of a Legal Ministry (if we take
the word Legal in any disparaging sense) to promise the Love and Favor of God,
Life and Salvation, to those that shall be found the exactest observers of the
things required by God in the Law (in the Moral Law) especially if such
obedience proceed from that Faith which works by Love; for the Ministry both
of the Lord Christ (and so of the two Apostles mentioned) made many Promises
upon these terms ( viz. upon keeping of these Commandments.) All, or the
greatest part of the Beatitudes (as they are called) pronounced by our Savior
in the entrance upon his Sermon on the Mount ( Mat. 5. of which we lately
spoke) are but so many Promises made unto persons duly observant of things
commanded in the Law. As when he says, Blessed are the Meck, blessed are the
Merciful, blessed are the Peacemakers, etc. Now Meekness, Mercifulness, and
Peacemaking, etc. are holy dispositions with their proper fruits and actions
commanded in the Law. So again, Joh. 15.10. If ye keep my Commandments, ye
shall continue in my love; even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and
abide in his love. Now his Commandments are no other but the very self-same
things which are commanded in the Law of God. Joh. 14.21. He that has my
Commandments, i. e. that has them in his mind, in his life and conversation,
he it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and
I will love him, etc. So that still we see that the Promises are made unto the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 2.6, 7, 10. where the Apostle (speaking of God)
says, that he will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing ( i. e. by keeping the Commands of God) seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life: but to them that are
contentious, etc. indignation and wrath. By such Passages as these it does
evidently appear, that both the Ministry of the Lord Christ, and of the Apostle
Paul, was full of these Promises unto moral qualifications, or unto obedience
unto the Law. Thus then we see, that a Ministry is not to be termed Legal in
any reprovable sense, upon the account of any the three properties mentioned;
nor yet upon the account of them all, though concurring in one and the same
Ministry: as (indeed) they ought, yea, and must, if they will be faithful, and
are like to edify men in faith and holiness.

Very like it is, that the persons, now under censure, i. e. Remission of sins
by Works, i. e. by the merit of Works; for otherwise Faith is a Work, and so
called by our Savior himself, Joh. 6.29. But to Preach Justification by Faith
is not to Preach Legally, but most Evangelically: For that was the Master vein
of the Ministry of Paul, viz. to avouch and prove that Justification was to be
obtained by Faith in Jesus Christ; whereas they (the Jews) held, that it was to
be obtained by observing and keeping the Law. Now though to Preach
Justification by Faith alone (as was even now said) be not to Preach Legally,
but Evangelically; yet, to Preach it by Faith, sensu meritorio, as if Faith,
were the meritorious cause of Justification, is either to Preach Legally, or
upon an account every whit as bad, and as repugnant to the tenor of the Gospel.

Secondly, That Ministry may (in a sense) be termed Legal, which, like unto
Pharaoh's Taskmasters in their hard dealings by the Israelites, exacteth the
full Tale of Brick from men, yet gives them no straw whereof to make them; I
mean, which is continually (in a manner) pressing men unto duties, yea, the
hardest of duties, binding the heavy burdens of the Law upon the Consciences
of men with the Iron bands of sharp reproofs, and sore threatenings; seldom or
never ministering unto them the rich and high encouragements of the Gospel,
whereby both their hearts and hands might be strengthened, and all that which
is distasteful to the flesh, in such works and ways, be drowned and taken
away. They that require of men to do Angels work, (I mean, do high and
excellent services to God) should feed them with the food of Angels; they had
need have the highest encouragements, even such as are in the Gospel. They that
require of men to be as fruitful, and as zealous, in serving God and men, as
Paul was, who labored to promote the interest of God and men, more abundantly
than they all (as himself says) they must endeavor to lift them up higher, as
high as the third heaven: for there (doubtless) it was that Paul learned that
nobleness, greatness, and worthiness of spirit; there he learned to act after
another manner of Rate than all the men of the World besides, who never came
there as he had done. The way to draw out men's hearts and souls, and all that
is within them, in serving God and men, doing good to their Generation, is as
far as possible to raise in them the consolation of the Gospel, then shall you
bring the World under your feet; and when that shall be under your feet, then
shall you be able to lift up your hands to any of the Commands of God: But
until men are full of the hope of the life, and glory, and great things of the
World which is to come, every good work and way will stick with them, and
combat with their souls and spirits; whereas give men but felicity enough, and
then if their eyes will do you any service, they will pluck them out and give
them unto you. But this only by the way, to give a little light whereby to
estimate a legal Ministry, which is a Word or Phrase used by many, but rightly
understood by very few.

Thirdly, Such a Ministry may be termed Legal which sends men forth about
their spiritual business in their own strength, without informing them, and
that plainly, that without Jesus and his Spirit they can do nothing. For the
gift of the Spirit unto men, and so also the Doctrine of Prayer, upon which God
does convey his Spirit, is Evangelical. Received you the Spirit by the hearing
of the Law? etc. therefore they who teach men that they have no need of the
Spirit, or of the gracious assistance thereof; but that they may do things in
their own strength are, in a sense, Anti-Evangelical Teachers.

Fourthly (and lastly) That Ministry also may not unproperly be called Legal,
which binds over to Condemnation, where the Gospel does not; that concludes
or shuts men up under Sin and Wrath, where the Gospel does not; or that
shall make any stricter bands of Condemnation than the Gospel does, viz. They
who shall determine the state of those men, who hold that Christ died for all
men, that these cannot be in a state of Grace (though this be a most plain and
direct Doctrine of the Scripture) and so they that teach and threaten men and
women that they shall never receive Remission of sins, and consequently shall
not be saved, unless they be twice baptized: now herein they bind men over unto
death upon such terms that the Gospel does not allow of; therefore such a
Ministry which teaches such things as these, is a legal Ministry.

Again, lowness and ordinariness of matter, or of teaching, in the Ministry
which they have a mind to quit, as one Reason of their withdrawing from it. It
is more than to be feared, that they know not what the deficiency in a
Ministry, which they call lowness, means, this being a more palpable pretense
than either of the other. For by lowness, I suppose, they mean, the pressing
and teaching of common, and ordinary, and known duties; as of Love, Mercy,
Patience, Faith, Temperance, etc. whereas the truth is, that the teaching and
pressing of these duties, upon such terms as they may and ought to be taught,
and pressed upon the Consciences of men, argues an excellency of power and of
faithfulness in a Ministry, yea, is the glory of it. For wherein can it
reasonably be conceived that the worth and glory of a Ministry should consist,
but in repairing the decayed Image of God in men, and in preparing and making
men meet for a heavenly Kingdom? Now wherein does the Image of God we speak of
in men stand, but in the accomplishing and perfecting the Creature for all
actions and services relating unto it, and proper for it to perform? As God is
most absolutely and every way accomplished, and that upon the highest terms of
perfection for the acting of all things which are proper for him to do. So
likewise, to put men into a rich and divine-like capacity this way; that is, to
furnish them with all principles, and dispositions, and knowledge of all things
fit for them to do; so that nothing may lie between them and the performance of
their duty but their own will; this is to raise up the Image of God in men. Or
if you place this Image of God in men in righteousness and true holiness it
comes but to the same; for that is a right Ministry indeed which has force to
raise men up unto these, especially, in such measures and degrees as they ought
to be found in men, and can qualify men fully for their duty and service, as
the performance of these do for their reward and glory. Therefore that Ministry
which preaches and presses the duties of Faith, Love, Mercy, Humility, etc.
upon men, so as really to enrich and fill the hearts and souls of men and women
with them is no low Ministry, but a Ministry of power and great glory. And thus
we have done with the second sort of Offenders against the Doctrine delivered
under the second Head The folly of their Delinquency was, that they turned
their backs upon wholesome and sound teaching; such wherein the Spirit of God
delights to go forth, and sat down under such teachings which do little more
than beat the Air, and which the Spirit of God knows not.

There is yet a third sort of Offenders against the Apostles Exhortation,

For the former: Are not the generality, or far greater part of men and women,
altogether neglective of all that is acted or done by the Spirit of God within
them? Yea, Are there not many that are ignorant whether there be any Holy
Ghost, any Spirit of God within them, yea, or no? Yea, many that have some
belief (it may be) that the Spirit, we now speak of, may be in them, who yet
are ignorant, and know not whether he does any thing in one kind or other
within them; whether he moves, enclineth, leads, or persuades one way or
other in them or no? If you ask me, But can the Spirit move or incline any
person, and yet this person not be moved or inclined by him? Or if they be
moved or inclined by him, can they be ignorant of it, must they not needs know
it? I reply:

First, To the former of these questions, That a Person may be said to be moved
or inclined two ways, or in a twofold sense: First, He may be said to be moved
or inclined when that is done unto him which is apt, and proper, and sufficient
to cause him to be moved and inclined, whether he be actually moved or inclined
or no.

Secondly, He may be said, and that in the more obvious sense of the two, to be
moved, when that force which is put to him, to move and incline him, prospers
to that end for which it is employed; that is, when the person moved, does as
it were fall before the enclination, and does yield unto that which he is
stirred, and moved, and inclined unto. In the former sense a man or woman may
be said to be moved, persuaded, or led by the Spirit, this way or that, unto
this course or that, and yet not be brought or prevailed with to walk in those
ways. Thus the goodness of God is said to lead men unto Repentance, Romans 2.4.
who yet are not prevailed with to repent. So when the Scriptures (speaking of
the Jews) says, That they resisted the Holy Ghost, it is plainly implied:

First, That they were (in a sense, which must needs be the sense we now speak
of) led by the Spirit of God [ i. e. were persuaded, moved, and inclined by
him] unto ways and practices that were holy and good; for otherwise how could
they be said to have resisted him? Resistance cannot be but only where there is
some attempt or assault made; therefore certainly when they did resist the Holy
Ghost, the Holy Ghost did attempt upon their hearts and consciences to persuade
them unto that which was right and pleasing in the sight of God. Again,

Secondly, It implies, that they were not persuaded [I mean, with success, or
so as to be prevailed with] to walk in those good ways whereunto the Holy
Ghost did incline them. In a like sense (2 Timothy 3.8.) some men are said to
resist the Truth. When Truth is preached and declared unto men, especially,
when with power, and authority, and with strength of conviction it does assault
or attempt their Judgments and Consciences, to subdue and subject them unto it
self; and men on the other hand strengthen themselves by pretenses, or fleshly
considerations, not to submit to it, not to acknowledge it, then are they
properly said to resist it. In a like Phrase or construction of Speech Israel
is said to have been purged, Ezekiel. 24.13. In thy filthiness is lewdness,
because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, therefore, etc. Thus then
you see how, and in what sense a person may be said to be led by the Spirit of
God, and yet not to be led by him: Even as God may be said to work in men both
to will and to do, and yet men neither will nor-do, as is clearly supposed,
Phil. 2.12, 13. upon a like account also, Moses [or rather God himself]
supposes that he [ i. e. God] sanctified men, yet men were not sanctified,
Lev. 20.7, 8. This for reply to the first demand propounded.

To the second I reply, That men may be led, moved, or inclined by the Holy
Ghost in both senses now explained, but especially in the former, and yet be
ignorant of it; I mean, by whom they are led, moved, or inclined. In the former
sense of the Phrase being led, a man or woman may be ignorant when they are led
by the Holy Ghost upon this account, viz. because they do not know, are not
acquainted with the movings or leadings of the Spirit of God; they understand
not whence such leadings or motions unto good, which at any time are stirring
in them, come: As Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.5, ^. when young, did not know the voice of
God when he spoke unto him, but thought it had been Eli: Now this ignorance, in
men and women is generally occasioned by a slothful, careless, and profane
disposition, wherewith they commonly suffer their hearts to be overgrown,
until in a manner they become insensible of it. Men do not remember their
Creator in the days of their youth (as Solomon advizeth them to do, Eccl.
12.1.) they do not enquire or seek after God (as the Scripture speaks:) They
do not care to acquaint themselves with him (as Eliphas, Job 22.21.) and so by
degrees there grows a greater and greater distance between God and them, until
they have quite forgotten him, and lost all those blessed impressions of his
Nature and Attributes which were implanted in them: And when things are at this
pass, the Holy Ghost may stir and move within them, unto ways and works that
are good and worthy, from day to day, and yet they remain ignorant from whence
such motions come, or whither they go. They (it is like) conceive they come
there by accident or chance, as Birds come flying through the air by them; or
that they spring out of their fancies and imaginations, as waters bubble and
spring out of the earth; but that the blessed Spirit of God should be their
Author or Parent is not to be found amongst all their thoughts. Besides, to
many of those leadings and movings of the Spirit of God within them, and these
of the greatest weight and moment; it is like that the greatest part of people
know not, apprehend not, that they are so much as good, or Worthy of God: How
then should they believe them to be from the Spirit of God? As when men find or
feel any impulses or beatings upon their hearts or spirits to turn Puritans (as
the Phrase was formerly) or to join themselves in the Companies and Societies
of men and women fearing God; to refrain from their former vain companies or
ways; they construe such motions as these, as temptations or insinuations of
Satan, and not the motions and insinuations of the Spirit of God.

In the latter sense of the Phrase, being led, viz. when men and women actually
go, as, and whither they are led, they may be ignorant when they are led by the
Spirit of God, viz. when they do things that are worthy and good, and yet act
with some regret or hesitancy of mind, whether these things they do be good or
no. Or (possibly) they may suppose the inward motions, by which they were led
unto such actions or ways as we now speak of, were but the workings of their
Consciences, the Dictates and Suggestions of their natural Consciences. But we
have no occasion to speak any further of this at present; that which we have
now to do, is, in the name of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ to expostulate
the case with such persons (in order to their own eternal peace and safety) who
instead of laying out themselves upon such terms as that they may be filled
with the Spirit of God, run counter (as it were) to such a course; and by
neglecting to be led by the Spirit of God take a course to be deserted by him,
and so empty themselves of him.

Now to open a little further the sinfulness and danger of such a course, led,
or neglecting to be led by the Spirit; it is to be considered, that men and
women may incur the guilt, and so the danger of not being led by the Spirit,
two ways, or by two degrees:

First, When they are not inwardly attentive to the Spirit that does speak
within them; I do not mean now, when they are not attentive to what the Spirit
does speak within them: But when they are not attentive to hear, or to hearken
whether the Spirit will speak, or has any thing to speak or say in secret unto
them or no. As a man many times, and in many cases, listens and hearkens, not
only unto those who he knows actually speak, but to understand whether there be
any speech or voice stirring or no; especially, they are wont to lie very close
in their attentions when they have reason to think that they, whose speech or
words they are desirous to hear (in case they do speak) will speak but softly,
and with a low voice: In such a case as this men are very careful to make no
noise themselves, nor to suffer any to be made about them, if they can help it;
the reason hereof is plain, because any noise hinders and drowns a soft voice
that it cannot be understood: The Town Clerk of Ephesus could not be heard for
a long season because of the uproar amongst the People.

Nor will a man of ordinary discretion, especially being of a weak voice
(though he has never so great a desire to speak) attempt to speak whilst
there is a noise round about him. This is the case in the great business before
us.

First, The voice of the Spirit of God in men, by which he guides them, is but
very soft and low [at least ordinarily;] it is uttered by the Mouth of the
Conscience, which is not wont to be wide opened, unless it be in some broader
or more known duties of the Second Table: what the reason hereof is, is not so
proper for present consideration.

Secondly, The Cares, Lusts, Thoughts, Desires, Fears, and Apprehensions of
things, relating to this present World, make a continual noise and hubbub in
the hearts and inward parts of men and women generally: So that in case any
thing were spoken to the heart, or inner man, especially with a soft voice,
whilst these things are stirring in him, it will not be heard or minded. And
therefore

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost, being a Spirit of Wisdom, will not speak (at least
ordinarily) unto hearts so full of distractions and confusions.

Neither fourthly, Do men, that voluntarily make noise, or suffer noises to be
made about them, desire to hear any man speak unto them.

Therefore fifthly (and lastly) It follows from these Premises, that such
persons who are earthly minded, and continually filled with the Cares, Lusts,
or Desires of this World, are either in no capacity at all to hear, or not at
all care to hear any thing that the Spirit shall speak unto them. Men that
desire to hear the Spirit of God speaking in them, must sequester and abstract
themselves from the noise and tumults of this World: For the voice of the
Spirit of God in men, that voice by which he suggests things in the Conscience,
is a still and low voice; and therefore when men are in a hurry in their
thoughts, whilst the World is lifting up its voice within them, there is no
opportunity for him to speak. When persons are full of the Cares of this Life,
and are making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, there is
no opportunity for the Spirit to declare himself to them, or to show them his
secrets. I will hearken what the Lord will speak, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
85.8. They that will listen to this still voice of the Spirit must muse, must
have all quiet within them, lay their ears close unto what shall be spoken.
They that do not thus hearken unto the Spirit of God, that do not thus listen,
and keep a perfect calm in their Spirits, are not likely to hear what the
Spirit speaks in them.

And yet in the fourth place there are another sort of men and women worse than
these; and these are they that resist the Spirit; Ye have resisted the Holy
Ghost, etc. Acts 7. where Stephen charge them with that grievous charge, that
they resisted the Holy Ghost when he was striving to do them good, and to
acquaint them with the mind of God, with true holiness, and ways leading to
Salvation. They resisted him, i. e. fortified themselves against him, cast
about with their Minds, and Reasons, and Understandings how they might
discover, and take hold of any pretense, why they should not submit unto such
and such Counsels, such Doctrines, such Truths wherein the Holy Ghost did from
time to time speak unto them. By this means men are said to resist the Holy
Ghost; and there is a Generation of men and women amongst us who dash their
foot at this stone of death; who when the Spirit of God, either in the Word, or
in the Counsel or Application of Christian Friends unto them, or otherwise
presents them with such and such truths of God which bear upon their
Consciences, making it evident that it is for their good that they should
submit themselves in the course of their lives and ways unto them; and
persuading them to abandon such and such ways, to cast from them all such
works which are contrary to those truths and sayings of God: They (I say) who
are well aware of these motions and suggestions of the Spirit to them, and yet
turn their backs upon them, are of this second or worser sort, who because they
are desperately unwilling to be led out of their old ways (loath to drink New
Wine, saying the Old is better) therefore they withstand the Spirit of God;
even when he comes with power, and is about to bind the Understandings of men
that they might not be able to move. Now, he is not to be resisted, in such
cases, but with a high hand of rebellion, and there must be abundance of enmity
and disobedience against him; otherwise men would be led away in a blessed
captivity unto Jesus Christ. This is the reason why men, whom God has had much
to do with, who have lived under a mighty and powerful Ministry, either they
are overcome, and prove the best and holiest of men; or otherwise they must arm
themselves with such weapons of Rebellion which will prove them to be the most
vile, and most desperate sinners in the World.

A fifth (and last) sort of Offenders are such who neglect to sow unto the
Spirit; Gal. 6.8. He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. We have opened heretofore what it is to sow to the Spirit: It is
to do such things, to go forth in such ways, and to be found frequent in such
Actions and Practices which will turn to the praise, and honor, and glory of
the Spirit of God; and not only so, but to do such things with an eye and
intention that the Spirit of God should receive honor, and reap praise by such
their ways. Now he properly sows unto a man, who does intend that the man,
to whom he sows, should reap benefit thereby: Even so a person is said to sow
unto the Spirit of God, who frequently is engaged in such ways and actions
which he knows must of necessity turn unto the honor and praise of the Spirit
of God. Now, if men and women shall rise up in their obedience unto God above
the line and common road of the World; if they shall walk in a more excellent
way than their Neighbors, more excellent than the common sort of Professors
about them: This must needs turn to the praise of the Spirit of God; for the
means by which they are advanced, and gotten above their Neighbors, and become
more excellent than they, this of course falls, and is ascribed by all to the
honor and praise of the Spirit of God: Men will conclude that surely the
Spirit of God acts and operateth in these men, and teaches them more
excellent works, and more heavenly curiosity than is found in the ordinary sort
of men in the World. Therefore they who refuse thus to sow unto the Spirit,
when the Spirit first sows unto them; that is, when the Spirit suggesteth
unto them, and graciously stirs up, and tempts their hearts and
Consciences to do such Heroic Acts, wherein there is a more than ordinary
strain of goodness to be seen, they do not consult the honor of the Spirit of
God, nor their own peace and enriching, but on the contrary their own sorrow
and poverty.

They (I say) that shall refuse thus to sow to the Spirit, when they shall find
their hearts carried out from time to time, to do some excellent thing to go
beyond the line of ordinary men; If any in this case shall say, there is no
need of such ways, that we should strain so high, or go so far to be Wiser, or
more Righteous, or fuller of Faith or good Works than other men are; and shall
put off the Spirit of God with such kind of Answers and Replies as these, and
shall refuse to sow unto him, this must needs likewise tend to the grieving of
the Spirit of God within them; and consequently they are not like afterward to
find those suggestions and impulses in their hearts and consciences as formerly
they were wont to have. So much for this Use, being a Use of Reproof.

CHAP. XVI. The fourth (and last) Use of the Doctrine being an Exhortation to
use all means we are capable of in order to a being filled with the Spirit of
God. Three Motives propounded: The first, More generally taken from the nature
of the Commandments of God. That this Duty is one of the holy and righteous
Retinue of Duties enjoined us by God. Neglect of his Commands provokes him to
Jealousy. The second Motive. This being known to be a Duty enjoined by God,
neglected, hinders the Soul from prospering in the things of its own peace. The
vast difference and great danger of an habitual Omission of known Duties in
comparison of Duties a man is ignorant of. A third Motive. This is a Duty
enjoined by the Lord Christ, who speaks now from Heaven. The difference between
God's speaking on the Earth, and now speaking from Heaven. Neglect of
Evangelical Duties much more provoking than the neglect under the Law. Heb.
12.25. in part opened. A being filled with the Spirit purely Evangelical.
THe Fourth (and last) Use is of Exhortation; and near relation to the
Exhortation and Duty now commended unto you, that are full of spirit and life
to quicken and stir you up to the performance of it.

First (in the general) you shall do well to consider, that the Duty whereunto
you have been exhorted, is one of that holy and righteous Retinue of Duties
commanded unto us, and enjoined upon us by God; and so the Exhortation by which
it is enjoined is one of the Counsels and Precepts of God, of the most High
God; it is no foreiner or stranger amongst them, it is none of the Tares which
the Enemy has introduced amongst the Counsels of God. The complexion of it
shows it to be a Precept of that heavenly Parentage and Race, the goodness and
loveliness of it shows it to be from none other but God alone. It is too
spiritual and holy, and too full of beauty to be of humane extraction, much
less of a Diabolical: Therefore as Christ said unto his Disciples, in another
case, I say unto you, my friends, fear not, etc. Even so may God say unto you,
I say unto you, my Friends, be filled with my Spirit. Though the residue of the
World round about you will not stir, their hearts and consciences will not
budge at this Exhortation; they know not the worth of it: Yet you, oh my
Friends, you that love me, you that are in a more peculiar manner beloved by
me, be ye filled with my Spirit.

My Brethren, this being one of the Royal Commands of God, It is a fearful
thing (as the Apostle is our Remembrancer, Heb. 10.31.) to fall into the hands
of the living God, i. e. to come under his revenging hand (as is to be gathered
from the former Verse.) Now, What is it that causes men to fall into the
avenging hand of God but the despising his Counsels, and neglecting the Words
of his Mouth without being reclaimed? Our simple not obeying the Commands of
God is not so much as our neglecting or despising his Commands: As on the other
hand, our simple keeping or obeying them as our reverence and respects showed
unto them. A man, though he may receive many indignities from his Child, or
others; yet if he do not apprehend that there is any neglect or contempt in the
person, who offers these indignities, he can bear it much the better: But if
he apprehend that it proceeds from neglect and contempt, this is highly
provoking. This is the case, my Brethren, for men and women to trespass upon
the Commandments of God at unawares, there being otherwise a reverential esteem
of these Commandments in the Soul, is not so provoking in the sight of God; But
it is the despising or neglecting the Commandments of God. And therefore the
Prophet Nathan, coming by Commission, immediately from God (2 Samuel 12.9, 10.)
did not charge the sin, which David had committed, so much upon the Acts of
Murder and Adultery, as upon his despising the Commandment of God. Wherefore
have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? David
did not maintain that high and reverend esteem in his heart and soul of these
Commands of God which he had violated. So in Isa. 5.24. Therefore as the fire
devoureth the Stubble, and the flame consumes the Chaff: So shall their Root
be rottenness, etc. Because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts,
and despised the Word of the Holy One of Israel. See also Psalm. 119.60. And the
Philosopher, in his definition of anger, makes it the offspring of neglect or
contempt, implying, that it is never conceived, or kindled in any man's breast,
by any other coal but that of contempt, at least so apprehended. My Brethren,
God is a God of great patience; he bears much from the Sons and Daughters of
men, and can pass by a thousand infirmities; He can bear with his Sons and
Daughters under mighty Provocations: But if men shall go on, from day to day,
in their neglect and contempt of him and his Counsels, and will not repent when
he gives them space, and admonishes them accordingly; if yet they will walk
on in the stubbornness of their hearts, then he will make his Jealousy to
smoke against them: and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. We heard but now what it is that causes a man to fall into the
hands of the Living God; and that not merely the committing of sin, but the
despising of the Commands of God, the undervaluing of them, and casting them
behind their backs; This is that which causes the breach between men and that
God whose name is Jealous. And therefore if the words of this Counsel and
blessed Advice shall be flighted by us, and looked upon as a common word, and
not be entertained as the Word of the Living God; this must needs provoke the
Spirit of God, and cause the Great God of Heaven and Earth to break forth, as a
Lion out of a Thicket, upon those who have neglected and despised this Word of
his. Indeed many men make but, as it were, a pastime (as Solomon's Expression
is) Fools make a pastime of sin: So many make it but a matter of course to pass
by, and to give the Counsels of God a hearing; they enter in at one ear, and
(there being none to entertain them, and keep them by the way) out they go at
the other. But now, my Brethren, though the Counsels and Precepts of God make
so little ado in the World, make no noise there: Like unto Jesus Christ, who
in the days of his flesh made no clamor, nor lifted up his voice in the
Streets; but when he shall come from heaven the Second time, then he will roar
like a Lion, and turn the World upside down, with such a turn as it was never
turned before: Even so will this Word, and this Counsel, and Exhortation, and
other the Commands of God; though now they do not cry, nor lift up their voice,
make no noise in the World; but Silver, and Gold, and Pleasures, and Honors,
these are they that engage the World, and cause tumults in the minds and
thoughts of men; these are they that set the World together by the ears,
whilst the Words and Counsels of God come not near the hearts of men, and have
little to do there: Yet these Words are they that will judge the World at last,
and find out the despisers of them, and will place them at the left hand of
Jesus Christ, to whom it shall be said. Depart from me ye cursed, I know you
not. My Brethren, we know not how soon that day will come upon us; the
Fig Trees and other Trees begin to put forth, and we cannot but think the
Summer is near at hand: But suppose we should despise this, and other the
Precepts of God, and set them at naught, it may be we may see some days of
pleasure, and ease, and contentment in the World; yet alas! What will it profit
a man (says our Savior, who was the best Estimator concerning matters of
profit) to gain the whole World and lose his Soul? Much less will it profit a
man to enjoy a few days of ease and contentment, under the neglect and
contempt of the Word of God, if at last he must lose his Soul, or incur thereby
Eternal Condemnation. Yea, if it should be but the quenching the Spirit of our
present joy, if it should rise no higher than so; this is such a loss, as that
they who understand the true worth and value of it will think and conclude it
to be a thousand times better rather to honor, and to reverence, and highly to
esteem all the Words, Counsels, and Exhortations of God, beginning at the
first, and so carrying them on unto the last, and taking this along with them
in their way, Be ye filled with the Spirit, than to lose the present comfort of
it by turning their backs upon this, or any other of the Commands of God. And
therefore,

Secondly, To strengthen your heart, and your hand, Peter calls unspeakable
and glorious, if you shall from henceforth neglect it, or cast it behind your
backs. For look, as a crack, or leake in a Vessel, will not suffer it to fill
with water, or other liquor (at least) not remain full for any time, though
much water be from time to time put into it: In like manner, though we should
be great doers in our own eyes, and though others may seem but as Grasshoppers
in comparison of us; yet nevertheless that peace, and that joy, and that inward
comfort that you should have if there were no neglect of any the Commands of
God will suffer loss. If this be the case, if any Command of God be despised or
neglected; this will be as a dead Fly in your Box of Ointment, and keep it from
making that sweet smell and savor, and from coming up into your Nostrils; you
will (in effect) lose the present luster and beauty, if not the future reward,
of all these choice services, if you do otherwise. Now, I say, who would run
the hazard of the loss of the great benefits and blessings of such great works
through the neglect or nonperformance of one? Who would lose all the joy,
peace, and comfore of many other services, and of much obedience, otherwise
exhibited unto God, and unto Jesus Christ, only to please the flesh, in the
neglect of one Commandment? As it is with the natural health of the body;
though a man should use many means for his health and strength, yet if he
should neglect one thing that is necessary for him to do; as suppose a man
should eat and drink such things only as would keep the body in good habit, yet
if he should never sleep; or if any other things as necessary as these be not
used in their places and seasons, health and good habit and state of body will
never be any man's portion: So in this case a man shall never find his soul in a
comfortable habit, he shall never be possessed with a spirit of joy, and of a
sound mind, but will be ever and anon apt to take hold of fears, and he will
always be obnoxious unto temptations, unless he do run in his obedience round
about the Commandments of God, so far as they are made known unto him. It is
true, it is not a step awry, now and then, besides a Commandment of God, no,
nor an habitual, or continual omission of an unknown Duty or Precept, that will
thus endamage the Soul; If men and women be truly conscientious, and habitually
careful to put in practice all they know of the good, and holy, and perfect
will of God concerning them, their faces may shine, and their hearts be lifted
up to Heaven: My meaning is, the rest and peace of their souls may be glorious,
and their inward man may be exalted highly; yea, though through the infirmities
of the flesh they should sometimes be prevented with some irregular and
unworthy actions; supposing that what they scatter thorough the infirmities of
the flesh, they gather up again by the strength of the Spirit, and repent
toties quoties. As though a man let pieces of money drop out of his hand, yet
if he presently stoop and take them up again, he suffers no great loss: Even
so, though a man, as often as he miscarries, drops a proportion or quantity of
his peace, yet if he stoop and gather up by Repentance that which he lets fall,
his soul may still prosper. But this is that which we say, that if a man shall
ordinarily or constantly neglect any of the holy Counsels or Precepts of God,
which have been discovered, and made known unto him for such; such a person
will never thrive in his inner man, his Consolations in the Gospel will never
be rich, or strong; no, though he should do many things otherwise very
commendable and good, yea, and be zealous for God; that disrespect which he
shows to that one Commandment of God, whatever it be, will be like a Moth
fretting his Garment; Or like a dead Fly in his Ointment, that will drown the
sweet savor which otherwise it would breath forth. For though God can bear
with the frailties and weaknesses of men, and can endure them with much long
suffering and patience under greater provocations than weaknesses and
infirmities; yet he will not, he cannot bear the coals of disrespects and
neglects from men; neither will he countenance from Heaven man or woman under a
contempt of his words, upon the account of any other service or obedience
whatsoever. We know the Charge was very strict under the Law, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye
shall not add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, etc. So
Chap. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you observe to do it, etc. You know, David
that man of God, who had that large Testimony from Heaven, that he was a man
after Gods own heart; yet he durst not (it seems) promise himself any
security from the Judgments or displeasure of God, upon any other terms but
upon the condition of his conscientious respects to all the Commandments of
God, as well one as another, Psalm. 119.6. So shall I not be ashamed when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments. And our Savior ( Joh. 5.14.) makes this
the touchstone of the Love and Friendship of his Disciples unto him, viz.
Zealously to do whatsoever they were commanded; Ye are my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you. You may understand the word Friend either Actively,
or Passively, thus; you shall deserve the name of Friends to God and Jesus
Christ (he speaks in the Evangelical Dialect) when you shall do (or to the
utmost of your power endeavor to do) or when your hearts stand clearly and
singly bent to do whatsoever I command you; though many times you may be
interrupted in the way of your doing, yet shall not this hinder your
acceptance with God, but you shall be dealt withal by him as if you had
actually done the thing whatever it be. Or otherwise Passive, If you do
whatsoever I command you, you shall be dealt withal as Friends, I will entreat
you, as he that is the greatest lover of his Friends does; I will bountifully
reward you, and gratify you over and over; I will make the World to know and
see that I indeed do love you. My Brethren, there is this reason why a neglect
or disrespect of any of the Words or Precepts of God (being made known unto a
man for such) should quench the spirit of the joy of all a man's services or
obedience besides, viz. Because he that despises one, constructively despises
all; as James reasons, Jam. 2.10.11. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all; and thus he proves what he
had said, For he that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill,
etc. As he that breaks a Staff but in one part, yet is said to break the
whole Staff: Even so, this Law of God, though it consists in many Parcels,
Branches, and Commands, yet is it one entire and perfect Rule of life, and of
the ways of men. Now he that breaks this Rule in any one part, he is guilty of
all, i. e. he is in effect guilty of all; or it is one and the same unto him as
if he had broken and transgressed them all; for he speaks chiefly of matters
of Punishment and Curses in the Law. Cursed is he that continues not in all
things that are written in the Law to do them. If a man should continue in
nothing at all that the Law requires, he should but be accursed; and if he did
not continue in all, cursed is he too upon that account. I say then, if men do
neglect, or pass by, or slight any one of the Counsels of God, it is
interpretatively the despising of them all. When men shall make Elect and
Reprobates amongst the Commandments of God, some they will keep with all their
hearts, but others they will trample under their feet; this shows, that the
ground of that obedience which they do exhibit, and perform unto some, is not
because they are the Commands of God, but something else; For if it were out of
a pure, true, and real respect to God, and reverence that they have unto him
that is the Lawgiver, they would respect one Law as well as another, and every
Law as his fellow, and would make no difference between them. Now then, Let
this be considered also which has been propounded in the second place to bind
the Exhortation fast and closs unto your Consciences, it being one of the
Precepts of God, and now made known unto you that you ought to be filled with
the Spirit of God: If you shall cast this behind your backs, or trample it
under your feet, your keeping the rest of the Commands of God, will turn but to
a slender account unto you. Will you lose all your other services for God? Have
you suffered so many things for God in vain? Gal. 3.4. What, have you done so
many things in vain as to your peace? Have you served God in a first and second
Command, and will you lose so great a recompense of reward, that fullness of
peace, and height of rejoicing in the Lord Jesus Christ? 2 John 8. Look to your
selves that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive
a full reward. You know, the young man that had kept so many of the Commands of
God, Mar. 10.21, 22. that there was only one thing wanting; How sad was it with
him upon our Saviors discourse? For it does appear that his state and
condition Godward was very deplorable, notwithstanding he had been so exact and
observant of the Commands of God. So that if you desire your hearts and souls
should be, like Jordan, overflowing their banks, if you desire they should be
readily prepared to carry you up to Heaven in joy and gladness, then you must
be careful to number this amongst the Precepts of God; you must see to it that
you endeavor to be filled with the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, Exhortation, brought by Jesus Christ from heaven, and in this respect
ought to be more highly reverenced than if it had been delivered over unto you
upon other terms. For this is to be considered, that what is delivered unto the
World in the New Testament, by the mouth of Jesus Christ himself, or upon the
account of his coming from Heaven unto the World (as all that which the Holy
Ghost has further revealed by the Apostles is) is more obliging and binding
upon the Consciences of men, and more severely punishable by God, when
neglected or despised, than things delivered in the Old Testament, or before
Christ's coming into the World were, or are. This (I conceive) is evident from
that of the Apostle, Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks: For
if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall we not
escape if we refuse him that speaks from heaven. To open this passage a
little, and so to give somewhat the more efficacy and weight to the Motive in
hand.

First, It is to be considered, that the opposition here made, between him that
spoke on Earth, and him that now speaks from Heaven, does not imply a
plurality of Speakers, or persons speaking; but only a difference between the
manner and terms of speaking at several times, by one and the same Speaker,
viz. God, or rather Christ; for it was he that spoke both on earth by Moses,
and that now speaks from Heaven. It is not unusual, in Emphatical Discourses,
to speak of one and the same person in different considerations as of two; as
the Woman that came to make a suit to King Philip, He being drowsy, and giving
her an unpleasing answer, she told him, She appealed from King Philip, when he
was sleepy, to King Philip when waking and more attentive: Now, there were not
two King Philips, but one, only as two in different considerations. We might
bring several instances, wherein one and the same person is represented under
two different considerations.

Secondly, When God, or Christ, spoke by Moses, he is said to have spoken on
Earth, not because Moses was on Earth when Christ spoke by him, but because he
spoke by a man who was from the Earth, or earthly (as it is said the first man
Adam was) for otherwise the Lord Christ himself spoke on the Earth [being on
the Earth] as well as Moses, and so the opposition would fall: But Christ, who
now speaks in the New Testament, is said to be from Heaven [or, which is the
same to speak from heaven, though the word speak is not in the Original, but
inserted by the Translators as the different Character implies:] but Christ (I
say) is said to be from Heaven, because he was of a miraculous, of an heavenly
Parentage and propagation, being conceived by the overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost, in the Womb of a Virgin, and not after the manner of men; according to
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.47. The second man is the Lord from Heaven;
meaning, of an heavenly Parentage, or royal Descent (as has been said) wherein
he had no Brother amongst all the Children of men.

Thirdly, It is to be considered, that whatsoever is dispensed unto the World,
and contained within the compass of the New Testament, as well in the Writings
of the Apostles as of the Evangelists, is to be looked upon as the Dispensation
of him who is from Heaven, as that which Christ himself speaks unto the
World. And for this reason he is said to be the Mediator of the New Testament,
Heb. 9.15. And elsewhere, The Surety of a better Testament, Cha. 7.22. The word
(...), in both these places (and elsewhere) translated Testament, signifies as
well a Covenant, and is so translated, Gal. 3.17. Acts 3.25. and in many places
besides; and properly enough in the ordinary Grammatical sense of it, it
signifies (in the general and indefinitely) any ordering or disposing of
things; so that when Christ is said to be the Mediator of the New Testament, or
of a New Covenant, the meaning is, that he is the Dispenser, or Promulgator, or
Minister of God unto the World of a new spiritual Economy of another spiritual
Charter, Settlement, or Establishment of matters relating unto the eternal
peace and blessedness of the World, differing from that which God had formerly
settled for a time by Moses. This new Economy Covenant or disposition of
things by the Lord Christ is called a better Covenant or Testament.

First, Because it is settled upon better Promises, wherein God does bring
forth more of the blessed fruits of his Grace and rich Bounty unto the World;
here life and immortality are brought to light; they are unvailed, and a
glorious representation made of them, that the World may look upon and see them
face to face.

Then secondly, It is called a better Covenant, because here is a better
discovery of the mind of God, concerning his Ordinances, which are of a more
excellent and spiritual nature, and of higher acceptance with him: here are
many things to be found which were not to be found under the Law. And Christ
(in one of the places mentioned) is said to be the Surety of this New Covenant,
i. e. One that is the great Avoucher, or Assertor of it; One who undertakes
with Power and Authority to secure the World of the truth and of the certainty
of this Covenant, and that it is from God. Now whatsoever is comprehended
within the virge and limits of that part of the Scriptures, which is commenly
called and known by the name of the New Testament, appertains to the New
Covenant which Christ has brought with him into the World, and has published,
settled, and established here. In which respect he may truly and properly be
said to be the disposer, and dispenser of the whole, and every part and parcel
of it. And as he is said to have spoken by the Prophets; so much more may he be
said now to have spoken by his Apostles; For whatsoever was spoken by the
Apostles was upon the account of Christ, the Spirit by which they spoke, was
purchased by Jesus Christ; so that the whole and entire Systeme and body of
Principles in the New Testament may all be ascribed to Jesus Christ, as if he
spoke all and every part thereof with his own mouth.

Fourthly (and lastly) Evident is is from the opposition and comparison which
the Apostle here makes between him that spoke on Earth (in the sense mentioned)
and him that speaks from Heaven; i. e. the known and customary neglect of any
Precept in the Gospel is of a far more provoking nature and import, and far
more punishable than the Disobedience of the former Law. Justice did not then
require any such severe execution upon Transgressors as now it does. Upon this
account God, respecting the times of the Gospel, threatens ( Mal. 3.5.) that
he would be a swift Witness; where it is evident that the Prophet speaks of the
days of Christ. Who (says he, ver. 2) may abide the day of his coming? And
ver. 3. He shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify
the Sons of Levy. Ver. 4. Then shall the Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord. Implying, that Christ in the days of the Gospel will
call men unto, and put them upon another manner of strain of holiness, and
righteousness, and heavenly mindedness than ever they had been put upon before.
Behold (says he) I will come near unto you in Judgment, and I will be a swift
Witness against the Sorcerers, etc. and fear ye not me says the Lord of Hosts?
He would draw nigh unto them in Judgment then, whereas he was at a great
distance from them in that respect under the Law. Forty years long (says he)
was I grieved with this Generation: But God will not now be grieved long with
any stubborn Generation of Delinquents under the Gospel, though it may be he do
not appear as a swift Judge in respect of Temporal Judgments; yet he will some
way or other be a swift Witness against them, he will declare and make manifest
from Heaven, after a competent time and reasonable space given them to repent,
that he does dislike, and that he is highly displeased with their sins, and
wickedness, and disobedience. It is upon this account that John the Baptist
tells the Jews (Christ being come into the World to settle a new Covenant
better than the former) That the Axe was laid to the Root of the Tree, Mat.
3.10. meaning, that whereas before God laid the Axe to the Boughs of the Tree,
but still left the Root standing, and so they did recover in time again from
under many severe Judgments: But Jesus Christ being now come amongst you, he
being sent unto the World, now look to your selves; if you do not every man
turn from his Iniquity, every man from his Abomination, you will be cut down,
and destroyed, and burnt with sire. For his Fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly purge his flower, etc. By what has been said we see, that to
despise an Evangelical Precept or Command of God has more of provocation of
guilt and demerit in it, than former Transgressions and Provocations under the
Law had. The Reason hereof is plain, viz. because though some of the
Evangelical Commands be more spiritual, and so more contrary unto, and more
grating upon the flesh, and in this respect more difficult to be observed than
the Precepts under the Law were; yet notwithstanding, all things considered,
the rich and glorious advantages which the Gospel affords unto men, above what
the Law does, to help them to obey: These things considered, and laid in the
Balance, it will appear, that a despising and neglecting of God and the Lord
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is a sin of a far greater and deeper demerit than
the neglect of a Command under the Law; for the more easy that obedience is,
which is prescribed, it is of so much the greater provocation and demerit when
men shall neglect to obey. God having in the Gospel afforded such mighty
Arguments and encouragements on the one hand to holiness and virtue; and
threatened destruction with eternal fire on the other hand, to them that shall
be disobedient. For men to be disobedient under such circumstances as these is
most provoking in the eyes of God. So that evident it is that such persons who
have greater Motives, greater means to persuade them to any service, if they
shall neglect and be despisers of these Commands, their demerit is so much the
greater, and their condemnation will be so much the sorer upon them. But now,
this Command, or Exhortation, to be filled with the Spirit, is not only
Evangelical, but it has a special and peculiar property in this kind, wherein
it agrees with few others; because the giving of the Spirit of God ( viz. in
such a degree as to be filled with it) is appropriate to the New Testament. It
is usual in the Scriptures, when things are more fully done, and after a more
rich and bountiful manner discovered, to represent them as newly done: though
the Spirit of God was given under the Law; yet the proportion and quantity of
it was but scanty in comparison of what is now given under the Gospel. Jesus
Christ is now glorified, and therefore he pours out of his Spirit upon the
Sons and Daughters of men more abundantly; So that to be filled with the Spirit
is a duty of such a nature, that it is not only Evangelical, but likewise more
purely Evangelical than many other duties are. This should be a great Argument,
which should bear upon our Spirits to persuade us to submit our selves unto the
obedience thereof, to gird up the loins of our minds, and to go about this
great duty with all readiness.

CHAP. XVII. Four Considerations more to enforce the Exhortation. The fourth
Motive: the great benefit accruing unto men and women by a serious engagement
in a course likely to issue in a being filled with the Spirit. It will free men
and women from foolish, unclean, and noisome lusts, somewhat peculiar in this
engagement differing from others, though worthy in their kind. A fifth Motive,
proving that in case men do what God has and does enable them to do in order
to a being filled with the Spirit of God, this their enterprise shall assuredly
prosper in their hand. Hope of obtaining great encouragement unto Endeavors.
Some more of the great Privileges that accompany a being filled with the
Spirit. A sixth Motive, That the Reasons and Understandings of men are not
capable of being employed upon terms of greater benefit and advantage than in
this engagement. A seventh Consideration, taken from the uncertainty of
obtaining the things of this World by all the means that can be used, and also
from the uncertainty of the continuance of these things, if gotten: Whereas a
being filled with the Spirit, as it is attainable, so by a perseverance in the
use of means our seize in this kind shall stand by us for ever.
FOurthly, obnoxious, and hereby treasure up nothing but sorrow and shame to
themselves. It was a profane Speech, and full of slander, which Pharaoh used
to the Officers of the People of Israel, when they came to him to complain of
their Burdens and Oppressions by their Taskmasters, Exodus 5.17. Ye are idle,
ye are idle (says he) therefore ye say, let us go and do sacrifice unto the
Lord. But it may be said with soberness and truth, that men and women, because
their hearts are idle and loose from all spiritual Engagements and Projections;
Therefore they say, Come let us follow vain pleasures; Let us provide thus and
thus for the fulfilling the lusts of the flesh; and otherwhile swarms and
multitudes of Cogitations that have neither head nor foot (as we use to say)
that are profitable for nothing, that have little or no tendency at all to one
end or other, are rambling up and down in the inward parts of men. One main
reason of that sad posture wherein God beheld the World when he intended to
destroy it by the Flood, when every imagination of the thoughts of men were
evil continually, Genesis 6.5. [or every day:] One main Reason (I say) why the
World was now overgrown with sinful and vain imaginations and thoughts, was,
because men and women (the Inhabitants hereof) were under no great spiritual
Engagements. This would have composed them, and drawn off those Imaginations of
their hearts, which were now evil continually, from those objects and occasions
which made them evil, and carried them to objects and occasions of an happy
consequence and import. The same thoughts and moral actings of their Souls, or
puttings forth of their imaginative Faculties, had they been but directed unto,
and set upon such objects and occasions which were honorable and good; this
would have altered their properties, and changed their natures from evil unto
good: For look what a good and faithful Shepherd is to his Sheep, he keeps them
from scattering, from wandering and going astray into places of danger, and
where they may be lost, and causes them to feed in safety: Look (I say) what a
good Shepherd is to his Sheep, such is a steady and fixed design being
honorable, and worthy to the thoughts and imaginations of the hearts of men;
it keeps them from scattering and running wild this way or that, where they are
like to be lost and vanish into nothing; it keeps them from applying or bending
themselves to occasions and things that are evil, and causes them to hunt
close, and to follow the sweet and rich sent of such a Game, which when it is
taken and won will enrich and bless men abundantly. Now any spiritual design
for God and Jesus Christ, carried on with strength and vigor, this is that
which will repel all your vain and foolish thoughts, it will draw away all
that food which fed and nourished them; it will make havoc and desolation
amongst all your vain thoughts, and sinful Lusts which are striving within you,
in order to the gratifying of the Flesh. And this is to be considered further,
that the greater and more comprehensive a man's Engagement or design is, the
Dominion which it has over his thoughts is so much the larger; it bears sway
over so many the more of a man's thoughts, and leaves a liberty of extravagancy
unto so many the fewer of them; yea, Umpires with so much the higher and
stricter hand of authority amongst those unto which its dominion extends.

For instance, Suppose a man's design be to live justly, being filled with the
Spirit. A man that is seriously and solemnly engaged in his heart and soul to
live justly, to wrong, hinder, or defraud no man; by virtue of this his design
he must needs refrain all thoughts of injustice, all projections, or devisings
which tend to the injuring or endamaging any man in his Estate (at least so far
as he apprehends any tendency in thoughts this way) and consequently all
thoughts and imaginations that may arise within him toward Voluptuousness or
expensive living, and all thoughts of Idleness, etc. So on the other hand, he
must needs raise and stir up such thoughts and resolutions within him, and
exercise himself in them which are proper to dispose and strengthen him to deal
justly by all, and to give every man that which is his due. For whosoever does
not resist and reject all thoughts of the former tendency, and indulge and
nourish all of the latter, it is a plain case that he is not full of that
heavenly engagement or design we speak of; I mean, of dealing justly by all
men, he is hollow and slight in it. But a man may be really under the command
of this design, and yet be extravagant and impertinent in thoughts of another
nature and tendency, I mean, vain and sinful in thoughts of several other kinds
which we shall not particularly insist upon. There are many vain thoughts which
may be entertained in the minds and hearts of men, which carry no direct
opposition to the design of giving to every man his due. Now, because this
design is but narrow, although it extends it self to many of a man's
thoughts; yet nevertheless, there are many others that are as bad as these,
that may have a standing in the hearts of men, and have place and room to abide
there. There is the same Reason and Consideration of all other Purposes,
Intentions, and Designs that are of such a particular and limited nature as
this.

But that design or engagement, which in the present Motive we commend unto
you, viz. to be filled with the Spirit, is more comprehensive, and where it
has taken the heart or soul with strength and power, it extends its
Jurisdiction and Command to all a man's Thoughts, Purposes, Counsels, mental
Agitations, Ends, and Aims whatsoever; Regulating, Restraining, Ordering,
Umpiring, setting up, and casting down, according to the exigency and import of
it. This is the very nature of this design, that he that has espoused it has,
upon the matter, threatened all vain Thoughts, all loose Cogitations; he has
threatened them all with ruin and destruction, and with the casting them out of
his heart for ever.

The Reason hereof is, because the nature of this Engagement is such, that it
cannot be effectually promoted or carried on but by a diligent and vigilant
superintendency and inspection over all a man's thoughts, and all that stirs
or moves, or that is conceived in him. For the Spirit takes check, and is
grieved (at least to a degree) at every connivance or indulgence of any thing
that is impertinent, unsavory, and foolish, inordinate, or irregular in the
heart or inward part of a man, and must have nothing cherished, favored, or so
much as tolerated here, but what is sober, holy, just, and every ways
conformable to the Law and Mind of God; otherwise he will not advance or lift
up himself in the mind and soul of a man, upon any such terms as he is ready to
do when he is pleased and accommodated to his mind in all things. It is true,
it is not the mere conceiving or rising up of foolish, vain, and irregular
thoughts in the heart or mind of a man or woman, which is distasteful to the
Holy Ghost, so as to offend or grieve him; for then he should take pleasure in
no man whatsoever; but it is the indulging of them, and when nothing is done to
suppress them: it is not simply their rising up in the minds of men, but the
approving of them, or at least the not endeavoring to suppress them, which
causes the Spirit of God that he will not, cannot work mightily, Ephesians. 4.29,
30. Where the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians that no corrupt communication
should proceed out of their mouths; He adds, And grieve not the holy Spirit of
God, by which ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. Corrupt Communication
does argue, that the root of bitterness within a man is let alone and winked
at; for otherwise, if it had been taken while it was a lust, while only in the
bud, it would never have proceeded so high; let therefore no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your mouths, and grieve not the holy Spirit, etc.
When foolish dispositions are let alone, they will grow as weeds, which if
plucked up whilst young would keep from seeding: So if Lust and sinful motions
be rejected at first coming, they will never show themselves out of doors.
Therefore when any person, man or woman, shall have espoused that most
honorable and heavenly design we speak of, of being filled with the Spirit; if
they be loyal and true to their Espousals in this kind, they must, and cannot
but abstain from, and suppress all absurd, foolish, and extravagant thoughts.
On the contrary, It is very considerable, that these importune and troublesome
Guests, or Inmates we speak of, vain, wild, foolish, and impertinent motions
and thoughts will hardly ever be reduced or brought to leave the mind or soul
of a man, unless it be by the interposure of some-great and worthy design
cordially entertained and resolved on by the Soul; there is hardly any other
course will do it: And when any man or woman shall for some tolerable time have
practiced this suppression and rejection of vain and foolish thoughts, as they
arise and put forth in them, they shall for the future have less and less
trouble with them, they will not be so apt to rise in that heart or soul which
is not wont to give them entertainment, where they are like to die as soon as
they begin to live: Even as weeds by often removing and cutting their roots are
quite killed in time, their root is discouraged and dies; or as hurtful flocks
of Birds, by being often frighted or driven away from the Corn, grow weary of
coming there, where they are continually frighted, and not suffered to have any
rest or peace.

Thus we see the truth of the Motive in hand, viz. filled with the Spirit, but
also in respect of other services it will do you by the way. It will (as you
have heard) put you upon another blessed exercise, I mean, to keep your hearts
and minds free from a troublesome and ignoble Rabble of foolish, vain,
unprofitable, and noisome thoughts. Let us (only for a close of this Motive)
weigh and ponder a little, of how happy and worthy a consequence and
concernment it is for men and women to have ease and freedom in this kind, to
be delivered from such cogitations and thoughts which are apt without end to
infest and molest their minds and hearts (which ought to be a Temple for the
Holy Ghost to dwell in:) being good for nothing but to dishonor, pollute, and
defile wherever they come, and to put by their betters. My Brethren, to make
you see of what great concernment it is to you, you may please to consider,
that your minds and understandings are the most noble and divine part of our
nature, and the puttings forth of them, are the best Trees in our Orchard, and
those that will bear the best and largest fruit. Now then, for these to give
out their strength in things that be unprofitable, and not only so, but in that
which annoyeth, molesteth, and defiles a man, is so great an imbasement of
them, and will turn to so great damage and loss, that it cannot in reason but
be apprehended a mighty accommodation to be free from the cause hereof. Now
then, inasmuch as we are not born free, nor can be free in this kind but by
much labor, My Brethren, If any of you (as it is said of Lot, that he vexed
his righteous soul with the unclean Conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7.)
have vexed your souls with these impure thoughts, and malignant cogitations; if
you have been truly sensible, and have taken knowledge of them, it is
impossible but that you should much lament the loss and damage your minds and
understandings do you, when they bring forth such rotten fruit; whereas if they
were taken off from such corruptions as these, they would conceive other manner
of births, births that are spiritual, that would make you glad when they are
born. It cannot but be, to any considering Christian, matter of offense and
grievance to find himself continually annoyed, and that he should have
troublesome Guests from day to day, and there should be no end, no remedy
against it. I beseech you consider, How can men lay out themselves, upon more
desirable terms, than to benefit themselves, than to make themselves truly
happy in this World, and likewise in the World to come? Now, the greatest
things must, in reason, be conceived to proceed from that which is most noble,
the Spring and Fountain of all commendable things: Now, this Fountain is the
Mind, Understanding, and Judgment of a man; these must do it, otherwise men
will never do any thing either for themselves, or others, to any purpose:
Therefore it is a thing worthy of us to hearken and learn how we may keep our
hearts from running out their strength upon such things which defile us, that
they may attend only upon such which are sweet and rich, such as are pleasant
both unto God, and unto Angels, and unto men; and shall be most pleasant unto
our selves and our own souls, when our taste is but come to us, when we shall
be able judiciously to taste, and discern the true worth and value of spiritual
things.

Fifthly, filled with the Spirit, which God has enabled you, or shall enable
you further to do in order thereunto, the enterprise shall most certainly
prosper in your hands, and you shall be filled with the Spirit of God; your
Seed shall not rot under the Clod, but shall yield an harvest. God does not put
men to run for Prizes which are not to be obtained by running, So run (says
he) that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. Doubtless, if it be true of God in the
course of nature, that he gives to every Seed its own Body: It is much more
true in spiritual cases, and in the Affairs of Heaven; he will reward every
man's labor, every man's endeavor. Whatsoever a man sows in this kind he
shall reap; and if he shall sow plentifully, i.e. if he shall show so much care
and diligence, as is requisite to bring about this great blessing, he shall eat
of the labor of his hands, yea, happy shall he be. Indeed sometimes God
suffers the natural Seed which is sown in the Earth to miscarry, and never to
yield any fruit or increase, according to that of Jeremiah, Jer. 12.13. Ye
shall sow Wheat, and reap thorns, Deuteronomy. 28.38. And that also in Lev. 26.20. And
your strength shall be spent in vain, and your Land shall not yield her
increase. Thus sometimes it comes to pass: but you see, God threatens it as a
matter out of course, which would never come to pass were it not that God did
this for the punishment of them that are wicked, and have match provoked him. He
sometimes withdraws himself from nature and second causes: But for the
Promises of God, in the course of spiritual ways and means, there is never any
exception here; for if a man sow wickedness, If he sow to the flesh, he shall
of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.7, 8. On the other hand, whatsoever good
thing a man does, the same shall he receive, viz. in the reward of it. God has
put himself in strict Bonds and Obligations, that if men shall do that which he
has given them in charge to do, if men shall study and use the means of Grace
with that diligence, care, faithfulness, and goodness of Conscience which he
has prescribed and enjoined them; look whatsoever this means is proper to
produce, this they shall be sure to enjoy. God is not wont to provoke men to
such things which are not attainable; he does not deal so with his Creature, he
only promises such things which are very feasible, and attainable by those
Methods and means which he has appointed them to use, by doing those things
which they may very well do, quitting themselves but like men. It is true
indeed, though the prize of being filled with the Spirit be never so rich,
though it will cause a man's face to shine like the face of an Angel, or like
God himself; yet if it lie not within any man's reach, if a man might lay out
himself after the most effectual manner, and yet notwithstanding come short in
the end; this would stifle all inclinations and dispositions this way: yea, and
to stir up men and women by any other Motive, though never so potent, would be
to very little purpose.

Let this be another Motive to stir you up to fall-in with the Exhortation
proposed unto you; you shall not lose your labor, you shall not sow your Seed
in vain, but shall have a goodly and blessed recompense of reward for
whatsoever you shall do faithfully and conscienciously herein: you may be
assured, that though to be filled with the Spirit be an exceeding great and
high privilege, and has much of God, and of glory in it, yet are you in a
capacity to come at it, and enjoy it.

My Brethren, filled with the Spirit: But it may be you will say, Wherein does
the greatness of it lie? What great or excellent things are there in it, that
we should be willing to consent unto you to lay out our selves for the
obtaining it? And it seems we must do it thoroughly, and not be remiss, or
half-hearted in the work, but must quit our selves like men, with the best of
our might and strength; and therefore What is this great thing which you call A
being filled with the Spirit? Or upon what account shall we be more happy and
blessed in our Conditions, when we have compassed it, than whilst we are
without it?

I answer, That though men had the Tongues of Angels, and the Understandings
and Wisdom of Angels too, yet they could not declare fully the glory, nor the
blessedness of such a state; the heights, depths, and the lengths and breadths
of this high Privilege or Prerogative of being filled with the Spirit. If the
thing could fall within the virge of humane Understanding, and could be
uttered, if you could rightly conceive of the worth or excellency of it, this
would make you call it the Privilege of a man, or something that a man can
reach or understand. The Apostle Paul, when he would express the transcendency
of that Privilege which he calls the peace of God, Phil. 4.7. he describes it
to be such a thing which passes all understanding. This Character of it gives
it high honor, and double esteem in the hearts and minds of men; but if he
should have expressed it in any such terms which had set limits and bounds unto
it, and told them that it was good to such and such a degree, but not further,
this had been apt to have diminished the esteem and reputation of it, and
consequently to have interrupted and checked the desires of it in the hearts of
men: Even so we may say concerning this great Privilege of being filled with
the Spirit; if we could measure out unto you, and were able to say, that it is
thus much and no more, this were neither for your benefit, or profit, neither
should we be found faithful or true Witnesses of those excellent and glorious
things of God. There is no question but that the Apostles in their days did
make large discoveries of the peace of God, and spoke many glorious things of
it, so much that might have enflamed the hearts of men to have desired it; but
yet there was more than all this in that Character whereby it is described,
viz. A peace that passes all understanding: So questionless many great and
excellent things (and that according to sobriety and truth) may be spoken
concerning this great and happy Privilege; yet if we should attempt any thing
in this kind, without giving knowledge, that we do not speak limitedly, or to
confine your apprehensions, as if there were nothing further or greater in it,
besides, and above, or beyond what we can express without some such intimation
or ^aution as this is, we should rather prejudice you and set you off, than
quicken you and set you up to look after it. We have formerly (as I remember)
acquainted you with several Royalties, and blessed Contentments, which do
attend the state of a person that is filled with the Spirit (...) God. One
thing was, that they that are filled with the Spirit of God are like to be much
employed and set on work by God; he de^ghteth not to employ such persons about
any great services which he has (...) do in the World that are streightened in
their spirits, whose anointing (...) but scanty, narrow, and low: God does not
care that much of his Work should pass thorough their hands, because they will
not quit themselves so as to answer the Majesty of God, nor the excellency of
such Services: Whereas those that are filled with the Spirit, look whatsoever
they go about, or put forth their hearts unto, they will carry it on with the
greatest authority and highest hand; neither will they baulk this or that Truth
of God, nor in the least give in for any opposition or contradiction of Men.
Now this is a great Privilege (if we had hearts to conceive aright of it:) for
a man or woman to be much employed, or much set on work by God; the Angels are
(as it were) proud of his service: Christ, speaking of his little ones, says.
Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven, Mat.
18.10. They stand waiting to see if there be any service or employment; they
strive who shall be most set on work, and who shall have most put into their
hands, for this is their honor and their glory. And doubtless, my Brethren, if
we had but the true sense and resentment of the transcendent worth, and
desirableness of serving God, and of being employed by him in the world, we
should account of it, and esteem it after another manner of rate than I fear
generally we do. Another thing was this; they that are partakers of that
blessedness are upon the matter out of the reach of all sorrows or troubles
about any thing that can befall them in this present World; those things which
cut other men to the very heart and soul, these men are secured from; when the
World rises up and lies down by them they know not; they are in an heavenly
ecstasy, or a spiritual kind of drunkenness: As Lot, being drunk, knew not when
his Daughters rose up from him, nor lay down by him: men that are full of the
Spirit are lifted up, they are in the upper Region, where no storms, no
tempests, nor troublesome things come, there is a perpetual serenity,
clearness, and peaceableness of mind; whilst the World generally, and those
that are strangers to this fullness of the Spirit, are tossed to and fro,
tumbling up and down, their thoughts disquieting and tormenting them
continually. And so again we showed, that they that are filled with the Spirit
are to a degree freed from Temptations. It is said of God, He cannot be tempted
with evil, Jam. 1.13. Now such men are partakers of that blessedness of God
himself, as far as flesh and blood is capable of drawing near unto him, Resist
the Devil and he will flee from you (says the Apostle James, c. 4.7.)
Brethren, Why should the Devil flee from him that resists him, and gives him
a peremptory denial? It is because that he has much to do, and but little time
to do it in, and he will not lose his time when he has no hope to speed; he is
then as if he stood upon thorns, (as we use to say;) if he get no profit or
advantage by his Suggestions, it is so much out of the way of his miserable
comfort, and that solace which he is capable of during his present state and
condition; all his solace being this, to draw men into communion and fellowship
with himself in his misery: and knowing by his own experience that the way
thereunto lies by the way of sin and doing wickedly; therefore he labors to
entice men to walk in such ways, knowing if he can but draw men into these
paths he will presently meet with them, and that they will arrive at that place
of endless misery and torment which he is gone unto. But now this great and
blessed Privilege of being filled with the Spirit of God will make all the
enticements and allurements, all the baits and temptations to evil of no force;
they will be as Arrows shot against a brazen Wall, that will recoyl and turn
upon him that shoots them; So that we need not ask a question, What the
fullness of the Spirit means? You see it is worthy all your labors, all your
endeavors and layings out of your selves in one kind or other; though you
should prejudice your flesh never so much upon the account of it, yet
nevertheless there is no cause for you to complain; for the Privilege is so
great, that it will do a thousand times more than bear its own charge, and it
will recompense a thousand fold into your bosom, whatsoever you expend of your
pleasures and enjoyments in the World for the attaining of it.

Sixthly, Absalom labored in the very fire to make himself King, but his
device was too great for him to perform; whilst he put forth his hand to reach
a Crown, he took hold of nothing but death and ruin.

Again secondly, Suppose a man should be able to make his nest amongst the
Stars, and to walk up and down in the midst of Stoves of fire (as it is said of
the King of Tire, Ezekiel. 28.14.) in respect of grandeur in the World; yet even
this would be but a faint and heartless condition in comparison. A Nest amongst
the Stars is in continual danger of being pulled down (as all that have been
made there since the beginning of the World have been) and he that walks up
and down with the greatest confidence and security amongst the Stoves of fire
(as the King of Tire did) will be sooner at the end of his walk than he is
aware of: Whereas he that is filled with the Spirit, the very taste and relish
of his condition is rich above measure, heart-taking and soul-pleasing: He
knows that, unless he himself shall pull down voluntarily, and with both his
hands, what he has built up for himself in peace and happiness, his Mountain
is too strong ever to be removed either by Angels or men. There is the same
consideration of all other ends or designs whatsoever, which may be conceived
to be Competitors with the great work we have so much spoken of, and with so
much affection and importunity commended unto you.

If you shall cause your minds and understandings to serve you in raising your
selves to great Estates in the World, and gathering in Riches, and making your
Families great on Earth, or in making provision of pleasures and delights for
the flesh in one kind or other; any of these will be but like the pilling of
straws (as we use to say) in comparison; they will be loss unto you. Those
Noble and Princelike Faculties of Reason, Judgment, and Understanding were
created and formed by God, and vested in the Natures or Souls of men, with a
regular proportion, and as it were on purpose to make after designs truly
honorable and high, such as a being filled with the Spirit of God is, together
with others of like nature and worth with it; and not at all to project or make
provision for the flesh, or for the outward man, save only in due subordination
unto these. As on the other hand, these spiritual and heavenly designs, these
high enjoyments are in their Natures and Constitutions suited to the said
Faculties, and as it were made and devised by God to be sought after,
compassed, and obtained by them: Much after the same manner, as the Apostle
observes the reciprocal proportion in Nature, and the Providence of God
between the belly and meats; Meats (says he) for the belly, and the belly for
meats; meaning, the belly with the Appurtenances of it in the natural body of a
man (and so of other Creatures) is so ordered and tempered by the natural
constitution, that it is apt to receive and concoct meat, and convert it to the
nourishment, strength, and health of the body: As on the other hand, meats are
of such a nature and constitution as that they are suitable to the belly, and
apt to be digested there, and turned into nourishment; and therefore as it
would be an unnatural kind of handling the mouth, stomach, and belly, an abuse
of them contrary to Nature to put stones and dirt into them, or any thing that
is contrary to the nourishment and good habit and state of the body or outward
man: In like manner, for men and women to compel their Minds, Reasons, and
Understandings to labor and travel, either only, or principally about things
of an inferior worth, and perishable nature, is a kind of unnatural dealing
with them, when as they are naturally endowed, and made capable of higher
engagements and seize: It is to reproach their excellency, and to change
their natural use into that which is against nature.

The Scripture it self from place to place urges and presses upon men the
Notion and Import of the Motive in hand, Labor not to be rich: cease from thine
own wisdom, etc. Prove. 23.4, 5. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a
Fool to get Wisdom, seeing he has not a heart to it? Pro. 17.16. He speaks
here as if Wisdom were in a great passion to see men enriched by God for great
seize, and yet it should so fall out that they employed these abilities
and faculties about things that were but mere Toys. By Wisdom he means such
things whereby he shall proclaim himself to be wise, if he shall seek after
them, namely, all the blessed conequences of Wisdom, as Happiness, Blessedness,
Glory, etc. in the general, and every particular contained in these generals
which any way may serve to advance the Creature man in true joy, or felicity.
Now Wisdom (as was noted before) speaks with great indignation interrogative
wise: Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a Fool, etc. a standing
advantage to make his face to shine, and yet he not have a heart to improve it,
but turns the means which God has put into his hand quite another way?

Let us also consider that other place, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes
upon that which is not? For Riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly
away, etc. There is an Emphasis in this Expression [that which is not;] we know
the Spirit of God is no reproacher of his Creature; and as for Silver, and
Gold, Houses, and Lands, these are all the Creatures of God, therefore he will
not vilify them beneath their worth, or pour any such shame and contempt upon
them which shall render them more vain than they are. Far be it from us to
think, that God, who is the Maker of them, should speak of them after such a
manner.

But why does Wisdom give such a name of disparagement [that which is not] unto
these things? Are Riches, etc. no better accommodation unto men than that which
is not, are these things no ways serviceable unto men?

Yes surely they are; only God speaking of them does by them as men when any
thing is bowed and stands bent, or crooked, they bend it a contrary way, that
so it may be made strait: So it is when the minds of men stand awry, and have
crooked Notions concerning things, when men's Judgments put a highter value or
estimate upon them than their natures (duly considered) will bear.

Now the Holy Ghost, under such circumstances as these, takes this wise and
prudent course to rectify the Judgments of men concerning them; he bends these
(as much as may be) quite another way. And so because the hearts of men have
high thoughts concerning Riches, and the great things of the World, and are
mightily intent that way; they think that Riches, Silver and Gold are to be
labored for night and day; therefore the Holy Ghost labors to bend men's
Judgments on the other way, and to make them think that there is nothing at all
in them but what may be compared to that which is not.

Or else the Emphasis of this Expression [that which is not] may very probable
be in this; because these things have a very little and inconsiderable degree
of entity or being; that which they have in being is so little, and so
inconsiderable that it was not worthy of comparison with real existence or
being. It is the manner of the Scriptures, that when any great or round Sums
set down or delivered, as Six or Seven Thousand Pounds, or the like, if there
be any fractions, as suppose four, five, or nine, etc. not to take any notice
of the Fractions, but only the round Sums: In like manner, that being which
Riches have is in a manner nothing in comparison of that which is reality, and
substance, or being indeed; therefore (...) takes no notice of that being which
they have, but passes (...) in silence, as being not worth the naming, or of
being brought to account.

Therefore for a man to seth^s eyes, to engage his heart and soul, and to cause
his reason and understanding, and his intellectual Faculties to labor about
them, to struggle, and to graple night and day about that which is not, is the
greatest indiscretion in the World? yea, the Interrogation, Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? does not only imply, that it is a matter of
infinite disparagement, of an ignoble and imbasing nature to the Creature man
to set his heart upon that which is not, when there are so many great and
glorious Objects that have existency and worth in them, and which are every way
worthy his mind; but also that it is of a most dangerous consequence unto him,
a matter of infinite disadvantage and loss: As if he had said, when thou art in
the way to be happy, and made equal with the Angels in heaven, thou will take a
course to ruin thy self, and make thy condition miserable for ever by setting
thine eyes and heart upon that which is not. Yet again, for a confirmation of
the Notion under debate, Isa. 55.2. Wherefore do ye spend your money for that
which is not bread: And your labor for that which satisfies not? The spending
of a man's money is the laying out of his gifts, and parts, and opportunities
for that which is not bread, i. e. for that which is not so indeed, is not
properly nourishment, because it only nourishes for a season. Labor not for
the meat which perishes (says our Savior, Joh. 6.27.) that is, all the
benefit that a man can hope to receive is only in this life; when he goes down
to the Grave, there is an end of all that he has enjoyed in this kind.

Here again, we see that the Holy Ghost expostulates the matter, is (as it
were) full of passion (as a man that is offended) with this People, that, when
as he had given them bread that would nourish them, and bring them up to
eternal life, they should lay out their money, i. e. spend their gifts, parts,
and opportunities only upon that bread which perishes.

It is frequent in Scripture, when the Holy Ghost would reproach men in things
that be irrational, thus to interrogate a reason or ground of what they do. I
say unto you (says Christ, Mat. 12.36.) that every man must give an account of
every idle word that he shall speak; they shall give an account, that is they
shall be put upon it to give one. A reason that is good, and sound, and
substantial, will pass, and God will give a quietus est upon it; but if it
prove only a pretense, a hollow and empty ground, a fallacious reason that is
given, this is that which will be the condemnation of the World in the day of
Judgment.

But the thing which we observe from hence is this,

If the Question should be put to all rich Wealth-Mongers, and Honour-mongers,
etc. What is the reason why they do toil and spend themselves about things that
are of no value, whilst they turn aside from the pursuing things that are
excellent, honorable, and worthy? Certainly, as of him that was asked in the
Parable, Friend, how came thou hither not having thy wedding Garment? It is
said that he was speechless: so would these men have nothing to answer. When
mensactions are irrational, and have not a lively spirit of reason in them, if
they shall be put upon it, and called upon to give a reason of what they do;
this is the only way to awaken them when they go on in a sottish and brutish
course to call upon them thus; What do thou do, art thou conscious of the
Action, that it will bear thee out before a righteous Judge? If the man have
any spark of Conscience, or any degree of Reason left within him, upon such an
Interrogatory as this put to him, he will bethink himself, and when he has
gone about, and can find nothing that will pass for a reason with God, nor with
considerate and intelligent men; in this case, even by the Law of his Creation
(in a manner) he is necessicated to take another course, namely, to desert, and
to retract that course and practice which he is in, and to betake himself to
such ways whereof he can give a reasonable, and worthy, and a sound account
both unto God and men. Jer. 2.12, 13. Be astonished O ye heavens at this, and
be ye horribly afraid; be ye very desolate, says the Lord. Such a passionate
expressing of himself as this is does bespeak something notable and strange,
somewhat that is quite besides the course of nature. But

What is that the Holy Ghost does usher in by such a Preface as this? What has
the Lord to say that should put the Heavens to such an astonishment? This is
it. For my People have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the Fountain
of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, breken Cisterns that will hold
no water.

For my People have committed two evils, etc. They have turned themselves aside
from wa^es and things that are honorable, that are holy, that are spiritual
and heavenly, from ways that would bless them, and make them happy for ever;
and have turned themselves unto such things which have nothing of worth in
them, such things which could not give them any true content or satisfaction,
therefore called, Cisterns, broken Cisterns etc. This is a deportment of the
Creature man toward God, in the consideration of which the Prophets call the
Heavens and the Earth to an Ecstasy of admiration and astonishment; hereby
giving us to understand, and to consider that there is nothing so monstrous,
and so far beside the course of nature as that men should forsake God, the
Fountain of living waters, who leads them in the way of salvation and
blessedness, and to go unto the empty and perishing Vanities of this present
World; Implying, that the Reason and Conscience of man when first given unto
him were directed unto God, that every man's understanding tends Godward. Now
that men should forsake this Object, and those ways and engagements which are
natural, and should turn aside, and call off their m^nds and thoughts from such
excellent things as these, and turn themselves to things that are merely vain,
light, and empty; This is that which God himself holds as the most horrible
and monstrous thing in the World, enough to cause the Heavens to forget their
Natures and Motions. Once more, Mat. 16.26. For what will it profit a man if he
should gain the whole World, and lose his own soul? etc. Now every man seeks
for profit, and it is but rational and natural so to do; and God does not only
give men fr^e leave to look after their profit, but has imposed it by way of
duty upon them, and counts it their folly not to do it; therefore much (...)
God offended at any way or engagement which will be for your advantage. Our
Savior says, What will it profit a man to gain the World, and lose his own
soul? Now how can men gain the World but by engaging the faculties and power of
their Souls in order hereunto? It is impossible for men to get Wealth if they
do not take some course about it. Our Savior would know of every man and woman
of us, what it will profit us when we have cast up the Account (and he would
have you cast it up.) Suppose that it were possible for you to gain the whole
World, and in the mean time you should lose your own souls; as All they will
certainly do who are so intent to gain the World, that they have no reason, no
understanding, no vigor of spirit to look after and to mind the great things
of Eternity, or such as this, a being filled with the Spirit. What will it
profit you in case you have gotten the whole World? It implies, not only the
invaluable disproportion between the gaining the whole World and losing their
Souls; but also that men's laying out themselves to gain the World is the
stumbling stone, upon which they stumble and lose their own Souls. You have the
World before you, and have Reasons and understandings; now weigh and consider
it with your selves, there is the loss of your souls. Do you know what this
will amount unto? Do you know that the endeavoring to win the whole World will
expose you to the losing, or (at least) the danger of losing your own Souls? So
that we may plainly see, that in these, and many such like places in the
Scriptures, the Holy Ghost makes it matter of shame and great reproach unto
men, to take off their Minds and Judgments from things that are of a most
excellent and glorious import, that will stand by them for ever, and set them
upon things of no value, nor continuance. Let us now ponder and weigh the
Motive last insisted upon, and so dismiss it; if we know how to contrive, how
to dispose of our time, of our reasons and understandings (which must indeed be
thoroughly engaged about this great Design of being filled with the Spirit) if
we intend to effect this Design; If we know (I say) how to dispose them
otherwise, to a better purpose, to more profit and advantage to our selves,
then might we more reasonably neglect, yea, and despise the Exhortation which
with so much importunity has been urged upon us: or if we knew any other prize
to run for, which were in any degree worthy to stand in competition with that
recommended in the Exhortation, we might reasonably stick and demur, and take
into consideration what we had best to do in the case; whether to lay our
selves out about a being filled with Spirit, or upon some other account
inconsistent with this: But if neither of these Lions be in our way, if there
be nothing disputably better than, nay, if there be nothing disputably equal
with a being filled with the Spirit, about which we can set the intellectual
Faculties of our souls on work, how shall we not fall down before the voice of
the Exhortation, which exhorts us to be filled with the Spirit, without any
more ado, and go forth with all our thoughts made and resolved in the highest,
that whatsoever shall be required of us, in a due order to a being thus filled,
we will to the utmost of our power so do? When we may have Bread for our money,
will we give it for Stones, or for that which will not profit or nourish? When
we may with the same labor and travel, both of soul and body, invest our
selves with Privileges and Possessions that are excellent and glorious, which
will stand by us to Eternity, shall we accept of things of little or no value?
Is not this for those that are come to be men to resume Childishness again? My
Brethren, these are matters of very vast, yea, prodigious concernment unto you:
The word that now has been spoken in your ears will judge you in the last day.
Let him therefore that has an heart consider what has been now propounded
unto him.

Seventhly, being filled with the Spirit shall most certainly obtain it.
Secondly, In persevering in this course unto the end your seize shall
stand by you in glory and blessedness for ever. But as the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions shall suffer hunger, etc. so it is with those that
seek the glory and great things of this World, that pursue the Honors, and
Wealth, and Pleasures thereof; these many times suffer hunger and want. He that
seeks after Honor and Riches falls short, and so he that seeks after
Pleasures is disappointed: But he that shall seek to be filled with the Spirit
of God, shall be filled therewith, neither shall any thing be able to separate
between him and it. And as the Apostle reasons concerning the love of God,
Romans 8. Even so it is in the case in hand, neither life, nor death, nor any
other thing, neither Trouble, nor Persecution, nor Angels, no nor Devils shall
be able to separate and step in between those who shall engage themselves in a
conscientious manner to be filled with the Spirit, and the actual
accomplishment and enjoyment of this felicity.

The Spirit of Ambition may work in you (as the Grace of God did in Paul)
mightily; and yet of this Spirit you may reap nothing but dishonor and
disgrace, and covering of the face with shame and confusion. Absalom (as we
lately intimated) ran with all his might, and with all his strength for the
Prize of a Kingdom; but that which he got by his running, was an ignominious
and untimely death, being hung by the hair of his head on the bough of a great
Oak, 2 Samuel 18.9. as he fled to save his life from the pursuit of David's men,
in which posture three Darts were thrust through his heart by Joab. Many
ambitious Climers in all Ages have met with the like disasters and
disappointments. All Histories (almost) fill the World with examples in this
kind, that men before they come at the top of the Ladder fall down and are
broken and crushed to pieces; they wholly miscarry and get nothing but a
covering of darkness instead of that grandeur or greatness which they lift up
their hearts unto; and many who did compass the grandeur and greatness in the
World which they sought after were soon dispossessed.

The like may be said concerning Riches, and of those that in the sweat of
their brows, and burning of their hearts have sought to sit down and rest
themselves under the shadow of a great Estate. As Paul said of his Countrymen,
the Jews, that following after the Law of Righteousness, they attained not the
Law of Righteousness; so we may say of many, that following after Riches they
have not attained to be rich: But whosoever follow after this, being filled
with the Spirit, have and shall most certainly attain it. Those carnal designs
are merely accidental and casual attempts which men often miscarry in. The
Scriptures are full of such Expressions, which sufficiently confirm the truth
of what we say; I returned, and saw an evil under the Sun (says Solomon, Eccl.
9.11.) the Race is not to the swift, nor the B^ttel to the strong, neither yet
bread to the wise, nor yet Riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of
skill; but time and chance happens to all. So elsewhere, Prove. 28.22. and
11.24. you shall find, that those who are great designers of Wealth, many times
are disappointed and sen^ empty away; He that makes haste to be rich has an
evil eye, and knows not (does not consider) that poverty is coming upon him.
And so, There is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty;
many times their Projects fail them, and they come to poverty. So that we see
there is great uncertainty in all these things, we do not know whether our
design will prosper in our hand or no; for God has not made any such connection
between these carnal projects and their ends, but that he can forbid their
coming together: But we have the Word of the Living God, the security of
Heaven, that if any man will build a spiritual house, carry on a heavenly
design, if they will lay out their hearts and spirits upon it, God will stand
by such men, their labor shall not be in vain. God has established a Law that
shall not be broken, a Law like unto the Law of the Sun and Moon, which shall
be kept inviolable, that he that desires to eat of this bread, shall have to
eat abundantly; he, that shall run the course of this Design, shall obtain. He
that gives to every Seed his own body (ordinarily in things natural) will
never fail, here he has put a Law upon himself; neither will his nature give
him leave to separate and divide between the means that are spiritual, and the
end to be attained by them. He that sows the Seed shall reap the Fruit;
whosoever shall ask in this kind shall receive, and whosoever knocks it shall
be opened unto him.

Now if you please but to consider, in a word, the weight and import of this
Motive, you know that men do not love to sow their Seed in vain; to part with
their Silver and Gold for things that are of no use. It is every man's case, and
they are accounted the wisest of men that can prevent such things, the
interposure whereof is apt to deprive them of that for which they have given
their money. Now then, this is the case, as to the business we have been
exhorting you unto, viz. A being filled with the Spirit; it is a Commodity,
which if you will lay out your selves for, it will most certainly be made good
unto you; it is not obnoxious to any disappointment either by God, Angels, or
Men. Now then, Why should any man bestow his time upon that which he may
possibly not enjoy; or in case he may enjoy it, it will be but for a short
season, or if he should enjoy it for any long season, yet at last it must go:
all the pain and labor, all the care and travel of soul will perish together?
Oh how happy then, above all worldly Projectors and Designers, are they whose
hearts are persuaded to hearken to the Counsel of God concerning a being filled
with the Spirit, even in this respect also (besides many others) that they are
certain of a good reward for their labor? They that run this Race shall
certainly attain; they that seek to be filled with the Spirit shall be filled,
whereas (as I said) all endeavors, about worldly accommodations, are but lost
labor in comparison of this.

CHAP. XVIII. The eighth (and last) Motive: That a being filled with the Spirit
will render the Condition of men and women most desirable in this World, and in
that which is to come. That no other course will do it but this, or none
without this. Four things, a concurrence whereof will render a man's Condition
in this life most desirable. 1. A freedom from all troublesome, distracting,
and tormenting fears and cares. 2. A heart and conscience abounding in Joy and
Peace. 3. A large and free Communion with God. 4. And lastly, A rich and large
interest in God to be able to carry great Matters in Prayer with him. Three of
these insisted on: 1. A being filled with the Spirit will discharge men from
all troublesome and distracting fears and cares. 2. The Peace and Joy of men
will abound by a being filled with the Spirit. 3. A third particular which
renders men's Condition so desirable in the World is a free and large Communion
with God. 1. What is meant by Commuwith God. 2. What by a free Communion. 3.
What is meant by a large and full Communion with God. 4. How this Communion
renders man's Condition very desirable in the World. 5. That this Privilege
must needs accompany a being filled with the Spirit. What it is for God to
dwell or abide in man. How a man may know that God dwells in him by the
Spirit which is given him. How perfect love casts out fear. In what respest
the Spirit may be said to witness with our spirits that we are the Children of
God. A well-grounded Confidence. The Causes of a false Confidence enquired
into. A good Conscience a ground of Assurance.
Eighthly (and lastly) To promote the interest of the Exhortation delivered in
your Judgments and Consciences, of enjoying; and that there is no other course
will do but this only. In this Motive there are three things contained:

First, That a being filled with the Spirit will render the Condition of a man
or woman in this life most desirable, happy, and blessed in the highest.

Secondly, That it will do the like for them in the World which is to come; it
will render their Conditions and Beings here the best that this World also can
afford unto the Sons and Daughters of Men.

Thirdly (and lastly) That there is no other course, no other engagement or
employment, that a man or woman can lay out themselves, and their time and
strength in, that will do either.

First, For the blessedness or desirableness of the Condition in the World that
now is there are are four things, a concurrent enjoyment of which must needs be
conceived to make the State and Condition of a man or woman in the World very
happy and desirable.

The first is, A well-grounded Vacuity or freedom from all troublesome,
distracting, and tormenting fears and cares.

Secondly, An Heart and Conscience abounding in Peace and Joy upon the like
terms.

The third, A large and free Communion with God.

The fourth and last, A large, and rich, and considerable interest in God, that
can carry all matters of request with him upon all occasions. I suppose, if any
man were in the actual enjoyment of all these four particulars, his Condition
and State would be as desirable as the heart and soul of a man can reasonably,
or with a true understanding, desire in this World. Now, he that is filled with
the Spirit of God will be invested with these four great blessings.

First, For a man or woman in this Vale of mortality and tears, to be out of
the reach of troublesome and tormenting fears and cares, to enjoy a constant
serenity and tranquillity of mind without being afraid either of what man can,
or God will do unto him; How great and happy must such a man's condition be?
Surely it is one of the special ingredients in the felicity and blessedness of
God himself, as David takes notice in Psalm. 2.4. He that sits in the
Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision; meaning, his
Enemies. My Brethren, For poor Creatures, who dwell in houses of clay, and are
compassed about with mortality to be in respect of their inner man, in
reference to any troubles, or things formidable that may assault them; for
them, I say, to have Communion with God in this heavenly privilege, to laugh
all troubles to scorn; to be like unto a Mountain, or a great Rock before
Storms, and Tempests, and Whirlwinds; How glorious above measure must such a
State and Condition be? To have the heart and soul like the upper Region of the
Air, where there are no disturbances or commotions, where to be (as I said even
now) they may be able to laugh all Enemies to scorn. Not to be afraid of what
either men can, or what God will do unto them, this is a most Divine
Privilege; especially, the obnoxiousness and weakness in this kind of the
generality of the hearts of men considered, it must needs be a very rare and
high attainment for any to live out of the reach of fears. Fear, as John says,
has torment; and indeed (upon the matter) nothing else has torment but fear;
neither is it simply any present sorrow or suffering, though very grievous,
even as sharp as nature it self, is well able to stand under, that has any
torment in it; but fear proceeding from the apprehension of the danger of some
misery approaching in the future. Now, if we were but armed in our hearts by
the fullness of the Spirit, no fear would enter in there; we should have no
cause to fear any danger for the future, and consequently sorrows and suffering
would not much offend us; they would be but of a very light and passable
consideration, we should not suffer any great matter upon the account of them.
Our Savior, Mat. 6.34. advises those that believe in him not to care for to
morrow, telling them the morrow shall care for it self, etc. if we would but
cut asunder from us our cares, we should ease our selves of much trouble. For
this is that by which men and women spoil themselves, in that they take up the
care of many days at once: Men will care for to morrow, and for forty days
together, whereas the care of one day, the evil, and trouble that does attend
it, is sufficient unto it; but the effect of this care for the time to come is
to fill with trouble and fear. There is indeed a fear, of which Solomon
speaks, Prove. 28.14 when he says, Happy is the man that fears always; and
it is rather an evil, or a misery to be freed from this fear than any matter of
profit. But this we say, a being filled with the Spirit of God, a rich
anointing with this oil will reduce the heart and soul of a man to such a pass,
to such a temper and frame, that it shall be impenetrable, invulnerable by such
Arrows of cares and fears which are wont to pierce and strike thorough the
hearts of other men, and to slay all their comforts and peace. As there are
some kinds of Oils or Ointments, as some have affirmed, which are so sovereign
against the impressions of hot boiling Lead, or the like, that they will secure
men from receiving any harm by them, if timely applied: Whether this be true or
not, yet in the business before us the Scripture it self takes notice of that
great and mavelous effect of a rich anointing of the Spirit of God we speak
of. Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. compared with Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3. And Psalm. 112.6, 7, 8.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine
Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
Psalm. 46. God is my refuge and strength, a very present help in time of
trouble; therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, etc. And so again, Though an
host of men should compass me about, yet herein will I be confident, Now we may
easily perceive that these are very high expressions of a fearless and
dreadless spirit, though the Earth be moved out of its place. The moving of the
Earth, and tossing to and fro of Mountains represent unto us things that are of
a most terrible and formidable nature, and very astonishing to the World. We
know the shaking of Mount Sinai was so terrible that Moses himself is said to
fear exceedingly: And so an Host of men is a thing which is most terrible, yet
says he in this case, though an host of men shall come marching against me,
yet herein will I be confident. And Psalm. 112.6, 7, 8. Surely he shall not be
removed for ever; The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance, he shall
not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, etc.
That which will cause the hearts of other men to fear (namely, evil tidings)
and cause them to shake and tremble like the Trees of the Forest when they are
shaken with a mighty wind, will have no operation (at least comparatively) upon
the men and women of this Character which we are now speaking of, viz. which
are filled with the Spirit.

Now the Reason why a rich anointing with the Spirit of God must fortify the
spirit and soul of a man, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be ye
filled with the Spirit. I conceive that by the opposition in this Comparison
the Apostles intent is to show, that there is a likeness between a being filled
with the Spirit, and being drunk with Wine: For as Drunkenness does stupifie
the natural senses, does bereave a man of the use and exercise of them, so that
for the time he is not capable of minding his own Concernments, he is not
affected with any thing that does concern his state or health, or any thing
that is before him: Even so, or after such a manner, a being filled with the
Spirit does (as it were) bereave a man of his carnal senses; it does reduce a
man in his mind and understanding to such a state that the Flesh and the things
thereof have little or no place in him, it casts him into a kind of heavenly
ecstasy, in which he is taken up with matters of another nature, of a more high
and excellent concernment; so that the things which concern him here in the
World, either matters of trouble, or sorrow, or any other thing or concernment
whatsoever little move or affect him whilst he is (as it were) in this
heavenly ecstasy; it does (as I said) bereave him of those senses, principles,
and thoughts which other men abound withal who are accounted sober men, and
wise in their Generation in the matters of this present World. If we be besides
our selves (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.13.) it is to God. There is no man that
is filled with the Spirit of God but he is apt to do as one that is besides
himself; he does not take knowledge, does not mind, is not so much affected
with such kind of things as relate to himself, which other men (as it were)
make their All in All, and according to the giving out of which, whether on the
right hand, or on the left, they stand or fall, they live or die; they live if
the World stand by them, if their Silver and Gold, their Health and Strength,
and other enjoyments continue with them, but if these fail them, they are dead
in the Nest: But it is not so with him that is filled with the Spirit of God.
For as it was with Lot, in his fit of Drunkenness, he neither perceived when
his Daughters lay down by him, nor yet when they rose up from him; so when a
man is in his heavenly rapture, of a fullness of the Spirit of God, he does not
much mind, nor is much affected when the World lies down by him, and bears
him company, nor when it rises up, and takes its leave and departs from him
in one kind of enjoyment or other. Now, this being the proper nature and
tendency of being filled with the Spirit to stupifie and turn the edge of
natural affections which occasion trouble and sorrow in the World, it must
needs follow, that they who are in this state must needs be under an heavenly
security, and their hearts like unto the upper Region, where there is no
impressions of any fiery Meteors, but a constant and uniform serenity and
tranquillity. In like manner is it with the heart and inward part of a man that
is filled with the Spirit of God, there is no impression of any sadness or
cares or tormenting fears; I speak only of the usual, habitual, and standing
frame and condition of such a man's soul and spirit; it is one thing what God
may do, or suffer to be done, in a case not ordinary, and in reference to some
extraordinary end and purpose of his in the World. He may give way, and his
Spirit may suspend his own actings, though the heart and soul be full of him,
and so there may be some weakness, and impressions of fear, and sadness, or the
like: But we speak not of what such a person may suffer at times, and in cases
not ordinary; but we speak of the standing and habitual frame of his heart and
soul, and what this fullness of the Spirit does for him, and what state it
puts him in ordinarily. And doubtless, if it were not so, God would want one
great Engine to draw and work up the hearts and spirits of men and women unto
the height of holiness. For if he would have men to be Noah's, and Jobs, and
Daniels, I mean, to be signally excellent in faith and holiness; if he would
have men like unto the tall Cedars in Lebanon, he must accordingly propound and
hold forth something, by way of reward and recompense, that shall (as it were)
draw and work them up above the common line, and the ordinary strain of the
World round about them: For if he should have no great privilege to invest
those withal, whose labors, and endeavors, and diligence should surpass the
labor and diligence of other men in ways of holiness and righteousness, the
World would be all of a level, and of the same pitch; the whole World of
Christians and Believers would be but men of a low stature. But now God, as he
has gone to work, having variety of considerations and rewards, some rich and
glorious above others to propound unto men, he has taken an effectual course
to have the ways of excellency in holiness and righteousness often frequented
and walked in; which otherwise would have been unoccupied by the Sons and
Daughters of men, if he had not provided encouragements to excite, or stir them
up thereunto. Therefore it is very reasonable to conceive, that a being filled
with the Spirit should be rewarded by God with some signal Privilege, namely,
by rendering them that are so filled free from troublesome cares and fears above
the Rate and Line of those whose hearts will not serve them to rise up unto it.

Secondly, Where there is a fullness, a rich anointing of the Spirit, Job 3.18,
19. There the Servant is free from his Master, etc. But that Peace which we now
speak of is somewhat positive, and has a true and real existence in the soul;
it is a sweet composedness of the mind, and spirit, and conscience of a man,
and this well built upon grounds of knowledge, by means whereof a man is whole
and entire himself, and at perfect liberty to serve God and men, and himself in
every good way and work: this is that Peace which we call a positive Peac,
which has Joy always accompanying it. We shall not, upon the occasion in
hand, stand to scan the description according to the several parts of it; this
would cause too great a digression; it shall suffice at present to know, that
the Peace which we affirm to be a fruit or effect of a being filled with the
Spirit is a very blessed and desirable thing; such a state or constitution of
the Spirit or soul of a man, which is a principal member, or part of that
happiness which a Creature whilst he is clothed with flesh and blood is
capable of attaining or enjoying. Now, that such a Peace as that, now briefly
represented unto you, must needs accompany a being filled with the Spirit, is
fully evident from the consideration of these three things, one consequentially
following and depending on another.

First, He that is filled with the Spirit must needs act for God at an
excellent and high rate of zeal and faithfulness.

Secondly, He that acts for God at such a rate as this is not much subject to
be tempted, and yet much less to be overcome or drawn into ways or works of
sin by temptation.

Thirdly (and lastly) He that is not overcome by temptation, nor drawn to
provoke God by sinning, cannot but enjoy much of that Peace of God which (as
the Apostle says) passes all understanding. To open this a little by the way.
A man who is of a large understanding may go on very far to conceive of the
blessedness of a peaceable estate and condition; he may form to himself
abundance of felicity, and set some kind of value thereon, and may compass much
ground, and travel very far into this Land, yet it passes all understanding;
for when men have sailed with their intellectual abilities very far, yet this
Peace of God has more in it; more for the comfort and accommodation of the
Creature than ever will be put to account, than ever will be drawn out by any
understanding in men. But this only by the way. But to return.

First, Luke, Act. 6.9, 10, being about to relate the Heroic Acts of Stephen,
First, In arguing and disputing down the Synagogue of the Libertines, and other
Sects; and then in his high Contest with the High Priests, and Elders, and
Scribes, and others present at the Council, where he reproved them all sharply
to their faces, saying, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears,
etc. Chap. 7.51. (exposing his life hereby to their malice and rage.) Luke, I
say, the Sacred Historian of these magnifick Acts of Stephen, gives special
notice beforehand, that he was a man full of the Holy Ghost, Acts 6.5. And
they chose Stephen a man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost, l^st otherwise
the greatness of the Actions might prejudice the belief of them in those that
should read them; Whereas the Reader taking notice that Stephen was a man
endued with more than ordinary Power and Wisdom from on High, full of the Holy
Ghost, they might upon this account look upon it as a thing no ways incredible
that Stephen should do, and speak, and suffer for both (...) did. So likewise,
when Paul, Acts 13.9. in the Condition of a stranger, undertook the bold and
high Contest against Elimas the Sorcerer (as he is called) a false Prophet,
being a great Favorite (as it seems) to Sergiue Paulus, the chief Ruler of
the Country (in the Isle of Cyprus) there is express mention made beforehand
of his being full of the Holy Ghost. Then Saul, who also is called Paul, filled
with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes upon him and said, etc. Implying, that such a
thing as this would hardly have been undertaken by Paul unless he had been
carried on by the Spirit of God within him, and that by some considerable
fullness of him. And this Paul, we now speak of, labored (we know) in the work
of the Lord more abundantly than they all; he was (as we may say) the Lord
Christ's right hand upon the Earth; he drove Satan, the God of this World,
before him from place to place, and triumphed over him every where, where he
came; he was too hard for him, and cast him down from heaven like lightning,
and turned the affairs of his Kingdom upside down, and laid wast his power,
made havoc and desolation in all the Territories which he had amongst the
generality of men. But how came it about, what was the reason why this Apostle
so much, and to such an high degree, over acted the Line of the Labors, Zeal,
and Faithfulness of all his Follows? Questionless the reason was, he had a
richer and fuller anointing of the Spirit than they; the Sails of his soul were
filled with a stronger gale of the Spirit of God than theirs: himself does, in
effect, give this account of his heroic and high Actings for Jesus Christ in
the World, Col. 1.28, 29. Whom we preach (says he) warning every man, and
teaching every man, in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus; whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working which
works in me mightily; he labored for this very purpose, to present every man
perfect in Christ, and he did it according to his working (namely, the Spirit
of Christ) which did work in him mightily, or with power. Where observe by the
way, that the Apostle says that he did labor in conformity unto the mighty
working of the grace of God, or of the Spirit of God in him; the meaning seems
to be this, that the Spirit of God, that put him on, and Paul were both agreed,
Paul as ready to go as the Spirit was to send. By this means Paul went on in
all those Heroic Actions which he did, and made great havoc and desolation
among the powers of sin, and darkness, and unbelief in the World. By means (I
say) of the Spirit, Paul submitting himself unto him, and receiving his
impressions, and going along with them, he was enabled to many great
achievements, and to labor more abundantly in the Gospel, and for the
interest of God and his glory in the World, and the good of men also, than any,
nay, all the rest of the Apostles; though they were men who were also very
serviceable in their Generation. To instance no father, the Lord Christ
himself, who was the Worthy of all Worthies that ever the great God of Heaven
and Earth employed in any service upon Earth; who was the firstborn Servant of
God, and Elder Brother to Paul himself; who kindled a fire that never was yet
quenched, nor ever shall be, until it has consumed all his Enemies; and laid a
foundation in his own blood to build up the Name of God in the greatest glory
amongst Angels and Men to the days of Eternity: He (I say) was a man of these
high and most transcendent Achievements, by the advantage he had of all other
men, in being filled with the Spirit above them all; according to that of Joh.
3.34. where it is said, that God gave him the Spirit without measure; he was
not only filled with the Spirit, but had the over flowing of the Spirit; never
did any man attain unto his pitch of zeal and faithfulness to the service of
God. So that there is no question, but that he that is filled with the Spirit
is in a capacity to Act, and cannot lightly but Act at a very high rate for God
if be do but follow the motions of the Spirit of God, and will go along with
them; then he cannot, I say, but be great in the sight of God, great in the
services of Christ, and of his Saints. If you desire to know the reason hereof,
it is, because, as the higher the wind blows, that Ship whose Sails are duly
trimmed runs so much the faster, and riddeth the more way upon the Seas:
Even so, when the heart and soul of a man shall be full of the Spirit of God,
such a person must needs be acted and carried on with more power, and vigor,
in a swifter manner or course, and be enabled to do twice as much as another in
the same compass of time, who has but a scanty presence of the Spirit of God
with him. You know it is our Saviors Expression, Joh. 3.6. That which is born
of the Spirit is Spirit. I suppose he makes mention of being born of the flesh
only to show, and make things more passable to the understanding of Nicodomus,
to make way for that which he spoke in the latter. Now says he, that which is
born of the flesh is flesh, that thou and every man knows; as the Parent that
begets a Child is of a fleshly nature, so that which is born must needs be
flesh also. And do thou not know, how a man shall be born again of the
Spirit? It is even as it is with those that be born of the flesh, they partake
of the same nature, and receive the impressions of the flesh: So it is with the
Spirit, that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit: Such as is the nature of
the Spirit of God, such also is that which is born or begotten of it, that is,
those Principles, whatsoever they are that he who is born of the Spirit does
receive, by means of the Spirit of God, must answer and be like unto those
which the Spirit of God himself has, of which he is born or begotten. Now you
know that the Spirit of God is full of the Love of God, and full of Zeal for
God, and set upon the magnifying of him in the World, and promoting his
Interest in the hearts of the Sons and Daughters of men. Now he that is born of
the Spirit must needs act and be inclined after the same manner; he will be
zealous for God, bestirring himself in his way, as the Spirit of God does in
his way. So then, this is the first thing we were to show in order to a
demonstration or proof, that a being filled with the Spirit must needs be
accompanied with abundance of peace and joy, viz. that he that is filled with
the Spirit must needs be large hearted and highly active for God.

The second thing which upon the same account we have to prove is, Solomon
says) are not much obnoxious to temptations by Satan, or however not like to
be overcome by them.

First, We say, that persons filled with the Spirit, and consequently acting
with an high hand, and great resolution for God and for Jesus Christ, are not,
in this respect, so obnoxious unto temptations; I mean, are not so like to be
assaulted, to be tempted by the Tempter. Satan has no such encouragements
from these men, they do not stand on purpose to be tempted by him, as the far
greatest part of men and women in the World do, who go so to work in the things
of God with so much deadness and lasiness that they do upon the matter invite
the Tempter. As we use to say, Opportunity makes a Thief; so the opportunity
that men offer the Tempter (who is carrying on his interest in the World, to
render it as miserable as he can at present, and as miserable as may be for
Eternity;) makes him so busy with them: Whereas those who are filled with the
Spirit do (upon the matter) cut him off of all opportunity in this kind, and
consequently make him less careful or solicitous to spend his temptations upon
such as these.

The Reason hereof is, because he has less hope to make any earnings upon such
men; the excellent Spirit, for ways and works of righteousness and holiness,
which he continually discovers in these men, breaks the heart of his hopes of
doing any good upon them, of prevailing over them. This observing of the wind
keeps him from sowing his temptations in those fields. As a man, though he has
a Quiver never so full of Arrows, cares not to shoot them against a brazen
Wall: So neither will Satan the Devil care to throw his fiery Darts against
those who are so hard to come at, who are always up, and out in the height of
their spirits for God. For as the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 9.10. he that
ploweth, or sows, ploweth and sows in hope; meaning, that no man would
either plow or sow but in hope to reap: So neither will Satan care to plow or
sow but when he has a hope of an harvest. Now his Harvest is nothing else but
the sin and wickedness of men, and unless it were for this he would not care to
tempt men. God of old gave this by way of motive and encouragement unto the
Jews to cause all their male children to appear three times a year in
Jerusalem, viz. that he would cast out the Nations before them, and enlarge
their borders; and as a fruit and consequence of this he adds, Neither shall
any man desire thy Land when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God
thrice in the year, Exodus 34.24. When I have taken such a course by magnifying
thee, by enlarging thy quarters, then no man's heart shall desire, or think of
conquering of thee. So when God has filled men and women with his Spirit, and
by means hereof has raised and enlarged their hearts to any Heroic kind of
acting and conversing in the World, and has removed sin and wickedness far
from them, there is no desire of ensnaring or foyling them like to come up into
the heart of Satan. And therefore it was that the Lord Christ was led by the
Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted by the Devil, Mat. 4.1. Mar. 1.12.
Luke 4.1. He had an anointing of the Spirit of God above all his Fellows, and
therefore the Devil had no mind to set upon him with any of his Temptations,
unless it were upon some special advantage; and therefore he was led aside into
a very desolate and howling Wilderness, amongst the wild Beasts (as Mark says)
there were some Wildernesses amongst them that had Towns, but this was
altogether without Inhabitants. All which clearly implies, that the Devil had
no mind to Duel with him, but upon special advantages, as his being ready to
suffer thorough hunger, his being amongst wild Beasts, in a place remote from
men, altogether without Inhabitants; for otherwise, what necessity was there
that the Lord Christ should be led aside into the Wilderness but only in order
hereunto? He continued fasting forty days, and afterward when he was an
hungry then he fell upon him. So likewise, the Devil, observing how mightily
the Grace and Spirit of God wrought in Paul, had (questionless) the less edge
to bestow time upon him in tempting of him; and Paul was little other in
Sathan's eye than a brazen Wall, against which he cared not to shoot. It is
true, the Apostle reports, 2 Cor. 12.7. how there was given unto him a
Messenger of Satan, a thorn in the flesh, lest he should be exalted above
measure. But first, That which is here termed a Messenger of Satan, and
described to be a thorn in the flesh, is said to have been given him [meaning,
by God,] i. e. to have been by a special interposure of God disposed to him,
not in order to a perpetration of any sin (which the greatest part of the
Devils temptations are) but to the preventing of it,

From whence (by the way) it clearly enough appears, that the thorn in the
flesh, here spoken of, was no last of uncleanness, nor any sensual
concupiscence, because then Paul would not have said that it had been given
unto him; But doubtless it is rather meant of some false Apostle that
endeavored to undermine him. Happily it may be it was some Christian Friend,
that did Paul a displeasure, that did undermine his credit in one kind or
other; but however the very end for which the Messenger of Satan was given
him, it was not to draw him into sin, but for the preventing of sin, as he
says, lest I should be exalted above measure; or lest he should conceive an
opinion of himself above that which was meet for him to conceive.

Secondly, It appears that Satan was in one kind or other over-acted by God in
sending such a Messenger, and that the Temptation was overruled by some hand
of God also. Thus it appears in the second place why those that are filled with
the Spirit of God are not obnoxious to be tempted by the Devil, and that the
Devil is not much inclined to tempt such persons as we speak of. This appears
further from Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. What is the
meaning of the Apostle but this? viz. Give him a short, and sharp, and absolute
answer, and you shall not long be troubled with him: for the D^^^ knows his
time is but short, it is shorter by many degrees now than it was then; the
Devil has no time to spare, nor to trifle away, and therefore it is like he
will not lose his labor nor time where he is resisted.

But in case such persons who are filled with the Spirit shall at any time be
tempted, they are not subject, or likely to yield unto the Temptations. The
reason of this is, as the Apostle informs us, Gal. 5.16, 17. Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, etc. That is, go along
with the Spirit of God, hearken to his motions, and they that be filled with
him cannot lightly but go along with him. The Spirit resists the Flesh, and
being in his might he is able to overcome the flesh; whilst the Tide of the
Spirit runs strong it bears the stream and current of the Flesh down
before it, 1 John 4.4. He that is in you is greater than he that is in the
World; the Spirit coming in with the fullness of his Power, though the Flesh
should attempt to carry men into ways of unworthiness, yea, though the Devil
should by his temptations strengthen the flesh; yet nevertheless, he that is in
them, the Spirit of God is greater and more mighty than corruptions are, or
than the Devil himself is. This is the second thing propounded, viz. that they
that are filled with the Spirit are not obnoxious to be tempted unto sin, or
however not so obnoxious to be overcome by temptations, as others are who have
but a scanty presence of the Spirit of God in them.

The third (and last) follows, which is, unspeakable and full of glory. Now
this is that which we are to prove unto you from the Scripture; and likewise
sound reason will stand by us in it. That joy and peace which is raised by the
Holy Ghost is far greater than the joy that men can take in silver and gold;
these kind of objects affect the heart but little comparatively: or if the
hearts of men should be so affected with these things that they run over with
that peace and joy which can be drawn from them; yet this then joy is but
groundless, a joy that has no substantial ground, it is such as w^ll nor stand
by you, it will ere long be gone, and the end of that joy will be sorrow: But
that which properly is the joy of the Lord is when that passion of joy rises
and springs up in men and women from the root of holiness, and by means of such
objects which they converse withal which are great and excellent, and of a
spiritual nature, and will bear them out in any measure or degree of rejoicing:
And as spiritual objects work upon, and move men's affections to an excellent
height, so will men also be constant and uniform in their joy and peace which
is thus raised in them: unless the working of this their joy and peace be
interrupted by men themselves, by behaving themselves unworthily toward God
and Je^us Christ; all the things in the World besides cannot do it.

When the Conscience testifies with a loud voice, that a man has lived
holily, and walked humbly with his God, has been obedient unto him in all his
ways and commands; it cannot be but that upon such a testimony a man must,
like unto Jordan in the time of harvest, overflow with joy and peace. Mercy (as
the Apostle James says, Jam. 2.13.) rejoices against Judgment; a Conscience
testifying to a man that he has been merciful, that he has done much good,
that has ministered like unto himself, according to the ability which God has
given him; such a conscience as this does make a man to rejoice against
Judgment. Now then, if this one course of worthiness be so great an advantage
unto men and women, how much greater is it when there is not only this
particular way of worthiness, but when this shall be strengthened with another
excellent way, and another, and another to that, when a man shall have this
Testimony in his conscience, that he has not only been a merciful man, but
also that in other things he has walked uprightly and perfectly before his
God; that he has not corrupted himself, neither by any unmercifulness of
Spirit, nor with any of the ways and practices of this World? When there is
such a consort of heavenly practices met together, these will enable men to
magnify themselves against the fears of death, and make men stand like Princes
before God, undaunted and unapaled. This then is the second of the four
particulars, a concurrent enjoyment whereof cannot lightly be conceived, but
that they must needs render a man's state and condition of life in this World
excellent and desirable.

The third thing, it good that this must needs render a man's condition
desirable in the World. And then fifthly, To show that this Privilege must
needs accompany our being filled with the Spirit.

First, Then by a Communion with God, I mean, an inward and spiritual converse
or intercourse of the soul with God, or a recourse making unto God upon all
occasions for direction, help, or comfort from hi^ together with a readiness in
God to correspond in all such occasions ^s these. I confess, Communion with
God, taking the word Communion in a large sense, extends farther than any
thing now expressed, and comprehends somewhat more, viz. a mutual or reciprocal
propensness between God and the Creature, to sympathize the one with the other,
according to the condition of their mutual affairs respectively, whether
prosperous or adverse; and true it is that this Communion also intercedes
between God and him that is filled with his Spirit: But in the Point before us
we chiefly intend the other, viz. a capacity or liberty of recoursing unto God
for solace, help, and direction, together with a willingness or readiness in
God to correspond or maintain intelligence with a person accordingly.

Secondly, By a free Communion in this kind, I mean, a recoursing unto God from
time to time for the ends and occasions specified; (as Paul did) with a liberty
and freedom of Spirit, with a Princelike boldness, without any mixture or touch
of fear, of that kind of fear which has torment in it; when a man has no
stand in his faith, but is able to cry, or to cry out aloud (as the word (...)
properly signifies) without any faultring or fainting, Abba Father, Romans 8.15.
or when a man (in another expression of the same Apostle) is able to come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. fearing no colors, as our common
saying is; when a man can have part and fellowship with those holy Angels who
behold the face of God continually, though with fear, yet with peace and joy
also. Now this we mean by a free Communion, when a man's heart is so settled,
and so composed that he has no encumbrance upon his faith.

Thirdly, By a large Communion with God, I mean, when a man or woman has
further dealing with God than ordinary, when by reason of the largeness of a
man's knowledge of him, and of his nature and Counsels, he has the opportunity
of treating with him about more particulars, and receiving answers from him
touching more particulars likewise; and consequently, as his knowledge of God
increases and advances so his Communion with God is enlarged and advanced
accordingly. Thus you see what we mean (in the business in hand) by Communion
with God, and by a free and large Communion with him.

Now then we are to show and make good unto you, For the first of these, that
which must needs afford an opportunity for a free Communion with God is, First
an assurance of the atonement and peace made with God by Christ, or by the
blood of Christ. Secondly, The testimony of a good Conscience upon good grounds
that (humane frailties only excepted, which come not into an account in the
case we now speak of) a man has walked (and resolves still to walk) in
sincerity and simplicity of heart before him in his whole course. ^^ow then, if
he that is filled with the Spirit be possessed with both these, or lives under
the sweet influence of them, he must needs be in a good capacity of a free
Communion with God. Now that persons who are filled with the Spirit must needs
be possessed of such an assurance of their atonement and peace made with God
by the blood of Jesus Christ, appears thus.

First, He that is filled with the Spirit must needs know that God dwells or
abides in him (as the Scriptures speak.) Secondly, That he truly and really
loves God; and from both these he cannot lightly but conclude his actual
atonement with God by Jesus Christ. And thirdly (and lastly) besides these,
the Spirit himself dwelling richly in him strongly testifies and witnesses as
much in a direct manner unto him, or unto his Spirit.

First, He that is filled with the Spirit must needs know that God dwells or
abides in him, 1 John 3.24. And he (says John) that keeps his Commandments
dwells in him, and he in him: And hereby we know that he abides in us by the
Spirit which he has given us.

But first, What is it for God to abide and dwell in a man? And secondly, How,
or upon what account do men, or may men know that God does dwell in them by the
Spirit which he has given unto them?

I answer first, God may be said to abide or dwell in a man or woman, when they
are ever and anon acted and drawn forth, upon all occasions which lie in their
way, to serve him, and to do business for him; and this with the same readiness
of mind, delight, and faithfulness, as himself could be supposed to do, if he
were in their places and conditions; so that what a man or woman does in this
case for God, a stander by may reasonably think that God himself did it (as in
a sense it is true that he does do it) and not they; for he stands at their
right hand assisting of them. I conceive, the meaning of the Scriptures when
they speak of Gods dwellng in men, it may be conceived after some such manner
as this. Two Friends live in two Countries far remote, many a hundred miles
perfonally distant one from the other: now it must be supposed that these two
Friends knew one another, and each of them must also believe that the other is
in being, by which means these two Friends have a dwelling one in the heart of
another: And in this sense Christ is said to dwell in men by faith, which is
making way to the other dwelling. As suppose a man that is in a remote Country
beyond the Sea, has a very good Friend dwelling here; and he has much
business to be looked after in this Country where his Friend lives: Now if this
Friend beyond the Seas dwell in his Friend here, in his heart and soul, this
man will be drawn, by means of his Friend that dwells in (...), to look after
what is for his benefit and advantage. And so likewise, if he dwell in his
Friends mind and soul who is beyond the Seas, he will act there upon the same
account for the benefit and advantage of this Friend also. Now what is the
reason why a man is drawn forth with so much diligence and carefulness to mind
his own business, but because every man dwells in himself, every man has an
indwelling in his own heart and soul? Sometimes indeed, and in some cases, men
dwell out of themselves, and depart from themselves; as we use to say, a man
dwells where he freely and heartily loves; because he does not so much mind his
own affairs, being gone out of himself to that which is beloved: In such a
Sense as this God is said to dwell in a man, when a man for Gods sake, or by
means of that indwelling of God in him is acted and drawn forth to mind and
look after the occasions and affairs of God in the World, to look after the
concernments of his Kingdom and glory, and of his truth, and of his servants,
and the like. So on the other hand a man may be said to dwell in God, when God,
out of that love which he bears unto him, will act and give out himself
freely for his satisfaction and peace, and for the reducing his condition unto
a desirable posture: I say, in such a case a Believer is said to dwell in God.
Now, that it is a duty lying upon us both to abide or dwell in Christ, or God,
and so to have God dwelling in us (there is the same reason of Gods abiding in
us, and of our abiding or dwelling in him:) That these (I say) are things to be
provided for, and procured by men themselves (I still mean by those means and
helps which are vouchsafed by God in order hereunto) appears from that
admonition of Christ, from Joh. 15.4, 5. Abide in me, (says Christ) and I in
you, i. e. Let me abide in you: or, and I will abide in you. Abide in me, take
such a course, remember your selves, consider what you have to do, that you may
abide in me. And in the next verse, He that abides in me, and I in him,
brings forth much fruit.

But what does Christ mean, to abide in him? What is it that he prescribes them
to do for their abiding in him? For it is not to be supposed, or thought, that
they could abide in him by doing nothing; no, nor yet that they should abide in
him simply by abiding in him; as if their abiding in him could or should be a
means of their abiding in him: Therefore when he does admonish them to abide in
him, his meaning is (as we now said) that they should take such a course, and
use such means whereby they might abide in him. What this course or means is,
by which men may abide in God and Christ, is laid down by the Apostle John, 1 John 3.24. He that k^epeth his Commandments abides in him, and he in him, and
hereby we know, etc. So that when Christ exhorts his Disciples to abide in
him, his meaning is nothing else, but that he would have them keep his
Commandments, and by that means they should manage their own occasions by his
love, and by his power, and wisdom; and he would manage his oc^^^ons with their
hands, and with their hearts, and with their affections. Abide in me, and I in
you; if we take it Provisory, Abide in me, and know that I shall then abide in
you, or let me abide in you, or that I may abide in you. I confess, this is a
good and proper sense; For the latter Clause, and I in you, implies, that
there is no man has any dwelling in Christ, but that first Christ has his
dwelling in him. For it is not man that stands and knocks at the door of
Christ's heart, but it is Christ that first stands and knocks at the hearts
of men: If any man opens unto him, then Christ comes in and dwells there;
as soon as the Creature does but open the door and give him entertainment,
Jesus Christ comes in, and takes up his abode, and then gives him who
opens unto him place in his heart also: And so there are two Friends looking
after and minding the affairs one of another. It is true, the Creature has the
advantage of it: For such a Friend as Jesus Christ is of ten thousand times
greater concernment and advantage unto him than he can be unto Jesus Christ;
yet nevertheless, as he has many great and weighty occasions, which cannot be
transacted or managed by any other hand but only by Jesus Christ, I say, cannot
be managed by himself alone, nor unless he abide in Christ, and have suffcient
place in his heart and soul. So on the other hand, Jesus Christ (as the Design
of God is now laid) has much business that cannot be managed nor carried on
but by such a kind of Agent or Instrument as the weak and contemptible Creature
man is: I say, Jesus Christ has much to do in the World, which cannot be
transacted according to his mind and desire without the hand and heart of the
Saints be in it to carry on the Enterprise. He has the World to convince of
sin, his Enemies to be confounded, and their mouths stopped; He has Patterns
and Examples of Righteousness and true Holiness to be held forth and exhibited
unto the World: He has his Gospel to be preached, carried on, and propagated
in the World so long as the foundation of it shall stand. Now these are his
Engines which he must make use of to carry on his interest in the World; and as
it was said concerning the Ass, that silly Creature, the Lord had need of him,
and therefore his Owner must let him go, to fulfill a great Prediction that was
before of him: Even so Christ continually stands in need of the helping hand,
and of the hearts and affections of the Children of men; therefore he does
exhort his Disciples that they should take such a course that they might dwell
in him, and that he might dwell in them; and that he might not be put out of
them. Now when men shall cool and decline in their affections unto Ghrist, and
unto the truths of the Gospel; when they shall take in any other Inmate or
Indweller, whose interest shall command the interest of Jesus Christ, and whom
they shall be more ready to serve and obey; this is to discharge, and not
suffer Jesus Christ to dwell any longer in them. But on the other hand, when
men shall give this Inmate or indweller Jesus Christ good entertainment in
their hearts and souls by bringing forth much fruit unto him, this will
strengthen his hand to make his abode there. Now where Christ thus dwells in
a man, that he seriously minds his interest and affairs, Christ on the other
hand, by means of this mutual cohabitation, dwelling or abiding of a man in
him, will always be ready to mind his occasions, to do him good, to project
his peace, comfort, and advantage in every kind. Now then, inasmuch as it is a
matter of very great consequence to the Believer that he should be active and
operative for God; so it cannot be thought but that Jesus Christ will put him
on, and be his remembrancer from day to day of that which is his duty to do; he
has not only an advantage of being fruitful that way, but to be fruitful
according to that degree of interest that Jesus Christ has in him. So that he
that dwells in Christ must needs bring forth much fruit, because Christ will
not be wanting unto him to quicken, and to strengthen him, and to give him
wisdom to do all things which he is called to do.

Secondly,

I reply first, By the Spirit which God is here said to have given us, is not
meant (I conceive) directly, and immediately the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of
God, but rather that Spirit which is begotten or born in us, of, or by the
Spirit; for the Spirit of God is wont to beget another Spirit in man in his own
Image and Likeness, according to that of the Gospel of John, That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit (as we
lately interpreted;) that which is born of the flesh is of a fleshly nature,
and has all the properties of the flesh, heaviness, and dumpishness, etc. and
so that which is begotten by the Spirit of God does resemble that Spirit which
does produce it. Now, as the Spirit of God, that begets this Spirit in a
man, is holy and pure, a Spirit of Love, and Meekness, and Gentleness, etc.
Even so is that Spirit which is begotten, a Spirit of Meekness, Love, Holiness,
Humility, etc. The reason why I rather thus understand the word Spirit (in the
place before us) is first, because this spirit (I mean) the spirit of a man,
wrought and new framed within him by the Spirit of God is the more immediate
principle of a man's actions, and the Spirit of God (in this respect) the more
remote, because he produces and works all our good works by the mediation of
that Spirit, or new frame of heart which he has raised in us. Now then, that
Spirit which has the more immediate conjunction with, or influence upon our
actions is more easily discernable by us; and consequently more proper to
discover, or make known that which is discoverable by it, as the dwelling of
God in us (in this place.)

Secondly, The Holy Ghost does not discover himself, or his presence in a man
(at least not his sanctifying presence of which we now speak) but only by that
spirit which he begets in his own likeness (as has been said) and by the
Fruits, or Works of the Spirit. For who can say upon any competent grounds, I
have the Spirit of God in me, unless he find the frame of his heart, and the
temper of his former spirit changed within him, and this for the better? He
that says he has the Spirit of God in him, upon any other ground or account,
speaks he knows not what, nor has any man reason to believe him. Now then,
if the Holy Ghost be not manifestive of himself, or of his own presence in men,
but only by that spirit which he begets or creates in men, and by the works
which this Spirit produces in them; but this Spirit, especially by the works
which it produces, is plainly manifestive of it self, and consequently of all
other things which must of necessity accompany it (amongst which the dwelling
of God in men is one:) It clearly follows, that this is the Spirit by which the
Holy Ghost himself here says, that we know that God abides, or dwells in us.

Thirdly, That Spirit in a man which must declare and evidence Gods dwelling or
abiding in him, must be a Spirit constantly, or habitually abiding in him: Now
the constant and habitual abiding of the Spirit of God in those who have
received him cannot be known but only by that habitual frame of heart, out of
which they act; for otherwise, there is a remaining of the Spirit of God in
them which is not sanctifying; many had the Holy Ghost in them to work
Miracles, but the sanctifying presence of the Holy Ghost in men cannot be
known, but only by the habitual and blessed frame of heart out of which they
act in the ways of God; and therefore in this respect also it is most likely
that the Holy Ghost means the spirit which is begotten in the hearts by this
Spirit.

Fourthly (and lastly) This Spirit we speak of, which is begotten in men by the
Spirit of God, may be said to be given unto us by God as well as the Holy Ghost
himself. For as God, when he gave Christ unto men, may be said to have given
them all things appertaining unto life and ble^^edness. He that has given the
Fountain may be said to have given the streams: So he that has given the
sanctifying Spirit, may be also said to have given all other things and
blessings that depend upon the same. Thus then we see this clear before us,
that he that is filled with the Spirit cannot but know that God dwells and
abides in him; and this was the first thing mentioned, which must needs
possess and fill men with a rich assurance that their atonement and peace is
made with God by the blood of Christ. For most assuredly God dwells in no man
but in him who believes in him. And secondly, Whosoever believes in him, his
atonement is complete with God. Thirdly (and lastly) the man or woman in whom
God dwells either knows or readily may know that God dwells in him.

The second thing propounded, Joh. 4.18. There is no fear in love, but perfect
love casts out fear; because fear has torment, he that fears is not made
perfect in love. There is no fear in love, i. e. with love, or where love is
found: The Preposition (...) is often used for (...) with, as 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold
fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me in faith [or with
faith] and love which is in Christ Jesus. So again, Mat. 16.27. For the Son of
man shall come in the glory [that is, with the glory] of his Father. There is
no fear in love; meaning, the love of God, and the fear of God [ i. e. the fear
of being hurt by God, or of receiving evil from him, as he explaineth himself
immediately] cannot stand together; But (says he) perfect love casts out
fear.

First, It is evident, that he speaks here principally and more particularly of
the love of God in men. Secondly, By perfect love he means love grown to a good
maturity and strength in the heart and soul of a man; when it is active and
brings forth a considerable proportion of fruit. By perfect love here he
cannot mean love which is absolutely and completely perfect, which is not
capable of any more intenseness or further enlargement; for there is no such
love of God to be found amongst men that dwell in houses of clay, no, not among
the greatest of the Saints; yea, it is a question, whether the love of the
Angels themselves be perfect in this sense or no. The word perfect and
perfection are most frequently used when applied to man, or any other Creature,
not in a strict or absolute, but a limited and diminutive sense. Things are
said to be perfect when they are grown to any good degree of perfection; So he
that offends not in word is said to be a perfect man, Jam. 3.2. that is, it
is a sign that he is an able Christian; so love to God, when it is grown to a
considerable strength in a man that it yields forth fruit in abundance, then
it is called perfect love; and I do not remember where the word is otherwise
used when applied to the Creature or things relating to it. Indeed when applied
to God it is to be taken in the strictest sense, but when applied to the
Creature in a lower sense.

Thirdly, It is here said, that the love of God when it is perfect (in the
sense declared) casts out fear; meaning, that the Genius or property of this
holy and heavenly affection is to work or cast our fear [ viz. that kind of
fear which has pain, or torment in it, as he presently expresses himself]
perfect love casts out fear, viz. when it is set on work, and employed
accordingly; for no passion, or affection in man acts or moves, but only
upon some apprehensions or other answerable to that affection, especially
spiritual affections, or affections when spiritualized, and as such, do not
produce the effects that are most natural and proper to them, but by the
mediation and engagement of the understanding. The reason hereof seems to be,
because such affections as these, are not natural unto men, but are as it were
grafted and implanted upon, or into their natures by the Spirit of God,
associating himself in the work; by means whereof their effects and
consequents, especially some of the richest, and choicest, and most excellent
of them are like strangers unto them; they cannot be produced by the affections
themselves but by the intervening of the Reasons, and Judgments, and
Understandings of men consulting with the Scriptures or Word of God. Now where
such affections take place in men, the affection is ready to produce the fruit
that is natural and proper to it; so that when it is said, Perfect love casts
out fear, it does not import that this is always done, but only that it may be
done, that there is that in the nature of love that is sufficient and proper to
do it. We lately gave you this Rule, that Verba agendi quandoque naturam seu
vim tantum innuunt, Verbs properly signifying action many times only declare
the natures and properties of things, and what they are able, apt, and likely
to do; as when the Apostle says, that knowledge puffs up, but charity, or
love edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. the meaning is not, that knowledge always puffs
up, but only it imports, that there is a kind of property in knowledge which
is apt to puff up. And so when he says, Charity edifieth, the meaning is not,
that this grace is always working thus, but it only declares the genius of
this famous grace, viz. That it is apt to provoke men and women to seek for
their spiritual enri^hing with the light and knowledge of God. So here, Perfect
love casts out fear, i. e. it is the nature and property of love to cast fear
out of the heart, viz. when it is grown perfect in the sense lately declared.

If it be here demanded,

To this I reply, if the act or effect here spoken of, the casting out of fear,
did proceed simply and solely from love, let the degree of it be what it will;
doubtless, love in the lowest degree of it as well as in that perfection or
strength here required would do the service: But as, in another case, faith is
said to act or work by love; so in the case in hand, Love in casting out fear
works by knowledge. As thus, a man must not simply love God, but he must know
he loves God; for otherwise our love to God will not be found to have such
power to cast out fear; as a Sun-Dial, the use and end of it being to show the
time of the day, yet will do nothing in this kind but only when the Sun shines
upon it: So it is in this case, if the love of God be in the heart of man, yet
if it be not shined upon by the understanding, and so have strength and vigor
added to it, it will be insignificant, and do nothing toward the casting out
of fear. Or as the Well of water near Hagar, Genesis 21.19. did not refresh her,
nor minister any hope of life until she knew where it was: So likewise is it
with the love of God, if it lies unknown to the mind of a man it will be as if
it were asleep, it will not stir, nor do any thing that is worthy of it. If a
man or woman, who loves God but a little, yet really and truly, could certainly
know that they do thus love him; this lower degree of this affection would cast
out fear. So that the reason why this great effect of casting out fear is
appropriated to love, when it is perfect, is, because usually it is not (nay,
it very hardly can be) known but only where it shows it self like the Sun in
the Firmament of Heaven, otherwise a man will be always questioning whether he
love God yea or no. Now when a man cannot be thoroughly satisfied that he loves
God, it cannot be that his love should cast out fear. But if he have the
knowledge that he loves God, this love of God, though but small, would cast
out fear as well as the other which is perfect.

If it be further demanded, But why should love, though perfect, cast out fear?
What is there, or what may there be conceived to be in the nature of it that
should have that kind of antipathy against fear, so as to remove, and not to
suffer it to abide in the heart and soul?

I answer, The reason of this effect, as proceeding from love, is to be found
as well in the nature of that fear, which is cast out by it, as in love it
self, or the nature hereof. For it is not the property of love to cast out
every thing else as well as fear. Therefore the Reason, at least somewhat of
the reason why it works here by way of antipathy, does depend upon the nature
and genius of this fear; and the reason here given of this effect of love is in
reference only to the nature of fear. Perfect love (says he) casts out fear,
because fear has Torment; so that it is that fear which is apt to offend,
grieve, disquiet, and discourage the hearts of men, that is cast out by perfect
love. But why should that fear which has this property in it, namely, to
torment, give an opportunity to love to throw it out of the hearts of men? The
Reason hereof again is, because the love of God is a grace of such high
acceptance with God, and renders those, wherever it is found, Friends of God;
and God is not willing that any of his Friends, any of those that love him,
should taste any thing that is grievous or obstructive unto their peace; and
therefore he has given perfect love this property, he has put enmity between
this principle of love in men, and between whatsoever does pain, or trouble, or
torment them; and whatsoever it has of this kind of property to discharge all
fear that has torment in it, it has by Commission from God. And the very
truth is, that if we would examine the business, we should find, that as fear
has torment, so there is nothing that has torment in it but fear, or nothing
without fear; all sicknesses and pains in the body, if you could but divide
fear from them; they would not torment at all; if a man did not fear the
continuance of them they would not disquiet nor trouble him. Now it is the
effect of love that it does remove from the hearts and souls of men whatsoever
is of a disquieting import unto them. The truth is, that love would do so
amongst men, were it perfectly known or understood: If I knew that this man did
know that my heart was perfect with him, and that I did entirely love him, I
would not fear that that man would willingly do me any harm. So then this is
one reason why love to God casts out fear, because that a man by this means
is mightily persuaded concerning God, that he is so good and gracious that he
will not fall heavy upon his Friends, those that love him. Yea, it is
impossible that any such thought of God should enter into the heart of such a
man to think that God should destroy any that do love him, and seek his honor
and glory, or that he should not do them good, and seek their peace and safety.
The Apostle takes this for a Principle that no man will gainsay, That all
things shall work together for good to those that love God, Romans 8.8. This is a
Principle which we all agree in, that Gods love is such to those, that we
cannot think but that all his Creatures, and all his Providence shall be
Tributaries to them. In the second place then it is evident from the Premises,
both latter and former, that he that is filled with the Spirit cannot but know
that he loves God.

Thirdly (and lastly) The third thing mentioned, i.e. with his heart, soul, and
conscience] that this atonement is made, and he accepted by God: this is the
Apostles express Doctrine, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our spirits that we are the Children of God: The Spirit it self, or the Spirit
himself, (...). the Apostle by this Emphatical expression, the Spirit himself,
seems To imply, that the thing or act which he speaks of, is of a most
worthy nature and import, of a sacred consequence, and such as well becomes
him, who is the Agent or Actor of it, the Spirit of God himself. But what is
that worthy thing which the Apostle here attributes to so great an Agent as the
Spirit of God? It is a witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Children of
God; which signifies as much, as that our Atonement is made, and that we are
at peace with him; it signifies this (I say) and somewhat more. Well, out how
are we to conceive of that act, here ascribed unto the Holy Ghost, his
witnessing this to, and with our Spirits that we are the Children of God? The
Expression of witnessing with our spirit plainly implies, that it is but one
and the same Act of witnessing, or witness-bearing, which is here jointly or in
common ascribed unto the Spirit of God, and the spirit of men; and that the
Spirit of God does not bear any such witness, as that here mentioned, apart
from the Spirit of men, or when this does not witness also. From whence it
appears, that the witnessing, or joynt-witnessing of the Spirit, here spoken
of, is only a fortifying, strengthening, raising, and enriching of the Witness
or Testimony of a man's own spirit: So when the heart, and soul, and conscience
of a man shall with more than ordinary strength, power, and authority testify
unto, or persuade him that he is the Child of God; Or rather thus, when a man
shall find himself persuaded and possessed upon these high terms, with such an
apprehension, it is a sign that the Spirit is in this persuasion, and that it
is he that gives the vigor, and all that which is more than ordinary unto it.
As the stream and current of a River is doubled and trebbled in the swiftness
of the motion, and in the depth and breadth of it when the rainwater, or the
waters of a Land-floud join themselves in the same motion with it, making
together one and the same stream: In like manner, when the apprehension or
persuasion in a man of his being a Child of God magnifies it self at a high
rate against fears, and doubtings, and jealousies, in every kind, it argues a
Conjunction of both Spirits, the Spirit of God and the spirit of man himself;
and that which is so over bearing, and overruling in this persuasion is
appropriately from the Spirit of God; according to that of our Apostle
immediately preceding the words in hand. But ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, by which, or whereby we cry Abba, Father. We cry, (...), i.e. cry
aloud, or with all our might (as we lately noted the proper import of the
word.) Now to cry aloud Abba, Father, signifies the inner man calling of God
Father, or a man's addressing himself unto God as unto a Father with a good
courage or Princelike confidence. A man's own spirit (I mean, with such an
assistance of the Spirit of God as the weakest Christian has) may whisper, or
secretly mutter, Abba, Father. But by the way, this is to be remembered.

First, That when the Apostle says, that by the Spirit, Abba, Father, he is
not so to be understood, as if he meant, that every one who has received of
the Spirit of Adoption, in any measure, were in a capacity hereby to cry, much
less actually did cry aloud, Abba, Father, upon the terms lately expressed; but
he means, that that Spirit which was sent down from heaven to accompany the
Gospel, and the Ministry of it, might be received, entertained, and entreated
by men and women as that they might become enlarged and enabled by him to cry
Abba, Father. Things use to be described and especially commended by the best
and richest of their fruits, and by what they are serviceable for when they are
in their perfection, and not by their mean or less considerable fruits and
services. As the Apostle commending and setting forth the excellency of love,
or Christian Charity, says, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. (among other things) Charity does
not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil. And again, Charity bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things, etc. His meaning in these descriptions
and commendations of Charity, is, not to imply that Charity in any degree
qualifies men for these high and excellent deportments of themselves in the
World; or as if persons in any degree charitable did perform all these worthy
things in their perfection: But that the nature of charity is such, and that
the means vouchsafed by God, to advance this grace in their souls, are such,
that men and women may be raised and enlarged in it to such a perfection or
degree as to be in a capacity of doing all these great and excellent things
formerly mentioned. So when Paul says, We have received the Spirit of Adoption
whereby we cry Abba, Father; his meaning is not, that every one who received
this Spirit in any measure or degree does actually thus cry, or is in a present
and immediate capacity to do it; but that this Spirit being once received may
be so comported with, and entreated by men, as that he will advance his
presence to such a fullness or degree, that they shall be able by means of that
strong testimony to cry Alba, Father. This is the first thing to be remembered
by the way.

A second thing, That the Spirit (speaking of the Spirit of God) witnesses
with our spirits that we are the Children of God [ i.e. (as we expounded)
mightily fortifies and strengthens that Testimony of our own spirit in this
behalf,] He does not suppose that every man and woman, who are more than
ordinarily raised in this persuasion or apprehension of themselves [I mean,
that they are the Children of God] receive the abundance of this testimony or
persuasion from the Spirit of God. For very possible it is, that men and women,
who are not the Children of God, but far from it, may be very strongly and
confidently persuaded that they stand in this relation unto God: But certain it
is, that such a persuasion as this in such persons comes not either in whole,
or in part, from the Spirit of God; because he never joyneth in any Testimony
whereby an untruth is confirmed. There may be another Spirit, a Spirit of
delusion, that stands at their right hand, ready to fall in with them at such
a turn as this, and (it is like) will make their persuasion great within them;
Our Savior, Joh. 16.2. gives an account of some that would think that they
did God good service when they put to death the Disciples of Christ, one of the
most horrid Acts of Impiety which could lightly be committed. And the Jews
themselves, with whom the Lord Christ had to do in the days of his flesh, were
as high and as confident, as confidence it self could make them, that they were
the Children of God, yea, the firstborn Children of God; and if there were no
more Children of God in the World, yet they must needs be of this Generation.
Now most true it is, that this confidence in such persons is, in a sense,
supernatural too; for certainly the Spirit of Error and Delusion, which
stands at the right hand of sinful and unworthy persons, does suggest this
unto them, that they are the Children and Saints of God, and falls in with
them after the manner of the Spirit of God; and if he finds but the least
mutterings or whisperings this way in such persons (whose spiritual estate and
condition he knows much better than themselves do) he will fall in with might
and main (according to his manner of working and operation) to help to raise
and fortify this persuasion in them; he will give them of this Wine to drink
until their senses be bewitched and besotted, and by this means their Judgments
and understandings bear them in hand with the highest confidence that they are
the only Sons and Daughters of God; and therefore we must take heed, and learn
to distinguish, and not believe the confident testimony and assurance which
some will pretend unto, of being the Sons and Daughters of God; we must
carefully distinguish between the Spirit of God himself, and the Spirit of
Error and Delusion, who (as I said) does but lie in wait to hear the Spirit of
a man whisper (whom he knows not to be a Child of God, but to be a wicked,
proud, formal, and hypocritical person) and then he will fall in amain with him
to strengthen his confidence: And therefore in respect of the degree and
measure of his confidence (happily) it may be as well with him that is deluded by
Satan, as it is with him that is strengthened and raised by the Spirit of God
himself; Yet, in respect of the manner of it, and several circumstances that do
attend this false persuasion and confidence, it may easily be discerned from
that which is true. The Apostles speaks, Col. 2.18. of some persons that were
vainly puffed up with their fleshly minds, whose hearts were not established with
grace, but with meats; meaning, that these carnal observations had puffed them
up with swelling thoughts of themselves. Therefore it is to be considered and
remembered, that the persons, with whose Spirits the Holy Ghost joins in
Testimony that they are the Children of God, are only such who are the Children
of God indeed, i.e. who approve themselves for such by an innocent, blameless,
and fruitful Conversation, and particularly, who reverence the Counsel and
Appointments of God in the Ministry of the Gospel, by attending hereupon from
day to day.

If we had time we might give this Item unto you, Received ye the Spirit (says
the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3.2.) by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? It was the hearing of the Doctrine of the Gospel, by which the Spirit of
Adoption entered into them; and this Spirit came down together with the Gospel
from heaven, to attend and accompany that in the Ministry and the Preaching of
it by the Apostles, and others that had part and fellowship with them in that
work. Even as the Spirit of fear or bondage (which the Apostle speaks of)
went forth or issued into the World by the Ministry of the Law, and upon the
giving of it upon Mount Sinai, unto which the Apostle alludes when he says, Ye
have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear; meaning, that they had
received it, namely, in their Fore Fathers, when they were in their loins; But
now (says he) you have received (namely, by the Gospel, and the Ministry
thereof) the Spirit of Adoption, by which you cry Alba, Father. Now then, when
you shall find men and women that are full of confidence and assurance that
they are the Children of God, if this Spirit have entered into them upon the
hearing of a false Gospel, or upon the Preaching of another Jesus, and not the
Christ of God, this is a dangerous sign that it is a Spirit of Delusion that
possesses and fills them with a windy confidence that they are the Children
of God, when indeed they are not; because the Spirit of God is not wont to go
forth, nor to enter into the hearts and consciences of men, but where the
glorious Gospel of God is received in the truth of it. We could instance in
some particulars, for there are (as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8.5. in his
days in respect of Gods and Lords) many that were Gods and Lords so called,
but (says he) unto us there is but one, etc. So the truth is, at this day
there are amongst us, and round about in this City, and near to us Gospels
many, and Preachers many; but in the mean time, there is but one Gospel for us,
for those that know the truth as it is in Jesus. And yet many of these Gospels,
we speak of, have their spirits that do attend upon them; and for the most part
they do wait upon these very Gospels and Ministries that are the rankest of all
others, filling the Receivers of them with the greatest assurance and
confidence that they are the Children of God, and in the right way of
worshipping and serving of him.

There is a Gospel which joins Baptism with Faith in Christ by way of necessity
to Justification (and so to Salvation;) even as the Jewish Converts did
Circumcision in the Apostles days, of which Paul says unto them, Gal. 5.2. I
say unto you, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; meaning,
if ye be Circumcised with an opinion of being justified thereby, Christ shall
profit you nothing.

There is another Gospel preached amongst us, which teaches you (in effect,
and underhand, yea, by express and near-hand consequence) that if you be
elected, how loosely, wickedly, profanely, and desperately soever ye shall
live, yet you are in no danger of perishing; yea, and that however you shall go
to work, God will bring you in one time or other; and that he will so far
change the state of affairs with you that you shall neither will nor choose but
to repent, and so be saved: together with several other Doctrines and Notions
of like dangerous consequence and import.

Again thirdly, Another Gospel (so called) ye have preached amongst you, which
calls you from the Scriptures, and the light of life which shines there,
unto that which they call a light within them (though that light be never so
dark;) As if the Scriptures and the light within men, so far as it is light,
and not darkness, were at odds: Or as if the conveying of Scripture light into
the hearts and Judgments of men were like to obscure, darken, or obstruct, and
not rather to increase, brighten, and perfect that light in men. This kind of
Gospel is of as dangerous consequence as any of the other.

A fourth Gospel preached abroad in the World is, that all that ever will or
shall be justified were justified from Eternity; and that upon this account God
sees no sin in them. Yea, there is a Gospel which preaches down all
Preaching, and denies the usefulness thereof. Many other Gospels there are (so
called in the World) which though they be at great variance amongst themselves;
yet they all agree in enmity and opposition to the true Gospel of Christ; like
Sampson's Foxes. But there is no end of enumerating these high, and by kind of
strains which men run into from day to day, thinking thereby still to better
their condition Godward. As you find many in a lingering condition with
sickness, that think if they should but change into such a Room, or into such a
Bed, they should be better: So when men have not made a serious and
conscientious improvement of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, whilst they did
attend and live under the Ministry and Preaching of it, but find themselves
dissatisfied in their hearts and souls, and not enjoying themselves upon terms
of that content which they desire; they think now, that if they do but go forth
into such other ways, and walk in such other paths, that then they shall be
made great, then they shall reign like Kings and Princes in the Profession of
Jesus Christ. Now the great Enemy of their Peace, and of the Salvation of their
souls, lies in wait to meet with such occasions and advantages as these are;
and therefore if such Notions do but begin to bud, and put forth in their first
conceptions, or that the hearts of men do but begin to hanker that way, the
Devil helps them with his persuasions to go on; and then men are very apt to be
persuaded that now the Spirit of God is come to them, and that he does procure
them that great peace of God which they could never attain nor find from his
hand before. I cannot pass by that Expression (though but lately handled, in
the Scriptures now opened) (...), because it carries in it so pregnant a
Testimony against that dangerous Doctrine, which of late has began to make
head amongst us, viz That the Holy Ghost is not God. Now if it be (...), the
Spirit himself, and not any other inferior spirit subservient unto him, who
bears witness with the Spirits of the Saints all the World over that they are
the Children of God; then can he be no other than God himself who fills all
places with his presence.

Thus then we see a third thing, viz. they have the Spirit of Adoption within
them, testifying aloud, and with authority, with their spirits that they are
the Children of God, and consequently, that their sins are fully attoned in his
sight. And this was the former particular of the two propounded, by which men
and women must needs be prepared, and put into a rich capacity of enjoying free
Communion with God. We shall not need (I suppose) to add any thing to prove or
show, that a clear assurance of a man's Atonement made with God opens an
effectual door unto him for a free Communion with God. This is lightsome and
evident enough of it self, especially if we take the word Atonement in a
complete signification; I mean, as it includes and carries with it grace and
acceptance of a man's person with God. For when God is actually reconciled unto
a Creature, and has accepted an atonement for his sin, He does not only cease
to be an Enemy unto him, remaining still as a Stranger, or as one from whose
anger or displeasure the Person reconciled and attoned is indeed free, but has
no further interest in him; but upon this said reconciliation unto this
Creature he becomes a most real Friend unto him, and admits him into his
special grace and favor. Amongst men it is often times otherwise, a man does not
remain an Enemy after Atonement, for that properly is imported in the word
Atonement: But in our Atonement with God there is another thing included, and
is inseparable from it, viz. special interest in the love and favor of God.
Indeed with men (as I said) the case may be otherwise, when there has been an
Atonement and Reconciliation made between two persons at a distance, yet they
may remain as strangers one unto another; there is no necessity that upon the
making up of the breach there must be intimate love and friendship: But it is
otherwise with God; he never comes to be reconciled unto any, but presently he
opens his heart and soul, and does entreat them graciously upon their
atonement made. Now then, if men, for whose sins God has accepted the
Atonement made by Christ, be not only delivered from all danger of suffering
by his displeasure; but further, be received and entertained into the greatest
respects of love and friendship; Evident it is, that they who are possessed of,
and do enjoy these two Privileges, especially being assured of their
possession in this kind, are in a good capacity of enjoying free Communion with
God: What should there be to hinder? And he that is filled with the Spirit, as
he must of necessity be in the possession of both, cannot but know that his
Atonement is made with God; and so (as we have lately showed) he must needs
have assurance also that he stands thus possessed of them. Yet

Secondly, Joh. 3.21. If our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God; if our hearts, i.e. our Consciences, condemn us not [ i.e. by a
Metonymie of the Effect put for the Cause; if our Consciences do not charge sin
upon us, do not upbraid us with voluntary and habitual neglect of, or
disobedience unto the Command of Christ] then have we confidence, or boldness,
or liberty of face, or of speech (as the word, (...), more properly signifies)
toward God. By the way, the Apostle is here to be understood of such persons
whose hearts or consciences are in some measure enlightened with the knowledge
of the ways and Precepts of God, and more particularly, with the knowledge of
his Precept or Command of believing in his Son Jesus Christ, as it follows in
ver. 23. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe in his Son Jesus
Christ. For otherwise, many men's hearts may not condemn them, yea, may
(possibly) commend and justify them who yet have not (...), any confidence, at
least not any right or ground of confidence (as some expound the word) toward
God. The hearts of those (I formerly instanced) who thought they should do God
good service in putting the Disciples of Christ to death, did not condemn them,
at least in this; and if not in so great and broad a sin as this, possibly not
in any other; yet had they no right or ground of boldness or confidence toward
God. So likewise they, of whom the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.18. in this Chapter,
and gives this Character, that they were vainly puffed up in their fleshly minds;
whose hearts were established (as he speaks elsewhere) not by grace, but by
meats; it is like their hearts did not condemn them, yet had they not ground of
confidence toward God. So also Paul himself had confidence enough in himself
when he had no ground, when he thought he ought to do many things against the
name of Christ. Therefore we must needs limit the Apostle John, in the passage
before us, to persons who have some competent knowledge of the Gospel, and of
the great things contained in it. And indeed, if we look narrowly to it, he
seems to speak appropriately unto such, and of such only. Beloved, if our
hearts condemn us not, etc. And whereas, being understood of such, he says,
Then have they confidence toward God; his meaning is not, that all such
actually and de facto have this confidence; but that they have a right to it,
and ground for it, and upon consideration and enquiry may have it. As many
things in Scriptures are said to be done by men, when it is meet they should do
them, or have a good ground or reason for the doing of them. Thus, Romans 6.8. If
we be dead with him, we believe that we shall live with him. We believe, i.e.
we have ground or reason sufficient to believe, that we shall live with him. So
1 John 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does
righteousness is born of him, i.e. of God; i.e. ye may know there are means in
abundance whereby ye may know, that he who does righteousness, and he only, is
born of God; meaning, that he proceeds from him according to this new capacity,
or new birth, which is nothing else but a participation of the Divine Nature.
As Children have Communion with their Parents in their nature: so he that does
Righteousness is partaker of the same Nature with God and Jesus Christ. And so
when God says, speaking of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. That he will command his
Children, and his House after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord; he
does not suppose, that they would certainly keep the way of the Lord; for we
know many of them did otherwise, and were cast out of his sight; therefore this
is not spoken by way of strict Prophecy, as if God had foretold what Abraham's
House and Family, and Posterity after him should do it: and therefore the
meaning must be, that they had ground in abundance to have done what Abraham
commanded them, viz. to keep the way of the Lord. Now then, when he says, If
our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; he clearly
implies, that where the heart of a man or woman does (in the sense declared)
condemn them, i.e. charge them with the customary and willing practice of any
known sin, or neglect of any Command of God, there can be no place for any
boldness or confidence toward God. The reason is, because fear and dread of
Divine Displeasure follows the consciousness of sin; as the shadow follows or
attends the body in the Sun. It does not indeed always follow sin, because sin
many times is committed where it is not known: but wherever it is committed
with knowledge, or against knowledge (for these are the same in the case we
speak of) there it is always accompanied with some impressions or other of
God's disapprobation or displeasure, until the sinner has recollected himself
by repentance, and sought the face of God. Thus then we see, that the testimony
of a good conscience, especially in conjunction with the assurance that a man's
Atonement is made with God, must needs invest him with a rich capacity of
enjoying a free Communion with God. If you ask, Why shall a man's not being
condemned by his heart (upon the terms specified) give him a right, or be a
regular ground of boldness, or confidence toward God? I reply, Because as fear
of shame and punishment from God are the natural results of sin, especially of
sin against knowledge (as we lately intimated:) So is expectation or hope of
reward, or countenance from God the natural result of Righteousness and
Holiness; neither can God himself separate between these things, I mean,
Righteousness and hope of reward, but only by such a kind of interposure by
which he should separate heat from the fire, or light from the Sun, as God may
in a miraculous way stand between the natural force of things; as when time was
he stood between the heat and the fire: For Righteousness and Holiness are of
that nature, that he that shall put forth his heart and hand to do them, does
in a natural way fill his heart with hope of reward, and countenance from God.
See upon this account, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. Heb. 10.19.20,
etc.

This for the second particular, found in those who are filled with the Spirit,
the testimony of a good conscience; which must needs, especially being joined
with the former assurance of a man's Atonement made with God, complete his
capacity of enjoying free Communion with God. That all those, who are filled
with the Spirit of God (in the sense formerly declared) cannot want the
Testimony we have spoken of, is (I suppose) so clear and manifest from the
contents of what has been formerly declared upon the Scripture in hand, that I
conceive it no ways necessary to insist upon any further proof of it.

But secondly, To demonstrate, being filled with the Spirit does yet further
contribute to the raising our happiness in this present life by investing us
with a capacity of enjoying Communion with God, we added, that it must needs
invest us with a capacity of a large and plentiful Communion also. Now, a free
Communion with God (as was formerly in effect said) imports a liberty or
freedom from any troublesome, tormenting, or discouraging fears in our
conversings with God, and in our application of our selves unto him; whether by
way of Meditation, or Contemplation of any of his glorious Attributes or
Perfections; or whether by Prayer, or Request; or whether by way of expectation
or dependence upon him for matters relating to this life, or that which is to
come. Now, in any of these three works (I do not remember any but what is
reducible to one of these) when a man or woman is at liberty, and this upon
good grounds, to do all this without fear (I still mean, without any such fear
which has trouble, pain, or torment in it) this I call a posture or capacity
of a free Communion with God; and this capacity we have already showed and
proved, that always it accompanies such a being filled with the Spirit as that
unto which you have been exhorted. Now as men and women filled with the Spirit
are capable of such a Communion with God as this, so are they, by the same
means and opportunity, capable of an enlarged Communion with God: They are in a
condition of conversing with God in all the three kinds, lately specified,
after a more large and ample manner, and about more particulars, and these more
spiritual and secret, and matters of a more high importance than they whose
anointing with the Spirit is more sparing and low. (Now to help you a little to
understand the difference;) a child of three or four years of age may probably
be as free in his Communion with his Parents, may go unto them, and speak unto
them, and hear them speak again unto him, with as little fear or trouble as his
brother who is come to maturity of years, and is a man grown: But yet by reason
that such a Child's understanding is at persent short and scant, in comparison
of his Brothers, who understands the things and affairs of men, which the Child
does not, or but very weakly and imperfectly: Therefore the Child's Communion
with his Parents is not so large, extends not to so many particulars of such
weighty concernments as his elder Brothers Communion does. I make use of this
Comparison, only to explain the difference between that which I call free, and
that which I call a full or large Communion with God; not to imply that, he
that is in a capacity of enjoying the one, may be in no capacity of enjoying
the other: For it has been already said, that he that is filled with the
Spirit is in a capacity of enjoying both. This Proposition we have proved as to
the former, viz. A capacity in such persons of enjoying a free Communion with
God; we now go forward to the proof of the other, viz. that the same persons
are in a capacity of enjoying the other also: an ample or large Communion with
God (in the sense lately opened.) To prove this there are only these two things
to be taken into consideration and showed:

First, That a large knowledge of God, of his Attributes, and Perfections, of
his Counsels, and Decrees, and other things relating to him, and recorded in
his word does invest men and women with a capacity of such an ample and large
Communion with him which we speak of.

Secondly, That he that is filled with the Spirit cannot lightly (if possibly)
but be thus enlarged in the knowledge of God, with the Attributes and
Perfections of God.

For the first of these, Perfections, Counsels, and Decrees must needs invest a
person with a capacity of a large Communion with him may be proved thus: Only
by the way, before we come to the proof, by the knowledge of God (in this
place) we do not mean simply, a knowing [ i. e. a having in a man's memory or
understanding] that which is written in the Scriptures, of God, of his
Attributes, Counsels, Decrees, etc. or a being able to argue and discourse of
these in a rational way, and to draw Conclusions and Consequences, though never
so clearly, directly, and substantially from them; it is not such a knowledge
as this that will qualify men for that full and large Communion with God. The
reason hereof is, because a man may have such a knowledge of God, his Nature,
and Attributes, and yet believe little or nothing at all of the truth of these
things which in such a sense he knows. As Aristotle, speaking of young men,
in reference to the excellent Principles of Morality, and Virtue, of
Temperance, Sobriety, etc. says, that young men are wont to speak of these
things, to utter them among themselves, but they do not believe them: In like
manner, many who are real Atheists in heart and soul may discourse largely that
there is a God; they may insist upon all those Arguments and Reasons that have
been given by learned men for the proof hereof; yea, they may urge them with a
great deal of stress and weight; yet it is not necessary to suppose but that
they may be in doubt whether they be true or no. The Fool (says David) has
said in his heart, there is no God; Many may say this in their hearts, while
they are zealously and with a great deal of heat arguing that there is a God.
It is recorded of one of the Popes, that in conference with one of his
Cardinals, about their great Revenues and Wealth they had gotten, he spoke thus
unto him, Quantum nobis profuit haec Christi fabula? What a world of Wealth
has this Story or Fable of Christ brought in unto us? Now this Pope, and so
many others may be devout in pressing and urging of the Gospel, and many things
contained in it, and yet all this while have no manner of belief that there is
any truth, or any reality in the Gospel, or in the things that are delivered
there. Many men have written very learned Commentaries upon many Books of
Scripture; yet it is not necessary to be supposed that they believe the truth
of these things upon which they thus write and make Expositions: Men may do the
like upon any fabulous Books of the Apocrypha, as of Bell and the Dragon; they
may draw from thence many good Conclusions and Doctrines, and yet not believe
that there was such a thing. I heard, not many years since, this passage of a
Preacher in England, that coming to the house of another Minister (of his
acquaintance) he was entreated to Preach for him on the Lord's day; he
consented, and performed the Service very gravely, and substantially; the
subject matter of his Sermon was to prove the Resurrection of the dead, he
insisted upon and pressed several weighty Reasons and Arguments to prove it:
Having ended his Sermon, the Minister, for whom he Preached being present, gave
him many thanks for his Sermon; adding some words testifying his special
approbation of it: Why (replied he that Preached) do you believe what I said
(meaning, concerning the Resurrection?) Believe it (said the other) what else?
(Being somewhat startled at such a Question.) Truly (said that Preacher) for my
part I do not. Therefore to be able to plead learnedly, and with acuteness of
Wit, or solidity of Understanding for any Truth, or Subject, does not
necessarily argue or prove that a man knows the truth or certainty of the being
of that which he pleads for at such a rate. Possibly men may be able to bring
forth such Arguments which may be able to carry all other men's judgments before
them, and yet they themselves may be empty all this while of the belief of
that, whatsoever it is they do assert and prove. The Scriptures themselves seem
to hold forth a difference between knowing a thing, and the believing of it,
Joh. 10.38. But if I do (says Christ to the Jews) the works of my Father,
[meaning, the works that his Father had appointed him to do, and such which are
proper for him only to do] though ye believe not me [ i. e. though you do not
as yet think me a person worthy of credit or belief] yet believe the works [ i.
e. believe that which the works testify of me] that ye may know and believe
that the Father is in me, and I in him; i. e. meaning, that ye may have
Arguments and Grounds, not only which are sufficient to persuade and convince
you of my Divinity; and upon which you may argue that I am the same
dialectically, or with probability; but by which also you may be actually and
de facto persuaded of the truth and certainty hereof, so as to believe it; that
you may know, and not only so, but that you may believe; that you may not only
have Arguments and Reasons to be able to discourse of it, but that your
knowledge may be rich and full of satisfaction in your own souls. And so in
that heavenly Prayer of his, Joh. 17.8. a little before his death, speaking of
his Disciples, For I (says he) have given them the words which thou gave me,
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
and they have believed that thou did send me. Our Savior seems to make a
difference between these two, their knowledge, and their belief of him. They
have known, (...), i. e. meaning, they have upon sufficient and true grounds
known, i. e. apprehended and conceived that I came from thee; yea, (says he)
they have done somewhat more than this, they have believed that thou have sent
me; they have yielded up their hearts, souls, and consciences to the convincing
power of these words which thou gave me to speak unto them, and have
according fully believed that thou have sent me. So then that knowledge of God,
of his Attributes, and Counsels, which we affirm to be requisite to put you
into a condition or capacity of an ample and large Communion with God, must be
a knowledge, not simply of those things which are written in the Scriptures
concerning God, but a knowledge of the reality, truth, and certainty of them;
i. e. that God is really such an One, such a Nature, Essence, and Being in all
points as the Scripture represents him to be, that he is full of Mercy, and
full of Goodnrss, etc. Now this is that kind of knowledge of which we do
affirm, that when it is extensive, and any whit large, it gives a capacity of
the Communion we speak of. Again,

Secondly, This was signified unto you, that that knowledge of God, etc. which
are declared and imparted unto the World by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures.
They must be men in Understanding, and not Children, that shall be the Sons and
Daughters of this high Prerogative we speak of; yea, they must be able, not
only to apprehend and conceive aright of the Mind of God in the Scriptures, so
far as the words in their Grammatical and next-hand sense will carry them; but
they must be expert (to some good degree at least) in the Logical sense of such
Scriptures also. My meaning is, they must be able to build, workman-like, upon
the Scriptures; they must be able to find out the Will of God, to understand,
and likewise to go along with many Principles and Grounds which the Holy Ghost
has laid down here, and be able to draw inferences from them, and to follow
their guidance, as far as they will lead them, into many particulars concerning
God. This is the nature of Principles, and general Grounds. As there was a
Wheel within a Wheel, in Ezekiels Vision, so there may be many Considerations,
many Propositions concerning God that may be wound up in one Expression, or one
direct Saying in Scripture. For there are very many things requisite to be
known and understood concerning God, for the investing men and women with that
capacity we speak of, of enjoying a large Communion with God, which are not
litera tenus, or in so many words expressed in the Scriptures; and yet they may
be plainly enough delivered and held forth here. For that may be truly and
properly enough said to be plainly taught and delivered, which with competent
diligence, study, and meditation may be gathered from those things which are
plainly and expressly taught and delivered. As Solomon, Prove. 8.9. speaks
concerning Instructions, end Precepts of Wisdem (as the former Translation
reads the place) They are all plain to him that will understand, i. e. whose
heart is set within him to understand them, who is not negligent and loose
minded to such things, but is willing to enquire and find out the mind of God
(as Lavater well expounds the place;) so may it be said of those things
concerning God which are necessary to be known and understood in order to that
end and purpose we speak of. And that of Solomon is true, That the diligent
hand makes rich, Prove. 10.4. as well in Spirituals as Temporals. Now all these
things of God, which being known put a man into a capacity of a large Communion
with God, are not upon any such terms laid down in the Scriptures, that if we
shall but spare any small time or labor, we may be as fully satisfied in them
as if we had seen them face to face. It is no where said in the Scripture, in
so many words, that God, in these operations and workings upon the hearts and
souls of men by his Word and Spirit, by which he intends to work Faith and
Conversion, is resistible; resistible, I mean, in such a sense which imports a
possibility in men, so wrought upon, never to be actually converted or brought
to believe, these operations of God notwithstanding: This (I say) is not in
these words, nor any other Grammatically equipollent to them, to be found in
the Scriptures; yet it is plainly enough taught and delivered there, and this
in several places, from whence it may be duly and clearly collected, as we have
heretofore made apparent unto you. So again, that Christ died for me, in
particular for the Atonement of my sin; or that God intended that Christ
should die for me; such Positions as these, though they are no where in so many
words delivered, yet they are delivered plainly enough in Scripture, and to
much satisfaction; so that every man may with a little consideration see them.
Thus then you see what manner of knowledge of God, and of his Attributes, and
Counsels it is, as well for the nature as for the Extent, Compass, or Degree
which is required to qualify men and women for this large Communion with God;
for the nature and quality of it, it must be a knowledge accompanied with a
through belief of God and his Attributes; for the extent or compass, a
knowledge which is somewhat comprehensive, both concerning God, his Nature,
Counsels, and Decrees, etc. Now that such a knowledge of God as this must needs
prepare and make men capable of a large Communion with him, is evident upon
this consideration, viz. Communion cannot well extend further than there is a
mutual knowledge of the one and of the other: How can two walk together unless
there be some agreement in Principles? It was the Saying of Achish King of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 21.15. Have I any need of mad men? When his Servant brought
David before him; his meaning was, that he could not tell well what to do with
him, or how to speak to him, or what to employ him about. And Solomon, Eccl.
5.4. speaking to the same purpose concerning God, says, That he has no
delight in Fools. Men that have no knowledge of God, nor of his Attributes,
etc. are like unto stocks and stones; they are not at all capable of that
Communion which we now speak of; So likewise men and women who have but a scant
knowledge of God, it may be ten parts of twelve dark, and but two light, so far
as they are ignorant, their Communion with God will be obstructed, and hindered;
and consequently, their Communion with God (if any at all) will be very narrow
and contracted.

I suppose we shall not need to spend time in proving, Peter dignifieth with
those two high Titles, Unspeakable, and Glorious; shall not this attend a free
and large Communion with God? It is mentioned by our Savior, as one of the
richest strains of felicity that the Elect Angels are partakers of, that they
stand before their heavenly Father, and behold his face continually, i. e. they
stand before him like unto Princes, undaunted, unappaled; they have a free and
large Communion with God: But that flesh and blood, the poor Children of men,
should arrive unto such a state and condition, as to have part and fellowship
with them in this their happiness and felicity, is certainly a transcendent
privilege unto them. It was a Reply that an old Philosopher made to a Tyrant
(a great Prince) who asked him what good he had gotten by the study of
Philosophy? Why (says he) I have gotten this, that I can talk with the
greatest Tyrant in the World without being afraid of him. Now if this be a
desirable thing, that a man can look the greatest and proudest man in the face
without being dismayed or afraid: What is it for a poor Creature, clothed with
flesh and blood, to be able to stand with an untroubled and undaunted spirit
before the great and mighty God of Heaven and Earth, to come freely and boldly
into his Presence? So again, to be able to stand and contemplate the
inestimable and incomprehensible Majesty of the great God of Heaven and Earth;
to be able (I say) to bear the weight of this Majesty and Glory without any
trouble or burden to the mind or spirit of a man, how great and how rich a
glory must this needs be? It was the Saying of another Philosopher, who was
greatly taken with that Creature the Sun; he professed, that if he might be
permitted to stand near the Sun, were it but for one day, so as that he might
but understand what nature the Sun was of, he would be content to die at
Evening (so much did he prize the knowledge and contemplation of this glorious
Creature.) We read of a whole Sect of Philosophers (...) would fix their eye
upon the Sun when it appeared, and so stand looking upon it, and never give
over looking till it went down out of their sight. My Brethen, all created
things are but slight resemblances and shadows: What is the glory of them all
if we shall but compare them with the glorious loveliness and splendor that is
in God? What is the beauty of the Sun in comparison of him and his beauty? etc.
We all (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18.) as in a glass behold the glory of the
Lord. The Angels do not see nor behold any other glory, but that which is
presented unto us in the glass of the Gospel, they indeed see it more clearly,
even face to face, we more darkly; and yet notwithstanding that Glass of the
Gospel, wherein we behold the glory of the Lord, is so clear and transparent,
that there is little difference between beholding his glory face to face, and
the beholding of it there; every Lineament of his face being here represented
to the eyes of our minds or understandings, so that we can sustain little loss
hereby. So that if men and women would but draw near unto this Glass wherein
the Face of Jesus Christ is thus represented, or to be seen, they might behold
any thing that the Angels in heaven do, and live in the same contemplation with
them. For here is the Power, and here is the Glory, and here is every thing in
this Glass: This does contain the whole extent of the Face of Christ (if I may
so speak.) It holds out all the perfections of him whose face it represents.
By the way, As men are known by their faces, so all which God is known by, is
called the face of God: As the Mercy of God, the Power of God, and the Goodness
of God, they all make the Face of God. Now then, to be able to bear the weight
of all this blessedness and glory, without losing the use of a man's
understanding, without being confounded, or troubled in his Intellectuals,
without being like a dead man, cannot but be an exceeding great Privilege. I
beseech you consider what other exercise or engagement of your selves, or of
the noble powers of your Souls can you imagine should produce any thing of a
like filling and satisfying nature? One thing have I desired of the Lord (says
David, Psalm. 27.4.) that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the House of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his holy Temple. He thought this not only a thing desirable, but he
was resolved to seek after it; he would first commend this his desire unto the
Lord, and then seek after it; he would try this way, and that, and any way that
would do. This one thing which he had singled out amongst all his other
requests, was, that he might dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of
his life to behold the beauty of the Lord. My Brethren, we generally are but
dull Spectators of his glory, it may be many of us are more taken with other
objects which seem to be of a more desirable import unto us; but if we did but
see with David's eyes, if we had judgment within us to estimate beauty indeed;
this would be our One thing, the thing which we would chiefly desire, to behold
the beauty of the Lord; especially, inasmuch as we have liberty to behold it
without being dismayed. So again, that was another thing in our large and free
Communion with God, to pray unto God with assurance that we shall be heard.
They that are large in the knowledge of God, that understand much of his Will;
they that have a large Communion with God in Prayer, they can pray with
assurance that they shall be accepted, and that their request shall be granted
unto them. Now then, if we shall weigh this Royal Privilege also in the
balance of the Sanctuary, we shall find it to weigh down Silver and Gold; all
these things will be but as the Dust in the Balance in comparison of it. To
call upon the Majesty of the great God of Heaven and Earth, and to have an
opportunity to make your request unto him for all things you desire; not only
all that at present you desire, but all things that can come into your hearts
to desire, and that you may upon occasion or emergency from day to day desire
of him, and to be supplied accordingly by the hand of your Angel, I mean, by
your Prayer: If this great Privilege be but considered, and laid to heart, and
measured by the measure of God, it will be found to amount to as considerable a
matter as any that we have presented you with.

And thus we have done with the third particular, which we formerly signified
unto you, must needs, in conjunction with the other three, render the Life and
Estate of a man in this World desirable in the highest; as desirable (I mean)
as this World will afford desirableness of condition unto the Sons and
Daughters of men.

CHAP. XIX. The Eighth Motive further opened in the fourth particular, a being
filled with the Spirit does interest men with a rich and large Interest in God.
How this Interest does arise by being filled with the Spirit of God. Reasons
why so little is done by Prayer now, in comparison of what was done in the
Primitive times. Without being filled with the Spirit none of the great
blessings, formerly mentioned (and which render a man's Condition so desirable
in this World) are to be obtained. The Reasons whence it comes to pass: And the
equitableness of God's proceeding with men therein. The difference between a
fearless and dreadless frame of spirit, that is counterfeit, and that which is
raised upon good Grounds. A being filled with the Spirit is the only way to
cause the Crown of glory to flourish on the head of a man; And that with a
greater measure of glory in the World which is to come.
THe Fourth (and last) particular was this,

First then, to show and prove this, That Persons filled with the Spirit of God
cannot but be great in their interest with God.

Secondly, That such a greatness of Interest in God, especially being
accompanied with the other three Privileges, formerly opened and asserted,
cannot but complete the felicity and desirableness of the life of a man or
woman in this World.

First, The Reason why they, who are filled with the Spirit, must needs be
great in the sight of God, and carry things with an high hand at the Throne of
Grace, is (that which heretofore we have proved at large) viz. because such
persons are men after Gods own heart (the Character which God himself gave of
David) i. e. (as himself explaineth the said Character) persons that will
fulfill all his pleasure (meaning, as concerning themselves, or so far as it
concerns them, or as they are in a capacity to fulfill it;) they will make the
most that can be made by men in their Clothes (as we use to say) of the
Interest of God and of Jesus Christ in the World. This same activeness and
spiritfulness in the service of God is one of the most natural, constant, and
visible fruits and effects of any man or woman's being filled with the Spirit of
God. For when the soul or inward part of a man is filled with the Spirit it
cannot contain it self; and the issuings and breathings of it out are nothing
else but excellent and high actings for God; a fruitfulness of life and
conversation. This is as natural and genuine fruit, of men's being filled with
the Spirit, as the Fig is the natural fruit of the Fig Tree, and the Grape the
natural fruit of the Vine. For the nature of the Spirit of God is to glorify
God, that is, to be serviceable unto his ends, purposes, and desires in the
World. And therefore, according to that true Rule in Philosophy, every Agent
seeks to assimilate his Patient unto himself: So the Spirit of God, where he
is in his fullness, he makes men lively and vigorous, he puts it into them,
and draws them on unto ways of Excellency, and gives them no rest, but is
still exciting of them unto the serving of God. But this Point we have argued
formerly, and evinced the truth of the thing from the Scriptures above all
contradictions: That which we have now to do, is to show and prove, that those
who are diligent, and faithful, and zealous observers of the Precepts of God,
and are free in laying out themselves upon the account of his interest and
glory, are Persons that have his ear (as we use to say) and who for the asking
may obtain any thing with reason and with righteousness at his hands; and the
Persons we now speak of are not apt or wont to ask any thing upon other terms.
But that which we now deliver is abundantly delivered by God himself unto you
in the Scriptures; namely, that Persons who are full of action for God have
large quarter at the Throne of Grace, and carry matters of high import with
God, and that with an high hand.

We have several passages in Scriptures to consult with, 1 John 3.22. And
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, etc. It is put in the Present Tense, as
it is very usual, after the manner of Prophetical Dialect, to speak of things
that be Future in the Present Tense, or as being present by reason of the truth
and certainty of the things that are spoken. So here, Whatsoever we ask we
receive, i. e. are as certain that we shall receive it as if we had it already;
whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments. Here is
the groundwork, because they observed them. The word is very emphatical,
signifying both the inward respect that men have of them in their minds,
memories, and consciences, and also the external action arising out of this;
not only because we keep his Commandments; but likewise, because we do those
things that are pleasing in his sight. He implies, that men may keep the
Commandments of God, and yet may not do the things that are pleasing in his
sight; For there is (as we have had occasion heretofore to distinguish) a
difference between the keeping of the Letter of the Precepts or Commands of
God, and the carrying on of those Commands to such an observance of them, which
include many particulars (which indeed commends our obedience unto God) yet are
not in the Letter, or surface of the Command. Now Prayer, though it should be
with the greatest earnestness performed, or with the greatest Faith and
Confidence, yet if it be not the Prayer of a righteous man, the Promise of
prevailing, much would not belong to it: So here, to ask a thing according to
the Will of God does not only include a praying righteously in respect of the
matter, and also in the manner, but also such Conditions and Qualifications
which according to the Will of God ought to be found in those that should pray;
amongst which Qualifications this is one, that they be men and women ready and
free to do such things which are pleasing to God; not simply and barely to do
his Commands, but to do those things which are pleasing unto him, Mat. 21.22.
All things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive. This
word, believing, is very comprehensive, and it does include in it all things
that are requisite and necessary for the reducing of this Prayer unto this
posture; that is, unto a receiving posture. Now certain it is, no man can have
that confidence; which John speaks of, toward God, or that believing to
receive whatsoever he shall ask in Prayer, which our Savior speaks of, but
only he who is conscious to himself of his faithfulness to God, and of his
integrity and uprightness in his ways. For, my Brethren, if the Consciences of
men and women shall reprove them of any looseness, or lightness of spirit; or
that they have served God by halves; that they have been off and on with him in
their practice, and negligent in making use of such advantages and
opportunities for the glorifying of his name, which he has put into their
hands; this will be like a Bridle in the Lips of men's Faith, there will be
fears, and jealousies, and inward doubtings within them: Whereas if our hearts
shall bear a rich Testimony unto us (which they will never do unless we shall
be under such a frame of spirit to do the things that are pleasing in his
sight) that we have walked before him in all uprightness, then will our Faith
and Confidence be steady, and we may pray with the greatest assurance that we
shall receive whatsoever we ask of God. And so again, Ask and it shall be given
you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, Mat. 7.7. I
mention this passage of Scripture to show, that where there is a promise made
of being heard and accepted with God (and there is the same Notion in the other
Scripture even now mentioned and argued) there is still something required of
men to render them meet to be accepted of him: As here God requires of such as
are but weak in Faith, and of an ordinary growth in holiness, and in the love
and favor of God, that they be frequent and constant in their importuning of
him before he will give them the things they desire of him: Whereas those who
are zealous for God have a more quick and ready audience. Christians of a lower
form and ordinary growth and stature (as I said even now) may be heard, but
they must put more strength to their Prayers, and wait long until they have
their answer from God, which is signified in these words, Seek and ye shall
find; which shows, that if persons have not that excellent qualification in the
sight of God to commend them in his love and favor, they must work so much the
harder, and wait so much the longer upon God. Shall he not avenge his Elect,
who cry day and night unto him? Luke 18.7. But Noah, Daniel, and Job, if they
shall but stand before him, the first appearance of them will do it. The eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears, etc. Psalm. 34.15, 17. The word open is not
in the Original, but the meaning is, that the ear of God is propense, and in a
leaning kind of posture toward the cries of the Righteous; the word may here
be taken Emphatically, as many times in Scripture it is, for some worthy,
choice, and excellent strain of righteousness. Those who are worthy and
righteous indeed, the ear of God (I say) is propense, and leans, and hangs
toward them and their Prayers; according to that of Cant. 2.14. Let me hear
thy voice, for sweet is thy voice. There is a kind of naturalness, and
pleasantness between the ear of God and the Prayers, and Petitions, and cries
of such a righteous man, Joh. 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my word abide in
you, ask what you will and it shall be done unto you. There is a double
condition mentioned, and expected to be in persons that desire to receive, and
to have every thing done unto them, and for them at the hand of God. First,
Their abiding in his Word, that they do not decline it, and turn their backs
upon it, nor cut themselves off from him, or hearing him further. And secondly,
If my word abide in you; if you be observant of opportunities, and improve the
times and seasons vouchsafed unto you, and will provide and take care that my
words abide in you, then (says he) your Prayer will be the great prevailer at
the Throne of Grace; God my Father will not deny you any thing that you shall
ask of him. For I suppose the meaning of these words, and my Word abide in you,
to be this, that persons should be solicitous about the words of Christ, and
matters of duty contained in them, and that they should not have them to seek,
but make special treasure of them, and have them always ready at hand, that
they may be directed, and put upon their duty and service by the means of them.
It is the common case of Christians; they would do the things which the Word of
Christ requires of them if this Word of his were present in their thoughts and
minds; but they miscarry at many a turn, and fall foul upon many things,
contrary to their duty, only because the Word by which they should be ^^^ected
is not in their minds, nor near at hand unto them: They do not (...) ca^^ that
the Word of Christ should dwell richly in them. It may (...) when they meet
with it they will give it the hearing, and it may be understand it also; but if
they do understand it they hide it not its their hearts (for they that hide we
know can find:) they have not that high esteem of it which they ought, for then
it would abide with them, and not be to seek upon such occasions, and at such
times when they should be directed by it to do and perform such and such
services acceptable unto God; and then for want of its presence with them there
is a breach in their obedience, and consequently in their peace and comforts;
and they are often thrown upon disadvantages when they come to the Throne of
Grace. Another place like unto this is, Joh. 16.26, 27. At that day ye shall
ask in my name, and I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you: For
the Father himself loves you, etc. The Father loves you, namely, because he
knows the love you have unto me, which you have declared by believing in me;
and therefore I shall have no need particularly to intercede for you. His
desire was to ground them in the greatest confidence of the love of God
himself, or the Father unto them; and therefore he says, inasmuch as you have
loved me, and declared your affection in believing that I came forth from God;
therefore, says he, the Father himself loves you, and is of himself exceeding
propense to hear your Prayers. Joh. 14.13. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. The meaning
of that clause, that the Father may be glorified in the Son, which steers the
sense of the whole Verse, does import this; that the things which ye shall ask,
in order to the glorifying of the Father, and that upon the account of me, or
in my name, such Requests and Petitions shall surely be granted, and I will
stand by you in them, and they shall be done unto you.

Besides we find that the Saints of old, Exodus 17.11. When Joshuah was fighting
with Amaleck in the Valley, etc. The Text says, That all the while that the
hands of Moses were lifted up Israel prevailed, but being weary, when they hung
down, Amaleck prevailed; and therefore they found a way ( Aaron and Hur) to
support them, and so Amaleck was overthrown. Now this lifting up and falling
down of Moses hands in Prayer was significative; for we cannot suppose but that
Moses did pray as effectually when his hands hung down as when they were lifted
up. And therefore I suppose this is taught and signified unto us by the lifting
up of Moses hands (which was nothing but a kind of Sacramental Action) that
God's acceptance of Prayer does not arise from any worth or excellence that is
inherent either in the Person, or in the Prayer (if strictly considered) but
from the Ordinance of God in the case, he having appointed this as a means by
which he will convey his favors unto men. And this is the nature of
Sacraments, and of all Sacramental Efficients; the benefit, and comforts, and
the like, that any of us do at any time receive by them, do not proceed from
any thing that we receive in the Elements, or in the nature of the Action that
is done by us, or by any other that have any part in the Action in the
Sacrament besides our selves. I say, the fruit of the Sacrament does not issue
from any of these, and yet without these we should not come at it; but the
reason of the blessing of the Sacraments is the Ordinance of God, who has
joined fast these means to such and such ends: Hence it is, that there is
efficacy in any kind, or to any degree. As in the healing of Naaman's Leprosy,
Go and wash in Jordan seven time, says the Prophet, 2 Kings 5.10. This was a
Sacrament which he was to perform in order to his healing; but the healing of
the Leprosy did not proceed from the water, nor from the Action of Washing,
but from the Ordinance and appointment of God, who had determined that the man
should be healed and cleansed of his Leprosy by submitting to his pleasure,
viz. In going to Jordan, and washing seven times. So when the blowing of the
Rams Horns, and compassing the City of Jericho by the Priests became effectual
to the bringing down the Walls thereof, Josh. 6.20. This Efficacy was not to be
found in the Rams Horns, nor in the Priests, nor in the compassing of the City
seven times, nor in the qualifications of the Priests; but it was to be sought
and found out in the good pleasure of God that had decreed and purposed it. Let
but men obey him in such and such Ceremonial Observations, and matters of light
consequence to the eye of ordinary understanding, and they shall see the
effects of it are, what he by his great and outstretched Arm will do for them:
In like manner, the reason why Prayer is so potent, and of that mighty vigor,
and prevalency with God, is, because there is much of a Sacramental nature in
it. For if we do but consider the righteousness that is to be found in the
Creature, even in such kind of persons that are active in the highest for God,
and are zealous and true hearted for his cause and glory; the Prayers (I say)
that shall from time to time be presented unto God by these men have nothing in
them which in a strict sense and rigid kind of estimate will bear any
proportion, in respect of the worthiness that is in the favors and
vouchsafements which they receive from God by this means; so that setting aside
his Promise in the case there is no strict Rule of Righteousness that obliges
him hereunto; and yet notwithstanding there is a natural kind of equity that
God should answer them: First, If we consider the nature of righteousness,
especially when it is raised to any excellent degree in the hearts and souls of
men, and when it utters it self accordingly. And then secondly, Considering the
nature of Prayers and Supplications made unto God. And then thirdly, Taking
into consideration the graciousness, and bountifulness, and goodness of God,
which are all essential unto him; then, I say, it is an equitable thing, and it
is very meet, and every way well becoming the great God, that he should do
this; that he should have respect to such persons as these, that serve him with
all their might and with all their strength; that he should indulge them with
some Eminent and Royal Privilege above the common and ordinary sort of those
that call upon him but only in an ordinary manner. And another Reason may be,
why God does reserve choice favors and privileges for men that are choice in
their Generation, and that have larger hearts toward him than others have, is,
that he may hereby lay an engagement upon the rest of the Children of men,
especially his own Children, that they proceed and be in a growing posture, and
that they should give their heart no rest nor peace until they come up to the
Line of their Elder Brethren, whom they shall see in such high grace and favor
with God. For should he vouchsafe an equality of grace and favor with himself
unto persons that are but low and broken in their obedience, and that are apt
from time to time to sin against him, and to pull down with one hand what they
build up with the other: If God (I say) should make these equal with those that
are most worthy in their way, he would not have an Argument wherewith to deal
with the hearts and consciences of men; for then there would be some who would
never strive to be excellent, or to be above others, if they that be beneath in
the Valley should have the light of the Countenance of God shine as bright upon
them as it does upon those that are at the top of the Mount, and that have
labored and took a great deal of pains to get up thither. But now it is
mavelous agreeable to the nature of God, and excellency of his holiness to
draw and wind up his Creatures, and to be training of them up by ways which
are suitable and kindly for them to be dealt withal, and still to be stirring
and working up their hearts, minds, and spirits unto things that are most
excellent, and that are most like himself. So that we see this prevalency of
Prayer with God is in part Sacramental and not merely natural and moral; that
there is equity and reason in it that God should do thus and thus by persons,
by giving a preeminence unto them above their Neighbors; and yet
notwithstanding, if we speak in a way of strictness and rigor of Justice,
there is nothing in the righteousness of the persons, nor in the Prayers of
these that can upon any such terms engage God and prevail with him.

But we were not long since saying, as Prayer is, and knowing withal the
interest which they had in God, they made account that it was but to dispatch
their Angel of Prayer into his presence and their desire would soon be granted.
See such a thing in David, Psalm. 18.3. I will call on the Lord, who is worthy
to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine Enemies; I will pray (says he)
and then I do expect (as it were of course) Salvation and deliverance from God.
And so again, in ver. 5, 6. The sorrows of hell compassed me about: And what
did he in this case? When he saw no way of escape, he dispatches his Angel unto
Heaven; and his Angel was sent back with deliverance: he heard my voice out of
his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears; And then what
follows? What a tempest and storm does God presently raise against his Enemies?
Ver. 7, 8, etc. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the Hills
moved, and were shaken, etc. And so again, ver. 18.19. They prevented me in the
day of my calamity: But the Lord was my stay, he delivered me, because he
delighted in me. We know it is a thing usual with men (and that which is but
equal, and no man's reproach or shame) to be more kind, and more enclinable to
help those that are willing to serve them, those that are respectful of them,
and charge their minds and thoughts with their Affairs and Concernments: I say,
it is but reasonable, that a man who is thus respected by another should show
and measure out respects proportionably to him again: So God (it seems) uses to
deal with men in this case, ver. 20, 21. The Lord rewarded me according to my
righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me;
for I have kept the ways of the Lord, and not wickedly departed from my God.
We see that it was not simply Prayer, or David's crying unto the Lord that
brought this deliverance down from Heaven unto him with so high an hand; no,
but it was his righteousness, the cleanness of his hands, the keeping of
himself clean in the sight of God; this was that which gave power to his
Prayer, and caused it to prevail at that high rate with him. And so Psalm. 6.9,
10. The Lord (says he) has heard my Supplication, and he will receive my
Prayer; And what then? Let all mine Enemies be ashamed and sore vexed, etc. As
if he had said, Let them look to it all mine Enemies; for I am resolved that I
will pray, and call upon God, and I know then what will fall to their portion,
and therefore let them look for nothing, nor expect nothing but ruin and
destruction when I shall do it. And in Rev. 11.5, 6. It is said there,
concerning the two Witnesses, That if any man would hurt them, fire proceeded
out of their mouth, and devoured their Enemies; and if any man will hurt them
be must in this manner be killed; As if he had said, there is no way with them
but one, if they attempt any thing cruelly and unmercifully against my
Witnesses, their fiery Prayers and Supplications, which proceed out of their
mouths, will destroy them. And so he goes on, ver. 6. These have power to shut
Heaven that it rain not in the day of their Prophecy, and have power over
waters to turn them into bleud, etc. Ye have heard that this Book of the
Revelations runs much upon Allegories and Types which it borrows from the
Old Testament; but the plain meaning of these Expressions is only this; that
those that should stand it out against Antichrist, his Apostacies, and the
Idolatrous doings in those times, should be able to do as great things, and to
bring to pass things of the like nature and consideration in their kind, with
those great works in the days of Elijah, and of Moses, etc. Ezekiel. 14.14. where
God speaks of Noah, Daniel, and Job, that if these men should stand before him,
yet they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness. It is very
likely that it was a received Principle amongst the Israelites, that men like
unto these could prevail for what they would with God, and God would not deny
them any thing that they asked of him: For otherwise it was to no purpose to
affect the people, and to take them off from expectation of any help from the
mediation of them, or such as they were, unless they had hoped for deliverance
by the means of such men. But now (says he) it is true indeed, if these men,
or any like unto them, should stand up and intercede with me, they should have
somewhat more than other men, they should prevail with me for themselves: But
as to the saving of the Nation, and the preventing of the Judgment which I am
now fully resolved to execute upon you, it is such, of such a nature and
consequence, that it is not fit for me to grant; neither indeed would these men
ask any such things at my hand, if they knew the state of things between me and
you, and how repugnant it is to those Principles of Holiness, Wisdom, and
Justice, by which I govern the World, and must govern it, if I govern it like
my self. So God likewise tells Jeremiah, Neither lift up a cry for this
people, for if they pray I will not hear them, Jer. 11.14. and 14.11. and 7.16.
As if Jeremiah had had such an opinion, that this people might have been
brought off from that Judgment which God intended toward them, and that God
should have suffered some kind of inconveniency to have denied him if he had
prayed for them; and therefore to prevent him, he plainly tells him, that he
would not have him pray for them. As if God had said, it is not at all out of
my way to deny such Petitions and Suits as they that are wicked and stubborn
put up; but it would be otherwise with me, in case thou should pray, and I
must go somewhat out of my way to deny thee, and therefore (says he) do it
not. Now this passage plainly shows, that such persons who excel in
righteousness, and that are wont to lay out themselves freely for God, he is
wont to express himself with an answerable freedom and bounty to them; and
consequently, to give them power at the Throne of Grace, and interest there.
Thus then we see how, and upon what account Persons filled with the Spirit of
God must needs according to the Scriptures have a great interest in God, and
carry a great stroke by their Prayers at the Throne of Grace, viz. because they
keep his Commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.

Now it is a matter of easy and ready apprehension to conceive of how rich a
consequence such an high Privilege as this we have mentioned, new Heavens, and
the new Earth, the Kingdom of Christ, and of the Saints; and is much discoursed
amongst us under the name of the Fifth Monarchy (a Name and Notion proper
enough for it:) and have a first-fruit granted unto them by God of those
glorious Privileges, of that Interest of Power and Grandeur which shall be
vested in the great Body, or whole Community of the Saints in that day (of
which we may have occasion ere long to speak more particularly.) So as this
shall be the Privilege and Prerogative of all the Saints in that day, that
they shall rule the Nations, as it were, with a Rod of Iron, and break them in
pieces like a Potters Vessel; meaning, that the whole Earth shall be given unto
them, as it is in Daniel, Dan. 7.18.27. Even so shall the persons, we speak of,
before the Dawning of that Day, before the New Heaven and the New Earth, taste
of the great happiness and felicity of the Chosen of God in those days; and
they shall Umpire, and Rule, and carry and sway the great Affairs of the World,
as we have it in Rev. 2.26, 27. He that overcomes and keeps my works unto
the end, that man that stands it out in my Cause, and fights it out unto
death, to him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule with a Rod
of Iron, etc. meaning, that he shall have part in the great felicity of that
day. You know that passage in Jam. 5.17. where it is said, that Elijah, who was
a man subject to the like passions, and the like infirmities with other men, I
suppose he means not so much (if at all) sinful infirmities, as corporal: he
was a man subject to sorrow, and sickness, and death as well as we, or any of
us are, and yet he did thus by Prayer; he prayed, and he shut the Heavens; and
again he prayed, and he opened the Heavens, and provided rain for the Earth by
his Prayer. Now I suppose the Apostle inserts these words, A man subject to
like passions as we are, to remove that great stumbling stone which might be in
the minds and thoughts of ordinary Christians that are weak and poor, that
carry about with them a body of sickness and death, and are despised in the
World, and not regarded and set by, by the great men in the World. How then
should they expect that a God of that infinite Majesty which he is, to whom
they should pray and make their requests should regard them; Especially in the
gratifying of them upon any such terms, that he should do any great or
excellent thing more than ordinary for them? Now, to such the Holy Ghost here
says, do not be troubled, let no such thought as this arise within you upon
such an occasion; for I tell you, that Elijah was a man as weak as you,
clothed with the same flesh, subject to sicknesses and pain, and to be
contemned and slighted by men, as he was by Ahab and others; yet this did not
at all obstruct his interest with God; his Prayer was potent and powerful with
him, for he did very great things, as you know, by his Prayer; he shut the
Heaven, being highly offended with the wickedness of the People, and their
Idolatry: He interceded (as it were) against them, and sought to draw down
Judgments upon them; indeed he sought hereby to humble them, and to bring them
to the sight of their sins (as it seems he did;) and accordingly, when he saw
that they did repent, and were reformed in their ways, he did by another
Prayer turn the course of the Displeasure of God another way, and drew down the
love and favor of God out of Heaven upon them.

And, wrack and havoc of their interest in the World. And there is more than
enough of this kind of spirit and vigor that is gotten into the the hearts and
inward parts of many Professors amongst us; who, like to the Jews of old, have
a great zeal for God, but not according to knowledge; yea, there is a great
variety of several shapes and forms of this kind of zeal amongst us. The
Antinomian, he lays out himself effectually for the advancement of his Opinion
and ways; and thinks he does God and his Gospel the only service in the World.
A second sort of Professor; he is as a flame of fire, he is content to spend,
and to be spent in the Service of his way, being full of confidence, that even
whilst he treads and tramples under foot the peace and comforts of the
Children and dear Servants of Christ, yet he is the only Benefactor to his
Throne and Kingdom amongst men. A third Party, abominating the Zeal of the
former, rises up early, and goes to bed late, and eats the bread of much
carefulness to mount upon the back of Secular Authority, and if he get but his
foot fast and sure upon this ground, he makes account that by turning the edge
of the Magistrates Sword against all that he conceits to be Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, etc. and by riding over the heads of all those whom he calls
Sectaries he shall set God upon the Throne, and put an Iron Scepter into the
hand of Jesus Christ, wherewith to break all his Enemies in pieces like a
Potters Vessel; making full account that God will never have a Temple upon
Earth unless it be of his building. The Seeker, whilst he throws the House of
God out of the Windows (as we use to say) and makes an utter desolation in the
Courts thereof, casting out all the Ordinances and Ministrations of it as
Menstruous and polluted Rags, and makes an headless, heartless, and confused
meeting of a few, to speak what any Spirit, one or other, shall prompt them
withal; he conceits (and this with confidence enough too) that he acts
according to the heart of Jesus Christ; and that persons of all other forms and
ways do rather great disservice to Jesus Christ, and the truth than otherwise;
and that he, and men of his inspiration, are the only persons that understand
aright what makes for the lifting up of the Throne of Christ amongst men. Yea,
the Rantor himself, whose Principles and ways have no more Communion with the
glory of God, or of Jesus Christ, than Light has with Darkness, or Christ
himself with Belial, yet he, in his own conceit, is the firstborn amongst the
Friends of God and of Jesus Christ: He alone it is that spreads abroad the
sweet savor of Jesus Christ in the World, whilst he pours out himself in all
manner of abominations, and sentenceth men of other Principles and Practices as
strangers unto God, and to the Gospel, and obscurers and darkeners of the Grace
of God, and the fullness of Redemption purchased by Jesus Christ. Yea, there is
another sort, who is the last-born Son of Satan (that I know amongst us) he
finds false fire in the Zeal of all the former, and therefore has set up a new
form or way for the worshipping and serving of God; and though Satan be more
palpably visible in it than in any of the former, yet he is confident that all
other ways ought to cast down their Crowns to the ground at the feet of it;
yea, and that they shall be made to do it. Thus God has many in the World that
pretend high in Friendship to him, and in Zeal for his glory, who yet indeed
trouble and disturb the World: And many of them labor in the very sire; and
some of them do as little spare their flesh, as the Servants of Baal did, who
cut themselves with Knives and Lances; which they needed not to do in case they
were real Friends indeed unto God, and worthy Imitators of the true Zeal and
Christian fervor of Spirit which uttered themselves in the Primitive
Christians. So that as Solomon, observing the common pretenses and professions
of men one to another, expresses himself thus, Prove 20.6. M^st men will boast,
every man of his own goodness; But who can find a faithful man? That is, a
Friend indeed and indeed: So may God altogether as truly say, that there are
many in the World, men of this way, and men of that way, men of a third, of a
fourth, and of a fifth, who all boast of their goodness, who pretend love to
me, and zeal for my glory; but I can hardly find a faithful man amongst them; a
man who naturally cares for the things of my glory. As the Apostle speaks
concerning Timothy, that did naturally mind his Affairs; it is one of the
hardest things in the World to find men (especially any public Society of men)
that do naturally mind the things of Jesus Christ. But the thing I was saying
unto you, is, that the reason why the interest of Prayer in the World, I mean,
amongst Professors of Christianity, is fallen so low as it is; and is in a
manner sunk in comparison of that which it was and appeared to be in the
Christians of old, is, because that the Spirit of love to God, that Heroic and
vigorous Spirit is sunk in the Christian World: It was upon the Wing in the
times of the Apostles, and some Ages after them; but now, among all pretenders
to God, certain it is, that God amongst them all finds not many faithful
Friends, not many of that integrity, and uprightness of heart and soul, which
was found in the Primitive Christians. For as God reasoned the case with the
Jews long since, Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, etc.
neither his ear heavy that he cannot hear. So then, this is a thing which needs
be no man's doubt or question, that to be great in the sight of God, and to have
his ear continually open unto a man's Prayer, must needs be a treasure of
comfort, and peace unto him; and so in consort with those three other
Privileges (formerly opened) renders a man's life and condition in the World as
desirable as God judges meet to permit it to be here.

We further added, a being filled with the Spirit would render a man's life in
this World comfortable, in respect of the four particulars mentioned, yea, most
desirable: So there is no other course that a man can take without this,
nothing that he can do besides, or with a neglect of this will do it, will
interest a person man or woman in any, or however, not in all the particulars
mentioned; without a joint concurrence of which there will be somewhat material
and of moment wanting to the completing of their condition in the World. Let
us speak a few words to this also, and prove unto you, that without a being
filled with the Spirit none of the four particulars can be enjoyed, or
possessed by you; at least upon any such terms on which they may be, and are
enjoyed by those that are filled with the Spirit, and on which the
desirableness of a man's life in the World is raised and maintained by them. Now
the reason (briefly) why none of the great Privileges mentioned can be enjoyed
like themselves by any other course taken, or means used, without a being
filled with the Spirit is this, because they all depend upon these cordial and
high engagements for God, and for the advancement of his interest in the World,
of which we have lately spoken; and these are not likely to be found in any
person, or persons, but in those only who are filled with the Spirit. So that
we have these two things to open and show unto you.

First, That the four particulars, wherein, as we have proved, the life of a
man, in this World, as to the greatest desirableness of it, consists, are not
to be had, or to be enjoyed, either devisim, but especially not conjunctim, but
only by a signal course of righteousness, or a very considerable degree of
activeness for God.

Secondly, That no man's heart will ever be lifted up to such a course of
righteousness as this, to such an activeness for God, but only theirs who are
filled with the Spirit of God, what course soever they may take otherwise. Now
the truth is, that both these, in effect and by clearness of consequence, have
been proved already; The former in those discussions, wherein we made it
appear, that every of the said four Privileges were (respectively) the natural
and proper fruits and consequences of the signal intergrity of men's hearts and
ways in the sight of God; The latter in those passages wherein in like manner
we evinced such an integrity of heart and life before God to be the genuine and
appropriate effect of a being filled with the Spirit. Therefore we shall here
only vindicate and clear those discussions and passages from such difficulties
or objections which may seem to encumber them, and to weaken the truth or
authority of them.

First then, That men may attain to a freedom from all troublesome and
tormenting cares and fears, and whatever of this nature is apt to render the
life of a man less comfortable, less desirable, without any such high
engagements for God (as were spoken of) and so consequently without being
filled with the Spirit, appears from hence, that many Heathen Philosophers, and
Wise men, especially of the Sect of the Stoics, by study and dealing with
themselves and their hearts effectually, from such Principles and
Considerations as the light of Nature afforded them, did attain this
achievement, they did absolutely deliver themselves from that bondage and
subjection we speak of, and did live in a constant tranquillity, and serenity
of mind and thoughts; and did not feel any pricking Thorn, or grieving Brier
of any troublesome passion. Yea, more generally, they of the Schole and Sect of
Epicurus lived free from all cares and fears; yea, there are many amongst our
selves, who (as our Proverb expresses it) set Cock on hoop, and as they put
the evil day far from them, so together herewith they put away all care, fear,
and all troublesome thoughts to the same distance; therefore it seems, at least
one of the four Privileges, wherein you placed the desirableness of a man's
life and condition in this World, viz. a freedom from all troublesome and
tormenting fears and cares may be obtained and enjoyed without a being filled
with the Spirit. I reply first, concerning Heathen Philosophers, these things;
First, That as Painters use to do very frequently, viz. flatter, and give
beauty and comeliness in the artificial face, where they are wanting in the
natural: So many Historians, when they have a person of note, or worth, or of
any great name to represent, or describe, they do not so much set or bend
themselves to inform the Reader of the truth of things concerning them, as to
show the rareness of their own genius and parts, by making them the most
accomplished persons in the World. As Sophocles the Tragedian made reply to him
who demanded a reason, why, contrary to his Fellow Euripides, he made all Women
that he personated in his Tragedies so excellently virtuous and good? I (says
he) represent them such as they should be: In like manner, we have great cause
to suspect that they who have reported such glorious things of some
Philosophers, and others, worthy men (like enough in their Sphere) rather
represented and reported them such as they should have been than such as they
were; as Paterculus (a Roman Historian (speaking of Cato, says of him, that he
was Virtuti similimus, qui recte nunquam fecit, ut facere videretur, sed quia
aliter facere non poterat: He was a man most like unto virtue it self, who
never did that which was right that he might appear to do it, but because he
could not do otherwise; as if he were a man unchangeably perfect and good.
After some other high Characters of commendation, he says of him that he was
Homo omnibus humanis vitiis immunis: A man that was far from the insirmities of
a man; with more of the same strain. Yet that which the same Author reports of
Scipio Aemylianus is much more, viz. That he was a man, Qui nunquam nisi
laudandum, aut fecit, aut dixit, aut sensit; who all his life long never spoke,
nor did, nor thought any thing but that which was good. And elsewhere this is
said of another, Solemn fa^ilius e Coelo dimovendum, etc. That it was a more
easy matter to turn the Sun out of his way than to turn him. Therefore we are
not bound to believe all that we have received by Tradition concerning the high
Strains, and Heroic seize and Enjoyments of Heathen Philosophers, and
others famous for virtue; although on the other hand, there is little question
to be made but that there were many of excellent Principles and deportments
amongst them, and such who shall rise up in Judgment against the common sort of
Professors of Christianity amongst us, and condemn them. However there is no
certainty of any such thing as absolute freedom from cares and fears enjoyed by
and of them, as that pretended in the Objection.

Secondly, Suppose that as far as an estimate can be made, etc. yet such an
estimate as this is far from certainty or infallibility. Though we should hear
them utter sayings, or speak of their security like that of Angels, it does not
follow that they spa^e truth. For as Aristotle, speaking of many excellent
Principles of Temperance and Sobriety, says of young men, that they use to
speak and discourse of these things, but do not believe them: In like manner,
men of Learning and Parts may hammer out many excellent Sayings and Strains of
a very high nature, and yet not believe them themselves. David sometimes indeed
said, I believed, and therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116.10. but the truth is, that
men may (and frequently do) speak and utter many things which they do not
believe. Our English Story reports of one John Crem^nsis, who was sent over by
the Pope to persuade the Priests from Marrying; that the very next night after
he had delivered his Message, and in an eloquent Oration commended Chastity to
the Clergy, he was found in Adultery. So that it is no great matter for men to
write excellent things, to talk of freedom from fears and cares, but to get
this into the heart and to make this real is another manner of thing.

Thirdly (and lastly) Though some of those, we speak of, might seem to enjoy
such a Privilege as that formerly described of a dreadless and fearless mind,
whilst either they were free from danger, or under the arrest of some evil
more tolerable, and more easy to be born; yet when they came to encounter with
the King of Fears, viz. Death, their inward security and height of confidence
and resolution was much shaken, and began to give in. As it is reported of
Socrates himself, the wisest, or at least one of the wisest men amongst them,
and withal the most virtuous and Worthy; who being condemned to die, and that
by taking Poison, when he came to drink his Hemlock (for that was to be his
deadly Draught) he looked pale; and yet he never did before bewray any kind of
fear; but set his countenance so that he was not wont to change it. So that
that fearlesness of Spirit which was in some Philosophers amongst the Heathen
was not complete, or full of power, it did not so reign over all formidable
Enemies but that when Death made her approaches this raised some fear in them.

But if it be here objected and said, Decii amongst the Romans; there were two
of them, the Father, and the Son, who in several Wars, wherein their Country
was in danger, did rush upon the face of death. And so Curtius another Roman,
who threw himself into a deep Chasm or opening of the Earth.

And some amongst the Grecians also were men of great resolution, as Codrus,
Themistocles, etc. and did expose themselves to eminent and certain dangers of
death, only for the safety of their Country; therefore such men as these were
free from all tormenting fears and troubles. But to this we answer:

First, That none of these did purely, or merely voluntarily devote themselves
unto death, but upon very great occasions, at least by them so apprehended,
viz. for the preservation of their Families, Wives, and Countries; so that to
expose themselves unto that which they did in this was but to choose the lesser
evil before the greater. So that all that can be made of the sense that those
had of death, was, that they apprehended it far better, and more desirable for
them to lose their lives, than that their Wives, and Families, and Country
should be destroyed.

Secondly, To expose a man's self to danger, or unto a certain evil, does not
prove that he is free from the fear of the evil, but only that he chooses and
prefers this evil before the other. As when a man is under a great and eminent
danger unless he attempts very desperately through; if he shall make this
attempt he is not certain he shall escape the danger he is in, only he does
suppose less danger of the two in that course which he takes or attempts: As in
the case of the four Lepers at the Gates of Samaria, there was n^ safety for
them to sit at the Gate, there they must perish; if they go into the City,
there they must perish likewise; but if they should arise and go to the Army,
they could but kill them, however in so doing they might escape. Now therefore
it does not show that there was no fear in them, but that they knew there was
was no possibility of escape in case they stayed at the Gate of the City.

Thirdly, There is little question but that a man may so go to work, and tamper
with his heart and mind as quite to stupifie them, and make them little other
than senseless, at least for a time, in respect of any object whatsoever; as the
Scripture speaks of some, whose hearts were as hard as brawn, and whose
consciences were seared as with a hot Iron. Men do seldom make trial of their
hearts what they can bring them unto, and can hardly believe such a Doctrine as
this, viz. That men may bring their hearts to what temper they please if they
will follow means that are proper to bring such a thing to pass. Now it is no
ways unlikely but that these, at least some of them, knew what considerations
were apt to make them void of fear (they being men of parts) they knew how to
deport themselves so, as to make themselves fearless and dreadless. If men will
attend only upon the thoughts of the excellency, and renown, and grandeur of
men that have died on such terms, as of Achilles, Epaminondas, etc. will feed
upon the beauty and desirableness of their Names and Fames; and then shall
think that they themselves, if they shall do such things, shall be as famous as
they, and their names shall live. If this course shall be taken for any
considerable space of time, and men shall but add hereunto other considerations
which are apt to render their lives in this World less pleasing, and less
desirable, no question but that they may harden their hearts, and stupifie
their senses, that they may quite quench and destroy all impressions of fear
which is naturally planted within them toward such formidable objects.

Fourthly, Very possibly Satan might stand at the right hand of such persons,
and help forward those who did devote themselves unto death; he might blow the
coals of vain glory when their hearts began to work and rise within them by
casting in his incentives. For we have heretofore showed unto you he has such
a kind of operation upon the hearts of men, and can join with their fancies and
imaginative powers, and put life into them by his injections. This may be
another means by which these Persons might attain unto this fearlesness and
dreadlesness of spirit.

Fifthly (and lastly for this) Concerning that freedom from tormenting cares
and fears, if there were any amongst them that had part and fellowship in any
such Privilege, upon such ground as the light of nature might afford them, it
may be thought that the Spirit of God was in the business; we may safely say,
that the Spirit of God might be there, and that it was his interposure: For the
Book of Nature is the Book of God as well as the Book of Scripture; though this
latter Book has more in it than the former, yet so far as that does teach, so
far does God own, countenance, and fall in with it. And we know that the
Scripture it self does speak the truth of this; and God is the God of Order,
and not of Confusion: Therefore those things which are written in the Book of
Nature do not cross any thing written in the Scripture. The truth is, that this
Book (I mean, the Book of the Scripture) is written to perfect that which is
decayed, blotted, and blurred in the Book of Nature, that we might come to the
knowledge of God with the more ease. Now, in case there be any who want this
Book of the Scripture, and shall mind and consider that other Book of God, the
Book of Nature, which Book requires many excellent things of men as well as the
Scriptures do. If they go so to work as they may, if they will study the works
of Righteousness which the Book of Nature teaches, and fall in with him who
teaches there, that is God; and still as light comes in walk up unto it, all
this while here is a fit opportunity for the Spirit of God to join himself with
those persons, and carry them on from lesser light to greater. It is for his
glory to delight in such persons who make much of his motions. They that will
but mind his beginnings, and his first breathings into their hearts and souls,
he will presently cause them to take up a new Lesson, and will still carry them
forward, and cause them to know things more considerable. Now then, put the
case that this was the state of any of them, that they did attain unto any such
Spirit to be above fears and dread; this might be by means of the Spirit of
God, which might be a kind of fullness of the Spirit in them.

If it be objected, without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12.

To this I reply, It is true, to speak of the body and bulk of the Heathen,
they were indeed without God in the World; this was the state of the generality
of them; yet notwithstanding the same Apostle says that they knew God, Romans
1.21. and 2.14.15. and that they were a Law unto themselves. Now look to what
degree they did those things, by the Law and light of Nature, that they would
have done in case they had had the written Law, to that degree they were a Law
unto themselves, and their Consciences either excused or accused them
accordingly. Now it is usual to speak some things of a Body or People in the
general which cannot belong or be applied to every individual or particular
person. As when Christ crucified is said to be unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Gentiles foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. it must be understood that he
speaks only of the generality of them; for the Apostle explains himself, But
unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, we preach Christ the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God. So that that which the Scriptures speak concerning
the Gentiles is not to be applied unto every particular, but only to the
generality of them. Concerning persons (whether they bear the name of
Christians or no) who by means of debauched Principles and Practices, by
following Lusts and Pleasures unsatiably, seem to have contracted or gained a
freedom from fears and tormenting cares, the truth is, that for the most part
they are not Inheritors, or in possession of any such freedom; it is but a Copy
of their countenance under this kind of practice. There is a Worm that lies
gnawing them, that ever and anon does sting and bite them, even in the greatest
heat of their jollity they are often stung. The Wiseman says, Prove. 14.13. that
even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. The end of foolish and vain jollity is heaviness, and not only so,
but many times it breaks out even in the midst of it, and comes upon them as
the pains of a woman with Child: which plainly shows that their fearlesness of
spirit is not of that kind which we speak of. These ways and courses of
pleasure bring but a false kind of joy; for their disease all this while lies
hid within them festering. And so men may cause these kinds of fears to be
allayed by this kind of mirth and jollity, as men may lay mud upon a Fountain,
but after a while the Spring will make its way: So will the Conscience be as a
Spring of sorrow and trouble; the Conscience will work thorough and thorough,
though they should lay on one kind of Pleasure after another; yea, though they
should lay on never so much; and it will appear in due time that these men are
far from being partakers with the Saints of God in that great and blessed
Privilege of being fearless and dreadless. So that we see that that
fearlesness of spirit, which we have argued for, is an appropriate effect of
our being filled with the Spirit God. And though there be some counterfeits of
it in some other persons, who are not full of this Spirit of God, yet if you
take the Privilege as we described it, take it in the richness of it, and in
the truth and reality of it, take it as being raised upon good grounds, that it
be not baffled with any thing that shall rise up against it, thus it is only
the effect of such a signal Righteousness as we speak of, and some other
answerable effects of a being filled with the Spirit.

Now as the case is in this Privilege, true joy is a severe thing; and for the
maintaining of it it requires much watchfulness of them that are the Subjects
thereof; they must not turn aside to do any thing that is unworthy of it. Now
therefore, when men are light and loose in their words and actions, carried
away by that contentment which is in sin, there is nothing of reality in their
joy. You may find out some other name for it, or if you will you may call it
Joy: but there is nothing of the nature or of the substance of this joy in it,
which is unspeakable and glorious; and so concerning that other particular, a
capacity of enjoying a free and large Communion with God: This cannot arise in
any man's heart without the Spirit of God, who can fill men with the knowledge
of God, and impart, and communicate the secrets of God accordingly. Who knows
the things of God but the Spirit of God, and he to whom the Spirit will reveal
them? And our Savior says, no man knows the things of God but only the Son;
no man knows them without manifestation and discovery of them by him. As Horse
and Mule, and other Creatures, do not, nor cannot understand the things of a
man, because they have no Communion with him in his Principles of Reason and
understanding: In like manner, neither are men capable of the things of God
further than himself does manifest these things unto them. Indeed there is this
difference between beasts having Communion with men, and men's having Communion
with God. As beasts, they have no Communion with men in Principles, so neither
are they capable of any Discourse or Communication, or of receiving the light
of knowledge from men: But it is otherwise with men in respect of the knowledge
of God, and Communion with him; for though they have no knowledge of the things
of God at the present, yet are they capable of the knowledge of them, if they
be communicated unto them they can relish them and improve them. And so for the
fourth particular (and last) that great interest in God to carry things in
Prayer; this is such a Privilege that, me thinks, every man must acknowledge
and grant, and cannot find any thing to oppose or object against it, but that
this must be the effect of an enlargement in Righteousness, and this comes by
the assistance of the Spirit of God. For God makes a great Treasury of his Ear;
that is only open for persons of greatness and worth; it is one of the highest
means, and greatest encouragement which God has in his hand to work and draw
up the hearts of men on high, viz. unto a life excellent in holiness, to grant
them a rich interest in Heaven, to have his car open to do great things for
them. Now, if God should grant all to other persons that are low and of an
ordinary conversation, God would be divided against himself, and should make
that common which he has set apart for great and signal Services. For should
he grant this great Privilege, to have his Ear open to persons of an ordinary
rate or growth in holiness, that when they prayed unto him for great things
they might obtain them at his hand, he would spoil his market for great things:
For who are they that would strive to outrun their Neighbors in matters
appertaining to God, if they apprehended that God would give as much interest
in himself, and in his love unto them that neither labor nor strive to gain
it? So that there is no question to be made, but that this Royal Privilege
also is the natural and appropriate effect and product of an high excellency in
Righteousness in the World, and consequently shows them that have it to be
filled with the Spirit of God. Thus we have made good the truth of our Motive
last propounded, so far as it concerns this present life, and the desirableness
of it; and have showed and proved, that he that is filled with the Spirit of
God must needs be invested in, and possessed of the four Privileges mentioned:
And secondly, that he that is possessed of these must needs live upon the most
desirable and happy terms that this World can afford. We cast in this likewise
additionally that this blessedness of life and condition is not to be obtained
by any other means but by being filled with the Spirit.

We now proceed to show the like concerning the life which is to come, viz.
that a being filled with the Spirit in this World is that which will make a
man's Crown of glory to flourish on his head, and this with the greatest
increase of glory, in the World which is to come. Only, by the way, we suppose
one thing, which I know is doubted of and questioned by some, and denied by
others, but yet is more generally received, and (questionless) is a truth, and
the Doctrine of the Scriptures themselves, viz. That as the state and condition
of men differ in this World, some live upon better and more comfortable terms
than others; so shall it also be in the World to come: I mean, amongst those
who shall all be happy and blessed, some shall be greater in blessedness than
others, and higher in glory, though it shall be well with them all, and they
shall all be happy and blessed. Now whereas the World to come, according to the
more general and probable Opinion, is twofold:

First, That state of the Saints under the Kingdom of Christ which is yet to
come, and that condition afterward when God shall be all in all, there is no
estate between these two. Now take either the one estate, or the other, they
may well be called the World which is to come; that is, a World which as it is
future, so the state and condition of it will be much different from the World
that now is. That which we are about to propound unto you does relate
indefinitely unto them both, in all, and in every of the several degrees and
dispensations of God in them. We shall not make any long business to argue and
vindicate the truth which we now suppose as the Basis or groundwork of the
next part of our discourse; partly, because we would not make any long
digression from the main business in hand; partly, because (as I remember) we,
not very long since, did argue the Point at large, giving reply both unto such
Scriptures, and such Arguments which are generally opposed unto the Opinion.
Therefore we shall at present only take some brief notice how the Scriptures
stand inclined in the Point, and add a Reason or two for the confirmation of
what we shall find the Scriptures hold forth in the case; and when we have laid
this foundation, we shall go forward with the building. First; For the
Scriptures there is a great appearance here, yea (doubtless) more than an
appearance too on the behalf of the Notion or Opinion which was lately
mentioned. All those passages wherein it is declared that God will judge every
man according to his works, and so reward every man according to his works,
suppose a difference in rewards, unless we shall suppose (that which is
manifestly untrue) viz. that the good works of all those who shall be saved are
equal, and that none of them have done either more or less, nor that they have
been more or less serviceable either unto God or men in their Generation; but
that all have been found alike righteous, alike faithful, alike zealous for
God. But supposing that the works of the Saints (I mean their works of
righteousness) are not equal, but that some have lifted up their hands higher
unto the Commands of God than others; then these passages of Scripture clearly
suppose that there will be found a variety of rewards between righteous men and
righteous men. For that such places of Scripture as these are not to be
understood only of the kind or general quality of men's works; as if the meaning
only were, that God would reward all those that shall have wrought
righteousness, and who have done well with eternal life; and that he will
punish those that have done wickedly and ungodlily with eternal death; now
though this be a truth, yet that this cannot be the meaning is apparent by the
Scriptures which speak elsewhere, not only of both kinds of works, and the
different species and kind of rewards and recompenses proper to them; but also
that both kinds of works shall be recompensed (respectively) with blessedness,
and with torments proportionably to the measure and degree wherein the one have
been good, and the other have been evil.

This appears from several places of Scripture (as likewise from the reason it
self, Cor. 9.6.) He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, but be that
sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. To restrain this to a reaping, i. e.
to what a man is like to receive, or shall receive in this present World is
contrary to several other Scriptures; If (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.19.) in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
Therefore when the Holy Ghost promises that they who sow bountifully shall
reap bountifully, it evidently follows, that this must be expounded of what
they shall receive from God in the World which is to come. And so in Rev.
14.13. where it is said of those that die in the Lord, Blessed are the dead,
etc. their works follow them. Which shows that their works do not only stand by
them, or abide with them here, while they are in this life; but that when they
shall go out of this World, then blessed are they that die in the Lord, for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, out of this World
into that which is to come.

The Apostle gives this by way of Motive to press to good works; that
whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord,
namely, in proportion; let a man do but little, and he shall receive but
little: but let him rise as high as he will, and be as fruitful as fruitfulness
it self can render him, he shall receive all and every particular Work, and
every particular Service in proportion of reward. Know, my Brethren, there is
not any of this precious Seed of glory and future blessedness lost, there is
not one corn or grain of this that shall rot under the clods. The Heavens are
the fruitfullest soil that can be sown in. The Seed that you sow is the
precious Seed of Righteousness, and true Holiness, and you cannot sow too thick
of this seed. For the Heavens are other manner of Fields than the Fields of
this World: They may (indeed) be sowed too thick with seed of another nature,
which may hinder the fructification thereof, but you cannot sow the Fields of
Heaven so thick but that your harvest will be answerable, Mat. 25.34, etc. our
Savior declares how, and after what manner he will entreat those that have, or
shall have ministered unto him in his members. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World: For I
was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. Our Savior makes this the very reason
and account which he gives unto the World, why the Saints were admitted into
that Kingdom which was prepared for them ( i. e. for men and women who did act
in the World after such a manner) because they had done these things: namely,
fed the hungry, and clothed, etc.

By the way, to give a little light unto that question, viz. by the Works of
the Law? Whenever the Apostle is disputing with the Jews, he treats with them
according to their own sense, which was, that they did expect to be justified
by the Works of the Law, upon a riged account of their own Righteousness, and
that upon the merit of what they did, and that it would be unrighteousness in
God not to justify them upon such terms. Now the Apostle argues that by the
Works of the Law, in this sense, no man can be justified. Justification is
taken two ways in Scripture, either for the putting of men into a state of
grace and favor with God; or else it may be taken for that final judgment or
award which God will pronounce unto men in the great Day. Now, if we speak of
the former, this no ways depends upon the Works of the Law, nor upon any Works
whatsoever, for then the bare or mere performance of such Works would justify
men. Now the Justification which Paul had chiefly to do with the Jews about was
the first of these justifications which stands in the remission of sins, which
he describes in Romans 4.7, 8. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man, etc. This does not depend upon
the Works of the Law, for without shedding of blood there is no remission of
sins, Heb. 9.22. therefore Justification, in this sense, does wholly depend
upon the blood of Jesus Christ, and is procured by it, and derived unto the
Creature which does believe and accept of him for a Savior. But if you take
Justification in the second sense, either for Gods approbation of men, or for
his final award, that he shall give unto men; this Justification does depend
wholly (upon the matter) upon men's Works, and upon their righteousness. For the
Sentence of that justification at that day shall be awarded unto men, not
according as they have believed, but according to the righteousness which they
have wrought, and so Works are necessary, when it is said: He that condemns
the Righteous and justifies the Wicked, that both are an abomination unto the
Lord, Prove. 17.15. Now to justify here (and in many other places) signifies to
approve, or discharge from punishment; so that for men to approve of the wicked
in their evil ways, and to discharge them from such punishment which ought to
be inflicted on them is an abomination to the Lord. Thus then we see, that what
the Scriptures speak concerning God's rewarding men's good works, it is not to
be restrained to any thing they receive from him in this life; yea, if what God
in the Scripture promises unto worthy, and well-doing, or unto men righteous
and holy, were confined to what they are like to receive from him in this
World, all the service that any man's righteousness or fruitfulness in well
doing would do him, would not amount to an exempting of him from being of all
men the most miserable, according to that passage of the Apostle lately
mentioned, 1 Cor. 15. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, etc.

But this only by the way. viz. That the good things which men and women do, in
respect of the reward of them, are not limited unto this present life. Besides
the Scripture already mentioned there are very many others which speak directly
as to this, viz. that there shall be different degrees of rewards, Dan. 12.3.
They that be wise shall shin as ^h brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many unto righteousn^s^ as the Stars for ever and ever. And so Mat. 10 41.
He that receiv^th a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Prophets
reward: which clearly shows that the reward of a Prophet is great. And so
again, He that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall
receive a righteous men's reward. Now here he makes a difference between the
reward of a righteous man and of a Prophet. And so in 1 Cor. 3 12. the Apostle
speaking of the different managing of the Ministry of the Gospel in the
preaching thereof expresses himself thus. If any man b^ild Hay and Stubble,
etc upon the foundation Jesus Christ he shall suffer loss, namely, in his
reward, though he may be saved. And so on the other hand, he that shall build
Silver, and Gold, and Precious stones shall not only be saved, but shall
sustain no loss or detriment in his reward, which the other shall certainly do.
Other foundation (says the Apostle, ver. 11.) can no man lay, i. e. upon any
reasonable terms or grounds. Men indeed may build upon this foundation, either
Silver, or Gold, or Precious Stones; or Hay, and Stubble, and rotten Wood; I
mean, men may build such kind of Doctrines which do hold a natural
correspondency with the foundation; or they may build such Doctrines as are
unsuitable, and are so expressed by the terms of Hay, and Stubble, and Wood;
that is, such Doctrines, Notions, and Imaginations which are altogether
inconsistent with that precious foundation Jesus Christ. Now (speaking of these
things) says he, Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall
declare it; and if any man's work shall abide the trial, he shall receive the
full reward of it: but if any man's work shall be burnt (meaning, in part, not
that the foundation shall burn;) if any man's superstructure shall be Hay,
Stubble, etc. he shall suffer loss; his reward shall not be so large, so rich,
and so great as it would have been in case he had neither built Hay, nor
Stubble, nor Wood, but only Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones. Therefore it is
clear, that there shall be some difference even amongst those that are
Preachers and Teachers of the Gospel, which together shall be saved in respect
of the reward of their labors. Besides this place there are several other
expressions to this purpose; that of our Savior in his answer to the Sons of
Zebedeus, Mat. 20.23 clearly does suppose that there are such places in his
Kingdom, places at his right hand, and at his left hand; we know it is not only
the common interpretation of the place, but it is likewise according to the
manner of all Nations, of Kings and supreme Governors, that those that are
nearest unto them in place, and highest in their favor, do sit next unto them
at the right hand, and at the left. And so again, 2 John v. 8. he advises them
not to lose those things which they had gained; meaning, that they had done
much good, that they had held forth the name of Jesus Christ; now take heed
(says he) that you do not lose the things which you have wrought, that you may
receive a fall reward. Now such men who shall hold on their way, not only when
there shall be no interruption in their way of well-doing, but also when
troubles and temptations shall attend them for righteousness sake; these are
they that shall not lose what they have wrought: But for others that shall
abate in their zeal and faithfulness to God, though they do not decline to that
degree, but that they may be saved at the last; yet will they not receive so
full a reward, there will not be so many blessings for them as there might have
been in case that they had pursued without making any digression. Mat. 5.10,
11, 12. Our Savior pronounces blessedness to them who are persecuted for
righteousness sake, Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute
you; and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my names sake;
rejoice and be exceeding glad (the word signifies, leap or dance for joy) for
great is your reward in heaven.

But besides the general vergency and leaning of the Scriptures on that hand we
speak of, there are several reasons and grounds agreeable to the Scriptures,
and to the nature of the thing it self that persuade very much that way.

First, If God should make those of his Saints, or believers that are most
remiss and negligent in his service here on earth, equal in reward of
blessedness and glory unto those who have been eminently zealous, and signally
faithful, and have been content to spend and be spent (as the Apostle speaks)
upon his interest and service; and especially if he shall be supposed to
declare his mind accordingly unto the World; he shall not only want one of the
greatest Arguments and Motives to persuade men and women unto ways that are
excellent, but also overture such a thing which would be a snare and temptation
to fight low, and to move drowsily, heavily, and slowly in the course of
Christianity. For when men shall know and consider, that whatsoever they shall
do more than others of their Brethren shall turn to no account at all unto
them, unless it be (happily) to somewhat that is less considerable in this
present World, as matter of credit, reputation, etc. though in such respects it
is much more like to work a quite contrary way, viz. to matter of envy, hatred,
etc. When men (I say) shall understand that all their high acting for God, and
the interest of his glory in the World, shall produce nothing of a more
desirable consequence, or import unto them than seven times less would have
done, must not their hand hereby be much weakened as to the things that are
excellent?

Secondly, If they who shall excel in righteousness shall be but equal in
reward unto those who shall act but at an under rate therein, then it follows,
that God should not love Holiness and Righteousness; at least that there should
be some Holiness, or (which is the same) some degree of Holiness which he does
not love; or at least, that he should love something in the Creature, which yet
he should not reward, or (which is the same with all these) that God should not
love him more, who is more holy, and righteous, and consequently more like unto
himself than another who is less righteous, less holy, and so less like
himself. But all these things are repugnant to the Nature of God. For certain
it is, that if God loves righteousness and holiness simply, and in respect of
their nature absolutely considered, then he proportionably loves them more
where they are found in any further or more eminent degree. As it was in
Christ, Because he loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity ( viz. with a more
perfect hatred than any other of the Saints) therefore he anointed him with the
oil of gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1.9.

Thirdly (and lastly) it is evident that God does consider the eminent services
of some men in this World, and does eminently, and above the rate of the
ordinary wages of other men, reward them here; whereas he suffers the like
Services of other men to pass unrewarded at present, at least in respect of any
rewards in the accommodations or good things of this World, yea, he suffers
some persons of very eminent zeal and faithfulness unto him, instead of any
recompense in the former enjoyments of this World, to be w^etchedly and cruelly
entreated by the World; which was the case of John ^he Baptist, and P^ul, and
of the rest of the Apostles generally. It is true indeed, the case is sometimes
otherwise: God does reward the eminent Services of his Saints with the good
things of this present World. As in Phineas the Son of Eleazer, Abraham, Job,
and some others. Number. 25.11, 12, etc. Gen 22.16, 17, 18. Job 42.10, 11, etc.
Now if God should highly reward the services of some men with the signal
blessings both of this World and the World to come, and should reward the like
services of other men only with the blessings of the World to come, and this
but the same in degree with the blessings of the other, who had a gracious
consideration likewise in the enjoyments of this World, and were free (at least
comparatively, and to a very great degree) from those sharp trials and
sufferings of the other; Should not God in such Dispensations as these be hard
and unequal?

If it be here said, Mat. 20.15.) Or is not the good both of this present life,
and the life to come, and all the degrees of either, his? And why then may he
not give either an equal, or unequal share and proportion to those whose
services and sufferings for him have been unequal? Or is he any ways
necessitated to consult the degree of men's obedience or services to apportion
or assign unto them his rewards?

I reply first, If we consider God in the absoluteness and infinity of his
Nature and Being, and as undeclared unto the World in that Covenant and Word,
and in those Promises, and other Manifestations which he has made of himself
in his Word unto men; doubtless, he is not impleadable, not liable to any man's
just exception, in case he should dispose of his Treasure or good things upon
such terms as the Objection mentions. For setting aside the consideration of
that Covenant which he has struck with the World in Christ no person could
have any reasonable color or pretense to except or contend against him, that
the deals more bountifully with some than with others; supposing that even
they, with whom he deals less bountifully, yet receive from him measure heaped
up, pressed down, and running over, above the Line of their Services or
Sufferings.

Secondly, If we consider God, as now having voluntarily engaged himself in the
Covenant of grace and bounty which is contained and expressed in the
Scriptures, and more particularly in the New Testament, in case he shall
distribute his Rewards only according to the terms and rules here expressed, he
may be said to do with his own what he will; because no man, nor other
Creature, prescribed unto him any of these Rules, no nor yet counseled or
advised him to prescribe or make them but himself only. Therefore when (in the
person of the Lord of the Vineyard in the Parable) he demands of him that
murmured against him for doing as he did [ i. e. for making those that had
wrought but one hour in the day equal unto them that had borne the heat and
burden of the day] Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own as I will? It
is not necessary to suppose that he claims a liberty or privilege to dispose
of that which is his, contrary to his revealed will, or contrary to those
terms, wherein he has declared that he will dispose of his own: It rather
supposes, that they that contended with him about that disposition of his own
which he made, judged those terms and rules according unto which this
disposition was made to be unreasonable and unequal; and that God pleades the
lawfulness and equity of them (and so the lawfulness of his proceedings,
according to them in disposing of his own) from this Principle in reason, and
of common acceptance amongst men: that it is lawful for any man to dispose of
that which is clearly and absolutely his own as himself pleases.

Thirdly, When God by Promise, or otherwise, has declared unto the World by
what Rules and Principles he purposes to walk toward all mankind in the
distributions of his rewards, in case he should walk contrary to them he should
be liable unto the exceptions, and expostulations, and cavils of men. Certainly
he never does this, does not make distribution of any of his Treasury contrary
to those terms which he has declared: Possibly he may sometimes seem to some
one to do so, who does not righly understand his Covenant, nor his mind and
meaning therein. Now then, the Laws or Terms of the Covenant, according unto
which God has declared, and still does declare unto the World, that he will
reward and punish men are to this effect (in the point we speak of) viz. that
he will reward every man according to his works; that they who sow sparingly
shall reap sparingly, and they that sow liberally shall reap liberally. And
again, that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord; with many things of like import. Therefore now, in respect of those
bands and engagements wherein God has voluntarily engaged himself he is not at
liberty to do otherwise. As Paul said, He could do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth: So neither can God do any thing against himself, but for
himself; he can do nothing against his own honor, and his own glory but only
for them. And as the Maxim, or Saying amongst men, Every man may do with his
own as he pleases, is to be understood with this Explication or Proviso; he
may do with it as he pleases, viz. in a rational way, and so as neither to
destroy or hurt himself or others: In like manner, God may do with his own what
he will, so he does all things for his own honor and glory. But that mentioned
in the Objection, wherein it is supposed that men that are unequal in Service
to God may yet be made equal in Rewards by him; it seems (at least) to have a
kind of appearance against the truth of God, and against those Engagements and
Declarations which he has made concerning himself, and concerning his
intentions and purposes to proceed with men in the Gospel. You heard before
that he that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly; now if he that sows
sparingly shall reap liberally, or have the same increase of his slender sowing
which the other has of his liberal sowing; here would (as it were) be a blot
upon the truth of God in such a Saying, and in such a Declaration of himself.
And so when he says, he that sows plentifully shall reap plentifully, it
must needs be understood comparatively in respect of him that sows sparingly:
So then evident it is, such a procedure of God with men as the Objection
supposes, obscureth the name and glory of God in the eyes of the World.

Only there is one thing which we ought to be somewhat tender of, There is a
time (says Solomon, Eccl. 2.5.) to gather stones, and a time to cust them
abroad; now it may be there may be ten times the proportion of the time to
gather stones of what there may be of that time which is seasonable for the
throwing them abroad: yet it does not follow but that it may be as fit that
stones be thrown away as gathered together. So there may be such cases (I
suppose it will be hard to determine the contrary, but that there may be such
cases) wherein God may refuse to go by his own Declarations and Expressions in
this kind, and that without being liable to any change, or blot, or blemish; as
if that God should suffer his truth to fail, or that he should go contrary to
his Word. It is true, when the Apostle says of him, he is a God that cannot
lie, it does not therefore follow that he does always literally perform what
he says; because that is not his meaning always so to do; we are not so to
take his Promise, nor is it so to be understood, but only of ordinary cases,
and where there is not some special inducement, one or other, of greater
consequence to cause him to leave it, and to walk on the other hand of it. Now
by all that we have argued upon this Point, we may see clearly, that as far as
we can estimate in like cases, God will reward equally those that shall be
equal in their service, and unequally those who shall be unequal in that sense;
and that he has in readiness Crowns of glory of different weight and
brightness, according as he sees and beholds that men and women do either
fall or continue low in their Service, or else as they grow, and proceed, and
rise: God (I say) has Crowns of glory to fit, and to answer according to the
Rules of his own proportion and equity, Rules of his own drawing up and making;
he has rewards commensurable to every man's case, and to every man's
faithfulness, and zeal in his Service.

Concerning that Parable, Mat. 20. a passage of Scripture which seems to cross
and thwart this Opinion of variety of Rewards in Heaven. They that are contrary
minded to us in the Point in hand understand, that by the Penny here, which is
said to be given to the Labour^^ respectively, is meant Eternal Life and
Salvation. Others (upon a better ground) are of a contrary Judgment, and do not
suppose it necessary that we should so understand it. And there are some that
are divided in their judgments about it; who yet agree in this, that Eternal
Life and Salvation is not signified by it. Touching the Parable, I clearly find
from the words of Christ which went before in Mat. 19. the last words, But many
that were last shall be first, that the intent of it was only to make good, or
to declare in an Instance or Type the truth of what the Lord Christ had said
that the first should be last. And indeed it is the general Scope of the
Parable that is to be minded; and all particular clauses and carriages in it
are not to be applied unto any special thing. As it is with many of your Maps,
there are the Places, and the Cities, and Distances of them; these are only the
Scope of the Maps; but there are many things by way of Ornament besides to make
them pleasant to the eyes: So I conceive, our Savior does frame most of his
Parables only with one edge, as it were to fit and suit the business which he
aims at, and which he seeks to convey, and stick in the minds and consciences
of the Hearers: But there are many Passages and Sayings in several Parables
which have no special and particular relation unto the main end, but only to
set off the Parable, and to make that, as it were, more fit for the
understanding, and pleasant to the apprehension, and more convenient to be
carried away by the memories of men: And so we may conceive that the main scope
of the Parable is only this, to show that men, who stand upon their terms, with
a mistaken conceit of themselves, and of their Services (as the Jews did) are
out of the way. And this our Savior would teach them by the Parable, when he
says they that were hired in the morning early contracted with the Householder
for so much for their days work, which is said to be a Penny: But for the rest
who were called to the work afterward we do not find any Contract or mention
made of what the Householder should give them, or what they should demand for
what they do, but only he tells them in the general what was meet for them
should be given them; he bids them go and labor, and do their work faithfully,
and that then they should receive accordingly. Now when he comes to account
with these workmen, he begins with those that were hired in the Morning, and
then with the rest that came later, and then with the last that came at the
Eleventh hour. When the first saw that there was as much given unto those that
had labored but one hour of the day as there was unto them that had borne the
heat and burden of the day; this caused them to break out against the
Householder that had hired them, as if he were unequal, unreasonable, and unjust
in giving more unto such as had labored less, as they judged it, and less to
them who had labored more (the proportion of their labor considered.) Now
Christ shows, that this might very well be in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is,
in the business of the Gospel, and preaching of that in the World; that God may
justly, and upon his own terms, though he would not account with such Murmurers
and Quarrellers about his terms; yet that God was at liberty to make what Law
or Terms he pleased for the disposal of his own, and to walk by this Rule
accordingly; that this was just and equal, and there was no cause to contend
with him, or to murmur against him for so doing.

But it may be some man's Question,

To this I answer, That God does not simply and barely estimate the external
Actions and Services of men, but does lay together, and puts into the balance
(whatsoever it may be) the inward frame of the heart and soul. And so we find
in Scripture, that when mention is made of the righteousness of God in judging
of men, it is said, that he will judge men according to their works; and bring
forth every secret thing to judgment. That which will bear special weight in
the judgment of God is the frame of the heart and spirit, which it may be some
had not the opportunity fully and thoroughly to express in their outward
deportments and service in the World; but when God comes to pass Sentence, and
to give Judgment, then he will estimate things according to the strictest and
accuratest terms of reason. But our Savior, in this Parable, sets forth the
high presuming nature of the Jews, in opposition to the Gentiles, whom they
despised, and who at the Eleventh hour of the day were called into the Service
of God. He there sets forth their Genius and Disposition, who because they had
done so much, and had been so laborious above others in the Works of the Law,
and in the Ceremonies and Sacrifices, and in the legal Rites and Observations;
therefore they thought they should have double and trebble, and a thousandfold
above the Gentiles, that came in so late. Now the Lord Christ declares unto the
Jews, Parabolically, that he knew the frames of their hearts, how they were
much expecting and looking for rewards from him for what they did upon the
account of themselves; but intimates that the Gentiles were content to submit
to the good will and pleasure of God; that they came in to serve him freely,
without indenting, or any particular contracting with him, after the manner
which it seems the Jews did. Upon this account he makes equal the performance
and Services of the Gentiles, though it was not of so long a continuance. The
Gentiles had not been so long in his Vineyard as they had been, yet the
Gentiles served him with a better heart and more ingenious mind and affections
than the Jews did; which they ought to have considered, and not so much to have
stood upon their ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, their Sacrifices, and Legal
Observations, as to contend with God for a reward in rigor of Justice. That by
the Penny is not here meant Eternal life, Chrysostom of old, and sundry later
Interpreters, have sufficiently proved from hence; namely, that they who come
in at the first hour of the day, that is, the murmurers, and those whose eyes
were evil because God was good, that envied at the bounty and magnificence of
God toward the poor Gentiles, that such persons are not like to receive the
Kingdom of Heaven, Salvation from the hand of God. Or if we should, in the last
place, understand by the Penny here the Kingdom of Heaven, or Salvation it self,
yet would it not follow from thence, that therefore all these workmen had all
the same part, and the same portion there, or the same degrees in glory.
Because as when it is said, that the Righteous shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father; though they shall be all equal in this that they shall
all shine as the Sun; yet it does not follow that they shall all shine with the
same luster and splendour and brightness, but that there may be different
degrees of shining: So it may be said, that all those persons, even they that
were men of an evil eye, and were apt to murmur and grudge, at them who they
thought were inferior unto themselves, and had not been so long in the Service
of God as they; supposing, I say, that those persons should be saved as well as
the other, yet it does not follow, that therefore there should be no difference
between the one and the other, for every one may have his Penny if we understand
Salvation by it; for all the Saints, and all Believers that have the least
Faith, and the lowest degree in Grace as well as the highest, they shall all be
saved: But it does in no wise follow from hence, because they shall receive
every man a Penny, that therefore they shall each one receive no greater
proportion than the other. I say, it hinders not, but that there may be
degrees, and greater proportions and shares in this Salvation to be conferred
upon some above what shall be given or conferred upon other. So that the truth
is, though this Parable be very hard and obscure, and accordingly has tried
the Judgments and Understandings of men, and divided them to purpose: Yet there
is nothing can reasonably be brought from it, which has any clear or pregnant
Argument against that inequality of rewards which we have been arguing until
now. So that we shall take this for a ground or Basis of that Discourse which
we are upon, That certainly there is a variety and difference of Rewards in
Heaven; there are Crowns, some greater and more weightier than others. Now this
we should have added in the close, that the Crowns of greatest weight and glory
are prepared for the heads of those who are filled with the Spirit of God;
these are the persons that shall be highest and nearest unto Jesus Christ in
his glory, they that shall most abound in the work of the Lord, they that are
fullest of Zeal and Faithfulness, they that will make the greatest disposure of
themselves, that shall be content to spend, and be spent upon the interest of
God in the World: certainly, if there be any Crowns of Glory in the World to
come more weighty than others, they are the persons that shall receive them
from Christ. Now it only remains that we weigh the Motive, and for that I shall
refer you to the consideration of what has already been delivered in this
Motive.

FINIS.
A Table of such Texts of Scripture unto which light is given in the foregoing
Discourse.
ABraham will command his Children, Genesis 18.9.
and his House after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord Page 512 Now
therefore go, Exodus 4.12.
and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say Page 143 If
there be a Prophet among you, Number. 12.6.
I the Lord ( or I Jehovah) will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and
will speak unto him in a Dream Page 143 I said indeed that thy Fathers House
shall walk before me for ever 1 Samuel 2.30.
Page 30 The Lord has heard my Supplication, Psalm. 6.9, 10.
and he will receive my Prayer; let all mine Enemies be ashamed, and sore vexed
Page 529 I will call on the Lord, Psalm. 18.3.
who is worthy to be praised, so shall I be saved from mine Enemies Page 529
The sorrows of Hell compassed me about. Ver. 5, 6.
He heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his
ears Page 529 The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, Ver. 34.15, 17.
and his ears are open to their cry; the Righteous cry, and the Lord hears
Page 525 Then shall I teach Transgressors the way, Ver. 51.13.
and Sinners shall be converted unto thee Page 48 They are all plain to him
that will understand Prove. 8.9.
Page 517 Wherefore is there a Price in the hand of a Fool to get wisdom, Prove.
17.16.
seeing he has not a heart? Page 474 He that despises his way, Prove. 19.16.
Page 83, 84 Labor not to be rich; Prove. 23.4.
Cease from thine own wisdom Page 474 Will thou set thine eyes upon that which
is not? Ver. 5.
For riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away Page 474 Awake thou
North wind, Cant. 4.16.
and come thou South, and blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow
out Page 183, 184 Make the heart of this people fat Isa. 6.9, 10.
Page 145 And now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me Isa. 48.16.
Page 145 Neither lift up a cry for this People, Jer. 11.14.
for if they pray I will not hear them Page 530 Behold the days come, Jer.
30.31.
says Jehovah, that I will make a new Covenant Page 145 They should deliver
but their own souls by their righteousness Ezekiel. 14.14.
Page 530 When I say unto the righteous man he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 33.13.
if he shall trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, in his
iniquity he shall die Page 30 The morning cloud, Hos. 6.4.
and early dew Page 88 Rejoice not against me, Mic. 7.8.
O mine Enemy Page 83 Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect Mat. 5.48.
Page 127 And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you: Mat. 7.7, 8.
seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every
one that asks, receives; he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks,
it shall be opened Page 309 Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in
the Kingdom of their Father Mat. 13.43.
Page 122, 123 Therefore every Scribe, Ver. 52.
which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a man that is an
Householder, which brings forth out of his Treasury things new and old Page
435 And they likewise received every man a Penny Ver. 20.9.
Page 93, 94, 119, 120 Grant these my two Sons may sit the one on thy right
hand, Ver. 21, 23.
and the other on thy left in thy Kingdom. It is not mine to give but unto them
for whom it is prepared of my Father Page 124, 125 For unto every one that
has, Ver. 25.29.
shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that has not shall
be taken away even that which he has Page 19, 27, 28, 29, etc. Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations, Ver. 28.19.
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost Page 135, etc. He saw the Heavens opened, Mar. 1.10.
and the Spirit like a Dove descending upon him Page 151, 152 Why does the man
thus speak blasphemies? Mar. 2.7.
Who can forgive sins but God only? Page 155, 156 Ye know not what you ask Mar.
10.35.
Page 27, etc. For it shall be given to whom it is prepared Ver. 40.
Page 27 That he would grant unto us, Luke 1.74.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear Page 68, 69 And ye your selves like unto men that wait for their
Lord when he will return from the Wedding, Luke 12.36, 37.
that when he comes and knocks they may open unto him immediately. Blessed
are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching; verily I
say unto you that he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to meat, and
will come forth and serve them Page 350 Which of you having a Servant plowing
or feeding Cattle will say to him by and by when he is come from the field,
Luke 17.7, 8.
go and sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, make ready
wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and
drunken, and afterward thou shall eat and drink. Does he thank that Servant
because he did the things which were commanded him? I trow not Page 350, etc.
That was the true light, Joh. 1.9.
which lights every man that comes into the World Page 284 I saw the Spirit
descending from Heaven like a Dove, Joh. 1.32.
and it abode upon him Page 153 Jesus answered, verily, Joh. 3.5.
verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God Page 156 That which is born of the flesh
is flesh Joh. 3.6.
Page 18 The wind blows where it lists, Joh. 3.8.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor
whither it goes Page 174 Except you see signs and wonders you will not believe
Joh. 4.48.
Page 408 I am come that they might have life, Joh. 10.10.
and that they might have it more abundantly Page 68 But if I do, Ver. 38.
though ye believe not me, believe the Works, that ye may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him Page 516 Even the Spirit of truth whom the
World cannot receive because it sees him not, Ver. 14.17.
neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be
in you Page 21.22 But the Comforter, Ver. 26.
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach
you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said
unto you Page 164 Abide in me, Ver. 15.4, 5.
and I in you; he that abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit
Page 197, 198 But when the Comforter is come whom I will send unto you from the
Father, Ver. 15.26.
even the Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify
of me Page 164, etc. He shall receive of mine and show it unto you Ver. 16.14.
Page 216, 217, 218 And now Father, Ver. 17.5.
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the World was Page 136, etc. For I have given unto them the words which
thou gave me, Ver. 8.
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
and they believed that thou did send me Page 516, etc. And when he had said
this, Ver. 20.22, 23.
he breathed on them, and says unto them: Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose
soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye
retain they are retained Page 173, etc. Men and Brethren, Acts 1.16.
this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the
mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas Page 176 And when they heard that,
Acts 4.24.
they lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God
which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is; who by
the mouth of thy servant David have said, Why did the Heathen rage? etc. Page
176 Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts 5.3.
Page 42, 177 Why have ye agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Ver.
9.
Page 177 For in him we live, Ver. 17.28.
and move, and have our being Page 86 We have not so much as heard whether
there be any Holy Ghost Ver. 19.2.
Page 228 Behold I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem Ver. 20.22.
Page 43. etc, Because when they knew God they glorified him not as God Romans
1.21.
Page 68 Who against hope believed in hope that he might become the Father of
many Nations Romans 4.18.
Page 105 Giving glory to God Ver. 20.
Page 105, etc. For I know that in me, Ver. 7.18.
that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing Page 299 But I see another Law in
my members warring against the Law of my mind, Ver. 23.
and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members Page
299 For as many as are led by the Spirit, Ver. 8.14.
etc. Page 295 We have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry: Ver. 15.
Abba, Father Page 505, etc. The Spirit it self bearing witness with our
Spirits that we are the Children of God Ver. 16.
Page 504, etc. And of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Ver. 9.5.
who is over all God blessed for ever Page 189 If thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, Ver. 10.9.
etc. Page 48 But fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord Ver. 12.11.
Page 14 Rulers are not a terror to good works, Ver. 13.3.
but to evil Page 68 Attending continually upon this very thing Ver. 6.
Page 68 For the Spirit of God searches the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2.10.
Page 171, 231, 232, 233 For what man knows the things of a man save the
Spirit of a man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11.
Page 171 For though I preach the Gospel I have nothing to glory of; 1 Cor.
9.16.
for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel
Page 353, 354 Wherefore Tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, 1
Cor. 14.22.
but to them that believe not: but Prophesying serves not for them that
believe not, but for them that believe Page 406, etc. Therefore, 1 Cor. 15.38.
my Beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work
of the Lord, for as much as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord Page
112, 113 Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.
but our sufficiency is of God Page 242 For whether we be besides our selves it
is to God, 2 Cor. 5.13.
or whether we be sober it is for your cause Page 43, 44 Having therefore these
Promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord Page 133, 134 Your Zeal has provoked very
many 2 Cor. 9.2.
Page 47 He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.6.
and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully Page 544 For the Weapons
of our Warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4.
but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong Holds Page 430, 431 There
was given to me a thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.
the Messenger of Satan Page 492 For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
Gal. 5.17.
etc. so that ye cannot do the things that ye would Page 252, 269 Bear ye on
another burdens and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2.
Page 50, 51 For he that sows to the Spirit, Gal. 6.8.
etc. Page 290 Which is his body, Ephesians. 1.23.
the fullness of him that fills all in all Page 131 For this cause I bow my
knee to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16.
Of whom the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named. That he would grant
you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man Page 58, 59, 60 That ye might being rooted and grounded
in love, Ver. 17, 18.
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the length, and breadth,
and depth, and height, etc. Page 71, 72, 73 Let no corrupt Communication
proceed out of your mouth, Ver. 4.29, 30.
etc. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God Page 12, 13, 304, 305 Knowing
whatsoever good thing any man does, Ver. 6.8.
the same shall he receive of the Lord whether he be bond or free Page 112 Many
waxed confident by my bonds Phil. 1.14.
Page 47 Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12, 13.
for it is God that works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure Page
158 Who shall change our vile body, Phil. 3.21.
etc. Page 122, 123 That in all things he might have the preeminence Col. 1.18.
Page 122 Quench not the Spirit 1 These. 5.19.
Page 10, 11, 12 God who counted me faithful, 1 Timothy 1.12.
putting me into the Ministry Page 35, 36 I obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.16.
that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering for a
pattern Page 33 For the time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.
but will heap up Teachers according to their own lusts Page 429 Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the immutability of
his Counsel, Heb. 6.17.18.
confirmed it by an Oath, etc. Page 67 For this is the Covenant which I will
make with the House of Israel, Heb. 8.10, 11.
etc. Page 394, etc. The Holy Ghost this signifying, Heb. 9.8.
etc. Page 149, 150 The Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29
Page 305, etc. Without Faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
Page 313, etc. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped
not, Heb. 12.25.
etc. Page 459 Then when Last has conceived it brings forth sin, Jam. 1.15.
etc. Page 299, 300 Mercy rejoices against Judgment Jam. 2.13.
Page 82, 83 Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are Jam. 5, 17.
Page 532 Whom having not seen, 1 Pet. 1.8.
ye love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, etc. Page 67, 68
Ye are a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9.
etc. that ye should show forth, etc. Page 79 Whereby are given unto us most
great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Page 133 An entrance in abundance into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ Ver. 11.
Page 257 And through Covetousness shall they with fained words make
Merchandise of you Ver. 2.3.
Page 429, etc. But the anointing which we have received of him abides in you,
1 John 2.27.
and you need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you Page 398 And every man that has this hope in him parifieth himself as he
is pure 1 John 3.3.
Page 133 If our heart condemn us not, Ver. 21.
then have we confidence toward God Page 511 Whatsoever we ask we receive of
him, Ver. 22.
because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight Page 523 There is no fear in love, Ver. 4.18.
but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment; he that fears
is not made perfect in love Page 128, 262, 501 For there are Three that bear
Record in Heaven, Ver. 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three are One, Page 179,
180 Sensual, Jude v. 19.
not having the Spirit, Page 8, 9, 10, 19, 20. He that overcomes, Rev. 2.26,
27.
etc. To him will I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them Page
531 If any man would hurt them, Rev. 11.5.
fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their Enemies: and if any
man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed Page 529 And the Spirit
and the Bride say come Rev. 22.17.
Page 225
Some general Rules for the opening and understanding of several Scriptures in
the Book.
I. THat every Negative Commandment includes the Affirmative contrary unto it
Page 10, etc. II. Adverbs of denying do very frequently import the contrary
unto that word unto which they are joined Page 11, 12, 13, etc. 299 III. When
Principles, or Dispositions in men, whether they be Dispositions unto Virtue
and Holiness, or unto Sin or Vice, are grown up unto any fullness, so that they
put forth themselves with force, and are vigorous and active in them, it is
usual in the Scripture Language to express such or such Principles or
Dispositions by the name of Spirit, Page 15, 16, etc. IV. Fullness or filling in
Scripture Language do not always (indeed very seldom, if at all) signify an
absolute or exact fullness, or a filling up to the brim; but things or persons,
in Scripture Phrase, are said to be full or filled with a thing when they have
a good, rich, and plentiful proportion of it Page 4 V. It is ordinary in
Scriptures to express one who uses not what he has, and which gives no
testimony or account of what he has, by the Phrase of not having at all Page
19, 20, 28, 29 VI. The gracious and free working of the Spirit, wherein it does
consist, and wherein it does not Page 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 The Object of Grace,
and the Object of Mercy, wherein they differ one from another Page 23, 24 VII.
It is frequent in the Scriptures for God to deliver and express as well
Threatenings, as Promises, absolutely, in respect of the tenor or form of words
wherein they are delivered, without the least whisper or noise of any Exception
or Clause of Restriction; when as notwithstanding both the one and the other
are conditional, and were by him intended for none other Page 30, 31 VIII. When
one and the same Action is raised and produced by a joint concurrence of two
different causes: one principal and independent in its efficacy or working, the
other subordinate and dependent in the acting thereof; the effect or work
produced between them is sometimes (as in good propriety of speech it may be)
ascribed to the one, and sometimes to the other; but more commonly to the
former, as that which is the principal Page 39 IX. It is the manner of the
Saints throughout the Scriptures (and so it was observed by Christ himself in
his Prayer) that whenever they make any great request unto God, they do not
simply mention, or insist upon what they desire; but they desire it in Gods
way, and by that means by which they knew that God was wont or likely to confer
it Page 59, 60 X. When any thing is prescribed or mentioned by way of means in
order to such or such an end, though the proportion of the means be not
expressed; yet it is to be estimated and judged of by the nature and quality of
the end to be obtained thereby Page 60 XI. In Scripture Phrase persons many
times are said to do that, not only which they actually, or at present, do, but
which they may, or have opportunity, and means, and are like to do: And
sometimes it speaks of men as doing that which is their duty, and what they
ought to do, whether they actually and indeed do it or no Page 68 XII. When
Grace is opposed to Works, it is not opposed to Works simply, much less any
kind of Works, but to Works in point of Merit, and as in the strictect justice
they deserve, that he who does them should be justified by God. In this sense
Grace is opposed to Works in Justification Page 69 XIII. It is a frequent
Dialect in Scripture to attribute that to the abstract, or form, which properly
belongs to the Subject as qualified therewith Page 82, 83 XIV. The Holy Ghost
sometimes uses the same word, not only in the same Contexture of Scripture,
but even in the same Sentence, to signify things that are only Analogically,
or in proportion the same, and not the same properly or specifically Page 98,
99 XV. This Particle or Pronoun (...) translated for whom is to be taken
Adjectively, and not merely nominally, or pronominally; that is, not as
signifying naked, or mere Subjects, but Subjects so and so qualified or
disposed Page 125 XVI. In many places Actions are ascribed unto him that does
assist, and direct, and help men in the performance of them, and not unto him
that is the formal and immediate Agent Page 232, 235 XVII. That in Scripture
Phrase is said properly and precisely to be of God, not simply which he acts
or works, but that which he acts or works freely, without any meritorious
or demeritorious engagement laid upon by the Creature Page 242 XVIII. Such
Causes which work and contribute toward their Effects Sacramentally only, are
in respect of that which is literal, or natural in them, the poorest and lowest
of all Causes, 244. Yet notwithstanding they produce their effects most
vigorously, most powerfully, and with an high hand Page ibid. XIX. A man may do
that which is commanded by God, and yet have little thank for his labor for
doing it, viz. when he knows not that it is commanded by him Page 248 XX. God
is well pleased with all such Counsels, Actions, and Ways of Men, which are in
their nature, and according to a true estimate and judgment of them, profitable
and advantageous; and he is the more and better pleased with the Counsels,
Actions, and ways of men, the richer and faller Connection they have with their
peace and happiness Page 248 XXI. Though the Spirit be Omnipotent, yet he is a
voluntary Agent, and so can exert, and put forth his Omnipotency in what degree
or manner of efficacy himself pleases Page 281 XXII. The way to do things by
the Spirit is not to forbear the doing of things or duties our selves, until we
find the Spirit of Grace, and feel it to work upon us; but to go about that
which is our Duty to do in the season of it, with a serious and humble
acknowledgement, and deep sense of our inability Page 283 XXIII. It is a usual
Dialect in Scripture, when the Act is expressed for the means or course that is
usually taken to effect it Page 284 XXIV. Though there be a presence of the
Spirit of God with men, in the state of Nature or unregeneracy; yet the
Scriptures do not speak of the Spirits dwelling in men, nor of their receiving
him, until they receive him in a greater measure, or after the manner in which
Believers receive him Page 285 XXV. Whatsoever Action a man does voluntarily
consent unto may properly enough be said to be his; especially when the Act of
his Will and Consent contributes any thing toward the Action Page 286 XXVI.
Whosoever makes the Creature either merely Passive in its Works or Services, or
willing (as they say) by or from a necessitation, they despoil it of all
capacity of being rewarded by God; and so while they pretend to be the great
Magnifiers of the Grace of God indeed and in truth make nothing of it Page 287
XXVII. It is a Principle in Reason and Equity, that they who make a regular and
worthy use of a less proportion of any good thing entrusted with them, should
(no other circumstance hindering) be entrusted with a greater Page 288 XXVIII.
God usually walks with Men by such Principles and Rules which are written on
their hearts by the finger of Nature, and which they are wont to observe and
walk by in their Civil and Common Affairs Page 31, 32, 288, 297 XXIX. God's
manner is not to reward, nor to take knowledge of the righteousness of men
until the World have taken knowledge of it Page 289 XXX. The Hebrew Dialect
many times uses and repeats the Antecedent for the Consequent Page 299 XXXI.
That is sometimes said to be d^ne which is done frequently, or isal ways
probable or likely to be done Page 301 XXXII. The Connexive Particle, and,
sometimes implies a Motive enforcing a preceding Exhortation Page 304 XXXIII.
God has built and framed the body of his Laws and Precepts, given unto men,
upon like terms, by such Principles and Rules of Wisdom and (...), according to
which prudent Law makers amongst men me went to compile and (...) the body of
those Civil or Politic Laws which they make for the benefit or use of their
States or Communities respectively Page 348, 349 XXXIV. The Gospel being a
Doctrine according to Godliness, every limb and vein of it must have a
tendency the same way Page 363 XXXV. When an Impostor persuades or uses means
to seduce, he is said to seduce, though the persons thus persuaded be not
actually seduced Page 399 XXXVI. Comparative senses or meanings are frequently
expressed in absolute and positive terms Page 407 XXXVII. When Men are greatly
averse from believing or repenting they are not like to bestow any serious or
intense consideration upon the means by which they should be brought to do
either; especially if they can find out any color or pretense to disparage
them, and so to arm their Consciences and Judgments against them Page 407
XXXVIII. Whether Words or Works, they must be kept for some time upon the mind
and intellectual faculties of the soul, before they can accomplish any
transmutation or change there Page 408 XXXIX. When a man is unwilling to do a
thing, he may, according to Scripture Dialect or manner of speaking, be said to
be unable to do it Page 20, 21, 413 XL. There is no ground to judge and
determine a Ministry to be legal because the face of it is set and bent (as it
were) to press men to the keeping of the Commands of God contained in the Moral
Law Page 441 XLI. A person may be said to be moved or inclined when that is
done unto him which is apt, and proper, and sufficient to cause him to be moved
and inclined, whether he be actually moved or inclined, or no Page 446 XLII.
Such a person is said to sow unto the Spirit who frequently is engaged in such
ways and actions which he knows must of necessity turn unto the honor and
praise of the Spirit of God Page 450 XLIII. That which is delivered unto the
World in the New Testament by the mouth of Jesus Christ himself, or upon the
account of his coming from Heaven (as all that which the Holy Ghost has
further revealed by the Apostles is) is more obliging and binding upon the
Consciences of men, and more severely punishable by God, when neglected or
despised, than the things delivered in the Old Testament, or before Christ's
coming into the World were, or are Page 459 XLIV. It is not unusual in
Emphatical Discourses to speak of one and the same person in different
considerations as of two Page 459 It is usual in the Scriptures, when things
are more fully done, or after a more rich and bountiful manner discovered, to
represent them as newly done Page 462 XLV. It is frequent in Scripture, when
the Holy Ghost would reprove Men in things that be irrational, to interrogate
them as to the reason or ground of what they do Page 476 XLVI. The Preposition
(...), in, is often used for (...), with Page 501 XLVII. The words Perfect and
Perfection are most frequently used when applied to Men, or any other Creature,
not in a strict, or absolute, but in a limited and diminutive sense, but when
applied to God in the strictest sense Page 501 XLVIII. Verbs properly
signifying action many times declare the Natures and Properties of things, and
what they are able, apt, and likely to do Page 502 XLIX. Many things in
Scripture are said to be done by men, when it is meet they should do them, or
have a good ground or reason for the doing of them Page 512 L. The Verb
Substantive (...), here used, which properly signifies the simple and absolute
Being on Existence of a thing, is often used in the Scriptures for the Being of a
thing in Act, Exercise, or manifestation Page 228
The End.

