Good News from the English Fleet: Being an ACCOUNT OF A Great and Bloody
Engagement Which happened Yesterday, betwixt Their Majesty's Fleet, Commanded by
the Earl of Torrington, And the French Fleet. Near the BEACHY, upon The Coast
of Sussex.
2. July. 1690
With a Particular Relation of the Blowing-up of Six of the Biggest of the
FRENCH Men of War; The Breaking the Lines of the FRENCH; And several other
Occurrences.
ON Monday the 23th. instant, the Earl of Torrington Sailed with their
Majesty's Fleet from St. Hellens, and the Spithead; the Wind being at
North-East, and stood toward the French Fleet (which, as the Advice Boats
brought an Account, lay at Anchor about two Leagues from Shore, off of
Freshwater-gate in the Isle of Wight) with a Resolution to Fight the French;
but the Witd coming about, and taking them short, he came to an Anchor, off of
a place called Dunnose, which is within Five Leagues, or Fifteen English Miles,
of the French Fleet, who were removed, and were at Auchor in Compton-Bay. The
next day, being Tuesday, about Three in the Morning, there came up with us, and
joined our Fleet, several Men of War, Dutch and English; and in the Evening,
the Dutch Admiral Evertzzen, in a Ship of Ninety delicate Brass Guns, with Two
Dutch Men of War more, one of which was a Rear Admiral. Also their Majesty's
Ships, the Lion and Constant Warwick, all joined our Fleet.

On Wednesday, about Five in the Morning, our Admiral, the Earl of Torrington,
stood to the Westward, the Wind at South and by East, with a Windward Tide; and
about Noon they were within fight of Dunnose Point, about Four Leagues from the
Shore.

The French Fleet stood at the same time to the Eastward, being at the like
distance from the Shore; and about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the two
Fleets were within a little above a League of each other; so that it was verily
expected an Engagement would immediately ensue, by the Disposition of the
French in their seeming to meet us; but on a sudden, the Admiral of the French
Ordered a Gun to be Fired, and Tacqued about, and the rest of the Fleet stood
after and followed him; who steered directly Westward, and from us. Our Fleet
followed them till Night, but we could not reach them near enough to Engage.

The next day being Thursday the 26th. the French Fleet came to an Anchor, on
the South side of the Isle of Wight.

On Friday there arose so great a Mist and Fog, that both the Fleets continued
at Anchor.

Nothing of moment happened on Saturday.

On Sunday, being the 29th. in the Morning, there joined our Admiral, Their
Majesty's Ships the Milford and Garland, and a Dutch Man of War of 72 Guns. And
in the Afternoon, our Advice-Boats brought Word, That the French Fleet had
weighed Anchor, and were put to Sea; upon which, our Fleet weighed likewise,
and made toward the French, who steered their Course as if they had
endeavored to get the Wind of us, or rather to avoid Fighting, and make for
their own Coast, would the Wind have permitted them.

And Yesterday, being Monday, (the 30th. Instant) about Eight in the Morning,
our Fleet came up with the French (who steered Eastward) early in the Morning,
near the. Beechy, on the Coast of Sussex, about Three Leagues off of the Shore:
And the two Fleets being drawn up into Lines, in order of Battle, ours in the
Form of a Half Moon, immediately the two Admirals advanced at the Head of their
Squadrons; and several S^ots beexchanged by each Fleet's Defiance-Frigats and
Advice-Boats, about Ten a Clock a most furious and bloody Fight ensued between
both Fleets, engaging Board and Board; which though it continued, till Night
put an end, yet it is observable, That after a few Hours, we took the Lines of
the French Fleet, and put them into great Confusion. They Fought retreating for
several Hours before Night, and it is thought this Morning our Fleet has engaged
them again, the Wind 'being still at East South East; so that they cannot well
escape us, by making to any of their own Ports that can harbor them, the
nearest French Ports being Dunkirk and Calice, neither of which can harbor
their great Men of War, by reason of the shallowness of the waters, that they
cannot get over the Bars: So that we Doubt not, but our Fleet (by the Blessing
of GOD) will destroy most of the French, before we let them go off from the
English Coast.

The particulars of this Engagement, also what Ships we have Taken, Sunk, and
Men Killed, is expected with grert impatience: But several Gentlemen from the
Hills of Sussex, with their Telescopes, affirm, that they saw Six large Ships
of the French on Fire, one of which being the Dauphin, a Ship of 110 Brass
Guns; on Board of which was their Grand Admiral M. Turville.

And thus we see how the great Monarch of the Universe, and Sovereign Disposer
of all Sublunary things, is graciously pleased to bless their Majesty's Arms,
as well by Sea as Land; to be, in so great a measure, instrumental in pulling
down the French Tyrant, who has arrived to that pitch of Pride and Vain glory
(like the great Tyrant in the Gospel) that neither feared G^d, nor regarded Man.

London, Printed for T. Clarke, in Smithfield. 1690.


