THE GOOD NEVVS OF ENGLANDS APPROVING THE COVENANT SENT FROM SCOTLAND: And some
Reasons for assisting the Parliament of ENGLAND, against the Papists and
Prelaticall Army.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy, and Ralph Smith. 1643.

4. September.
THe Covenant which was sent up from the General Assembly, and Convention of
Estates, was approven unanimouslie by the Assembly of Divines on Friday the
first, by the House of Commons on Saturday the second, and by the House of
Peers on Monday the fourth of September, nemine contradicente, as both the
printed Diurnalls, and written Letters report, with a great and happy change of
the countenance of people, and face of affairs thereupon. Blessed be the name
of God therefore.

Reasons for assisting the Parliament of ENGLAND against the Papists and
Prelatical Army.
FIRST,THe Controversy now in England, being betwixt the Lord Jesus and
Antichrist with his followers, if we would not come under the curse of Meroz,
we should come out upon so clear a call, from the representative body of
England, to the representative body of Scotland, and help the Lord against the
mighty, being assured that the help that we give to his Kirk, in such an
exigent, is given to himself, and shall not want a blessed reward. Secondly,
There was an Act past by the Convention of Estates, Anno 1585. conform to the
desire of the General Assembly 1583. for a common band and union betwixt the
two Kingdoms, wherein the Estates found it necessary for their own safety, and
the safety of Religion, not only to join all their Forces at home, but also
to enter in a league and Christian confederation with all Protestant Princes
and Estates, against the bloody league at Trent, and do think that this defense
of the Gospel, is the most lawful cause that Christians can maintain and
defend, especially this union betwixt the two Kingdoms, against all attempts
contrary to either of them, to be a necessary security for both their Estates,
and they conceive the same league to be offensive and defensive in matters of
Religion, and do solemnly swear to confirm the whole Articles thereof in the
next Parliament, and neither to spare their lives nor goods in the quarrel,
and maintenance thereof, both against Foreign Invasion, and intestine
Insurrection of Papists within this Island; Conformed to which there followed,
first a league betwixt the two Crowns, subscribed at Berwick, 1586. to the same
effect, and upon the fear and apprehension of the Spanish Armado, 1587. and
1588. the Confession of Faith was subscribed by all the Subjects of this
Kingdom, together with the General Band therein, by the order of the King,
Counsel and Convention of States, wherein the Subjects did swear to join and
concur with the whole Forces of their Friends and Favorers against
whatsoever Foreign, or Intestine Powers of Papists and their partners, shall
arrive or rise, within this Land, or any part thereof, ready to defend or
pursue them, and therefore the cause being the same, the parties being the
same, and the danger being the same, now we are bound to perform, now what we
promised then. Thirdly, we stand obliged to England, for old kindness to us
being in the same posture then, that they are in now, for in the year 1556. and
1557. the Estates of this Land, finding the Reformation of Religion, opposed,
by their own Princes with Arms and violence, and themselves oppressed by the
Popish Army, sought and obtained the assistance of an Army from England, upon
the conditions recorded in the History, whereby they expelled the French Army,
made the pacification; at Leith held the Parliamant 1560. established the
Religion. Thereafter they got new assistance from England, to suppress the
general Popish Faction; whereby they took in the Castle of Edinburgh from the
Lord of Grange, and in that public printed Prayer, prefixed to the Psalm
Book, we solemnly promised never to forget their kindness against the French,
which we call to mind in the manifestation of the lawfulness of the
expedition into England, we stand obliged to them also for their late
kindness, for they not only refused to levy Arms against us in the last
troubles, but also did meditate for a Treaty, did welcome and kindly entertain
our Army for a year, did freely bestow upon us their brotherly assistance of
three hundredth thousand pound, whereupon we acknowledged our thankfulness, not
to consist in affection and words at that time, but in the mutual kindness
and real Declaration to be expected from the whole Kingdom of Scotland, in
all time to come, besides solemn promises and vows, repeated in our late
Declaration, and Information, published to the world, wherein we assure them of
our help, in their need, as in the Remonstrance of the States of Scotland,
1639. page 28. Remonstrance to the Parliament of England 1640. page 15, 16.
Intentions of the Army of Scotland, near the end. Fourthly, the common danger
imminent to both Kirks and Kingdoms, do invite us to help them: for as we have
expressed in many Declarations, we and they sail in one bottom, dwell in one
house, are members of one body, that according to our own Principles, if either
of the two Nations or Kirks be ruinated the other cannot long subsist, if the
Parliament of England be destroyed, and Popery be set up there, it is a leading
case to this Kingdom and Kirk, for we have the same friends and foes, the
same cause, and must run the same hazard, and many years experience has taught
us, what influence Popery and Prelacy in England may have upon Scotland, for
from thence came the Prelates, the Ceremonies, the Book of Common Prayers, and
Canons, and upon our refusal the bloody sword came from thence, therefore we
are to take Englands conditions to heart, as a common cause, to put forth our
helping hand, if we tender Religion, Laws, and Liberties. Fifthly, the common
advantage redounding to both Kirks and Kingdoms, do persuade help: for hereby
we have a fair opportunity to advance uniformitie in Discipline and Worship,
which will prove the surest bond of Union, and bulwark to both. And it is most
desired by the godly, and most opposed by Papists. They have already laid the
foundation of a good building, by casting out the Prelacie, that great Idol,
and they are now calling for our help to rear the building, and put on the
Cap-stone in Gods own time, and also that Union will prove the greatest terror
abroad of both Kingdoms, and the greatest comfort and encouragement to the
bleeding, down-born Kirks abroad: And may give the greatest blow to the
Kingdom of Antichrist. Sixthly, If we forsake England, we forsake our dearest
friends, who can best help us incase we be reduced to the like straits
hereafter, by the common adversary, for the distance and distressed estates of
other Protestant Kirks, make them unable to help us in this kind, and if we
denude our selves of the support of England, by suffering them to sink, we do
not only betray their safety, but our own, let us do herein as we would be
done to, what course would we crave of them, in case the Popish and malignant
Faction did prevail, by murders and rapines, as in the days of Queen Regent
did ruin our Kirks and Kingdom, certainly no answer would be satisfactory,
but timely help. Seventhly, If we suffer the Parliament of England to be cut
off, we have lost our peace with England, because after our disappointment
through breach of the Declaration at Dunce, we resolved to seek not a present,
but a durable peace for our selves and our posterity, and the surest mean we
could pitch on, was to settle our demands by advice of the Parliament of
England, as the best caution and warrant of our peace, and particularly that
Parliament has undertaken upon public faith, to pursue and apprehend any of
their subjects that should break the peace by invading this Kingdom, therefore
Religion and sense teaches us to see to the preservation of that amity which
did obtain, and yet does maintain our Religion and Liberties against the
designs of our common enemies in England, Papists and Prelates; seeing we may
remember, that these persons who now bide in the Parlialment, were the main
impediments of Subsidies, for tevying war against us, and the prime procurers
of that Brotherly assistance, and so are probably the instruments that will
most secure our peace from any disturbance from that Kingdom; but if they be
destroyed, and the Popish and Prelaticall Faction, the workers of our woe, do
overruled the Parliament; and force it by arms, we may expect war both from
King and Parliament, which they will, over power, and may upon three months
warning, denounce war against us, whereunto they will not want pretenses; and
we have reason to fear, that seeing they know their dis-appointment to have
come from this Kingdom, yea, they do construct all, resisting of the King by
arms, to be rebellion and foul treason; yea, some of the Malignants at home
are reported to have vented, that the King was not tied to keep what he had
granted to us, because by calling and keeping of the Convention, we have first
broken to him. Eighthly, If we should desert them at this time, yet as Mordecai
said to Esther, deliverance shall arise to them from elsewhere, but we and our
Fathers house may look for destruction, and who knows but we are restored to
our Religion and Liberties, to a free Convention at this time, and made a
mirror of Gods mercy to all Nations and Kirks, that we may help our Brethren
of England, pouring out their tears and blood for a Reformation; such an
occasion to express love to Christ, and zeal for his Cause, was never offered
to any Nation: therefore as the two Tribes of Reuben and Gad, with the half of
Manasseh, did not sit down and take their ease, but went over Jordan armed
before their Brethren, to possess them in the Land of Promise: so should we go
before our Brethren, and help them to the liberty of the Gospel, and casting
out of the Canaanites. Ninthly, that this is the only means for the procuring
of an happy agreement betwixt the King and the Parliament, by putting up of the
sword, and saving Christian blood from being shed, suppressing of Papists, and
establishing Religion in his Dominions: for humble Supplications and
Remonstrances, reached out with naked hands, will not prevail with our
adversaries, who have environed our King, and closed his ears to the cry of his
Subjects.
But it will be objected, seeing our Religion and Liberties are established
according to our own desires by Act of Assembly and Parliament, with his
Majesty's consent, and seeing his Majesty's Declaration to the whole Kingdom,
and Letter to every Nobleman and Borough, do give assurance for preservation
of the same, without altering, we have no interest nor hazard however business
go in England, but should keep our selves in peace and quiet.

1. Answer, in all the proceedings of this business we have from time to time
declared that neither verbal promises, nor fair Declarations for maintaining
Religion and Liberty could secure us, because we have so often found facta
verbis contraria, and that by the power and means of our adversaries. As for
example, the treaty at Dunce, when we for his Majesty's honor confided to
verbal gracious expressions of his Majesty's for conditions of the Treaty, yet
afterward they were denied, and burnt by the hands of the hangman, and all
reversed that then was condescended on, for our Religion and Liberty, and an
Army levied against us; it was the counsel of Monsieur de Osel to the Queen
Regent at Saint Andrews, for reversing our first Reformation to grant our
Predecessors in fair promises and Declarations all that they craved, and when
thereby they should be divided, to interpret these by her self: and to take
order with the heads of the opponers: and this policy was used by the King of
France for subverting of the Protestant Religion, for he fed the one half of
them with fair promises of Freedoms and Privileges, until he had cut off the
other half, as witnesses Monsieur de Thou; 71 page 463. 2. As we have found by
former experience, that the establishment of our first Reformation by an Act of
Assemby and Parliament, could not secure us from the violent pressing of
Innovations against both; and in the new Remonstrance, 1640. page 16. we have
fully expressed, that no Assembly or Parliament, no rotten Cable, nor slipping
Anchor of Articles, whereunto we had fastened our hopes, can be any Road or
Harbor of safety for us, so long as our enemies sit at the Helm, and govern
the Kings Council, and Courses, and who makes the Kings Majesty by
extra-judiciall Declarations, to enerve and evacuate all that is done in
Assembly and Parliament, and to interpret Laws contrary to the advice of
Judicators of Kirk and State, as of late our mediation betwixt his Majesty and
his Parliament, was rejected contrary to the advice and judgment of
Commissioners of the peace, and the Council and hard answer to the
Commissioners of the Kirk, was contrary to an Article of the Treaty, and the
Act of the General Assembly, and his stopping of our Commissioners to go to
London, contrary to his own safe conduct. 3. If the Parliament of England that
now is, be destroyed, who shall undertake for our safety, as the Kings
Declarations of his own Intentions cannot exceed his Person, nor secure us at
the hands of his Successors; so we may perceive in the late discovery of the
plots of the Scots, English, and Irish Papists, that these Declarations can be
no sufficient security against the surprising of Papists and Malignants, if
they be permitted to carry arms within any of the Kingdoms.
But we are a poor people, not able for such an undertaking.

For answer, the representative body of the Kingdom now conveened, can best
satisfy this objection. Secondly, when God calls his people, and makes them
willing, he gives them also strength, that through him they do valiantly.
Thirdly, God has helped us in all enterprises for his Cause, and he will yet
provide, in the Mount it shall be seen; we were but poor the last time, we went
to the field in his errand, and yet he provided for us beyond expectation; his
hand is not shortened that he cannot save, if the Lord call us, he will be with
us, and if he be with us, we shall not want: we hope the wise Convention of
States will see to the conditions that the Kingdom receive as little detriment
as may be, only let us not think it strange if the best works meet with the
greatest difficulties. Thirdly, it is objected they will not embrace a
Presbyteriall government in the Kirk, and so no hope of uniformity. Answer,
they have already put out Espiscopall government, root and branch, neither will
they, nor do the Protestant Kirks know of any other but Presbyteriall.

Secondly, their zealous Predecessors having in the days of Queen Elizabeth
adventured upon many and heavy sufferings for setting up a Presbyteriall
government, were born down with the streams of the times, and the power of
Prelacie; and if any zealous man amongst them have their scruples against
Presbyteriall government, we trust the Lord will reveal the truth unto them.

Thirdly, they have in many Declarations, expressed their resolutions and desires
for uniformity.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.


