IMPRIMATUR,

Geo. Hooper,
Rmo Dno Arch. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis. 20. Dec. 1675. ex Aedib. Lambeth.
THE College of Physicians VINDICATED, And the true State of PHYSIC In this
Nation Faithfully represented: In Answer to a scandalous Pamphlet, ENTITLED,
The CORNER STONE, etc.

By Charles Goodall, Dr. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops head,
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

TO The Right Honorable Sir FRANCIS NORTH Lord Chief Justice OF THE COMMON
PLEAS.
My LORD,
THE address of this short discourse to your Lordship, has a double
encouragement; the greatness of the Cause in which it engages, and the
confidence it has of your Honors Patronage; I mean not, my Lord, so much from
any interest of the Writer, as of the Cause; which concerns no less than the
Rights and Privileges of one of the learned Societies in the world. I know
your Lordship too well, to think the scale of Justice (when in your hand)
capable of being weighed down by favor or affection, be the occasion of it
never so moving; nor indeed does our Cause want it: yet if strictness of
Integrity could be any ways bowed in your Lordship, it would be in regard to
Learning and the support of a noble and ingenuous Art, against the barbarous
attempts of rude and illiterate Impostors. The College of Physicians have long
since received particular marks of your Lordships favor; which they owe to the
great intimacy your Lordship has had with Nature her self; and the consequent
value you must needs put upon all such, whose Industry and parts have
recommended them to her familiarity: Whether the College deserve that
character no man better understands than your Lordship, to whom few or none
of their writings or other transactions are probably unknown. And it is their
happiness in this juncture of affairs, where so many machinations and
contrivances are made against them, that the two Chief Justices of this Land
are Men so abundantly accomplished in all Learning, that is necessary to the
true Stating of the question; both of You being fit to be made the Oracles of
Philosophy, as well as Law; and to give a true estimate of the difference
between an Academick education backed with Experience and Industry in practice;
and the impudent pretensions of a few broken Tradesmen, etc. I forbear worse
names to them, though never so deserved, nay bestowed upon each other in their
own writings; because of the reverence I bear your Lordship, whose ears are not
fit to be abused with such language, and whose inclinations lead you to attend
to things and not to persons; considering not the interest of any particular
Man or Society, but of the Nation, which very much depends upon the issue of
the controversy managed in this Treatise, by,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, Charles Goodall.

READER,
THE Treatise against which I write, is so mean in it self, that the very
answering of it, needs an Apology; for no wise man is in danger of being
taken with so scurrilous a Pamphlet, or can think the interest of the College
fit to be put in the scale with it; But the greatest part of the world is not
wise, and Physic is so abstruse, as to be above the capacity and judgment of
the Vulgar, and therefore liable to the misrepresentation of Knaves; who with
small color of reason and great clamor, can breed in the common people what
esteem of it they please.

I have therefore thought it necessary to undeceive the ordinary Readers of
that Pamphlet, by giving them as plain an explication as I could of the State
of the Question; which since it is of a mixed nature, partly relating to the
Legality of the Colleges Jurisdiction, and partly to the usefulness or
hurtfulness of that power, I have been forced to adventure upon the exercise of
more Faculties than One, and to meddle in matters of Law as well as Physic.

If I have in the former transgressed the limits of my Profession. I have but
followed my Adversary, who did it before me; Not, that I expect not, a far
better and sounder defense to be made at the Bar, when the Cause is pleaded by
men learned in the Law; But because something was necessary to be said to the
People, whose prejudice against the College, as it is easily raised by so weak
an accusation as that of my Adversaries; so it will, I doubt not, as easily be
taken away, by a plain Narrative of those Laws and Statutes by which the
College is firmly established and governed, and of which their leisure or
education would not permit them otherwise to take notice.

The later part was more within my Sphere, and therefore more freely handled;
yet that also required such plainness and conciseness, as was requisite to
inform the Reader without tiring of him; But as short as it is, I hope it is
sufficient to make all men understand the real advantages of a regular
institution of Methodical practice, and the danger of Empirical administrations.

Reader, I will detain thee no longer, but remit thee to the Book it self.
Farewell, and be Candid.

THE College of Physicians VINDICATED, AND The True State of PHYSIC in this
Nation faithfully represented.
ALthough it has not yet been my happiness to be a Member of the Learned
Society of Physicians in London, yet I profess my self an honourer of them, and
cannot without indignation behold men of so great worth and abilities in their
Faculty, so barbarously assaulted by a wretched combination of ignorant and
impudent Empiricks, who being united into a confederacy and fortified by a
common stock, dare now attack the Law as well as the College; and purchase
from hirelings fit for such turns the suggestion of whatever tricks and mean
arts are devisable to elude either the proceedings of Courts, or the Statutes
themselves, which the prudence of our Lawgivers have provided in this case. By
this means that security, which was thereby intended for the lives and healths
of the Inhabitants of this Nation is endangered, and one of the noblest
Professions in the world exposed to the contempt of the vulgar; who not being
competent Judges of the justice or merits of any cause, much less of one of so
high an importance, are notwithstanding most forward in their censures; and
whilst they are entertained with the ridicule of the subject, by degrees do
suffer themselves to be cheated into a false opinion.

It is therefore high time to undeceive them, and by detecting the legerdemain
of these Juglers to take away the veneration and reverence which ignorance
otherwise produces in such mean capacities toward men, whom but to understand
is sufficient to render contemptible. I have for this purpose pitched upon a
Pamphlet, entitled, A Corner stone, etc. which whether written by the Club of
Mountebanks, by whom the pretended Author is said to be maintained in his
Lawsuit, or whether the fruit of one man's labor, I know not; but I find it
contains the substance of what all of them have hitherto said against the
College. An Answer therefore to this, may save us the trouble of writing any
more upon this Subject; nor need that Answer be prolix, if we consider all
their objections are reducible to these three following Questions.

1. Whether the College of Physicians be established by Act of Parliament?

2. Whether the proceedings of the College against Empiricks and unlicenced
persons be oppressive?

3. Whether Physicians educated in Universities, and particularly the College
of Physicians in London, have been the great hinderers of the Art of Physic,
and more especially that of Chemistry?

CHAP. I.
FOr the clearing of the first you must know, that in 3 H. 8. the King and
Parliament taking into serious consideration the great injury that was done to
his Liege people by a great multitude of ignorant persons, as, Smiths, Weavers,
Women, etc. who boldly took upon them to practice the noble Science of Physic
to the high displeasure of God, great infamy of the Faculty, and destruction of
many of his Subjects, as the Act more at large expresses: it was therefore by
the Authority of that Parliament enacted, That no person should practice
Physic, except he were first examined, approved and admitted by the Bishop of
London or Dean of Paul's, calling to him or them four Doctors of Physic, etc.
This Act continued in force till the 14th and 15th of the same Kings Reign, at
which time a Charter that had been granted in the 10th year of the same by the
intercession of Cardinal Woolsey and six eminent Physicians, three of which
belonged to the King's own person (wherein a perpetual College of Physicians
was erected and granted in London, and within seven miles of the same, with
several privileges therein specified) was confirmed by Act of Parliament; in
which Act it was ordained, established and enacted, That the said Corporation
of the said Commonalty and Fellowship of the Faculty of Physic aforesaid, and
all and every Grant and Article and other thing contained and specified in the
said Letters Patents, be approved, granted, ratified and confirmed in this
present Parliament, and clearly authorized and admitted by the same, good
lawful and available to the said Body Corporate and their Successors for ever,
in as ample and large manner as may be taken, thought and construed by the same.

Now if you please to compare this Act with the College Charter, which is part
of the Act it self embodied in it, you will find that all the privileges
therein contained were granted them; Notwithstanding any precedent Statute,
Ordinance, Act or proviso in any Act formerly made, published or ordained to
the contrary: One of which privileges were as the Patent expresses it, to
have super-visum and scrutinium, correctionem and gubernationem omnium and
singulorum dictae Civitatis Medicorum utentium Facultate Medicinae in eadem
civitate, ac aliorum Medicorum forinsecorum quorumcunque facultatem illam
Medicinae aliquo modo frequentantium and utentium infra eandem Civitatem and
suburbia ejusdem sive intra septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem civitatis,
etc. i. e. The oversight and search, correction and government of all and every
Physician of the said City practicing Physic therein; and of all others using
the said Faculty of Physic within the said City or Suburbs thereof, or within
seven miles of the same. And in another part of this Patent it is so clear and
evident that the sole power of Licensing Physicians does belong to the
College, that it plainly tells you in the following words; Concessimus
Praesidenti and Collegio seu Communitati and Successoribus suis, quod Nemo in
dicta civitate aut yer 7. milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceat dictam
facultatem, nisi ad hoc per dictum Praesidentem and Communitatem, seu
Successores ejus admissus sit per ejusdem Praesidentis and Collegii literas
Sigillo suo communi sigillatas sub poena centum solidorum pro quolibet mense.
i. e. We grant to the President and College or Commonalty and their
Successors, that none shall practice Physic in London or within seven miles of
the same, unless he be first admitted by the said President and College or
their Successors, and obtain their License signed with their common Seal, in
pain of forfeiting for every month five pounds. Now let any judicious person
compare these two passages with the Statute made in 3 H. 8. beforementioned,
and I doubt not but he may be fully satisfied that the power which was granted
to the Bishops by that Statute was now invested in the College by the 14th and
15th of the same Kings Reign: for it is evident that the word Nemo in the Patent
is a general Negative, and excludes all from practicing, but such as have
procured the College License.

But notwithstanding this plain evidence Mr. Adrian Huyberts desires leave to
produce certain circumstances (as he terms them) whereby it may appear
questionable whether ever any such Law as that in the 14th and 15th of H. 8.
was passed in due form; the reason he urges being this; that it does not
appear by any Record that the Royal Assent was given to it, there being neither
at top nor bottom of it to be seen Le Roy le veult, the only Signature whereby
any thing is known to be a Law.

To this I reply, that I very much question whether ever Mr. H. took the pains
to search the Records of the Tower; if he did not, as I have some reason
inclining me to believe; I must crave leave to tell him and that by more
weighty circumstances than he has produced to the contrary, that the ipse
dixit of his unanswerable Author will pass for an Oracle with none but the
Empiricks, for doubtless no rational man can imagine

1. That a Prince so sensible of the great mischief redounding to the Nation by
this Mechanical Tribe, and of the great felicity which might be obtained for
the public by establishing a College of grave and learned Physicians, who
should admit none to the practice of that noble Science without their
approbation; should grant a Charter to them by the special request of persons
so often employed about his Royal Person, and so much interested in Him; and
yet should take no care of confirming this Patent by Act of Parliament, when as
our Adversaries confess it was offered to Him.

2. It Is as difficult to imagine that the same College of Physicians in the
same Kings Reign, and that but 17. years after, should have several other
privileges granted them by Act of Parliament (as their not keeping watch or
ward, bearing offices, etc.) and that by the name of the President of the
Corporation of the Commonalty and Fellowship of the Science and Faculty of
Physic in the City of London, and the Commons of the Fellows of the same, etc.
if they had not had their Charter confirmed by the forementioned Act.

3. It Is yet a greater difficulty to imagine that a Parliament holden in the
first of Queen Mary, which was not above 28. or 30. years after the Collegiate
Statute was made, should pass another Act in confirmation of this, only on a
presumptive evidence that there had been such a One made, when reallyit never
had been so in rerum natura; and that this they did, is very evident; which
making much to our purpose, and likewise to the abrogating of the Act made in 3
H. 8. I shall take the pains of transcribing.

Whereas in the Parliament holden at London on the 15th day of April, in the
14th year of the Reign of our late Sovereign King Henry the VIIIth and from
thence adjourned to Westminster the last day of July in the 15th year of the
Reign of the same King, and there holden, It was enacted, That a certain grant
by Letters Patents of incorporation made and granted by our said late King, to
the Physicians of London, and all Clauses and Articles contained in the same
Grant should be approved, granted, ratified and confirmed by the same
Parliament.

For the consideration whereof be it Enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, That the said Statute or Act of Parliament, with every Article and
Clause therein contained, shall from henceforth stand and continue still in
full strength, force and effect, any Act, Statute, Law, Custom, or any other
thing made, had, or used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

4. It Is certain that this Act of Parliament has been owned as such by all the
grave Judges and Lawyers of this Land upon every Trial betwixt the College and
the Empiricks. And though in Dr. Bonhams Case the College was overthrown, yet
it was not for that the Judges questioned the legality of the Act of the 14th
and 15th of H. 8. for the Lord Chief Justice Cook, Justice Warburton and
Justice Daniel of the Common Pleas Bench, were so far from doubting the
Authority of that Act, that they plainly tell us in that very Case, that the
Censors had their Authority by Letters Patents and Act of Parliament, which are
high matters of Record: and in the 4th of King James there was a recovery upon
this Statute against one Gardener; and in the 7th of King Charles the First,
there was another recovery in the Common Pleas against one Butler; and in the
8th of the same Kings Reign a Writ of Error was brought in the King-Bench, and
there Judgment affirmed, both Courts owning the Statute of the 14th and 15th of
H. 8. where the College Charter was confirmed; and in 1651. there was another
recovery in the Common Pleas upon the same Statute against Trigge. And though
Mr. H. tell us of one single Judge that would not admit of the College Patent
as established by Act of Parliament in the time of the late Usurper (who could
scarcely have affection for a Society of men established by Regal power, of
whom several had expressed so great Loyalty to their Sovereign) yet very
prudently he omits his reasons, lest we should observe so much of partiality if
not bribery in him, that it might justly be suspected that Interest not
Judgment obliged him to such an Opinion: but allow Mr. H. what he desires from
this instance, does he seriously think that this is as authentic as the
Judgment of all the Judges of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, (which I just
now intimated) and the High Court of Parliament in the First of Queen Mary? I
am apt to believe he cannot; however if he does, I am sure he will scarcely
persuade any other into such an opinion, unless it be those of his own
Association, who would gladly have it so.

But to give the Gentleman all the advantage he can desire to his
circumstantial Argument, that there is not to be seen on the top or bottom of
this Roll the Kings Royal Assent, I make a question whether this will carry his
Cause; because the Kings Signature is sometimes endors'd on the back side of
the Roll; and if he did really put himself to the trouble of searching, I wish
he would have informed us whether he found this Roy le veult endors'd upon
every single Roll of the other 13. Statutes made in the same Session; for it is
a little odd to conceive that one poor single Statute in the same Session,
where 14 were passed, and that not the first or last, but the 5. in order,
should be solely questioned; especially seeing Mr. Pulton in the preamble
before those Statutes assures us that the King by the assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled, had ordained, made and
enacted certain Statutes and Ordinances in manner and form following, of which
number this is One.

Mr. H's second circumstance to prove that the Collegiate Patent was never
established by Act of Parliament, is this; because he says, that it does
militate against the Spirit of an English Parliament, the great Sanctuary of
public freedom.

To this I need return no other Answer, but only desire Mr. H. to read over the
forementioned Statutes of 14 and 32 H. 8. and 1 Mar. and then tell me whether
the Parliaments of England did not judge without any breach of Magna Charta,
that learned and experienced men were the fittest to pass a judgment of those
brought up in their own profession: and doubtless had Mr. H. understood the
nature of humane Societies, and the necessity of Laws for their government, he
would not have betrayed his weakness and ignorance so much as he has done in
this Argument.

In the same page he tells us, that it might be an easy matter to impose upon
a Printer a Copy of a Bill instead of a Statute, especially about matters of
Physic, whose concerns in those days were but in few hands; and the
Professors very inconsiderable persons; and that after it had been once printed
for a Law, how easy was it for the Lawyers unawares to accept it, and Mr.
Pulton to reprint it without further enquiry?

To these surmises, I answer, that Mr. H. would have done well to have told us
the men that durst impose upon a Printer a Copy of a Bill instead of a Statute;
or given us an instance of a Printer that was ever so audacious or adventurous
to do it; if he cannot, it is strange that he should trouble the world with such
idle and wild supposals, that never had any better foundation than in an
ill-contriv'd fiction; which doubtless can never obtain greater credit with any
judicious man, seeing that all Bills which pass both Houses of Parliament are
fairly engrossed and offered to the King to Sign, which being done, Copies of
those Bills are taken out by the Clerk of the Parliament, who diligently and
faithfully examines them with the Printer by the original Records; and then are
the Copies of them committed to the Press. Now by this conjecture of Mr. H.
both the Clerk of the Parliament and the Printer, or one at least of them, must
needs be imposed upon (as he terms it) But how improbable this is, let any one
consider seeing the apparent danger that must needs ensue; it being the custom
of Parliament to print all their Acts after every Session, that so all the
subjects might understand their duty and the rule they have to steer their
actions by; and no doubt but there were some Judges in that Session in the
House of Lords, and Lawyers in the House of Commons, who had the Copies of
those Acts when printed by them, and would soon have taken notice of an affront
of so high a nature as this, put upon the King and both Houses of Parliament:
and though I must confess that a Printer may commit an Erratum in the printing
of an Act, which occasions the Judges many times to search the Records of the
Tower, as being their only authentic evidence to decide a disputable case; yet
surely no president can ever be produced of a Bill that was printed for an Act,
and owned for such by a Parliament in the same Kings Reign, and confirmed by
another about 28. years after, and allowed as such in several Trials by the
Judges of both Benches; when in truth it was but a cheat imposed upon them;
especially seeing it was an Act of that nature, which was both public and
penal, and might probably have trials upon it the Term after it was passed,
there being at that time so many Aggressors thereof.

And as for what Mr. H. tells us as to the state of Physic in those days,
that it was but in few hands, and those inconsiderable persons.

It Is manifestly false; for it is evident that there was then a great number of
the predecessors of Mr. H's society swarming in the Nation, which occasioned
that Act to be made in 3 H. 8. as the preamble tells you; but then we will
grant him that they were persons as inconsiderable as the Cobblers, Weavers and
Trumpeters of our own days, that practice physic to as good purpose as the
old Women, Smiths, and other Mechanics then did; who as that Act specifieth,
had no insight into physic nor into any other kind of learning, some of them
being so ignorant as they could not read. (a fair description of great part of
the Empiricks of our time) But if Mr. H. intended by this expression those that
were the true Professors of physic in that age, they were far from
inconsiderable persons, as witness Doctor Linacre, Chamber, de Victoria,
Halsewell, Frances, Yaxeley, etc. the first of which is particularly mentioned
in the Chronicle of that Kings Reign amongst the great men of note of that time.

And as for what he says of Mr. Pultons reprinting this Statute without
further enquiry,

It Is such a rude and uncharitable reflection upon so industrious and worthy a
person, that it is necessary to acquaint the world with what account that
excellent Author has given of his great faithfulness and industry in this
undertaking; his words are these; with as great care and industry as I could
use, so many of the old Statutes heretofore printed in the English tongue and
which are the foundation of proceedings both legal and judicial, have been by
me truly and sincerely examined by the original Records thereof; and the
residue with the Register of Writs being the most ancient book of the Law; the
old and new Natura Brevium, the books of Entries, the books of Years and Terms
in the Law; the best approved and printed books, and by all such other
circumstances as might best give probability of truth to the learned. Now
certainly Mr. H. if Mr. Pulton was willing to take such vast pains to examine
the old Statutes by the Records of the Tower, and the variety of books he here
mentions, that full satisfaction might be given to all inquisitive men; he
would not without further inquiry print a Bill for a Statute, especially seeing
that he might with much more ease satisfy himself and others of the truth of
this Statute, than of those old Satutes he mentions.

And though Mr. H. tells us that after this Bill (as he calls it) had been once
printed for a Statute, it was an easy matter for the Lawyers unawares to
accept it;

To this I answer, that if it were so easy for the Lawyers unawares to accept
of a Bill for a Statute; yet methinks the Parliaments of England should not so
readily accept it; nor yet the grave Judges and Sergeants of the Law, whose
proper study and employment is to search the Records of the Tower and Statutes
of Parliament; I confess I am therefore so charitable to think that he could
not entertain such dishonorable thoughts of those so grave and judicious of
that Faculty; but must rather intend by that saucy expression the younger and
less experienced Wits of the Law; but then one would admire, that they should
not have been so happy in their discoveries for near 150 years, as the
Castle-Cole Philosophers of our age pretend to be; and truly of all the
discoveries they have made, since they obtained Certificates of their abilities
to practice physic, and have converted that noble Art into a contemptible
trade, this may bear away the Bell; it being indeed their true Cornerstone,
for erecting a new College of Mountebanks and petty-Chapmen: but when all is
done, I am apt to believe that this Gentleman and the rest of his society will
find the Lawyers more wary men than they are aware of; and truly it behooves
them to be so, when they are to deal with men of such reaching heads, beyond
all of their own faculty, and have made greater discoveries in the Lawyers
profession, than any of them can pretend to, though they could have studied the
Law from the 15 of H. 8. to the 27 of C. 2.

The third circumstance that gives Mr. H. cause to believe the forementioned
Act to be no Statute, is this; that in 3 H. 8. there was a Statute that lodged
the power of licensing persons in the hands of the Bishop of London, or Dean of
Paul's; which as he says, p. 13. was never repealed by any succeeding Law.

To this I need return little other answer, but only desire M. H. to peruse the
abrogation of that Statute, in 14 and 15 H. 8. compared with the latter part of
the Letters Patent, granted by King Henry in the 10 of his Reign; and the First
of Queen Mary 9. with those four circumstances mentioned p. 8 -- 10 to which
give me leave to add a fifth, it being very pertinent to our present purpose;
and that is, the Statute made in 32 H. 8. where the Surgeons of London were
likewise made a Body Corporate, and had the search, oversight, punishment and
correction of offenses committed against Barbery and Surgery. Now let this
Statute be compared with that made in 3 H. 8. and you will find that all
Surgeons as well as Physicians were exempted by one and the same Statute
from exercising their Art, except they were first examined, approved and
admitted by the Bishop of London or Dean of Paul's, upon pain of forfeiting five
pounds for every month. Now is it probable that the King and Parliament should
abrogate the latter part of this Act for the Surgeons and Barbers in London,
and that as far as I can observe unrequested; and yet the former part of that
very same Act should still remain in force against the Physicians; when the
reason of both was but one and the same? which you may read in the beginning of
that Act, as follows, for as much as the Science and cunning of Physic and
Surgery is daily within this Realm exercised by a great multitude of
ignorant persons, therefore it was enacted that no Physician or Surgeon
should practice Physic or Surgery without the Bishops License, etc. Now I
wish that Mr. H. would give us some instances of Surgeons (since this
Charter of theirs) that have taken Licenses of the Bishop, or Dean of Paul's,
refusing obedience to their own Corporation, and pleading the Act of 3 H. 8.
which they may as justifiably and legally do, as any that practice Physic by
the Bishops Licenses, and refuse submission to Collegiate establishments; but I
am apt to believe he cannot, and then I will leave it to the judgment of any
sober man whether Mr. H. has not more rudely treated the Faculty of Physic
than any other profession; allowing Surgeons and Barbers a greater
privilege, than he would Physicians; although a man would have thought that
his having been bred an Apothecary, should have taught him better manners
toward his Masters; but alas! poor man, he has been so long versed in the
Quacking profession, that as far as I can learn by the character he has given
of himself, it is a Chronical distemper; so that doubtless had he consulted the
Lawyers about justifying his practice against the College, they would rather
have advised him to plead prescription for his doing so, than the abrogated
Statute of 3 H. 8. I wish therefore that the good man would be so kind to
himself as seriously to read over the Statutes I have mentioned, and consider
of the circumstances I have proposed against his, to prove that the Collegiate
Charter is established by Act of Parliament; and then I doubt not but he will
leave discoursing so impertinently and like an Apothecary; if not, I know not
what can better help him out of this dangerous malady of his, than a dose of
his own Celestial Liquor, which (as he says) is suited to all palates and
constitutions. But to proceed and give the Gentleman all the scope I can, let
me tell him, that in his beloved Statute, though the power of licensing
Physicians in London was invested in the Bishops hands; yet that of examination
was lodged in the Physicians, else it is difficult to give a satisfactory reason
why the Bishop or Dean are obliged to call to him or them four Doctors of
Physic, unless it were upon the forementioned account; which having been (I
conceive) seldom or never observed of late, it is a question to me, whether any
of the Licenses given without this material clause be current in Law, if this
beloved Act of his were now in full force and power; seeing it is plain that in
Doctor Bonham's Case the Justices of the Common Pleas gave it against the
College for their not pursuing their power given them by the Statute. And then
it is probable that Mr. H. and most of his Tribe might find it a greater trouble
to obtain their Licenses, than yet they have done; and would then as little
approve of the Bishops as they do of the Physicians Statute; for it is not that
they respect one more than the other (they being as truly State-Fanaticks as
any can be termed Ecclesiastic ones) but that they hope their Certificates may
pass for examination, a test they more hate than Physicians themselves. But
however it be, I am sure it is scarce worth Mr. H's so zealous contending for
this Act, seeing that in all points it suits not with his apprehension, that
Certificates of the integrity of men's lives, and good success in practice are
the surest evidence of a man's learning and knowledge proper for his Faculty;
the Act well foreseeing that the greatest number of Smiths, old Women, and
Weavers, might readily procure those testimonials of their ability to practice;
and therefore as the preamble of that Act tells us, that forasmuch as to the
Science of Physic there is required both great learning and ripe experience;
it has made provision of a much better test of men's abilities in that
profession, viz. Such as have been educated in the same Faculty, and by their
great learning and experience have arrived to some perfection in that noble and
honorable Art.

The fourth Circumstance Mr. H. has mentioned to prove the Collegiate Statute
not confirmed by Act of Parliament, abounds with such manifest contradictions
that it needs not any other confutation, but barely its reading over, which
the Reader may find in the 14 page of his book.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1.
The Second question was this; Whether the proceedings of the College against
Empiricks and unlicensed persons be oppressive?
TO the clearing of this question I have done much already in proving that the
College has been established by 3 Acts of Parliament, owned as such by all
the grave Judges and Lawyers of the Kingdom, and therefore acting by those
Statute Laws that were made, ratified and confirmed by England's Sovereigns and
Parliaments, it is very rude if not audacious to term their proceedings
according to these Laws, oppression and persecution; as Mr. H. has done in the
title of his book, and in the first page thereof.

I shall therefore, for the clearing of this Question, and the full
satisfaction of all ingenious and inquisitive persons, give them a true and
faithful account of the excellent government of this learned Society. After
that King Henry the VIII. had constituted a College of Physicians, and granted
them power of choosing a President, Elects and Censors; and invested them with
power of making Statutes and Ordinances pro salubri gubernatione, super-visu
and correctione Collegii and omnium hominum eandem facultatem in dicta civitate
seu per septem milliaria exercentium, i. e. for the safe or wholesome government,
oversight and correction of the College, and of all men practicing Physic in
the said City or within seven miles of the same. They accordingly made these
following Statutes.

And first, as to the Electors in the College,
Who were by the Letters Patent in number six, but by the Statute of the 14 and
15 H. 8. were increased to eight; which number have been ever since continued
(and by the by may afford us another argument of the legality of that Statute)
and have the sole power of choosing the President and succeeding Elects; yet
this power of theirs is so far from an arbitrary one, that they are by Statutes
of their own obliged to choose none into that order, but such, Qui gravitate,
literis, moribus and aetate caeteris praefulgeant, Doctoratus que gradu
insigniantur, and natione sunt Angli, who for gravity, learning, good behavior
and age do excel the rest, and have taken their Degrees of Doctor, and are
English men by birth. And though formerly in public Universities, and when
they were admitted into the College, they had given so full and ample
testimonies of their great knowledge and experience in their Art; yet
notwithstanding are they obliged by Statutes of their own, that whoever is
chosen as an Elector shall be again examined by the rest; and as if that
examination were not a sufficient testimony of their fitness for so great an
Office; they do dare fidem that they will give their consent and suffrage to
the choice of none as President or Elector, nisi qui gravitatem, eruditionem,
mores integros, aetatem decentem and sincerum animum en rem publicam, and
alacritatem ad obeund^ officia cognita and perspecta habuerit, but he, of whose
gravity, learning, competent age, sincere affection to the public good, and
readiness to undergo all Offices, they are sufficiently satisfied.

As to the President:
He is yearly chosen out of one of the Elects, and such a person, quem caeteri
Electores praesentes aut plurimi pro temporis, rei and personae ratione idoneum
judicaverint: whom, either all or the major part of the Electors present shall
think most fit for that office, as to his person and the circumstances of the
present time and occasions of the College. His power is great as being the
principal Minister of managing the public and private affairs of the College;
yet not extravagant or unlimited; he having no power of making or abrogating
Laws without the consent and approbation of the rest; and is farther under the
obligation of a solemn promise, ut honor Collegii asservetur, statuta ejusdem
sine fraud observentur, omniaque acturum in salutem reipublicae. That the
honor of the College shall be preserved, the Statutes observed without
collusion, and that in all transactions he will have an eye to the good of the
Commonwealth.

As to the Censors,
They are yearly chosen by the President and major part of the College, being
four in number, and those grave and learned men: their Office is to take
cognizance of all that practice Physic within London and seven miles of the
same, sive nostrates fuerint, sive advenae, eosque examinare, corrigere,
gubernare, and lite (si opus sit) una eum Praeside and Thesaurario persequi,
eorum medendi rations inquirere, etc. whether they be English or strangers,
and to examine, correct, govern, and with the assistance of the President and
Treasurer to prosecute them at Law, if there be occasion; and to enquire into
the manner of their practice, etc. And that they may perform this their Office
with the greater faithfulness, they are under the obligation of a solemn Oath,
which seeing it may give great satisfaction to all rational and inquisitive
persons, how much it may tend to the encouragement of learning and industry,
and the advancement of public good, I have taken leave to acquaint them with.
Jurabunt coram Praeside, se neminem in Collegium admittendum de^eturos nisi
quem, omni seposito affectu, judicaverint and literis and moribus idoneum; nec
pretio, prece vel gratia quenquam hominem approbaturos, etc. They shall swear
before the President, that they will admit no man into the College, but whom
(laying aside all affection) they shall judge worthy, by reason of his learning
and good manners; neither shall they be drawn to the approbation of any man by
reward, entreaty or favor.

As to the Candidates of the College (out of which number the Fellows of that
Honorable Society are chosen) and their Examination, in order to their
admission:
None is to be admitted a Candidate, qui non sit in medicina Doctor, and
natione Britannus, and medicinam exercuerit per quadriennium, Who is not Doctor
in Physic, and an Englishman by birth, and has practiced Physic four years.
And before this admission every one whether Candidate or Licentiate is to be
thrice examined by the President and four Censors of their abilities for the
practice of Physic; they having well observed, quod nullo modo (nisi
examinatione prius habita) nobis constare possit, quam sit quilibet idoneus, ut
secundum regni leges ad medicinae praxin admittatur, that it cannot appear to
them by any other means but by examination, how fit any one is to be admitted,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom, to the practice of Physic.

Their First Examination
Is to enquire of their knowledge in the rudiments of Physic, viz. in the
Physiological and Anatomical part thereof; which though contemned by the
ignorant Empiricks of our days; yet doubtless will never be so by the learned
and inquisitive Age we live in, and was so far from being despised in former,
that the great Oracle of the Law, the Lord Chief Justice Cook in Dr. Bonhams
Case, has this very expression; oportet Medicum esse Philosophum; ubi enim
Philosophus desinit, Medicus incipit. It behooves a Physician to be a
Philosopher; for where the Philosopher ends the Physician begins.

Their Second Examination
Is in the Pathological part of Physic, where there is a diligent enquiry into
the causes, differences, symptoms and signs of Diseases; that so their Nature
or Essence may more easily be discovered; likewise the great doctrine of Fevers
(which distemper puts a period to the lives of most men) is inquired into, and
many other questions proposed relating to Pulses, Urines, etc. coincident with
these.

Their Third Examination
Comprehends the method of cure and diaetetick part of Physic, especially what
relates to the government of Sick and languishing Patients in acute distempers;
where are likewise propounded several material questions of a different nature
from the former; as what cautions are to be observed in purging and bleeding?
what time of the year and disease they may with the greatest advantage be made
use of? in what distempers? in what persons? etc. which questions if seriously
pondered by any judicious person, he will readily grant us his suffrage to the
usefulness of such an examination, which tends so much to the making men fit to
cure their Patients diseases cito, tuto, and jucunde. But here their enquiry
does not rest, they knowing very well the great injury that may be done to the
public by Vomits or Opiates unduely administered (of which I shall acquaint the
world when I come to treat of Chemistry.) and therefore they are diligent to
examine the kinds, quantity, use and danger of them, likewise the manner of
their operation upon humane bodies; which being thoroughly and duly understood,
they may be tools of excellent use in a wise man's hands.

When these Examinations are thus passed, they are obliged to a diligent
observation of the Statutes of the College, and never to exhibit or teach any
noxious or venenate Medicines, which may occasion miscarriage, or tend to the
detriment or injury of any person, etc.

As to Licentiates,
Their Examination is much of the same nature with the Candidates, yet the
reason of not receiving them into the government of the College is, as the
Statutes mention, Quoniam complures in hac civitate medicinam faciunt, quos
inidoneos omnino censemus ut in numerum Sociorum aut Candidatorum adoptentur;
vel natione non sint Britanni, vel Doctoratus gradum non adepti fuerint, vel
non satis docti, aut aetate and gravitate provecti fuerint, vel alias
consimiles ob causas; and tamen reipublicae inservire and saluti hominum
prodesse possunt, saltem in Nonnullis curationibus; ideo de his ordinamus and
statuimus ut post examinationes debitas and approbationem Praesidis and
Censorum permittantur ad praxin. Because many practice Physic in this City,
whom we think altogether unfit to be admitted into the number of Fellows or
Candidates, as being not Englishmen by birth, or not having taken the degree
of Doctor, or not sufficiently learned, or not of a competent age or gravity,
or for other such like causes; yet seeing they may be serviccable to the
Commonwealth, and procure the health of men, at least in some Cures; we do
therefore ordain and appoint that after due examination and approbation of the
President and Censors they be permitted to practice.

Yet let me acquaint you by the by, that amongst the number of Licentiates that
have been admitted by the College, there have been men of great reputation and
eminency both for their learning and great success in practice, as well as
improvements in Physic: as witness the famous Doctor Wedderburn, Dr. Nurse,
Dr. Sydenham; with many other excellent persons of that Profession. And if you
please to compare the just beforementioned Statute with that made in relation
to Candidates, who took their degrees in foreign Universities, and are
therefore obliged to incorporate in one of our own, before they be admitted
into the College; you may observe the College, like trueborn Englishmen, so
much concerning themselves for the welfare and honor of their own Country,
and reputation of the two famous Universities of this Land; that their being
foreigners by birth, or non-incorporating into one of our own Academies,
(though degrees have been taken in others) is a sufficient bar to their being
admitted as Candidates; yet not an exclusion of them, from using their Talents
of learning and parts for the public good and interest of the Kings subjects;
and therefore are they readily admitted to a share of several of the
privileges of the College, though not to the government thereof. This I hope
will encourage several learned and ingenious Physicians to enter themselves as
Permissi into this Honorable Society, seeing they have debarred themselves of
coming in as Candidates, by reason of their Education and taking their Degrees
abroad; considering how much it may conduce both to their own honor, and the
public good of the Commonwealth, that no intestine divisions or unhappy
factions should be continued amongst learned and ingenious men of the same
Faculty.

As to Empiricks,
Though then professed Adversaries, yet their proceedings against them are
managed with that prudence and moderation, that they are rather to be commended
than censured: they first giving order to their Beadle to acquaint them that
they abstain from practice, until they have passed the approbation of the
College, and accordingly do appoint a particular day and hour for that
purpose; to which if they refuse submission, and do contemn the power and order
of the College, then are they according to the Statute Laws of the Kingdom
proceeded against.

As to a Monopoly
Which Mr. H. and the rest of his Friends have particularly charged the
College of Physicians with; it argues either gross ignorance of the Statutes
of that Society, or want of common honesty: the College having made particular
provision against Monopolies in the following Statute; Volumus, ut omnes,
quotquot examinatos tam doctrina quam moribus idoneos repererint Censores, ad
Medicinae praxin admmittant, ne Collegium nostrum Monopolii accusetur. We will,
that all, who have been examined and found by the Censors of competent learning
and good behavior, should be admitted to the practice of Physic, lest our
College should be accused of a Monopoly.

As to the rest of their Statutes
They principally relating to other Officers in the College, as Treasurers,
Register, etc. and to the management of their private affairs, it concerns not
me here to take notice of them, nor others to be acquainted with them; only
give me leave before I conclude this subject, to tell you, that their
encouragements to virtue are so great, and punishment of vice so severe, that I
could heartily wish that their example might encourage other Societies to the
making and observing so good and wholesome Laws, which doubtless would prove the
happiness of ours as well as succeeding Ages. And that I may not seem to impose
upon the world, or astonish them with Hyperbole's, I will acquaint them with
one of their own Statutes in confirmation of this assertion; statuimus and
ordinamus, ut siquis criminis alicujus gravioris ac publici reus, aut vitio
aliquo infamis fuerit, ablegetur a Collegio, ne si retineremus talem, videremur
aut virtutem contemnere, aut eodem morbo laborare: We do decree and order, that
if any man be guilty of any great or public crime, or infamous for any vice,
he shall be expelled the College, lest if we should retain any such person, we
should seem to contemn virtue, or be guilty of the like our selves.

And as they are thus severe in the expulsion of those, whose vices have
rendered them notorious; so are they no less ready to encourage learned and
virtuous men, assuring us that it is one of their principal endeavors to
incorporate those, qui mores honestos and amabiles habent. And to conclude, for
their moral conversation to each others, their manner of consultation in
reference to their sick and languishing Patients; with their method of
composing all differences that may arise amongst them (much excelling that of
Pope Adrian's infallible Chair) I cannot but congratulate the happiness of that
great and renowned Society, and shall heartily wish that all their proceedings
may prove as successful, as I am sure they are just.

But notwithstanding all this clear evidence of the equity of their Statutes
and justice of their proceedings, Mr. H. charge them as oppressive and
persecuting; which foul charge (one would have expected) should have been
attended with plain and evident demonstration; which occasioned me to take the
pains very seriously and attentively to view and review his Pamphlet; but all
was to little purpose; parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus; for at the
long run I could only find a few lines bestowed upon the Reader to acquaint him
with a suit at Law commenced against him by the College of Physicians; Now
whether this was Oppression on the Colleges part, or stubbornness and
refractoriness on Mr. H. I will leave it to the judgment of all indifferent
persons, who understand the nature of Oppression; which I take to be, as it
has relation to this present controversy, an unlawful seizing upon the
possessions of others, owning and avowing the doing so; and this by pretending
a claim to them; corrupting justice by bribes and gifts, or else overruling it
by Authority. But how little the College can be charged with this so heinous a
crime, and how much Mr. H. with refractoriness, will be very evident to any
person, that pleases to peruse the former part of this book, where he may find
that the power which they exercise toward Mr. H. and the rest of his
companions, is established in them by Act of Parliament, and this not by one
single Act but by three successively; in which are declared the penalties that
would necessarily ensue upon the violation of them, which Mr. H. so little
regards that he tells you that he will be in the seent of the College, and his
house shall be open to receive Patients, and furnish them with Medicines; and
as if this was not sufficient to discover his resolved opposition to the Laws
of the Kingdom, and Statutes of the College, he breaks out into opprobrious
and vilifying terms, calling them tippling Committees, book Doctors, masters of
the stage, etc. and charge them for managing their Art under a great mystery
of iniquity: which mystery I have faithfully acquainted the world with in this
Chapter, where their most just, excellent and equitable Government is
faithfully represented to the view and judgment of all impartial Readers; and
though these men do so often Cant upon their monopolizing of Physic, it is so
far from truth, that they frankly offer to receive all to the practice of that
Art, who upon examination appear to be sober and learned; and if their
accomplishments will not arrive to so mean a character as this, yet if it
appears that they may any ways be serviceable to the Commonwealth, or promote
the welfare of mankind, although but in some cures (as is expressed in their
Statutes relating to Licentiates) they do readily admit them to practice; which
I hope does sufficiently prove that this worthy Society is so tender of the
lives and health of the Kings subjects, that they would discourage none from
doing them service, who by a fair examination appear any ways qualified for
such an undertaking, and without this approbation, how any man is able to
satisfy others of his own Faculty of his abilities for that employment
(wherein the precious lives of so many men, women and children are concerned) I
do not yet understand.

SECT. 2.
Physic no Conjectural Art.
BUt Mr. H. being wiser than my self, yea than all men but those of his own
tribe, has found out a better and surer test of Physicians abilities, viz.
Certificates of their good success in practice, which, he says, is the surest
evidence of a man's learning and knowledge proper for his Faculty; and therefore
he strenuously endeavors to discharge Physicians of that employment, because
Physic is conjectural, having no certain rules to judge by, etc. and therefore
Physicians no competent Judges therein.

To this I answer,
1. That success in practice is a more uncertain evidence of a man's learning
and knowledge in our Faculty than examination; unless this success appear by
sufficient circumstance to be the effect of judgment and knowledge; and if so,
why should any person accomplished with those abilities refuse to give a
satisfactory account of his proficiency in the Medical Science, to those
learned Physicians that are by Law deputed for that purpose? And surely less
reason we have of questioning the success of that man's endeavors, who
prescribes nothing to his Patients but what is consonant to the rules of reason
and Art, than an Empirick's that observes neither; though life and health be
not thereby obtained, which is not to be attributed to the ignorance or mistake
of the Physician, but to divine providence interposing therein; whilst the
fortuitous prescription of Medicines (though attended with success) is no ways
to be allowed, nor the person to be better esteemed, that directed them; and
that, because they prescribed those remedies without understanding the nature
of the disease, or the proper time of their exhibition; which though
advantageous to some, may prove ruinous to others, as I have fully satisfied
the world in the latter part of this Book relating to the methodus medendi; and
though sometimes we will allow that Patients hereby have recovered, yet seeing
it has been by accident and not by Art, we might probably have seen the same,
if the Patients had solely committed themselves to Natures regimen, which is
usually attended with far greater success than their high applauded Chemical
preparations; especially if managed by the diligent attendance and judicious
observation (which were the great Arcana of divine Hippocrates) of a prudent
Physician, who is as cautious of discomposing or tumultuating the blood with
Cordials and Elixirs, as of weakening and impoverishing it with too cooling and
refrigerating Julips, and therefore rather waits her motions, remembering that
golden rule, cunctando res agitur.

2. If success in practice be the surest evidence of a man's learning and
knowledge proper for his Faculty, as Mr. H. asserts page 9. how comes it to
pass that the event of diseases is ever an unequal Judicature, as he tells us
out of my Lord Bacon the very page after? who farther says, as he quotes him,
that who can tell, if a Patient die or recover, whether it be by accident or by
Art? now pray Mr. H. what becomes of your Certificates in this case?

But to proceed to that part of Mr. H's assertion, viz. the conjecturalness of
our Art, from whence he would persuade us that Physicians are no competent
Judges, because their Art is conjectural, having no certain rules to judge by.

To this I Answer,
1. If the Art of Physic be Conjectural, why may not Physicians be as good, if
not better Conjecturers in their own Art, than any other sort of men?
especially seeing they so well understand both the Theoretick and Practick part
thereof; for surely he that is the best Conjecturer, is the best able to judge
what conjectures are most rational, and founded upon the fairest probabilities.

2. If there can be no Judges in Physic, how comes it to pass that Mr. H. so
fiercely contends for the Reverend Bishops being so fit for that employment?
seeing that according to his own assertion, they have no certain rules to judge
by.

3. I would gladly know of Mr. H. how Physicians in former Ages were so fit for
that employment, but in ours must by no means be allowed; the reason he gives
is this, because the Art was then fixed and staked down to certain points,
maxims or rules, etc. but how if I should tell him that from his own principles
it may fairly be deduced that the same maxims and rules are still remaining?
for if his notion be true, that the College has made no improvement in
Physic, and are only to be esteemed the Sectators of Aristotle and Galen; no
doubt but they retain the same maxims they there espoused; although let me tell
him (for his better information) that there are several discoveries in the
Physiological part of Physic so clearly demonstrated in our days, by those
great and renowned Physicians he so much contemns, that we must deny even
credit to our senses, if we will not give in our suffrage to the certainty of
them; which have been so far from rendering our Art more conjectural, that they
have obtained the universal consent of all the ingenious of our Faculty;
witness the Circulation of the blood, its sanguification by the vital spirits
and not by the Liver (as the Ancients and all later Physicians believed, till
the incomparable Doctor Glisson discharged it of that office) the motion of the
Chyle through the lacteal vessels, discovered by Asellius; its discharging
itself into the common receptacle, and from that through the ductus Chyliferus
and valves of the subclavian veins into the mass of blood, happily found out by
the industrious Pecquet; the Lymphaticks by Dr. Jolive, the Ductus salivales
and lachrymales by our learned countryman Doctor Wharton, and that excellent
Anatomist Steno, and many others which I shall ere long have occasion to
mention; which doctrines had they been discovered in the days of those Greeks
and Arabians he talks of, would have been so far from everting all maxims in
Physic, that I rather think they would have been engraven in letters of Gold,
and the Authors have had Statues erected to their memory.

And truly if we well look into the profession of physic, we shall not find it
so Conjectural an Art as Mr. H. pretends; for Medicine strictly so called is
very little conjectural as to the rules of it, though as to the particular
application of those rules to the hic and nunc of a single patient it may be;
but that is no more than is in Divinity and Law, and indeed in all the
professions of the world. The errors of a man's life consisting in the ill usage
of avowed and undoubted principles, and misapplying them to particular
instances. But still as to the Theory of our Art as far as it is strictly
Medical, it will not be found (as I just now mentioned) so Conjectural as our
Adversaries pretend; for as to the subject Physic treats of, it is certain and
well known to every one of the Faculty; and the end and design of the same is
no less agreed upon on all hands; and for the general description and
Diagnosticks of diseases, who ever yet contested about them? it being
universally agreed that there are such distempers, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Pleurisies, Gout, Stone, Fevers, Quartane Agues, etc. which are so
specifically differenced by their descriptions and diagnosticks, that not only
Physicians but Nurses are able to know them. And for the Pharmaceutick part of
Physic, so far as it relates to the use of such remedies, which by experience
have been found of great benefit in several diseases of humane bodies, who has
not readily embraced it?

I might likewise inform Mr. H. that we are generally agreed as to the Causes
of diseases so far as they relate to air, diet, and the rest of the
non-naturalia; so that it is plain Physicians have had a standing rule to judge
by these 2 or 3000 years, nor will they want such a rule to the worlds end.

But the matters of debate are of a more remote consideration, and not so truly
Medical as Philosophical, I mean the Physiological principles which are
borrowed out of natural Philosophy to the building up of an Art which might in
all parts be complete.

And though our Adversaries would pretend that these principles are wholly
conjectural, yet possibly if they be attentively considered, it may be found
that our contests as to these, are rather verbal than real; differences about
the focus or minera morbi, or it may be about what hypothesis such a humor may
be best explicated by; whether Galenical, Spagirical, or Sylvian.

I shall therefore endeavor to show both in Acute and Chronical diseases how
little our Art may be esteemed conjectural from such debates as these. For
instance, suppose that the Galenists shall teach us that intermittent Fevers or
Agues proceed from excrementitious choler, phlegm, or melancholy congested in
some minera of the body, and according as those humors do sooner or later tend
toward a state of putrefaction and commotion (whereby they are conveyed into
the blood, and ferment therewith) do cause those febrile paroxysms to return
sooner or later.

And the Willisians shall tell us, that the Essence of the one consists in a
more retorrid constitution of the mass of blood, being too much impregnated
with Saline and Sulphurous particles; the other in a more acid and austere
one, which being deprived of its sweet and balsamic nature, is apt by reason
of its penury of spirits and too great exaltation of its terrestrial and
tartareous parts, (consisting of salt and earth) to degenerate into a fluor,
and induce a sowrness upon the whole mass: the third in a more debile
constitution of blood than the former, insomuch that the greatest part of the
nutritious juice is perverted into a fermentative matter, which occasions the
Fits to return so much sooner than in a Tertian or Quartane.

And the Sylvians as strongly contend that these Intermittents have their focus
in the Pancreas, and derive their original or primary cause from the vitiosity
of the pancreatick juice, which at different periods according to its various
constitution does discharge its self through its common ductus into the
intestines, and there fermenting with an ill affected bile and phlegm does
produce not only the various symptoms that accompany these Agues, but the
different species of them.

And thus in continued Fevers, the one shall tell you that the putrefaction of
the humors in the Veins and Arteries is the immediate cause:

The other, too great an exaltation of the Sulphurous parts of the blood,
which immediately breaking forth into an effervescence, procures that distemper
we call a Fever.

The third shall tell you, that the saliva, bile, and lympha being ill affected
and continually circulating through the heart, do there excite the
forementioned effervescency, which occasions this distemper.

And thus in most Chronical affections, as Hypochondriack melancholy, Scurvey,
Gout, Rheumatisms, Hysteric affections, Madness, etc.

The Sylvians shall tell you that these and many others of the like nature do
own their original to a preternatural fermentation of an acid juice or lympha
with different subjects; or from diversity of acids fermenting with one and the
same subject, from whence they would explicate all the phenomenon of those
symptoms that are observable in the forementioned distempers.

The Willisians will no less probably assert, that they proceed, from too great
an exaltation of the Saline parts of the blood, which are perverted in some of
these distempers into an acid and austere nature; in others, into a sour and
corrosive (so that the animal spirits, and nervous liquor are therewith
affected) and in others, into a state of fixed Alkalies, whereby the lixivial
parts of the blood being conveyed by the Arteries into several parts of the
body, and fermenting with the sour recrements of the nervous juice, do produce
some of the forementioned distempers.

And the Galenists shall teach you, that the cause of some of these is an atra
bilis, which is sharp like Vinegar or Aqua fortis.

Now let any judicious person compare these several Hypotheses, and then tell
me whether there be such a difference betwixt them as our Adversaries would
pretend to; for seeing they all agree as I before mentioned, as to the
description, Diagnosticks, and procatarctick causes of these diseases; to which
give me leave to add, Indications for the cure of most distempers, which though
explicated by different Hypotheses, yet are so nearly related to one another,
that we may find them generally directing but one and the same method of cure;
and persisting in the use of Medicines of the like nature, which surely cannot
render our Art so Conjectural as Mr. H. would have it.

And as for those internal causes of diseases I mentioned; which of the
Galenists, Willisians or Sylvians ever doubted the existence of those acid
humors, whereby they would explicate the symptoms of several Chronical
affections, which are so far from Conjectural, that there have been several
undeniable demonstrations to prove the truth of them? One of which is mentioned
by the learned Doctor Willis in his Treatise de morb. Convuls. p. 116. who had
a patient, whose sweat was so corrosive, that like Aqua fortis it would cito
exedere and corrumpere lintea; and in his excellent Treatise de morbis Capitis
he tells us, usitatum est nonnullos saepe laticem quasi vitriolicum oesophagi
ac palati tunicas erodentem vomitu excernere. And Skenkius in his observations
as quoted by that great and noble Philosopher Mr. Boil, gives us an account of
the corrosiveness of some juices, which rejected by Urine or Vomit would boil
on brass, fret linen, and stain silver.

And thus I might run through the whole Catalogue of diseases both Acute and
Chronical, and satisfy all ingenious Naturalists, how little prejudice our Art
suffers by allowing this freedom of Philosophising; for by Physicians comparing
these several Hypotheses, they may make choice of explicating the nature of
diseases by that Hypothesis, which they find most universally satisfactory;
although it is certain that our Moderns have ill managed their talents in
Physic, if they have not (by enriching our age with so many fresh discoveries)
made us Masters of the reason of many of those rules which were gathered from
observation only and practice by the Ancients, especially considering they have
happily found out several humors in the body which our predecessors were
unacquainted with; as the Nervous and Lymphatick liquors, Nutritious juices,
and other great Anatomick discoveries, whereby they might more securely and
unerringly found their Hypotheses, and more happily solve the phenomenon of
diseases.

And therefore I will not deny that this Age having made so many improvements
of the rules that were given by the Ancients, may in some part vary the
doctrine concerning Indications and methods of Cure, the greatest part of which
improvements I shall anon show to be the effect of Anatomical discoveries. But
this does not at all invalidate my assertion nor change the main body of
practical Medicine, in which the chiefest trials are made by Collegiate
examinations: that still persisting as much the same, as a house is the same
that it was a 100 years ago, though some ingenious Artist, by beating out some
large windows, bringing pipes of water, and digging cellars, have rendered it
more commodious.

And as for those Theories I mentioned, they have not only advanced much the
true skill of the present Practisers; but have found that allowance among the
learned men of the College, that they tie not any man so strictly in their
examinations to the Hypothesis of the Ancients; but are content with such
rational accounts of Philosophical questions as his studies have furnished him
withal; provided be be versed in the practical Theory or general maxims
thereof, which I call the rule of physic; nay though in some of them he
differs from their opinion, not explicating the constitution of humane bodies,
or conjunct causes of their preternatural affections by the doctrine of the
four Elements, but instead thereof solidly answers those Physiological
questions by the Willisian or Sylvian principles, they do not condemn him; the
only thing they sight against, being ignorance and men's impudent reviling of
what they so little understand.

SECT. 3.
The method of taking Degrees, in the University of Leyden.
HAving now performed that part of my task, which relates to those certain
foundations upon which our Art is established: I shall now make it my endeavor
to vindicate the famous University of Leyden, with some worthy and ingenious
Physicians, whom Mr. H. has so rudely treated; which you may find in the 19.
29. and 30. pages of his pamphlet; although I think neither of them have much
reason to take it unkindly at his hands; he having been so audacious as to
affront High Courts of Parliament, Kings Bench, and Common Pleas; not sparing
the Lawyers, but representing them as men who would unawares accept of a Bill
for a Statute; nor yet Mr. Pulton, one of the most industrious men of our Age;
to whom all the subjects in England are highly endebted for his faithfulness
and care in collecting the Statute Laws of the Kingdom.

But to our present purpose, and to the giving a faithful relation of the
manner of taking Degrees in Leyden, which feather in the Cap Mr. H. so much
contemns, as you may see in the forementioned pages; I suppose because he was
as unwilling to pass an Examination there, as now he is in England; knowing
very well that his Certificates would not be accepted by the learned Professors
of that University, for the surest evidence of his learning and knowledge fit
for his Faculty; and though he is in some hopes that the Statute of 3 H. 8. may
do him some service here, yet it was to little purpose to plead it there.

The method of educating Physicians and taking Degrees in Leyden is after the
following manner.
When persons have studied some years Philosophy and other Arts for their
better accomplishment, they have liberty allowed them of admitting themselves
Pupils to any of the Professors in physic of that University, whose office or
employment is to read Lectures daily to their Disciples; and those who are
admitted under the practick Professors, do frequently accompany or meet them at
their Hospitals, where are usually a great variety of Patients lying sick of
several diseases; the Professor as soon as he comes, feels the Patients pulse,
enquires into the Symptoms of their distempers, particular temperaments,
methods of living, etc. and then d^^^^lly acquaints his Disciples with all
their complaints and the circumstances of their Cases: then questions them
severally what their Opinions are as to the nature of their Sickness? what
Causes they would assign procatarctick or conjunct occasioning them? what
prognostics they would make? and what methods of Cure they would propose? And
thus, when they have variously given their judgment; he commends one, reproves
another, and encourages all to diligent pains and study in their profession;
then heartily delivers his own judgment and prognostic, and directs such
remedies as may be most serviceable to the Patients ease and recovery.

These Medicines are penned by his Disciples, who meet next day together at the
Hospital, discourse the Patients and enquire of the success of their Professors
prescriptions; and then wait his attendance to hear his farther opinion.

And thus are the sick people continually treated until a perfect Crisis
attends them; which when it proves mortal, the diseased body is dissected, and
a Lecture read thereupon for the fuller information of the forementioned
Students.

Which, how much it may tend to the advantage of all that are educated in such
an improving method, I leave to the judgment of others: And could heartily wish
that seeing our own Academies have no such public Hospitals amongst them, that
his Majesty's College of Physicians would propose a method for obtaining some
such laudable custom, for the greater encouragement of all the ingenious in
our Faculty, that are educated in our own famous Universities, and Foreigners
too; that no advantage might be proposed in another Nation, which might not
much more happily be obtained in our own. For doubtless this would not only
conduce to the greater improvement of our Art by uniting the Theoretick and
Practick part of physic so advantageously together, that the Students thereof,
whilst they are diligently pursuing the one, might not miss of obtaining the
other; having daily so many and great observations afforded them of the
treatment and cure of most acute and chronical distempers; but would likewise
encourage them to make some considerable progress in one of the main desiderata
of Anatomy, by the dissection and careful observation of the situation, shape,
color, connection, substance, etc. of the Brain, Lungs, Liver, Intestines, etc.
in such as dyed of the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Consumption, Dropsy, Jaundies,
Small pox, Coughs, etc. solicitously examining the preternatural constitution
of every part in those and other diseases, in order to the better understanding
of the places affected and the conjunct causes (as has been very worthily
intimated by Mr. Oldenburgh, Transaction n. 107. from the advice of that famous
Anatomist Bartholinus) whereby much public service might be done to posterity
by acquainting the world with an exact observation of so great Anatomick
discoveries. And if the famous Doctor Glisson, Willis, Sylvius, and some other
great men of our Art have merited so much from all learned and ingenious men
for commnnicating their private observations upon several morbid bodies; what
might be expected from the Members of the College of Physicians? and how much
would the world be endebted to them? if (having obtained the approbation and
consent of the Governors of our public Hospitals) they would successively take
their turns to dissect the bodies of those that dyed of several diseases
therein; and diligently observe not only the different morbid impressions, that
were made on the several viscera and habits of body, in those that dyed of one
and the same disease; but likewise of those that dyed of distinct distempers?
How much this might tend to our present and future benefit, I leave to the
judgment of others to determine? Only give me leave to say, that I am apt to
think that such a design as this managed according to the prudence of the
College of Physicians, might not only advance the reputation of so noble a
Science in this Nation, that is now endeavored to be rendered contemptible by
the ignorant Empiricks of our days; but would give it such a fame throughout
Europe; that our own Universities and City of London (as I before mentioned)
might not only obtain the preference of others for the speedy advancements that
might be made in the Art of Physic, but likewise encourage English men and
Foreigners to spend their time amongst us, the advantages and improvements
being so much greater here, than elsewhere to be obtained.

But to proceed in acquainting you with the method of taking Degrees in Leyden,
which is after the following manner.

Whenever any Student has spent a competent time in that University, or any
Foreigner comes over to take his Degree; he first makes his application to the
Dean of the Faculty, who examines him one hour in the Theoretick and Practick
part of Physic; and if he finds him not well accomplished in either, he
interdicts him making any farther progress in order to the taking of a Degree,
till he be better fitted for so great an undertaking; but if he gives a full
and satisfactory account of his proficiency in both; he is sent to visit the
rest of the Professors of that Faculty, who appointing a convenient time, do
all meet together and examine him two hours. And if he be then approved, they
give him two Aphorisms of Hippocrates to discourse of next day a quarter of an
hour; and then they oppose that explication for three quarters of an hour:
after this he is to make and print certain Theses upon what subject he
pleases, which he sends to all the Professors of the University, who meet him
at an appointed hour, and are Judges of his abilities in the defense of those
Theses against the four Professors of Physic, who each man in his place acts
the part of an Opponent till an hour be spent; then is he admitted by the Dean
of the Faculty, having obtained the approbation of the Rector Magnificus and
the rest of the Professors of the University to the Degree of Doctor, and
receives their diploma as a testimonial of his due performance of all the
forementioned exercises.

This in short is the manner of taking Degrees privately, but if more
publicly; the person that takes his Degree is opposed by Non-graduates in that
Faculty in their public Schools, and the Professors of Physic with the rest
of the Professors of the University sit by as Judges.

Now how slight soever Mr. H. has endeavored to make the taking of Degrees in
foreign Universities, yet for this he is to be commended, that he was as
cautious of passing an examination there as he has been by the College of
Physicians in London.

And as for those ingenious and learned Physicians he reflects upon, p. 19.
it is very well known that several of them have taken their Degrees in our own
Universities, and that all of them are ready to pay no small respect and
veneration to the College; and were so far from thinking them incapable Judges
of their own Art, that they readily profer'd the examination by Collegiate
Statutes expected from them; and never had they proposed entering themselves as
Honorary Fellows, had not a precedent Act of that Society and encouragement
from several of the Members, invited them to it: but after they perceived it
ill resented by some and not fairly reported by others; they were so far from
encouraging Empiricks in their undue, illegal, and destructive practices, that
nothing could have proved a greater motive with some of them to incorporate
themselves with that honorable and learned Society.

CHAP. III.
SECT. 1.
The third Question was, Whether Physicians educated in Universities, and
particularly the College of Physicians in London, have been the great
hinderers of the Art of Physic, and more especially that of Chemistry.
THat I may the more fully and satisfactorily clear this Question, which I
esteem to be of the greatest moment betwixt the College of Physicians and
these boasting Empiricks, I will treat particularly of our Art as it has
reference to these three main Pillars, Anatomy, Chemistry and the Methodus
medendi, and show that the College, with those learned and eminent Physicians,
who have had their Education in Academies, and are so rudely treated by Mr. H.
and his Mercurial Crew, have been so far from being the hinderers of the Art of
Physic in the forementioned respects, that they have been the principal, if
not sole promoters of it.

And as to the first, viz. Anatomy.
Our Adversaries themselves will allow us in this, the pre-eminence, not out of
any good nature or modesty; but purely from the too great palpableness of their
ignorance herein: which since it has fallen to their lot not to be versed in,
they do what ignorant men use to do with matters of knowledge, viz. take all
occasions of contemning and slighting it; whereas it is notoriously known to
all men of skill, that the learned and great Physicians of all Ages, who have
been the great Improvers of the Faculty, have principally built on this
Foundation. This it were easy to prove historically from Aesculapius downwards
to Herophilus, Hippocrates, Polybus, Aristotle, Galen, Avicen, etc. which
having fully been done by that great ornament of our University of Cambridge,
the learned Doctor Walter Needham in the prefatory speech to his last Reading
at Chirurgeons-Hall; where he did likewise prove that all the diagnosticks of
physic and methods of cure in all Ages have been derived out of Anatomy; and
although he allowed Chemistry its due value, yet he did sufficiently evince
that Pharmacy it self, of which Chemistry is but a part, made up but one of the
pillars by which Physic was supported, Anatomy being the other; I need not
insist any longer upon the proof of that; but proceed to acquaint you what has
been done in later Ages; and especially in this, whose happiness in many
excellent discoveries has kindled so ardent a zeal to the completing of that
study, that several eminent Physicians have spent years in the consideration
and diligent enquiry into particular parts, as witness the most ingenious de
Graef, who tells you in his Epistle to that excellent piece of his de succo
pancreat. that he was in the search and study of that, from 63 to 66; and since
there would be found (says he) some carping fellows, quorum genius rixis ac
compotationibus magis quam cadaverum dissectionibus indulget (a fair and full
description of Mr. H's society) qui me ridebunt, quod tantum temporis hujus
investigationi impendam; whose genius more prompting them to scolding and
drinking than to the dissecting of dead bodies, will scorn me for spending so
much time in the investigation of the pancreatick juice; therefore he resolved
to comfort himself with the story of Democritus, and the Abderitae as it is
reported in Hippocrates, which the Reader may there find very fully and
pertinently quoted.

And surely he that considers the time that our immortal Doctor Harvey spent
upon his books de circulatione sanguinis and generatione animalium, our
incomparable Professor Doctor Glisson de Epate, Dr. Wharton, de glandulis, Dr.
Willis, de cerebro, Dr. Needham, de formato foetu, Dr. Lower, de cord,
Bellinus, de structura renum, etc. cannot imagine that half a years time spent
in Anatomy is enough to fit any Physician for practice, as Mr. H. asserts p.
15. Which occasions me to think that if the good man had taken his Degree in
some foreign University, the Professors might much more likely have dismissed
him with that proverbial encomium than any man I know; accipimus pecuniam and
dimittimus asinum: for I can tell him that those learned Professors are so far
from embracing that Notion, that they not only have spent great part of their
time in acquainting the world with what new Anatomical discoveries they or
others have made, but have also resolved, as one of them frankly tells us,
quousque vita mihi supererit, e tenebris eruere conabor; and ^um vita
defecerit, inquirenda relinquam posteris.

And whereas Mr. H. is pleased to tell us in the very same page that he is
ready to prove, that the Physicians of the College have done nothing in all
their Anatomick Theaters, which may conduce to better cure.

Let me tell him that this assertion of his, did put me to a stand to consider,
whether his impudence or ignorance were greatest; and truly had not this
expression proceeded from a man that is much better acquainted with Stages, and
more aptly fitted to act the Mountebank with his Celestial liquor, than those
he would advance to that employment, I think he could not have been so rude to
treat learned men in their Profession, in so sordid and scurrilous a manner.

But however I shall undertake to prove for his better information these
following assertions.

1. That something has been done in Anatomy, both by the Ancients and Moderns,
which has conduced to the better cure of diseases; and then answer their so
much cried up objection borrowed out of Celsus, with some reasons mentioned by
a late Author in confirmation thereof.

2. That the Moderns have very much improved the Anatomick part of Physic by
their late discoveries; though Mr. H. proffers in public to evidence, that
they have done nothing by it worth a straw, beyond what was done by the
Ancients; and then vindicate that Noble person M. Boil, whom he has so much
abused by a false quotation upon this subject, and perverting the sense of that
excellent Author.

3. That the greatest Anatomists and Practisers of our Age are, and have been
the greatest Chemists.

SECT. 2.
As to the first, Anatomy has conduced to the better Cure of Diseases.
ANatomy in general has so far conduced to the Cure of diseases that it has
laid the foundations of that noble Art; by teaching us the nature and manner of
concoctions, excretions and motions of the blood and humors; the true and sound
constitution of all the several parts, which being compared with those that
have been found in morbid bodies so much deviating from the sound ones, have
not only given greater light to the discovery of many diseases formerly
unknown, but likewise engaged learned men to a diligent invention of
appropriate Medicines most likely to prevent and cure those formerly latent
distempers. Who would ever have thought of Cancers, Gangreens, Inflations and
Dropsies of the womb? Inflammations, Ulcers, Scirrhous tumors of the Lungs,
Liver, Spleen, Sweetbread, etc. if Anatomy had not discovered them? And as for
the doctrine of Pulses, there is no man judicious in our Faculty that will not
freely acknowledge, that great Indications are to be taken, both for the
exhibition of Medicines, and passing prognostics, from a diligent observation
and exploration of them: how easily may we thereby judge of the strength or
debility of our Patients? The indications or contra-indications for Cordials,
Juleps, Phlebotomy, Purgation, etc. All which are of no small moment to the
better cure of diseases; but how was it possible to deliver any artificial
rules concerning them, till the structure of the Heart and Arteries was
understood? And therefore it is that Pliny does deliver an account of the
original of this skill, which he derives from Herophilus that great Anatomist,
concerning whom he says, quod Arteriarum pulsum in modulos certos legesque
metricas primus redegerit, ejusque varietates edocuerit, as was more fully
observed in the forementioned speech of the learned Dr. W. Needham.

And though Mr. H. was so confident as to tell us, that nothing has been done
of late by Anatomy which may conduce to better cure; give me leave to acquaint
him with some discoveries which may fully evert this so ignorant and ridiculous
assertion:

As for instance; since the discharge of the Liver from its sanguifying office,
and affixing sanguification to the vital spirits residing in the blood; it has
been clearly demonstrated that most diseases do derive their original from some
ill affections of the mass of blood, and not from the morbid constitution of
the viscera, (which are parts usually but secondarily affected) whereupon our
remedies that have been primarily indicated, have had their chief respect to
the reduction of the blood to its due and native Crasis; and not to the
application of Topics, to those parts which never give the first occasion to
the forementioned dyscrasie; for these are generally in their healthful,
genuine state, until the sanguineous mass does affix some preternatural
recrements upon them: wherefore the application of Epithemes, unguents,
emplasters, etc. are sound in several of the forementioned cases not so
serviceable as was formerly thought; as particularly in those diseases which
were believed to derive their original from a calida Epatis intemperies; the
primary cure of which depends upon the discharge of those bilious or
sulphurous parts of the blood, by venae-section which are too luxuriant
therein; or else upon the reduction of them to their pristine state, by
internal and appropriate remedies; and not upon Topical applications. I might
farther discourse of Dropsies, Scurvy, and other distempers of the like nature;
which were imagined to derive their original from the viscera, but that the
judicious Reader by considering that one case I mentioned, may easily be
induced to believe that in these also the blood and not the viscera is the
primary seat of the disease.

I could likewise inform Mr. H. of the great advantages that might accrue to
Physic by that excellent discovery of the circulation of the Chyle with the
mass of blood; it being well known that blood appearing with its Chyle swimming
upon it, has till of late days been taken as Sanious; and consequently the
person from whose arm it has been drawn, being possessed with the fancy of a
Surfeit, may have put himself upon methods of physic to cure a fictitious
disease, and thereby laid a foundation for a real one.

And doubtless not only this, but many other late Anatomick discoveries might
tend very much to the better cure of diseases; as for instance, the commixture
of the air with the mass of blood, which has been experimented so absolutely
necessary to the maintaining of Animal life; that neither the motion of the
blood nor spirits could be preserved without its continual supply; nay though
some time their motion has been impeded; yet upon a fresh and speedy
communication of air to the Heart and blood, they have both recovered their
pristine state. Which puts me in mind of two excellent observations to this
purpose intimated by the ingenious Doctor Thruston in his Treatise de
respiratione; who there tells us of an experiment of that accomplished
Physician and accurate Anatomist Doctor Croon, who stifling a Chicken till she
seemed quite dead, yet a good while after by blowing air into the Lungs revived
it.

The second was an experiment performed by the no less accurate Anatomist,
Doctor Needham, who in a dog dead and opened, after all cessations of pulse,
recovered the motion of the heart merely by blowing up air into the receptacle
of the Chyle, which from thence by its ductus was transmitted into the mass of
blood.

Now doubtless from these experiments, and others of the like nature, much
might be collected for the improvement of the practick part of our Art;
especially in those cases, where we are apt to be too severe in keeping our
Patients from those reviving gusts of air, which probably might tend much more
to the depuration of the blood and refreshment of the animal spirits, than the
greatest Cordials that could have been exhibited. Which puts me in mind of what
great relief I have seen instantly given to Hysterical Patients in acute
diseases by allowing them fresh gales of air.

And no less to a young Gentleman in a deep Consumption, who was speedily and
even to the wonder of all that knew him, recovered to a healthful state by
riding five or sixscore miles into the country to take the Air.

And within these few days discoursing with the learned Doctor Bradey, Master
of Caius College in Cambridge, and an eminent practiser in this Town, upon
this subject; he was pleased to acquaint me with a very notable observation in
confirmation of this assertion, viz. in a Patient of his, who being very highly
Asthmatick and Hysteric, and thereby necessitated to keep her bed six winters
together, found constant and speedy relief in the paroxysms of the
forementioned distempers, by undrawing the curtains of her bed, putting out the
fire in her chamber, and letting in air; and that which was very remarkable,
was, that in the greatest of her extremities, if the wind lay in the window,
and the casements were opened, she found so great advantage thereby, that not
content with what passage Nature had made in her nostrils for air, she would
dilate them with her fingers, that it might be more plentifully conveyed to her
Lungs.

Which truly is not so much to be wondered at, seeing the Atmosphere is so
highly impregnated with nitrous particles, which as the Lord Bacon has well
observed, are the only refrigerating Cordials that can be exhibited.

And surely if the motion and florid color of the Arterial blood do so much
depend upon a due commixture of the air; and many diseases and sudden deaths
are occasioned by too great a crassitude, roapiness and coagulation of the
blood; how much might the free admission of air into the rooms of sick and
diseased Patients, and it may be (where we durst not allow of their rising) the
bare suction of it by some artificial pipe contrived for that purpose, tend to
their more easy and speedy recovery?

And if in high Fevers, deliriums, etc. that excellent Physician Riverius would
direct the strowing the Patients chambers with green herbs, and pouring water
out of one tub or pail into another; surely these late experiments may
encourage us in several cases to admit of fresh gales of air into those
Patients chambers, who are almost parched up or suffocated for want thereof.

And truly if we consider how many fair and beautiful Ladies, in the prime and
flower of their years, are precipitated into Phthisicks and Consumptions, from
being too closely mewed up with their near relations, lying sick of those
distempers; and how many of those afflicted with them, are rendered incurable,
and sometimes speedily destroyed by the inspiration of air so highly vitiated
from their own morbid expirations; I cannot imagine but the most ingenious
Physicians will allow me, that great improvements might be made hereby for the
better cure of diseases, if we were as diligent in observation as we have been
in speculation, which otherwise is really no better, than (as our adversaries
term it) the ornamental part of physic.

But now it is high time to answer their cried up objection taken out of Celsus,
which is as a late Author has told us in plain English.

That nothing is more foolish than to imagine that things within a man should
be in the same state when he is dying, as they were when he was living; much
more when he is actually dead; for, says he, most diseases lying in the
variations of blood and humors, spirits and ferments of the parts are causes
remote from such ocular inspection. And that nothing certain can be concluded
from the stagnation of blood or other humors found in any place or passage of
the body after death, is evident in this, that nature upon deaths approach
being driven to most violent motions, does extravasate, intravasate, throw
blood and humors in and out, here and there, and every where, Cap-a-pee,
through the most abstruse and unperceivable passages; so that if stagnant or
coagulated blood, or other humors, be found in any part by anatomizing, it
cannot be concluded it was so before death.

Thus far has that ingenious Author endeavored to defend so ill a cause;
which endeavors had they been employed to better purposes, I doubt not but he
might have been more serviceable to himself and the Commonwealth of learning.

But seeing his inclinations have engaged him to different apprehensions, I
hope he will pardon us that we refuse to give him our assent to what he has
yet writ on this subject; unless his reasons were more cogent or prevailing.

For I would gladly have this Author acquaint us, what alteration is made in
the body of a healthful man, when he dies of a violent death as to those
things which we enquire after; I mean as to the viscera and solid parts: do
they lose any thing of their figure, connection, proportion? etc. I confess that
they are something altered as to their color, but I hope we may satisfy our
selves as to the reason of that mutation. Which of the vessels do we then find
wanting? The lacteals we acknowledge do then disappear, and the Lymphaticks too
some time after death, but the defect of these, vivi-section will supply.

And as for the rest of the humors (the blood excepted) they receive no great
alteration in death, as witness the gall, urine, Lympha, etc. And as for the
blood it self, I hope we may observe both it and its motion in the dissection
of living Animals, and I am sure we may discover its passages even in dead
bodies, by injections.

And what though we readily allow, that most diseases lie in the variation of
the blood and humors, spirits and ferments; yet our Antagonist himself is
willing to grant us, that the morbid impressions they make upon the several
viscera are visible enough; and so are the blood and humors no less in some
diseases, though he is pleased to assert that they are causes remote from
ocular inspection; as witness the inflammatory blood that is usually drawn from
the arms of Patients in Rheumatisms, Quinsies, Pleurisies, etc.

And for the humors, there is enough to be found for the proof thereof in
Sylvius and de Graef, who have acquainted the world with what a variety of
diseases do owe their original to the preternatural affections of the bile,
pituita, Lymphatick liquor and pancreatick juice, all which may easily be
obtained, and that in some considerable quantity, in living and dead, in sound
and morbid bodies.

And as for what is said of the extravasation and intravasation; throwing blood
and humors in and out, here and there and every where, Cap-a-pee, through the
most abstruse and unperceivable passages in deaths approaches.

I must confess that I do not well understand this notion, till the Author has
better cleared it: for according to my apprehension the impetuous and
disorderly motion that he would fancy the humors to be in at such a time,
should be so far from directing them into those unperceivable passages, that it
should altogether hinder their motion through those fictitious Meanders.

And farther let him give me leave to tell him, that I am not of his belief
that the blood and humors are then in such an impetuous motion; the languid
pulses of most dying persons affording us a sufficient argument to the
contrary; and for my own part (with submission to better judgments) I am apt to
think that the disorder that is observed in the body upon the approaches of
death, does chiefly proceed from the tumult of the Animal spirits, which are
put into those disorders and irregular motions for want of a due supply of
influential spirits, from the mass of blood; which alas! at that time is so far
from being endued with such volatile and luxuriant parts to occasion this
motion, that I take it not only to be perverted in its whole crasis, but a
weak, confused, and depauperated liquor.

And farther as to what is said of extravasation and intravasation in deaths
approaches, it is as difficult to believe as all the former, seeing that upon
the point of death we rarely observe maculae or exanthemata, etc. to appear,
but usually in the beginning or augmentation of pestilential or malignant
diseases; and if at that nick of time, there should be any appearance of
extravasated blood, it is as improbable to believe, that it should be again
resorb'd for the reasons abovementioned.

And for what he says, that if stagnant or coagulated blood or other humors be
found in any part by anatomizing, it cannot be concluded it was so before death.

I judge it as difficult to imagine as all the rest; for what should hinder my
assent from believing that there was a great quantity of aqueous humors in the
bodies of Hydropical persons whilst alive, their bellies being so tense and
swelled, though I do not actually see it, till my knife discovers it?

And thus if we find the Cystick ductus wholly obstructed by any calculous
concretion or viscid bile, so that the gall being replete and turgid can
receive no more of its felleous liquor from the blood; which wanting its due
separation and discharge, does gradually so load and saturate it, that it does
not only pervert its constituent principles and the animal spirits originated
from them, but procure the patients death; shall I question whether this
obstruction of the ductus and distention of the gall, were thus whilst the
patient was living?

And thus suppose upon some sudden rupture or erosion of any of the vessels of
the inward parts, there should be a great discharge of blood into the brain,
thorax or abdomen, and the patient immediately die, shall I question whether
this breach was there, or blood extravasated before death ensued?

Much more might be said to this purpose, but I shall now proceed no farther in
an Anatomical reply to this Author; but only crave leave to tell him, that he
has done his Chemical friends little service in this harangue against Anatomy;
for since the spagyrical Analysis of bodies is made by fire and menstrua; it is
notoriously known that they are so much altered thereby, that such divisions do
not so much explicate parts as destroy them; or at least to use Helmont's
expression, convert them in alia entia. Whereas the Anatomist does only by wary
incisions still discover the more inward parts as whole and unchanged as may
be: and when he comes to dissect any particular part, as the Liver, Spleen,
etc. he first vieweth what he intends to dissect, and still proceeds
leisurely to observe the inward vessels, etc. upon their first appearance,
whilst they are yet whole; he never injuring any thing with his knife, till
having sufficiently considered it, he thinks fit to destroy it in order to some
future discovery of what is beyond it.

And to conclude, I appeal to any judicious man, whether with a curious knife
he may not discover more of an Animal than he can by Chemical preparation.

The second thing that I undertook to prove was this:
That the Moderns had very much improved the Anatomick part of physic by their
late discoveries, etc.

For the clearing of this assertion I need not take much pains, seeing it is
well known to most of our Faculty that there has been a more satisfactory and
true account given to the world of the constitution, structure and nutrition of
humane bodies, etc. witness that excellent and full account which Doctor Harvey
has acquainted the world withal in his Treatise de generatione Animalium: what
service has he done to the public by that surprising and admirable discovery
of the circulation of the blood, which has since been universally embraced,
and given him so great a name throughout the world? What service has the
incomparable Dr. Glisson done our Faculty in giving us a more faithful account
of the nature of sanguification, bilification, separation of Urine and other
humors from the mass of blood, etc. Doctor Willis of nutrition, generation and
separation of the succus nervosus and Animal spirits, with their preternatural
affections? How lame and imperfect was our former knowledge of the nature of
the saliva and other juices that are conveyed into the mouth, together with
their passages; until our famous countryman Doctor Wharton, and of late the
learned Steno have given so full an account of them? Although I am credibly
informed, that the world is chiefly indebted to the industry of that great
Anatomist Doctor Walter Needham, for these later discoveries. Who ever dreamt
that the Lungs consisted only of vessels and bladders? that the Liver, Spleen
and Reins were conglomerate glandules, until that expert Anatomist and great
Naturalist Malpighius acquainted us therewith? Who ever imagined that the
Testicles of the male should only be a conglomeration of vessels; and the
female Testicles, Ovaries, until the industrious and learned de Graef
discovered it? Who ever instructed us well as to the operation of Cathartick
medicines in humane bodies; or as to the reason of the different colors of the
excrements that are observed to be evacuated by them, until that great
Anatomical light Sir G. Ent the President and Ornament of the College of
Physicians? whose learned Pen did likewise in those early times both defend and
illustrate the Circulation of the blood in that excellent Apology he made for
it against Parisanus; and not only so, but start many other novel doctrines to
which we owe many of the more modern Hypotheses; which notwithstanding had
never been improved to that height they are now come to, had not he by the
forementioned book, and by his frequent communications to his Philosophical
friends given many hints which occasioned excellent discoveries, of which that
of the succus nervosus is not the least, which how far it owneth him for the
Author Doctor Glisson does sufficiently witness in his learned Treatise de
Epate.

And for the true conveyance of the Chyle into the mass of blood, which of the
Ancients were acquainted there with? It Is true, they owned its discharge
through the Meseraick veins into the Liver; but were as ignorant of its true
passage into the blood, as they were of giving us any clear demonstration of
the commixture of the air therewith, which notwithstanding they taught in their
Schools as an Ens rationis, having no experimental proof for the truth of this
assertion.

How much then is the world beholden to the great industry and indefatigable
pains of that great Anatomist Doctor Lower, who in that incomparable book of
his de Cord (one of the most fertile for clear satisfactory and experimental
demonstration, that ever yet has been printed) has not only more plainly
evinced the true passage of the Chyle through its lacteals, receptacle, and
chyliferous ducts, than formerly; but as unanswerably demonstrated that there
can be no other, by which it should have its discharge into the mass of blood?
And if the Reader pleases to peruse those experiments of his, whereby he has
as satisfactorily proved the commixture of the nitrous particles of the air
with the mass of blood, he may find them as clear and demonstrative as the
former.

And though the circulation of the blood was happily discovered by the great
Doctor Harvey, yet the velocity of its motion and circulation, was never so
clearly and fully evinced as it has been by Doctor Lower: and how much this
may tend to the clearing up of several of the dark and obscure phenomenon of
nature; as the speedy passage of liquors from the stomach to the reins, etc. I
leave to the ingenious of our Faculty to determine? And doubtless great service
he has done us, in clearing out the nature, origination, conveyance and
separation of milk in the breasts of women; a doctrine so much controverted in
former ages. And no less service have the learned Doctor Walter Needham and
Doctor Lower done us, in their experimental demonstrations of the circulation
of the Chyle with the mass of blood some hours before its assimilation: which
discovery with many (if not all) of the former, are to be admired, not only for
the truth and excellency of their invention, but for their great usefulness in
physic, as I have before mentioned.

Wherefore it is apparent that these discoveries have not only tended to the
better cure of diseases (as I lately proved) but have likewise been very
advantageous in affording us more useful Hypotheses in physic; for our
principles having been more certain and demonstrative, it were very
unreasonable to conceive that our foundations should not be more firmly laid
than the Ancients, who were not acquainted with the distribution and natural
motions of the nutritious humor, blood, nervous and Lymphatick liquors, etc.

Since the investigation of which the world has been made happy with the
excellent writings both of foreigners and our own contrymen.

One of which (I mean the learned Doctor Willis) has satisfied the world so
well with his excellent and surpassing abilities in that kind, that his Name as
well as his writings will be admired both in our own and succeedings ages.

And if (as Noble Mr. Boil has acquainted us) Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato,
and diverse others of those (whose wisdom made after Ages reverence Antiquity)
did not only esteem the truths of Nature worth studying for, but thought them
too worth traveling for, as far as those Eastern countries, whose wise men
were then cried up for the best Expositors of the obscure book of Nature:

How much reason then have we and the learned world, to bewail our unhappiness
in the loss of one of the greatest and clearest Commentators thereon?

Witness that ingenious explication of the phenomenon of those stupendous cases
he acquaints us with in his book de morbis convulsivis, etc. and though he
frankly confesses that in his explication of the theory of diseases, he does
not tread in the footsteps of the Ancients, but his Hypotheses are altogether
new; yet says that learned Author, they are such, quae super observatis
Anatomicis fundatae, ac firmiter stabilitae; aegrotantium phenomenon quaeque
melius solvunt, symptomatum causas aptius declarant, and medendi rations
unicuique affectui magis accommodas suggerunt; Which being more firmly founded
and established upon Anatomical observations, do better solve the phenomenon of
the sick, more aptly discover the causes of their symptoms, and suggest more
appropriate methods for the cure of every affection.

And though Sylvius his Hypothesis has not been so universally embraced by our
English Physicians, yet in foreign parts it has met with no less acceptance
from the most learned and judicious of our Faculty, than the forementioned; his
Ternary of humors being questioned by none of the Anatomists of our days; from
the depravation and exorbitancy of which, he would derive all the preternatural
affections of humane bodies; but however, whether his Hypothesis be true or
not, it is known very well to his friends and enemies too, that his success in
practice has given him a reputation not only in the Low Countries, but amongst
most of the learned men in Europe.

Which has occasioned your worthy friend M. N. to acknowledge that he has done
the world more service toward the promotion of the Art of Physic, than ever
any man did before him in the United Provinces: and how kind and generous he
has formerly been to Doctor Willis, in acquainting all the learned of our
Faculty, how much they were indebted to him for that excellent Treatise of his
de febribus, I shall have occasion ere long to acquaint them with.

But if all this will not satisfy Mr. H. of the improvements that our Moderns
have made, whereby they have done something more worth than a straw, beyond
what the Ancients have done, I would advise him to read over what I have
discoursed of in the precedent particular; and what he may find in the latter
part of that Section which treats of Chemistry; and if he can spare so much
time from his quacking avocations, I would recommend to his serious perusal
that excellent book of Doctor Lower's, called Pyretologia Willisiana; which was
written against his countryman Meara upon this very matter of contest between
my self and him; (which having been printed in the same year that his beloved
friend's was printed in, and received no answer to it from its most avowed
Adversaries for eleven years; methinks it should be owned for a much more
unanswerable book than M. N's. which has had four satisfactory answers already
to it) whereby I should be in some hopes that he might happily be reduced to
his wits again, which were unfortunately lost when he wrote this scandalous
Pamphlet against the College of Physicians, though he spared not for pen, ink
nor paper.

And though Mr. H. and some others of his acquaintance would seem to commend
the Ancients by this assertion; that our late Anatomists have done nothing by
Anatomy worth a straw, beyond what was done by the Ancients; I take it to be,
not out of judgment or skill in them, of which they are generally ignorant;
much less out of love to them, whom they contemn as often as they are thwarted by
them; as witness the principal if not sole design of the forementioned book Mr.
H. so highly commends, which tells us, that we must proceed by other
definitions of the nature of diseases, and indagations of their causes, and
invent other remedies and reasons and rules of curation, than what have been
delivered by the Ancients, and not confine our selves to their conceptions,
aphorisms and inventions, etc and charge the Aristotelians and Galenists for
superstitious devotion to their old heathenish authors; and their Sectators as
drones of the old methodical Hive; that practice in the ordinary dog-road of
Physic, and therefore calls them, the herd of vulgar Methodists; and the old
way of practice, lazy; its principles dull, and the bane of our profession,
etc. which is a plain demonstration that Mr. H. in this assertion did only use
the Ancients as an engine to pull down modern discoveries.

Whereas we profess our selves to have a great respect and veneration for them,
as having done great things in Physic in their times, for which we and our
posterity will own our selves highly obliged, and readily allow the great
honor that was due to their names: yet are we not so superstitious as to
believe all their doctrines as infallible, or that they had searched so fully
into Natures mysteries, that nothing was left to future industry to discover;
and therefore I will be bold to say, that though there has been so great
pains, and much more than I can acquaint the world with, taken to investigate
the nature of humane bodies, with the several juices and ferments that are
lodged in them, yet many things belonging to them are yet unobserved, and
others so obscurely and dissatisfactorily delivered; as may still lay an
obligation upon all the ingenious of our Faculty to diligent search and enquiry.

Amongst the number of which I esteem the ferment of the stomach, of which I
must confess much more has been ingeniously wrote than demonstratively proved:
some conceiving digestion to be caused by heat, others by an acid humor from
the Spleen; which last opinion has justly been exploded by our later
Anatomists, by reason there are no passages to be found, by which this humor
may be conveyed from the Spleen into the stomach, and therefore others have
asserted it to have its passage through the gastrick Arteries, and its supply
from the mass of blood, and some from the Nerves; the Sylvians have asserted
that this Stomachical ferment proceeds from the saliva commixed with our
aliment in deglutition and conveyed into the stomach: and Doctor Willis (of
late) from the reliquiae Chyli turned sour like leven, and preserved in the
stomach, which being mixed there with a spirituous liquor, conveyed from the
Arteries, does not by dissolution alone, but also by fermentation convert our
Aliment into a homogeneous Chyle.

But notwithstanding all these ingenious conjectures, I must confess that I am
no ways satisfied with them, having never observed any fermentation betwixt
the contents of the stomach and lixivial, or volatile Alkalies; which puts me
in mind of what that great Philosopher Mr. Boil has said to this purpose in
the usefulness of his experimental Philosophy, who there tells us, that he has
fruitlesly endeavored to discover the stomachical acidity, to which many of
our modern Physicians are pleased to ascribe the first digestion of the
nutriment of Animals, in the purposely dissected stomachs of ravenous
Sea-fishes; in whose stomachs though our taste could not perceive any sensible
acidity, yet we found in one of them a couple of fishes each of them about a
foot long, whereof the one, which seemed but to have been newly devoured, had
suffered little or no alteration in the great fishes stomach: but the other had
all its outside, save the head, uniformly wasted to a pretty depth beneath the
former surface of the body, and looked as if it had not been boiled or wrought
upon by any considerable heat; but uniformly corroded like a piece of silver
coin in Aqua fortis.

And truly I must be so free to acknowledge to the world, that from these and
some other reasons, I began to question the existence of the forementioned
ferments; and could not therefore forbear to propose to my self some methods,
whereby I might obtain a greater satisfaction and certainty in this so great
yet controverted subject, and have therefore already made some progress in it;
but there being so great a number of experiments required to a faithful and due
investigation of it; I durst not deliver my opinion herein, till unerring
experiments and not conjectures shall encourage me to it.

In the mean time I am sure that all ingenious men will allow me, that many
things in our Art may still be discovered by future industry; which occasioned
the learned de Graef to use this expression, quod post mill secula indefessis
naturae scrutatoribus quaedam invenienda sunt, that after a thousand ages some
things will be found out by the diligent and indefatigable searchers of nature:
and therefore I think we have more reason to be sorry that no more has been
done in Anatomical discoveries, than to quarrel with men for knowing and doing
so much.

But now it is high time to acquaint the world how unworthily and injuriously
Mr. H. and some other of his friends have treated that great improver of
learning and encourager of all Arts and Sciences, the honorable Mr. Boil. The
occasion of his quoting him, you may find p. 15. where having told us that
Anatomy is, the last part Physicians have to play, or trick to show, to
entertain Spectators and amuse the world, to uphold some repute among such as
are ignorant, and draw on customers; so that it is wonderful to see how many,
even of the nobility and gentry as well as the citizens, are taken by this sort
of trick, the mock-shews of pretended discovery by Anatomy; he endeavors to
confirm this theatrical harangue against that noble Art by the following
quotation. But how little is to be expected from such Actors, that Honorable
Gentleman Mr. Boil tells you, in his book of experimental Philosophy, where he
says, he does not see wherein by any of those new discoveries, any thing has
been done, to better the cure of diseases, and then adds, you may take his word.

Now how unjustly he has abused that noble Author, not only in the unfaithful
representing his design, for which he there discoursed of Anatomical
discoveries, but likewise in the false quoting of that passage, that it might
serve his purpose; you may observe in the following account; if you please to
consult Mr. Boyles second part of the usefulness of experimental Philosophy, p.
222, 223. where dissuading from the neglect of useful remedies, because
presented by persons that ignore them, and perhaps too, hold opinions contrary
to them, he leaves the Reader, to consider what is in the person of the
Empirical sect represented by Celsus, which you may there read; and then tells
you, that though this sentence ascribes too little to reason, yet there is
something in it that deserves to be considered, especially since we observe not
that the late Anatomical discoveries of the motions of the Chyle and Lymphatick
liquor, by formerly unknown ways in newly detected vessels, has yet made men
cure diseases much better than before. Not that I think that Anatomical and
Pathological discoveries will not in process of time, (when the Historia facti,
shall be fully and indisputably made out, and the Theories thereby suggested
clearly established) highly conduce to the improvement of the Therapeutical
part of physic; but yet this observation may make it the more reasonable to
beware of relying so much upon the yet disputable opinions of Physicians, as to
despise all practices, though usually successful, that agree not with them.

Thus have I faithfully and fully transcribed what that Noble person has said
of this subject, that all Physicians may take notice how unworthily he is
treated by the Empiricks of our days, who are as much pleased with any passage
they can meet with in that excellent Author, which they fancy may be made
serviceable to their designs, as they have been with their confutation of the
learned Doctor Willis in the title pages of their books; but I hope that none
of our Faculty will ever give credit to any quotation of theirs, without a due
examination of the Authors design: for it is plain by this account that I have
given of Mr. Boyles quotation, that he has been so far from discoursing
against Anatomy, that he has spoken as much in the favor thereof as any of
our Moderns would have done; and therefore, as if he had foreseen this vile
sort of men, that would abuse these excellent passages, he wrote them with so
much caution, that one could have scarcely imagined, that a man who pretends to
cure the poor members of Jesus freely for his sake, durst have been guilty of
such apparent and malicious falsehoods, and that to maintain so bad a cause.

I shall therefore for the prevention of these Empiricks for the future from
quoting any passages out of Mr. Boil against Anatomy, acquaint the world out of
this very book, what a great honor and veneration he has for this noble Art;
where you may find in the first part of it, p. 5. that telling us, that one
would think that the conversing with dead and stinking carkases (that are not
only hideous objects in themselves, but made more ghastly by putting us in mind
that our selves must be such) should be not only a very melancholy, but a very
hated employment. And yet, says he, there are Anatomists that dote upon it.
And I confess its instructiveness has not only so reconciled me to it, but so
enamored me of it, that I have often spent hours much less delightfully, not
only in Courts, but even in Libraries, than in tracing in those forsaken
Mansions, the inimitable workmanship of the Omniscient Architect.

And in p. 9. he tells us, that, were we not lulled asleep by custom or
sensuality, it could not but trouble as well as it injures a reasonable soul to
ignore the structure and contrivance of that admirably organized body, in which
she lives, and to whose intervention she owes the knowledge she has of other
Creatures.

And in the second part of the same book, p. 9. he positively asserts, that
since diverse things in Anatomy, as particularly the motion of the blood and
Chyle cannot be discovered in a dead dissected body (where the cold has shut
up and obliterated many passages) that may be seen in one opened alive; it must
be very advantageous to a Physicians Anatomical knowledge, to see the
dissections of Dogs, Swine and other live creatures; which puts me in mind of
what a very learned Physician ingeniously observed, that Dogs, Pigs, and
Monkyes, have contributed more to the advancement of Physic, than this sort of
men ever did or are like to do.

But to proceed in a further account of the great estimation that this noble
Author had for Anatomy, which you may find in p. 46. of the same book, where he
tells you, that not only the dissections of sound beasts may assist the
Physician to discover the like parts of a humane body, but the dissection of
morbid beasts may sometimes illustrate the doctrine of the causes and seats of
diseases. For that this part of Pathology has been very much improved by the
diligence of modern Physicians, by dissecting the bodies of men killed by
diseases, we might justly be accused of want of curiosity or gratitude, if we
did not thankfully acknowledge; for indeed much of that improvement of Physic
(for which the Ancients, were they now alive, might envy our new Physicians)
may, in my poor opinion, be ascribed to our industrious scrutiny of the seat
and effects of the peccant matter of diseases in the bodies of those that have
been destroyed by them. And in the same page he blames the acute Helmont for
not having been a more diligent dissector of beasts.

And in the following page he tell us, that here we may also consider, that
there are diverse explications of particular diseases, or troublesome accidents
proposed by Physicians, especially since the discovery of the bloods
circulation, wherein the compression, obstruction, or irritation of some Nerve,
or distension of some Vein by too much blood, or some hindrance of the free
passage of the blood through this or that particular Vessel, is assigned for
the cause of this or that disease or symptom; Now in diverse of these cases
the liberty lately mentioned, that a skilful Dissector may take in beasts, to
open the body or limbs, to make Ligatures strong or weak on their Vessels or
other inward parts, as occasion shall require, to leave them there as long as
he pleases, to prick or apply sharp liquors to any Nervous or Membranous part,
and whenever he thinks convenient, to dissect the Animal again, to observe what
change his experiment has produced there: Such a liberty, I say, which is not
to be taken in humane bodies, may in some case either confirm or confute the
Theories proposed, and so put an end to diverse Pathological controversies, and
perhaps too, occasion the discovery of the true and genuine causes of the
phenomenon disputed of, or of others really as abstruse.

Now, pray Mr. H. can any unprejudiced or impartial person read this account
Mr. Boil has given of his estimation for Anatomy, and yet believe that little
is to be expected from it, and that he does not see wherein by any of those new
discoveries, any thing has been done to better the cure of diseases? I am apt
to think he cannot; and if so, what reason has Mr. H. to peruse these passages
with blushing Cheeks (if he has either ingenuity or modesty left him) and come
and supplicate pardon of that Noble person, for that injury he has done him in
public print?

The third Assertion was this,

That the greatest Anatomists and Practisers of our Age have been the greatest
Chemists.
For the proof of this, I need not take any great pains; seeing two of our
latest Anatomists and greatest Practisers may afford us so clear a testimony to
the truth of this Assertion, I mean the eminently learned Doctor Willis and
Sylvius; both which excellent Physicians have obtained an universal reputation
throughout the world, for their admirable accomplishments in the Anatomick and
practick part of Physic; and how highly they did esteem of Anatomy, their
great industry and pains therein, with their learned writings drawn from that
fountain, will sufficiently testify to all posterity; witness that
incomparable book of Doctor Willis de Cerebro, with what he has wrote de
ventriculo, intestinis and pulmonibus; and Sylvius his disputationes Medicae;
and though a friend of Mr. H. would persuade us that Sylvius his doctrines had
not their rise from Academies, but from his own and others Laboratories; yet I
believe he will scarcely be credited by any ingenious Physician, that has been
conversant in his writings; for it is plain that Anatomy not Chemistry laid the
first foundation of his Ternary of humors; by which he and his Disciples ever
since have endeavored, not only to explicate the phenomenon of all distempers;
but as strenuously to defend.

And for Dr. Willis, he has plainly told us that his Pathological discourses
are established upon Anatomical observations.

Now that both these great men were not meanly versed in the Spagyrical Art, I
am sure your unanswerable friend will allow us; for as to the latter he has
told us, that he raised most of his doctrines from Chemical experiments, and
verified them with pleasant and speedy cures, by joining the use of plants and
minerals together, both Chymically prepared, which has rendered him worthy the
reading and imitating; and farther says, that the forementioned doctrines had
not their rise from the Ancients, but most of them from Laboratories of his own
and others, wrought out of the fire for near forty years together, and
confirmed by constant practice among the sick; in which work of curing he
excelled all his Fellows in the most difficult cases.

And as to the former, he has acknowledged to the world eleven years agone in
public print, that he was a Physician indeed and Philosopher by fire.

The third I shall here name, is that profound Chemist Borrichius, whose
affection to Anatomy has been so great and surpassing; that he has been so
far from thinking a year or half a years study sufficient for its attainment;
that he has not only spent vast pains and labor in the dissection of humane
bodies, but has expressed even the greatest curiosity of any one in our Age
for the advancement of our Art by Anatomick discoveries; and so far was this
generous soul, from esteeming it an honor for Paracelsus (whom I hope Mr. H.
will own for a Chemist) to be thought an adversary to Anatomy; that his learned
Pen has been particularly engaged to vindicate him from that aspersion so
unjustly cast upon him by Conringius; and therefore he acquaints the world with
Paracelsus his great industry in the dissection of several Animals; and gives
this following account of that great estimation, that famous Chemist had for
Anatomy, out of his own works; which making much to our present purpose I shall
crave leave to transcribe.

And first, in his fragment, de peste, he tells us, that Paracelsus taught,
Vulnerum curam ex partium laesarum natura cognoscendam; that the cure of wounds
was to be obtained from understanding the nature of the parts affected. In his
11. Book de morbis verm. he asserts, ex Anatome constare, vermes quandoque piam
duramque matrem pertudisse and profectam inde phrenesin, vermes item in spleen,
fell, and pulmonibus genitos, That it does appear from Anatomy, that Worms
have sometimes made their passage through the membranes of the Brain, and from
thence a Frenzy has been occasioned; and also, that Worms have been
generated in the Spleen, Gall, and Lungs.

And in his Book, de vit. long. cap. 11. principio, inquit, considerantur
parts ejus, and hae ex locali Anatomia per locum totius physici corporis, cum
intellectu medullarum, conditionum, usus ligamentorum, formarum ossium, and
cartilaginis, nervorum, carnis proprietatum, septemque principalium membrorum
virtutum, ut quid acturus sis in physico, teipsum intelligas ad hanc regulam;
principio oportet probe cognitam habeamus universam rationem atque naturam cum
physici corporis, tum physicae vitae: In the beginning, says he, are to be
considered the parts, and these from local Anatomy, through the several parts
of a natural body, with an understanding of the nature of medullary juices, of
embalmings, use of the ligaments, shape of the bones, cartilages and nerves,
properties of the flesh, offices of the seven principal members; that whatever
thou do in physical bodies, thou may understand thy self according to this
rule; in the beginning it behooves us that we well understand the universal
constitution and nature as well of a natural body as a natural life.

And further, says Borrichius, I think it will appear how great Paracelsus was
in the Anatomy of beasts from his Book, de pestilit. tract. 1. where he says,
contemplare leonem and felem, quam omnino Anatome docet utrumque forma and
habitu omni corporis invicem convenire: contemplate the Lion and Cat, which
Anatomy does teach to be alike in the form and habit of their bodies. And in
his History of the Lion; feles, inquit, tam insignem habent conformationem cum
leonibus, ut fundamentum quasi habere videatur fabula in Alcorano inventa, ubi
narratur, quod felis in arca prognata sit ex sternutatione leonis. Catts, says
he, have such an exact conformity with Lions, that the fable invented in the
Alcoran may seem to have its foundation from this, which tells you, that the
Cat was generated in the Ark from the sneezing of the Lion. Nay further, in his
Book de ulceribus gallicis, prolixe probat usum genuinae Anatomes; he largely
demonstrates the use of genuine Anatomy; and so far was Paracelsus from being
an Adversary to this excellent Art, that Borrichius tells us, quod scripta
Paracelsi fatentur ex Anatomia cujusvis medici initium and finem esse, that the
writings of Paracelsus do testify that the beginning and end of every
Physician is from Anatomy: and to conclude, he gives us this character of that
great Chemist, quod progressus est in Anatome ultra vulgatas Anatomicorum
metas, that his proficiency and excellency was such in Anatomy, that he
exceeded the ordinary seize of Anatomists.

Now having thus brought so great a testimony for Anatomy out of the works of
the greatest and most applauded Chemists of former Ages and of our own too; I
hope Mr. H. will not be so bold for the future, as to speak so contemptibly
against that noble Art; And lest he should suspect by this commendation of
Paracelsus for Anatomy, that Borrichius was a man who gave not Chemistry its
just value and due; let me recommend to his perusal those two incomparable
books that he has wrote of that subject, the one de ortu and progressu
Chymiae; the other Hermetis, Aegyptiorum and Chymicorum sapientia ab Hermanni
Conringii animadversionibus vindicata; whereby he must be necessitated to own
him; not only as a profound Chemist, understanding the rise, progress, and
nature of that Art better than himself and all his companions; but as Master of
greater Arcana in Chemistry than any they can reasonably pretend to; yea so
great an Antiquary and universal Scholar has he approved himself by the
forementioned books, that his learning and worth will be had in estimation by
our own and succeeding ages.

I might further acquaint Mr. H. with the ingenious Doctor Daniel Cox, a man
better versed in the Art of Chemistry, than any of Mr. H's Society; and yet so
far from being an Adversary to Anatomy, that he has publicly told the world,
that no Physician, who has any spark of curiosity or sense of his duty, but
will endeavor to acquaint himself with these great processes of Nature, the
preparation of the food, its distribution; respiration, muscular motion, and
generation; to which we may add the exclusion of what is useless or burdensome:
and then he can be no longer a stranger to her regular actings, and knows what
are most likely to continue them such without interruption: but to attain this
knowledge, the Physician must be at the expense of much money, time and labor,
this skill not coming by inspiration, but is the result of innumerable
experiments and observations, and therefore one dissection of a dead man is not
sufficient to inform him, but he converseth with many other Animals living or
dead, whereon he makes numerous experiments, which by Analogy and induction he
applies to man.

Now that this ingenious Physician is no less acquainted with Chemical
processes, than Anatomical dissections, I might easily prove by what he has
already acquainted the world withal, as to the great industry and pains that he
has taken in the investigation of the nature of vegetables, etc. whereby (as
he has told us) he can by an easy and genuine method prepare simples so that
their whole Crasis shall be preserved entire, their virtues rather heightened
than in the least impaired; and as for flowers, he can by a most natural and
facile method without so much as the help of culinary fire, convert them into
liquors exceedingly spirituous, which may be kept without loss of virtue for
many years; nay, without any additament to vegetables than what they may
receive from the air, he can procure copiously a Liquor, which rectified, is
not to be distinguished from spirit of Blood, Soot, Hartshorn or other Urinous
spirits or salts; and mixed with highly dephlegmed spirit of Wine, will
coagulate into the offa alba. I might likewise mention those excellent
Experiments of his, lately communicated to the Royal Society; where he has at
large proved that alcalisate or fixed salts extracted out of the Ashes of
vegetables, Volatile salts, and Vinous spirits do not differ from each other.
And as for Medicines of the higher form in Chemistry, I wish Mr. H. could
produce such as that ingenious Doctor is Master of, whose extraordinary effects
he has seen and can witness; as the Volatile salt of Tartar, Basilius
Valentinus his Tincture of Antimony, Tinctura Lilii, Helmonts Laudanum, his
Aroph Paracelsi; the Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol, its Essential oil, the
tincture of gold, etc.

And that I might not seem too tedious upon this subject, I will acquaint Mr.
H. at present but with one more, who was no contemptible Chemist, though his
Talent lay much more in practice; and for that he has had an universal esteem
from all learned men; who have been conversant in his book de peste: now for
what estimation this learned Author Diemerbroeck has for Anatomy, you may
judge by his Epistle to that late Body of Anatomy, that he has published where
he tells you, quod Medica Ars sine Anatomica vix solidis fundamentis innititur,
and haec sine illa inutilis est. That the Medical Art without the Anatomical is
scarcely fixed upon solid foundations, and without it it is nothing worth.

Now pray, Mr. H. inform us, whether we may not more rationally hope for
greater things from these men's labors, who are not less acquainted with the
structure of humane bodies and Philosophical improvements, than they are with
the Spagyrical Art; than from an Empirical crew of men, who can pretend to
little better education than a Smiths Anvil, or some such Mechanical trade? For
it is sufficiently proved by the Honorable Mr. Boil in that incomparable book
of his so often mentioned, that the Naturalists knowledge does highly tend to
the advancement of our Faculty in all parts of the Medical Art, which indeed
was the principal, if not sole design of the Authors writing that Treatise; to
which I shall refer all ingenious persons, not doubting but upon a serious
perusal thereof, they will not only clearly discover the utter incapacity of
our London Empiricks from making any future pretensions to improvements in
Physic; but readily acknowledge the great obligations they owe to our famous
Universities and learned College of Physicians in London, from whose fountains
have been derived those great discoveries both in Nature and Art, relating to
the Medical Science, whereby men may more happily be cured of their diseases
and enjoy the blessings of a happy and pleasant life.

SECT. 3.
As to Chemistry.
I Shall in this Section endeavor to show that Physicians educated in
Universities, and particularly Members of the College of Physicians, have been
so far from being the hinderers of the Art of Chemistry, that they have been
the great Improvers and promoters of it.

As to the clearing of this Assertion to the satisfaction of all Impartial
Readers; I shall crave leave to acquaint them; that our contest at present with
this Empirical tribe of men, is not about the antiquity, excellency, or
usefulness of this Art; nor yet about the Arcana majora in that Science, which
the Ancients did endeavor to persuade the world they were Masters of; for, by
the by, let me tell them, that they have exploded their doctrines and
principles, which were the very same with Aristotle's and Galens (which are so
much contemned by Mr. H. and others of his Society) as may be seen at large in
their writings of the Elements in general, and each of them in particular.

And as to the great Arcana of the Ancients, the universal by dissolution of
Gold, liquor Alkahest, Ferment, grand Elixir, etc. there is none of them I
presume, will dare to pretend to them; they being (as I conceive) but bad
Commentators upon so obscure and dark a text; it being very well known to all
men that have been conversant in their writings, that they affected an
Aenigmatical and Hieroglyphical style, too difficult for these men to unfold.

And therefore they have wisely contented themselves with Authors of a later
date and lower form in Chemistry; which had they well understood, they would
not have discoursed so contemptibly against the fountains of all good and
ingenious literature and education, viz. the famous Universities of our own and
foreign Countries; nor yet have fancied that a few preparations stolen out of
Faber, Horstius, etc. should have merited such a splendid title as that of
Aurora Chymica; nor that Antimonial or Mercurial preparations (the most
dangerous, venenate and fatal Medicines, if not wisely and faithfully managed
both by their Operators, and those that exhibit them) should have deserved the
estimation of remedies extracted by the Solar rays; nor that an Infusion of
Senna, Elecampane, Liquorice, Guajacum, Coriander and Annise-seeds in Aqua
vitae, should have deserved the title of Elixir Salutis: nor a dissolution of
Elaterium, Jalapp, Gummi gutta, or the like, in a little Brandy, or Spirit of
Wine, drawn from Scurvy Grass; that of a Golden Purging Spirit: nor yet that
these Medicines should have suited all palates and constitutions, as they
knavishly pretend.

For it is no difficulty to prove that none of these Medicines (which they would
gladly have the ignorant vulgar believe Universal) can cure diseases better,
nor yet so well, as the Emetick Infusion which every Apothecary has in his
shop; nor as the Cathartick pills or potions which our Dispensatory does
sufficiently furnish us withal, and every Novice in our Art may easily
prescribe: but the cures that are performed by the forementioned remedies, are
to be attributed to little else but the method of using them, which they as
much contemn and ignore as learning it self.

And therefore that they might maintain their repute with their ignorant
Devotionists, they have affixed several monster-dropsied titles to their
pretended Arcana; as Aqua Tetra-Chymagogon; Pilulae Anticachecticae, Pulvis
Catholicus Emetico catharticus, Elixir Lysiponon, Archei Sedativum and
Anodynum, Bezoardick and Anti-odontalgick powders fabricated by Sol and Luna;
Panpharmacons, etc. which occasions those poor silly souls to fancy their
Authors a form above Physicians, the very names of their remedies being more
likely to fright or conjure away their diseases than their medicines.

And as for their cures, that are cried up and down the streets in printed
Bills, and patched on every post; I take them to be of as good credit as their
Predecessor's O Dowdes; of which the ingenious Mr. Johnson formerly Operator to
the College of Physicians has given the world an account. And lest his
testimony should not please them, or his credit be suspected, as having some
dependence upon that learned College; I shall acquaint them with what
characters they have lately given each other in their printed bills; the one
charging the other for an ignorant Dunce that cannot write three lines of true
English and sense; for villainy and poison, etc. and for several of the Cures
that he pretends to have done in several parts of England, he will prove them
forged and lies; the other charging his Adversary for Felony, Burglary and
other misdemeanors. And therefore one of the most ingenious of this gang of
men, having formerly received an account out of several of the Counties of
England, of the apparent, undeniable, and inexcusable tragedies that have been
caused by taking these Empirical Medicines; has told the world in Print, that
their Universal remedies are but dangerous Venomes; and their Authors but
stupid and blockish Philosophers; heteroclite pieces of mortality; as Weavers,
Tailors, Botchers, Cobblers, etc. who of late having thrown aside their Bodkins
and Thimbles, Lasts, Awles, and Shuttles, are become (Asini ad Lyram) like so
many Apes in a Carpenters work-room, etc.

And lest Mr. H. should be offended with this relation I have given from some
of his Brethrens writings, I will be so kind as to acquaint him with the
operation of some of their famous, wonderful, and never failing Medicines, (as
they term them) which have been attended with the following success.

The first is discoursed of by Doctor Willis in the first part of his
Pharmaceutice rationalis, p. 99. who there gives an account of the exhibition
of two doses of a Cathartick powder from an Empirick to two Boys; the effect
whereof was this, that in one of them the powder wrought no less than an
hundred times in the space of forty eight hours; the other it neither purged
nor vomited; but in few days his hair fell off, and nails grew black, and in a
short time aqueous pustles broke forth in all the habit of his body, which were
soon hardened into crusty scabs, which were of so poisonous and venenate a
nature, that the poor boy was miserably afflicted with them for above two years
before any cure could be obtained; although the most appropriate Medicines were
not wanting during that time.

The second by Doctor Castle; who in his Chemical Galenist acquaints us, p. 22.
that having visited his learned friend Dr. Cox, he told him that he had been
lately called to a Citizen of London, who upon taking a Vomit from an Empirick,
fell into an Hypercatharsis, and out of that into dismal Convulsions, in which
in despite of the most proper remedies he dyed.

And it is not long since that my Apothecary told me, that one of this Tribe
being sent for to a poor Hostler in a Fever, whom finding after some days
treatment in great want of rest; he sent for a dram of Opium (at least 58
grains too much) with some Diascordium to give this Fellow inwardly; which the
Apothecary understanding, refused to supply him with, which caused him to husse
like one of the Hectors of the Town, that his learning and skill should be
called in question by an Apothecary, though it were to save a man's life.

I could likewise acquaint Mr. H. with a Friend and Companion of his, who
promising his Patient a speedy cure, performed it in good earnest; the Physic
he exhibited, being of such a deleterious, deadly quality, that its operation
was not only incredibly violent; but in a short time it found its passage into
the blood, and from thence for several days discharged such large quantities
of that noble and vital liquor; that the poor languishing Patient speedily
dyed; notwithstanding the most rational and proper remedies that were made use
of, by a very great and learned Physician to have prevented his death.

And if Mr. H. were as good at an application as I find him at a false
quotation; I could tell him of a man that served seven years with an
Apothecary, and traveled into Holland, Germany, France and Spain; and thus
spent eight and thirty years in laborious pains and travels to gain experience
and knowledge in Physic above the common sort, and to look into the practice
of the best Physicians and Artists of diverse Nations; and then coming into
England well furnished with a Celestial liquor, and other remedies which
himself and Patients might depend upon; very confidently undertook the Cure of
a Gentleman that had for a year or two labored under a pertinacious Jaundice
and inveterate Dropsy (though given over by the most eminent and learned
Physicians of our Age) promising to carry off the disease without any
evacuating remedies; yet after a weeks use of his Arcana, the Patient fell into
violent Vomitings and dejections downwards, suffering forty or more evacuations
in a short space; which giving some present relief, encouraged the Patient to
continue the use of this Gentleman's Physic; which after a week or ten days
time, procuring such another evacuating paroxysm, it very unfortunately proved
so high and fatal to the Patient, that he dyed in the Operation; the Physician
by Certificate giving hopes of his recovery to the last moment of his life. Now
surely Mr. H. had this Traveller been as studious in his enquiries into the
nature and causes of the forementioned distempers, as he has been into
Chemical preparations; he would not have exhibited those medicines so
fortuitously; nor yet have passed a prognostic so ignorantly.

And to conclude, I will at present trouble Mr. H. but with one story more of
this friend of his; and that was of his exhibition of another of his effectual
remedies to a young Virgin, which unexpectedly (as I presume) having the
fortune of raising some slight Salivation, he ordered her to swallow her
Spittle, which speedily produced such Symptoms, that both the Parents of the
Child and the learned Physicians that were afterward sent for, did both judge
her poisoned by the medicines exhibited; which proved so indeed; for in a very
short space she dyed thereby.

Now surely, Mr. H. had the forementioned person been half so good a
Philosopher or Physician as the learned Dr. Witherly, or Dr. Hodges, whom he is
pleased to call Novices; (although the former is a person of those excellent
accomplishments in his Faculty, that his reputation is great with most persons
of Quality in this famous City; and is Physician to his Majesty's own person;
the later a person, to whom posterity will own themselves endebted, for leaving
behind him so full and complete a History of the late direful London Plague) he
would have understood, that when Mercurial or other mineral preparations had
put the blood into a fluor, and impregnated it with sour and Vitriolick parts,
it must needs be very dangerous to swallow that saliva down, which would not
only injure the Tone of the Stomach, Intestines and other viscera, but destroy
the native temper of the blood, Animal spirits and all the other noble juices
of the body.

And that, Mr. H. this dearly beloved friend of yours, may not for the future
by such unjustifiable Arcana, ruin the lives and health of any more of his
Patients in this kind, I will acquaint him with the following observation;
which was of a poor silly Dog, who unfortunately lapping up a quantity of
saliva in a Patients chamber of mine that was Salivated; immediately forsook
his victuals, grew languid and weak, pining away to skin and bones, and in a
short time dyed.

But to proceed according to my former promise; I shall now endeavor to prove
that what advancement has accrewed to this noble Art of Chemistry, did never
own its original to these Adversaries of ours, or any of their Predecessors;
but to Physicians of Academick education and Collegiate members.

Which certainly is so far from a difficulty to undertake; that whoever has
been acquainted with the learned writings of Mynsicht, Crollius, Faber
Beguinus, Hartman, Grulingius, Horstius, Schroderus, Quercetan, Zwelfer,
Becherus, Langelott, Borrichius, etc. (most of which men I hope Mr. H. will own
to have been better versed in Chemistry than himself or any of his Companions)
will give me their assent to so great a truth; which any ingenious person may
be satisfied in, who pleases to peruse the forementioned Authors; but more
especially the admirable Pharmacopoeas of the learned Quercetan and Zwelfer;
the one having acquainted the world with the great improvements, that may be
made in the medicinal part of Physic by Chemical Pharmacy; the other no less
judiciously correcting the errors of the common Pharmacopoeias; and
substituting remedies that might answer the same intentions the Authors
expected from their former compositions, but much more efficaciously.

And surely he that reads, how learnedly the great Borrichius has defended
this excellent Art against C^nringius; will not only admire what he has
written upon that subject, but expect something great in Chemistry from that
learned man. And for the famous Langelott, there is none who has been
acquainted with the admirable remedies he has already discovered, but must
acknowledge that he has been very conversant with Nature even in her greatest
secrets. And he that has read over the famous Becherus his Physica
subterranea, will scarcely scruple to allow us, what vast improvements have
been already made from these true Adepts of Nature; who having divulged to the
world the great familiarity they already enjoy in her palace, what may be
expected from them, when they come to be admitted as part of her Cabinet
Counsel?

Now good Mr. H. do you or any of your friends give us parallel instances of
the like improvements that have been made by any of your Society in this Art we
contend about, and we will ingenuously give them their due; but for my own part
I profess that I know not of any, neither do I believe that such instances can
be produced, and then what little reason has Mr. H. to glory of that great
spirit that is now up and at work for further and further improvement amongst
the working Physicians, as he terms those of his own fraternity?

And though he has taken the pains to transcribe that thread bare story of
Quercetan and Sir Theodore Mayerne out of that unanswerable book (as he
ignorantly calls it, having I perceive never perused the replies to it) Medela
Medicinae, in perpetuum rei scandalum, as his friend would have the world
believe; yet how little to the purpose, you may observe by the following
account.

In p. 23. he tells us that in the year 1603. the laborious famous Quercetan
and Sir Theodore de Mayerne, were both of them in two several public Sentences
of the Academian Professors, and whole College of Physicians in Paris, printed
by their order, condemned, (and in positive terms the whole Art it self of
Chemistry) as men not only unworthy to be consulted with by the Physicians of
the College; especially Mayerne, declaring him an unlearned, impudent, drunken
mad fellow; exhorting all Nations to abominate them both, and banish them and
the like practisers out of their Territories, as Monsters of mankind: and
threatening all the Fellows of that College, that if they did consult with
either of them about any Patient, they should be deprived of all privilege
belonging to their College.

Well quoted Mr. H! had you known when you had done well, you would have
proceeded no farther in this relation, but I perceive you were near the pitch
of one and thirty when you transcribed this story, and then unfortunately all
came out, for Children, etc. -- witness what follows in the very same page
where he tells us;

That for all this, the one of those condemned persons became famous in France,
the Kings chief Physician, and lived to see that College repent of their
folly, and their successors become admirers of those Chemical books and
remedies which they had so rashly damned. The other (viz. Mayerne) became
Physician to two Kings of England, and two of France, and left a name of great
wealth and honor behind him.

To this story of your friend's M. N. which I have observed twice quoted by
himself, and once by Mr. H. I might return this answer; that Chemistry was then
in its infancy in France, and therefore no wonder that it met with such
opposition even from a learned Society; seeing it was not the fate of that Art
alone to meet with so ill and unjust entertainment: For Anatomy it self (which
is so much damned and hectored against by you and your companions) has born
its share in that kind; witness that excellent story of Democritus, who was
esteemed no better than a mad man by the Senate and people where he lived, for
secluding himself from company to investigate the nature and use of the bilis;
which occasioned the great Hippocrates by request of the Senate, etc. to come a
perilous and troublesome voyage by Sea, to undertake his cure; who finding him
diligently employed in the dissection of Animals; he commended his industry,
admired his wisdom, and accused his friends of madness in their censures: which
madness how much it has possessed Mr. H. and the Pseudo-Chymists of our Age, I
will leave to the judgment of any judicious person, who has been conversant in
their writings.

And lest this they should think the only case we can produce, I could tell
them of the unkind usage and ill treatment that our immortal Doctor Harvey met
with; for that great invention of his, the circulation of the blood; for which
posterity will both admire and bless him.

And if there were need, I might tell him of many more; but though I should, I
fear it would be to little purpose; for his and his Brethrens ignorance and
confidence do make them more irreconcilable to Anatomy, than the College of
Paris ever was to the learned Quercetan and famous Mayern.

But to proceed in giving Mr. H. a closer answer; I now would gladly know of
him, how much this story is quoted to his purpose; and what it is that he has
so wisely collected from it? For let any judicious man read it, and he may
plainly observe that the persons that were thus severely damned (as he terms
it) were not Empiricks, but Doctors of Physic, men of Academick education;
great Philosophers and Naturalists, (which in Mr. H. and our Adversaries,
opinions could make them no better, than idle and formal Speculators, Academian
Thinkers, Medicasters and talking Book-Doctors,) only they lived in an age,
wherein other Physicians education and practice had too much prejudiced them
against the noble Art of Chemistry; which prejudice (it seems) by Mr. H's own
confession was not so great, but they lived to repent of their folly; and their
successors became admirers of those Chemical books and remedies. It Is well
then, Mr. H. I perceive the College of Paris is now in your favor; for by
your own quotation and confession, they are become admirers of those books and
medicines they formerly damned: This passage I must own did so much please me
when I read it, that I was in some hopes to have found the College of London
received into favor in the next page; but no such matter, the man forgetful of
what he had quoted but in the page before about the College of Paris, tells us
quite another tale, viz. that Corporations of Physic have been the great
hinderers of the progress of this Art throughout Europe, and still are: well
observed Mr. H! but what testimony have we for this so bold and confident an
assertion? the chief that I can find is this, that the College of Paris did
damn two learned men, and soundly repented for their pains; which repentance
was so serious that it left such an impression upon their posterity, that they
admired (as I before mentioned) both the men and their remedies, which their
Predecessors so rashly condemned; and yet they must be quoted upon every
occasion as enemies to this Art of Chemistry.

But not withstanding these contradictions, which ought to be allowed to a man
that makes so little of Academick learning; pray what is all this Harangue to
the College of Physicians in London? especially seeing it is so well known,
that the famous Sir Theodore de Mayerne was so far from being an Adversary to
Corporations of Physic, that he was a member of this learned Society.

But to proceed, I shall further endeavor to clear the truth of my assertion;
and seeing Mr. H. discovers so much anger against the College of Paris, I will
acquaint him out of one of their own Country men's writings and an eminent
Chemist too, Le Febure, lately Royal Professor to His Majesty of England, and
Apothecary in Ordinary to his Honorable Household, and Fellow of the Royal
Society; what improvements have been made in this Art by men of Academick
education in France, and those whom I presume might be of their College too.

And in the first place he tells us, that Physicians are the fountains from
whence all first receive the noble knowledge of true Natural things, and the
manner of preparing them well And that Mr. H. may be assured that he intended
not by the name Physicians, any of his Tribe; that like not (as he terms it)
that Feather in the Cap; he does particularly and ingenuously acknowledge his
obligations to those learned men, to whom he was so much endebted for his
attainmens in Chemical pharmacy.

The one was, Dr. Duhan Doctor of Physic and Professor of Philosophy, who
promoted him much in his diligent searching into physical verities; yea so
eminent was this Doctor in his knowledge in Chemistry, that he tells you, that
France suffered much by his untimely death, he designing to publish some
writings, that would have much illustrated the knowledge of things natural,
Medicine and Pharmacy.

The second was M. du Clos Doctor of Physic, who did him the favor (as he
frankly and ingenuously acknowledges) to correct his defaults, and lead him by
the hand of his judgment and experience, through all that which he had
undertaken in his endeavors; to advance the dignity of Pharmacy, which now
(says he) lies bending toward its ruins; if it be not upheld by its true
Arches and pillars; the faithful, learned, experienced and curious Physicians;
nay farther, he confesses, that he was endebted to this Doctor for the
well-being he had acquired in his Profession.

The third was, Mons. Vallot, chief Physician to the present King of France,
from whose unfathomed depths of learning and experience he yet obtained farther
light and knowledge in this Art: So that he owns him, for the true Father and
Restorer of Medicine and Chemistry, and tells us, that he could not do less
than to let posterity know, how much he stood endebted to the bounty, learning
and sole generosity of this great and illustrious Mecaenas.

And to conclude, he frankly tells the world, in that excellent Book of his,
called his Complete Body of Chemistry; that he has given nothing therein, but
what has been received from Physicians, so that it is to them only to whom you
owe the obligation.

But to come nearer home, let me tell Mr. H. that this is not all the evidence
that I can produce for the proof of my assertion; for it is very well known that
the lately mentioned Sir Theodore Mayerne and old Doctor Rugeley were members
of the College of Physicians, and persons so eminently skilled in this Art we
contest about, that I doubt not but our Adversaries themselves will allow us
their suffrage to the truth thereof: And so far was that learned College from
discouraging Chemistry in those early days, that it is very well known, they
had a constant Operator employed by them.

And for our own time, who is ignorant of the great abilities of several of the
members of that worthy Society? witness the excellent Dr. Rugely, Dr. Jonathan
Goddard (who lately dyed) Dr. Merret, etc. the first of which eminent
Physicians, is not only a Gentleman of universal learning and accomplishments
both of body and mind; but of that profound insight into the Art of Chemistry,
that were Mr. H's beloved Helmont now alive, he could give him no less
character than I have done.

I might farther mention several other members of that worthy Society, and
University Physicians too, whose private Laboratories, and continued pains that
have been spent in them, for the public good, and particular benefit of their
Patients; might make these men ashamed (if they had any ingenuity left them) to
pretend that they are, and have been the great hinderers of the progress of
this Art throughout Europe: which is so notoriously false, that I shall crave
leave to acquaint them with what improvements have been made in Chemistry, by
one more of the late Fellows of that learned College, and that was the
excellent Doctor Willis, who was likewise Professor of Natural Philosophy in
the famous University of Oxford, and Fellow of the Royal Society in London; who
has not only ingenuously communicated many good medicines, which are scattered
up and down his works; but was master of greater Arcana in Chemistry, than any
our Adversaries can reasonably pretend to; which any rational man will grant
me, that seriously and consideratively reads over that incomparable book of
his de Febribus, and especially the first part of it de fermentatione.

Where he has most judiciously and learnedly acquainted all ingenious
Physicians and Naturalists, with the reasons that prevailed with him, to
embrace the Spagyrical principles, for the explication of all the difficult
phenomenon in Nature, as well as in humane bodies; and very learnedly
demonstrated their true existence; which having done, he gives us an admirable
account of the great alterations that are made in the works of Nature and Art,
viz. in the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral kingdoms, from the intestine
combination and motion, separation and dissolution of these active principles.

And in the ninth Chapter of that Tract, he has furnished us with such a
learned and satisfactory account of the several menstrua that are most proper,
for the solution of all natural bodies; whose vinculum does chiefly consist in
Sulphurous, Saline or Terrestrial parts; that none who reads him, but must
admire him for an acute Philosopher, as well as a profound Chemist: for the
knowledge of these does indeed accomplish a Physician for the improvement of
Chemical Pharmacy; especially if we add hereto a full understanding of the true
nature of Fermentation, Digestion and Circulation, which our Author was no
stranger to.

And truly I may be bold to say that we may expect far greater seize in
this Art from him, that thoroughly understands the forementioned operations,
than from the whole Club of our London Empiricks; who generally are ignorant,
not only of the constitutive principles of those Bodies, they would pretend to
analyze; but likewise of their proper Solvents.

And therefore the learned Doctor Willis just before mentioned, has well
acquainted us in his Epistle to that admirable book of his, which he calls, his
Pharmaceutice rationalis, what we may expect from this sort of men, where he
tells us; Dum mineralia inscite tractant, eventum quendam incertum expectantes,
potius quam aliquid serio designantes; si forsan productum insolitum
apparuerit, cum novo hoc Pharmaco (cujus virtutes prorsus ignotae, saepe aut
nullae aut maleficae existunt) morbos statim omnes sanaturos pollicentur,
ipsumque in quovis casu ad magnam aegrotantis noxam and non raro perniciem
audacter exhibent: adeo secure and temerarie solent carnifices isti de corio
humano ludere, dum ad medicamenta ista (in quibus aculeus semper latet
venenosus) aut paranda, aut exhibenda nullo consilio, nulliusque methodi filo,
sed mero casu and caeco quodam impetu ducuntur: i. e. Whilst they unskilfully
handle minerals, rather expecting an uncertain event, than prosecuting any
serious design; if by chance any unusual product does appear, they straightway
promise the cure of all diseases from that new Medicine; whose virtues are
altogether unknown; or it may be pernicious, or none at all; and this they
boldly exhibit in any case to the great injury of the Patient, nay it may be
to his utter ruin; so rashly and confidently do these Butchers of mankind
sport away the precious lives of men, whilst they adventure upon the
preparation and exhibition of such medicines as these (in which there is
constantly latent some venomous sting) not being directed thereto by any advice
or method, but merely driven on by chance and blind rashness.

But to proceed in a farther account of our excellent Authors seize in
Chemistry, which we may find, if we will take the pains to peruse the second
part of the forementioned book, which treats de febribus, and the third de
urinis; where he has given us an incomparable account of the constituent
principles both of humane blood, and urine; from whence he has rationally and
ingeniously deduced such useful Hypotheses, for the explication of the
phenomenon of both, in a natural and preternatural state; that no Age can
parallel.

And though some boasting Empiricks, have pretended a confutation of his
learned writings in the title pages of their scurrilous books; yet to how
little purpose, any ingenious person may be satisfied, who is willing for his
curiosity to lose so much precious time as to read them over: And therefore our
learned Author did very prudently return them no other answer but the following
(the most proper that could be contrived for those Adversaries of his, whose
writings were stuffed with little else but Billingsgate language) Quandoquidem
Empirici nonnulli, arrepta tam quidlibet impune scribendi, quam ludendi de
corio humano licentia; placita mea, quae non satis intelligunt, passim
dilacerant, and convellunt; and quo speciosius merces suas venditent,
libellorum titulis me Triumphatum praedicant; hos non aliter quam silentio and
contemptu redarguam, utpote quorum scripta and responso indigna sunt and spreta
exolescent: nec majoris illos aestimo, qui argumentorum loco, tantum opprobria
and convitia ingerentes, debacchari potius quam Philosophari videntur. Whereas
some Empiricks having taken the liberty of writing any thing, as well as
dallying with the lives of men, do rudely treat those opinions of mine, which
they do not well understand; and that their books might more speciously sell,
they carry me in Triumph in their title pages: But to these men I shall return
no other answer but silence and contempt; whose writings are not worthy of a
better, and being contemned will vanish of themselves and be forgotten: neither
have I greater estimation for those men, who do rather rage and rail like mad
and drunken sotts; than reason like Philosophers, printing little else but ill
language and revilings.

But it may be Mr. H. will not yet allow me (notwithstanding this so clear
demonstration which I have given of the surpassing abilities of this learned
man) that he was so great a Proficient in the Spagyrical Art as himself, or
some of his Companions would pretend to be:

But suppose, Mr. H. that I should produce a greater and truer evidence, for
the confirmation of this assertion, out of that unanswerable book of your
friend's, Doctor Marchamont Nedhams, which you at large have told us p. 23. was
written eleven years ago; than you have produced out of the honorable Mr.
Boil against Anatomy, and that without everting the design of the Author or a
false quotation; would this be a means to silence your confidence for the
future, and make you more wary in railing against Academick education and
Collegiate members? I confess one would think it should; and therefore out of
respect and kindness to you, for some real favors that you have formerly done
to some deserving persons; I shall desire you to read over the beginning of p.
237. of that book called Medela Medicinae, where you will find, that your
unanswerable friend having told the world in the latter part of the page
preceding, that all along that Treatise, he had said little but what was in
the language of the best writers of this latter Age, or agreeable to their
sense; he there craves leave to make use of one, who is (I may well say) the
Ornament of our Nation next to immortal Harvey, by name Doctor Willis,
Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Oxon; one that has made
himself a Physician indeed, and Philosopher by Fire.

And in p. 336. he tells you, that he thought it necessary to give the Reader a
taste of Doctor Willis his new Doctrine about Urines, which certainly (says
he) is much more agreeable to reason than any thing that was ever said before
upon that subject, and must needs be abundantly more conducible to the practice
of Physic; seeing it directs our judgment not by mere outward appearances and
bare observations of old; but by an accommodation of our understandings in the
real principles which are in Urines, the same as in men's bodies; from whence
doubtless a more certain way of judgment must needs arise, than can be imagined
by any other course that may be taken to judge by Urines, concerning the state
of the blood and its diseases. I cannot therefore but recommend that Tract of
Urines to ingenious Practisers, as a more sure guide than any that they can
meet with in former Authors.

And in p. 415. of the same book he owneth, that this learned Doctor had the
honor of opening the eyes of the world, more than any before him (his acute
Helmont not excepted) about the nature of Fevers.

Now pray, Mr. H. let me persuade you to take the pains seriously to peruse and
consider these passages faithfully quoted out of your unanswerable book, and
then let us understand the reason, why you made so bold a challenge, and that
in the view of the world, to the whole College of Physicians, as to nominate
any one particular of improvement that their Society have made in the Art of
Curing since their first incorporation, etc. seeing that your ingenious friend
in that very book you quoted as unanswerable, has told the world that Dr.
Willis did understand the nature of Fevers more than any before him, and
consequently the Cure: nay further (as I just before quoted) he frankly owneth,
that the Doctors principles about Urines were the same as in men's bodies, which
must needs be abundantly more conducible to the practice of Physic, and to
judge of the state of the blood and its diseases, than any that were formerly
delivered.

Now certainly, Mr. H. those doctrines which can acquaint us, with the real
constituent principles of the blood, and other humors and recrements of humane
bodies, with their various preternatural affections, must of necessity tend to
one particular improvement, and be abundantly conducible to the practice of
Physic; which you by no means will allow the College since their first
Incorporation, but will undertake to prove the contrary, as you have boldly
asserted, p. 15.

But seeing, Mr. H. by the account you have given of your travels, and your
quacking Avocations; I may justly suspect that you have not had time to search
into all that has been written by the learned members of that Honorable
Society; I will be so ingenuous for the present, as to acquaint you with
another particular of improvement, that was made in the Art of curing, by the
learned Doctor Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Doctor Regemorter; and that was the
Rickets, a disease altogether unknown to the Ancients; it being the Endemial
distemper of our own Nation. And if there were need, I could mention several
other improvements in this Art, which have been made by this learned Society,
but that Mr. H's desiring an instance but of one, has prevented my discoursing
any further at present on this subject.

But to proceed, Mr. H. tells us, p. 28. of ingenious men that were not
educated in a Collegiate way, who afterward betaking themselves to learn the
Art of Physic in the most proper way, which is by labor; have soon outstript
the Scholasticks in right knowledge of the materia medica.

To this I answer, that Mr. H. had done well, if he had acquainted us with
those ingenious men, who by their labor have outstript the Scholasticks in
right knowledge of the materia medica, for we know very well that dolus
versatur in universalibus: and farther give me leave to tell him, that I am not
of his belief, that manual operation alone will fit any man, (much less those
of his mechanical Tribe) for any great improvement in the materia medica; it
being very well known, that no person is truly capable of performing any thing
great in Chemical pharmacy, who is ignorant of the constituent principles of
those bodies he operates upon, or of those to whom his remedies are to be
exhibited; and therefore it was one of the chief designs of that noble Author
Mr. Boil in that Treatise of his, so often mentioned, the usefulness of
Experimental Natural Philosophy, to show, how much the Naturalists knowledge
might be serviceable to him, in the improvement of all the parts of Physic,
and more especially the Pharmaceutical: and surely if labor be the most proper
way to advance this Art, the Smiths, Brewers and Colliers may be greater
Proficients therein, than Mr. H. or the most learned of his companions; for
it is certain, they are much more able by labor and pains to obtain it: but the
contrary is manifest, by the writings of the learned Quercetan, Zwelfer and
other eminent Chemists, who had never been capable of doing half that service
in Pharmacy, for which the world is so much endebted to them; had they not been
as great Philosophers, as they were Operators. And therefore that excellent
Chemist Le Febure has well observed the two following maxims.

1. That Chemistry does not merely consist in the skill of preparing well a
remedy, as many do erroneously imagine; but in the using of it with due
circumstances, and respect to the Theorems of Art, which is properly the true
Physic.

2. That whosoever meddles with Chemical remedies, without the previous grounds
of Theory, can deserve no other name than of an Empirick; since he is
altogether ignorant of the internal efficient causes of their effects, and
cannot give the physical reasons, why he does administer such a remedy for such
and such disease.

And further I can acquaint Mr. H. with several of the members of the College
of Physicians now living, who for their elegant and rational prescriptions, and
true knowledge of the materia medica, do not only excel Mr. H. and all his
Society; but are highly honored for their admirable and surpassing
improvements therein, by all of their own Faculty; as witness the most
accomplished Dr. Thomas Cox, Dr. Wolf, etc.

And though Mr. H. is pleased to tell us, p. 20. that remedies well prepared by
Chemical Art, seem to be as the hands of God reached down from heaven in this
latter age, in exceeding mercy to poor man, when his iniquities have so altered
the whole scene of diseases, etc. which makes them exceedingly different from
what they were in the days of Hippocrates and Galen, and indeed from what they
were a hundred years ago, and less; so that the old Art and remedies are
insufficient to deal with them.

To this I answer, that in my opinion Mr. H's Divinity is as heterodox as his
Physic has been; for it is a little odd to conceive that the iniquities of men
should have been the procuring causes of exceeding mercy; I do therefore very
much fear, that Mr. H. has been as great a stranger to his Bible as he has
been to Philosophy; else he might have observed, and that without the help of
Spectacles, that all the judgments that God Almighty has inflicted upon poor
man, have been procured by his sins; amongst the number of which Judgments Mr.
H. might well have ranked his Chemical remedies, which have proved so indeed to
some that have made use of them; as I have lately mentioned; and then I am sure
they can procure but little commendation to his Art.

And as for his discourse of the great alteration of diseases since Hippocrates
and Galens time, from whence he would prove that the old Art and remedies are
altogether insufficient; let me tell him, that there are so full and
satisfactory Answers given to his friend upon that subject, that I should
injure those learned men, should I now dwell or insist long upon that
controversy; and therefore I shall recommend to his perusal those four books
which were written against his friend's Medela medicinae ten or eleven years
agone: only by the by let me tell him, that it is possible that the old Art and
remedies may be sufficient to deal with the diseases of our days, though much
altered from those in former times; but that it is Mr. H's and the rest of his
Companions misfortune, that they understand not how to exhibit them, being so
great contemners of a rational methodical practice; by which I must frankly
own, that I have seen far greater cures performed with Chicken-broth, Whey,
Milk and Water, etc. than by all their applauded Chemical Arcana.

And further for that alteration of diseases they discourse of; I could tell
them of a Physician of the learned College they so much decry; who has done
more service to the public in acquainting the world with a faithful History of
the Acute diseases of our days, with their specifical differences, and happy
cures, by the old remedies, they so much damn; than they or any of their
Predecessors have done by all their books that ever they printed, or medicines
they published. And though we may allow, that the Theories of Fevers and other
distempers may possibly of late, by the industry of Collegiate members, have
been built upon more solid foundations, than formerly; yet this is so far from
occasioning us to reject the good old remedies and methods of practice, that
Doctor Willis has well observed, Quod indicationes quaedam, antiquitus
receptae, adhuc ratae perstant, eruntque in perpetuum observandae; quia
Experientiae primae hujus artis magistrae debentur: that some indications that
were of old received, are yet approved, and will for ever be observed, because
they owe their original to experience, the first mistress of Art. And to the
same purpose, he discourses of the remedies that were used by the Ancients,
and no less valued by the Moderns.

And no less ingeniously did the learned Doctor Castle acquaint the world in
the Epistle to his Chemical Galenist, where he solidly and rationally asserts,
that the practical part of Physic being grounded upon experience, does not so
much depend upon the notional; that, this being overthrown, the other must
necessarily fall to the ground, the Fancies and reasonings of Philosophers and
Physicians being built upon the practice; and signifying not much more to the
Fundamentals of the Art of Physic, than pinnacles to the body and foundation
of a building, which (though they be blown down) may stand unshaken: much of
the Therapeutick part of Physic being (as he has well observed) like Dials
and Almanacks, which agree as well with that of Copernicus, as Ptolomy's
Hypothesis: Therefore says he, as the Ancients made a true use of the light
and heat of the Sun, in distinguishing and measuring times and seasons, and
managing of their husbandry, though probably they erred in their notion of his
motion round the earth; so did the Physi^ians no less happily employ Apollo's
Art in the Curing of diseases, though they were ignorant of the true motion of
the blood, and of (the Sun of the Microcosm) the heart.

But to conclude this discourse about Chemistry; I would gladly know of Mr. H.
why the Chemical mineral medicaments set down in the London Pharmacopoeia, are
things but of the lowest form in Chemistry, and neglected by knowing men in
this Age of improvement? And that because I find upon a serious perusal of
them, that the learned Quercetan and Sir Theodore Mayerne (whom you will own I
hope as most eminent Chemists) have been the Authors, Approvers and Defenders
of some of them, and have raised so great a reputation to their names by their
successful administrations, that they both became eminently famous in our own
and foreign Courts and Cities: but now it seems, they are neglected by knowing
men in this Age of improvement; I confess, I should be very thankful to Mr. H.
to acquaint us with those knowing men he boasts of; and of their great
improvements in Chemical pharmacy; for let me tell him, how contemptibly soever
he and his companions do think of the London Dispensatory; the best Chemists of
them all, would be at a great loss for a key to open most mineral bodies, if
they should exclude their proper solvents which are there to be found; And it
may be in stubborn and chronical diseases, they might be glad to steal now and
then some Chalybeate or Mercurial preparation out of that contemptible book;
and yet rail at it, for affording them that kindness at so dead a lift: and
further I might tell them that in acute diseases, there are as efficacious
Chemical medicines to be found in that Dispensatory, as most of their
Laboratories will afford: and doubtless did any of their Shops or Furnaces
supply them with half so many of those Chemical oils, Mineral solvents,
Diaphoretick powders, Chalibeate, Vitriolick, Antimonial, Mercurial and Anodyne
preparations; Essential and Lixivial salts, with safe and experimental Chemical
Emeticks and Catharticks, etc. that are there to be found; we should have had
them applauded for Polyacea's, and Panacea's too: some of which, might probably
have as well answered the Helmontians primary indication in the cure of
diseases, as their singular Arcana of so general use fabricated out of Mercury;
it being, as they tell us, the pacifying, indulging and gratifying the Archeus,
the Architectonical contriver of our first being; every Atome of those generous
remedies, sending forth lively illustrious beams; with the intuition of which,
the Archeus being wonderfully affected and infinitely delighted, it lays
aside all morosity, melancholy, exorbitant passions, and the entertainment of
deformed Ideas; by means whereof an Eutaxie, Eucrasie and Symmetrie in the
inferior orbs of the Microcosm follows: and others of them, as fully their
second principal indication, which is, as they say, the ablation of the inward
efficient Cause and the outward occasional irritating matter, by such generous
remedies, which taking part with Nature, might help her to conquer evils and
exclude the Nosopoietick thorns and briars, those goads in the sides of the
Archeus, extimulating it to enormous passions and perturbations, through the
Sluice and outlet most patulous and convenient: as an Acid son of Helmont has
lately discoursed in his direct method of curing Chymically.

But to proceed, notwithstanding the London Dispensatory has furnished us with
the forementioned Chemical preparations, it must not only be hectored against,
but damned by Mr. H. and his Companions; either because it pretends not to
teach them the preparations of the Solar, Lunar, Mercurial, Saturnal, Jovial,
Venereal and Martial, Metalline Sulphures or Celestial Liquors; or rather,
because it has that unpardonable fault accompanying it, viz. its Authority
from the learned College of Physicians in London; which will certainly give it
a far greater reputation amongst all judicious men, than the Chemical Champion
of your cause will give the Apothecaries Laboratory, by telling the world that
since he had found the Company of Apothecaries had erected a Laboratory at
their Hall, for supply of their Shops with Medicines of all sorts of the
Chemical preparation, he was resolved wholly to refer Patients with bills to
receive medicines dispensed by their hands; which new device, though expected
to prove advantageous, yet I wish he finds it not (as you prognosticate of the
Anatomists of our Age) the last part he has to play or trick to show, to
entertain Spectators, and amuse the world, to uphold some repute among such as
are ignorant, and draw on Customers; and for my own part, I am to apt believe
that this action of his, may be so ill resented amongst his Brethren the
Arcanamongers of London, that it may occasion some intestine faction in your
Empirical Commonwealth, as has lately been publicly managed by some of your
Tribe; but then it is to be hoped that when knaves fall together by the ears --

SECT. 4.
The usefulness of Method in the Cure of Diseases.
HAving thus far proceeded in the demonstration of what I promised; I come now
to enter upon some short discourse of the methodus medendi; which though our
Adversaries, nay it may be our friends may not judge worth the contending for;
yet I think fit to give all ingenious persons an account of the great
usefulness, yea necessity of the strict observation of it; and that because I
frequently observe, that the Enthusiastic Pseudo-Chymists of our Age, do so
much contemn and decry it; being masters (as they pretend) of such great Arcana
in Physic, as will happily Cure diseases without it.

I shall therefore endeavor to clear the truth of this assertion, by producing
several instances both of Acute and Chronical diseases, whose happy Cure is
principally (if not solely) to be attributed to the prudent method of the
discreet and judicious Physician; amongst the number of which, I shall first
begin with Fevers; they being to be ranked amongst the most Epidemical
distempers we know of.

And in the first place, we will discourse of those, that are generally owned
as putrid; in which are constantly observed ratione motus, four considerable
mutations, viz. their beginning, augmentation, state and declination.

In the beginning of which putrid Fevers, it is usually observed; that the
Sulphurous parts of the blood growing too luxuriant, do break forth into a
flame; agitating the whole mass in a preternatural manner; whereby its crasis
is in danger of being destroyed, its vessels too much distended; and if not
timely calmed, affections of the Head and Nerves, with pain and spasms do
usually ensue: wherefore in this state of the disease, here are present
indications for Phlebotomy to ventilate this mass of blood; for a spare and
refrigerating diet; for Emeticks, (if indicated) lenient Catharticks, Clysters,
etc. which many times are no less prosperously than judiciously prescribed;
this formidable distemper being nip't in its bud, it Sulphurous pabulum being
extracted by bleeding, Clysters, etc. or its disorder quieted by a cooling diet.

But if notwithstanding the proper application of the forementioned remedies,
this Febrile flame cannot be extinguished; but it still increases to a higher
degree, so that intolerable thirst and inquietude, headache and watchfulness,
with delirium and phrensies do continually attend our Patients: here are fresh
indications for repeated phlebotomy, clysters, cooling Julips and decoctions,
etc. whereby the spirits may be refreshed, the parched viscera cooled; and if
possibly, the motion of the blood so moderated, that it may not injure the head
or genus nervosum.

In the state of this disease, we are diligently to attend Natures motions;
that so we might observe whether a future Crisis may be expected or not; which
if it does appear a perfect and salutiferous one; the febrile heat declines,
signs of concoction appear in their urines, and all things prognosticate a
speedy and happy recovery: But on the other hand, if Natures attempts be too
weak for making a full discharge of that adust, febrile matter, which has
passed its due deflagration, and is fitted for expulsion; we ought then to
afford her some gentle assistance by some mild Diaphoretick or lenient
cathartick; accordingly as we observe at that nick of time the tendency of her
motions: But if we find, that in this state of the Fever, there is no Crisis;
or at best, but an imperfect one attempted by Nature; the Patients pulse being
very weak, and his spirits low; we must then be very cautious of any evacuation
by Sweat or Stool, it being not to be attempted without manifest danger of the
Patients life: And therefore we should rather allow her time, and attend her
diligently; until the blood being reduced to a more orderly motion, and the
spirits recruited, she may gradually make secretion and exclusion of the
morbifick matter, in order to the obtaining of her due and native temper; than
increase the too great and unhappy confusion she is already under, by
exhibiting any high Diaphoreticks or Catharticks; this being a time, that
nothing of medicine is to be allowed, unless it be some very temperate Cardiack.

In the declination of this distemper, an exactness of diet is to be observed;
and at length some gentle purgations to be prescribed, to exterminate the
relics of that febrile matter, which probably may be already protruded out of
the Meseraick Arteries in order to its discharge by the intestines; lest it
should be again resorbed, and a relapse ensue thereupon; upon which account we
do likewise as strictly forbid the Patients overhasty eating of flesh-meat,
until their Urines appear in color, consistence and hypostasis like to those
who are in a healthful state; and then we direct them to begin with broths, and
so gradually to adventure upon a flesh diet.

To this purpose has the learned Doctor Willis acquainted us in that excellent
book of his de febribus.

Now pray let sober and judicious men consider, what apparent hazards and
dangers they must necessarily adventure upon, by employing any, but Physicians
well skilled in their Faculty; seeing it is apparent by the forementioned
account of Fevers, (which I have faithfully acquainted them with) what
diligence and judgment ought to be made use of in every state of this disease;
that so the Patient might happily be restored to his pristine health and temper.

But now let us suppose, that in the first attack of this distemper, an
Empirick should be sent for, who being ignorant of its nature, should presently
exhibit some of his well rectified spirits of strong liquors, complete Aqua
vitae, Punch, Analeptical and refocillating wines, etc. can any rational man
imagine that these hot and fiery medicines, should be any ways proper to bridle
the tumult and ferociency of the blood; which being already too much exalted by
hot and bilious parts abounding in it, does rather require a discharge by
venaesection, etc. or attemperating, by cooling medicines; than an advancement
to a higher pitch of luxuriancy, by the forementioned Chemical liquors? which
doubtless can do no less than inflame and fire the whole mass of blood in a
moment: whereas it is evident that Phlebotomy, Clysters, etc. being made use of;
or large proportions of Whey and other cooling liquors freely drunk in the
first assault of these Fevers, have often prevented their farther increase: but
to expect the like advantage from the forementioned rich and spirituous drinks,
would prove as fruitless if not foolish, as to undertake the quenching of an
house on fire, by throwing on gunpowder and fireballs.

Now if this mischief must necessarily attend these Empirical prescriptions, in
the first attack of these Fevers; what may we expect from them in their
augmentation? I dare assure you, little else but thunder and lightning;
phrensies, heart-burnings, Convulsions, etc. especially seeing that the most
prudent management of these Fevers in this state of the disease, can scarcely
calm the impetuous motion of the inflammable parts of the blood.

And if we farther proceed to the State of this distemper, how much sooner may
these Empiricks dispatch their poor languishing Patients, whose only security
depends upon their precedent management, that so a perfect and salutiferous
Crisis might ensue? which if it should not happen, but their universal
medicines are made use of, how certainly must the sick bid adieu to their
Relations? this being a time, when neither Cathartick or Sudorifick, much less
any hot or vinous medicines can be used, without manifest endangering the
Patients life.

And for the declination; what care must be used for some time, that the
Patients eat no flesh-meat or broths made of the same; lest an unhappy relapse
should ensue; how can we then imagine that their spirituous medicines or Aqua
vitae's, impregnated with brisk and active vegetables, may then be allowed of?

But it is possible they will tell me, that they are not without other Chemical
preparations, which they use upon such occasions, and in such distempers as we
discourse of; viz. their Elixir vivisicans, their pulvis Catholicus
diaphoreticus, Aurum vitae diaphoreticum, Elixir grande Cordiale, etc. which
one of the most candid and ingenious of that Society has told us, that they
are to him (with some others that he has mentioned) quasi tot medicinae
columnae, etc.

To this I answer, if this be so, I wish that Mr. H. would tell us, how he
durst pretend to the world, that one single medicine should suit all palates
and constitutions; and that others of his Tribe should no less ignorantly than
confidently engage, that their private Arcana will perform in helping all
curable diseases, what in reason may be expected from all other.

But give me leave, Mr. H. to tell you, that I very much suspect that neither
you nor any of your fraternity do well understand the exhibition of your own
remedies; they being rarely to be administered (as I before showed) in putrid
Fevers; by reason that there are usually contraindications to their exhibition,
both in the beginning, augmentation and state of them; lest in the two former
they should occasion too violent an ebullition of the blood; and in the later
wholly impede her Crisis.

For I would have them to understand, that these Fevers are usually but Natures
instruments, to discharge the luxuriant and bilious parts of the blood; when
they are apt to exceed their due bounds and limits; which if prudently managed
by an Artist in the Faculty, she will gradually deflagrate this morbifick
matter, and being over-burdened with it, will both separate and exclude it; and
this much more happily and opportunely, than if she were disordered by any of
your Jovial powders, or Solar diaphoreticks; Nature wisely observing her proper
periods and times, when this secretion and exclusion of the recrements of the
blood should be made, to the greatest relief and advantage of the Patient;
whereas your medicines (as I before intimated) do usually disturb all her
regular actings, and make a confusion in the very crasis of the blood; and
therefore are as wisely administered to cure this sort of Fevers, before Natures
appointed time; (which is usually about the thirteenth or fourteenth day) as
they would be to a woman, in expectation of bringing forth a healthful and
living child, in five or six months time.

Now if these putrid Fevers ought to be managed with so much diligence and
observation; how woefully would these men bungle and miscarry with all their
applauded Arcana, when they were called to exhibit them in Fevers specifically
different from the former?

As for instance, the putrid Fevers of women in Childbed, where cooling or
heating remedies are equally dangerous; their proper indications principally
allowing the use of Uterines; whereby the blood might be attenuated and
disposed to discharge it self by the Iliack and Hypogastrick vessels, in order
to its necessary depuration.

And thus, I might likewise instance in those lacteal Fevers; which usually
attend the female sex about the third or fourth day after delivery; which are
solely to be managed by a spare and appropriate diet; and committed to Natures
regimen; and though many times the Symptoms that do accompany this sort of
Fevers, are a little troublesome, and it may be frightful too, to the Patients;
as heat, thirst, inquietude of the whole body, pain in the back, shoulders,
breasts, etc. yet if these be not increased by some overhasty and undue
administrations, they usually are freed from them within three or four days,
by a constant Crisis of Natures own procuring.

I might further acquaint Mr. H. with the mischiefs that must necessarily have
attended their Celestial liquors and Stomachical essences in several Fevers
that our late days have produced (of which the world will speedily have a very
full and satisfactory account from that excellent Methodist, the industrious
Dr. Sydenham) as particularly the Fevers which did accompany the Small pox,
when it was the Epidemical distemper of the Town; wherein the forementioned
Chemical preparations would have been so far from alleviating or curing those
severe Symptoms that did attend them, that they would rather have highly
increased them; amongst the number of which Symptoms, profuse and violent
Sweats would usually (if not constantly) accompany the sick and feeble
Patients, even from their first invasion; and that though no Medicines were
exhibited, or other means made use of, to increase that disease of the blood,
lympha, or nervous liquor.

And truly, so much have most of our late Fevers differed from those putrid
ones I lately discoursed of; that I doubt not but most observing and
unprejudiced Physicians will frankly own, that the forementioned Sweats were so
far from relieving or curing the Symptoms that attended their Patients; that
usually more dangerous and mortal ones did speedily affect both head and genus
nervosum.

Now surely, if our Indications may best be taken from the juvantia and
laedentia in Physic, we cannot allow those discharges as critical, which are
rarely or never attended with relief to the Patient; but do rather seem to
proceed from some strange perversion and fluor of the mass of blood, and other
noble juices of the body: and though it must be allowed, that in all methods
some must dye; yet doubtless every honest and conscientious Physician is very
diligent to observe, to what method of Cure a disease does most happily and
generally yield; and therefore in Epidemical distempers, that seem to be
specifically different from each other; the advice of the learned Doctor Willis
may be thankfully entertained, which he gives us in cases of this nature;
Praeter medici cujusque privatum judicium, experientia potissimum medendi
rationem suppeditat; cum enim hae Febres primo grassantur, singuli fere singula
tentant remedia, and ex eorum successibus una collatis facile ediscitur, quali
demum methodo innitendum erit; donec ultimo crebro tentamine seu transeuntium
vestigiis, via quasi regia and lata, ad hujusmodi affectuum rationem teritur,
variisque observationibus monitisque munitur.

But to proceed; I would gladly know of Mr. H. and the rest of the
Arcana-mongers of this Town, who are apt to believe that all distempers may be
happily cured by their strong and Vinous liquors, Diaphoretick powders, etc.
what they would have done in those pestilential and malignant diseases, which
could be cured by no other method, but that, which they continually decry and
exclaim against; although very powerful Alexipharmick and Diaphoretick
medicines had been frequently made use of in the forementioned cases, to little
or no advantage. And that they may not charge me with discoursing any thing of
my own sense in these cases; I will acquaint them with my Authors, and some
observations that I have read of this kind.

The first they may find in the 359 page of Riverius his praxis, where he
gives us an account of a pestilential Fever, that raged in so great violence
at Montpelier in the year 1623, that multitudes died of it; And further lie
tells us, that he observed that in all those Patients, quibus parotides
superveniebant; which was usually about the ninth or eleventh day of the
disease, (there commonly preceding or accompanying a delirium, stupor,
convulsive motions, with unequal formicating pulses, etc.) they all died within
two days after; notwithstanding the frequent exhibition of Alexipharmick
medicines, and the diligent application of Topics; which engaged this
ingenious and excellent Physician to think, that these swellings proved so
fatal, because the parts affected were not capable of receiving all the
morbifick matter; wherefore that which still remained in the blood, killed the
Patient; and therefore he thought, that Natures work being begun in those
swellings, might be happily supplied by venae-section or gentle purgation: But
these indications seemed to be contra-indicated, by the great imbecility of
the Patients, who appeared to be even in the agonies of death; yet on the other
hand considering, that it was better to experiment a doubtful remedy in one or
two persons, than to leave so many to undoubted destruction: he resolved first
to prescribe Phlebotomy to the quantity of three ounces, which blood was very
corrupt; and after three or four hours the Patients pulse waxing stronger, it
encouraged him the day following to prescribe him a lenient purge, which
likewise was attended with that good success, that his deplorable Patient was
delivered from the jaws of death; and afterward (says he) all the sick that
had these parotides behind their ears, I first bled several times a little at a
time, and the day following purged them, and so all of them who were thus
ordered, happily recovered; not one of them afterward dying in the whole year,
that had those parotides behind their ears. Which observation this learned and
ingenuous Physician thought so necessary to communicate, that he tells us in
the forementioned page, insigne hoc experimentum silentio praeterire nefas
fuisset.

And in the fourth Century of his observations he acquaints us, that in the
plague it self, an ingenious Physician having undertaken the care of the third
part of a City miserably afflicted with that depopulating disease, he
prescribed to all his Patients an Emetick potion, whereby he was so happy as to
cure almost all that were committed to his care, he scarcely losing ten or
twelve for his part; when as in the other two parts of the Town, few escaped.

And if any of your friends, Mr. H. will take the pains to consult the rest of
his observations in malignant Fevers; they may find him frequently using the
Launcet, purgations, etc. even in those cases where violet colored spots,
exanthemata, etc. have appeared.

As particularly in a Counselor who was fifty five years old; who upon the
ninth day of his disease fell into ravings and convulsive motions of his hands,
with a certain profound sleepiness, and looseness; which Symptoms were likewise
attended with exanthemata, etc. yet notwithstanding these direful Symptoms, and
the great evacuations the patient had undergone from a Diarrhoea and Cupping
glasses; he bled him on the twelfth day to the quantity of four or five ounces;
which blood being corrupt and the Patient bearing it well, he bled him the like
quantity five hours after; the Patient finding no diminution of his strength
thereby; and thus by the forementioned use of the Launcet and temperate
medicines, he gradually recovered his health.

Another Patient he mentions in the fourth Century of his observations, p. 79,
80. who upon consultation was ordered to be bled, notwithstanding he had
bluish spots broken out all over his body; which gave the Patient great
relief, he being in a short time happily cured; And though we find that one of
those learned Physicians upon their consultation, did at first oppose
Phlebotomy; lest the malignant matter should strike in again; yet upon the
others reply, that there was little fear of that, by reason it had been for
some days protruded into the habit of the body; they both consented to the
forementioned remedy.

And in his second Century, he tells us of a Citizen extremely weakened with a
malignant Fever; whom he undertook to purge with a gentle infusion three or
four days together, whereby his strength was a little increased, and by little
and little he began to be better; repeating his purgations at certain times.

And in an Epidemical Fever which raged so violently at Avignion, Bellicadre
and other places, that very few escaped, their chief Symptoms being a Cough,
pain of the Head and loins, frenzies, phthisical affections, etc. the remedies
that were found effectual, were pectoral medicaments, gentle purgations (not
forgetting blood-letting as principally efficacious) cooling Clysters,
Cuppingglasses, Cordial opiates, etc.

Which observations do put me in mind of what an ingenious Licentiate of the
College of Physicians acquainted me with, in the late malignant Fevers, that
accompanied the Small pox at Colchester, when it was the Epidemical disease of
that Town, viz. that those Fevers were very acute and mortal, being attended
with prodigious Sweats, spasms, tremulous motions in the hands, stiffness in
their jaws, livid spots in their bodies, etc. and though that observing
Physician was a great Helmontian, and did frequently exhibit high
Alexipharmicks and Bezoardick Cordials; yet says he, they signified no more
than chips in pottage, the Patients generally dying under the use of them; but
at length bleeding was attempted, which cured several, though it were used the
eighth or twelfth day of their disease.

But to proceed; though in the forementioned observations we may take notice,
that Alexipharmick and Diaphoretick remedies, did not so well answer the
seeming indications for them; but Physicians were necessitated to alter their
methods of practice: yet how efficacious this Classis of medicines was in the
late London pestilential Fever, is as evident, by that account Doctor Sydenham
has acquainted us with, in the second Edition of his book de Febribus; where
he tells us, that after he had Sweat his Patients twenty four hours, he
observed that they were so far from complaining of the loss and decay of their
strength by that plentiful evacuation they underwent by Sweating; that they
rather obtained more life and vigor thereby: tantum enim abest (says he) ut
se exinde debiliores factos quererentur, quin potius quantum supervacanei
humoris sudando dejecissent, tantundem novi roboris sibi accrevisse
profiterentur -- And that which was very observable in these pestilential
Fevers was this; that toward the latter end of the forementioned Sweats, there
would break forth fresh ones more natural, genuine, and eopious than the
former; and that without the help of Medicines, which were accompanied with
much more ease and refreshment to the Patient, they being altogether critical
and eradicative.

Now by comparing this last observation and those mentioned by the eminently
learned and famous Diemerbroeck, with those other I just now acquainted the
Reader with, we may easily observe what a necessity there is of following that
advice of the learned Dr. Willis in cases of this nature, which I lately
quoted; and farther how many peoples lives would have been sacrificed to
Empirical prescriptions, had they in the forementioned distempers relied upon
them, there seeming to be (as I intimated) some specifical difference even
amongst these pestilential and malignant diseases, by reason they would not
yield to one and the same method of cure, though it was rationally attempted.

And though we will allow Mr. H. that Empirical prescriptions are not like to
be accompanied with those unhappy and fatal consequences in the distempers we
just now discoursed of, by reason they are sometimes of a strengthening and
sudorifick nature; which are generally indicated in these diseases; yet how
much mischief they are like to be attended with in putrid and other Epidemical
Fevers, I have in part shown already, and shall now take notice of in variolous
cases.

In which I take the indications for cure to be the very same, that the
judicious Doctor Sydenham has laid down in his book de febribus, viz.

1. The preservation of the mass of blood, during its time of separation and
expulsion, in that exact and equal motion, that the protrusion of the morbifick
matter might neither be too hasty or precipitant, nor yet too dull or sluggish;
the first (as he excellently observes) procuring too often, violent Phrensies,
or such profuse Sweats as might occasion the secretion and exclusion of those
parts of the blood, which never were intended or designed by Nature for that
purpose; the later impeding or hindering the due expulsion of the variolous
matter: and therefore in the beginning of this distemper, he is no less fearful
of administering too high Cordials, etc. than he is of Bleeding, Clysters,
cooling medicines, etc.

His second indication is taken, from the time of the expulsion of the
variolous pustles, into the habit of body; in which he is very careful that
those Abscesses of natures protruding, might be preserved in a due manner,
until they arrive to a state of maturation and decidency. And therefore at this
time is he as diligently and studiously employed to prevent the too high
ebullition of the blood, lest whilst these pustles are in their state of
crudity, any of their morbifick parts should be resorbed; as he is, that the
blood should not grow too languid or weak, lest Nature should be unable to
perform what is required at her hands.

Now seeing it is manifest, by this short account I have given of this
distemper, what care and judgment ought to be used by every prudent Physician
for the Cure hereof; how unfit, yea dangerous must Empirical prescriptions of
necessity be in cases of this nature; where too great an exaltation or
depression of the mass of blood is alike dangerous, and where there may be
indications for cooling remedies, or at least for those that are very
temperate, as well as for Cordials?

But to proceed, we will now discourse of a Chronical distemper, viz. the
Scurvy; which some of Mr. H's fraternity do pretend to cure by their golden
purging spirits, Spirits of Scurvey-grass, Elixir Salutis, etc. not making any
observation as to the different constitutions of the Patients to whom they are
exhibited; whereas it is undoubtedly true that many Patients, who are afflicted
with the forementioned distemper, have the constituent principles of their
blood, so much differing from others; either from an hereditary indisposition,
or some irregularities in the non-naturals, or the like; that some of them
shall have their blood chiefly constituted of dull and torpid parts, and others
of hot, adust and bilious; insomuch that it is clear and evident, that the
remedies which are indicated in one constitution, ought not to be used in the
other: for where the dyscrasie of the blood does chiefly consist in a
saline-sulphureous or impoverished mass, there remedies that are not
impregnated with hot, vinous and volatile parts, may be highly serviceable, by
reason they do as it were afresh actuate and enliven this flat and depraved
blood, inspiring it with additional ferments. But then, if this sort of
remedies should be exhibited to those scorbutic bodies, whose diathesis of
blood, spirits and other humors consist in too hot and nitrosulphureous parts;
how soon would they upon every light occasion, be hurried into Fevers, violent
tumults, heat and disorders of the whole body? the proper indications for
medicines in this case, being only for such, as we call mild or temperate;
which gradually do calm and quiet the forementioned disorders of the blood,
sedate its too frequent and preternatural fermentations, and in process of time
so purify and alter it, that it shall recover its pristine and native temper.

And that I might more fully and satisfactorily clear the truth of this
assertion, I will acquaint Mr. H. what his unanswerable friend has observed to
this purpose, viz. in p. 92. of his Medela Medicinae, where he tells you, that
Scurvy Grass, Water-cress, common Wormwood, Water-mint, Horseradish, etc. do a
world of mischief, and are eminently destructive in the Scurvey, where the
disease is lodged in a blood and humors full of acidity or acrimony, and
abounding with a vicious volatile salt; by reason, they render the salient
particles of all sorts, the more capering, turgid and unruly within the veins,
and send them a gadding thence about the habit of the body; by which means a
foundation is laid for Agues of all sorts, Fevers, Vertigoes, running pains,
stitches, Headaches, Cramps, Convulsions, Griping of the guts, short
Breathings, straitness of the Chest, Fluxes of all sorts, Gouts, Hypochondriack
and Hysterical passions, Inflammations, Pleurisies and all diseases of the
Lungs.

Nay, so full is he in the defense of what I have discoursed of in a disease,
which he would persuade the world is no less common than the Scurvy, (it having
(as he says) so corrupted the frame of Nature, that even in Countrey-Cottages
it is a hard matter to find a woman in puris naturalibus) that he tells us, p.
80. of the forementioned book; that the common sort of Receipt-mongers should
undertake the management of this Cure, and that the wealthier sort of men
should so readily venture their bodies in their hands, shows the blind boldness
of the one, and the mavelous indiscretion of the other. I will grant (says
he) that it is possible an ordinary man may be acquainted with a method very
good and sufficient in general against this disease, and he may do some Cures
with it, etc. but that such a man should think himself fit with such a
traditional method and the credit of having cured some by it, to undertake the
cure in all cases, is terrible to consider, since every rational Practiser
knows, there is so great a variety in the Pox it self, respecting the nature of
the venom, and other qualifications of the body in which it is seated, that in
a thousand bodies infected, you shall not find two that are alike
circumstantiated, or that yield concurrents so alike, as that there will arise
thence the like indication for cure in the one as in the other; or that the
same method and medicines may be used to one as to another, without prejudice
and damage; which frequently happens to be so great, that instead of curing
this disease they exasperate it; and do often precipitate men's bodies into
other destroying distempers. I might (says he) be copious in instances to
confirm this from my own observation; but that being not fit to be done, you
may see enough in the observations of Horstius, Zacutus, Riverius, etc. in whom
you will find (as we say in our English Proverb) what is one man's meat, may be
another man's poison; what cured one of the Pox was destructive to another;
those wise men ever varying the way and means of curing, according to the
nature of the person and disease they were to deal with.

Now good Mr. H. do you and the rest of your friends seriously peruse these
passages faithfully quoted out of your unanswerable book, and then tell me,
what fair defense you can make in telling the world, that your Celestial
liquor will suit all palates and constitutions; that your Spirit of Scurvygrass
incorporated with its fixed salt, with your Golden purging Spirits, will
prevent the Scurvy and cure it also, if not of too long continuance; and if so,
the later will certainly effect the cure, if the disease be curable; and
therefore it is commended as beneficial to all persons that travel by land or
sea: and that your pills are the most approved remedy for relief of mankind
against all medicable or curable distempers: yea one of your gang has been so
bold and impudent, as in public print to tell the world, that his Pills are
the true tincture of the Sun, and has dominion from the same light; for as the
Sun at its appearance gives nourishment to all creatures, so do his pills give
present relief, comfort and nourishment to all mankind; nay he tells us, that
they are the greatest temporal blessing, that ever God bestowed upon the sons
and daughters of men: and yet his Antagonist has published to the world; that
a Chemist has made Oath, that he extracted out of a very few of these Pills
near half a small vial glass of Quicksilver, which he has sealed by him.

But, Mr. H. that I might farther inform you of what may be done by ordinary
medicines well managed by method, I will acquaint you with the following
observations.

The first is taken out of the Lord Bacon 's Natural History, who tells you, p.
16. that there be many medicines, which by themselves would do no Cure, but
perhaps hurt; but being applied in a certain order one after another, (...)
great Cures. I have tried my self (says he) a remedy for the Gout, which has
seldom failed, but driven it away in twenty four hours space; It is first to
apply a pultess, then a bath, and then a plaster; the first relaxeth the pores
and makes the humors apt to exhale; the fomentation calls forth the Humor by
vapors; and the plaster repelleth new humor from falling: now says he, The
pultess alone would make the part more soft and weak, and apter to take the
defluxion and impression of the humor; the fomentation alone, if it were too
weak, without way made by the pultess, would draw forth little; if too strong,
it would draw to the part, as well as draw from it: the plaster alone, would
pen the humor already contained in the part, and so exasperate it, as well as
forbid new humor: therefore they must all be taken in order as is said.

The second observation shall be of the Cholera morbus, a disease which is
oft-times no less violent than mortal; upon which account it may truly be
ranked amongst those distempers the Ancients called extreme peracuti; its
Symptoms being often times so violent, that in six or eight hours space,
strong, and lusty men have been reduced to spasms and Convulsions, with other
as well amazing as surprising Symptoms; and yet have I seen these per acute and
cruel distempers relieved in a few hours space by a remedy of no higher
extraction than Chicken broth; and that although the Patients have been judged
both by themselves and all their Relations to have been entering the very
confines of death; yet in a few days time they have been well and healthful
again, and that without the use of any Chemical Arcana.

And thus by a no less successful than rational method, has the industrious
Doctor Sydenham acquainted us with the Cure of that cruel and tormenting
disease, the Iliack passion.

And I doubt not, but that ere long he will give us an account of several other
prosperous methods which he made use of in the Dysentery, Colic, Hysteric
affections, etc. which have been attended with so speedy and happy success,
that all the effectual remedies which Mr. H. obtained by his laborious pains
and travels, deserve not to come in competition with those Galenical
prescriptions methodically administered, whereby he performed the forementioned
Cures; and whatever Mr. H. may think, I am apt to believe that in process of
time, that Physician will be universally judged the greatest Artist in his
Faculty, who can cure diseases much more speedily, easily, and safely by the
judicious administration and methodical prescription of proper medicines,
(though Galenical) than he that patcheth upon every post his Arcana, or gives
us large commendations of his pilulae in omnes morbos, in every printed
pamphlet.

I could likewise tell Mr. H. that I could acquaint him with a ^alenical
medicine methodically used, which has been much more successful in the Cure of
quartano Agues, than his Celestial liquor or appropriate remedies, which
sometimes have been so violent in there oper^tion, that they have endangered the
translation of his Patients into a Celestial Country.

I might further assure him, that I have seen a medicine so judiciously managed
in some diseases accompanied with most violent, racking, and tormenting pains;
that the Patients in a few hours have not only been relieved from those
dreadful tortures; but by a methodical use of it, secured from all danger of a
relapse; which medicine should it have been used without this due
circumspection and method, it would have inevitably ruined and destroyed the
Patients to whom it had been exhibited.

I could thus proceed to acquaint all ingenious persons, with what care and
observation is made use of by all honest and conscientious Physicians in the
exhibition of their remedies for the relief or cure of all other distempers,
which are incident to humane bodies; as Hypochondriack Melancholy, Dropsies,
Jaundies, Apoplexies, Sanguineous fluxes, etc. who being men of liberal
education, and well acquainted with the component parts of humane bodies, and
the causes that do ordinarily put them into disorders, and produce that variety
of Symptoms which do usually accompany distempers; they do wisely consider, as
the learned Doctor Willis has well observed; quippe dum manifesto liquet,
cujusmodi particulae in patiente aut alterandae, aut in motum concitandae; and
quales in agente ad opus illud requiruntur, non difficile erit hoc satis apt
designare, ac ad alterum illud rite-accommodare.

And though, Mr. H. I will not scruple to allow you that some Chemical remedies
may be of great value and excellency for their admirable efficacy in the Cure
of some distempers; yet doubtless they are not to be used without methods, nor
yet, where there are not fair indications for prescribing them; unless we were
willing to sacrifice our Patients lives to ignorance and confidence: neither do
I understand wherefore they should be applauded in those cases, where other
remedies have been experimented much more powerful and successful in their
operation; which occasioned that noble Chemical Philosopher Mr. Boil to
confess, that he never knew any of the vulgar Chemists Essences or Elixirs half
so powerful a remedy to stanch blood, as a slight mixture of Hen-bane and white
Poppy seeds, beaten up into a stiff Electuary with Conserve of Roses; nor ever
did he see such wonderful effects against spitting and vomiting of blood, of
the most elaborate Chemical preparations, as he had done of a slight Syrup made
of the juice of Plantane, Comfrey, etc.

But to draw near a conclusion of this discourse, I do very much hope that all
ingenious persons who have taken the pains to peruse this Book, and therein
observed how much pains and industry, how much learning and judgment is
required to the due qualification of an able Physician; will not only
gratefully own how much this Nation is endebted to the labors of the famous
Universities and learned College of Physicians; whose members have been so
indefatigably industrious in every province of Physic, as if they seemed
thereby to tell the world, that they could never rest satisfied, till they had
obtained as great a perfection in their Art as it was capable of; but will
likewise use their joint endeavors to detect the folly and knavery of our
London Empiricks, whose Elixirs and Panaceas may be truly assigned as more
probable causes of the stubbornness and contumaciousness of our late diseases,
with their great and main alterations; than the Chimerical Ternary of your
unanswerable friends, viz. the Pox, Scurvy, and Worms; whereby many of his
Majesty's subjects have not only been deprived of the Cure of their distempers,
but sacrificed their lives to the forementioned detestable prescriptions.

It Is therefore likewise to be hoped, that our Sovereign Lord the King, who
has been so great an Encourager of all liberal Arts and Sciences, will imitate
his Royal Predecessor King Henry the Eighth, in confirming that Charter by Act
of Parliament, which out of his Royal bounty he has lately bestowed upon his
College of Physicians, whereby the mechanical successors of those old
Empiricks, exactly described and characterized in 3 H. 8. may be prevented for
the future, from trying experiments upon his Majesty's Subjects; to the high
displeasure of God, great infamy of the Faculty, and the grievous hurt, damage
and destruction of the Kings liege people, etc.

Nay further, it is to be hoped, that the Chancellors of our Universities, with
the grave Judges of our Land, and all other persons of ingenuous or Academick
educations, will be exemplary in the encouragement of this no less famous than
worthy College; that so the Laws already made and established by the
Parliaments of England, being diligently prosecuted by them, may give some
check to their Empirical pride and insolency, as well as their bold invasion of
this noble Art of Medicine, whereby so many of the worthy Professors of it have
met with no small discouragement. I shall therefore crave leave to conclude
this subject with what has been no less ingeniously than judiciously observed
by a very curious and inquisitive person, viz. That if Physicians, who are men
of so clear judgments, so unparalled for industry, have no more respect or
consideration than mean, empty, shallow pretenders; we may have reason to fear,
that hereafter persons of so great abilities and liberal education, will scorn
to look toward a Faculty, which though honorable in its own nature, is so low
and mean in the esteem of the world; that every person who has confidence to
affirm he is a Physician, although perfectly ignorant of the Rudiments of
Physic, shall yet have no less countenance from the public; than those
gallant persons, who after a long courtship have rendered Nature familiar, are
acquainted with the causes and Cure of diseases; and who have so deserved of
mankind, that I cannot but marshal them next to those divine persons, who also
as these, are often slighted and neglected, although of them the world is not
worthy.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the writing of the first part of my Book, which relates to the
establishment of the College of Physicians by Law, I understood that the
Records of the Parliament, in 14 and 15 H. 8. were to be seen at the Rolls
Chapel; which engaged me to make a very diligent search into that Act, and the
rest which concerned the College of Physicians: where I found upon that
Parliament Roll 36 Acts public and private, whereof 26 were signed at the
bottom with Respons. Regis le Roy le veult; and ten others stitched to these on
the same Roll, without le Roy le veult: But at the end of the Roll there is
affixed a Commission granted by the King to Cardinal Woolsey to Prorogue and
Adjourn the Parliament, from Blackfryers to Westminster, and there to continue
and hold it; immediately after which Commission we may find, that upon the 13
day of August, about six in the evening, the King being present, the House of
Commons was sent for, and Sir Thomas Moore their Speaker having made a very
elegant and learned Speech, he presented the King with a very large Subsidy
given by the Commons, as a Testimony of their great devotion to their Prince;
which being done, and the Lord Chancellor having (according to the usual
custom) privately conferred with his Majesty, he commanded that all those Acts
which were made in that present Parliament for the public good, should be
recited and published. Quibus ex ordine per initia recitatis and lectis
singulis publicavit Parliamento respons. secundum Annotationes Regiae
voluntatis Declarativas a dors. script. fact. dictus reverendissimus dominus
Legatus Cancellar. exhortando and admonendo nomine Regis omnes Dominos and
Communes supradictos ut diligenter ordinata Statuta pro bono publico in hoc
Parliamento observarent and ab aliis observari procurarent, etc.

Now it is evident that the Titles of all Bills that were agreed upon by both
Houses, were read in the Kings presence, and received the Royal Assent, though
it was not engrossed by the Clerk of the Parliament upon Ten of those Acts
which are to be seen in the forementioned Roll, which are but Transcripts of
the Original Records; and therefore as far as can be proved, Roy le veult might
be engrossed at the top or bottom of these Ten as well as the other 26. in the
Original Records; But however it is plain, that the Form and Essence of a
Statute Law does not consist in the Clerk of the Parliaments engrossing the
Royal Assent at the top or bottom of an Act, (that not being done until the
Session is over) but in the Clerk of the Crown's pronouncing of it after he
has read the Title of each Act, according to certain instructions given from
the King. Now the Clerk having in the audience of Lords and Commons pronounced
aloud to every public Bill le Roy le veult, to every private Bill soit fait
comme il est desire, and to every public Bill the King refuses to pass le Roy
se avisera; 'twas no difficulty for the Judges and Lawyers, Lords and Commoners
to know what Acts passed that Session; and that this Act relating to Physicians
did then pass by this Royal Assent, seems very clear; because (as I before
intimated in page 8. of my book) a Parliament within 17 years after in the same
Kings Reign owned the College as a Body Corporate, and gave them several
privileges which they maintain, and enjoy to this day; and about 28 or 30
years after, another Parliament confirmed the 14 and 15 H. 8. with every
Article and Clause therein contained, as you may see more at large, page 9, 10.
And that the giving the Royal Assent to these two Acts last mentioned in 32 H.
8. and 1 Q. M. might not be questioned, you may see it thus engrossed upon the
top of the first, Item alia quaedam Billa formam cujusdam Actus in se continens
exhibita est suae Regiae Majestati in Parliamento praedicto, cujus tenor
sequitur in haec verba. And then the whole Statute is recited. And at the
bottom you will find it thus engrossed, Cui quidem Billae perlectae and ad
plenum intellectae per dictum Dominum nostrum Regem ex authoritate and assensu
Parliamenti praedicti sic respons. est, Soit fait comme il est desire. And at
the bottom of the second of the two last mentioned Statutes you will find it
thus engrossed, Cui quidem Billae perlectae and ad plenum intellectae per
dictam Dominam Reginam ex authoritate Parliamenti praedicti sic respons. est,
le Reign le veult. Now it is plain that these Sessions of Parliament were not
so long distant from the former, but that some that were in both Houses of
Parliament in these two Sessions, might be in that; and therefore would not
have owned the forementioned for an Act, if they had not heard the Royal Assent
given to it? But besides, this Act of Parliament with some others of the Ten
were ever owned as Acts of Parliament: As for instance, an Act that the Sir
Clerks of Chancery might marry, an Act concerning Cordwayners, an Act of
Tracing Hares, an Act for the Clothiers in Suffolk, an Act for the payment of
Custom, an Act for the Haven or Port of Southhampton; all which, with two or
three private ones, were passed by the same authority that the Physicians was;
and if that be invalid, all the former are much more. Nay further, these Acts
were publicly printed, and bound up after that Session; which has been in use
ever since Printing has been common in England; so that they may be found not
only in the Rolls Chapel, but in Mr. Pulton's Statute-book, and in old Books
that are bound up with Acts of Parliament that were made in particular Princes
Reigns, which may be seen at Mr. Millers in St. Paul's Churchyard.

But suppose that this Testimony were not sufficient, I would desire Mr. H. to
resolve me whether the forementioned Parliaments owning and declaring it as an
Act, and the Judges upon several Trials giving their opinions for it, and the
receiving it as a Record into the Rolls Chapel, be not evidence enough to
prove this very Statute an Act of Parliament; for I am credibly informed, that
a Record being brought into the Rolls Chapel, and received as such by the
Master of that Court, who is termed sacrorum scriniorum Magister, is so far
from being questioned, that it is a full and sufficient evidence in any Court.


