A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Auricular Confession, As it is prescribed by the
COUNCIL OF TRENT, And practiced in the CHURCH of ROME.

With a Postscript on occasion of a Book lately printed in France, called
Historia Confessionis Auricularis.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills Jun. for Benj. Took at the Sign of the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and Fincham Gardener at the Sign of the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street. 1648.

OF Auricular Confession.
THE Zealots of the Church of Rome, are wont to Glory of the singular
advantages, in the Communion of that Church, especially in respect of the
greater means and helps of Spiritual comfort, which they pretend are to be had
there, above and beyond what are to be found amongst other Societies of
Christians. Which one thing, if it could be as substantially made out, as it is
confidently asserted, could not fail to sway very much with all Wise men, and
would undoubtedly prevail with all devout persons, (who were made acquainted
with the secret) to go over to them. But if contrariwise it appear upon search,
that their pretensions of this kind are false and groundless, and that the
methods of Administering consolation, which are peculiar to that Church, are as
well unsafe and deceitful, as singular and unnecessary: Then the same Prudence
and Sincerity, will oblige a man to suspect that Communion, instead of becoming
a proselyte to it, and to look upon the aforesaid boastings as the effect
either of designed imposture, or at the least of Ignorance and Delusion.

Amongst other things, that Church highly values it self upon, the Sacrament of
Penance (as they call it) and as deeply blames and condemns the Church of
England, and other Reformed Churches, for their defect in, and neglect of so
important and comfortable an Office. And under that specious pretext, her
Emissaries (who are wont according to the phrase of the Apostle, to creep into
houses, and lead Captive silly Women, etc.) insinuate themselves into such of
the People as have more Zeal then knowledge, and now and then wheedle some of
them over into their Society. To that purpose, they will not only harangue them
with fine stories of the ease and benefit of it, as of an Ancient and useful
Rite, but will also Preach to them the necessity of it as of Divine
Institution, and that it is as important (in its kind) as Baptism or the Lords
Supper* For that Confession to a Priest, and his Absolution thereupon obtained,
is the only means appointed by God for the procuring of Pardon of all mortal
sins committed after Baptism.

As for Original sin, or whatsoever actual transgressions may have been
committed before Baptism, Council. Trid. sess. 14. c. 2.
all those they acknowledge to be washed away in that sacred Laver. And for sins
of Infirmity or Venial sins, these may be done away by several easy methods, by
Contrition alone say some, nay, by Attrition alone Vid. Becan. Tract. de
Sacramentis in specie.
(say others) by Habitual Grace says a third, etc. But for mortal sins
committed after a man is admitted into the Church by Baptism* for these there
is no other door of Mercy, but the Priests Lips, nor has God appointed, or
will admit of any other way of Reconciliation then this, of Confession to a
Priest, and his Absolution.

This Sacrament of Penance therefore is called by them, Secunda Tabula post
naufragium, the peculiar refuge of a lapsed Christian, the only Sanctuary of a
gu^lty Conscience, the sole means of restoring such a person to Peace of
Conscience the Favor of God, and the hopes of Heaven. And withal, this method
is held to be so Sovereign and Effectual a remedy, that it cures toties,
quoties; and whatever a man's in fearriages have been, and how often soever
repeated, if he do but as often resort to it, he shall return as pure and clean
as when he first came from the Font.

This ready and easy way (say they) has God allowed men, of quitting all
scores with himself, in the use of which they may have perfect peace in their
Consciences, and may think of the day of Judgment without horror, having their
Case decided beforehand by Gods Deputy the Priest, and their Pardon ready to
produce, and plead at the Tribunal of Christ.

What a mighty defect is it therefore in the Protestant Churches, who wanting
this Sacrament, want the principal ministry of reconciliation? And who would
not join himself to the Society of that Church, where this great Case is so
abundantly provided for? For if all this be true, he must be extremely
foolhardy and deserve to perish, who will not be of that Communion from whence
the way to Heaven is so very easy and obvious, no wonder therefore I say, if
not only the loose and vicious are fond of this Communion where they may sin
and confess, and confess and sin again without any great danger, but it would
be strange if the more Virtuous and Prudent also, did not out of more caution
think it became them to comply with his expedient. For as much as there is no
man who understands himself, but must be conscious of having committed sins
since his Baptism, and then for fear some of them should prove to be of a
mortal nature, it will be his safest course to betake himself to this refuge,
and consequently he will easily be drawn to that Church, where the only remedy
of his disease is to be had.

But the best of it is, these things are so oner said then proved, and more
easily phansied by silly People, then believed by those of discretion. And
therefore there may be no culpable defect in the reformed Churches, that they
trust not to this remedy in so great a Case. And as for the Church of England
in particular, though she has no fondness for Mountebank Medicines, as
observing them to be seldom successful; yet she is not wanting in her care, and
compassion to the Souls of those under her guidance, but expresses as much
tenderness of their peace and comfort, as the Church of Rome can pretend to.
Indeed she has not set up a Confessors Chair in every Parish, nor much less
placed the Priest in the Seat of God Almighty, as thinking it safer, at least
in ordinary Cases, to remit men to the Text of the written word of God, and to
the public Ministry thereof, for resolution of Conscience, then to the secret
Oracle of a Priest in a corner, and advises them rather to observe what God
himself declares of the nature and guilt of sin, the aggravations or abatements
of it, and the terms and conditions of Pardon, then what a Priest pronounces.
But however this course does not please the Church of Rome, for reasons best
known to themselves, which if we may guess at, the main seems to be this, they
do not think it fit to let men be their own carvers, but lead them like
Children by the hand; my meaning is, they keep People as much in Ignorance of
the Holy Scripture as they can, locking that up from them in an unknown Tongue;
now if they may not be trusted with those Sacred Records, so as to inform
themselves of the terms of the New Covenant, the conditions of the Pardon of
sin, and Salvation, it is then but reasonable that the Priest should Judge for
them, and that they await their doom from his Mouth. Yet I do not see why in a
Protestant Church, where the whole Religion is in the Mother Tongue, the Old
and especially the New Testament constantly, and conscientiously expounded, and
the People allowed to search the Scriptures, and to see whether things be so or
no, I see not, I say, Why in such a case the Priest may not in great measure be
excused the trouble of attending secret Confessions, without danger to the
Souls of men.

But besides this, there is a constant use of Confession and Absolution too, in
the Church of England, in every Days Service; which though they be both in
general terms, as they ought to be in public Worship, yet every Penitent can
both from his own Conscience supply the generality of the Confession by a
remorseful reflection upon his own particular sins, as well as if he did it at
the knees of a Priest; and also by an Act of Faith can apply the general
Sentence of Absolution to his own Soul, with as good and comfortable effects,
as if it had been specially pronounced by his Confessor.

But this public Confession does not please the Romanists neither, and they
know a Reason for their dislike; namely, because this does not conciliate so
great a Veneration to the Priesthood, as when all men are brought to kneel to
them for Salvation: Neither does this way make them to pry into the secret
thoughts of Men, as Auricular Confession does, wherein the Priest is not only
made a Judge of men's estate, but a Spy upon their behavior, and is capable of
becoming an Intelligencer to his Superiors of all the Designs, Interests, and
even Constitutions of the People.

Moreover the Church of England allows of private Confessions also, as
particularly in the Visitation of the sick, (which office extends also to them
that are troubled in Mind or Conscience, as well as to the afflicted in Body)
where the Minister is directed to examine particularly the state of the
Decumbents Soul, to search and romage his Conscience, to try his Faith, his
Repentance, his Charity, nay, to move him to make a special Confession of his
sins, and afterward to absolve him upon just grounds.

Nay further yet, if (besides the case of Sickness) any Man shall either out of
perplexity of Mind, scrupulosity or remorse of Conscience, or any other devout
consideration, think it needful to apply himself to a Priest of the Church of
England for advice, ease, or relief, he has encouragement and direction so to
do in the first Exhortation to the Holy Communion, and may be sure to find
those who will tenderly, and faithfully, as well as secretly administer to his
necessities. So that I see not what defect or omission can be objected to this
Church in all this Affair, or what Temptation any Man can have upon this
account to go from us to the Church of Rome.

But all this will not satisfy them of the Church of Rome, they are neither
contented with public confession, nor with private, no nor with secret
neither, if it be only occasional or voluntary: It is the universality and
necessity of it which they insist upon, for it is not with them a Matter of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, to prevent the Scandal of the Society, to conserve
the Reverence of the Church, or to rest rain men from sinning, or much less an
Office of Expediency and Prudence to be resorted to upon exigencies, or such as
may accidentally become necessary upon emergency as suppose upon the atrocity
of some fact committed, the scandalousness of some persons former life, which
may make him more doubtful of his Pardon, the weakness of his Judgment, the
Melancholy of his Temper, or the Anxiety of his Mind, or any such like
occasion* but it must be the standing indispensable duty of all men, as the
condition of the Pardon of their Sins; in one word it must be a Sacrament of
Divine institution, and of Universal Obligation.

For so the Council of Trent determins, Sess. 4. Canon

1. Si quis, dixerit in Ecolesia Catholica poenitentiam nom esse vere and
proprie Sacramentum pro fidelibus, quoties post Baptismum in peccata labentur,
ipsi Deo reconciliandi^ a Domino nostro institutum, Anathema sit; i. e. Let him
be accursed, who shall affirm that Penance is not truly and properly a
Sacrament instituted and appointed in the Universal Church, by our Lord Christ
himself, for the reconciling those Christians to the Divine Majesty, who have
fallen into Sin after their Baptism.

And in the Doctrinal part of that Decree they teach and assert more
particularly; First, That our Savior instituted this Sacrament expressly, Joh.
20. 22.

2. That this Sacrament consists of two parts, viz. the Matter and the Form;
the Matter of the Sacrament Sess. 14. Cap. 2.
(or quasi materia as they cautiously speak) is the act or acts of the
Penitent, namely, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction; the Form of it is
the act of the Priest in these words, Absolvote.

3. That therefore it is the duty of every Man who has fallen after Baptism,
as aforesaid, to confess his sins Cap. 3.
at least once a year to a Priest.

4. That this confession is to be secret; for public Confession Cap. 5.
they say is neither commanded nor expedient.

5. That this confession of Mortal sin be very exact and Ibid.
particular together with all circumstances, especially such as speciem facti
mutant^, alter the kind or degree of sin, and that it extend to the most secret
sins, even of thought; or against the 9th. and 10th. Commandment. Ibid.


6. That the Penitent thus doing, the Absolution of Cap. 6.
the Priest hereupon pronounced is not conditional or declarative only, but
absolute and judicial.

Now in opposition to this Doctrine and Decree of theirs, and the practice of
that Church pursuant thereof, as well as in defense of the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of England in that particular, I will here endeavor to
make good these Three things.

1. That our blessed Lord and Savior has neither in his Gospel instituted
such an Auricular Confession as aforesaid, nor much less, such a Sacrament of
Penance as the Church of Rome supposes in the recited Decree.

2. That Auricular Confession has not been of constant and universal use in
the Christian Church, as the Romanists pretend, much less looked upon as of
Sacramental and necessary Obligation.

3. That Auricular Confession as it is now used in the Church of Rome, is not
only unnecessary and burdensome, but in many respects very mischievous to
Piety, and the great ends of Christian Religion.

If the first of these appear to be true, then (at the worst) the want of such
an Auricular Confession in the reformed Churches, can be but an irregularity,
and no essential defect.

If the second of these assertions be made good, then it can be no defect at
all in those Churches that use not such a Rite, but a novelty and imposition on
their parts who so strictly require it.

But if the third be true, it will be the corruption and great fault of the
Church of Rome to persevere in the injunction and practice of it, and the
excellency and commendation of those Churches which exclude it.

I begin with the first, that it does not appear that our Savior has
instituted such an Auricular Confession, of such a Sacrament of Penance as the
Church of Rome pretends and practices.

I confess it is a Negative which I here undertake to make good, which is
accounted a difficult Province, but the Council of Trent has relieved us in
that particular by founding the Institution expressly upon that one passage of
the Gospel, Joh. 20. 22. So that we shall not need to examine the whole Body of
Scripture to discover what footsteps of Divine Institution may be found here or
there, for the Council wholly insists and relies upon that Text of St. John,
and therefore if that fail them, the whole Hypothesis falls to the ground.

Now for the clearing of this, let us lay the words before us; and they are
these, He breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins
ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are
retained.

Now here I appeal to any Man that has Eyes in his Head, or Ears to hear,
whether in this Text there be any one word of Auricular Confession, or much
less of such a circumstantiated one as they require; And this is so manifest
and notorious, that their own ancient Canonists and several of their learned
Divines are ashamed of the pretense of Divine Institution founded upon this or
any other passage of Scripture, and therefore are content to defend the
practice of the Church of Rome in this particular, upon the account of the
Authority, and general usage of the Church; which we shall come to examine by
and by in its due place.

In the mean time I cannot choose but admire the mighty Faith of a Romanist,
who can believe in spite of his own Eyes. It seemed to us an unsuperable
difficulty heretofore, for a Man to persuade himself that in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist Bread was transubstantiated into Flesh, because it was against
the express Testimony of Sense, yea, although for that there was the
countenance of Five figurative (but mistaken) words to support the credulity;
but this of the Sacrament of Penance clearly out-does it, for here a Man must
believe a thing to be, when as there is not so much as one word for the ground
of his Faith, or the proof of the thing in question. How many Sacraments may
not such men have if they please? What voluminous Creeds may not they swallow
and digest? What Mountains may not such a wonderful Faith remove?

But let us hear what they have to say for themselves; perhaps in the first
place they will plead the Authority of the Council of Trent, which has
peremptorily determined the sense of the passage of the Gospel to the purpose
aforesaid. Indeed that Council in the third Canon of their fourteenth Session,
does damn all those who deny that a Sacrament of Penance and Auricular
Confession is prescribed in that Text of St. John, or who apply it to any other
purpose. But in so doing, they both usurp a Prerogative which was never
pretended to or practiced by any Council before them, and withal they betray a
consciousness that the Text it self yielded no sufficient evidence of the thing
which they designed to countenance by it; for what Councils (ever till now)
brought a Text, and then imposed an Interpretation upon it contrary to the
words? And then backed that Interpretation with an Anathema? If the Text were
plain or could be made so, why was not that done? And to be sure if that cannot
be done by other means, the curse will not do it; at least to any but very
obedient Roman Consciences. Besides if this course be allowed, I see not but a
Council may bring in what Religion they please, having first made a Nose of Wax
of the Holy Scripture, and then writhed it into what shape they best phansy;
for in such a case, if the words of the Gospel do not favor me, I can govern
the sense, and if the letter be silent or intractable, I can help that with an
Interpretation; and if I have authority or confidence enough to impose that,
under the peril of Anathema, I am no longer an Interpreter or a Judge, but a
Lawgiver, and need not trouble my self with Scriptum est, but may (if I will
speak plain) say decretum est, and the business is done.

But if neither the Letter of Scripture, nor the Authority of a Council will do
in this case, then in the second place they think they have at least some
color of Reason to relieve them; and if they cannot find Auricular Confession
in the Text, yet they will by consequence infer it thence; for they say
although indeed it is true it is not here expressly mentioned, yet it is certain
that our Savior in the Text before us instituted a Sacrament of Penance, and
therefore Auricular Confession must necessarily be implied because absolution
cannot be without Confession.

Here the Reader will observe that the point in Question between us is very
much altered* for we are now fallen from the consideration of the Divine
Institution of Auricular Confession in particular to that of a Sacrament of
Penance in general, i. e. from a direct proof to a subintelligitur. But we will
follow them hither also, and for the clearing of this matter we will briefly
consider these three things.

1. Whether that can properly be said to be of Divine institution, and
necessary to Salvation, which depends on an inference, and is proved only by an
innuendo?

2. Whether it can be reasonable to assert that our Savior there institutes a
Sacrament of Penance, where not only Auricular Confession, but the whole matter
of such a Sacrament is lest undefined?

3. Whether if our Savior (had done that which it is plain he has not, that
is,) had here instituted and appointed all those things, which by the Church of
Rome are required as the material parts of Penance, yet this could have been
esteemed a Sacrament?

1. For the first of these, we have no more to do but to consider the force and
signification of this word Institution. Now that in the common use of men
(especially of those which speak distinctly and understandingly) implies a
setting up de novo, or the appointing that to become a duty, which was not
knowable, or at least not known to be so before it became so appointed. For
this word Institution is that which we use to express a positive command by, in
opposition to that which is Moral in the strictest sense, and of natural
obligation. Now it is very evident that all things of this Nature ought to be
appointed very plainly and expressly, or else they can carry no obligation with
them; for seeing the whole Reason of their becoming matter of Law or Duty, lies
in the will of the Legislator, if that be not plainly discovered, they cannot
be said to be instituted, and so there can be no Obligation to observe them,
because where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression; and a Law is no
Law in effect which is not sufficiently promulged. Is it not therefore a very
strange thing to tell us of an Institution by implication only, and yet at the
same time to tell us that the matter so (pretended to be) instituted, is no
less then absolutely Sess. 14. C. 2.
necessary to the Salvation of Sinners?

2. The second of these will easily be resolved by considering what we observed
before from the Council of Trent, viz. that this Sacrament of Penance consists
of Sess. 14. C 3
Matter and Form; the Form is the Priests Absolution, but the Matter or
Materials of this Sacrament are Contrition, Confession to a Priest, and
Satisfaction or Performance of the Penance enjoined by him; now it is evident
that not only Auricular Confession (of which we have spoken hitherto but also
Contrition and Satisfaction, are wholly omitted and past over in silence by the
Evangelist in this passage of Scripture, from whence they fetch their Sacrament
of Penance; and is it not a wonderfully strange thing, that our Savior should
be supposed to institute a Sacrament without any Materials of it at all? Surely
therefore this must be either a very Spiritual Sacrament, or none at all.

Let us guess at the probability of this in proportion to either of the other
undoubted Sacraments. Suppose our Savior instead of that accurate form in
which he instituted the Eucharist had only said, I would have you my Disciples
and all that shall believe on my Name to keep a Memorial of me when I am gone:
Or suppose he said only as he does, Joh. 6. 55. My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is drink indeed, would any one have concluded here, that our Savior in
so saying, had appointed Bread and Wine to be consecrated, to be received in
such a manner, and in a word that he had (without more ado) instituted such a
Sacrament as we usually celebrate? No certainly, and therefore we see our
Savior is the most express and particular therein that can be, for he takes
Bread, blesses it, breaks it, gives it to them, saying, Take eat, this is my
body, etc. and after Supper he takes the Cup, blesses it, gives it to them,
saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is the New Testament in my Blood, etc.
and then adds, do this in remembrance of me. Now who is there that observes
this accuracy of our Savior in the Eucharist, can imagine that he should
intend to institute a Sacrament of Penance, and that as necessary to Salvation
(in the Opinion of the Romanists) as the other, only with this Form of words,
Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. and without the least mention
of Confession, Contrition, or any other Material or necessary Part of
Circumstance of it.

3. But in the third and last place, let us suppose that our Savior had in the
Text before us instituted Penance, and had appointed particularly all those
things, which they call the Material parts of it, (as it is evident he has
not) yet even then, and upon that Supposition, Penance would not have proved to
be a Sacrament properly so called.

I confess according to a loose acceptance of the word Sacrament, something
may be said for it; for so there are many things have had the name of Sacrament
applied to them. Tertullian somewhere calls Elisha's Ax the Sacrament of Wood,
and in his Book against Marcion he styles the whole Christian Religion a
Sacrament. St. Austin in several places calls Bread, Fish, the Rock, and the
Mystery of Number, Sacraments, for he has given us a general Rule in his Fifth
Epistle, viz. That all signs when they belong to divine things are called
Sacraments: And in consideration hereof it is acknowledged by Cassander, that
the Number of Sacraments was indefinite in the Church of Rome it self, until
the times of Peter Lombard. But all this notwithstanding, and properly
speaking, this Rite of Penance taking it altogether (and even supposing
whatsoever the Romanists can suppose to belong to it) cannot be reputed a
Sacrament, according to the allowed definitions of a Sacrament delivered by
their own Divines. Some of them define a Sacrament thus, Hugo de S. Vict. lib.
de Sacram.
Sacramentum est corporale elementum foris sensibiliter propositum, ex
similitudine repraesentans and ex institutione significans, and ex
Sanctificatione continens invisibilem gratiam. And the Magist. Sent. lib. 4.
did. 1.
Master of the Sentences himself describes it somewhat more briefly, but to the
same effect in these words: Sacramentum est invisibilis gratiae visibilis
forma, ejusdem gratiae imaginem gerens and causa existens; both which
definitions are acknowledged and applauded by the Jesuit Becanus Tract. 2. de
Sacramentis.
Becanus: And the plain truth is a Sacrament cannot be better expressed in so few
words, then it is by St. Aug. c. Faust. Lib. 19. C. 16.
Austin when he calls it verbum visibile a visible Word or Gospel: For it
pleased the Divine Wisdom and Goodness by this institution of Sacraments to
condescend to our weakness, and thereby to give us sensible Tokens or Pledges
of what he had promised in his Written word, to the intent that our dullness
might be relieved, and our Faith assisted; forasmuch as herein, our Eyes and
other Senses as well as our Ears are made Witnesses of his gracious intentions.
Thus by Baptismal washing he gives us a sensible token and representation of
our regeneration, and the washing away of our sins by the Blood of Christ; and
by the participation of Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper we have a Token and
Symbol of our Union with Christ, our Friendship with God and Communion with
each other.

But now it is manifest there is no such thing as this in their Sacrament of
Penance (as even Bellarmine himself confesses.) For they do not say or mean
that the Absolution of the Priest is a Token or Emblem of God's forgiveness,
but that the Priest actually pardons in God's stead, by Virtue of a Power
delegated to him. So that according to them, here must be a Sacrament, not only
without any material parts instituted, but also without any thing Figurative,
Symbolical or Significative which seems to be as expressly contrary to their own
Doctrine in the aforesaid definitions as to the truth it self.

Nay, further to evince the difference of this Rite of Penance from all other
proper Sacraments; it deserves observation, that whereas in those other
acknowledged Sacraments, the Priest in God's Name delivers to us the Pledges
and Symbols of Divine Grace. Here in this of Penance we must bring all the
material Parts and Pledges our selves, and present them to God, or to the
Priest in his stead: My meaning is, that whereas (for instance) in Baptism the
Priest applies to us the Symbol of Water, and in the Eucharist delivers to us
the consecrated Elements in token of the Divine Grace, contrary-wise here in
Penance we must on our parts bring with us Contrition, Confession, and
Satisfaction too, in which respect we may be rather said to give Pledges to
God, then he to us; which is widely different from the Nature of other
Sacraments, and seems no less to be contrary to the Reason and Notion of a
Sacrament in general.

The Sum of what we have hitherto discoursed, amounts to this; First, That here
is no Auricular Confession instituted by our Savior, Joh. 20. 22. as was
pretended. Secondly, Nor, any Sacrament of Penance in which it can be included
or implied; no nor indeed any Sacrament at all.

I confess I might have spared all the words I have used in proving the latter,
for so long as I have made appear that private Confession is not instituted, it
was not so very material to consider whether Penance could be a Sacrament or
no; but this I added to show the imperious dictates of that Church, and their
extravagancy in imposing the most Sacred Names upon their own inventions,
thereby to give them the greater veneration with the People.

And thus I would dismiss the first part of my undertaking, but yet the
Romanists will not forego their pretensions for Auricular Confession; for they
will yet urge, that whether or no we will call it a Sacrament which our Savior
institutes in the Text before us, it is however certain here is a Power
conferred on the Apostles, and their Successors, of remitting and retaining
sins; for by these words, Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted, etc.
Christus constituit Sacerdotes sui ipsius Vicarios. Sess. 14. Prasides and
Judices Ib. c. 4.
Our Savior has made the Priest a judge of Men's consciences and conditions;
Sacerdos solvit peccata potestate quadam praetoria Bellar. lib. 1. de sacram.
c. 10. Christus ratam habet sententiam a Sacerdote latam. id. lib. 3. c. 2.
wherefore that he may not proceed blindly and indiscriminately it is necessary
that he know the merits of the Cause, and not only understand the matter of
fact, but all the circumstances which may aggravate or extenuate it, all which
cannot be attained without the Confession of the party, therefore Auricular
Confession is as necessarily implied in the Text, as Absolution or Retention of
sins is expressed in it. So they.

But I crave leave to demand in the first place, Is it certain that upon such a
Confession as they require, the Priest (as such) will be able to make a right
judgment of a Man's case that addresses himself to him, especially considering
the intricacy of some Cases, and the ignorance of some Priests; upon this
account are those memorable words of St. Austin Confess. lib. 10. c. 3. Quid
mihi ergo est cum hominibus ut audiant Confessiones meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi
sint omnes languores meos, and unde sciunt cum a meipso de meipso audiunt, an
verum dicam? Quando quidem nemo scit hominum quid agitur in homine, nisi
spiritus hominis qui in ipso est. i. e. To what purpose should I Confess my
sins to Men who cannot heal my wounds? For how shall they (who know nothing of
my heart but by my own Confession) know whether I say true or no? For no one
knows what is in Man, but the Spirit of Man that is in him. O yes, they will
say clave non errante, that is to say, if he judge right, he judges right, and
no more, and this is mighty comfort to a distressed conscience.

Secondly, Though we grant our Savior has given the Priest Authority to Remit
and Retain sins, yet how does it appear that this extends to Secret sins; sins;
in thought only, or as the Council expresses it against the ninth and tenth
Commandments? Of open sins and public scandals the Church has cognizance, and
has a right which she may insist upon, or recede from, if she see cause,
because such sins are an injury to the Society as well as an offense against
God, and therefore here the Officers of the Church may dispense her Authority,
and Remit or Retain (as we shall see more by and by;) but in secret sins where
only God is injured, and to which he is only privy, what has the Church to do,
unless they be voluntarily discovered to her? Otherwise they are properly
reserved Cases to the Tribunal of God.

Thirdly, I would be bold to enquire further, why may not sins, especially such
as we last named, be Remitted upon Confession to God, without Confession to the
Priest also? And I the rather ask this for these two reasons, First I observe
that this very Council of Trent says, that until the times of our Sess. 14. c.
1.
Savior, and his Institution of this Sacrament, sins were remitted upon
contrition only, and application to the mercies of God, without Auricular
Confession. They cannot therefore now say, remission implies this Confession,
for that cannot be said to be implied in the nature of a thing, when the thing
it self can be had without it.

They will answer that it is sufficient, that it is now made necessary by our
Savior. But I reply, Then that Institution which now makes it necessary, must
be better proved then yet it has been, or else Men will be very apt to hope
they may now under the Gospel obtain Pardon (at least) upon as easy terms as
it was to be had at before.

My Second reason of asking that Third Question is this; I observe that their
own Schoolmen acknowledge Aquinas sum. part. 3. Q. 68.
sins to be remitted under the Gospel by the Priest without any Confession to
Men, particularly in the Administration of Baptism, by which it plainly
appears, that Confession is not implied in the nature of Remission, but one may
be had without the other, and then why may not a sinner after Baptism, hope for
Pardon upon his contrite and devout application to the Word and Sacraments,
without this new device and pick-lock of Conscience, Auricular Confession.

But so much for that.

Sect. 3. I proceed now to the second thing propounded, namely, to inquire
historically whether or no Auricular, or such a secret, and Sacramental
Confession, as aforesaid, has been of constant and universal use in the
Christian Church, as the Romanists pretend, and as the Council of Trent
asserts, Sessi. 14. Chap. 5.

This inquiry is not into matter of Law or Divine Right, as the former was, but
of Fact only, yet never the less it is of great moment upon a double account:

1. Because this is the ground which the Old Roman Canonists wholly went upon,
(as I noted before;) they exploded all pretense of Divine Institution in the
case, as having more modesty (it seems) then to pretend so high upon no better
evidence, or at least they contented themselves to prescribe for it only upon
the Authority of constant and universal practice; now if we show the falseness,
of this ground, as well as of the other, then will their Hypothesis of
Auricular Confession have no foot to stand upon.

2. Because the Credit of what has been already said under the former head
does very much depend upon this, and that Discourse will be confirmed or
impaired respectively to what shall be evidently made out in this second point.
Forasmuch as if on the one side it be made apparent that such a Rite has been
of constant use in the Christian Church, it will afford a great presumption
that it took its rise at first from Divine Institution, notwithstanding all we
have offered to the contrary. So on the other side, if the Evidence here answer
not the Pretension, and no sufficient footsteps of constant and universal
practice appear: Then will all that which we have hitherto discoursed, be
greatly strengthened and confirmed; because it is by no means probable, that if
there had been a Divine Law in the case, that such a thing would have been
generally neglected by the Christian Church.

Now for the clearing of this, though I am here only upon the defensive, and so
bound to no more then to examine the proofs which the Romanists bring for their
pretensions, yet I will deal ingenuously, as seeking not to find Flaws, but to
discover the Truth, and therefore give these instances as so many reasons for
the Negative.

In the first place I crave leave to premise this: If Auricular Confession were
so great a Gospel mystery, so wonderfully efficacious a method of saving Souls,
as to be typified in the Law (as the Romanists teach) as well as instituted in
the Gospel and practiced by the whole Church, one might seem justly to wonder
how it comes to pass that there should be no mention, nor appearance of it in
the whole course of our Saviors own Ministry; he used to be an example, as
well as a Lawgiver to the Church, he washed his Disciples Feet, before he
enjoined them to wash one another; he exemplified the other Sacraments before
he prescribed his Apostles to administer them, and one would have thought such
an Instance of his example had been more necessary in this business of Penance,
rather than any other, if it had been but to make way for the Understanding of
so obscure an Institution; since especially, one would have thought to find
some Traces of this in the Ministry of our Savior, because he daily conversed
with sinners, he reproved them, instructed them, healed them, pardoned them,
but never brought any of them to such a Confession as we are treating of; viz.
To a particular enumeration of their sins with the circumstances, nor upon so
doing formally absolved them. His very Disciples (some of which had been great
sinners) were admitted without it; the Woman of Samaria was told by him all
that ever she did, but she was not brought on her knees to make her own
Confession; but most strange of all it is, that the Woman taken in Adultery,
when he had made her accusers slink away, was not privately brought to it; it
may be they will say, there was no need of Confession to him who knew all
before, but yet it might have been necessary to bring these Sinners to be
ashamed of themselves by that means to work Repentance, and fit them for
Pardon, at least if this Method had been of such mighty use and wonderful
necessity as is pretended.

2. But to let pass that; in the next place it is matter of wonder that nothing
of this practice appears in the Ministry of the Apostles; they went about
preaching the Gospel, calling Men to Repentance, erecting and governing
Churches, but never set themselves down in a Confessors Chair for penitents,
secretly to tell them in their Ear, the Story of their vicious Lives; indeed we
read, Acts 19. 18. That some came in and showed their deeds; but first it was
voluntary, and in a fit of Holy Zeal, for we cannot find that they were
required to do it, as of Sacramental Obligation; and besides, the Confession
was public before the Church, not clancular, and whispered in secret; it is
true also that St. James, chap. 5. 16. advises the Christians to confess their
faults one to another, (which is made a mighty evidence in this Case;) but it
is as true, that this was spoken in an extraordinary Case, as appears v. 14. in
bodily sickness and distress of Conscience, they are advised to lay open their
condition, in order to relief and succor, by the more ardent and affectionate
Prayers of those who should be made privy to it, but it is not made a standing
and universal rule for all Men to comply with, whether they be sick or well, in
prosperity or adversity, perplexed or quiet in their Consciences, much less of
Sacramental and Necessary Obligation, as in the Roman Church.

3. Let us go on in the next ages after the Apostles, for about two hundred
years we find not one word of this kind of Confession, which we enquire for.
Indeed the writings of that time which are extant, are not many, but if this
business had been of such consequence as is pretended, it is strange that those
Holy Men Ignatius, Clemens and Justin Martyr, should not have any mention of it.

Indeed Bellarmine brings us one instance within this Period, and that is from
Irenaeus, who speaking of Certain Women who had been abused by Marcion the
Heretic, says they afterward came and Confessed all, with shame and sorrow,
to the Church. But what is this to the purpose? We dispute not against public
Confession, which is acknowledged to be truly Primitive, and we wish it had
been constantly maintained in after ages, it is only the necessity of Clancular
Confession that we are unsatisfied in and this passage speaks nothing at all to
that Case.

4. In Tertullians time, which was also much about Two hundred Years after our
Savior, we find great things said of Confession, but it is of that which was
public, and in the face of the Church, not to a Priest in a Corner, and this
indeed was greatly encouraged and required by the Holy Men of those times, as
that which in the Case of open and scandalous sins, freed the Church both from
the guilt, and from the reproach of them, and in the Case of secret sins, was a
means (by open shame) to bring Men to Repentance, and so to Pardon. And the
Confession was principally directed to God, who was the person offended by the
sin, yet it was made before Men to raise a fervency in their Prayers, as is
noted before, and to obtain their effectual intercession with God on behalf of
the penitent. This that Ancient writer makes manifest to be his Sense in his
Book de Poenitentia in these words Plerumque vero jejuniis preces alere*,
ingemiscere, lachrymari, and mugire dies noctesque ad Dominum Deum tuum,
Presbyteris advolvi, and aris (or rather charis) dei adgeniculari, omnibus
fratribus legationes saae deprecationis injungere, haec omnia ex homologesis ut
poenitentiam commendet, etc. the penitent often joins Fasting to his prayers,
weeps, wails and moans night and day before God, casts himself at the feet of
the Priests, kneels to all holy people, and entreats all the Brethren to be his
Intercessors with God Almighty for his Pardon: This is penitential Confession,
Tertull. Apol. c. 39.
etc. And in his Apology more plainly; Coimus in Caetum, etc. ibidem
exhortationes, castigationes and censura divina nam and judicatur magno cum
pondere ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, summumque futuri judicii praejudicium
est si quis it a deliquer it ut a communione, etc. religetur; we have (says
he) in our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, a Spiritual Judicature, and with great
gravity censure offenders, etc. But I need say no more of this; for we have the
Testimony of Beatus Rhenanus, one of the Roman Church and of great insight into
Ecclesiastical Affairs, who gives us this account of Tertullian Beatus Rhenan.
in praef. ad Tertull. de poeitent.
and his times, nihil illum de clancularia illa poenitentia loqui, quae id
temporis penitus ignorabatur; there was no such thing as secret or Clancular
Confession in use in Tertullian's time, which was a thing not so much as known
by the Christian Church in those days.

5. To go a little lower, such was the manner of proceedings in St. Cyprian's
time, as he himself describes it, the sinner by outward gestures and tokens
showed St. Syprian. Lib. 3. Ephesians. 15.
himself to be sorrowful and penitent for his sin, and then made humble
Confession thereof before the whole Congregation, and desired all the Brethren
to pray for him; which done, the Bishop and Clergy laid their hands upon him,
and so reconciled him: So it was also in Origen's time, and once for all, to
deliver the Custom of the Church in those times, touching this Origin in Ps. 37.
particular, I will add the words of the Historian, Rei Sozomen L. 7. Cap. 16.
ad terram se pronos abjiciunt, etc. they that are Conscious to themselves to
have offended, fall down flat upon the ground with Weeping and Lamentations in
the Church, on the other side the Bishop runs to them with tears in his Eyes,
and falls down to the ground, also in token of Sorrow and Compassion, and the
whole Congregation in the mean while Sympathizing with both, is overwhelmed
with tears, etc.

6. If we go lower yet to the times of St. Chrysostom and St. Austin, we find
those Holy Men speaking very St. Chrysostom. ad Hebr. Homil. 31. Id. in Sermon. de
Confess. and poenit. etc.
slightly of Confessions to Men, so little did they think of Auricular
Confession being a Sacrament. St. Austin's Judgment in the case we have heard
before, in the Tenth Book of his Confessions, and third Chapter; and for the
other, the Testimonies out of him are so many, and so well known, that I cannot
think it necessary to transcribe them; and as for St. Jerome who lived about the
same time, I think it sufficient to repeat the account of Erasmus, who was very
conversant in his Writings, and indeed of all the other Fathers, and who had no
other fault I know, but that he did use Mordaci radere vero, to be too great a
Tell-truth; which sure will not invalidate his Testimony; his words are these,
Apparet tempore Hieronimi nondum institutam fuisse secretam admissorum
Confessionem. -- Verum in hoc labuntur Theologi quidam parum attenti, quod quae
veteres scribunt de publica and generali confessione, ea trahunt ad occultam
and long diversi generis, i. e. It is evident (says he) that in St. Jerome's
time (which was about Four hundred years after our Savior) there was no such
thing as Secret Consession in use; but the mistake is that some few later and
inconsiderate Divines have taken the instances of general and public
Confession then practiced, for arguments of that Auricular Confession which is
now used, though quite of a different nature from it.

Thus we have traced the Current of Antiquity for Four or Five hundred years to
search for the Head of this Nilus, the source and rise of that kind of
Confession which is so highly magnified by the Church of Rome, but hitherto we
have found nothing of it, and this methinks should be sufficient to stagger an
impartial inquirer, (at least it is as much as can be expected in so short a
Treatise as this is intended to be) and may satisfy the unprejudicate, that
there is as little of Antiquity to favor this Rite, as there is of Divine
Institution to be pleaded for it. But yet I know on the other side, that the
Romanists pretend to bring abundance of Testimonies for it, and Bellarmine
particularly goes from Century to Century with his Citations to prescribe for
the constant and uninterrupted use of it, but I do sincerely think that these
Four following short Observations will enable a Man to answer them all.

1. I observe that whereas this word Exomologesis is commonly used by diverse
of the Fathers, as the Phrase whereby they intend to express the whole nature
of Repentance in all the parts and branches of it, as is evident by the passage
I cited out of Tertullian de Poenit. even now, and is acknowledged by
Bellarmine himself; nevertheless, merely because that word signifies Confession
properly, and nothing else, these Romish Sophisters, where they find this word
Exomologesis, force it into an Argument for that Confession, which they contend
for; and so several Discourses of the Fathers, concerning Repentance in
general, are made to be nothing but Exhortations to, or Encomiums of Confession
in particular, and that must be nothing else neither but Auricular Confession,
the thing in Question. A cast of his skill in this way, Bellarmine gives us in
Irenaeus, the very first Author he cites for Auricular Confession in the last
quoted Book and Chapter of his Writings De Sacramentis.

2. Whereas the Novatians excluded all hopes of Repentance or Pardon for sins
committed after Baptism, but the true Church contrariwise admitted to hopes of
Pardon upon their Repentance; upon this occasion, when some of the Fathers
justly magnify the advantages, and comfortableness of the true Church above the
Schismatical, as that it set open a Door of Hope to those who confessed their
sins, and applied themselves to her Ministry: Hence these witty men will
persuade the World, that every true Church had a Confessors Chair, and such a
formal way of pardoning as they now practice at Rome; as if there was no
remission of Sin, where there was no Auricular Confession, and as if all that
excluded the latter, rejected the former too, and were no better than Novatian
Heretics; whenas in Truth the Power of the Keys is exercised in all the
Ministries of the Church, and she Pardons and retains Sins, otherwise than by
the Oracle of a particular Confessor, as we have seen already. This piece of
juggling the same Bellarmine is Bellarm. de Poenit. Lib. 3. C. 8.
also guilty of in his Citation of Lactantius.

3. Whereas the Ancient Writers are much in the Commendation of Confession of
Sins, whether it be to God or to the Church, but generally intending that which
is Public, it is common with those of the Church of Rome, to lay hold of all
such sayings as were intended to persuade to, and encourage public
Confessions, and to apply them to Auricular or Clancular Confessions, thus
particularly the aforesaid Author does by Tertullian in his Citation of him.
Id. Lib. 3. C. 6.


4. And Lastly, Whereas it is also true that several of those Holy Men of Old,
do in some cases very much recommend Confession of secret sins, and persuade
some sorts of Men to the use of it, namely those that are in great perplexity
of Conscience, and that needed Ghostly Counsel and Advice, or to the intent
that they might obtain the assistance of the Churches Prayers, and make them
the more ardent and effectual on their behalf, whereas I say, they recommended
this as an expression of Zeal, or a prudent expedient, or at most as necessary
only in some cases pro hic and nunc. These great Patrons of Auricular
Confession do with their usual artifice apply all these passages, to prove it
to be a standing and universally necessary duty, a Law to all Christians, this
is a very common fault amongst them, and particularly St. Cyprian is thus
misapplied by the same forementioned Writer, Lib. 3. Cap. 7.

Hitherto inquiring into the most Ancient and Purest times of the Church, by
the Writings of the Fathers of those times, we have not been able to discover
any sufficient ground for such an Auricular Confession, as the Church of Rome
pretends to, much less for a constant and uninterrupted succession of it. But
now after all I must acknowledge there is a passage in Ecclesiastical Socrat.
Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 19. Sozomen. Lib. 7. C. 16.
History which seems to promise us satisfaction herein, and therefore must by
no means be slightly passed over without due consideration; it is the famous
story of Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, and Predecessor to St. Chrysostom
which happened something less then Four hundred years after our Savior.

The Story as it is related by the joint Testimony of Socrates and Sozomen runs
thus: In the time of this Nectarius there was (it seems) a Custom in that
Church (as also in most others) that one of the Presbyters of greatest Piety,
Wisdom, and Gravity should be chosen Penitentiary, that is, be appointed to the
peculiar Office of receiving Confessions, and to assist, and direct the
Penitents in the management of their Repentance: Now it happens that a certain
Woman of Quality, stricken with remorse of Conscience, comes to the
Penitentiary (that then was) and according to Custom, makes a particular
Confession of all such sins, as she was conscious to her self to have committed
since her Baptism, for which he according to his Office appointed her the
Penance of Fasting, and continual Prayers to expiate her Guilt, and give proof
of the Truth of her Repentance. But she proceeding on very particularly in her
Confessions, at last amongst other things comes to declare that a certain
Deacon of that Church had lien with her; upon notice of which horrid Fact, the
Deacon is forthwith cashiered and cast out of the Church: By which means the
miscarriage takes Air, and coming to the knowledge of the People, they
presently fall into a mighty commotion and rage about it, partly in detestation
of so foul an Action of the Deacon, but principally in contemplation of the
Dishonor, and Scandal thereby reflected on the whole Church. The Bishop
finding the Honor of the whole Body of his Clergy extremely concerned in this
accident, and being very anxious what to do in this case, at last by the
Counsel of one Eudaemon a Presbyter of that Church, he resolves thenceforth to
abolish the Office of Penitentiary, both to extinguish the present flame, and
to prevent the like occasion for the future; and now by this means every Man is
left to the Conduct of his own Conscience, and permitted to partake of the Holy
Mysteries at his own peril. This is the matter of fact faithfully rendered from
the words of the Historian; but this if we take it in the gross, and look no
further then so, will not do much toward the deciding of the present
Controversy, we will therefore examine things a little more narrowly by the
help of such hints as those Writers afford us, perhaps we may make good use of
it at last; and to this purpose,

1. I observe in the first place, that though at the first blush here seems to
be an early and great example of that Auricular Confession which we oppose,
forasmuch as here is not only the Order of the Church of Constantinople, for
Confession to a Priest, but that to be of all sins committed after Baptism, and
this to be made to him in secret; notwithstanding upon a more thorough view it
will appear quite another thing from that pleaded for, and practiced by the
Church of Rome, and that especially in the respects following: First, In the
Auricular Confession in the Story, there is some remainder of the ancient
Discipline of the Church (whose Confessions used to be open and public, as I
have showed) in that here a public Officer is appointed by the Church to
receive them, such an one as whose Prudence, and Learning, and Piety she could
confide in for a business of so great nicety and difficulty, and it is neither
left to the Penitent to choose his Confident for his Confessor, nor at large
for every Priest to represent the Authority of the Church in so ticklish an
Affair as that of Discipline, but to a public Officer appointed by the Church
for this purpose; so that Confession to him cannot be said to be private,
seeing it is done to the whole Church by him. To confirm which, Secondly, This
Penitentiary it seems was bound (as there was occasion) to discover the matters
(opened to him in secret) to the Church, as appears in the Crime of the Deacon
in the Story; there was no pretense of a Seal of Confession in this Case, as in
the Church of Rome, by Virtue of which a Man may confess and go on to sin again
secretly, without danger of being brought upon the Stage, whatsoever the
atrocity of his Crime be, and indeed without any effectual course in Order to
his Repentance and Reformation. Again, Thirdly, This Confession in the Story
does not pretend to be of absolute necessity as if a Man's sins might not be
pardoned without it; but only a prudent Provision of the Church to help Men
forward in their Repentance, to direct the Acts and Expressions of it, and
especially to relieve perplexed and weak Consciences, and to assist them in
their preparations for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and this appears,
amongst other things, by the account which the Historian gives us of the
consequence of abolishing it, viz. That now every Man is left to his own
Conscience about his partaking of the holy Mysteries; but it is not said or
intimated that he was left under the guilt of his Sins, for want of Confession.
To which add in the last place, that this Office whatever it was, was not
reputed a Sacrament, but rather, as I noted before, an expedient to prepare men
for it, for doubtless neither that Bishop, nor that Church would have ever
consented to the abolition of a Sacrament, for the sake of such a Scandal as
happened in the mismanagement of it, or if they had done so, much less can it
be imagined that the greatest part of the Christian Church would have concurred
with them in it, as we shall by and by see they did.

2. I observe concerning the beginning of this Penitentiary Office, the time
and occasion of this usage; namely, that the Historians do not pretend it to
have been Apostolical, much less of strictly Divine Institution, but they lay
the Heat of its first rise about the time of the Decian Persecution, which was
about Two hundred years after our Savior. I confess Nicephorus would Nicephor.
Lib. 12. Cap. 28.
persuade us of its greater Antiquity, and that it was rather revived then
instituted at that time, for he speaking of the bringing it into use at the
Decian Persecution says, (...), i. e. the Church pursuant of the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons constituted a Penitentiary, etc. And Petavius is so
addicted to the Roman Hypothesis, as very unreasonably to favor this Conceit;
but the Truth seems to be (as Valesius very ingenuously acknowledges) only
this, that here was a mistake of the import of the words of the Historian, who
says only that when the Church had chosen their Penitentiary (...), they added
him to the Canon, that is to the number of those in the Matricula or Roll of
such as were to be maintained in and by the Church, or as we would say they
made him Canon of the Church; not that he was Constituted in such an Office,
pursuant of an Ancienter Law or Canon, as Nicephorus carelessly or wilfully
mistakes. Besides afterward when the Historian observes that the Novatians
universally withstood this Order from the beginning of it, he calls it (...);
q. d. this new Institution, or Addition, or Supplement of the Ancient Rites of
the Church; so that there is no reason we should date this Institution higher
then the Historian does, namely, after the Decian Persecution.

But what should be the ground and reasons of erecting this new Office, and
Officer in the Church then, if it was not before? Of this I give two accounts.

First, The Church being now very numerous, and the Zeal and Devotion very
great; and what by the compassionate reception which the Church gave to
Penitents, and her ardent Prayers for them, what by the earnest harangues of
Holy Men to move People to repentance, abundance were inclined to confess their
sins, and this Confession being till that time accustomed to be open, and
public in the face of the Congregation, it must needs happen (all those
circumstances considered together) that a great many things would be brought
upon the Stage, the Publication of which would be attended with great
inconveniences; for some sins are of that Nature, that they scarce can take Air
without spreading a Contagion, some Confessions would make sport for light and
vain Persons, and besides abundance of other inconveniences (easy to be
imagined by any one) the publication of some sins might expose the Penitents to
the Severity of the Pagan Criminal Judge; upon these and such like
considerations, the Church thought fit therefore I (as have intimated before)
to appoint one wise and very grave Person in her stead to receive the
Confessions; who by his discretion might so discriminate matters, that what
things were fit for silence, might have private Methods applied to them, but
what were fit to be brought upon the Stage, might be made Public examples of,
or receive a Public remedy.

Secondly, But the Historian leads us to a more special Reason of this
Institution at that time; namely, that the rage of the Decian Persecution
cruelly shook the Church, and abundance of her weaker members fell off in the
Storm, and, which was worst of all, the Church was distracted about the
restitution or final rejection of those that had so miscarried; for though the
best and wisest of the Church were so merciful and considerate of humane
infirmity, as to be willing to receive those in again, upon Repentance, over
whom the Temptation of fear had too much prevailed, yet the Novatians a great
and Zealous part of Christianity, looked upon such as desperate, who had once
broken their baptismal Vow, and would rather separate from the Church
themselves, than suffer such to be restored to it. Here the Church was in a
great strait, either she must be very severe to some, or she shall seem very
unkind to others, she must either let the weak perish, or she must offend them
that counted themselves strong. Now in this case she being both tenderly
compassionate toward those that had fallen, and withal willing to satisfy
those Novatian Dissenters, or at least to deliver her self from Scandal, takes
this course, she requires that those who had fallen, and desired to be restored
again to her Society, should acknowledge their faults, and make all the
Penitent satisfaction that was possible for them to perform, that so neither
they may be too easily tempted to do so again by the gentleness of the remedy,
nor the Novatians reproach her Lenity, or take pet, as if no difference was
made between the sound and the lapsed; for these causes, though the most
public Penance was thought little enough to be undergone by the lapsed; but
yet on the other side, considering wisely the inconveniences of public Penance
in some cases (as I specified before) she therefore took this middle course;
namely, she appointed a public Confessor, who having first heard privately the
several cases of the Penitents, should bring into public, only such of them as
(without incurring any of the aforesaid dangers) might be made exemplary. And
this appears to be the true reason of this Institution, and the bottom of this
affair, by this remarkable passage in the Historian; That whereas the
generality of the Orthodox closed presently with this wife temperament, the
Novatians only, those self conceited Non-conformists, rejected (...), this
expedient as a new invention; they were too humoursome to comply with such a
temperament.

But here another Question arises, viz. How far this new expedient was embraced
by the Orthodox Churches, for if it was only received by that of
Constantinople, the Authority would not be so great; for it is possible to
imagine, that other Churches might allow every private Priest to confess, and
so admit of no public Penitentiary.

To which I answer, that by the History it seems plain enough, that this was
not the peculiar manner of the Church of Constantinople only, but the usual
Method in that time of most other Churches also; but I must needs say, I do not
find that the Church of Rome complied with them herein, though it was not much
to her Honor to be singular, where there was so much Prudence and Piety to
have inclined her to Uniformity. However this is gained, which is my point,
that the Church of Rome is not countenanced in her practice of private and
clancular Confessions, by the general usage of the Church, as they pretend.

3. I observe concerning this Office of Penitentiary, that as it was erected
upon prudential considerations, so it was upon the same grounds abolished, by
the same Authority of the Church which first instituted it, and that after
about Two hundred years continuance in the time of Nectarius, as we have seen;
and therein he was followed, says Sozomen by almost all the Bishops and
Churches in the World; this therefore was far from being thought either a
Divine or Apostolical Constitution: Petavius would here persuade us, that it
was only public Confession, and not private, which was upon this occasion so
generally laid aside, as we have seen, but this is done by him more out of
tenderness of Auricular Confession, than upon good reason; and Valesius goes
beyond him, and will needs persuade us, that neither public nor private
Confession were put down in this juncture, but only that the lately erected
Officer of Penitentiary was cashiered; but I must crave leave to say, there is
no sufficient reason for either of these conjectures, but on the contrary plain
Evidence against them, for Socrates, who is the first and principal relater of
this whole story says he was personally acquainted with this Presbyter
Eudemon, who gave the advice to Nectarius to make this change in the Discipline
of the Church, and that he had the aforesaid relation of it from his own Mouth,
and expostulated with him about it, giving his reasons to the contrary, and
suggested his suspicions that the state of Piety would be much endamaged by
this change, and in plain words tells him, that he had now bereft men of
assistance in the conduct of their Consciences, and hindered the great benefit
men have, or might have one of another by private advice and correption. Now
this fear of his had been the absurdest thing in the World, if upon this
counsel and advice of his, only one certain Man in the Office of public
Confessioner had been laid aside, but both the use of public and private
Confessions had been kept up and retained.

But after all (for ought appears) the Church of Rome kept her old Mumpsimus,
she tenacious of her own customs especially of such as may advance her Interest
and Authority, complies not with this Innovation or Reformation (be it for
better or worse) but her Priests go on with their Confessions, and turn all
Religion almost into Clancular Transactions, in despite of the example of
other Churches. It may be she met with opposition sometimes, but she was forced
to disemble it till the Heroic Age of the Schoolmen, and then those lusty
Champions with their Fustian-stuff of videtur quod sic, and probatur quod non,
make good all her pretensions. After them in the year 1215 comes the Fourth
Lateran Council, and that decrees Auricular Consession to be made by every body
once a year at the least; and last of all comes the Council of Trent, and
declares it to be of Divine Institution, necessary to Salvation, and the
constant and universal custom of the Christian Church: And so we have the
Pedigree of the Romish Auricular Confession.

Sect. 4. I come now to the third and last Stage of my undertaking, which is,
to show that Secret or Auricular Confession, as it is now prescribed and
practiced in and by the Church of Rome, is not only unnecessary, and burdensome
in it self, but also very mischievous to Piety, and the great ends of Christian
Religion.

For the former part of this charge, if it be not evident enough already, it
will easily be made out from the Premises, for they cannot deny that they make
this kind of Confession necessary to Salvation, at least as necessary as
Baptism it self is, (supposing a Man has sinned after Baptism) now if it be
neither made so by Divine Institution, nor acknowledged to be so by the
constant Opinion of the Church, what an horrible imposition is here upon the
Consciences of Men, when in the highest and worst sense that can be they teach
for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and make Salvation harder than God has
made it, and suspend men's hopes upon other terms then he has done? If it was
prescribed by the present Church as a matter of Order and Discipline only, or
of convenience and expediency, we should never boggle at it upon this account,
or dispute the point with them; or if it was only declared necessary pro hic
and nunc, upon extraordinary emergency, by the peculiar condition of the
Penitent, his weakness of judgment, the perplexity of his Conscience, his
horrible guilt or extreme Agonies, we would not differ with them upon that
neither; but when it is made necessary universally, and declared the
indispensable duty of all men whatsoever who have sinned after Baptism (when
God has required no such thing, but declares himself satisfied with true
contrition and hearty remorse for what is past, and sincere Reformation for the
time to come; this I say is an intolerable Tyranny and usurpation upon the
Consciences of Men. And that is not all neither, for besides its burdensomness
in the general, it particularly aggravates and increases a Man's other burdens,
for instead of relieving perplexed Consciences, which is the true and principal
use of Confessions to Men, this priestly Confession as it is prescribed by the
Council, intangles and afflicts them more; for that injoyns that the Penitent
lay open all his sins, even the most secret, although but in thought or desire
only, such as against the Ninth or Tenth Commandment, (according to their
Division of the Decalogue,) now this is many times difficult enough; but that is
not all, he must also recount all the circumstances of these sins, which may
increase or diminish the guilt, especially such as alter the species and kind
of sin: Now what sad work is here for a Melancholy Man? All the circumstances
are innumerable, and how can he tell which are they that change the Species of
the act, unless he be as great a School-man as his Confessor. Besides all this,
it may be he is not very skilful in the distinction between venial and mortal
sins, and if he omit one mortal sin, he is undone; therefore it is necessary
for him (by consequence) to confess all venial sins too, and then where shall
the poor Man begin, or when shall he make an end Such a Carnifieina such a rack
and torture, in a word, such an Holy Inquisition is this business of Auricular
Confession become. And that Eminent Divine of Strasburgh (of whom Beatus
Rhenanus speaks) seems very well to have understood both himself, and this
matter who pronounces that Scotus and Thomas had with their tricks, and
subtilties, so perplexed this plain Business of Confession, that now it was
become plainly impossible And so much for that.

But as for the second part of this impeachment, viz. That the Auricular
Confession now used in the Church of Rome, is mischievous to Piety; This
remains yet to be demonstrated, and we will do it the rather in this place,
because it will be an abundant Confirmation of all that which has been
discoursed under the two former Heads; and might indeed have saved the labor
of them, but that we were unwilling to leave any pretense of theirs
undiscussed; for if this practice of theirs appear to be mischievous to Pretty,
it will never by any sober man be thought either to have been instituted by our
Savior, or to have been the sense and usage of the Catholic Church, whatever
they pretend on its behalf.

Now therefore this last and important part of my charge I make good by these
Three Articles following.

First, This Method of theirs is dangerous to Piety, as it is very apt to cheat
People into an Opinion that they are in a better Condition then truly they are,
or may be in toward God, as that their sins are pardoned, and discharged by
him, when there is no such matter. The Churchmen of Rome complain of the
Doctrine of some reformed Divines touching assurance of Salvation, that it
fills men with too great confidence, and renders them careless and
presumptuous; but whatsoever there is in that, it is not my business now to
dispute it, however methinks it will not very well become a Romanist to
aggravate it, till he have acquitted himself in the point before us; for by
this Assurance Office of theirs they comply too much with the self flattery of
Men's own Hearts, they render Men secure, before they are safe, and furnish them
with a confidence like that of the Whore Solomon speaks of, who wipes her
Mouth, and says I have done no evil. For Men return from the Confessors Chair
(as they are made to believe) as Pure as from the Font, and as Innocent as from
their Mothers Womb; as if God was concluded by the act of the Priest, and as if
he being satisfied with an humble posture, a dejected look, and a lamentable
murmur, God Almighty would be put off so too.

Ah nimium faciles qui tristia crimina, etc. Ah cheating Priests who made fond
Men believe,
That God Almighty pardons all you shrieve.
Perhaps they will say this is the fault and folly of the Men, not of the
Institution of the Church: But why do they not teach them better then? Nay, why
do they countenance and encourage them in so dangerous mistakes? For whither
else tend those words in the Decree of the Council of Trent, ipsi Deo
reconciliandis? q. d. that by this way of Confession, etc. Sess. 14. Can. 1.
men are reconciled to the Divine Majesty himself; or those other forecited,
where the Priest is said to be the Vicar of Christ, and in his stead, a Judge
or President; or Ibid. Cap. 5.
especially what other meaning can those words have where it is said, that this
Rite is as necessary as Baptism, for as in that all sins are remitted which
were committed Ibid. Cap. 2.
in former time, so in this all sins committed after Baptism are likewise
remitted?

Now I say, what is the natural tendency of all this, but to make People
believe that their Salvation or Damnation is in the Power of the Priest, that
he is a little God Almighty, and his discharge would certainly pass current in
the Court of Heaven. But there is sophistry and juggle in all this, as I thus
make appear; for,

1. The Priest cannot pardon whom he will, let him be called Judex and Praeses
never so; for if his Sentence be not according to Law it will be declared Null
at the Great Day; only it may be good and valid in the mean time in foro
Ecclesiae; and here lies the cheat.

2. Nor are all sins retained or unforgiven with God, that are not pardoned by
the Priest; it is true in public Scandals, till the Sinner submit to the
Church, God will not forgive him; For what that binds on Earth is in this sense
bound in Heaven; but what has the Church to do to retain, or to bind the
Sinner in the case of secret sins, where it can charge no guilt on him?

3. Nor is it properly the act of the Priest which pardons, but the Tenor of
the Law, and the disposition of Mind in the Penitent agreeable thereunto,
qualifying him for Pardon, to which the Pardon is to be imputed: As it is not
the Herald which pardons, but the Prince who by his Proclamation bestows that
Grace upon those who are so and so qualified.

4. Nor, Lastly, Can the Priest be said to pardon so properly by those
Majestic words, absolvo te, as by his whole Ministry, in instructing People in
the Terms of the New Covenant, and making Application of that to them by the
Sacraments; this he has Commission to do, but those big words I cannot find
that he has any where Authority to pronounce, and therefore (as I think I
observed before) the Ancient Church had no form of Absolution, but only
receiving Penitents to the Communion: And the Greek Church had so much modesty
as to Absolve in the third Person, not in the first, to show that their Pardon
was Ministerial and Declarative only.

All these things notwithstanding the People are let to go away with such an
Opinion as aforesaid (because it is for the Grandeur and Interest of the
Priesthood, that they should be cheated; but these misapprehensions would
vanish, if their teachers would be so just as to distinguish between God's
Absolution, and the Absolution of the Church; the first of which extends to the
most secret sins, the latter to open Scandals only; the one delivers from all
real guilt, the other from external Censure only; of the latter the Priest may
(by the leave of the Church) have the full dispensation, so that he is really
pardoned with her that has satisfied the Priest; but of the former he
dispenses but conditionally. To confirm all which I will here add only two
Testimonies of the judgment of the Ancient Church.

The first is of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in his Epistle to St. Cyprian,
reckoned the Seventy Fifth of St. Cyprians, where speaking of holding
Ecclesiastical Councils every Year, he gives these reasons for it; Vt si qua
graviora sunt communi consilio dirigantur, lapsis quoque fratribus, and post
lavacrum salutare a Diabolo vulneratis, per poenitentiam medela quaeratur; non
quasi a nobis remissionem peccatorum consequantur, sed ut per nos ad
intelligentiam delictorum suorum convertantur, and Domino before satisfacere
cogantur; partly (says he) that by joint advice, and common consent, we may
agree upon an uniform Order in such weighty Affairs as concern our respective
Churches, partly that we may give relief, and apply a remedy to those who by
the temptation of the Devil have fallen into sin after Baptism; not that we can
give them Pardon of their sin, but that by our Ministry they may be brought to
a knowledge of their sins, and directed into a right course to obtain Pardon at
the Hands of God. The other is of Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury whose
words are these: Confessio quae soli Deo fit purgat pecoata: Ea Theod. Cantuar.
apud Beat. Rhen. in praef. ad Tertul. depoenit.
vero quae Sacerdoti fit, docet qualiter purgentur. Confession to God properly
obtains the Pardon of Sin; but by Confession to Men, we are only put into the
right way to obtain pardon. Thus they:

But now in the Church of Rome, the case is otherwise; there the Priest
sustains the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and is not so much his
Delegate as his Plenipotentiary, and his Pardon is as full and good as if the
Judge of the World had pronounced it pro Tribunali; so that if the most lewd
and habitual Sinner have but the good fortune to go out of the World under the
Blessing of his Ghostly Father, that is to say, either death came so soon after
his last Absolution, or the Priest came so opportunely after his last sin, that
he has not begun a new score, he is sure to go Heaven without more ado. This I
represent as the first mischief attending their Doctrine, and Practice of
Auricular Confession. But this is not all, for

Secondly, It corrupts and debauches the very Doctrine and Nature of Repentance
which the whole Gospel lays so much stress upon: Making Attrition (which is but
a slight sorrow for sin, or a dislike of it in Contemplation of the Wrath of
God impendent over it) pass for Contrition, which implies an hatred and
detestation of it for its own moral evil and deformity, with a firm resolution
of amendment. This they many of them are not ashamed to teach, and their
practice of Absolution supposes and requires it. The Jesuits in particular,
who have almost ingrost to themselves the whole Monopoly of Confessions, avow
this as their Principle. Father Bauny, Escobar, and Suarez declare their
Judgment, that the Priest ought to absolve a Man upon his saying, that he
detests his sin, although at the same time the Confessor does not believe that
he does so. And Caussin says, if this be not true, there can be no use of
Confessions amongst the greatest part of Men. These things (it is true) are
disliked by some others of the Romanists, and the Curees of France are so
honest as to cry shame of it before all the World; for, say they, Attrition is
but the work of Nature, and if that alone will serve for Pardon, then a Man may
be pardoned without Grace. But therefore, say the others, the Sacrament of
Penance does it alone, and this is for the Honor of the Sacrament; greatly for
the Honor of it (say I) that it is of greater power then our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel, which cannot help a wicked Man to Heaven, whilst he
continues so, but this Sacrament it seems can. Nor can they excuse this matter
by saying these odious assertions are but the private Opinions of some Divines.
For they are plainly favored by the determinations of the Council of Trent; I
confess that Council delivers it self warily and cunningly Conc. Trident. Sess.
14. Cap 4.
in this point (as it uses to do in such cases) yet these are their words, Illa
vero contritio imperfecta quae attritio dicitur, quamvis sine Sacramento
Poenitentiae perse ad justificationem perducere peccatorem nequeat, tamen eum
ad* Dei Gratiam in Sacramento Poenitentiae impetrandam disponit, etc. Which is
as much as to say, though Attrition or a superficial Sorrow for Sin, barely,
alone, and without Confession to a Priest, will not justify a Man before God,
yet Attrition and Confession together will do it, for then they are as good as
true Repentance. And in this sense Melchior Canus long since thought he
understood the Council well enough.

Thirdly, This business of Auricular Confession, as it is practiced in the
Church of Rome, is so far from being a means to prevent and restrain sin, as it
highly pretends to be (and I am sure as it ought to be, if it be good for any
thing) that contrariwise it is either lost labor, and a mere Ceremony, or it
greatly incourages and imboldens, and hardens Men in it, both by the Secrecy,
the Multitudes, and the Frequency of these Confessions, by the cursory,
hypocritical and evasive ways of confessing, by the slight Penances imposed,
and the cheapness, easiness, and even prostitution of Absolutions.

It were easy to be copious in instances of all these kinds, but it is an
uncomfortable subject, and I hasten to a conclusion; therefore I will only
touch upon them briefly.

1. For the privacy of these Confessions. In the Ancient Church (as I have
noted before) the Scandalous Sinner was brought upon the Stage before a great
Assembly of Grave and Holy Men, he lay prostrate on the ground, which he
watered with his Tears, he crept on his Knees, and implored the Pity and
Prayers of all present, in whose countenances (if for shame he could look up)
he saw abhorrence of his fact, indignation at God's dishonor, conjoined with
compassion to his Soul, and joy for his Repentance; his Confession was full of
remorse and confusion; the remedy was as sharp and disgustful to Flesh and
Blood as the Disease had been pleasant, and the pain of this expiation was able
to imbitter the sweet of Sin to him ever after. Or if the Confession was not
made before the whole Church, but to the Penitentiary only, yet he was a Grave
and Holy Person, chosen by the Church, and representing it, a Person resident
in that Church, and so able to take notice of, and mind the future Conversation
of those that addressed themselves to him; a Person of that Sanctity and
Reverence that he could not choose but detest and abhor all base and vile
actions that should come to his knowledge: Now it must needs be a terrible cut
to a Sinner to have all his lewdness laid open before such an one, and then to
be justly, and sharply rebuked by him, to have his sins aggravated, and to be
made to see his own ugly shape in a true glass held by him, besides to be
enjoined the performance of a strict Penance of Fasting and Prayer, and after
all (if this do not do) to have the Church made acquainted with the whole
matter (as in the case of the Deacon aforesaid.) This course was likely to work
something of remorse in the Sinner for what was past, and to make him watchful
and careful for the time to come.

But what is the way of the Church of Rome like to this? Where a Man may
confess to any Priest, to him that knows him not, and so cannot observe his
future life and carriage; nay, perhaps that knows not how to value the guilt of
sin, or to judge which be Venial, and which Mortal Sins, or especially what
circumstances do alter the species of it, and it may be too, he may be such an
one that makes no Conscience himself of the sins I confess to him. Now, when
all is transacted between me and such a Priest in a corner, and that under the
inviolable Seal of Confession, what great shame can this put me to? What
remorse is it likely to work in me? What shall discourage me from going on to
sin again, if no worse thing happen to me?

2. And then for the multitude of Confessions in the Church of Rome, that also
takes off the shame, and weakens the efficacy of it, so that if it do no harm,
it is not likely to do any good; for who is concerned much in the doing that
which he sees all the World do as well as himself; if only notorious Sinners
were brought to Confession (as it was in the Primitive Church) then it might
probably and reasonably provoke a blush, and cause a remorse in him to whom
such a remedy was prescribed; but when he sees the whole Parish, and the Priest
too brought to it, and Men as generally complying with it, as they approach to
the Lord's Table; What great wonders can this work? What shame can it inflict
upon any Man! What effect can be expected from it, but that it ordinarily makes
Men secure and careless, and grow as familiar with sin as with the remedy, or
at least think as well of themselves as of other Men, since it seems they have
as much need of Confession and absolution as himself?

3. To which the frequency and often repetitions of these kind of Confessions
adds very much; it is very likely that modesty may work much upon a Man the
first or second time he goes to Confession, and it may something discompose his
Countenance when he lays open all his secret miscarriages, to a Person
especially for whom he has a Reverence (for we see every thing, even sin it
self is modest in its beginnings;) and no doubt it is some restraint of sin
whilst a Man is sensible that he must undergo a great deal of pain and shame in
vomiting up again his sweet Morsels which he eats in secret: But by that time
he has been used to this a while, it grows easy and habitual to him, and
custom has made the very punishment pleasant as well as the sin; especially,
if we add,

4. The formal, cursory, hypocritical, and illusive ways of Confession in
frequent use amongst them; as that a Man may choose his own Priest, and then to
be sure the greatest Sinner will have a Confessor right for his turn, that
shall not be too severe and scrupulous with him; that a Man may confess in
transitu, in a hurry or huddle, and then there can be no remark made upon his
Person nor his sins; that a Man may make one part of his Confession to one
Priest, and reserve the other part for another, so that neither of them shall
be able to make any thing of it; that he may have one Confessor for his Mortal
sins, and another for his Venial; so that one shall save him, if the other damn
him; nay, for failing, the forgetful sinner may have another Man to confess for
him, or at least he may confess, that he has not confessed; these and
abundance more such illusive Methods are in daily use amongst them, and not
only taken up by the licentious and unconscionable People, but allowed by some
or other of their great Casuists; now let any Man judge whether this be a
likelier way to restrain sin, or to encourage it; whether the easiness of the
remedy (if this be one) must not of necessity make the Disease seem not very
formidable; in a word, whether this be not a ridiculing their own Religion,
and, which is worse, a teaching Men to be so fool hardy as to make a mock of
sin.

5. This sad reckoning will be inflamed yet higher if we consider the slight
Penances usually imposed by these Spiritual Judges upon the greatest Crimes.
The Council determines that the Confessor must be exactly made acquainted with
all the circumstances of the sin, that so he may be able to adjust a Penance to
it; now when some great sin is confessed and that in very foul circumstances,
if the Penance proportioned to it, by the Priest be to say two or three Pater
Nosters, or Ave-Maria's extraordinary, to give a little Money in Alms to the
Poor or some Pious use, to kneel on his bare knees before such a Shrine, to
kiss such an Image, to go on Pilgrimage a few Miles to such a Saint, or at most
to wear an Hair Shirt, or it may be to fast with Pish, and Wine, and
Sweetmeats, etc. does not this make that sin which is thus mawled and
stigmatized, look very dreadfully, can any Man find in his Heart to sin again,
when it has cost him so dear already?

Oh, but they will tell us these Penances are not intended to correspond with
the guilt of the sin, but only to satisfy the debt of Temporal punishment. But
we had thought that the end of Penance had been, to work in the Penitent a
disposition for Pardon, by giving him both opportunities and direction to
express the sincerity of his Repentance; and this was the use of Penance in the
Primitive Church, together with the taking off the Scandal from the Society;
and for that other end how does the Church of Rome know so certainly that there
is a debt of Temporal punishment remaining due, after the sin is pardoned
before God; it is true, God may pardon so far only as he pleases, he may
resolve to punish temporally those whom he has forgiven eternally, as we see
he did in the case of David; but that this is not his constant Method appears
by this that our Savior releases the Temporal punishment to many in the
Gospel, whose diseases he cured, saying to them, Your sins are forgiven you,
when as yet it did not appear that all Scores were quitted with God so, but
that they might have perished eternally, if they did not prevent it by Faith
and Repentance.

6. But lastly, to come to an end of this sad story, the easiness and
prostitution of their absolutions in the Church of Rome contributes, as much to
the encouraging of Vice and carelessness in Religion as any of the former; for
what else can be the natural effect and consequence of that ruled case among
their Casuists (as I showed before) that the Priest is bound to absolve him
that confesses, and says, he is sorry for his sin, though he does in his Heart
believe that he is not contrite, but that either the Priests Pardon is a very
cheat, or else that Pardon is due of course to the most impenitent Sinner, and
there is no more to do but Confess and be Saved? or what is the meaning of
their common practice to absolve men upon their Deathbeds, whether they be
contrite, or attrite, or neither, at least when they can give no Evidence of
either? If they intended this only for absolution from the Censures of the
Church it might be called Charity, and look something like the practice of the
Primitive Church, which released those upon their Deathbeds, whom it would not
discharge all their lives before, tho not then neither without signs of
Attrition and contrition too; but these pretend to quite another thing; namely
to release men in foro Conscientiae, and to give them a Passport to Heaven
without Repentance, which is a very strange thing, to say no worse of it. Or to
instance one thing more, what is the meaning of their practice of giving
Absolution before the Penance is performed (as is usual with them) unless this
be it, that whether the Man make any Conscience at all how he lives hereafter,
yet he is pardoned as much as the Priest can do it for him, and is not this a
likely way of reformation?

I conclude therefore now upon the whole matter that Auricular Confession, as
it is used in the Church of Rome, is only an Artifice of greatening the Priest,
and pleasing the People; a trick of gratifying the undevout and impious as well
as the Devout and Religious; the latter it imposes upon by its outward
appearance of Humility and Piety; to the former it serves for a palliative Cure
of the Gripes of Conscience, which they are now and then troubled with; in
reality it tends to make sin easy and tolerable by the cheapness of its
Pardon, and in a word, it is nothing but the Old Discipline of the Church in
Dust and Ashes. And therefore though the Church of England in her Liturgy,
piously wishes for the Restoration of the Ancient Discipline of the Church, it
can be no defect in her that she troubles not her self with this Rubbish.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had finished the foregoing Papers, and most part of them had also past
the Press, I happened to have notice that there was a Book just then come over
from France, written by a Divine of the Sorbone, which with great appearance of
Learning maintained the just contrary to what I had asserted (especially in the
Historical part of this Question) and pretended to prove from the most Ancient
Monuments of the Holy Scriptures, Fathers, Popes and Councils, that Auricular
Confession had been the constant Doctrine, and Universal and Uninterrupted
usage of the Christian Church for near 1300 years from the Times of our Savior
to the Laterane Council.

So soon as I heard this, I heartily wished, that either the said Book had come
out a little sooner, or at least that my Papers had been yet in my hands; to
the intent that it might have been in my Power, to have corrected what might be
amiss, or supplied what was defective in that short Discourse, or indeed if
occasion were, to have wholly suppressed it.

For as soon as I entered upon the said Book, and found from no less a Man than
the Author himself, that he had diligently read over all that had been written
on both sides of this controversy, and that this work of his was the product of
Eighteen years study, and that in the prime of his years, and most flourishing
time of his parts, that it was published upon the maturest deliberation on his
part, and with the greatest applause and approbation of the Faculty, I thought
I had reason to suspect, whether a small Tract, written in haste by a Man of no
Name, and full enough of other Business, could be fit to be seen on the same
Day with so elaborate a work.

But by that time I had read a little further, I took Heart, and permitted the
Press to go on; and now, that I have gone over the whole, I do here profess
sincerely, that in all that learned Discourse I scarcely found any thing which
I had not foreseen, and as I think in some measure prevented. But certain I am,
nothing occurred that staggered my Judgment, or which did not rather confirm me
in what I had written; for though I met with abundance of Citations, and a
great deal of Wit, and Dexterity in the management of them, yet I found none of
them come home to the point; for whereas they sometimes recommend and press
Confession of Sin in general sometimes to the Church, sometimes to the Priest
or Bishop as well as to God Almighty: Again sometimes they speak great things
of the Dignity of the Priesthood, and the great Honor that Order has in
being wonderfully useful to the relief of Guilty or Afflicted Consciences;
other while they treat of the Power of the Keys, and the Authority of the
Church, the danger of her Censures, the Comfort of her Absolution, and the
severity of her Discipline, etc. but all these things are acknowledged by us
without laborious proof, as well as by our Adversaries: That which we demand,
and expect therefore, is, where shall we find in any of the Ancient Fathers,
Auricular Confession said to be a Sacrament, or any part of one? Or where is
the Universal necessity of it asserted? Or that secret sins committed after
Baptism, are by no other means, or upon no other terms pardoned with God, then
upon their being confessed to men? In these things lies the hinge of our
dispute, and of these particulars one ought in Reason to expect the most direct
and plain proof imaginable, if the matter was of such Consequence, of such
Universal practice and notoriety as they pretend; but nothing of all this
appears in this Writer more than in those that have gone before him. In
contemplation of which I now adventure this little Tract into the World, with
somewhat more of Confidence then I should have done, had it not been for this
occasion.

But lest I should seem to be too partial in the Case, or to give too slight an
account of this Learned Man's performance, the Reader who pleases shall be
judge by a Specimen or two which I will here briefly represent to him.

The former of them shall be the very first argument or Testimony he produces
for his Assertion, which I the rather make my choice to give instance in,
because no Man can be said ingenuously to seek for faults, to pick and choose
for matter of exception, that takes the first thing that comes to hand.

The business is this, Chap. 2. Page 11. of his Book he cites the Council of
Illiberis (with a great deal of circumstance) as the first Witness for his
Cause, and the Testimony is taken from the Seventy Sixth Canon, the words are
these, Si quis Diaconum, etc. i. e. If any Man shall suffer himself to be
ordained Deacon, and shall afterward be convicted to have formerly committed
some Mortal (or Capital Crime;) if the said Crime come to light by his own
voluntary Confession, he shall for the space of Three years be debarred the
Holy Communion, but in case his sin be discovered and made known to the Church
by some other hand, then he shall suffer Five years suspension, and after that
be admitted only to Lay Communion.

Now who would have ever thought this passage fit to be made choice of as the
first proof of Auricular Confession, or who can imagine it should be any proof
at all, much less a clear or direct one?

Oh, but here is Confession! It may happen so if the party please, but it is
not enjoined, but voluntary, and that not Auricular neither, but unto the
Church, at least for ought appears.

And it is confession of a secret Sin too! True it was so, till it was either
confessed or betrayed.

And here is Penance imposed for a secret sin: True when it was become public.

And here is a different degree of Penance imposed upon him that ingenuously
confesses, from him that stays till he is accused, and has his sin proved upon
him: And good Reason, for the one gave tokens of Repentance, and the other
none. But then here is -- What? no Sacrament of Penance, no declared absolute
necessity of Confession to Men in order to pardon with God, but only a
necessity that when the Fact is become notorious, whether by the Confession of
the Party, or otherwise, that the Church use her endeavors to bring the Sinner
to Repentance, and free her self from Scandal by making a difference betwixt
the Good and the Bad, the more hopeful, and the less.

If this be a clear and proper Argument for the necessity of Auricular
Confession: God help poor Protestants that cannot discern it; but oh the Wit of
Man, and the Power of Learning and Logic! What may not such Men prove if they
have a mind to it?

The other passage I instance in, is in his Tenth Chapter, Page 156. viz. the
Critical and Famous Business of the Nectarian Reformation at Constantinople, of
which I have spoken somewhat largely in the foregoing Papers. Now for this:
This Learned Gentleman after he has acknowledged very frankly that public
Confession of sins was the Ancient use of the Church in the times of St.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Origin; that is, for the space of about
Three hundred years, and that instead of that ancient usage (upon occasion of
the Decian Persecution) a public Penitentiary was appointed at Constantinople,
and most other Orthodox Churches, and in short, after he had with more
ingenuity then some others of his party, owned the undoubted Truth of the
Relations of Socrates and Sozomen touching this Affair, and made some
Observations thereupon not much to the advantage of his cause, he at length
delivers that which would be very much to his purpose, if it could be credible;
namely, that upon the whole matter Nectarius in abolishing the Penitentiary,
neither abolished public nor private Confessions, but instead of obliging Men
to go to the Penitentiary left every Man bound to resort to his respective
Diocesan, and confess his sins to him; and so Auricular Confession is after
this change every whit as necessary as it was be^^e; very true (say I) it is as
necessary now as it was before, for it was only voluntary before, and so it may
be after. But if the intention of Nectarius, and the effect of that alteration
was only the change of the Person, and every Man still obliged to confess to
some body, how comes it to be said in the story that every Man was left to his
own Conscience, does that word signify the Bishop? then we have found out a
right Fanatic Diocesan, for they will all readily confess to this Bishop, and
believe his Absolution as sufficient as any Romanist of them all does: And yet
it seems to be undeniably plain that Socrates after this Reforma^ thought of no
other Confessor but this, nor imagi^^ Men now bound to make any other
Confession, this (which if it was not Auricular was very se^^ for otherwise how
comes it to pass that he expo^^^lates the matter with Eudaemon who advised
change, and bewailed the danger of this liberty wh^^^ was hereby given men, if
they were as strictly bo^^^ still to confess to their Bishop as they were
before the Penitentiary; therefore the Truth of the Busi^^^ seems evidently to
be this, that men were now at ^^berty to make their Confessions of secret Sins
volu^^^rily, as they were no doubt before the Institution Penitentiary. And now
what has this Learned G^^tleman gotten by mustering up this story; well h^^
ever the Conclusion must be held, let the Prem^^^ look to themselves.

I could find in my Heart (now my hand is in) proceed further and to observe;
what pitiful s^^^ he is put to, in his Thirteenth Chapter, to evade
Testimonies brought by Monsieur Daille out of^^^ Chrysostom against his
Hypothesis. And the ra^^ because (out of mere tediousness of writing) I in
foregoing Papers omitted to specify the most remar^^ble discourses which that
excellent Author has upon this Subject. But the Authorities are so plain and
answerable, and the Evasions of this Gentleman forced and palpable, that I
think it needless to about to vindicate the one, or confute the other; in
spite of Art this same Thirteenth Chapter (speak of) will afford no less than
Thirteen Argume^^ against the necessity of Auricular Confession.

FINIS.

