The First Apparition of Bishop Goodman's Ghost, BEING A New strange Sight, Or:
A Late strange Vision. Making a woeful Repetition, of his former Confession; in
1653. Upon the Extirpation of Bishops: in 1642. Now Occasionally Revewed, and
seasonably Renewed. 1681. For an Adhortatory Admonition to all Bishops, and
their Courts.
I Confess, that God would never have permitted us, to have Suffered in such a
manner, as we have done, had we not provoked Him with our Sins. And that I may
be our own Accuser, I think our greatest Offense did consist in these two
things.

First, That many of Us, did not spend our Church-means in a Church-like
manner; but converted them to our own private Uses: Or otherwise, Misimploy'd
them: Therefore, God justly takes them away; and permits Sacrilege: we our
Selves having first Offended in the same kind. For certainly, Church-means
should have relation as well to the Uses as to the Persons: and a Churchman in
mispending them, commits Sacrilege.

And whereas many excuse it, in regard of their Wives, and Children; God
forbid, but regard should be had to Them: yet still with moderation.

I cannot excuse the Excess of Apparel, and some other courses of Expense. Yet,
This I must testify for a Truth, that speaking privately with some Bishops,
they told me, and I believed them; that they laid not up, one Farthing of their
Bishoprics: and This may appear, for many of them, died very Poor: As
Worcester, Hereford, Peterborough, Bristol: and not unlike, but others will do
so.

Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: therefore God has made us now Incapable of Any
Jurisdiction.

So just and wonderful is God in all his Judgments. I confess, in mine own
particular, I did as much desire, and labor to reform it, as any man could do;
yet I could never prevail. Herein a little to excuse the Church; I have it, and
can produce it at this time, under the Kings own Hand, and Seal: wherein he
forbids, that any Churchman, or Priest in Holy Orders, should be a
Chancellor: and This was the Occasion, of all the Corruption, in the
Spiritual Courts. For the Judges at the Common Law have their Pensions, and
Allowances: but Chauncellours have none at all: They live only upon the Fees of
the Court: and for Them to Dismiss a Cause; it was to lose so much blood. Now
if they be naught in Themselves; then they must for their own Advantage and
Profit, have Instruments and Agents accordingly: so the Registers, Proctors,
Apparators; they were --

Pessimum genus hominum. While the Spiritual Court was only Governed by
Churchmen and Priests; [as it ought to be, and has ever been so heretofore:]
they had their Spiritual Benefices, and Dignities to live upon; and did scorn
the Fees of the Court. Besides the Holiness of the Profession, kept them from
Bribing, and Corruption.

Little do men think, how much they suffer, by this own Position; -- That
Churchmen should not Interpose in Civil and Moral Affairs: whereas formerly,
Bishops, and Churchmen were only trusted with Last Wills and Testaments; and
granting out Administrations: -- and certainly, if there be any Honesty amongst
men; it must be supposed to be rather in them, then in others. But there having
been such an Abuse; it must be acknowledged, that God is most Just in all his
ways: and what has befallen us, it is according to the Deserts of our Sin.

The Book in which this Confession is, was by that Right Reverend Bishop, Dr.
Godfrey Goodman: late Bishop of Gloucester; given with his own hand to me
ANTHONY SADLER: At that time Chaplain to the Right Honorable Letticia Lady
Pagett Dowager.

Printed by H. B. in the Year 1681.


