Good News for England: OR A Speedy, Safe, AND EASY WAY HOW IRELAND May be
Reduced to the Obedience of the Crown of England, In six Months time.

Humbled offered to the Serious Consideration of the King and Queen's most
Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords S^iritual and
Temporal, and Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.

With Allowance.

London, Printed; and Sold at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court in
Grace Church Street, 1669.

A Speedy, Safe and Effectual way for Reducing of Ireland to the Obedience of
the Crown of England in six Months, etc.
GOD giving his Blessing, One Hundred Thousand men will subdue Ireland in six
Months with less charge then Forty Thousand men can well do it in two Years;
for if the Army be great, so as sufficiently to overpower the Enemy, then very
few will be killed or lost in the Service, which above all things ought to be
regarded in a Christian Prince and People: But if the Army be not bigger than
the Enemies, there may be the more lost in the Service, and the Work longer a
doing.

Objection. So many men cannot easily be spared or raised.

Answer. Eighty Thousand may soon be raised in England and Wales, and Twenty
Thousand in Scotland, giving every Foot-Soldier seven Shillings a Week, they
will be encouraged; the which doing, and having of the said number Ten Thousand
of them Horsemen, the cost and charge of the Army, of Officers, and Horse and
Foot, the Clothes, Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, and all Charges; Admit it arise
to ten Shillings each man, one with the other each Week, which is Fifty
Thousand Pounds per Week in six Months, is Thirteen Hundred Thousand Pounds,
or Twenty six Hundred Thousand Pounds for a Year.

Object. So much Money will be too great a Charge upon the Nations.

Answ. There are men in London, and in England, and some in Scotland, that
would lend most of the above sum, upon Condition to be paid it out of the
forfeited Lands in Ireland, considered at a certain price per Acre when the
Country is vanquished. And such as would lend Moneys (considerable) should pay
nothing of the Tax. And all such, either Poor or Rich, that would not lend
Moneys, and take Debentures, should be taxed and rated by Authority in a Pole
Bill, according to their Abilities; and this would quickly do the Work; and
then England would be safe, and all the Dominions thereunto belonging in Rest
and Peace. Also this Army, whilst they are doing this Work, would be exercised,
and so bravely disciplined, that they would be fit, the beginning of the next
Year fifty thousand of them, to go to Holland, to assist Holland, or to go to
France, to do Justice upon the French.

Object. Where would Provisions be had for such an Army?

Answ. Money answers all things: Corn is very plenty and cheap in England,
and these hundred thousand men being maintained by the Provisions of England,
Wales and Scotland, they may have their Provisions brought out of England, etc.
to them, especially great store of Corn and Bread, Cheese, Butter and Beer,
etc. which England can spare (for payment) and be glad to have a way to vend
it. And as for Flesh, Fish, etc. there is abundance in Ireland.

Object. What shall be done with the Irish, seeing it is contrary to the Nature
of an English man, or a Protestant, to Masacree, Kill or Destroy a Nation of
People, or hurt one Soul, when they have overcome them in defense of the
English Interest, and Protestant Religion?

Answ. Seeing the Irish Papists are mostly such bloody and cruel People, that
whilst the English have lived peaceable and quiet amongst them; or rather the
English, whilst they had power, suffering the Irish to live in the same peace
and quiet with themseves. Yet we see that the Irish Papists, as soon as they
got power into their Hands, they rebelled against the English, and against all
the British Protestants, endeavoring with all Severity and Cruelty to utterly
destroy, and put out the English and British Protestants from under Heaven, or
from having a Being to dwell any where upon the face of the whole Earth,
witness France, and Ireland, and Savoy, and how they have already done, and are
still proceeding to do.

Therefore every man of them in Ireland having taken up Arms and Clubs, Staves,
Pickes, etc. it would be but just on our parts, as English men, Protestants and
good Christians, loving of Mercy, to deal better by them then they do by us,
and to give them some place to live and dwell upon the Earth, to send all the
Families of them that will not submit to the English Government, now
established, to inhabit in Virginia and Maryland, and other Plantations and
Islands in America under the Dominion of England. And all of the men that have
been exercising any sort of Weapon against the English and British Protestants,
that will not give good security for their loyal and peaceable Behavior for
the time to come, to be bestowed upon the Emperor of Germany, to assist him to
fight against the Turks, or what else may seem fit, etc.

The foregoing ought to be considered and done quickly; for in the Popish
Standard upon the Castle of Dublin it is written, NOW, or NEVER.
NOW, and FOR EVER.


So that it is now the British Protestants business through all the World,
especially in England and Scotland, to put themselves quickly upon great and
extraordinary Charge, to be beforehand with their Enemies, and then in the
strength of God they may do their business, so as they may vanquish and
overcome the Enemies of their Peace; and so order the matter that their Enemies
never more get the Dominion over them,

Suppose ten Carpenters would be building a Ship two Years, then forty
Carpenters would be building it half a Year: Besides, consider the Interest of
Money lying long dead or unprofitable; and consider the present profit of the
use of the Ship. Also, an Enemy may get the Advantage of the matter, by making
more speed to the Market, wherefore make haste, bid a good Price, lest the
Enemy fore-stall and increase both Principal and Profit.

Suppose a great Ship of great force, met with another great Ship of small
force, its likely the great Ship of great force would soon take the other great
Ship of small force, with the loss of few or no men: So a great Army of great
force will soon Conquor a great Army of small force, without loss of much men.
And the greater the Army, and the stronger the Force, the more they daunt and
discourage their Enemies. These things considered, and that notwithstanding the
Army, and the charge be great, yet the shortness of the Work, and of the Time,
it will be done cheaper with a great Army, and quicker, with less loss of men,
than with a small Army in longer time, and more loss of men. And the Work being
quickly done, they may be put upon other Service, as is before plainly
demonstrated: And moreover the three Nations would be at Peace to trade and
deal, and be profitable to themselves, and in a short time would regain all the
charge, etc. And whereas if it be long a doing, Trade will be hindered, and the
Nations will grow weak and feeble: And suppose, that it may be a year before
the said Army be called up out of Ireland upon other Service; however, there is
a Kingdom gained for twenty six hundred thousand pounds, which is supposed to
be worth a hundred times that value; and moreover England cannot be well, nor
safe without Irland be under its Obedience. Also again consider, that there
will be in doing this a brave Army made and disciplined to again France,

God direct you.
FINIS.

