GOOD NEWS FROM Colonel Hollis HIS REGIMENT: Declaring the proceedings of the
Volunteers that set forth with him from London, in an overthrow given to the
Cavaliers, and putting them to flight near Vxbridge.

Also a relation of great store of ammunition found under a Hay-mow in
Salisbury-Court in London, and brought into Guild Hall, Aug. 19

Likewise the true Copy of a Letter sent from Leicestershire by M. Burton, a
Messenger belonging to the Parliament House, to a Gentleman in London.

Wherein is declared how three wain-load of ammunition was taken from the
Cavaliers, and sent to Coventry, as it was intended to have been sent from
Leicester to Warwick.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Io. Johnson. August 20. 1642.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM COLONEL HOLLIS HIS REGIMENT. ALSO A Relation of four carts
loads of ammunition taken in Salisbury-Court Aug. 19.
SInce the setting forth of the Volunteers that went under the command of
Colonel Hollis, they have performed cour^giously the charge which they
undertook, unanimously and cheerfully marching toward the town of Vxbridge,
not doing the least harm to either man, woman or child; but in their march one
evening being late, they were set upon by a great number of Cavaliers who
suddenly issued out of a wood; but the Volunteers having their muskets charged,
by reason they were benighted, immediately gave fire against them, the Diers
and Butchers being in the foremost ranks near the front, who so fast sent the
bullets amongst them, that the Cavaliers were glad to betake them to flight,
leaving behind them twenty or thirty brave horses which were wounded.

Never was any Kingdom more infested with monsters then this of ours in these
distempered and disasterous times, wherein (like Africa) it abound with new
monsters, which viper-like even tear out the bowels of their mother-nation
that first gave them being. There is scarce a day wherein some State-ruining
plot or other is not detected. Their deeds of darkness are for the most part
(blessed be the Father of lights) brought to light. See an example of it in
this days discovery: in Salisbury-Court in London the 19. of this present
August, in a Lords stable under a great hay-mow was found four cart loads of
all sorts of ammunition for war, which was taken away and carried into
Guild Hall. There were also three carts laden with ammunition powder and shot
taken from the Cavaliers (and carried into Coventry) as it was carrying out of
Leicestershire to Warwick, the manner whereof you may see in this ensuing Letter.

The true Copy of a Leter sent from Leicestershire by William Burton a
Messenger of the Parliament to a Gentleman in London.
IN the first place give me leave in a sociable way to co^mmend my best
respects to your self and your kind wife, hoping of your peaceable
quietness, though you intend defense, both for your selves, and us here in
Leicester, Warwick, and Northamptonshire. All which Counties are now in such
distractions as they despair for want of relief and aid from you, I mean the
Head at Westminster, on whom our shoulders relied to stand, for want whereof
many are revolted: some stand still, and more in desperate fear for want of
encouragement: So that upon Friday last when I was at Daventry, I understood
that many Cavaliers were come to Warwick, and there assaulted the Castle so
far, as two men within the Castle were slain, presuming to do more mischief
with the four pieces they got from my Lord Brook at Banbury: but (as God would
have it) by overcharging two of them broke, and the third (as is supposed) was
poisoned, so they did no more hurt: the fourth, being so little, could not
reach the Castle, though they had before the overcharging shot down one of the
Church pinacles. Again, the Cavaliers the same day came to two or three little
villages near Rugby in Warwick shire, and disarmed the inhabitants of Mu^ket,
Pike, and other warlike provision: but one little town (called Kil^^y)
withstanding them, the Cavaliers shot three of them to death, and ransackt the
town, and took away all armor and ammunition whatsoever, and carried it to
Warwi^k. Upon which affright there have diverse women died since, one ran stark
mad, and two by miscarriage. These Cavaliers take away all the ammunition in
every village town in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire,
Warwickshire, and N^rthamptonshire. They have yet spared the trained bands: but
yesterday night came a Warrant for all tr^ined men to appear at Leicester on
tuesday being the 16* of this month: but the Warrant having no hand to it
(though it was supposed to come from M. Hastings) they are resolved not to go.
And this day here at Hinckley we understand that he means to disarme the
trained band, and take the armor into his own possession, for His Majesty's
use, who is expected to be at Leicester on wednesday next, and from thence to
Warwick, and so to Alesbury, where His Majestis purpose is to set up his
Standard, as here we are informed. And most of the Gentry in all the said
Counties are solely for the King, especially the Clergy in general: as some
fifty pound and one horse, some thirty pound and two horse^, some twenty,
fifteen, ten, and eight pounds apiece, none under eight, yet all in general
contributarie. The Earl of Essex his delay is strangely admired here; insomuch
as I suppose if he were here, all the Cavaliers might be surprised: For, M.
Hastings, M. Chamberlain, and M. Purfie, who were sending each of them a great
Cart load, the one powder and shot, the other muskets, the third bullets and
pikes for war: they were all intercepted and sent to Coventry, which is
replenished with hundreds of Volunteers for the Parliaments side. I heard that
the Commission of Array was yesterday (being Sunday) and to day at Leicester
set up: whereupon is demanded the tenth of every man's estate, lands or goods,
and is to be seized, and so by consequence at pleasure hereafter, if the
Parliament relieve it not. I am determined to go to Coventry to morrow, and the
next day to L^icester, from whence I shall inform you furth^r as occasion and
experience shall offer i^ self. And so I rest,

Yours as ever I was, William Burton.
(...) Hinckley in Leicester Shire, August 17. 1642.

His Majesty having commanded all his lo^ing subjects to repair unto him that
will aid an^ as^^st him, the chiefest of the Gentry of Yo^kshire do refuse to
obey the said command, and are resolved to assist the Parliament against all
that shall oppose them, profering their own persons to both Houses to maintain
the said Cause. And they seeing that His Majesty is resolved to set up his
Standard, they humbly desired His most sacred Majesty to change His intention
from so doing: resolving to the uttermost of their power to resist those
persons that shall animate His Majesty to eng^ge this Kingdom in a civil
war.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare, That all such persons as shall,
upon any pretense whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this War, with Horse,
Arms, Plate or Money, are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom,
and shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Ordered to be forthwith published and printed, H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

