The Complete Gentleman: OR DIRECTIONS For the EDUCATION OF YOUTH As to their
BREEDING at HOME And TRAVELING ABROAD.

In Two Treatises.

By I. GAILHARD Gent. Who has been Tutor Abroad to several of the Nobility and
Gentry.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet
Street, near Temple Bar, 1678.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Henrico Episcopo Land. a Sacris Dom.
September. 22. 1677.
A TREATISE Concerning the EDUCATION OF YOUTH.

The First Part. About their Breeding at Home.

By I. GAILHARD, Gent.

Vae tibi qui praees and non prodes, si quia praeesse nequis, prodesse recusas.

Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
Ovid. In the SAVOY: Printed by T.N. for I. Starkey at the Mitre in
Fleet Street, near Temple Bar, 1678.

To the Right Honorable, THEOPHILUS, Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings,
Hungerford, Homet, Botreaux, Moelis, Molins and Peverel, etc.
My Lord,
AS the Tempers of men are different, so are their Conditions, according as
they are placed by Providence, Nature, or their Industry; but all privileged
men, whether with nobleness of Birth, fullness of Riches, or greatness of Parts,
and Virtue, are equally bound in their station to act according to the measure
of their power.

They who are in elevations ought to avoid making idols or ciphers of
themselves; as if they were thus placed only for their own sake, or for a show
to others: but the higher they are, the nearer they are to God; and the more
lively images of him, whose influences are more immediately derived on them;
not there to rest, but to be imparted to those of an orb inferior to theirs;
which ends, if they do not answer, they may well look upon themselves in their
elevation as standing on the edg of a dreadful precipice. For the higher they
are lifted up, the greater and more dangerous will be their fall; and to their
own shame they will undergo the fate of those fiery vapors, elevated in the
air; which to the eyes of men seem to be Stars, and placed amongst them; but on
a sudden, by their fall, vanish away; and then it appears what they were,
namely, an illusion without reality. No man endued with Judgment and Reason,
will believe him who acts the part of a Prince upon the Stage (though for a
time he borrows Royal Ornaments, and assumes over his equals a Sovereign
Authority) to be indeed what he seems and pretends to be; it is so but for a
time, and to give delight to his Spectators: so will he off, who being a man of
quality, is useless to those, who, because he is above them, have their eyes
fixed upon him, and gives them neither good Precepts, Advises, nor Examples.
There is no Star but has its influences within her sphere, no good Tree but
produces good Fruit; but he who is noble, and does not act his part, is but a
vain shadow.

Your Lordship knows, and is concerned to know these things; for not only you
are born to be under our Sovereign, one of the chief Pillars of the State, as a
member of the most illustrious House of Peers, whereof few go before you; but
also you are so highly advantaged by your Birth, that the Blood of many Princes
runs in your Veins. This Privilege is so far improved by the care and
tenderness of the extraordinary Person who brought you into the world, and your
own good dispositions, that in your Lordship we find this to be true, Men of a
superior Orb are not tied to common Rules, neither does virtue in such persons
as you, stay for years. You make a good use of such advantages, and in your
Lordship these good causes produce good effects: that which into others would
infuse pride and loftiness, in you breeds meekness and humility; so that you
never give occasion to the ordinary dispute in the world, between Superiors and
Inferiors, caused by want and excess, too little, and too much; for often great
men are apt to require and exact too great respects and submission from the
lower sort, who, on their parts, are too prone to deny yielding the Honor and
Obedience which they owe to those who are above them.

My heart not satisfied some years ago to have vowed it self to serve your
Lordship, is now ambitious to make it known to the world; and that which first
of all was the effect of a choice, being attended with my inclination, is at
last become a strong and necessary duty, grounded upon those Virtues, which,
for a competent time, I could perceive to spring in you, but now are ripening
and drawing toward perfection: whereupon I must express my joy to your
Lordship, pray for an increase, and beseech him who will honor those that
honor him, to make you like a new shining Star in the Firmament of the State,
to raise you from one degree of light to another; that you may have Christian
and wise influences over those that are round about you, and to season your
tender years with his true Grace, which none will be more glad of, than

Right Honorable, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant, J.
Gailhard.

TO THE READER.
THE Subject I now handle is as important and necessary as any to humane
Society; inasmuch as being reduced to Rules, and these Rules brought to
practice, it will have great influences, and prove very beneficial* if any ways
I can treat it sutably to its worth, it will afford variety of things for
several sorts of persons; for all the parts of it joined together, are very
comprehensive, and of a large extent: What time I could spare from my necessary
Employment, for part of a Summer which I passed at Angers in France, I bestowed
upon this; but since, it was laid aside for about seven years, by reason of my
farther traveling into France, Italy, Germany, etc. but now that God has been
pleased to bring me back again, I think sit to impart it to the world.

I will not go about giving an account of it, but leave it to the judgment of
the Reader; only I hope none will take exceptions at any thing I say, in some
places of the other parts; for I can assure them I never intend, but rather
avoid offending others in what I do or say; and much less do I point at any
when I speak of the tricks of vicious and debauched persons, which I believe
none but those who are such, will take notice of: and in such a case, I will
not much trouble my self with what they can say or do; because they are like
those whose wounds are so sore, that they cannot endure the Chyrurgion should
touch them in the least, let his hand be never so gentle; so if one mentions
the vices of such, they cannot abide it, but start thereat.

A wise man said of old, that four good Mothers had begotten four good
Children, viz. Familiarity, Contempt; Prosperity, Pride; Confidence, Danger;
and Truth, Hatred: Hence comes the Proverb, Veritas odium parit, in the
delivery whereof one ought to be very cautious; specially when any ways it
reflects upon great men: thus Il Ferrante Palavicini suffered for his An
Italian Book.
Divortio celeste, etc. and witty Boccalini at Venice, was beaten to death with
bags full of sand for his Pietra del Paragone, and some things in his Raguagli
di Parnasso; and a poor Italian Poet was made suffer the Strapata for this
general expression of his, Biasimare un principe e pericolo e lodarlo, bugia.
To blame a Prince is dangerous, but to commend him is a lie. Subjects of this
nature ought not to be handled at all, or at least very sparingly: The mark of
Majesty which God has printed upon the forehead of Princes, ought to be
respected by all men; but the faults of particular men may be more freely
censured upon occasion; specially when it is for the public good.

For my part I look upon this world as a stage, and I value men only according
as they act their part in it: He who is but a Countreyman, and lives well as
such, seems to me more commendable, than he who is a Gentleman born, and does
not the actions of a Gentleman: so that esteeming every one for what he is, and
not for what he has, I equally value those who have the greatest Charges and
Dignities, and those who carry burdens upon their backs; except Virtue makes a
difference between them: Indeed Birth, Places, and Authority, in whatsoever
Subject they be found, ought to be respected; but Virtue alone makes men to be
esteemed.

I am neither so ignorant, nor so inconsiderate, as not to think that there are
those who are as illustrious for their Merits, as for their Birth and Fortune;
and that this age is not so barbarous, but that some in it have good
Inclinations, and do good Actions; but that number is small, and the multitude
is usually affected to evil.

This consideration has put me upon this matter; for as my genius cannot long
allow me to be idle, so I have chosen a subject, which being satisfactory to
me, might prove useful and beneficial to others. What few things I have learned
in my Travels, I think my self, upon serious consideration, obliged to impart
to others, who may thence receive some small instructions, and directions, if
they have a mind to see the world: though the chief thing I propound herein to
my self, is to show the necessity, benefit, and excellency of a good Breeding,
becoming none so much as a Gentleman, who, by his Virtue and Merit, more than
by his Extraction, should be raised above the Commonalty; for Virtue first of
all made a difference between man and man, there being an equality between all
the Children of Adam, as to Birth and Nature; and certainly when the Nobility
and Gentry want Merits to Command, and Abilities to Govern, they must change
place with the lower sort of People, whom Parts and Virtue, (though not without
favor) will raise to the greatest Charges and Dignities in the Land.

OF THE EDUCATION OF YOUTH At Home.
Of Breeding Children at Home.
TO have Youth well brought up, is so necessary to Humane Society, that all
Nations ought to make it one of their chief cares: If Egyptians, Caldeans,
Persians, Grecians, Romans, and other Heathens were so studious of it, how much
more are Christians (who have greater lights than they had) bound to mind it?
For that which to others was a natural and politic duty, is enforced upon us
by the Gospel, which the more men do conform to, the better they understand
their duty; which not only themselves will practice, but also ^uggest to those
who have any dependence upon them, and so infuse into them Virtue and Sciences.
The better a Christian is, the more humble, civil, and gentle he will be, and
the greater care he will take to teach those who are related to him, to be so
too. This more nearly concerns Parents, who have a tie to instruct their
Children, beyond any other Relation whatsoever. It Is not enough to have brought
them into the world, except they instruct them to live well therein; nor to
have given them being, unless they direct them how to attain to a well-being.
Nature alone is no great matter, for Beasts do not want a sensitive principle,
and even amongst them there are those which are not satisfied to have brought
forth their young ones, but they tend, and take care of them till they are able
to shift for themselves. Birds of prey will lead them to it, and Eagles which
use to be about Rocks and Mountains, and to fly very high, expose their young
ones to the beams of the Sun, to the end they may abide it when it shines
clear and hot upon them; Cats lead theirs to catch Mice, Dogs their Whelps to
hunt, and those creatures which are apt to be destroyed with snares, will often
teach their little ones how to avoid them: This natural instinct should not
have more power on Beasts, than reason in men.

How much greater is the obligation which Parents lay upon their Children, when
to being they add breeding, when not only they make them men, but also teach
them how to be knowing and virtuous men? As to the first, nature makes us all
alike, it produces us all with body and soul; flesh and blood, the essential
parts of humanity; but Education makes a difference, and sets a mark of
distinction; wherefore it is well called a second nature: For want of this, a
poor Country-man's Son will be fit only to handle a Plough, and follow vile and
mechanical employments; though perhaps he has within him dispositions to learn
great things, and to receive good impressions if they were given him.
Contrariwise* a great man's Son's dullness and weakness are often overcome by a
constant care taken of his Education, whereby his bad natural qualities are
mended, his imperfections and defects corrected, and what seeds of good
dispositions he has in him are improved; whereas if he had been neglected, he
had perhaps been unfit for any good thing.

How often has Breeding proved a better and a surer estate and inheritance
than Lands, Riches, and Honors; all these things are subject to losses,
chances, and revolutions; but Breeding is an unestimable treasure, unseparable
from him who has it. A man may be fooled out of his Estate, but not out of his
Wit: providence has put such a difference between the means and fortunes of
men, to leave a field to Virtue, which being exercised, may attain rewards
which men of worth do often obtain; and though sometimes they miss them, yet
they have in themselves the satisfaction to deserve them: And certainly it is
more honorable not to have, yet deserve, than to have and not deserve. Now
when a man wants Birth and Means, Education will supply them; for it reforms
what is amiss in nature, and perfects what good we have; it helps a man to get
what he has not, and to preserve what he has; so that at one time or other it
proves necessary and useful to all sorts of persons. Breeding and Discipline
(says Plato) when they are good, In the fourth Dialogue of his Republic.
make parts to be good; and if they were good before, they become better
thereby.

From the School of good Breeding will come good Christians, loyal Subjects,
obedient Children, faithful Servants; in one word, persons good in every
relation. On the contrary, what often causes Impiety, Atheism, Blasphemy,
Disobedience, Rebellion, etc. but the want of care of Youth, which once being
fallen into a debauched course of life, care neither for God nor men. Hence do
arise Disorders in Families, troubles and civil Wars in States? for often God
punishes men for neglecting (though but in part) this duty; as in the case of
Ely's Children, 1 Samuel 3.13.
by a special Judgment of God his whole Family was destroyed, because his Sons
made themselves vile, and he restrained them not: if therefore every Parent
would take care of his Family, every Magistrate, of the Town he is in, of every
Province, and so of every Kingdom, the world would go better than it does, and
Youth would not generally prove so unruly: thus evil would be cut off by the
root, and thereby much mischief prevented.

The nature of Youth for the most part is like Wax by the fire; and what
Aristotle says of the mind, that it is a smooth table upon which any thing can
be written, may be applied to the present subject; it is like the materia prima
of Philosophers, apt to receive any form: though, I confess, evil rather than
good, by reason of the depravation of humane nature: therefore the whole care,
pains, and industry of Parents is required. To this purpose Frantzius animal.
Hist. Sacra, cap. 26. fol. 394.
one speaking of the Nightingale, says, that it sings before the young ones to
teach them: and he adds, It has been observed, that with much attention they
hearken to it, and then repeat it one after another: Farther, says he, It has
also been taken notice, that it does interrupt their singing, to correct them
when they sing amiss, in order to perfect them in the quality wherein that Bird
does excel. What a precedent is this for Parents?

The Manners of a man usually are suitable to his Breeding, which teaches to
speak, and to do well: Educatio mores facit and id sapit unusquisque quod
didicit, etc. ait Seneca.
Breeding frames the manners of men, and every one knows what he has
learned: therefore a good custom must remove that which a bad one has
introduced. Indeed it has great influences upon the temper, not only to
perfect it when it is good, but also to alter it when it is otherwise, rooting
out what is amiss in it. Let Nature be what it will it may be changed by
Education; for Invidus, iracundus, iners, vinosus, amator Horat. lib. 1. ep. 1.

Nemo adeo ferus est qui non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem praebeat aurem.
This was well known to the Lycurgu^.
Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians, who to recommend his Laws to his Valor. max.
Citizens, and to withdraw them from the corruption and effeminate pleasures
they were in at that time, took care to breed up two whelps, the one a
Greyhound, the other, a currish breed; the former he kept at home, and fed him
with good meat; but the last he often carried into the Field to hunting: one
day he brought forth both before the people, and set down good victuals of one
side, and let out a Hare on the other; whereupon the Dogs did run each after
his usual meat, the Greyhound after victuals, the other after the Hare: then he
said to the people, do you see what a difference, diversity of Breeding has
set between the two whelps, and how it has had over them a greater power than
nature?

We also see that young Children, who, by reason of the innocence of their age,
are not capable to dissemble, love their Nurses more than their Mothers; so
that Breeding makes on them a greater impression than Generation; according to
the opinion of Euripides, Ipsa educa^io inter homines frequenter ma^orem vim
excitat amoris quam ipsa generatio.
Alexander the Great, being asked one day whom he loved best, his Father Philip
or Aristotle? My preceptor, said he, Ille enim ut essem* hic ut praeclare
institutus essem author fuit. Commonly Education is a rule to a man as long as
he lives. The Disciples of that great Philosopher, Plutarchus.
when they were arguing upon a point, used often to say, The Master said so,
St. Paul sends some to their rudiments and former instructions; and in another
place, he says, But you have not so learned Christ. That which he says upon
the account of Religion, may be applied to the purpose of Education; how men,
though come to age, ought to remember lessons given them in their Youth, and
bring them to practice. The advice of a Roman Poet is very good, -- Te ipsum
Concute number tibi quae vitiorum inseverit olim, Horat. lib. 1. Satyr. 3.

Natura aut etiam consuetudo mala, namque
Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris.
If it be necessary at last to come to this trial and examen of himself, there
must be a necessity first to receive instructions about it, which are part of,
and depend upon Breeding.

And because it is not enough to convince men of the necessity of this, except
some ways be showed how to bring it about, hereupon I confess my heart begins
to fail me, specially when I consider how many thousands in the world have a
riper judgment, and greater experience than I; and therefore am unwilling to
give my advice about it: For I know how different the ways, and how contrary
man's opinions are about it; yet being so far engaged in it, I must go through,
but submit to the censure of ingenious readers.

I could wish in the first place to see the care of Parents extended upon
Children immediately after they are born, and (if it were convenient) the
Mother to suckle them; for Children are by half, more obliged to Mothers who
take these pains, than to those who do not; it being known that a Nurse is a
second Mother. I say this, not only because it is possible for them to be
changed by those Nurses when they are born to great Estates, and have others
put in their room, but also because all have not that care and true tenderness
of Mothers who have carried them nine months in their Womb: However, in case
they are resolved to save themselves this trouble, they must be careful in the
choice of a Nurse; seeing a Child for the most part retains much of her humor
and temper, communicated through the Blood, out of which is formed the Milk,
which is the food, and is turned into the very substance of the Child; the
spirits also being therein conveyed: therefore I would choose a healthful,
jovial, and virtuous woman; all which are necessary qualifications for a Nurse:
for as we use to say, such the Father, such the Son; such the Mother, such the
Daughter. Though this be not universally true, yet the reason why it should be
so, being better than why it should not be, the like we may affirm of the Nurse
and the Child.

This reason some give why Tyberius the Emperor was so given to Wine, because
his Nurse was a drunkard, and used to feed him with Bread sopt in Wine. This
vice did not only attend him in his retirement in Caprea, but also followed him
to his grave. Others do affirm that the famous Grecian Achilles was so valiant,
and so courageous, because Chyron fed him with the Marrow, Hearts, and Livers
of Lions, and other stout Creatures. Many other things of this nature might be
produced to the same purpose.

It is the practice of some Nurses and Servants about Children, to fright them
with stories and representations, which make so deep an impression upon them,
that they can never break it as long as they live: This sometimes frights them
out of their wits, or makes them so timorous, that they hardly dare walk a step
in the dark, sleep without company in their chamber, or without a burning
candle all night; and other effects it produces, which make them ridiculous to
others. I know those who are very rational, yet cannot shake it off, though
they strive to do it: they know it to be a very great imperfection, yet cannot
remedy it. Thus a coward knows he is so, and would be glad to be courageous,
but cannot help it. This sometimes is an effect of having been frighted, rather
than a natural defect. Let them also avoid giving them blows, whereof the marks
or effects remain upon them till they are carried to their grave; and very
often a lameness, crookedness, and such deformity, yea, death, are caused by a
blow, a fall, or the like.

I would have Children to be taught something betimes, and almost as soon as
they are able to crawl, and to speak any ways intelligibly. Quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit odorem, testa diu. Hor. l. 1. ep. 2.
A vessel ever retains a scent of the liquor that was first put into it: Prove.
22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. It Is true, impressions in Youth are easily taken away, as a
young plant is soon rooted out; but when acts are turned into habits, and these
contracted through a long succession, it is very difficult, especially if they
are bad, and in this sense the Rule is good, Principiis obsta.

Care is to be taken at first, that Youth be not enticed or drawn to evil
practices and customs, for the inward principle being naturally corrupt,
namely, the mind darkened, and so unabled to discern true from false, the will
and affections depraved and prone to evil, if these natural dispositions be
strengthened with evil practice, and become habitual, all that will not only be
settled and confirmed, but also it will become inveterate and past remedy,
without God's special grace. And this is to be minded the more, because the
disturbance which passions work in Youth, and the being possessed with evil
habits, makes such a confusion between the images of true and real good, and of
that which only appears such, that reason, which is born after them, and amidst
this storm, is framed within us, is not in a capacity at that time distinctly
to put a difference, by which means the soul is mistaken in her choice.

But the first and chief thing I would have them to be taught, is, piety, and
the fear of God, Psa^m 111.10.
which, as David and Solomon say, Prove. 1.7.
Is the beginning of wisdom and knowledge: wherefore the same Prophet says,
Psalm. 22.9.
Thou art my God from my mothers womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon
my mothers breast: And the wisest man that ever was, Eccles. 12.1.
bids us Remember our Creator in the days of our youth. St, Paul commends his
Disciple Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5.
because from his youth up, by the care of his Mother, and Grandmother, he was
instructed in the Faith, and fear of God; and that from a child he had known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvation. Let
profane and wicked men talk what they will, the best and safest is God's way.
This Principle, and others of our Religion I wish were early and continually
infused into them, by learning some easy Catechism, reading in the Bible as
soon as they are able, and using them to go to Church, behave themselves
reverently, and as much as they are able, to give attention to what is
preached; and when they are come home, they must be asked what they remember of
the Sermon, censuring them for their neglect, and praising and encouraging them
for their diligence.

Above all things they ought to be put upon the duty of prayer, I would have
them persuaded of the dependence they have upon God for food, raiment, and
other necessaries for this and the life to come: when they fall upon their
knees, they ought to be made sensible of the glory, power, purity, and mercy of
^od, and (as much as they are capable) of their own unworthiness, sinfulness,
and misery, craving pardon for their sins, in and through the Merits and
Sufferings of our Savior alone, (and this will begin to work humility in them)
they must be thankful for mercies received, and crave those they stand in need
of, especially the constant protection of God.

Moreover, Parents must ever be giving them good precepts, and never bad
examples. The Spartans to cause their Children to abhor drunkenness, made their
servants drunk, and then exposed them to the sight of their Children; who
seeing what a vile vice this is, did thereby loath and hate it. So upon other
accounts, the use of such demonstrations will make a deep impression upon the
minds and memories of youth.

Hereupon I must express my dissenting from the opinion of many, who think it
not fit to entertain youth with serious things, and others which are or seem to
be above their capacity, and not suitable to their years; but certainly
experience does confute this error; tell them nothing but of toys and trifles,
and their mind will run about such things: their mind is never at rest, but is
constantly taken up with something: now it is with it as with the ground, sow
Oats in it, and it will bring forth Oats, but sow Wheat, and it will produce
what it has received: therefore my reason is, that though Children have not
ripeness of judgment to use it, yet memory is the faculty wherein that age does
excel, to which they commit the things they hear: and though for the present
the benefit of it does not appear, yet it is as the seed in the ground, which
does not immediately come to maturity, but it falls in first, then corrupts,
afterward it buds, and springs up, and at last gives us fruit; so in time
youth will remember good things taught them, and reduce them to a practice.

Morality is the second thing they ought to learn, and this flows from the
former; for where there is a right Principle of Piety, it will appear in life
and conversation: and though infancy be hardly capable of the strict and severe
rules of Morality, yet at least they must have a view of the Principles of it;
which, as judgment ripeneth, may be refined; and come to perfection. The
Heathens, by the light of Nature, and the help of Learning, have given notable
lessons about it; and whosoever is able to read and understand the Writings of
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, etc. will subscribe to what I say,
and also admire to see them so much go beyond many Christians in the knowledge
and practice of moral virtues, yet for want of Faith their Chastity, Sobriety,
Fortitude, etc. were but shining sins, Splendida peccata, as St. Austin calls
them.

Now, though I could wish Parents to be remiss in those things which are of an
indifferent nature, yet stiffly they must be set against vices, and things
contrary to good manners; but the chastisement is to be left to their prudence;
ever making a distinction between the person and the thing: but of this
hereafter we will speak more at large, as of the difference of irregularities,
committed out of ignorance, humane weakness, or of set purpose; yet one must
never allow them the gross breaches of the Law of God, as Swearing, Lying,
Stealing, etc. not in the least degree thereof; for from a low degree one
easily rises to a higher, and so persists till he be consummated in that sin,
and then consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, the custom of sinning takes
away the sense of sin.

It is very ill done of some who allow Children to use by-Oaths, merry-Lyes,
and petty-Thefts of Toys and Trifles, and do not consider how the Devil is
thereby intruding sin, though in a disguise, and not in that horrid shape which
is natural to it. No, no, he who takes the Name of God in vain, if not
prevented, will at last be brought to Swear, Forswear, Curse and Blaspheme;
from merry Lies he will proceed to those which are pernicious: He who steals a
pin, will at last steal a pound. What men allow when it is in their power, and
their duty to hinder, they are approvers of, and so guilty of the sad
consequences that arise therefrom. To mak^ Youth abhor sin, it must be
represented to them odious, vile, and in its own colors. Justice (...) d^eply
to be printed in their hearts, and they to be made perfect in this Rule, Quod
tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris, Deal with others as you would be dealt by.

Now as there are many of a stubborn humor, and naturally inclined to
mischief* so admonitions ought to be used: and if this cannot serve, correction
must be applied. Indeed some Parents are sometimes the cause of their Childrens
destruction; like Apes they so dally, embrace, and make so much of them, that
they choke and stifle them. This unnatural tenderness (I must so call it) is so
pernicious; that they who are afraid of keeping a Rod in the house to correct a
Child, sometimes see him drawn to the Gallows for want of timely chastisement.
This saying too often proves true, He who has not a rod in his house for his
Son, keeps a rope for him. A wiser man than such, Prove. 22.15.
further says, Folly is bound in the heart of a Child, but the rod of
correction shall drive it off. This sparing of children is so far from being a
sign of true love, that it is a strong demonstration of hatred or indifferency.
Let what Solomon says to this purpose be taken notice of, Prove. 13.24.
He that spares his rod hates his Son, but he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes; that is, in his childhood and infancy: yet this correction is used
with different success; some under it like wax by the fire, are softened and
bettered, others like clay and dirt are hardened.

On the other side, some Parents, far from being too indulgent, go to an
extreme of severity or cruelty. When Children are chastened, it must be in
measure, and with moderation, by Fathers, not by Hangmen. When God chastises
his Children, he does it in mercy, and not in fury, to heal, and not to
destroy; Hos. 11.8.
His heart is turned within him. Some are so unreasonable, that if they are
vexed at any thing, and a Child lies in their way, out of a frolic, or folly,
this Child who at that time has done nothing amiss, must be beaten, and a
Father or Mother will pass their anger upon him: a stranger so doing may happen
to be excused; for he is not obliged to the natural affection which a Father
and Mother ought to have. In the case of the two Harlots, 1 Kings 3.26.
she who was not the Mother of the Child alive, was content he should be
divided; but the tenderness of the true Mother could not allow of it, she had
rather lose him altogether, than see him destroyed: So that it is more natural
and pardonable for Parents to be too indulgent, than too severe; though I do
not deny there ought to be a proportion between the fault and the chastisement.
But before I pass farther, I must take notice of a thing considerable in it
self, though it be not to the present purpose. How the case of the two Harlots
is an emblem of the difference between Kings and Tyrants; Kings are Fathers of
their people, whom they deal with like children whom they love, and are tender
of their good, peace, and happiness: but Tyrants care not for them only to
serve their ends; and let them sink or swim, it is all one to them.

But to return to the matter in hand, fatherly corrections ought to be
inflicted seasonably: there is time and season for every thing: a chastisement
as well as a word in season is very effectual, it must also be done gently; for
natural tenderness must not be forgotten. Yet I do not deny, as I said before,
it should be somewhat suitable to the offense; and in this Parents ought not to
be actuated by any violent passion, only out of a desire for the Childrens
good. In a word, a rod in their hand is to be physic, to heal, and not poison
to kill: and this is spoken to fathers more than to Mothers; because these last
are commonly more inclined to tenderness than to severity: Wherefore we see how
God, to show his kindness in Scriptures, compares himself to Mothers, oftener
than to Fathers, upon four accounts, of Love, Indulgency, Allurements, and
Condescension.

Erudition, or learning is the third thing, I wish Children to be put upon; but
it must be a learning proportionable to their capacity; provided it be no
prejudice to their health: for upon this account one is not to venture the
substance for the accident, which yet I would not have to be understood of the
two former, especially of Piety, which includes a necessity to salvation; for
then I could speak in the words of that pious man, who being dissuaded from his
study, and reading of godly Books, as a thing contrary to his health, answered
thus, For life sake I must not lose that for which I ought to live. Nec propter
vitam vivendi perdere causam.

Let them begin with Reading, Writing, and what thing else is fit for their age
and capacity; but Parents must be able either by themselves, or others, to know
not only the capacity, but also the temper of the Tutor, or Schoolmaster; for
Scholars have much of the nature of Preceptors: and this I may give for a true
observation of mine (which I do not pretend to be of an universal truth) upon
several persons; the reason is clear, for the fear which the one strikes into
the others, makes these last study the temper of the former, to conform
themselves to it; so that if those prove melancholic, or choleric, these, out
of fear or complacency, will imitate them thereby to become the more
acceptable. And indeed how can a young man, apt to receive impressions, not
fall into the temper of a man whom he is constantly with, and whom he looks
upon as given him to show good examples, as well as to give good precepts;
besides, that his temper and actions do creep, and insensibly, or unawares
insinuate into the young man.

The way of some, first to have a Tutor at home, then send them to a Free
School, so to the University; when they are fit for it, is often attended with
success; but as it is usual almost in every thing to meet with letts and
hindrances, in this it falls out so sometimes; for at home often the fondness
of a Mother will spoil all, Experience shows how few become eminent for
learning, of those who are born in a place where is an University if they stay
in it.
accusing the Tutor one time of too much severity, another of neglect, and
another time for giving too hard tasks, so that a young Boy who is not willing
to be tied to his Book, perceiving this, abuses it, and then there is no
dealing with him. Farther, in some Schools except one has a great care of him,
he will neglect his Book, and fall into a disorderly course of life, often
running too and fro, which some Masters will wink at for their interest, to
perpetuate them in the School. As for the Universities, there is often so much
corruption, by reason of the great concourse of Scholars, who debauch one
another, one alone being sufficient to corrupt many, that instead of learning
they sometimes forget; and when they should improve themselves in Virtue, Arts,
and Sciences, they abjure all good manners, and become proficient only in Vices.

Yet for all this, my intent is not to speak against the use of those things,
because they are abused* only, I desire the abuses so to be taken away, as to
be reformed: for I am not so singular, and unreasonable as to condemn things
settled by the advice of good and judicious men, by experience found to be
useful and necessary: only, I point at some inconveniences which sometimes
happen in it, to the end they may be avoided. And seeing the best things are
liable to be corrupted, I will never think the worse of Schools, and
Universities, such corruptions creeping in through the fault of some persons
and times: Contrariwise, I consider them as Seminaries of Learning; than the
which, as yet, the wit and prudence of men could find no better; therefore,
mending what I said to be amiss, a Tutor is very necessary in a house; for
being under the eyes of Parents, he will the better mind his Duty; and his
Advices and Precepts being strengthened with the authority and presence of
Parents, will have greater influences upon the Scholar. In Free Schools there
will sometimes be an emulation who shall learn best, when they who perform
their Duty receive praises and encouragements; and the University breeding will
be very beneficial, when the good Orders of every College shall be put in
execution; for indeed Universities are the center and spring of Learning. One
thing more I add in relation to Schools, that when there happens to be an
unruly and uncorrigible young man, 'twill be the credit and interest of the
Master to dismiss him, for fear he should spoil the whole School; for a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

Some Masters have a pernicious method, which is also too common, to affect
being formidable to Scholars: Obedience I know to be the ground which whole
Education is to be builded upon; but I think a voluntary obedience, when it can
be had, is much better than a forced one. Fair means ought to be tried before
one makes use of severity, and rigor; but there are those who would have
Scholars to quake in their presence, and to fall upon their knees, and as it
were, adore them. Whosoever it is that teaches us any thing, we ought to honor
and respect him upon that account; yet I cannot approve to see extorted such
respects, and in such a degree as are not due. This indeed is a very bad
precedent to young men; for when things which they ought not, are exacted, they
are put in the way, and authorized to deny those which are due.

I say therefore, that too great and unseasonable severity produces often sad
effects; they would fright young men into learning, instead of enticing them to
it: this is the way to make them hate and abhor all manner of erudition. The
first rudiments of Learning are crabby, and bitter enough in themselves,
without any farther mixture of gall and wormwood* The will of men will be
persuaded, but not forced: it is as of the string of a Watch, if it be wound
higher than it should be, it will break. Learning must be represented to them
as a pleasure and advantage, and not as a wrack or a torture. Difficulties
ought to be cleared and levelled, and, as much as is possible, they should be
led to it by a smooth way: yet for all this I know Muses do not sit upon a
level ground, but upon a high hill, so that none can go up without some
difficulty: but withal, I say, they ought to be led up not through the
steepest, or thorniest, but the easiest way, which will prove more pleasant and
beneficial to both Tutor and Pupil. When there is a bad step, or any crabby
pass, the young man should be cheared up, and encouraged, and not run him out
of breath.

I do not deny, but that it is sometimes necessary to chastise them, specially
some, whose temper requires it; but I would have it done with moderation, and
only when it is fit and necessary; yet avoiding injurious and unbecoming
expressions, and giving those blows, whereof the marks do remain so long after,
not correcting them ad libitum, or out of a fancy, but when there is a just
cause, and that as Fathers, not like Tyrants or Hangmen.

Here I cannot forbear inveighing against those Schoolmen, Petrus Lombardus,
etc.
who have corrupted Sciences, specially Philosophy and Divinity, which they
have stripped of their natural habit, and clothed with a strange dress, under
several barbarous names and notions, to make a monopoly of it to themselves;
many things in both Philosophy and Divinity were clear and intelligible, but
now they have drawn a curtain about, and darkened it with fantastical terms
and expressions, which signify nothing but what they have been pleased to
allow: this is the cause of many disputes and vain contentions, which since the
year 1130. or thereabouts have troubled the wit and quiet of men.

The way of teaching Youth in Schools, is so well known, and so common, that it
were in vain for me to speak any thing of it; besides, that every one follows
the method he thinks best, and it is natural for men to stand out in their
opinion: yet I must say, that with some the ordinary method will not do; but
ways ought to be found out suitable to the young man's genius. Sometimes
Conversation will be more effectual than reading and learning by heart, though
by all means these must be used; the young man is to help, for the
Schoolmaster cannot infuse it; therefore the Scholar must take pains: however,
I say there are some methods easier and better than others. When I speak of
Conversation and Reading, I do not oppose, but distinguish one from the other;
and I would have discourse used sometimes by way of diversion. When a Scholar
is not in a humor, or disposed to learn one thing, then he must be put upon
another; or instead of making him learn with reading, one should teach him with
telling, or take some other way to cheat him, as it were, into learning.

But this is better done by a Preceptor in a House, than by a Master in a
public School. He, who at once has but one or two to mind, can better take
his time, and has more leisure to study his or their temper, and accordingly
order or alter his method; but he who has many to look to, has generally one
common way, which every one coming into his School is to submit to; and
certainly this cannot be alike fit for every Scholar.

I love to hear a young man asking the reasons of the rules and precepts given
him by his Tutor. It is recorded of Cato, that as soon as he had received any
document from his, he enquired after the cause of it: this is necessary; for if
things be committed only to memory, this may happen to fail, or else sometime
they will be like a Bird that whistles the tunes he heard often: so that put
them out of their tune, they are gone, and silent; or if the words of the
things learned are changed, or out of place, though the sense remains, they
are at a loss; like those who (when they begin to Dance) can do it only in the
same Room where they are used to do it; or if they go about it in another end of
the Chamber, then presently they are out. The same it is of some Schoolboys,
who if in the least they are put out of their ways, will hardly say any thing
to the purpose, or speak three words together of good sense; or if they do it
will be by a mere accident. Thus we read of a Parre in Rome, which in the days
of Augustus was (as many more) taught to salute the Emperor with his Ave
Imperator, which he said one day, as Augustus was going by, who answered, I
heard many such salutations: after which the Bird said, Oleum and operam
perdidi, I lost my time and my pains: whereof the Emperor took such notice,
that he caused the Master of the Parret to be called to him, and gave him some
tokens of his Liberality. Now the Master never intended to teach him these last
words; but as the Bird was dull, and did not learn well, often he complained he
had lost his time, and his pains, in teaching of him; which the Parret
remembering at that time, it came in as well as could be. And indeed some of
these creatures take notice of words sometimes more than men do imagine, and
can remember words which they heard but once. One day in one of the chief
Courts of Europe, upon a discourse about Parrets, made by a Lady, who
exceedingly commended her own, the Queen desired to see it, and it was sent
for; and as soon as the Cage was set down in the presence of the Court, in the
language of the Country where this was, he said, Let evil take the sluts who
are the cause I am all wet. The truth was, it rained when it was brought
through the streets, and the Footman that carried it, spoke the same words
which the Parret did well remember. I doubt in Schools are too many such
Parrets who superficially know something, but are not acquainted with the
grounds and causes thereof.

Wherefore, to get Youth the more willing to learn, I would endeavor to make
them sensible of the great and many advantages which come by Learning; whereof
the first is the informing of the judgment, and enlightening of the
understanding, which to understand the better, one must know there is a faculty
of the soul, called intellect, which is a door and inlet into the soul: for
whatsoever objects senses do convey into the soul, they of necessity must pass
by this, whose office is to hear, and to judge after examination: In the first
part it is called passive, and in the second active: This intellect is as the
eye of the soul, whereby she discerns true from false, which is its proper
object; as good from evil is the object of the will, yet as this last does
determinate her self according to the last dictate of the former, the notions
of good and evil do necessarily fall under its serious consideration: for the
intellect is as a judgment seat at whose bar stand all propositions about
things suggested to the soul, whether or not to be done, chosen or rejected: to
the end, that after Discursus.
reasons pro and con represented, it may pass a sentence, and take a final
resolution. Hence it is that often we see men so slow, staggering and
unresolved by reason of scruples remaining in their mind; which till they be
cleared, and difficulties removed, they will come to no conclusion: so that
comparing inconveniences with advantages, and finding them of an equal weight,
the predominant passion does often intervene to make the scales cast on one
side, so that a timorous man will not dare to undertake a thing for fear of
dangers: but a bold man will venture through with this consideration, Audaces
fortuna juvat timidosque repellit. But this intellect has its darkness and
ignorance, it is naturally blind, because of Adam's fall: for as promises to
Adam were not for him alone, but also were extended upon all mankind, so
threatenings concerned all his posterity; he was not as a private man, but a
public person, representative of all mankind: as therefore through his
disobedience, he not only lost his supernatural privileges, as holiness,
righteousness, the image of God and innocence; so all his natural gifts and
faculties were thereby corrupted, and this depravation has reached all his
successors: no wonder therefore if the intellect of every young man is still
involved in that blindness which is also much increased by the suggestions of
Satan, and other inward corruptions: the Devil ever goes about to beguile it,
disguising as much as he is able the true nature of objects, insinuating evil
for good, falsehood for truth; so that many times it is miserably deceived in
its judgments, especially about spiritual things; in which operation the grace
of God must intervene, and the morning Star must shine till the Sun of
Righteousness, being come to his noon, does dissipate the clouds of darkness,
and ignorance: therefore says St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.8.
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know it: for in
the new Creation, as in the first, darkness is before light; so that now God
says as he did then, Let there be light; and there is light; or else man
proceeds from one degree of sin of those expressed in St. James, Jam. 1.14, 15.
he is tempted by those objects which by his lust are received; and by them and
the enticements he is deceived; after this, sin is conceived, then brought
forth, lastly finished or consummated.

Although the mind be not so blind in, and ignorant of natural and humane
things, as of Divine and Spiritual; yet there is a great cloud drawn over it,
which in some degrees may be dissipated by learning. In these days knowledge is
not infused, but acquired with time and pains. We are not born learned, but we
become so by degrees: though alas, if we would speak seriously, and come to an
examen of our selves, we would say with a wise man, Socrates.
Hoc unum scio quod nihil scio, one thing I know, that I know nothing; for
indeed, what we are ignorant of is much more than what we know. I will say
farther, that the most learned man in the world has but a superficial knowledge
of things: nay, more than this, let a man never so much have studied a
question, one or other coming after him can have such notions of it as the
other never thought upon. Amongst Grecians, when Sciences first of all came out
of Egypt, the bravest wits suffered to be called Magi (...) Wisemen; then after
some proficiency with Pythagoras, they took the name of (...) Philosophers,
friends or lovers of Wisdom; and when they were come to a higher pitch of
learning, they would with Socrates be called Rhetores, Speakers, or men
discoursing of Wisdom: that is, the more learned they did grow, the better they
knew their ignorance. It Is an observation made of Solomon, Eccles. 1.
that first he calls himself King over Israel, then King in Jerusalem; and for
once he calls himself King, three times he takes the name of Preacher, to show
that the nearer he was drawing to God, and the more he was looking upon
himself, the humbler he was. Just as when a man goes down a River, he can see
the bottom of it, and thereupon has great thoughts of himself: but when he
comes to the main Sea, he can discover no bottom there; all are abysses and
depths: then he sees the vanity and lightness of his former thoughts.

Indeed Learning, except it be sanctified, makes a man swell with pride,
Knowledge pusseth up: 1 Cor. 8.1.
Hence it is, that as Corruption optimi est pessima, Nothing is so insufferable
as the pride of a man of Learning* because wanting experience of the world, he
commits many absurd errors: indeed he is altogether impertinent; so that having
conceived a high opinion of his learning, though it be in imagination more than
in reality, slights all the world, as if they were ignorant and fools: looks he
on others as did the Pharisees on the people, But this people who knows not
the Law are cursed. John 7.49.
If such a Scholar (as now we speak of) once out of his Study goes into
company, either he will act many tricks of pedantry, or else be as mute as a
fish; he can hardly speak of any thing but Books, of Logic, Metaphysick, etc.
without any consideration, whether it be suitable with the company he is in; and
yet in whatsoever he says, would be accounted an Oracle, applauding himself,
and desiring to be applauded by others. An empty vessel makes a sound, when a
full one makes none; an ear full of corn hangs down, when that which is
blasted, and has nothing in it looks up and stands upright.

I must not omit a reason why Learning instructs ones understanding, because
it teaches us to know things by their causes, effects, de^initions,
descriptions, and attributes; so that the intellect being so well informed,
will hardly admit to be imposed upon by any sophistical arguments; for thereby
he is put in a capacity of discerning right from wrong, and acquainted with the
several methods and ways, even with some rules (which seldom admit of any
exceptions) not to yield to any probable, likely, and specious words and
expressions to be defrauded of the knowledge of truth.

A second benefit of Learning, is the good influences it has upon the will,
not so much immediately as by the means of the intellect, which being so well
informed, as we said, will conform her self to his last determinations: for
though the will, which is a most free agent, does suffer no co-action, nor
violence, yet it is moved, inclined, and persuaded.

Learning does also afford us help, and rules, how to master our passions,
though not always, yet oftentimes, when they would break out with violence and
impetuosity. In man is, that which is called the inferior part of the soul,
wherein under the appetites irascible and concupiscible are that we call
passions, which all men are subject to, though some more, some less, the best
and wisest of men struggling against, and striving to bring them under. Hor.
lib. 1. S^t^r. 3.
Vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est qui minimis urgetur. -- Now these
passions are seated in the heart, wherein reason ought to preside, and sit, as
a Queen; which if things were in a due order and subordination, all passions
ought to obey, and be subservient unto: but this part of man is much sensible
of the sad effects of Adam's sin. For as through pride and infidelity he
disobeyed his God, so his natural affections are become rebellious to him,
tyrannizing the best part of his soul, and sometimes usurp that power, which
they ought to submit to: for as they are in the most brutish and sensitive part
of man, so it is harder to rule them. God, who is able to subdue all things unto
himself, and who in the day of his power, from unwilling, Psalm. 110.3.
makes us a willing people, when he pleases, does curb, tame, break, and bruise
those unruly and inordinate affections, let them be never so stiff and
stubborn; wherefore the best remedy for those who are much subject to these
disorders, and who desire to be rid of them, is to address themselves to God
for his assistance, who can bring every thought and affection under to the
obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ.

After this, Humane learning is of great use and advantage; for thereby we are
not only acquainted with the nature of the distemper, but also are taught the
best and most suitable remedy, and the fittest way to apply it. Men who are
acted by sensual principles, aim at the satisfaction of their senses; but they
who have learned and felt the corruption of these, will fence against, and
bridle them. Not to be hindered in following the dictates of reason, they will
know how these passions make us like unto brutes, which infinitely we ought to
differ from; specially by reason of our immortal souls, created after Gods
image and likeness. Philosophy can teach us the vast difference, which God in
his mercy has set between us and brutes: whether it be in our principle or in
our end; whether in our essence or existence: and though as to the matter,
there be some conformity, as to the form there is such a disparity, as between
mortal and immortal, corruptible and uncorruptible? How many examples can
History afford us, of those, who having prostituted their reason, and inslaved
themselves to their passions, were brought to troubles and miseries: And as we
see, that in States, when those, whose duty it is to obey, take upon them to
govern, all things go into a confusion. So when in man passions are exalted
above reason, nothing follows but disorders, mischiefs, and unavoidable ruin
both within and without.

I need not to mention any of those precepts and rules, which Divinity teaches
us upon this subject. Scripture which is the fountain of it, is full of
arguments to that purpose; and any one who exercises himself in the reading
thereof, will upon this account, find a great deal of help and comfort therein.
Divinity, which as I said, is derived from thence, does much enlarge and
explain it, and affords us the best directions we can wish for to master our
passions.

But to proceed to another thing, of all humane Sciences, Moral Philosophy
teaches us best therein; she wants no motives, incentives, precepts, rules, and
examples, to bring us to it. By the help of these, great men of Antiquity, as
Socrates, Alexander the Great, Scipio, Cato, and many others, made their
chastity, patience, constancy, temperance, and other virtues so famous: for
having found out by the light of Nature, and the rules of Morality, how
necessary it was for them to conquer their passions, they undertook it with
success, and forced their enemies to admire and love them: And amongst all
these examples, there is hardly any but was a learned and understanding man:
the Conquerors themselves, as Alexander, Caesar, etc. were so; the former
having been carefully instructed by his Tutor Aristotle; and Caesar's
Commentaries show what a manner of man he was. One day, Aristotle being asked,
what a difference there was between learned men and unlearned; Such, said he,
as between the living and the dead: being of opinion, that a man without
learning is a statue more than a man.

And now I am upon this subject, I must show how beneficial Learning is; sure I
am, it is necessary to many, and convenient to all; it does enrich the mind,
rectify the will, regulate affections, quickens and perfects natural parts,
and is an ornament to the whole man, whom it does fit and dispose almost for
every thing: But this is most certainly true, that it is neither a burden nor
a hinderance to any. And first, if I consider it in relation to a man in his
retirement, when he is far from company, and wants conversation, then he has
reading and meditation. Sometimes ones affairs will call him into the
solitariness of the Country, or his Distempers will keep him within doors;
whilst those who love Hawking and Hunting only, want Hawks and Hounds; and
others who love nothing but Gaming, want Money or Company: he will not want
entertainment, he can converse with the dead, who sincerely, and without fear
or flattery, do condemn Vice, and commend Virtue; without stirring from his
study he can know the world, without any danger he can see Battles, breaking
and overturning of Kingdoms: so that whilst others do not know what to do when
their sports fail them, this is content, and satisfied, and with one may well
say, Non minus solus quam solus, I am never less alone than when I am alone:
for in his Book he will find the company and experience of great men who went
before him, examples to be followed, and dangers to be avoided.

Moreover, is a man in any company? he is able more or less to discourse upon
most matters; and is he obliged himself to entertain company in his own house
or elsewhere? he has stock and variety to do it: and a Traveller, if he be
learned, is a fit companion for any honest and virtuous man he meets with; of
whom one finds abroad a great variety.

I hope no body will deny, how every one who is to speak in public, if it must
be well done, has occasion of some learning. A Lawyer who desires to be
eminent, must be versed in Rhetoric to give a form to, and set his speech in
order; and understand something in Logic to deliver his reasons and arguments
in a due method: Learning can afford him many things to enrich his discours^,
which rules of Rhetoric will make more elegant, more pathetick, and
persuasive, and will perhaps render him more eloquent if he has any
disposition toward it.

A Divine, who in the Pulpit is almost every day to instruct, correct,
convince, and persuade; how can he teach effectually, and move affections with
success, except all Arts and Sciences, which are servants to Divinity, do
afford him plenty and variety of matter: People will respect and esteem their
Pastors for their parts: learning and abilities by which respect they are
disposed to give ear to, and follow exhortations and directions they receive
from them: Daily experience teaches us how unlearned and ignorant Preachers are
not much followed, and it is an effect of God's anger when he takes shining
Stars and Candlesticks (for so the Scripture calls Ministers) from a people,
Rev. 2.5.
and gives them ignorant teachers. These, who being unstable and unlea^ned, 2
Pet. 3.16.
do wrest Scriptures to their own condemnation. In a word, solidity and
elegancy of a Sermon, and eloquence of a Pastor (which things receive great
help from Learning) are ever acceptable to heaters, and necessary to a
Preacher, who is to make good his cause out of Scripture, Nature, Reason,
Authority, etc. and to defend it from the cavils and sophistry of his
Adversaries.

Statesmen also, when they sit at a Council Table to make their proposals,
ought to back them with reasons, confirm them with examples and precedents, and
to refute the grounds of contrary Opinions. In their Treaties with Foreign
States, how nimble, wise, and circumspect ought they to be, to elude the
designs of others, and to carry on their own: when any League is to be formed,
or dissolved, Manifesto's to be published, and so many intrigues abroad and at
home carried on: and in the management of all other State a^fairs, how
beneficial will it prove to have a good pen used by a good head. Histories
afford us examples of those who through Learning were so fitted for public
employments, that almost as soon as they began, they made themselves famous
therein, some in politics, others in martial affairs. The same I may say of
every private Gentleman, who being a man of Estate and Interest in his Country,
has ground to hope for being chosen a Parliament man, where almost every day,
when they sit, have occasion of making trial of their parts and learning,
whereby they are cried up, come to be leading men in the House, and so are
taken notice of, the whole Nation over, and become necessary to Court and State.

Though as yet I have not named Physicians, I suppose none will deny that
Learning is necessary to them; and though I know the practical part is that
which is required most of all, this is certainly much helped and made easier by
Theory: and indeed of all professions this of Physic requires reading as much
as any. The object is so noble, has so many dependencies, and is of so vast an
extent, that it requires the whole man, and the whole life of man? How many
thousands of Distempers is the body subject to, whereof they are to know the
signs and symptoms, the causes, effects, and remedies? what a study is that of
the temper and constitutions of men which they must know, and several
circumstances to be observed by them; then the number of Books concerning their
profession, which at one time or other, it is fit for them to read, written in
Arabic, Greek, Latin, and several other Languages; surely their task is great,
seeing that, according to what says one of the Fathers, Adam through sin has
l^ft the soul of his posterity to the care of Divines, their body in the hands
of Physicians, and their goods and estates are committed to Lawyers.

Therefore there is no doubt to be made, but that Learning will prove a great
advantage to old and young, Doctors and Scholars, and to every one according to
his capacity: It is then necessary betimes to put Children upon it; there being
so Ars long a vita brevis.
long a course to run, and the life of man being so short. Amongst Heathens
Learning was so considerable, that one of their Sects accounted it to be the
chief good of men: as others declared themselves for virtue. St. Paul desires
to be delivered from unreasonable men: 2 These. 3.2.
the word is (...) without Topics or Logic, to show that this Art or Science
which is the door into all the rest, is essential, or at least necessary to man
as such; Reason being an essential principle of humanity.

Hitherto I specified nothing of what Books, Arts, and Sciences Youth are to be
taught; because in my discourse about Learning, I have been drawn to speak of
that which is proper and necessary to men of all ages. Indeed to treat of this
exactly and methodically, I ought to have made a distinction of ages, as
Childhood, infancy, etc. but as in so doing many things had fallen under
consideration, which are not of my purpose, I thought fit to wave it till now,
when I intend in few words to tell my mind of it.

First, I know that not only every Nation, but also almost every School, and
every particular Preceptor have different ways and methods, and read some
different Books, excepting Accidence, Grammars and Dictionaries; which though,
as to the substance and rules they be every where alike, yet they are digested
and compiled in a different way; so that every Nation has these fundamental
Books particular to her ^elf: but as to Classical Authors, they use very much
the same every where; the choice which has been made of them being universally
approved of, and with good reason too; for they are the productions of as sine
wits as ever Rome had, I mean the Poets; as Ovid, Virgil, Horace, and These two
for Comedies.
Terence (though an African) with Plautus, etc. for the Latins: Hesiode and
Ho^^^ for the Greeks. For Prose of the lower orb, Corderius, Vives, Erasmus his
Colloquies, then Quintus Curtius, Florus, Justin, Caesar's Commentaries, and of
a higher form for Poets, Lucanus, Iuvenalis, Persius. For Historians, Livius,
Suetonius, C. Tacitus, Plutarch, and several others, all which I may reduce
under the notion of Humaniores litterae taught in Schools to several forms,
besides, Fables, whether Poetical or Moral, as Ovid's Metamorphoses, AEsop's,
and others.

But there are some nice spirits, who would have the use of these Books
forbidden only because they are the works of Heathens; yet I think they ought
to be satisfied, considering they are universally used amongst Christians: but
I add, they are not made use of upon any account of Faith or Religion, but only
for the Wit, Learning, Language, and sometimes good Morality, found in them,
and for want of better in that kind.

In all this, I would have them to proceed by degrees, as first of all, being
perfect in their Accidence and Grammar, to turn English into Latin, and to
learn by heart some of the Works of the forenamed Poets, with the English of
it, or else if that be too hard to begin with Cato's Disticha de moribus, or
Verini Di^ticha, because, besides the tongue, they may therein learn very good
sentences of morality: All this time I do not exclude the private Exercises
they ought to make in their Studies, when they are come from School; for having
done the task required of them in the School, they may, and must fall upon
reading of some History or other good Book, whether Latin or English, commended
to them, or of their own choosing.

Poetry they ought not to neglect, specially they who have any genius toward
it; and therefore they must exercise themselves in all manner of Verses,
whether Exameter and Pentameter, Sapphick, Asclepiade, Phaleuck, Iambick,
Choriambick, or others; for thereby they will attain to a greater facility of
understanding Latin Poets, who expressed themselves in those kinds of Verses.
In all this I wish, that as the School and age do bring the young man's parts
to maturity, so Tutors would advance their Lectures. I said before, those ought
not to neglect making Verses who are inclined and disposed toward it; such as
Ovid, who says of himself, Quicquid conabar dicere carmen erat: and it had
been pity his Father had prevailed with him, when through hard usage he
extorted this promise from him, Parce mihi genitor, post hac hand carmina
condam. As to Cicero for want of this disposition he did better to follow the
prose wherein he so admirably well could express himself, and leave off his --
O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam.

In the mean time I wish them not to neglect the Tongues, or School Languages:
first, the Latin; I know all this while they have been learning of it; but I
desire the purity, the Idiome, and the critic part, and as much as can be to
perfect themselves in it; for most ancient Authors have written in this tongue,
which is the door of Sciences, and the universal character, whereby all Nations
may understand one another, it ought to be loved not only for the use and
necessity, but also for the beauty and elegancy. Hence it is that some call it
Lingua Regina, the tongue which is the queen of all the rest. The difficulty of
this consists in speaking.

Then the Greek called Lingua Copiosa, because it abounds very much in words
and expressions; and for the composition of words, none is so fit as this. Many
good Books are written in it, out of which the Romans borrowed part of their
learning: and once at Athens, which was the great School of the world, all Arts
and Sciences were taught in this Tongue. Cicero himself was there to learn it:
this is of a great use, specially to Divines, to understand the Septuagint, or
70 Interpreters, but chiefly the New Testament, originally written in Greek.
When St. Paul did write to the Romans it was in Greek, though he knew well the
Latin Tongue, which he spoke when he was amongst them: the knowledge of Tongues
being one of the gifts which God had bestowed upon him. This he expresses when
he says, I speak more tongues than you all: 1 Cor. 14.18.
This is also a Tongue necessary to Phy^itians to understand the works of
Hypocrates, Dioscorides, Galenus, and others who have written in it; besides
that, most parts of man's body, great many Diseases, and the names of several
Drugs are expressed in that language; the difficulty of this consists in
writing.

The Hebrew Tongue, called Lingua Sancta by reason of the many holy things
written in it, is very necessary to Divines for the understanding of the Old
Testament, which is originally in this. In the confusion of Languages, at the
building of the Tower of Babel, this remained in the house of one Heber, whence
I think it was called Hebrew; besides the reason I already mentioned why it is
called holy, there may be this, that it contains no unhandsome or unbecoming
word, but it does express things in terms very decent and modest: where there
is a question about a Text, or the true signification of a word, to be able to
discourse of it, one must be versed in the Original, which also has a peculiar
idiome, and a singular energy, which it loses in part, being translated into
other Languages: Furthermore, if one has a mind to understand the Targums,
Talmuds, and other Rabinical Writings, he must be skilled in the Hebrew
Language, out of which most other Languages, whether ancient or modern have
borrowed something. Under this I comprehend the Samaritan, whereof the letters
differ only in figure from the Hebrew, We have only the Pentateuch, or five
Books of Moses written in this; the difficulty of it consists in reading.

The Chaldaic Language will also prove useful and necessary to Divines, not
only by reason of the affinity it has with the Hebrew, of which it is a
Dialect; the character of both having the same name and figure, but also by
reason of the Paraphrase written in that language, which was necessary for the
understanding of the Text after 70 years captivity; for the people born in
Babylon and other places of Chaldea, wherein they were dispersed, being forced
to speak the language of their Masters, forgot their own (for here it was not
as in Egypt, where they were altogether in the Land of Goshen.) After they had
leave to return home, this Paraphrase was compiled to make them understand the
Text, as I said before, which came to be of an Authority almost equivalent to
the original. Hence came that affinity, and some mixture of both; and there is
whole Chapters in this tongue in the Prophecy of Daniel, some verses in Ezra,
and elsewhere.

The Syriack, which is derived from the Hebrew and Chaldaick, or as others
think, is almost the same with this, only of a different Dialect, is also
necessary, because of the version of the Old and New Testament made into it;
which compared with the Hebrew, gives a great light to the sense of the Text,
and much more in relation to the New Testament; for this in Judea was the
common tongue in the days of our Savior, and of his Apostles; wherefore, in
several places of the Gospels and Epistles, we find several idiomes and phrases
of this tongue, which are no ways proper to the Greek; so that it is thought the
Evangelists (except St. Luke, who specially well understood the Greek tongue)
conceived first in Syriack their Gospels, and then put them into Greek. This
Syriack then was their mother tongue; so that true Hebrew was not commonly
understood; as appears by this, that our Savior on the Cross, Matthew. 27.46,
47, 49.
crying out Eli Eli Lamma sabactani, The standers by amongst them, the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem being the greatest part, did not understand it, but
said, he calls for Elias; and the rest said, let us see whether Elias will
come: which words could not be pronounced but by Jews, who were acquainted with
the name and history of Elias.

The Arabic tongue is very considerable upon the account of her antiquity and
usefulness; for it did not only begin to be known in the days of Ismael son of
Agar, who went into Arabia the Desert; but it was so after the confusion of
tongues at Babel, when Sabi, a Nephew of Cham, went into it, whence it was
called Sabea. That people called Arabians, have been careful to keep it from
mixture with other Languages; for they had no communication with other Nations.
Hence it is that they call themselves the best Gentlemen of the world; their
blood in matter of alliances having not been mixed with other people: They have
gotten the name of being the greatest Robbers in the world. This tongue is very
copious and easy to be learned, there being but few rules, with fewer
exceptions: This, as I said, is of great use to Divines, not only by reason of
the affinity it has with the Hebrew, but also because of the traduction of the
Bible into it: which compared with the original, gives a great light to the
Text. All Books of Mahumetan's super^tition are written in it, as well as the
Alcoran; in all their Services they use it; and where they have Schools, they
learn it, as here we do Latin and Greek. It is also useful to Physicians,
because there has been of that Nation great men in that profession who have
written in that language; besides those Books which are extant about other Arts
and Sciences, as Mathematics, Politics, Historical and Chemical.

Other tongues there are, which, if a man's genius inclines him to learn, he
will find help and pleasure in it; but these I think to be the chief and most
necessary to be learned in Schools, which indeed for the most part are commonly
taught in them.

But I must leave off speaking of tongues to reassume my discourse where I left
it, when I began to fall upon this subject. I would have the young Scholar to
be put upon Declamations as soon as he is fit for it; this will not only try,
but also improve his parts; for then he must read Books to get a stock upon
occasion: and also this will give him confidence to speak in public, which he
will endeavor to do to his credit: Herein he can be much helped by Rhetoric,
whose end is to persuade; therefore he must perfect himself in all the common
places thereof; whence he may learn Invention and Elocution, of which the first
will afford him matter enough for the subject he shall have in hand; and the
last can teach him a way and a method how to dispose of it into a good order:
then the (...) and figures will be an ornament to his discourse, whether it
falls under the Genders demonstrative, deliberative, or judiciarie, to state
well a case, then ground it upon solid reasons, neatly delivered, and in a good
language and to have the way of conciliating or getting the good will of Judges
and hearers, are certainly the essential parts of the art of Oratory. By these
means the two great Orators, Demosthenes and Cicero; the one among the Greeks,
the other amongst the Romans, spoke so often with the good success which every
one knows: This can enable a man not only to speak in public, but also fit him
with dexterity, privately to manage a business.

Logic will teach him to speak Categorically, and in few words to say much, to
put an argument in form, and to know the fallacy of those made against the
moods of every figure, and all manner of sophistry: there he may learn what is
an ens rationis, what universals, what substances, accident, and other
predicaments are: in a word, dialectick can give him a taste of all other Arts
and Sciences, this being the right door into them all.

Natural Philosophy can instruct him of the Principles of natural being, and of
the natural body it self; besides all things in it, from it, or relating to it,
the subject of generation and corruption so necessary and useful to be known;
and the matters concerning the soul may therein be cleared to him. This is
necessary to Physicians, specially, according to the maxim, Vbi desinit
Physicus ibi incipit Medicus.

Metaphysick treats of supernatural things, that is, in comparison of those
relating to natural Philosophy, therein one shall hear of ens transcendens,
essences of things, unum, verum, bonum, and several other things very obstruse,
except they be judiciously and methodically cleared. Hence is the next step to
Divinity; for, Vbi desinit Metaphysicus, ibi incipit Theologus.

Ethics direct how to guide our actions and rule our passions; it makes Vice
odious, and Virtue lovely; it resolves several dubious cases, and represents
the four Cardinal Virtues to be followed by us, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance,
and Prudence are therein set forth in such a dress as is able to make us strive
to attain to them. In a word, hence are derived the good precepts of what is
called morality, which (specially those of prudence) are of great use to
Statesmen, according to the saying, Vbi desinit Ethicus, ibi incipit Politicus.

History also must be known; it has two parts, one called natural, which is a
general collection of the particular works of nature; the other is civil, and
this is a collection of the life and works of particular men; Chronology and
Cosmography, both depending upon natural History, are the Basis and Foundation
of that we call civil: they afford the circumstances of time and place, without
which nothing can be done, or preserved in order. Natural History relates to
the productions of Nature, as the Civil to the actions of men. Indeed it is an
uncertain, difficult, and almost unpossible thing for Modern Authors to examine
the motions and accidents of former times, to find out the natural inclination
of persons whom we never have seen or known, to declare the unresolvedness of a
council we were never called to, to dive into the secrets of a Prince, whose
confident we never have been, and to describe things unknown: Wherefore the
best is to find Historians who lived in the times when things related were
acted, and were well acquainted with the things they did write: yet the thing
shall still be liable to exception; namely, that such Writers have perhaps been
partial, and may be misinformed: nevertheless, although such an History be
defectuous in her circumstances, yet it is solid in the main, and as to matter
of fact relating public actions of times past.

The study of History is very beneficial to all sorts of persons, it is instead
of Learning to the unlearned, and supplies some, not only with knowledge, but
also, with prudence; several other things are merely speculative, and for
theory only; but this is altogether for practice. Politics and Morals are two
of the most practical things that are; for what speculations they contain, do
rend only to lead to a practice; yet this goes further, for it contains the
effects of what they only show reasons for; it is not satisfied to give rules,
as they do, but also strengthens them with precedents, and illustrates it with
examples. In the reading of it we make a reflection upon the manners and
actions of good and evil men, and observe therein that which kept order in
Corporations and Societies, and what caused disorders in them; whence are drawn
judicious consequences of what is to be done or avoided, whether in public or
private: out of this Morals and Politics are derived.

Further, History is so pleasant, that every one delights in it; for it contains
many things to ex^ite the curiosity of men, and is free of those crabby things
and difficulties which other sorts of Learning are attended with. Other
Sciences are sometimes subject to decay: but on the contrary, this is renewed
every day by the access of new matter and transactions; so that it is so far
from losing any thing of its luster, that it is increased every day: which
advantage she imparts to those who are acquainted with her; for by her help
young men grow old in experience, without any decay of strength; and old men go
back to their younger da^s, and lose nothing of their wisdom. Whenever
History gives us councels, it declares the events of it, and all actions it
does publish; one way or other it makes known the motives and causes; so that
we may perceive thereby, which either prudence or hazard had nearer influenc^s
upon great events. In a word, there is such a variety of things pleasant and
profitable, that he who will not value it must be thought to have forfeited
common sense and reason.

But the great and general advantage we get by History, is the experience of so
many ages, that so we should enjoy the fruit of other men's labors, be wise at
their own costs, and receive benefit from every thing they have done, whether
bad or good, avoiding them in one, and imitating in the other; having marked to
posterity, and as it were, set a buoy to warn us from dangers and places, where
others have been dashed or sunk. This commendation of History I can conclude no
better than with what the Emperor Basilius in his excellent instruction
exhorted his Son Leon to follow, when he should come to the Empire. Son,
neglect not the reading of ancient Histories, for without pain you may find
therein that which others have collected with mu^^ labor; you can learn what
virtues made some to be honest men, and for what vices others were accounted
wicked. In it you may observe all the differences of humane life, and how many
changes all things are subject to: the inconstancy o^ worldly affairs will
appear to you, and the notable falls of the greatest Empires of the world: In
short, you may observe how bad actions ever are followed with some punishments;
and how good ones at one time or other are attended with rewards: so that you
must avoid the first for fear of falling into the hands of Divine Justice, and
give up your self to these last to deserve the rewards which infallibly you
shall receive.

Nothing can be added to these instructions, which deserve to be written in
letters of gold; but I must say, that Histories are to be read with some
caution; for most are censured for one thing or other, there being nothing
perfect in this world. Hist. lib. 4.
Cornelius Tacitus, who thought amiss of Providence, does nevertheless flatter
Vespasian, with being a minister chosen by the gods to work miracles, and give
sight to a blind man, and health to one who was sick in the City of Alexandria.
In which two things, Lipsius.
as one says well, he contradicts himself to become a flatterer: this makes
Tertullian call him a forger of lies. Others do show themselves partial thus,
by reason of jealousy between Plato and Xenophon: The Wars of Cyrus, lib. 2.
this last speaks ill of Menon, because he was Plato's good friend. So because
Herodotus had been ill used by the Corinthians in his Writings, contrary to
truth, makes them run away in the Battle of Salamina; so he omitted some things
tending to the commendation of that people which might have been an ornament to
his History. Amongst the rest, the solemn Prayer of the Corinthian Women to
Venus, This is Plutarch's observation against Herodotus.
to the end she would inflame their Husbands hearts to the Battle against the
Persians: And because Salustius was an enemy to Cicero, he passes by the honor
done to him after the suppression of Catalina's Conspiracy. This vice
Thucidides is cleared from by Marcellus in the History of his Life.

The same Herodotus and others have written some fabulous and false things, not
out of any desire they had so to do, but for want of a true information: Indeed
to make credible a History, it were to be wished, that he who writes it had
been present to the actions he mentions, or had heard them from those who
were present; and yet he must not indifferently make use of every ones notes,
but chiefly of those, who being concerned, are able to declare the causes,
councels, and ends aimed at; which qualification makes me esteem Thucidides in
the Athenian Wars: And to speak the truth, Ministers of State are the fittest
men to write Histories, or at least to furnish matter for it; for they are
acquainted with the true estate of affairs, the grounds, deliberations, secret
and underhand Treaties, and with the will and interests of their Princes; but
either they have no time to do it, or else dare not, thinking it not fit nor
safe for them.

Lastly, most are partial for their Nation or themselves, and then say nothing
to the advantage of their enemies, but what is not possible for them to
conceal: It Is as when the Children of Israel had no Cutlers amongst them, they
were forced to go to the Philistines to whet their Knives and Swords, who were
sure never to set them the right edge; so either they will be silent of the
brave Exploits of the enemies of their Nations, or derogate very much from them
to lessen their own losses, and make greater their victories: Upon this reason
I judge of Annibals transcendent merit and warlike capacity: For if Livius a
Roman could not avoid to speak well of so dangerous an enemy of his Country,
Yet born in Pado^.
what had it been if we could have seen his History written by a Carthaginian.

As for Divinity, for certain the more one knows of it the better it will be;
yet because every one's genius and calling does not require to be a Doctor of
it, I must show how much is necessary for every one to know. First, it is
required all should be instructed in the Principles of Religion, common to all
Nations; namely, that there is a God, who is the first cause of all things, and
has his being from from himself, and so through the Articles of Christian
Reformed Religion, as they are set down in our Confession of Faith and
Catechisms, whether they be the Churches, or of particular men, as Ball's,
Perkins's, which is one of the plainest, clearest, easiest, yet as much
methodical as any; and of Primate Vshers, which is an excellent one, but for
Christians of a higher form; the Assemblies Catechism is full, intelligible and
excellent.

Then they must be versed in Scriptures, because their Faith is to be built
upon it; wherefore they should have at hand one or two Texts at least, to ground
upon every Article of their Belief. In a word, I would have every young man
well principled, and so well grounded in his Religion, that according to the
Precept of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15.
they may be ready to give an account of their Faith to every one that asks it,
not only declaring what it is that they believe, but also giving their reasons
and proofs for it, and answering objections which others can make against it;
for it is not enough to assert, but also one must defend his Religion, for fear,
when he goes abroad, he should be moved and shaken from it.

Having affirmed that we ought to be versed in Scriptures, because our Faith is
grounded thereupon, and it being known, how in some places they contain things
difficult, and above any ordinary capacity, I think it necessary to enlarge
more upon this, the more, because the simple and ignorant ought as well to know
what they believe, as the greatest Scholar; every one being to answer for
himself, and to be justified (...) In fide sua, Habak. 2.4. Psalm. 119. and
others.
by his own Faith, waving here the great question we have with the Roman
Church, concerning reading of Scriptures by common people, which is not only
lawful, but also necessary for them. David bearing this testimony that it makes
wise the simple, gives knowledge to the ignorant, opens the eyes of the blind,
and many things more to this purpose.

I say, Scriptures contain things necessary to be known; first as to the
substance, that there is one God the maker of the world, and of all things
therein, and that he is the preserver thereof; all what he says we must
believe to be true, and in him we ought to trust and put our confidence:
although there be but one God in nature, yet there are three Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, co-essential in nature, coeternal in time, and coequal,
or together equal in power: these persons are distinguished, not divided:
amongst them is an order without confusion; the nature is spiritual, and
consequently immaterial and uncorruptible; simple without any composition,
whether metaphysical of substance and accident, physical of matter and form, or
moral of act and power: It is infinite, eternal, unchangeable, and independent.
Now this God is known to us in his Nature, Attributes, whether incommunicable,
such as we named just now, or communicable as are his Justice, Goodness, Mercy,
and Wisdom; whereof he is pleased to impart some drops to his creatures; and in
his works which his word does inform us of, either explicitly or by clear and
necessary consequence.

Now therefore that there is a God, in Acts 16.28.
whom we live, move, and have our being, w^o Romans 2.6.
is a rewarder of all men according to their deeds, who having made the world,
formed man after his image; and that man through his disobedience, infidelity,
and pride, fell from that estate of innocence and integrity, wherein he was
created, which not only brought guilt upon him, and all mankind, but also
punishment and misery consisting in death, of afflictions, natural, spiritual
and eternal; insomuch that thereby we are all fallen into temporal, and become
guilty of everlasting pains and damnation, out of which we cannot be delivered
by any strength, wisdom, or capacity of ours: therefore, God out of his
wonderful and infinite mercy, promised a Savior, from time to time, renewed
the promises, sealed and confirmed them by several types and figures, who would
come in the fullness of times to satisfy his Justice, appease his Wrath, make a
full expiation for our sins, and reconcile us to God: This Savior was to
represent our person, put himself in our place, and suffer the pains and
torments we had deserved. Because humane nature had offended, he was to be a
man, otherwise it had not consisted with the justice of God to punish that
nature which had not sinned; and as farther it was necessary he should be a man
to die, so he was to be a God to conquer and overcome death.

In three words, the substance of it is, that there is one God, and that
through the fall of Adam we had been all damned, if God had not given us a
Savior. The knowledge of these things is necessary to salvation, and except we
believe it we cannot be saved: now all this is clearly and intelligiby
expressed in Scripture; so that any ordinary capacity may easily be brought to
understand it, and this we call necessary to be known as to the substance.
Under the Old Testament, to know and believe this was sufficient to salvation,
for their Faith was extended upon a Messiah to come, and not upon one already
come; so that till the time of the Declaration, who this Savior was, the
object of their Faith was an Individuum Vagum, and they were in the dark who
that particular person should be. Wherefore John the Baptist confesses his
ignorance in this point, when he says, John 1.33.
As for me, I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water, said,
etc. Hence it is that he sent two of his Disciples to ask him, Matthew. 11.3.
Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another. He knew him by the
Spirit's descending and remaining upon him. This was the characteristical note.

But now there is a second thing necessary to salvation to be known by all who
lived since the coming in the flesh of our Savior, and under the Gospel; and
this is necessary as to the declaration, namely, that the Savior promised,
prophesied of, and typified, is that particular person Jesus Christ, both God
and man, Son of the Virgin Mary, born in Bethlehem, in the days of Herod; and
when by the command of Caesar Augustus the world was to be taxed: In a word,
the same that was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, and who did and
suffered all things mentioned in the Gospel; and in few words, contained in the
Apostolical Creed. This same we ought to believe to be our only Savior and
Redeemer, whom we ought to rely upon, and put our trust in, apply him to us by
Faith; and except we know and believe this, there is no hope of salvation for
us, as Scripture does fully and clearly declare; so that this Principle may be
infused into the meanest capacity. Si Christum discis nihil est si caetera
nescis,
Si Christum nescis nihil est si caetera discis.
But in the third place, there are some things contained in Scriptures,
concerning which the Spirit of God has not been pleased clearly to reveal his
mind to us. As revealed things belong to men, so secret things belong to God,
which we must not pry into, nor presume beyond what is written. 1 Cor. 4.6.
Prophecies are certainly dark, till they become a History; for to understand
them before they are fulfilled, one must be endued with a Prophetical Spirit:
Besides Prophecies, there are other Points attended with many difficulties
which Doctors themselves labor and study very hard to understand. Such are the
ways and manners of things: That things are, is a matter of fact; and after God
has said in his word they are so, it admits of no difficulty out of this
Principle, That God is the God of Truth; but the manner of things is that which
breeds scruples, the word being either silent or dark about it. As for
instance, that there is one God in Nature, and three Persons, Scripture does
clearly set it forth in several places: and if this truth be obscure in one
Text, some other place of Scripture will clear it, it being proper to Scripture
to explain it self by it self; yet how this Unity and Trinity can consist
together: though learned men be able to apprehend, yet mean persons and low
capacities are not capable of it: so is the mystery of Incarnation, how the
second Person who has Divine Nature can assume Humane Nature, and yet the
Father and Holy Ghost who have both Divine Nature should not be Incarnated; and
again, how both Natures can be united in one Person and the idiomes and
proprieties of every Nature should not be united; but every Nature should
retain her own attributes, without mixture or confusion; yet this we know to be
true, but cannot dive into the manner how this is done.

There are also other things, as the day when the great judgment shall be, and
where it is to be, and what places Heaven and Hell shall be in, which arise
from vanity and unnecessary Curiosity. Other questions there are, which men
ought not to dispute too much about* because they are somewhat problematical
and good and learned men do differ in their opinion concerning them, as may be
this: Whether there will be degrees of Glory, and whether this world shall be
changed, as to the substance, or only in the accidents? all which points
Scripture is not so clear about, as it is in others, because the two first I
named are necessary to salvation; and these are not, so that a man may very
w^ll be saved without knowledge of them: and though they are beyond the reach
of ignorant people, it will be no hinderance to their salvation: because
whatsoever is necessary to be known in order to it, is plainly and clearly set
down in the word. And to make this be understood in few words, there are three
parts of Divinity; the first called Dogmatical, or Didactical, explains; the
second Practical, for the practice, applies; and the third Polemical, for
Dispute, decides* It is necessary to salvation to know the two former, but not
the last. If any one who understands Latin has a mind to some methodical
insight into these things, he may read some systeme or other of Divinity, as
may he Wollebius, which is compendious, but excellent: Wendelinus is very good,
specially in the Polemical part, Altingius and others.

Having showed what is necessary and convenient for Youth to know; I must not
forget to bring them to the knowledge of themselves: (...).
Know thy self was a great lesson amongst Heathens, which to do, is a great
duty incumbent upon Christians: therefore, whether a man considers himself in
his essential parts, Soul and Body, he ought to understand the duty of both,
and to apply both to some good and honest exercise; or whether he does reflect
upon the whole as he is a man, that is the most excellent of God's Creatures:
He must endeavor not to degenerate from this excellency, specially seeing
every creature has some particular quality, and every quality of them all,
ought to be found in man in a higher degree of perfection: And indeed the
knowledge of these Creatures should lead us to our duty: At their first
creation they were all for the use and service of man, but he having rebelled
against his Maker, other creatures have so dealt with him. Now there are of
three sorts; some still are serviceable to man, as Horses, Dogs, etc. Others
hurtful to him, as all ravenous and venomous Serpents, Vipers, Wolv^s, Tigers,
etc. Others are as Hyeroglyphicks to him, 2 Pet. 2.22.
the Dogs returning to his vomit, the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, Isa.
1.3.
the Asse's knowing his owner, and the Ox his Masters Crib testify against his
ungratefulness. The Stork, the Crane, the Swallow, knowing their appointed time
witness against his obstinacy in evil ways.

Other Creatures give good examples, some of Piety toward their Parents; as
the Stork which carries and takes care of them when they are no longer able to
fly: Others of charity to their young ones, as the Pelican bleeding himself
for their sake; some their thankfulness, as Horses, Elephants, Camels, who
serve those from whom they receive their meat. Others fidelity, as Dogs; some
prudence, as Ants, Bees; some valor and courage as Lions; others subtleness,
Justice, etc. Now man, who is an epitome of the wonders of God, comparing
himself with these creatures, will find himself more excellent than they, and
having an absolute or relative knowledge of himself, he will strive to answer
the gifts he has received from God and Nature, and to walk accordingly. Cui
dedit erectos ad sydera tollere vultus. This they will do of themselves, when
they come to riper years; in the mean time, and whilst they are young, these
Principles ought to be infused into them: First, how to carry themselves with
their Superiors, as Parents, with that respect and obedience due to them; the
like they must do to Princes, and Magistrates appointed by them, paying them
Tributes, Customs, and Honors; submitting to the Laws of those under whose
protection they live, hating innovations; according to Solomon's saying, Prove.
24.21.
My Son, meddle not with them that are given to change. And because they are
members of the civil Society, they must sometimes deprive themselves of
particular advantages for public good; thereunto sacrificing their interests,
and suffering some prejudice upon the same account: so they ought to be
respectful to any particular persons, who are their superiors in quality,
place, parts, or age.

Secondly, with their equals they must be civil and courteous, provided it be
not to the prejudice of their Rights and Privileges; specially with those whom
there is ground to contest with; though what a man does in his own house in
point of civility, does no ways derogate from him; neither in England is it
drawn into consequence: one must by all means be careful to avoid every
occasion of dispute and contention.

Thirdly, with their inferiors they must be kind, loving, affable, bountiful,
generous, and liberal upon occasion: civil, provided this civility be not
abused, forbearing to do any thing whereby they may be slighted by them.

Fourthly, they must be taught how to behave themselves with friends, so as not
to lose their amity, using all lawful possible means to preserve their
friendship, not putting them to any trouble, but upon a good account; for he
who does not so value and esteem them, as to avoid as much as he can being
importunate with them, does not deserve to have friends. It Is a great part of
wisdom to make a right use ^f them, and not trouble them upon any triflle or
trivial account; but one is to take heed of those whom the Poet speaks of.
Iuven. Satyr.
Quos sportula fecit amicos.


Fifthly, with enemies one ought to be wary and circumspect, and not give them
any advantage* yet one must have charity for them, using lawful means to
prevent the mischiefs they intend against us. In a word, they should be taught
with all manner of persons to carry themselves with civility and prudence.

Politicians prescribe these rules; if thy Birth or Charges give thee authority
over some, use it with justice; for one must obey his condition if he will not
be exposed to the contempt of the world: against thy equals wait for the
advantages of Fortune, to use it yet with moderation; and do so behave thy self
toward thy Superiors, that they be not forced to go beyond the limits of
modesty, and to prove insolent, and hard with thee. In a word, let thy whole
carriage, thy very thoughts and desires, be suitable to thy condition, for fear
of bringing t^y self into danger, harm, shame, and infamy: This some great men
have known and practiced. Once Parmenion having said these words, If I were
Alexander, I would accept of the proffers of Darius; Alexander answered, so
would I if I were Parmenion. The words of Lewis XII of France were very
notable; for once being advised to avenge himself on those who had wronged him
before he was a King, answered, It is not becoming a King of France to avenge
injuries done to a Duke of Orleans, for such he had been.

When I said Youth ought to be taught the excellency of Humane Nature, it was
by way of motive for them to good actions, and not as a ground of pride and
loftiness in them; for I never intended to exclude the knowledge they must have
of their weaknesses and imperfections which I could desire them to be humbled
under; yet Instructions about this should not be given by way of perpetual
elegy and constant lamentations; as the way of some is to talk of nothing but
of the miseries of times, and of Humane Nature, Heraclitus like in this. It is
not enough to speak so much of the Wound, and nothing of the Cure, to lay open
the Distemper, and yet neither show nor apply any Remedy: Young men must
necessarily know what is amiss in their Nature and Persons; but withal they
must be acquainted with what they are and ought to do, that they may mend and
reform.

Although hitherto I have distinctly spoken of Learning and Morality, wherein
Youth ought to be instructed, I do not mean they should be taught at several
times and ages; for these things may very well be contemporary; only there are
degrees of both, which require a greater maturity of years than others; which I
must refer to the prudence of the Teacher, to use according to the capacity of
the young man. It is certain, that practice of of Virtue is the end of Science,
as Science is a perfect disposition to Virtue; so that not only they consist
together, but also are a mutual help one to another.

Parents, who have several other things to mind, either public or private,
according to their station, do choose and appoint those who are to make this
their whole business, yet both these things, Learning and Morality, are of so
vast an extent, that men of means and quality think it a sufficient work for
two; whereof one called Preceptor, takes care only to instruct them in Arts and
Sciences; and the other under the name of Governor, has the oversight of their
actions; but this must be no hinderance to either, to teach or advise according
as there is occasion: for both these parts were performed by those famous men
who had care of Princes whom they taught not only Scholarship, but also Maxims
of State. Aristotle was such an one to Alexander the Great, who amidst his
Victories, by Letters asked his advice about several emergencies. Polybius not
only instructed Scipio the African in his younger years, but also followed him
in his Expeditions, and had considerable Employments in his Armies. Titus
Livius had the care of Tiberius's Education: so had Seneca of Nero's. This
last, according to the opinion of some, having discovered in his Disciple a
great inclination to cruelty, compiled his Book of Clemency, De Clementia,
thereby, if possible, to alter his temper: which cruel inclination, Nero, being
come to riper years, dissembled for a time.

Indeed, often men make a sure judgment of Children and Youth in their tender
years, of what they are like to prove, their nature being then not capable of
dissembling; but appearing nakedly such as it will be. Thus Alexander gave
signs of his future greatness in the questions he made to Ambassadors sent to
his Father; and of his ambition when he wept for his Fathers Victories;
Plutarch.
who as he complained, left nothing for him to conquer: yet I know every thing
done or said by persons of that quality, are looked upon with magnifying and
multiplying-Glasses. Cato also at his going out of infancy, showed how one day
he would be zealous of the liberty of the Republic; one day seeing in Sylla's
House the Heads of some who by his command had been put to death, asked, Why is
not this Tyrant made away? and being told of the danger there was in such an
undertaking, by reason of the great care he took of his safety; Valor. Max.
lib. 3. cap. 1.
He resolved to carry a Dagger under his clothes, and stab him at the first
opportunity. This design his Governor had very much ado to dissuade him from.

These are strong signs of the passion which is like to be predominant in young
men, when they come to riper years; though others who know how important it is
to understand the genius of Children, to make instructions profitable to them,
go up higher, and do consult the nature of Parents; concluding with Horace, Nec
imbecillem, generant aquilae Columbam; as if with the Blood of the Father, all
fatherly good parts and qualities were transmitted into the veins of the Son;
which rule, though sometimes it proves true, yet is not certain, and admits of
exceptions: The Soul is not produced by the Father; and though her faculties do
often follow the temper of the body, yet wit and goodness are not begotten:
otherwise this proverb were not true, which has been so often confirmed by
experience, Filii heroum noxae: therefore I must say, that though it be much to
be well born, yet it is much more to be well brought up: Nature is potent and
strong, but Institution and Breeding go beyond: For as I said before, Infancy
is tractable to any habit; and as it is ignorant of what are Virtue and Vice,
so it ^s as susceptible of one as of the other.

Indeed it seems strange to an ordinary eye, that a Father full of Courage and
Generosity should beget a base and a cowardly Son; neither is it very probable,
but that a Son, who is part of his Father, should have something of his
qualities: for some particular Vices or Virtues are running in the Blood of
some Families, as of Nations. Sensitive creatures do communicate their Nature,
and transmit their essential Qualities to that which they beget: A Lion by
Nature is courageous, a Wolf ravenous, etc. And some have been of opinion, that
it should be so with men; for Suetonius relates in the life of Nero, that his
Father, a very wicked man, said, that Nothing could be born of him and
Agrippina which were not detestable and hurtful to the Public: But if this
were always true; why shall not the children of one Father and Mother be all of
one and the same Nature, which yet proves so much to the contrary.

Once it was a question concerning that famous Aleibiades, which were greater
in him, his vices, or his Virtues? a thing never so disputable about any one as
about him; for he had excellent good qualities: also strong and dangerous
Vices, so balanced the one by the other, that no body could tell whether he
would at last prove to be the best or worst of men. Two things which he boasted
of, were his extraordinary Beauty, and his illustrious Extraction. But Socrates
the first Author, as far as we can find, of the Precepts of Morality, upon
which account men said of him, that Having found Philosophy, traveling through
Heavens and Elements, he brought it to dwell in Houses and Cities; made him
understand one day* that Quality, Riches, and Honors, without Honesty, could
only make him able the more to do wrong and injury to others: and he so proved
to him, that though he was of a noble extraction, Cicero lib. de Tuscul. quest.
except he was qualified with Virtue and Merit, he was no better than a Porter,
that Alcibiades shed tears, and earnestly entreated the Philosopher to show him
the way to Virtue.

Montague in his Essays has something to this purpose; but specially
concerning the inclinations of Youth, If, Lib. 1. cap. 25.
says he, the Disciple be so minded, as to hear a Tale, rather than a Relation
of a considerable Journey; if he leaves following of a Drum which led him to
the way of honor, to go after another inviting him to see Mountebanks, who
takes more pleasure to come from a Tennis-Court, or from a Ball or Dance, with
advantage, than to return dusty and victorious from a Fight: I ^ind no fitter
way for such an one than to make him a Cook in same good City, though he were
the Son of a Duke; according to the rule of Plato, that Children are to be
disposed of, not according to the means and quality of their Fathers, but
according to the faculties of their own Souls. So that let a Young man be never
so well qualified from the side of his Parents, except he has good
Dispositions, virtuous and honest Inclinations in himself, he will never be the
more esteemed, because, Simia est semper simia etiamsi purpura vestiatur. But
of this I intend hereafter to speak more at large.

Because we have already more than once mentioned honesty as the quality
without which others are insignificant, we must now tell what it is. Diogenes
Laertius, in the life of Plato, says, this great Philosopher called honesty,
That which is reasonable, commendable, profitable, decent and convenient This
is the Spirit which gives life to every action; without this salt there is no
savor in any thing we do? How acceptable to God and men is an honest heart;
many a learned, valiant, and wise man can be found in the world; but how hard
is it to find a true honest man.

But to return to my purpose; to the end the endeavors of a Tutor be effectual
upon a young Scholar, it is very necessary for him to understand his genius and
inclination; this is the most judicious and methodical course that can be
taken; and herein, besides what he can observe in his Conversation, Physicians
can help him; for in every man they find four essential qualities, dry, moist,
hot, and cold: Dryness is by Galenus accounted the principle of Prudence; and
moisture of Folly. These are qualities of ^our Principles, constituting the
body of man, all which are to be found in every man; but usually one is
predominant over all the rest: the better they are mixed and tempered, the
better is the Constitution, and the longer the life of man: these answer to the
four Elements which Natural Philosophers affirm to be in every mixed and
compound; of which the one is hot and dry, the other hot and moist; the third
cold and dry, the fourth cold and moist.

These Principles are called Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm, and Blood; every one
of which is adapted to, and prevalent in one season of the year: The Flai a
bilis or Choler does abound in Summer, which season does well agree with her
quality, hot and dry. Atra bilis, or Melancholy abounds in Autumn, which are
both dry and cold: Phlegm is prevalent in Winter, which is moist and cold; and
so it is, for certainly this is the coldest of all Humors; but in Spring the
Blood does abound, which agree in this, that both are hot and moist. Now as the
humor of Melancholy is sour, of Choler, bitter; of Phlegm, salt, and of Blood,
sweet; so they make the tempers of men harsh and troublesome, rough and severe,
churlish and soft; and every one of these is to be discerned by the Complexion:
Choler makes lean and yellowish; Melancholy, dark and black; Blood, fat and
ruddy; and Phlegm, white: These qualities, more or less, according as they are
predominant, do tyrannize over a man, except by the use of Reason and Prudence,
he does correct and qualify them.

When Choler abounds in the Brain, it drives men into madness; as the Atra
bilis impells them into Melancholy. As we said before, Phlegm being cold, they
who are predominated by it, are subject to want Memory and Prudence: when
therefore old people fall a raving and doting, it is because of this coldness,
whereby every office of the Soul is hindered, and not by reason of dryness
attending that age. Now Blood has a mixture of the three others, and is
esteemed the best temper of all: the hotter and thicker it is, the greater
strength it gives to the person; but the thinner and colder it is, the better
the senses and understanding do act: yet though we see creatures who have it so
to be more prudent and ingenious as Bees, than others, it is not to be
attributed to the coldness of Blood, but to the thinness and pureness of it:
those creatures which have it thinner, are the most timorous, because fear
cools it: contrariwise, they which have it thick, are more courageous,
choleric, and furious as Bulls, Lions, Bears, wild Boars; because Choler makes
hot: and solid things that are hot will heat much more than moist. The nature
of youth, says Plato, is wild and almost mad, when that of old men will be
full of austerity, roughness, and tediousness: For Youth is a hot age, and full
of blood, which old age wants, and is very cold: so that the very age is to be
observed in point of Education. No man, says Galenus, is willingly evil; but
he is such from the natural depravation of his body, and from a bad breeding.
But this must be well understood, or else it is much liable to exception.

I am much of the mind of that learned man, who proves, in a Treatise made on
purpose, Mores animi ^equuntur corporis temperamentum. Gal.
that the manners of the Soul do follow the temper of the body. Indeed the
union of these two parts is so great, that necessarily there must be a great
communication of their parts, and faculties: senses do convey objects to the
intellect, and the faculties of the Soul do operate through the organs of the
body, which too often defile the purity wherein the Soul should abide: The Body
does afford the Soul too much matter, and incentives to sin, and the law of the
Members is hard enough for the law of the Understanding; therefore in some
measure we may well refer the virtues and vices of the soul, to the temper of
body. Men of a choleric humor are quick and dexterous: Melancholy gives
integrity and constancy with Luxury; Phlegm makes one mild and gentle, and the
great abundance of blood casts them into simplicity, and stupidity: what more
shall we say to this? from all these humors arise rashness, impatience,
dullness, suspicion, and mistrustfulness, which often lead men to cruelty; hence
arise discontentedness, murmurings, indifferency for any thing, and a number of
passions which so much disturb the peace and quietness of men, are effects of
these tempers and humors predominant in man: which if a Tutor were able, and
would take pains to find out, it would be easy for him to remedy several
inconveniences, whereof the causes would thus be known to him.

I add that to undertake this upon good grounds and better hopes of success,
the genius and age of the young Gentleman are not only to be looked into, but
dealt with accordingly; which to effect, one is to consider, that to
understand, to imagine, and to remember, are proper operations of the rational
Soul; inasmuch as the intellect, the wit, and the memory are faculties of the
same: As Memory is for things past, so it may be said the Intellect and Wit are
part for present, and part for those which are to come; and both these last
receive a great help from the first: for it does afford matter to discourse,
and to be exercised upon. These faculties of the Soul have their working in the
head, where, upon occasion, are drawn the spirits into the brain: Hence it is
that there is more brains in the head of a Man, than in that of the greatest
Ox; and it is observed, that those Brutes which draw nearer to men, as dogs,
apes, and foxes, have more of it than others.

A man excels in one faculty or other, according to the temper he is of at such
a time; or as it is altered, either through accidents, or the usual course of
nature, that is, according to the several ages; which age and genius (I say it
again) if not well observed, and dealt with accordingly by the Instructor, he
will build upon the sand: and if he succeeds, as to him it will be by mere
hazard, but when he has found it out, he must put him forward in that way,
according to the faculty best in him, whether Memory, Wit, or Understanding;
yet let not the others be idle, and let no time be lost.

I named just before the four Principles of the temperature of man; yet I say,
cold does nothing of it self, only helps to temperate the rest, therefore the
good one is to be neither too moist, nor too dry, nor too hot, nor too cold:
for when one is too predominant, it ever disturbs, and at last destroys the
rest. The Memory, to be good, must be moist, the Intellect dry, and the Wit
hot; yet every one within certain degrees; and as these qualities are contrary,
so it happens seldom that one who has a good wit, has also a sound judgment;
because the first requires heat, whereby this last is weakened; and he who has
a good judgment, has seldom a good memory; because that must be dry, and this
must be moist: yet I do not deny, but that sometimes a man of a good judgment
may also have a good Memory, or a good Wit; yet all in a moderate degree; but
the stronger and more predominant one of the faculties is, the weaker the
others are.

Hence, as I say elsewhere, it will appear how Memory is the prevalent faculty
in the most tender years, because that age abounds in moisture: therefore Plato
had reason to say, In the presence of children we should ever speak of good and
honest actions, inciting to Virtue; because the memory, softened with moisture,
is better able to receive impressions than when it is dried up: As one sees the
difference between hard and soft, clay and wax; yet a Child must not be
troubled with many several different matters at the same time, because they
breed a confusion for want of being duly placed: besides that, to every Science
are prescribed some bounds which must not be trespassed; and therefore see you
perfect him in some measure, before you proceed to other things. Arts and
Sciences gotten with Memory, and proper to it, are Grammar, some Theory of the
Law, the Principles, but not the Controversies, of Divinity, Arithmetic,
reading of History, and Languages which are learned by Children, better than by
men of riper years; yet, remember Memory grows better for being used.

When one is passed from childhood to infancy, the mind begins to understand;
and therefore proportionable things must be offered to that present capacity;
as good Authors, and something of Logic: but when by degrees that moisture
ceases to abound, then the Understanding grows stronger; as we see it by
experience with people who live in hot Countries, who are wiser and more
judicious than those who inhabit cold Climates; where reigns more simplicity
and stupidity, because the Sun and heat cannot dry up part of their moisture;
as it does where it shines with more strength. Now to the Intellect belongs to
distinguish, to discourse, conclude, judge and choose; and things proper to it,
are Dialectick, Natural Philosophy, Theory of Physic, the practice of the Law,
Polemical and School Divinity.

To Wit, belong invention and composition of things; it has in its operation a
beginning, a progress, and a decay, as the other faculties: when it turns too
much into fancy, and arises to some hotter degree than it should, it becomes
destructive, and falls into delirium, making one lightheaded: they who go so
far, fancy high and great things; their brains being overheated with too much
working, or reading Romantical Adventures, which they should be forbidden to
do, this humoring and elevating that fancy. Yet certainly, true Wit is of a
vast extent, for to it do belong all Arts and Sciences, consisting in figure,
harmony, and proportion; as Music, Picture-Drawing; Eloquence, the practice of
Physic, Mathematics, Astrology, application to several things at the same
time, which yet is not an ordinary effect of it. Poetry, for some young men can
sooner make twenty good Verses in two hours, than learn by heart ten lines in
two days; whereby is seen the difference of Wit and Memory: as the example of
Socrates makes it visible between Wit and Understanding; for the Oracle
pronounced him to be the wisest man alive, when he never had the wit to make
one good verse; though as much as in him lay, he had learned the rules of
Poetry. Lastly, to pen well, Cards and several other Games, are under the
compass of Wit, which must be taken up with good things.

I make much depend upon the temperature of the body (yet detest the
consequence of Galenus) but I make most depend upon a rational Soul; yet I
think it fit for men to endeavor to know the natural causes of things; for
Nature is a Book to be read and observed by us, leaving all to the concourse
and influences of the All-mighty and wise God, Maker of our immortalSouls. One
must endeavor to get all former Rules confirmed by experience; because in some
cases, general Rules fail.

Some, the better to know the temper of men, will proceed farther, and consult
Physiognomy; whereof Aristotle has given some Rules: and to begin with the
forehead, according to the Proverb Which to gain say, others have made this
Proverb, Fronti nulla sid^s.
Frons hominem praefert; they who have it great are lasie; if little, they are
light and inconstant; if it be large and broad, they are easy to be moved and
unsettled in mind. If the eyebrows be straight as it were in a line, they
signify one to be effeminate; if they bow toward the nose, he is sower and
churlish: if they be turned toward the temples, he is a jearer and dissembler:
long eyelids are a sign of corrupt manners, short ones a mark of probity; they
which almost constantly look down, denote envy; an over white eye, or whose
apple seems divided by a streak of white, signify good nature; that eye which
is neither very big, nor very little, has a very advantageous signification;
that which moves too much, shows inconstancy; that which fixes much upon
objects, betokens impudency; but that which moves neither too much, nor too
little, is a sign of goodness, and prudence. Little ears signify corrupt
nature; long ones and upright, folly or prattling; but indifferent ones are a
good sign; so of the nose, mouth, etc. if a man be hairy very much, he is
either strong or given to luxury. But enough of this.

Others would consult Chyromancy, and by the help of some lines in the hollow
of the hand, enquire into several things; not so much to know the nature, as to
dive into several accidents which are certainly or likely to befall one.

Astrologers will tell us of Constellations, Aspects, Conjunctions and
Influences, which Stars have upon those who are born under them: but this
casting of Nativities and Horoscopes, and Fortune-telling are (to my opinion)
things no ways to be minded or looked after; the Science thereof being
conjectural, uncertain, and forbidden by Scriptures. Rather I will consider the
Country, and nature of the Climate under which one is born; some Nations are
fiery and hasty, others slow and phlegmatic; some are of a sweet nature and
civilized, when others are wild and not sociable: yet I would not consult the
twelve Signs, nor enquire into the twelve Houses, though it is certainly true,
that many things have influences upon the temper and constitution of men; the
very weather pretends to it: rainy and moist makes them dull and heavy; cold,
lusty; hot, weak and heavy.

When I said that Stars and heavenly Signs are not to be minded, I do not
intend any ways to derogate from that virtue which God has printed in them;
for it is certain they were not created in vain; for God and Nature do nothing
in vain: not only they are signs of times and seasons, and distinguish the day
from the night, but also they have influences upon sublunary and earthly
things. It were trivial for me to say that in sowing of seeds in the ground,
and planting of plants in the garden, the motion and time of the Moon is to be
minded, which Spring-Tides declare, in a higher way; and the Sun forms mines of
Gold under ground, purifies things, and ripens the fruit of the ground. But why
should I insist on these things; does not a Maxim of Philosophy affirm, that
Sol and homo generant hominem, it is not only the principle of light, but also
of life to many things; yet none of these Planets or fixed Stars have any
coactive influences, inclinant non necessitant: so that out of them nothing can
positively be affirmed, but only guessed at, and by way of conjecture.

But there are so many other things whereby to know young men, that one can
never want means to instruct and satisfy himself therein; the looks, the
gestures, the countenance, the very colors which passions spread over the
face, do often tell us much of what is in the heart. Now I can see one blush
for mode^ty, then another will grow pale for anger; love, fear, hatred are read
upon the face, and seen in the eyes, which are well called the looking-glass of
the soul: let one but endeavor sometimes to stir those passions, and they will
soon discover themselves: let a Tutor invite his Disciple to talk and
discourse, and if he be any way ingenious, he will soon find out what he is;
then let him observe his actions, his exercises, his pleasures, and his company.

Actions are certainly the surest rule whereby to judge of a man; for here I
make no distinction of ages: every free agent will propound an end to himself
of whatsoever he does, whether it be Actus elicitus, or imperatus: this end to
a wise agent is the first in intention, but the last in execution: for as he
looks to the end, so he thinks on the means how to attain to it: Yet I would
not have every single action of a man severely to be examined; for it is hardly
possible but there shall be one defect or other in it. I speak not only as in
the sight of God, but also of men. To confirm what I say, many things must
contribute to a good action, and the want in one single thing is enough to make
it bad. Every action imports four things, a principle, a matter, a manner, and
the end; there ought to be a rectitude in these four circumstances to make it
good.

First, there must be a good Principle, which is of several sorts, and may be
reduced to these three heads; as it is honest, profitable, or pleasant: under
the notion of the first, is that which arises from Conscience, as being of
Divine, Natural, or Politic Right; as to do Justice, and not act against
Reason: but some act out of a principle of honor, as others of Conscience:
wherein they consider themselves, and would do nothing whereby a stain or
blemish should be laid upon their action, person, or family: And a third sort
do act out of a principle of decency, not looking upon themselves obliged to
such an act, but only they account it to be fit, handsome, and convenient for
them: though there be a difference between these three motives, yet they are
all reduced under that we have called honest: but many act out of another
principle, called Interest, wherein they are self-ended, and look only to their
benefit and advantage: This very often causes men to do things unlawful and
unjust, so that many times it may be called pernicious, rather than profitable.
A third Principle may be called of inclination, not derived from any rule or
precept, but only from our mind and will to please one passion, or other;
whether it be love, hatred, or the like, without any consideration of
advantage, or any reason tending thereunto. Non amo te Claudi nec possum dicere
quaro
Hoc tantum possum dicere non amo te.
Then there must be the matter which is either good, or evil; according as it
is consentaneous or contrary to law and rule* yet though it be evil, it is ever
under the notion of good; for good is that which is multum appe^ibile, much to
be desired, Now no body wishes evil as such, let the inclination be never so
corrupt, and as bad as that of Medea in the Poet. -- Video meliora, proboque
Ovid.

Deteriora sequor.
Which answers to this of St. Paul, The good I would that I do not, Romans 7.19.
and the evil I would not, that I do* not because it is evil, but some specious
show or pretense of good intervening, though but imaginary, through the inward
corruption, the agent determinates himself, though with some difference; as the
action is either spiritual, natural, moral, voluntary, or mixed.

In the third place there is the way of doing, which is called the manner or
form of the action, which is very considerable: for it is not enough to do a
good thing, it must be done in a due form: this circumstance God requires very
much, according to this, Verba parum prosunt, prosunt adverbia multum,
Non bona tam pensat quam been facta Deus.


Lastly, there is an end to every action, as I said already; and this
circumstance is so considerable, that it does denominate the whole action.
Philosophers tell us, Bonitas petitur ab objecto, such as the end and object
are, such the action will be, either good or evil. These four circumstances I
will give an instance of, to illustrate what I say, let it be that of giving
Alms, which is a good action, as to the matter; it being commanded and
commended in Scripture. He who gives Alms and performs this good action, ought
to do it out of a good principle of obedience to Gods precepts, and charity to
his neighbor, and not out of vanity or pride. Then this must be done in a good
way, not publicly, and Pharisee like, causing the trumpet to be sounded before
one, but secretly, and so that the right hand does not know what the left is
doing: and lastly, the end must not be to be seen and praised of men, but only
to relieve the poor, and needy. Besides all this, there ought to be a gradual
perfection, that is, that every one of these circumstances be observed in a
competent degree; namely, whether my charity be not cold, whether I give as
much as I am able, and is suitable with the present wants of the receiver: after
all this, who can boast of his capacity to do a perfect action?

Therefore a Tutor can never expect it from a Pupil, only he will observe
whether he has a good bottom, and an honest heart; which goodness and honesty
he must endeavor to improve with judicious advice, wise precepts, and good
examples, from himself and others, into whose company he does introduce him;
allowing him that honest liberty (yet free from licentiousness) which so much
becomes a young man of quality, who ought neither to be humoured nor
discouraged, so as to be driven into bashfulness.

Because often Children are apt to forget Precepts and Admonitions after they
have been given; if they were followed with an example of any History, true, or
invented upon the matter, it would take a deeper root (thus to teach ignorant
people, our Savior used Parables so often) but to have it to make a greater
impression, in my opinion the precept, not long after it has been given,
should be reduced to practice. Thus in the last age, a Preceptor to a great and
young Prince having observed in him a hasty nature, and seeing all his advices
could not prevail upon it, for his inclination did strongly draw him that way,
all his general rules he reduced to a particular one, viz. Never to set his
hand to any thing, till after he had read it, and considered on it. Yet a day or
two after, he brought in great haste a paper to the Prince to sign, having pen
and ink ready to that purpose; so the Prince signed without so much as reading
what it was: which being done, the Preceptor said to him, Sir, you are King no
longer; for you may see how by this paper you made over your Kingdom to me.
Inventions of this kind will certainly prove beneficial to Youth; and the
higher is the quality of the Pupil, the more their temper is to be studied,
seeing, if by their Education they may hope for great charges when they come to
be of age; they will have great and public influences, their actions being ^o
much taken notice of, and men so willing to follow their examples, according to
this, Regi^ ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. Therefore when a Tutor sees his
Precepts do not produce the effect he wishes for, he must not grow impatient,
but still use his endeavors* some tempers are dull and heavy, which have much
ado to understand and retain: it is of Wits as of Fruits, some are ripe sooner
than others; so they being often gently, and in season told of their faults,
will mend at last. Failings are natural to men, specially in that tender age,
therefore one should be compassionate to, and redress them, aliquando bonus
dormitat Homerus, is an ordinary saying, the best and most careful are subject
to miscarry: but withal, a difference is to be made, when faults are committed
out of ignorance, and humane infirmity, or out of wilfulness and malice.

It is a great part of prudence to know when Youth must rest or work; it is the
dexterity of a rider to know when to hold in, and when to put on; and to know
his time is a great matter: some can learn more in one hour* than others in a
whole day; therefore they who are not able, or have no genius, to be kept too
long at it, must not be tired out, which would make them nauseate all Learning
and Morality; they must have rest, and refreshment: for says the Poet, --
Neque semper arcum Horat. lib. 2. od. 10.

Tendit Apollo.
But when the Tutor has care, and capacity, and a good method to instruct, and
when the Scholar is willing and able to learn, and to act what is necessary;
for there must be a disposition in the recipient, then there is hopes that God,
who has made all things by his power, and preserves them by his wisdom, will
bless with success, their labor and mutual endeavors; but if not only there
are no such good dispositions, but rather bad ones in him, certainly there is
no good hopes; For Sincerum est nisi vas quodcunque infundis acescit. Horat.
lib. 1. ep. 2.


It is not only convenient, but also necessary to use Children to hardship, if
their strength and constitution can bear it; for thereby not only they will
take exercise, which is necessary to dissipate bad humors, and to use their
joints, whereby they will be more nimble and stronger, and which also will make
them grow; but also they will use themselves to labor, and make it natural to
them: it is a great matter when they are hardened from their childhood, for it
makes their constitution strong and lusty: Hunting, Riding, Walking, and
moderately using ones body, to the like exercises, can much contribute to it.
Indeed some are brought up in so tender and effeminate a way, that it is a shame
to think on it; so that if ever they be put upon any inconvenience, they are not
able to hold out, but sink under any hardship, and are soon swept away; then
those Parents who so much dally with, and seem to be so tender of them, may see
their error, when any distemper comes upon them. It is natural and reasonable
for every one to desire the health and life of his children, but the ways which
men take to arrive to it, are much different, and the means often contrary to
the end. I had reason to say elsewhere, that Breeding is a second nature, for
Children will (may be as long as they live) retain that alteration which
perhaps at that time was made in their temper: Look on a Country-man's, or an
ordinary man's Son, he does generally prove strong, and fit for hardship; and
though it be necessary to proportionate the hardship to the Child's strength,
it is no way requisite to stand so much upon the quality of the Parents; for
besides what I already observed, that this is good for their health, I believe,
great and little ones, rich and poor, noble and commoners, may at one time or
other happen to be put to shifts; so that from the Prince to the lowest
Subject, it is uncertain what one shall happen to be brought to: it is well to
be fitted to wrestle against what difficulties we shall meet withal.

Besides that, the greatest Kings in the world, when they are put upon action,
are glad of a body able to endure hardship; the greatest Conquerors do share in
it: not only the common Soldiers, but also Officers undergo it. What a fine
thing was it for Pompeius, to have to be his Soldiers, those young Romans,
who, for fear of being cut in the face, whereby it had been spoiled, turned
their backs in the day of battle. In a word, as there is none but one time or
other of his life may happen to be put upon action, it is prudently done of
Parents to fit them for it, from their youth up* and I am sure, that to be able
to endure hardship is a qualification without which one can do nothing, or very
little in mart^al affairs. God, who had appointed David to many troubles and
hardships, disposed him to it, through his former manner of life, when he kept
his Father's sheep in the field, exposed to the heat of the Sun, Wind, Rain,
and other injuries of Weather; and may be with a crust of dry bread in his
pocket. I do not deny how decent it is that Children of men of quality should
be brought up in a handsomer way than those of common people: but I speak
against the fondness which some have for them, which is so far from deserving
to be called care, that I more properly name it want of care.

Let the inconveniences of this manner of Breeding be observed, These young
Gentlemen when ^hey come somewhat to know themselves, they will eat no course
meat, only the most delicate they can find for money. They scorn to wear clothes
except they be very rich; they will think it is below them to walk, but if they
go out, it must be in a Coach; they will not so much as take the pains to stick
a pin about them; and if there be no servant to give them a glass of Wine, they
will rather be choakt than take it themselves: Sometimes the weather is not
good for them to walk out, therefore they will sit at home, and Dice or Card
away many a pound, or in a Tavern, and drink away their health, till the Gout,
or Gravel comes upon them, or a Pleurisy, an Apoplexy, or some other sudden
Disease carries them to their Grave: After this way of breeding, certainly we
must not look for many manly spirits, and if there be any, it is their good
temper, and strong constitution which keep them from being spoiled by this; and
as h^reby the name effeminate given to these spirits has been borrowed from
women, so some manly spirits have passed into the bodies of women; for there
are some of these whose heroic minds will shame the low and pusillanimous
hearts of those, Ovid.
Sint procul a nobis Iuvenes ut foemina compti.

Seeing I am now upon this subject, it will not be amiss to speak of two
contrary ways of Breeding; one effeminate, used by a people called Sybarites;
the other manly, by the Lacedaemonians: the former studied nothing but how to
soften and render effeminate their spirits and bodies: but the last as much as
in them lay, endeavored to frame their bodies to a strength necessary for war,
and to infuse a true principle of valor into their soul. The Sybarites brought
up their Children in the bosom of a lasie and idle voluptuousness, wherein they
sucked vices as it were from the breast, and before they could know them: And as
a stomach weakened through excesses can bear no solid meat, but that only which
is very light; so their soul had therein contracted such a nausea and distaste,
that it could no ways savor and relish the food of virtue. Insomuch that it
wanted strength not only to digest, but also to keep it for never so short a
time. The Lacedaemonians nourished their children with sobriety, and without
delicacy; they used them to injuries of weather, they made them fight and
wrestle one against another; commending some for their strength, others for
their dexterity, and constancy; they taught them to be respectful to old age,
and often told them of the brave exploits and feats of their Ancestors, to
encourage them to virtue; they ordered them to be short, but sententious in
their discourses, and constantly to mind generous actions.

But what manner of men must they have been, who for several years were kept as
soft and warm, as if they had been in their Mothers womb; who would not so much
as suffer workmen in their Town for fear their sleep had been interrupted with
the noise they made; whose Cooks were the first Preceptors they gave their
Children; Parents being careful how to refine their taste more than their wit;
who made in bed most of their Exercises, and their most serious Discourses at
Table; inviting people to their Feasts a whole year before, that they might
have time to make extraordinary provisions, and those who were invited, geeat
preparations to come to it, looking for excesses in every thing. Now I would
fain know what good can be expected from such a Breeding?

On the contrary, the Lacedaemonians who were brought up amidst noble and
generous examples, and were as good as framed by the hands of virtue, could
produce none but great and extraordinary actions, worthy of an immortal praise:
and indeed the last of them were the first amongst other Nations. But at last,
what was the end of these two people? it is well known how, as long as lasted
the Discipline by Lycurgus, settled in Sparta, thence came forth so many valiant
men, that all their enemies were afraid of them, and durst not fight with an
Army, wherein were but few of them; when three hundred thousand Sybarites were
overthrown by the Crotonians with a handful of men, and all their Towns taken
within less than two months.

The ancient Inhabitants of Crete (now Candia) used to hang up their Sons
breakfast, which if they had a mind to get, they were to fetch down with
Arrows: hence it is that they were so good marks-men. The same is said of those
of the Islands Balearides, now Majorca, Minorca, and Yvica.

Here I need not to be told how this was of old, and now things are so much
altered, that what Nation soever, or particular man would follow all the steps
of ancient Nations, would become ridiculous: for I know every Nation had, and
still has some particular thing suitable to the genius and state of the
generality of it: and even in every Nation, according to the several intents
and quality of Parents, there is some diversity in breeding of Youth; they must
be bred the way according to which they are to be disposed of Thus a difference
is to be observed in the breeding of a Soldier, and of a Lawyer; these being
particular employments, which in time they are to betake themselves to: But I
speak of a general way of breeding, which is not to be tied, either to times,
or places; as Virtue, Knowledge, and the like: under which may be reduced the
way of the Spartians, and others I named

How much does this condemn those Parents, who only think upon building of
houses, and richly furnishing them; of getting Horses, Hounds, Hawks, etc. and
hardly think upon him who is heir apparent to these things; and sometimes will
take more care to have a Horse well dressed, than a Son well bred. Shall I
confirm all I said against an effeminate (and consequently vicious) Education,
by that which was given to one of the greatest Princes of Europe for these many
age^, I mean, Henry IV. born Prince of Bearn, lawful Heir to Navarre,
afterward King of France: his Grandfather Henry of Albret would not have him
brought up with the delicacy used with persons of that quality; knowing well,
how in a soft and tender body lodges usually a soft and a weak spirit: He did
also forbid he should wear rich clothes, or be flattered and treated with that
submission due to Princes; because all these things infuse vanity, and lift up
the heart of children to pride, rather than to a true sense of generosity: he
only ordered him to be clothed, and fed, as were other Children of the
Country; and that he should be used to run and climb up the Rocks, which are
thick in those parts to the end he might thereby be used to hardship, and his
tender body might become strong and lusty, It Is reported, that commonly he fed
upon brown Bread, Beef, Cheese, and Garlic; and that often they made him walk
bare-head, and bare-feet; and probably without this he had never been able to
undergo so much hardship as he met with when he was forced to defend his right,
and conquer his Kingdom with the edg of his Sword. Pope Sixtus V. had reason
then to say, that for certain he would overcome the League (a strong Faction in
France) because the general of it, the Duke of Mayenne was longer at Table,
than Henry IV. was in bed.

But I know every one has not a constitution strong enough to bear this, in
which case one ought not to go beyond his strength: However this is sufficient
to show how necessary it is for one to have a body used to hardship; specially
for t^ose who intend to be Soldiers: which profession very often does not
depend upon men, being sometimes forced to it, by some accident or other; as
may be a Civil War, an invasion of a Foreign Enemy, or a Conquest to be made by
the Prince: besides that, it is well known to be a part of policy in time of
Peace, to be in a posture of War, and to stand upon the defensive. And that
Country which has a number of men of service experienced in warlike affairs,
is considerable in her self, and formidable to her Neighbors: Arms are the
usual way of conquering or preserving States; for indeed, counsel alone, at
least without a martial prudence, proves often successless, except the Sword be
in a readiness to back it, therefore men able to command Armies, are so much
respected by some, and feared by others; which preferment, when it is bestowed
upon their merit, they often have sweated for, and endured the brunt of the
day, whereby they attained unto that experience, which they were so
considerable for: and hereupon I can but admire at the change which when there
is occasion, this works upon the nature of men. Of this we have two notable
examples of two great men who were contemporary, and this not long ago, in the
days of Henry IV. of France, lived the Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal Biron,
both gallant men for War, but in a different way: The former was of a wary,
slow, one phlegmatic temper at a Council Table, and in his ordinary actions:
The other contrariwise was of a quick, hasty, and somewhat rash nature: yet
when these two men were at the head of an Army, they were altogether other men:
the Duke of Bouillon was so fierce and fiery, that he hardly could hold in, and
was seen to foam when he went to the Charge: but the other did master himself
so much, was so quiet, so calm, and as serious as if there had been nothing to
do: in this condition the former was better disposed for a Soldier than for a
General; and the last was more fit for a General than for a Soldier. Indeed it
cannot be well enough admired what a change is wrought in some men when they
were upon the point of action. We read of one Garzia Sanchio, King of Navarre,
who when he met with his enemies, grew pale and quaked; whence he was surnamed
the Quaker; who yet was like a thunder in a Battle. The like we hear of
another, who trembled when his man did put his Armor on him; which he once
asking the reason of, he was answered, My body has reason to tremble, knowing
what a danger my heart will anon bring it to. This in other men is an effect of
fear, but in these, it is caused by a sudden raising of the blood.

As Children in their generation are to be members of a politic body, and of a
civil society; I wish they were fitted to keep the bond of it, and therefore
taught the practice of meekness, humility, civility, etc. which qualities
breeding a mutual respect and affection, do much contribute to keep peace in
families, amongst Neighbors, and through whole Nations; and because Virtue
begets plenty and riches, which cause pride and idleness, I would have them
instructed as much as may be to avoid so bad effects of so good a cause;
thereby to prevent calamity and destruction, as befell Sodom and Gomorrah: we
had never thought that the sin of those places had been other than that
abominable one named from that first one, if Ezechiel had not expressed it
thus; Chap. 16.49.
The sin of Sodom was pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness, want
of charity, and haughtiness.

To fence betimes against this, let Children be taught to study decency in
their clothes, modesty in their behavior, sobriety and temperance in their
diet; not so much to please their palate, as to nourish their body, using
wholesome meat and keeping a good diet; for exuberancy of food causes surfeits,
which do endanger their life, or at least makes them unfit to learn or do any
thing well, causing a dullness in their spirits: wherefore it is much necessary
to make them use some exercise, whereby digestion may the sooner, and the more
easily be made to prevent crudities and indigestions of stomach, which often
trouble a man as long as he lives. This I say, not to retract of what I told
just now, of using them to hardship, but for those only whose natural weakness
cannot bear that manner of breeding; or to comply with those who do not like
it; for all ever comes to this, that a plain food is more nourishing, and less
hurtful, than that which is accounted more exquisite; because the palate is
pleased with it, though it be otherwise with the stomach.

Here it will not be amiss to say in particular; some things of the civility
which upon several occasions Tutors ought to teach Children committed to their
care; for they are given not only to teach them their Book, but also to oversee
their carriage and manners, and betimes frame them to a civil and handsome
behavior, that they may be the fitter to be admitted into company and
conversation: use him betimes to be civil, meek, and respectful, to do others
all the pleasure he can, but no injury: not to be proud of any parts or
advantages he has above others; forbear disputing, and too much contradicting
what others say, and being eager or obstinate in defending his opinions. To
trust to every one, or to no body, are two extremes to be avoided; and to
betray a man's secret is an evil not to be practiced; he may mention favors
received, but not those he has bestowed.

When he walks, if he meets with any Magistrate, or other to whom respect is
due, let him put off his hat, and give them the hand: when he is in
conversation, let him look modestly on him who speaks; not interrupting him, or
saying any thing till he has done speaking: his gesture ought to be composed,
not to turn his eyes to and fro, move his legs too much, play with his hat,
bite his nails, scratch his head, blow his nose without turning aside his head,
or pick it, or his ears with his fingers, spit often, wag his head, move his
hand too much, whistle or sing when he has nothing to say, or do the like
unbecoming things: let him not speak too fast, or too loud, but softly and
gently, not brag of himself, or any thing of his, despise or speak amiss of
others: let his words be true, modest, not contrary to Piety, Morality, or
Charity, only he ought not to speak any filthy or dishonest word, but he must
not seem to approve of any (if spoken by others) with smiling or laughing
thereat: Contrariwise he must show his dislike, even censure the speaker if it
be fit for him; or else he will do well if he seems not to have heard; and
afterward he is carefully to avoid such a man's company. In a word, let him
abstain from every idle and vicious discourse, and every indecent gesture.

His Clothes must be suitable to his age and quality, neat, and clean; yet not
proud at it if they be rich. let him keep his face, nose, teeth, and hands from
being dirty and foul; and those parts covered which modesty forbids to be shown.

At Table, he must not fit down till Grace be said by him or some other; the
like is to be observed when he rises: as to washing, before or after meals, let
him follow the custom of the Country, keep his mouth and fingers clean; cut
his morsels, whether bread or meat, nor hold it in his hand, nor lean his elbow
on the Table, his body must be upright: avoid being greedy in eating, or making
too much noise with his mouth, which ought to be empty when he speaks, or
drinks, and never too full; in which both eating and drinking, he ought to
avoid excess, as licking his fingers, knawing of bones, etc. At table, avoid
jearing, and o^fensive words: it is the custom of some to take that time to
slander and speak ami^s of others. This St. Austin hated so much, that he
caused these Verses in great Characters to be written over his Table. Quisquis
amat diciis absentum rodere famam,
Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.


It were endless to insist upon these and many more things of this nature,
which are better learned with practice than by rule: for they are trivial, yet
necessary things within the reach and capacity of any ordinary Tutor; to whose
care and prudence it must be left to make use of it.

Toward a good breeding of Children, it is a great help to institute Schools
where there is none; and to encourage those which are already settled; providing
them with able, painful, and honest men, with a plentiful, or at least a
sufficient allowance for their maintenance: for else take this away, and the
rest will fall of it self. This saying, Languescit sine praemio virtus, is as
true as common. Nature teaches us to seek for necessaries first of all; so that
if one wants food or raiment, he can mind nothing else till he has it, and
other things which men usually have occasion for. Honest men will go carefully
and faithfully about their work, but not with cheerfulness, if they want
necessary encouragements. The benefit of these Schools, and rewards to those
who kept them, being known to Julian the Apostate, out of the violent desire he
was possessed with to extirpate Christian Religion, took it by the root, and
with his wicked policy which Christians called the worst part of his
Persecution, he first of all discouraged Schools, wherein Christians caused
their Children to be taught and instructed in the Principles of their Religion,
and other necessary things; then he altogether suppressed them: so that this
ceasing, except a special care were taken by Parents in their Families,
civility and neatness were thrust out of doors, and wild and ignorant Barbarism
brought in.

For Virtue and Learning are not born with us, but acquired by us; they are not
a gift of nature, but a reward or a purchase of pains and industry. Let Plato,
and the Academians, yea the Stoics say what they will; for Aristotle was in
the right, when he says, things which naturally are so and so, will not be
otherwise, Quod natura dedit, tollere nemo potest, let stones be thrown up, and
the air be pressed down; yet stones can never be used to ascend, nor the air to
descend; gravity being the natural quality of one, and lightness of the other.
Nevertheless, it is certain, that it is possible for men from being evil to turn
to be good, as a virtuous man can become vicious; which could not be if we had
brought virtue or vice into the world; besides, that in things we do by nature,
power does precede the act: whereof we see the contrary in virtue or vice; for
virtue and vice do not consist in any single act, but in the habit formed of
many: wherefore Cyrillus Alexandrinus against Julian the Apostate, Lib. 3.
says. If nature had filled our souls with virtue, vice could not have been
introduced into them; so that we see she only made us susceptible thereof, as
we are also of vice; because that which is disposed to receive one thing, is
also capable to receive the contrary of it. Virtue is a hidden treasure, which
we must take pains to find out by the help of Precepts, which by degrees are
contracted into an habit; and that is properly what we call Art and Science.
This was the opinion of the first Lawgivers, who to that end instituted
several Disciplines for Youth, and gave them rules suitable to the government
which they would use them to: for although nature has not given us virtue, she
has not denied us means to attain to it; she has even given us some seeds and
dispositions to it, having put in us affections, whereby upon occasion it does
receive some increase: for says the Pythagorician Hyppodamus, Lib. de Rep
Through desire and fear one grow; a notable proficient in virtues

Another great help to Education of Children, would be the suppression of all
vicious and corrupt places, or any that engage Youth to debanchedness; as may
be public Gaming places, many Taverns, of which the number is exceeding; which
are all enticements to young men to fall into depravation, and an idle course
of life. I would not except Plays, when profane, lascivious, blasphemous, or
other vicious parts are acted upon the Stage; for else representing of Virtue
in her lively colors, may be a motive to love and follow it: So when Vice
appears in his own shape, it will make it odious to us; therefore much is
depending upon the subject they act; to show how ridiculous in all his wa^s is
a covetous man, will instruct us of the vileness and sordidness of that vice:
and this was the first use of Comedies introduced amongst the Romans in the
days of grave and wise men, who had the government of the Republic, continued
in Augustus's days, which multiplied to an excess, and degenerated under the
Reign of Vicious Emperors: for, instead that first they were only instructive,
they turned only to delight spectators, and to flatter great men in their
Vices; whereby the true end thereof was perverted. Intrigues of State were also
represented; therein I can see Nero^ either dissembling his natural
inclination, or overawed by his Mother, or else persuaded by the wise and good
advices of Seneca and Burrhus, live and reign virtuously for the space of five
years; then fly out and break loose against those Counselors, because they
dissuaded him from violence and evil actions. To see the advice of those
faithful and virtuous men slighted, and the suggestions of a base and infamous
Narcissus, or other flatterers be received; and on the other side, Agrippina
accusing Seneca and Burrhus, to be the authors of what evil counsels her Son
took against her Authority, Reason, and Justice? does not this show the
condition of few honest men amongst the wicked, they give the good counsels
which are not followed; and yet suffer the blame of evil ones, which they ever
spoke against. This, if any, is the good which can be learned from Plays; but
on the other side, the life of Actors and Actrices, their gestures, actions,
carriage, and whatsoever else is in them joined to the bad inclinations of the
generality of spectators, will quite hinder any good effect, and destroy what
good dispositions might happen to be in them: besides that, History will
instruct us of all these passages, which yet being acted, will make a deeper
impression upon the faculties and passions of the soul, both to instruct, and
to delight it. In one word, a good use may be made of Plays, though generally
none but a bad one be made of them.

But setting Plays aside, I shall assert the necessity of suppressing vicious
things and places, which allure Youth to evil and debauchedness; Magistrates
being much concerned in it: virtuous Subjects will submit to Law* and obey
Authority, when vicious men will cause troubles and disturbances. This I press
the more, by reason of the depravation which is in Youth, in every man, and in
the whole man; and that not only original and inherent to their nature, but
also contracted by a loose breeding, worse examples, debauched company, and
other accidents. Young men generally are not sound within, but there is a
hidden and inward enemy apt to betray the whole man upon occasion, and to let
in any outward foe; in them matter is very combustible, and ready to take fire
with the least sparkle from without.

Now I return to the Tutors part, which is, ever to keep Children doing one
thing or other. There are three sorts of life, one speculative, and the other
active; one for learning, the other for practice: let them be kept to which
they please, or rather both; but avoid the otiosam or idle life: standing water
does gather mud and corruption. Children (specially they who are quick and
lively) when they have no good to do, they will rather do evil than be idle. It
is a considerable saying of an ancient Doctor, that the whole life of man
passes, Vel nihil agendo, aut male agendo, vel aliud agendo, either, in doing
nothing, or doing evil, or else doing that which concerns us not; playing the
part of busybodies; therefore there must be variety of things to put them
upon: indeed some there are which Youth must learn to do by the by; others they
ought to apply themselves seriously to; for they must not so much mind their
Book, as to neglect conversation when they begin to be capable of it: neither
must they be so taken with speculation, as to omit action altogether, and
wholly to deprive themselves of every innocent and lawful pleasure and
recreation, which God, Nature, Reason, Health, Decency, and such like do permit
or require. Seek ye first, says Scripture, the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof: This first implies a priority, of which there is one of
order; for an order is required in every thing. Such a priority of order there
is in the persons of the most Holy and Blessed Trinity; another priority there
is of nature, but not of time; such is the Sun before his light, for the cause
must be in nature before the effect; yet at the same time the Sun was he gave
light: but another priority there is in time, and not in nature; so in time a
Father is before his Son, for he was born many years before him; yet he is not
so in nature, because he cannot be a Father till he has a Child; these two
being relative; which as Schoolmen say, Se mutuo ponunt and tollunt, put one,
and you put both; take away one, and you take away both.

In short, the Tutor is to keep his Gentleman in exercise, to have him get a
stock of Learning, not suffering him, like the sluggard, to wallow himself upon
his bed, Prove. 26.13.
or to say, Prove. 22.13.29.
there is a Lion in the way; but let him be diligent; for such stand not before
mean persons, but even before Kings. Laziness is the pillow of Vices, Nam
diuturna quies vitiis alimenta ministrat, Disticha de moribus.
says Cato. And David speaks of some who contrive mischief upon their bed:
it is not upon it that virtue is to be found: for, Non jacet in molli veneranda
scientia lecto,
Ipsa sed assiduo parta labor venit.
Another says very well, Nulla est sine pulvere palma; a manner of speaking
borrowed from those who used to exercise themselves in the Olympic
Recreations; who to obtain the prize, were to run and endure heat, sweat, and
dust. Now this study and application is beneficial in several ways; for not
only one learns and instructs himself, but also thereby he resists those
temptations, which, though some sooner, and some later, are exposed to, this
was well known by the Poet, when he says -- Et ni Horat.

Posces ante diem librum cum lumine, si non
Intendes animum studiis and rebus honestis
Invidia vel amore vigil torquebere --
Which is a lesson not for young only, but for old also: When we do ill, the
Devil tempts us; but we tempt him to work on us when we are idle. I found her
upon my ground (said he, speaking of a woman whom he had possessed) and being
idle. The same Poet advises men to read and to enquire how to pass well their
life, free from vices, specially Luxury, which is cause of poverty to many. His
words are these, Inter cuncta leges, and percunctabere doctos Hor. l. 1. ep. 18.

Qua ratione queas traducere leniter aevum
Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido.
These things and the like should ever be pressed upon youth by those who have
care over them; they must be told, how glorious and beneficial it is to be
pious, learned, discreet, and prudent; and how odious and destructive it is to
be ignorant, and given to vices; how wisely done it is to observe times,
places, and persons; and how good to know his own work and strength; how
necessary to think of death, and consider his latter end; the vanity and
uncertainty of all things here, whether it be vanity of pleasures, inconstancy
of honors, and deceitfulness of riches; and how comfortable it is, and will
be, to live and die well: and the conclusion of such instructions, Pr^v. 12.13.
or (as Solomon says) of the whole matter, is, to fear God and keep all his
Commandments.

Thus far may be extended the care over Children and young men, whilst they are
at home; but one or other will object, How can a young man learn all things
mentioned, before he goes abroad? or at what time would you have him to go? To
this I have several things to answer; one is that I never intended herein to
give an imaginary model of Education, to please fancy, more than to benefit
young men: it is against neither reason nor custom, and I propound nothing but
what can be done in part, or in the whole, in some degree. Not many years ago a
Lord in this Land had a Son, who being but eight years of age, understood the
Latin and Greek Tongues. And one I have known, who being but eleven years old,
had gone over his Common-places of Rhetoric, had a good introduction into
Philosophy, and could give some account of Divinity: but these two died very
young, and were like those fruits which are soon ripe, and soon rotten; and as
those lights whose flashing and brightness is seen only as they fall from the
sky; like those flowers which dum oriuntur moriuntur, one day sees them blossom
and wither: therefore I grant such examples to be rare, and the persons
extraordinary: but such a forwardness I neither mean nor require, I keep within
bounds of an ordinary course of learning and improvement.

Furthermore, it is not to be expected, that a young Gentleman should be
universally learned; this is more than what is required of Doctors, and
Professors in Universities: besides, that nature has not been so liberal to
every man as to make one capable altogether of all manner of learning: Clemens
Alexandrinus, Pedagogo, has elegantly compared the soul of man to animated
Fields; for as every Field is not fit for every Plant, so our spirits are not
fit to learn every Science; some require a good and happy memory: it is in vain
for us to pretend to others without a quick and pregnant imagination; and some
others cannot be gotten without a great strength of judgment. But these three
faculties very seldom meet good in one man, sufficient to render him capable of
all manner of Sciences. Therefore hitherto the world has afforded but very few
examples; four or five of those whose temper and genius has been suitable to
the variety and depth of Learning, and though in some very few, such an
universal disposition was found; yet still it would be with inequality and
difference to one Art and Science more than to another.

Besides, that one ought to apply himself most of all to that which is of his
intended or actual profession: Does one aspire to be a Divine, then Divinity
must be his principal study; or else does he intend to be a Physician, then he
must particularly apply himself to the study of Physic; and so of the rest.
This is the maxim which men of riper years, and in public employments ought to
observe. For if a Judge was not well acquainted with the Laws and Customs of his
Country; if a Secretary of State was not able to pen well, had no skill in
Languages, and was not informed of the Treaties of Peace, Alliances, and
Leagues; if he cared not to know the several Interests, Governments of States,
their Forces, Riches, wherein they consist, and the manners of the people;
thereupon to regulate his Negotiations. If a General of an Army was not able to
order the march of his Troops throughout Friends or Enemies Country, to pitch
a Camp, to Besiege or defend a place, to set his Army in order of Battle, and
the like; would it not be a shame for them, and they unfit for such places? But
if a Lawyer does not know what belongs to War, or a Soldier what belongs to
Law, it is no disparagement to them, because it does not belong to their
profession.

Again, I do not expect Youth should have the fruit of every Art, Science,
Language, or Virtue I have named; only let them have the seeds of it: and let
these be dispositions thereunto, and foundations to build upon hereafter. To
this I add that that which is very essential to my purpose, that the Principles
which make up the greater part of my Discourse, are necessary to every one who
pretends to be a Scholar: for, who is he who makes any considerable stay in
Schools and Universities, but will be acquainted with the Classical Authors I
named, with the Languages I spoke of, with Rhetoric, Philosophy, Morals
included; so that in all this I mentioned nothing but what every young man
brought up a Scholar, ought to know in some measure, which they may attain unto
if betimes they are put upon it, and have mind and abilities to follow it.

Withal, I do not intend to impose any thing upon others, only let the Reader
suppose I writ what I think fit to be done, or would do my self, if that were
my calling; for in such things, often opinions do differ, and as many heads as
many minds: as in matter of taste, one likes the sweet, and another the sour:
one finds one meat very savory, and another cannot relish it; yet for all this,
there are some Principles which most are agreed upon about this; (except some
whose taste is perhaps depraved through some distemper or other accident)
namely, that Gall and things very bitter have no good taste; and also that
there are things insipid. So it is in relation to another of our senses,
namely, the eye. In the case of Beauty, one likes the fat, another is pleased
with the lean; one is taken with the black, another with the white complexion;
and several other things to this purpose; as the blue and the black eyes: yet
there are principles concerning this, which we are all agreed upon; namely,
that a good complexion, a white skin, regular features, and an exact proportion
of all parts, are marks of beauty: for if one would affirm, that a squint eye,
or a nose awry were signs of beauty, he would make himself ridiculous. The same
I may say of the subject in hand, though concerning Breeding of Youth, men do
differ in the ways, and methods, or other things; yet we all agree that
Erudition or Learning of Arts and Sciences, the precepts of Morality, and the
like, are essential parts of Education, or at least much contributing to
complete one, As therefore this is the chief, not to say the only matter I have
handled in this Treatise, I believe I may well conclude, that it contains
nothing but what is possible and necessary to be done; not out of ^ principle
which many are acted by, and which indeed is as natural for an Author to lick
his work, as for a father to love his child; it being often with Writings, as
with Whelps; which to make very smooth, the bitch takes great pains to lick
over; so do some Authors with their productions, till they be polished to their
mind.

I add one thing more, to wit, that there are several cases and circumstances
of Education, upon which one can hardly give any particular Rules* the genius
of young men being so different, and so contrary, that many things must be left
to the prudence of the Tutor* circumstances of persons, times, and places
herein are much to be observed.

FINIS.
A TREATISE Concerning the EDUCATION OF YOUTH.

The Second Part. About their Breeding Abroad.

By I. GAILHARD, Gent.

Quid brevi fortes jaculamur avo
Multa? quid terras alio calentes
Sole mutamus? patriae quis exul,
Se quoque fugit.
Horat. lib. 2. Ode. 16. In the SAVOY: Printed by T.N. for I. Starkey at the
Mitre in Fleet Street, near Temple Bar, 1678.

To the Honorable Sir THOMAS GROSVENOR BARONET.
SIR,
WHen first I had the Honor to see you, thorough my own experience, I was
confirmed in the opinion of a Sympathy between persons; for then my inclination
was wrought upon with much respect and tenderness for you: these beginnings
produced by sudden Causes, were soon grounded upon others better known, and
strengthened with the consideration of your being committed to my Care, and I
entrusted with the direction of your Travels. Then that which was at first an
effect either of inclination or choice, was enforced as a necessary duty of
being diligent and faithful in the Trust I had taken upon me.

I was much encouraged, and received it as a good Omen, to see you in those
very tender years, take a generous Resolution; and this as much out of your own
motion, as upon the suggestion of others (yet in subordination to the direction
of those who had right and authority over you) to leave Relations and Country,
to strive after being bettered with an Outlandish Breeding.

But when I began better to be acquainted with you, all former Dispositions and
Engagements ceased or were suspended, to give place to new and greater Ties. I
could perceive in you, all inclinations to be Good, free from Vice, and
favorable Dispositions to receive what good impressions I was able to work
upon you* a Judgment desirous, or rather greedy to be informed; a Will ready to
be directed, and Affections to be rectified: And in few words, by way of
Reading, Conversations, propounding Doubts, asking good Questions, you were
unwearied in your Endeavors to be instructed: And with your close following
Riding the great Horse, Fencing, Dancing, Drawing Landskips, and Designing;
Learning upon the Gitar, the French and Italian Tongues, and following other
Exercises, to acquire those Accomplishments, which do so much become a
Gentleman of your Age, Estate and Quality: It is very hard to find one as you;
who would take so much Pains, and be so exact in making Observations about
Persons, Places and Things; so that for the space of four years, thorough all
France, Italy, part of Hungary, Bohemia, Germany, and Switzerland, hardly any
considerable Person or Thing, has escaped your fight. It is rare to see others
as well as you, in the depth of Winter, to be with Masters of Exercises by
Candlelight, and sometimes an hour before day, and not be satisfied with the
explication of the Writings of your Master of Mathematics, but also to take
your self the Pains to Copy them.

But one of the greatest Commendations I can add, is, That you ever yielded to
Reason, and were pleased to take my advice, and follow my counsel, which made
my Task comfortable to me, and your Travels beneficial to your self: Hence it
is, that in your Actions, one could perceive you had the two essential things
necessary to every one of them, namely Rule; that is, Grounds and Causes, with
Resolution; that is, Courage and Constancy, whereby you know some difficulties
lying in our way, have been overcome.

Your Moneys you did not trifle away, but bestowed them upon good Books,
Medals, and other useful Rarities worth the Curiosity of a Complete Gentleman;
so that one may see you have been a good Husband of two precious Things, your
Time and your Moneys.

After this, you may judge of my inclination, and the world of the necessity of
my Dedicating this to you, which, with the other Parts of my Book, you know
were compiled the first Summer we were together in France; Accept it therefore
with the full assurance of my ever being,

Sir, Your most Humble Servant, I. Gailhard.

The Preface.
THe Ends of Men are reduced to that which ^is either honest, pleasant, or
profitable; these give motion to all their actings: by right they should be
unseparable one from another, for that which is honest, should be pleasant and
profitable, and so of the rest: But the corruption of Men has not only put a
difference, but also made such a contrariety, that often just things do
prejudice, and dishonest will please the most: pleasure and profit, also are
many ^imes asunder. All Moralists are agreed in their opinion (though they
differ in their practice) how that which is honest, should be preferred to the
rest; and that which is beneficial, to that which is only pleasant, specially
when many are concerned in the profit, and when the pleasure is of few
particular Men.

Of Writers, some intend to please, and others have mind to instruct; to my
opinion, these last are to be preferred to the former, because they are more
useful and necessary: those who desire only to please, do often miss their
aim; for as many Men as many Minds; and to agree with the fancies of Men, is
very difficult: but he who instructs well, goes upon better grounds, and more
solid principles: this is a Work of necessity, when the other is of curiosity,
and like a News Book, is to be read over only once, and then is as an Almanac
out of date.

The Objects of the curiosity of Men are different, according to their
inclination, or usual application, to some of the several Arts and Sciences,
that are in the World; yet (not to speak of the avis aeria, the Bird which
Naturalists affirm to live only with the Air) as some Creatures feed upon
slight, and others upon substantial things; so some Men feed upon fancy, and
use a Chymerical Food, leaving the Body for the shadow, and will be better
pleased to hear a Tale, than the Relation of some important Achievements;
these I look upon as distempered Men; and they who in their Writings do humor
them in it, are as Physicians who do but dally with, and cure not their
Patients, and in Job's words, Physicians of no value; and who, though they be
not the Authors, yet are accessory, and do much contribute to the continuation
of such weaknesses. I, for my part, think it fitter to benefit the Mind which
is rational, than to please the Fancy, which is ^often extravagant, and to do
something for the public good, is more solid contentment, than to gratfie the
itching desires of some few particular Men.

For all this, I do not deny but that debet misceri utile dulci, the Mind
delights sometimes to have pleasant and slight things; but it must be like the
Fruit, as we use to afford our Palate after the Stomach is satisfied with
substantial Meat, one may condescend to the several genius and capacities of
Men; yet I conceive the Accessory is not to be made the Principal, nor the
Accidents be put into the place of the Substance.

If one, writing a Relation of Italy, would (for example) only say, or chiefly
insist upon this, in the Church of San Giovanni in Parma, the Altar Piece is
the transfiguration of our Savior; by Coreggio, and in a Chapel there, are
two others af the same; one is the taking down of our Savior from the Cross,
and the other the Martydom of one Felicetta, and of another of their Saints.
Nay, if he went further, and said, in the great Altar, is room for 14000
persons, 80 Machines; in the middle is brought in water about 14 Foot high, so
that Sea Fights are represented therein. Moreover, there is in the Stables a
great number of rare and fair Horses; hard by are Coaches extraordinary rich,
one of them being over-laid with Silver; Fine Gardens, Walks, Fountains, and
little Houses full of excellent Pictures. If further he said, there is the
College called De'i Nobili, wherein none but persons of quality are admitted;
yet without difference of Nations, and for 50 l. a man by the year, they are
taught Sciences, and Riding, Fencing, Dancing, and the like Exercises, who have
certain Laws by themselves, and one whom they call Prince the Head of all; and
that their San Francesco Borgia is their Founder, and are under the protection
of the present Duke. I say for all this, except more necessary and substantial
things be observed, such a Relation will be very defectuous.

I will suppose in another example, he went more exactly upon particulars,
namely that in the Palace of the Duke of Modena, there is in several Chambers,
a Madonna, or the Virgins Picture, made by Coreggio, a good Samaritan, taking
care of the wounded Man by Bassano, Christ appearing to Mary in the Garden by
Guido Reni; Judas offering Moneys to our Savior by Titiano: another good
Samaritan by Paolo Veronese; and the Wedding of Cana, by the same; St Jerome by
Rubens; the Judgment of Solomon by Paolo Veronese; Christ dead by Guarcini;
St. Peter coming to Christ upon the Sea, by Tintoretto; one Venus, by Titian;
another by Augustino Caracci; in another Room, three Pictures by the Caracci,
one by Annibale, another by Agostino, and the third by Ludovico; another Room
is full of Figures in Tapistry, all excellent Needle Work; in another are
Hangings representing the History of St. Paul's Voyage toward Rome; and in the
same, are two admirable pieces, by Raphaele di Urbino. Lastly, in another, are
the Picture of some Princes of the Family; chiefly Borso, the first of it, and
of the last Duke, that worthy Prince Francis, and of his Son Alfonso, who died
in the same Room. Therein also is that incomparable Picture of Magdalena, lying
down, leaning upon the Elbow, and reading, to be valued not so much by the many
Jewels as Emeraulds, Hyacinthes and Opales, etc. which the Frame is full of: as
for the transcendent skill of Annibale Caracci, of which the worth can never be
praised, nor paid enough; but for brevities sake, I omit several more drawn by
Perugini, Procaccini, Julio, Romano, Albano, etc. all which Names, if the word
Picture was taken out, to many Readers would seem to be Spells; and this way of
taking observations, is the easiest of all, which every common capacity is able
to do, by the means of those who show these things, or of Guides, whom Italians
call Interpreti, who are found almost in every City; so that there is but
taking Pen and Ink, and Writing what they say, which yet sometimes tends to
make Strangers believe things which are not, except they can themselves discern
things.

Hence it is, that in the Books of some Travelers we read of several things
relating to Religion, which are indeed, or at least are so like Tales, that a
rational Man can but admire thereat; of this sort, is that of the Convertite in
Rome disciplining, and lashing themselves till Blood came out; it is to speak
with too much confidence of what passes in those places; if there be such
Blood, and it be not sprinkled a purpose, it is that which they fetch out one of
another, or that which they fetched out with stabbing themselves; and this I
speak out of certain grounds. Of the same kind is that of the Casa Sancta, or
the Virgins House, carried by Angels from Judea in^o Dalmatia, and thence to
Loretto. Of the Picture of the Blessed Virgin began by St. Luc, and ^inished by
Angels, which I have seen in three several places. Of Sta. Caterina of Siena,
being actually married to Christ, and walking bodily with him in a place, which
is showed in that City. The Stairs under which St. Alexis lay unknown for
seventeen years in his Fathers House. The Miraculous Crucifix which spoke to
Sta. Brigida, and the other which said to Thomas Aquinas, been de me Scripsisti
Thoma, and many such Piae frauds? What shall I say of St. Francis of Paula,
who being not suffered to come into the Passage Boat between Regio and Messina,
because he had no Moneys for his Passage, he, like another Elisha, spread his
Cloak upon the Sea, and thus he and his Companion crossed it. St. Denis, and
two more, are said, after their Heads had been cut off, to have carried them
upon their hands for some Miles, at least for some space of ground. And San
Silvestre, who upon Mount Oreste, having heard by Angel he was chosen Pope, got
upon his Mule, which in three leaps thence carried him to Rome every leap being
of about 8 miles; and for a Sign, there are Chapels with the print of a Mules
Shoe before it, in the way from Rome to Rignano. And at Rome is the print of
our Saviors Foot, when he met with St. Peter, which is much bigger than ever
was Goliah's. In Padoa is the print of Sta. Justina's Finger upon a Stone, and
many more such things, the writing whereof I think may well be spared, by those
who writ Books of Travels, as being of no use to a Reader: and I think it were
as good to say, Tartary is a good place for Civility, Turkey for Gentility,
Moscovy ^or Learning, Spain for good Cheer, and Paris for Small Beer.

Neither must one trouble the Reader with the mention of every Fiddler he meets
with in his Travels, nor fill up Paper with every petty Accident. Shall I say,
that the last time I was in Bologna, I saw executed a young Man of 24 years of
age, who confessed to have murdered 22 persons, and had but ten shillings for
killing some of them? Or shall I boast how in another Place the Governor did me
the favor to invite me to Dine with him? or that in another City I went to see
a Ball, and the like. These kinds of Triftes may well be forborne, and better
and more substantial and necessary things put in their place.

Such (to the purpose of what I have already said) may be a description of the
Person and Temper of the forenamed Princes or others, with some of the most
essential things relating to their Families, Courts, Ways of Government, Nature
of their People, etc. which will please Statesmen, and most who are curious to
know the Fashions and Customs of strange Countries, as Picture Drawers will
delight in matters of Picture; Historians in things relating to History; and
Geographers in Geography: So that when all is said, every one must be lest to
his opinion and ways; only every Writer is to see what manner of persons he is
willing to please, or inform; and accordingly he ought to choose and treat of
Subjects.

Thus I do in this, for as I propound to my self to please and bene^it
Travelers, so I endeavor herein, to give some help and directions; which is
the thing I chiefly insist upon.

OF THE EDUCATION OF YOUNG GENTLEMEN ABROAD.
HE who takes upon himself to be a Guide to others, if he be true and faithful
in what he has undertaken, he will not think he has done enough to have led
them through a near and smooth way, and then leave them in the lurch, when they
are fallen into a bad one: he will rather guide them through, and bring them to
the journeys end, knowing how of all Virtues, perseverance is the mother;
without which none shall, or deserves to be crowned. So as hitherto I showed
how young men may be made Scholars; now I must direct them how to become
Gentlemen indeed; not by Birth, for nature does that for them, but by Merit and
Virtue. I will bring them out of their study, and from amongst the dead, to
converse with the living. We must now make them look abroad, raise them to a
higher form, and teach them how to know the world; which to live in and not
understand, is a shame and a disadvantage when one is come to a competent age.
Having then gotten what a home Breeding can afford till a certain time, if
domestic affairs do permit, Parents will do very well to send them into
Foreign parts.

I know there are those who disapprove Traveling, and they are of two sorts;
some do absolutely reject it as a thing not good in it self; but the^e are so
unreasonable, that I have little to say to them; for I account them to be
people wanting experience; who condemn what they do not understand: who are
like AEsop's Fox, whose tail having been cut off, would have advised all the
rest to have theirs so too: for having not traveled, they wish others to
follow their example: or if they have, perhaps they have conceived a prejudice
against some Nations, caused through their own miscarriage; in which case they
could wish every one would espouse their quarrel, and would be sorry to see
others better than themselves.

Others more reasonable are not for Traveling, not because of the thing it
self, but out of fear of several inconveniences which often Travelers fall
into. Of this sort are fond Mothers, who cannot suffer their Children to go out
of their sight; but if they be so minded, it is as good to pin them to their
elbow, or tie them to a Chimney-corner; not that I should disapprove natural
tenderness, only excess is what I dislike in it: they fear for the life and
health of their Children, because of a^cidents which may happen to fall out;
besides the change of Air, and Climate, the vices of the Countries they go
into, the dangers they run in; weighty considerations for those who have but
one Son, or few, to leave Heirs of their Estates, and successors of their
Names; and many more reasons of this nature, which I will grant.

But to argue the case with such, I would fain know, whether Sicknesses, Death,
and Vices do not reign at home as well as abroad: this indeed were a good
argument, if as long as one is at home he could be free of these
inconveniences; but daily experience teaches us the contrary, and more too:
first, for health, several examples we have of those, who being sickly at home,
have recovered their health abroad; the moisture of our Climate caused by the
neighborhood of the Seas, Fenns, Moorish Grounds, Ponds, Rivers, and the like,
is the cause of some Distempers, as Scurvy, and Consumptions in our Nation more
than in others. Then for Death, some in England have sad experience how their
Sons having for several years been abroad in health, died not long after they
were come home; as if they were come over only to give up the ghost in the arms
of their Friends: To this I add, that our days as our hairs are numbered; and
God who is not tied to times nor places, is able to protect us every where; so
that whether or not our hour be come, it is not in our power to reverse the
decree of God.

As to Country breeding, which is opposed to the Courts, to the Cities, or to
Traveling; when it is merely such, it is a clownish one. Before a Gentleman
comes to a settlement, Hawking, Coursing, and Hunting, are the dainties of it,
then taking Tobacco, and going to the Alehouse and Tavern, where matches are
made for Races, Cock-fighting, and the like; and if a Gentleman be not as
forward as they are, then he is proud, he is an enemy to good fellowship, and
is not a man fit for society: thence Dicing and Carding will follow, which at
last are attended with loss of Estates, and destruction of Families. I desire
to know, what good employment is such a one fit for? indeed to speak the best
of him, we use to say, he is an honest Country Gentleman; that is, often apt to
be fooled, who has neither much wit nor experience: but when a man is abroad,
he studies the temper of men, and learns their several fashions; he becomes a
fit companion for every one, he observes the good and evil of others, he knows
how to avoid tricks put upon men, refines and fits himself for any employment,
and fixes in a certain manner of life, not forgetting himself to be an
Englishman, nor with becoming a Frenchman, an Italian, or a German, but
building upon the true foundation of an Englishman, and making use of the
different ways of those several Nations, as Ornaments only, and not as a
bottom; for why should he transform himself into, and, as it were, become a
Foreigner, who is to live in England all the rest of his days: it is enough for
him as it were to squeeze the quintessence of what ways, manners, and other
good things those Countries do afford.

Yet God forbid I should, by what I said a little before, in the least speak
amiss of that we call a Country life; which to many proves so quie^, and so
satisfactory; and which for a time most of the Nobility, and of the Gentry are
glad to lead out of choice, or by reason of their concerns and interest: but I
mean the Country life, merely such; when a Gentleman is able to talk of
nothing but of a Plough, Corn, Horses, Hounds, etc. which yet does not reach
persons of the highest quality, whose Houses in the Country are like petty
Courts: therefore it is necessary for the completing of a Gentleman, to know
more than Farmers, Faulconers, and Park-keepers: but without insisting any
longer upon this, the third part of this work wherein I treat of a private
life, will sufficiently show how well I speak of a Country life.

Concerning dangers which Travelers are exposed to, I hold they ought to be
avoided with care and prudence, and the occasions too; but to be so timorous,
as to be afraid of that which perhaps shall never be, and has no probability
of being, it is to have a groundless fear; as if I were afraid to go out,
because it is possible for tyles to fall upon my head: so can a Chimney, when I
am sitting by the fire. These, as to means and occasions we ought prudently to
avoid; and for the event, to submit it to Gods Providence: For if dangers ought
to be so much minded, no body must drink out of a Gold or Silver Cup, because
some were poisoned out of the like; no body go to Sea, because some are
drowned; none must go to War, because ^everal are killed: so that take away
dangers, there is no reward, no merits, nor virtue.

Now the two ends of Traveling are profit and pleasure; the last subordinate
to the former, arising from the satisfaction one has about the first, and from
the variety of objects: for that which Frenchmen call divertissement, or
recreation, comes from diversity, which certainly causes a pleasure, almost
every day one seeing different things: but benefit is a thing I mind most of
all, it is a thing gotten by Travels, as confirmed by the practice of all
polished and civilized Nations, ancient and modern. Not to look farther, than
the Romans sent their Sons into Grecia, to learn Arts and Sciences; and into
Tuscany to be instructed in the Mysteries of their Reli^ion.
Romans, who traveled into Greece; and men of several Nations to Rome and
Italy: And now all those who send their Children out of England, Sueden,
Germany, Holland, etc. to travel into Foreign parts, must needs have some good
grounds for what they do: Kings themselves and Sovereign Princes do the same,
not rashly, but doubtless upon mature deliberation: and there are several, who
seeing their Children follow a bad course at home, send them abroad on purpose
to reform them; as often they do, though to their own costs: for rash
quarrelsome men will find those who are able to tame them; and therefore are
forced to learn wisdom; which coming to a daily practice, is at last contracted
into an habit. When they are abroad, they are remote from those many occasions
they have to be debauched at home. As for an instance, in matter of Drinking,
if one should practice this in Italy, and most parts of France; namely, South
and Southwest, he would be a laughing stock; so that he will be mocked out of
this vice. Now for men to learn sobriety, civility, frugality, and an universal
compliance with all manner of tempers, to be acquainted with persons and
places, the most considerable in Europe, to be instructed in the way of
Government of several Nations, and with their forces, riches, and nature, to
gather all the good there is in them, and at last to know and rule himself, are
matters of no small concernment to be gotten by traveling: to say nothing of
the advantage of Languages, whereby one is fitted for considerable employments
at home, and one is capable of improving himself out of all Books written in
several Tongues.

But because young Gentlemen are hardly capable to benefit themselves, they
want help and directions which they receive from those who usually go under the
name of Governors, Companions, or what other notion you please; whose office is
to take care of the Gentleman's person, improvement, and affairs; therefore
upon this last account in Italy they are called Majordomo, or Steward. These
Governors so called, because they have the government of their Pupils, are of
two sorts, some capable of that employment, and some not: Of these last there
are several, who go as much to improve themselves, as the young Gentleman; so
that these make that to be their end, which to others is but the means. They
intend first to go abroad, and to bring it about, they seek for an opportunity
of Traveling at the costs of others* instead that others go abroad to
discharge the trust committed to them. These indeed want Governors themselves,
and are much at a loss about the Language, Fashions, Ways, and Places of
Improvement, when they come abroad, and are unacquainted with the best
conveniences of Traveling, value of Moneys, and price of things; upon which
accounts I have known some sadly cheated: And suppose such a Tutor, having been
a year or two in France, for the first time should begin to understand these
things (which yet, specially the Language, are difficult for men come to riper
years) if he be to go into Italy, he must begin all again, and will be at a
loss as much as before; new Language, new Persons, new Fashions will breed new
difficulties: So that he who is able to be a Governor in France, will be an
ignorant one in Italy; so after of Germany, Holland, Spain, etc, the Fashions
of these Nations differing as much as their Languages.

Out of these, what shall we say to those Parents, with whom cheapness is the
prevailing qualification, when they are about choosing a Governor, not
considering so much, whether or not he has a competent prudence and
experience. It is indeed a sad thing to see how sometimes when there are two
Governors in hand, they will prefer him who takes less: thus they conclude,
this I like, I believe he is an honest man, and will be content with a small
allowance. Men who are willing to spend 3 or 4 hundred pound, more or less,
will be unwilling to gratify a Governor with 20 or 30 l. more than they have a
mind to allow, which he who is knowing can save them once a year; they do the
most, and refuse to do the least, and care not how they discourage a man
capable to serve them; and will stand with them upon a small matter. I know
every honest man will be careful of, true and faithful to his trust; but
certainly he cannot go about it with that cheerfulness which is necessary.

The be^ter to examine this matter, I must name some of the qualifications more
necessary to a Governor: First, I would have him to be a Scholar, thereby on
all occasions, and upon every subject, to be able to discourse with, and
instruct a Gentleman; Scholarship will afford him Arguments and Reasons, as
well as Precedents and Examples, to persuade him to, or dissuade him from what
he thinks fit; yet I do not deny, but that one who is no Scholar may have some
capacity to discharge his trust in this kind; the experience he has of the
world supplying his want of learning: but certainly he cannot do it so well:
and no body can deny it to be better he were learned, at least in some degree,
and in some kind or other of Learning; for it is not to be expected, that men
shall be learned all alike. This learning will teach him a method how to infuse
things into the young man's mind; so that both will be the better for it: for
scholarship refines and strengthens natural parts. Yet I would not have the
Tutor merely a Scholar, and nothing else; for many things different from
scholarship are to be suggested to a young Traveller when he is abroad, which
the other cannot do, if himself does not understand it.

Secondly, A Governor must be a Traveller* one thing it is to be at School at
home, and another to be abroad: as the ends, so the ways o^ these two manners
of Breeding are different. He who speaks out of his own knowledge and
experience, does it with a greater weight and efficacy, because upon surer
grounds; for he who acts only upon trust, and by hearing say, will find his
knowledge very defectuous, and the changes of some circumstances will often put
him clearly to a loss; for he who Travels where he was before, is better able
to order his going or staying, and his whole Travels: and certainly it is a
greater advantage for a man to know his ground, and what things are worth
seeing, as he stays at, or goes by a place, He who has seen things before, is
better able to discourse and make observations upon, and make others take
notice of it.

Thirdly, I would have a Governor gentile, well brought up himself, who has
seen the world, and frequented the Courts, whereby he has polished and
civilized himself, and has gotten a more plausible and insinuating way; whose
presence, action, and behavior, are acceptable, and who in some measure is
himself a pattern of a Gentleman: he being such, a young man will strive to
imitat^ and make him his model; for it is usual with youth to follow the ways of
those whom they converse with, and insensibly, as it were, to transform
themselves into them; Youth in his tender years being so apt to receive
impressions; so that the person and carriage of one they see and converse with
almost every hour, must needs have great influences upon them, and will polish
whatsoever is rough and clownish in them: and this is a mark of distinction
between a mere Scholar and a Traveller; between a Country Clown and a
Gentleman, who thereby will become meek, sweet, courteous, and affable; all
qualities fit to win the hearts of men. Furthermore, I pity those Governors who
never traveled before, nor ever frequented any Courts, by reason of the many
inconveniences they often are liable to. When they know places and persons,
where they are, they may bring their Gentlemen into good, safe, and honest
companies; for Youth will not ever be doing his Exercises, keeping his Chamber,
seeing the same Companies; but sometimes they will look for change, and have
variety: being of this temper, in case they have no virtuous society to keep
with, they will fall into bad and vicious, where they may happen to be
debauched, trepanned into Marriages, and abused otherwise: and in this last
case, when a Tutor has neither friends nor acquaintances, he will not know
what to do, nor which way to right himself.

See what a Governor was Aristotle, he was both a Philosopher and a Courtier;
therefore Philippus of Macedonia very often could not forbear expressing his
joy, because there was such a man alive to commit the Education of his Son to,
not only able to teach him much learning, but also instruct him how to live and
reign well over himself and his Subjects: How few Aristotle's in the world? how
few Alexanders also?

Diogenes was much in the wrong, to think that to live at Court; did not become
a Philosopher; because Aristippus being much esteemed by Alexander the Great,
by reason of his Prudence, Learning, Quaintness, and other good qualities,
followed his Court; which made Diogenes to say, Aristippus was not content with
his condition: but indeed it is very proper for such persons to come nigh
Princes, that through a constant Conversation they may infuse Knowledge,
Wisdom, and Goodness into them, which are all Royal qualities, specially the
last, as confessed by the King of Egypt; who hearing Alexander was called the
Great, said, He is not greater if he be not better than I: But Aristippus gave
the Cynick Philosopher a fit answer, Si scires regibus uti, olus ac
mendicitatem fastidires, If thou could but know how to make use of, or
rather how to behave thy self, and live with Kings, thou would despise, and
be weary of a mean diet, and beggarliness. To this very purpose Horatius says,
Si prandere^ olus patienter regibus uti,
Nollet Aristippus, si sciret regibus uti
Fastidiret olus, qui me notat. --
Indeed Aristophanes had reason to say, that a a virtuous man makes a right use
of every thing: whereunto answers what Ovid says, Pectoribus mores tot sunt
quot in orb figurae
Qui sapit innumeris moribus aptus erit.
Against what I said, some will object, all Governors cannot be Travelers, and
Courtiers; there must be a beginning to every thing, and there is a first time
of doing it; this I confess to be true, but withal, I would never advise any
one to send a Tutor to serve his prentiship with his Son; for those first
essays or trials are often dangerous, or at least unprofitable: let them first
travel at their own charges, if they are able; if not, in some other capacity,
different from that of a Governor. Though a man of a discreet and prudent
carriage can safely be trusted with this, and other Employments; yet to do
things well, it is requisite to have some experience in the thing we undertake.
Here I cannot forbear speaking of a commendable custom they have in Germany,
for that Nation is so fully convinced of the necessity of Traveling, and of
the benefit arising therefrom, that they hardly value there, a man who has not
been abroad; their Princes not excepted. Now amongst them, are four sorts of
those who go to Travel: some who are rich and have means of their own, Travel
at their own charges; others who are not so, but are taken notice to be hopeful
and of good natural parts, are commended to their Prince, who liking them,
sends them to Travel at his own costs, allowing so much by the year, and a
certain time to go and improve their parts, which if they attain unto, when
they are come home, they bestow charges and employments upon them. The third
sort of them, are those who either living in Republics, such are many of their
great Cities, or being of so low an extraction, as have no grounds to hope for
the Princes protection, have all their friends joining together to get for them
a Purse of 500, or 600 l. more or less, and send them to travel and learn
abroad; and when they are come home, they are preferred according to the
improvement they made of their time and moneys. The last sort of them are those
who go abroad in the capacity of Valets de Chamber, and other sorts of
Servingmen, and several turn Soldiers, and serve other Princes, which chiefly
they use to do in France.

In the fourth place, a Governor should be communicative, not dull, or silent,
but able and ready upon all occasions to insinuate necessary and virtuous
Precepts and Advices to his Pupil, universally to instruct him as much as both
their capacities do reach: If this saying concerning all men be true, as it is,
we are born for others more than for our selves; of which Kings and Princes are
not excluded; for they are born, and are obliged to rule for the good of their
Subjects. Certainly, Governors are bound to promote the good of their Gentlemen
more than their own concerns (though one does not exclude the other) and
therefore ought to infuse into them what virtue and learning they have in
themselves. Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. which yet in
some does imply much vanity and ostentation, both to be avoided.

Some would also have Governors well shaped, to the end their person may be the
more acceptable; for those who have any defect in that kind, may happen not to
receive the respect which otherwise they deserve from a Gentleman: others would
have them healthful, that they may be the better able to go about their work;
others require they should be neat, and cleanly in their Clothes: in a word,
the more good qualities they have within or without, the better, which I
conclude all with this necessary one, that they be honest and virtuous men* for
without this, as I said before, all qualities are defectuous. Yet in the
examination of this, I wish men to be wary, and prudent; not indifferently to
believe the report of every one: for sometimes the malice or interest of some
men, make others to suffer horrid injustices. Some are apt to conceive a
prejudice against others. I would not hereupon press men to u^e Charity (which
yet is the duty of every Christian) thus far, as that when it is apparent, pro
as con, one should believe the best, or at least suspend his judgment, till
farther and better information, which may be given by those who commend the
person for being well known to those who have occasion for such a one, it is to
be supposed, for fear of disparaging themselves, have grounds and reasons for
what they do, may be arising from former trials they had of the person
commended. Out of this it does appear, how it is Charity and Prudence not to
believe slightly what is reported amiss of another; there being no man in this
world, but has some enemy, and consequently may happen to be slandered by the
same: and therefore it were well done to consider what makes men speak ill one
of another, which is often because of former enmities, and falling out; in
which case the testimony of such is suspect; it being usual with many unjustly
to condemn others, thereby thinking to justify themselves, and to raise their
reputation upon the ruin of that of others.

There are those who ^end their Sons without Governors, which I say nothing to,
because every one has his reasons, and ought to know his affairs; but it will
certainly prove beneficial to have the help of one who is qualified. I know
some young men think it to be a discredit to them to have a Governor; but it is
no more shame for a Gentleman to have a Governor, than for a Traveller to take
a Guide when he is unacquainted with the way; and to refuse such an help,
implies much presumption and imprudence. I believe there are Princes as able to
govern themselves as many private men, and yet I have known some above thirty
years old, who had one with them who went under such a notion; which certainly
is more for honor and benefit, than to be without; though they did but take the
care and management of their affairs: and there are those, who though they have
no use of Governors, when they are come home, do keep them about their persons
for greatness sake, or for advice and other uses. Some there are who have been,
or are abroad without Tutors, Though common use makes a difference between a
Tutor and a Governor, yet I indifferently use both words, because the office is
but one and the same, both tueri debe^t; it is otherwise of a Pr^ceptor.
who had not run themselves beyond Seas into such premunire's, if they had had
one about them who had prevented extravagant expenses, their being arrested,
and such other dangers and shame, Those indeed who once were abroad, and had
such Directors, if they go again, are better able to manage their affairs.
Some will take a faithful Valet de Chamber, who has some experience, which is
better than none, or a raw one; and this when the Gentleman is passed twenty:
but except the Master be of a good nature, the Servant will not dare to ^ay to
him any thing against his mind, or give him good advice: rather to get his love
he will serve and comply with him in any thing for his own ends; whereof the
consequences are often very bad. When a man is not able, or has no mind to be
at the charges of keeping abro^d a Governor with his Son, in my opinion the
best way is to join with one or two more, to help to bear charges; or else to
send one with him well qualified, to carry him over, and settle him in one
place or other of France, or of other Countries, to be there with him two or
three months, leave him there after he has set him in a good way, and then
come home.

It Is fit to say also something of qualifications necessary to young Gentlemen,
who are appointed to Travel; but because, though all agree in their ultimate
end, to procure their good, the subordinate ones are so different, that in many
these dispositions are more to be wished than hoped for; in some it is to
divert them from bad inclinations they are subject to, or to withdraw them from
vices they are given to, in others to mend and reform their bad nature, in
others to learn the Language and Exercises, in many to improve themselves in
one or several things, in others to get health, confidence, etc. so that often
Parents have private reasons for sending them abroad. However, though these
things be not depending upon those who are to Travel with them, yet it is to be
wished they had some or all the good qualities I am now ready to express.

Be^ides what I mentioned in the first part of this Book of Piety, Erudition,
and Morality; it is to be wished a young Gentleman were of good parts, both
acquired by study, and innate or by nature, when the understanding is naturally
good, the apprehension quick, and memory happy, it is a great encouragement to a
Governor, and in a young man a good disposition to receive and retain
instructions; contrariwise, when he is dull and heavy, it is tedious,
uncomfortable, and hard infusing things into him: This requires a good method,
and a great patience in the Teacher, who must tell again and again, things,
before the Scholar can remember them; yet for all this he must not be
discouraged, nor the young man: for, Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe
cadendo. And sometimes those who are slow, and so heavy in receiving, are
strong in keeping what they received.

It is to be wished in the second place he be of a good nature, meek, and
gentle; not froward nor humorsome, but easy to be dealt withal, apt and
willing to be directed and advised: this is a great satisfaction to a man, who
is to deal with such tempers; for he sees he bestows well his time and pains,
and is like thereby to get credit and reputation, which to men is a great
motive to act; but when a man sees that what he does is in vain; that the more
he strives to please, and to benefit, the less he is regarded, and that his
labors are paid with unthankfulness; that whatsoever he does is disliked, and
that the young man grows so unruly and wild, that there are little hopes of
remedy to recall him: then he begins to feel the weight and burden of his task,
which he wishes to be discharged of, wanting strength and courage to go
through: this will make Traveling unpleasant and unprofitable to both; so that
when it proves so, both do share in the hardness and the trouble.

Thirdly, In a young man is required an opinion, that his Governor is worthy
of, and able to perform the trust committed to him. Some young Travelers are
so highly conceited of themselves, and set themselves at such a value, that they
look upon every one else as much their inferior, and every way below them: but
they must learn not to overvalue themselves, nor undervalue others; and not
use like Serving-men, those whom their Parents thought fit and worthy to give
them as Directors.

In the fourth place, I would have Gentlemen young when they begin to Travel
abroad, and this for several reasons: First, what bad inclinations may happen
to be in them, cannot be very strong in so short a time, and therefore are more
easily rooted out, and better ones grafted in their place: As long as evil is
not contracted into an habit, still there is hopes of a remedy; but when it is
inveterate, and has been in possession for a long time, then it proves more
dangerous and hard to be removed. Secondly, because when they be young, they
are the more tractable, and receive impressions better; and though some think
them to be less reasonable, than when they are come to riper years, I believe
also their passions are weaker in them; and therefore are not so strong headed,
and less obstinate. They do not go abroad to show they are very rational, men
of wit and parts, but to learn these things; and when they have it, to perfect
themselves therein: Neither is a Governor given them to be a witness and
spectator of what good qualities they have, but rather to show how they may get
them in case they want them* and raise them to a higher degree of perfection,
if they are endued therewith. A Preceptor will be pleased when his Scholar
moves questions to him, and learns easily what he teaches him; but if, because
the young man has good parts, he would not mind his Masters instructions, but
constantly be a disputing against him, this is worse than if he were less
witty, but more yielding to rule and advice: for I repeat here what I said
elsewhere, how obedience is the foundation upon which all instructions are to
be built, and the basis of good Breeding: God also loves Obedience better than
Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15.22.


It is a custom with many in England, to order Traveling to their Sons, as
Emetick Wine is by the Physician prescribed to the Patient; that is, when they
know not what else to do, and when Schools, Universities, Inns of Courts, and
every other way has been tried to no purpose: then that nature which could be
tamed in none of these places, is given to be mended by a Governor, with many a
woe to him; and all this, because the young Gentleman was not sent abroad
betime, and before he was hardened in his evil courses.

Moreover, when they are young, they are more capable of learning Tongues, and
Exercises; provided, in relation to these last, their bodies be able to bear
the hardship of it; which, to know, must be left to the prudence of the
Governor; there being some Exercises harder than others: so Parents must judge
of the fittest time for them to begin their journey, whether they be young
enough, yet not too young, out of the strength or weakness of their Complexion;
only more care must be taken of them upon the Journey, when they are of a
feeble Constitution: Some are sit to Travel at 13 or 14, others at 15, 16, and
17. but when they are passed 20, some who are of no good nature, will grow
strong and stiff, reject instruction, and think themselves wi^er than their
Teachers: of these we may say, what St. James speaks of the tongue, James 3.6,
7, 8.
Every kind of birds, of beasts, and of serpents, can be, and has been tamed,
but the^e can no man tame; so unruly they are.

Indeed, when Governors light upon wild and loose humors, they are to be
pitied; it is a burden as heavy as any they can lie under, and a task as hard
as any they can undertake; which it were well for them to be discharged of.
When things succeed well, God receives the glory of it, young Gentlemen the
profit and advantage, their Relations content and satisfaction, and the
Governor gets credit by it. See how many ways good is hindered by the unruly
and untoward carriage of such. Certainly, when a man is able well to govern
Youth, he will be fit for other things, and those not inconsiderable.

But in few words, in a Gentleman under my conduct, I could desire to be first
a disposition in him to that I would put him upon; few succeed in what they are
not fit for, nor capable of. Secondly, an inclination, Without a h^arty
application no man can master any thing that concerns the understanding.
it is not enough to be able to do a thing, yet have no mind to it. Thirdly, an
application, without which none of the former can come to any good; and all
these ought to have a good direction, or else they prove useless, and can
hardly do, or come to any good.

I wish every young Gentleman that travels abroad, to know that his Parents
have not rashly given them their Governors: it is well known what a strict
perquisition they make about them for the most part; and except they be
satisfied concerning them by men of probity and known integrity, they will not
employ them; for as they love their Children, as they look upon a Son to be the
Heir of their Estate, the hopes and staff of their Family, whose Person,
Education, and Affairs they wholly commit to him: certainly, men who have but
common sense and reason will not do it, without good grounds; seeing upon the
Breeding of that Son often depend the prosperity, or destruction of a Family.
This being granted, why are young men so wanting in their respect and duty to
Parents, as to slight the choice which they made, and do as good as accuse them
of want of Prudence, Knowledge, and Judgment, by disapproving, and, as much as
in them lies, condemning that election: after this rate they will be accounted
wise, and their Fathers must be fools.

But besides this, they must not be ignorant how Parents have invested
Governors with their power and authority, not to destruction, but to
edification, which Parents at their departure have, or ought to have made an
open declaration of, charging them to take their advice in every thing, and to
do nothing without it, seeing they are wholly committed to his care, which he
is obliged to perform for conscience sake, and for his own credit and interest,
being to answer for miscarriages happening through his fault; wherein if he
does well, he shall receive praise, or on the contrary, shame: So that after
this, a young man can do nothing against his Governor, but it will reflect upon
his Parents, whom he represents, who will have all the reason in the world to
be offended thereat, for contempt of their persons and authority; for indeed,
abroad to him he is instead of a Father, a Gentleman being considered as one
under age: wherefore many people will be loath to trust him, though he be known
to be a person of Quality, and of a good Estate; and in case they do, without
the Governors consent, this can be forced by no law beyond Seas to pay his
debts, if the young men be out of the way. Let them also consider, that they
and their Tutors are so nearly related to one another, that all their concerns
they make their own, and share with them in the praise or the blame, the
satisfaction or di^pleasure ^ However, I must say this, let discouragements be
what they will, till Parents, (who weekly, or at least as often as conveniently
can be, ought to receive from the Governor an exact account and information of
what falls out) have taken order about things, he ought to mind his work
nevertheless, and steer the Ship for all the Storm: Di^ficulties must not
discourage him too much, (...), Difficilia quae pulchra, and nulla sine pulvere
palma, time is a great Physician, and many a foul morning has been followed
with a fair afternoon, Co'l tempo e la paglia se maturono le nespoli, say the
Italians.

Now I must pass to some preparatory dispositions, which a Gentleman must use
in order to his Travels: First, he would do well to get something of the
Language of the Country he is next to go to, as an introduction to it, though
it were only to understand something of it, and be able to ask for necessary
things; this can rid him of the surprizal others are subject to, who coming
into a Foreign Country, and understanding not one word of the Tongue, look as
if they were fallen from the Clouds: hereby their Journey is most pleasant to
them, and they are sooner disposed to receive the benefit of it: so they ought
to have something of the French before they go out of England, of Italian
before they leave France, and of the German before they stir out of Italy, and
so of the rest.

They must also take a Progress into the Country to see what Curiosities and
remarkable things are in it, to be able to give an account thereof to those who
will ask about it; for it is very ordinary to some of those in whose Country
one Travels to put several questions concerning it; and then indeed it is a
shame not to be able to satisfy them in several things they ask. To have the
curiosity of seeing other Countries, and yet neglect to know his own, is a
strange sort of curiosity; as if a Master of a Family did not care to be
acquainted with what passes in his Family, and yet were very inquisitive to
know what is done in his neighbors house; to be ignorant of his own affairs,
and yet be well informed of those of other men, is to invert the order of
things, and put last that which should be first: let a man set his house in
order, and then look abroad: and to make a more particular application of this,
England is a Country of which much can be said, it is strongly and conveniently
seated under a temperate Climate, producing all things necessary for life, as
Wheat and all manner of Corn; there is variety of Drink and Liquors, and though
Wine does not grow in it, we have it of all sorts: there are good Pastures,
whereby abundance of Beasts and Cattle are fed, whose Flesh, Milk, Butter, and
Cheese are dainty; very fine Cloth is made of the Wool of one, and
extraordinary good Leather of the Hides of the other: Fuel is very plentiful,
so is all manner of Wood and Timber to build, but specially Oak, to make Ships
of. You see there is enough to eat, to drink, to be clothed, to warm himself,
and shipping to defend the Island, and to assault others. Besides this, it has
no less variety of Dainties, as all manner of Fowl and Fish, whether salt or
fresh, of Sea, Ponds, and Rivers: as for Venison, there is hardly any Person of
Quality, but has his Park stored with Deers of all sorts, Warrens full of
Rabits: What shall I say of the Mines of Tin, Iron, Lead, and of Coal-pits?
Besides, England produces the stoutest Cocks, finest Horses, and good for
service, the best Dogs that can be: and if after the things I named just now,
it was proper to mention Women, I could say they are the handsomest in the
world. Foreign Nations do value every thing which comes out of England, as
Knives, Stockings, Gloves, Laces, Cloth, Hangings, Ribons, Watches, and all
manner of Manufactories.

All these things a young Gentleman must be acquainted withal, as with the
constitution of the Nation, which has the best of what could be drawn from
Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical Governments; so the settlement of
Trade, wherein it consists, how many people live by it, and the several
East Indies, Turkey, Spanish Companies of Merchants, etc. though it is not to be
expected they should be perfect in these things, yet it will be well to have a
superficial knowledge thereof, they must also be able to give some account of
the Government, and of the Navy, which is the glory, and the strength of the
Nation.

But this is most proper to what I am to say in the third place, which
Gentlemen ought to be versed in, viz. the fashions and customs particular to
the Nation, though 'twere but Cock-fighting, Bull and Bear-baiting, running of
Races, Wrestling, playing with Cudgels, Foot and Stool-ball, etc. because upon
occasion beyond Seas, this may be matter of a discourse: but to wave these
kinds of sports, and come to solid and more necessary things, A Country
Gentleman being come up to the City, if he has none more urgent and necessary
occasions to go about, let him go once a day, or every other day to
Westminster Hall, if it be Parliament or Term time, to Court once or twice a
week, and as often to the Exchange* hereby he will get a superficial knowledge
of things most important to the Nation; 'twere not amiss also to see the
Quarter Sessions in the Old Bailey: for I am of opinion, that a young Gentleman
before he comes to a settlement, ought to think that nothing is below him to be
known; which rule he must observe, specially when he is beyond Seas: These
things I mention but by the by, and as the heads of what they ought to be
informed of, as much as it is possible and convenient before they go over; or
else, if they be too young, put it off till they are come back, and then be
sure to do it.

Thus things being disposed for the journey, the Governor must get as exact an
information as is possible for him, of the nature and temper of the young man,
which Parents are best able to do, and consequently of the best way to deal
with him: Thus in an hours time he can know as much as would require whole
months to make his Observation; this indeed is the shortest and best way: but
because persons and things are subject to alterations, to this information
given him, he ought, for the future, to join his own Observations, and make it
his study to know the young man's genius, to take a method accordingly; for
every method does not suit with every temper.

The Governor being so engaged, the first thing he goes about must be to get
the young man's love and affection, which he may do in several ways: First,
being very tender of him, and upon the Road, procuring him all necessary and
convenient accommodations, remedying, as soon as may be, inconveniences,
giving good words when any thing falls amiss: Certainly, if he be not of a very
bad nature, the care of him in such things will work upon him. Secondly, show
him Curiosities worth seeing, as you stay or go by; this will divert, and
please him, and make him like the Country: in the mean time help him to make
his Observations of things, and desire him to set them down in writing. Thus he
can see you take pains, and are willing to please him, and promote his good and
benefit; so that he cannot choose but have affection for you. Thirdly, be civil
and respectful to him, which will be a precedent for him to be so to you; for
he who is willing to receive must give too; and we use to say, one hand washes
another: so you do give him an example of being civil to others, which is a
token of a sweet nature, and of good Breeding; and hereby one will appear to be
much a Gentleman. This in point of society, is very taking, it wins the
heart, works upon affections, disarmeth an enemy, and extraordinarily obliges
a friend; and without it the friendship of a man is not to be valued a straw;
for where is a real love, there is also respect and civility: and he does not
deserve a friend, who does not use him this way. Lastly, please him in
indifferent things, to make him comply with you in substantial, and necessary;
and never stand with him upon trifles, which were a morosity in you; and in
case he desires a thing, which is neither reasonable nor convenient to do,
dissuade him from it with strength of reason, and not by authority: if you give
him reason of such actions, you lay before him a leading case to give you an
account of his; and herein whether or not you do agree, you will ever show your
self the wisest of the two, which a man in your capacity is concerned and
obliged to be.

This course being taken, probably love and union will be settled between the
Traveller and his Governor, which is the ground of a success in the journey, or
else no pleasure nor profit in Traveling: to this effect, all occasions of
dispute ought to be avoided; and because some conceived hatred against
Governors in general, whom they look upon as curbs and bridles to hold them in,
and restrain their courses; insomuch that they hate the very name, I do not say
this to comply with the peevishness of those who are such, but I look on them
asdistempered, and so would endeavor to cure them.
it will be well if that can satisfy, to avoid taking the name of Tutor,
Governor, or any other odious to them, and use that of Companion or Camrade,
which Germans use much, or any one else they will like, signifying equality,
seeing they dislike the ^ormer; because they seem to include a superiority:
therefore never domineer over them, and away with those who would keep them in
a low, submissive and slavish way: this is the ground of hatred and
differences, and the great hinderance to peace, union, and love. Indeed the
word Tutor is more proper for Schools and Universities, and that of Governor is
more honorable for the Gentleman, than for him who bears it.

One of the first Lessons the Governor gives him, must tend to remove
prejudices in case he has some against any Nation; for then he will dislike
every thing he sees there; and this may happen to prove an occasion of many
troubles and quarrels: and let this be printed in his mind, never to blame a
whole Nation for the fault of few particular men: for as we say, faults are
personal, and in every Nation are both good and evil.

Another advice will be to make him leave off that jarring and wrangling humor,
which usually is gotten in the Schools, whereby they gainsay every thing
others speak; they hear others not to learn, but only to contradict; which to
do they think to be a piece of wit: so far from being true, that thereby they
make themselves absurd and insufferable in company: what right have they to
take upon them to censure every word or action of others, and that so
unnecessarily, impertinently, and unseasonably, that one can but admire it?
Travelers must not discommend and dislike every thing they see in other
Countries, and commend every thing in their own, without occasion to do it.
Some make odious comparisons which is carefully to be avoided.

Some Parents use to give instructions to the Governor before they set forth,
which he will do well to receive; for it may be a help to him, and thereby he
will show the respect he bears to, and the dependency he has upon the
Father, who being acquainted with the temper of his Son, must needs be able to
give some use^ul Directions; which correspondency must hold as long as they are
abroad: not only from time to time (as I said before) giving Parents an account
of what is done, but also signifying, when occasion requires, some of his
resolutions, and asking advice thereupon, before they be put in execution: but
withal, in several things a Governor must not be stinted. I heard of some
Parents, who order their Sons to stay a fortnight in one place, eight days in
another, five, and no more in another, and the like; which they who are upon
the place, are better able to judge of; many accidents falling out every day:
these things, and many more, ought to be left to the prudence and freedom of
the Governor, to provide according to emergencies; yet what resolutions he
takes he must impart to the Gentleman, in case there is no inconvenience to do
it, make him like it, and have his consent therein. In matter of moneys also he
must not be so confined, but that he may sometimes dispose of some small sums;
for let a man be never so exact in forecasting expenses, still fall out some
occasions of laying out which were not foreseen. Two ways there are of giving
allowance; one is when a Father allows so much by the year, and no more;
whereupon the Governor takes upon him to defray every thing: yet I think if he
could make it appear, he well laid out more than he received, Parents would not
disown him therein; though it would be well for him, when he sees the sum not
like to do it, to write about it, and know their mind before he lays out any
thing of his own, except there were extraordinary occasion for it: thus he
secures himself from those who are very hard upon such accounts. The other way
of allowing, is not to fix upon a sum, but to receive an account of what is
spent, and to enter it, whether it be more or less. Thus when unexpectedly some
charges happen, Parents receiving good grounds and satisfaction about it, will
acquiesce.

But before I proceed further in point of moneys, I must again (for I can never
take too much notice of it) say it is to be known how Governors are given to
young men, not to overawe or offer them any violence, for there has been an
end of this when they left School; but to afford them help and directions; even
as we see when a Child begins to stand upon his legs, and to walk, one or other
holds him by the arm, or stands close by to hinder him from falling, though we
see many times he will hardly suffer to be touched or helped: This indeed is to
be admired at, when the Child begins to walk, he will not be helped, though he
stands in need of it, when his will is, as it were, born, he will not suffer it
to be guided: however a Governor is given, if possible, to keep a young man
from those stumblings and falls, which youth and want of experience and
knowledge do often expose them to in the world; and those who have any wit or
good nature, will not be angry against, but rather kind and thankful to him for
giving those counsels, and using those means which can keep them from
miscarriages, shame, danger, hurt, and such other inconveniences which are so
frequent in the world.

To return upon matter of moneys, before they come away from home, such course
is to be taken, as that upon all occasions they may surely be supplied with
moneys, which I believe is not so certain by way of Bills of exchange, as by
Letters of Credit; for Bills of Exchange may happen to miscarry, be lost, or
refused: in which case a man is often left in the lurch. Upon this account I
have known several who lost their time, and opportunity, before they could
receive timely and necessary supplies of moneys; for sometimes they wait so
long for the coming of a Bill of Exchange to discharge and be gone from a
place, that it is spent before they can receive it; so they must be forced to
stay till they have another: Let them forecast as much as they can, it is
possible for them to fall short of their account, specially if they are very
remote from home: but let them be never so far, Letters of Credit can secure
them, for ever a man has this along with him, which he ought to renew as he
goes from one great place to another, but specially for those where he intends
to make a considerable stay; only before he leaves the other Town, he may take
moneys, as much, or more than he thinks will be enough to carry him thither:
And let a Traveller observe this (except he be in a place where is great danger
of being robbed) ever to have moneys by him, yet not make a show of it; for he
does not know what sudden occasion he may have of it, so many sad accidents
falling out every day: and what, if when I am walking in the street, I am
unhappily forced, or suddenly engaged in my own defense, or of a Friend, to
draw, and wound, or kill a man, which thing is not impossible, what would
become of me if I had no moneys to get a horseback, and be gone. Such a
mischance may befall a Gentleman or his Governor.

Letters of Commendation are also necessary for those who Travel in parts,
where they have no friends nor acquaintances; at least if they do no good they
will do no harm, but often upon occasion they prove very beneficial and
advantageous, whether a man does but go by a place or stay in it any time; for a
Traveller cannot tell what occasion he may have of Friends, and favor, when he
is in a place, or before he comes to it. These Letters must be gotten from the
best hands; for the more he who commends is considerable, the more respect,
civility, and service he who is commended will receive.

These necessary provisions being made, the Governor will carry out of England
his Gentleman to Paris, where he ought to show him some of the chief fair
houses, and other curiosities in or about that City, to refresh and divert him
after his Journey to that place, which also will make the Gentleman like the
Country more and more; which is very material for his intended and future
improvement: Whilst he is there he must wait upon the Lord Ambassador, in case
the King keeps one there at that time; and in case there be no inconvenience,
what other English persons of the highest quality are there: so once, or twice,
he may visit any singular friend, if he has any there, yet avoid too many
acquaintances with his own Countrymen. He will also do well to go, if he makes
but a short stay in Paris, at least once to Charenton, to the Protestant Church
there, whether or not he understands the Language, to give God thanks for his
protection so far, and to crave his blessing upon the whole Journey: thus he
will see that numerous Assembly. This being done, he will do well to be gone
thence, to settle somewhere else.

Concerning the place of settlement, men differ in their opinions; all agree
that one must be chosen to stay at, and to learn the Language, Fashions, and
Exercises; which cannot be done if one be constantly a Traveling, and ever
upon a motion, but time of rest must be allowed to do it; for the* Proverb
says, the rolling stone gathers no moss. Some think fit to settle at Paris;
and may be they are in the right, having reasons for it; but mine are to the
contrary, upon the first setting out: first, one must have learned the
Language, some customs of the Nation, and gotten some experience before he be
ripe for Paris; where a Novice cannot enjoy that society which is to be had in
other Towns: It is not usual for Citizens to like strangers coming to converse
within their doors, except they have particular reason for it* and people of
Quality have not the patience to hear a Gentleman unable to speak two words
together of good sense, but in other Towns it is otherwise. Secondly, the place
is very chargeable and expensive^. Thirdly, debauched company of one
Countryman or other, is almost unavoidable; for not being capable of
conversing with people of that Country, he will do it with those he can meet
with. Fourthly, Exercises are dear, and most Masters there do not take much
pains with one, because of the number of Scholars, or the distance of places.
Fifthly, there is a daily and universal occasion of falling into evil courses;
and one will be hardly able to learn the Language, by reason of the number of
his Contrymen he will find there; this is for those who live in Pensions and
Auberges: As for Academies, if there be not many of one Nation, there is a good
Breeding in them, and think it a good way; but such orders are observed in
them, as several Gentlemen would have much ado to be brought under; some being
so much used to their liberty, that they could hardly submit to the r^les of
keeping to certain hours, of coming in within such a time, and after that,
having no liberty to go out, nor at any time without asking leave, but when a
man has done what he went about, and is coming home, I would advise him to
stay at Paris, at least half a year, to perfect himself in his exercises, to
see the Court, and frequent the company of some persons of Quality, and of
several witty, judicious, and learned men, and other persons of worth and
merit: but of this more hereafter.

After Paris, places most frequented by strangers are along the River Loire
from Orleans downwards, seated in a pleasant and plentiful Country, their
language is well spoken amongst people of some fashion, good and able Masters
of Exercises are found in them, and the people thereof are very kind and civil
to strangers, Orleans, Blois, Saumur, and Angers are such: yet though I like
them all, to my mind Angers ought to have the preference; it being more
considerable than the two last (which yet I think to be fitter than the former)
in greatness, number of Inhabitants, and of persons of Quality, it being the
head City of a Province formerly belonging to England; it is in a good Air,
has fine Wal^^s about the Town, very able Masters in all manner of Exercises,
and people much civilized, of a sweet nature, according to their Proverb.
Angevin doux and ven^n.
Hitherto strangers have been free there from being trepan'd into Marriages, as
it is usual in other places. In the way to that, or any other place, one has a
mind to go to, as I hinted before, one must b^ careful to show all curiosities
to the Gentleman, and persuade him to take notes of what he sees and observes.

The method herein to be observed is this, as soon as you are come to a Town,
and have taken a short rest and refreshment (if you want it) in your Inn, which
ever ought to be the best, or one of the best; the first thing you do must be
to carry your Letters of Commendation, if you have any, to the persons they are
directed to; and if in any thing you want their assistance, you may desire it
of them, with all civility and excuses suitable to their and your quality. The
second thing, in case you are not acquainted with the Town, must be to desire
your Landlord to go with you, or give you some rational man, to carry you to
see the Town, the Walls, and the Fortifications thereof, Walks, broad places,
Churches, public Buildings, Closets full of Rarities, or any other ancient or
modern Curio^ities. So when you walk up and down the streets, if any remarkable
thing be obvious, desire to be informed of it, enquire about the most potent
Families, whether noble or not, of their Charges, Estates, and Interest in the
place; then ask by what Trade or other means the Town or City does chiefly
subsist, and what are the customs and temper of the Inhabitants; afterward of
the policy, and of the way and form of Government; not forgetting to know how
far does reach the power and authority of the Clergy, what are the Privileges
of the City and Citizens, what difference is amongst them, and what are the
Prerogatives of the Nobility and Gentry; and in case the Landlord, or he whom
he has given you, be not able to satisfy you in these points, desire him to
direct you to some body capable to do it; But this is when the Governor is a
stranger to the place; for else he must himself acquaint his Gentleman with all
these things. And here is seen the advantage of one who knows them already.

Having thus viewed the Town, and Castle, if there be any, and in the general
being informed of the policy and constitution thereof, as you come back to your
Lodging, you may meditate and discourse upon these things, yet very discreetly;
with those you think capable of it, to get, if possible, a more exact and
particular information of every thing: After all this, when you are gone into
your Chamber, you must take pains orderly to set down in writing in your Diary
Book, what you heard and learned; and if you are many, or only two, it will be
well for every one to have his own Book afterward to compare notes, and know
who has been more exact, and what is most curious therein; which upon occasion
you may discourse about, and find out the motives, causes, and authors of
things. Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.

Further, it will be well to have before you the Maps of every Province, and,
if possible, of the Towns you are in, to know the right situation thereof
(which also may be done by getting upon some Steeple, or high place) and learn
their Frontiers and Neighbors: It must not be neglected or forgotten to write
down the Histories, merry Tales, notable Sentences, witty Replies, the good
words, and every fine expression which every day you happen to hear in company,
thereby to profit and make use of upon occasion: after all this you may receive
the visits of those whom you were commended to, or return to take your leave of
them, at which time you may be better able, and upon surer grounds to discourse
with them upon every thing you have seen, and if possible, get a clearer
information of; and in case in the same City or Town, lived any person of
eminent quality in a great state, keeping a kind of a Court, or other great
Officers, and men eminent for learning or other parts; or according to the
nature of the place, if there be any Princes, though Strangers or Ambassadors,
Residents, etc. you may enquire, whether they like to receive such visits as
yours may be, you may desire those you are commended to, to procure you the
honor of kissing their hands, usually persons of high quality love to be
courted, and take this as a civility.

And because it would not be well to go to them, and be mute, or to speak
nonsense, you may make to them a short* civil, and respectful complement,
declaring your Nation, how you are English Gentlemen, who have undertaken to
Travel* with a desire to fit your selves to serve your King and Country, and
all their Frirnds and Allies (this if they be public Ministers of Princes,
friends to the Crown of England) and that you were loath to go by without
kissing their hands, and tendering your humble services to them: when by the
means of these visits, you are grown better acquainted, one may get a further
information of the constitution of the place, or Province, where you are, of
the nature of the Inhabitants, and of the state and inclination of the
Neighbors; yet all this must be done with much respect, discreetness,
prudence, and modesty, for fear of being accounted pedants, silly and ignorant,
or giddy and rash, which would cause slightings and contempt.

And in case there be occasion given to discourse upon the manners, nature, or
customs of both, or either Nation, viz. the Travelers, and his whom he is
with, or of the Kings, Princes, great men, even of particular persons; the
Traveller must carefully take heed not to let fall any word whereat any one
might justly be offended, and perhaps resent it, bewaring to avoid nothing more
than to slander or speak ill, or rashly, or presumptuously judge of others,
which are the two dangerous rocks in conversation; contrariwise they must keep
within general terms, give the best interpretation to things, and no ways show
themselves partial, bold, or passionate; but if others speak or judge too
freely of things, or persons, they ought to hear them with indifferency, and
seem to admire at, rather than approve of what they say, and not answer to it,
as if they were ignorant of the matter: but of this more hereafter.

Only I will add two things, one is, that the Governor, who upon all occasions
is to give advice to his charge, must well know his quality, and judiciously
understand what belongs to it; for if he be of the highest or lower quality,
he ought to carry himself with him accordingly, with more or less formality, at
least before Strangers; for else freedom is wholly necessary, and he ought to
advise him to carry himself toward others, according to his and their
qualities. The other thing I add, is this; we see how Travelers must not make
post haste when they go through places, but ought to take time to rest, and be
informed of things, whereby the Journey will be more pleasant and profitable:
nay, one must take horse sometimes, and go out of his way to see what deserves
it.

Being then come to a place of settlement, the mind and endeavors of the
Gentleman, and of his Governor, must wholly tend to be improved, yet more or
less, according to every ones occasions; for they who are Scholars and
Travelers, to get either a livelihood, or a preferment, are most concerned to
improve themselves; but their settlement must begin with the set rules of
Piety, which from the first day of their setting forth, they ought daily to
have practiced. Every morning and evening one ought to fall upon his knees, and
devoutly to call upon God; acknowledging his glory, and mercies, his own
unworthiness, original and actual sinfulness, whether out of ignorance, or
against the testimony of his conscience, the lights of Nature, and of Grace;
beseeching God for Jesus Christ's sake, to look on him with an eye of pity and
compassion, to be reconciled unto him, and to apply to him all the merits and
sufferings, whereby his Son has appeased his wrath, satisfied his justice, and
made a full expiation for sins, whereof the filth may be washed clean in his
precious Blood, and the guilt so forgiven, that it may never rise up in
judgment to accuse, convince, condemn, or shame him in this world, or that
which is to come: then he must thank God for the protection which till then he
has afforded him, he has brought him out of his own Country, through deep
waters, and dry land; yet no harm has befallen him: he must beg his help in
the carrying on of the design he had in his going over; that in the first place
he would teach him to fear his Majesty, and to keep his Commandments; and then
how to improve himself, to bless his weak endeavors, and of those who have a
hand in his Education, enabling him to receive their instructions, and making
him willing to be advised by them in every good thing, to the end the glory of
all may be given to God, satisfaction to his Friends, and Relations, and he
receive the benefit of it; wishing withal, in due time to meet with his
Friends, if it be his pleasure, to their mutual comfort; beseeching God, till
then, to take him into his protection, and deliver him from those dangers which
Travelers are exposed to.

I conceive these heads are comprehensive of his ordinary wants and
necessities; besides this, before he goes to his Prayers, he must read at
least two Chapters in the Bible every day: Further, he must be sure to observe
the Lords day, which beyond Seas is too much profaned; either going to the
Protestant Churches, where it can be done, or else in his own Chamber, in
prayer and reading Scriptures, and some good Book of Devotion, or doing both,
and other works of Piety: and let this be performed without failing or
interruption. Therefore that one may be the better able and free to go about
this, they must choose a convenient Lodging, of which the people be honest,
affording good accommodation, and the Master, if possible, be a man of parts
and learning, whose conversation one may have at Table* which will prove
pleasant and useful for the Language, and other things. Also, let them be
Protestants, if it can be done; for union in judgment makes commonly union of
affections, and one is free from snares, both of changing his Religion, and
being brought to trouble, in case of speaking amiss of another: besides that,
in case of sickness, one can receive comfort from a Minister, and will not be
troubled with Priests, as it is usual in Popish Countries, upon such occasions,
of which we have seen examples: then in a Protestant house one may have flesh,
if he has a mind to it upon Fridays, and other forbidden days, which many of
the contrary Religion would not give.

This being regulated, the young Traveller must immediately be put upon some
Exercises fit for, and becoming a Gentleman, which his genius and strength
ought to be consulted about: if he has no mind nor disposition to it, it will
hardly come to any good; some also of those Exercises requiring a greater
strength than others. The time of the year is to be considered; for if he be
weak, some violent Exercises, as riding the Great Horse, and, may be, Fencing
could endanger his health in Summer: the quality of Exercises is to be looked
upon; first, to do those which are most necessary, and then others; according
as he and the Governor do agree; he must have enough to take him up at least
the greatest part of the morning, and some of the afternoon, yet so as not to
be overburthened therewith; for then he would be tired, and do none well. When
days are longer he can do more than when they are short; except the heat were
so great, as to take his heart and strength from it; but in hot weather he must
begin betimes in the morning: every Exercise commo^nly takes up an hour, except
the Great Horse, which requires much more* those he undertakes, he must be
constant and diligent in.

The benefit coming from doing these exercises is manifold; first, thereby he
learns and instructs himself; so hereafter upon occasion, being skilled in it,
he may make use of them* then they take him up, and use him to be active and
stirring; and ^ome of them which make him stretch his joints, help to make him
grow: and this keeping him in action, makes him nimble, strong, and healthful:
Furthermore, they keep him from idleness, and bad company, and are a pleasure
and a recreation to him; for almost every hour he has a new one, and thereby
is diverted from evil thoughts, passions, and deeds: but let the time of these
Exercises be so ordered, that in the morning he may have a whole hour to
himself, to eat his breakfast, to rest, to walk, or do what he has a mind to.
Let him also have time to read and study; for all his time must not be given to
bodily exercises.

To tell my opinion of this more particularly, first, one must know how long he
is allowed to be abroad in the whole; for then he must divide the time into so
many parts, as an instance, some travel no farther than France, and these must
resolve to be so long in Saumur, Angers, etc. so long in going the Grand Tour,
and may be staying at Montpelier, Lion, Geneva, and so long at Paris. This must
be known to a certain time, or thereabouts; for there ought to be a rule in
ordering of our time. Others intend besides France, to see Italy; others
farther, will come home through Germany, and the Low Countries; and of these
some will only go directly through Germany, others will see the Emperors Court,
some of the Electors, and of other Princes there; some have a curiosity of
making a step into Denmark and Sueden: There are those who before they come
home, will go into Spain and Portugal: In all this one can never take his
measures well, or order of his journey, except he knows, so long I must be in
France, so long in Italy, and so forth; which generally depends upon the
pleasure of Parents; who will not have their Sons to be long in some places,
and be very long in others, according to reasons they have for it, which yet
may be altered, as they receive from the Governor advice of conveniences, or
inconveniences, not foreseen in those places; whereby we see how much is
referred to the prudence of a Director.

Now to state a case of this, I will suppose I am to be abroad three years, or
thereabouts (I believe the time is never so much stinted, as to stand upon one
month or two; the more, because the altering of our resolutions does often
depend upon accidents, which are not in our power) and within this time I am to
see France, Italy, Germany, and part of the Low Countries, then I will resolve
thus, in France I will be first 18 months, 9 or 10 in Italy, 5 in Germany, and
the Low Countries, and 4 or 5 at Paris, before I go home: Of every one I will
speak in order.

Of the eighteen months I am to be in France, I will pass two in going from
London to Angers, or the place I intend to settle at by the River Loire (which
places I do prefer to those more Southerly, as Montpellier, etc. not only upon
the account of the Language and Exercises, but also for health and safety sake;
for one must not remove out of England into very hot Countries, upon a sudden,
but by degrees) to rest and see what is worth seeing, upon the way: then I will
reside 9 or 10 months in one place, 10 weeks, or 3 months to go the Grand Tour,
6 weeks to see Geneva, and make a step into Switzerland, or as far as
Strasbourg, and the other six weeks at Lion, till the season be fit to go into
Italy. Note, that when I say 9 or 10 months, and do not just fix the time,
which in that place the longer it is the better, my reason is, that ever I
would be beforehand with my time, and have six weeks, or two months in case of
Distempers, or other accidents; or otherwise to dispose of it, as I see
occasion for: Let this be an essential rule for Travelers, To be good husbands
of their time and moneys.

In the space of nine or ten months I am to reside in a place; the Governor
ought not only to lay the foundations of, but also set very forward the work,
for which his Gentleman went into France. As to the Language, Exercises, and
Fashions, specially the informing of his judgment: all which things are better
learned thus, than when a man is going forward on his Journey. To this end, in
case he has no experience of his own, who in that place are the best Masters
of Exercises, he is to ask the advice of those who are able to judge of it, and
are not partial: and in case men in giving their advice, prove partial, as
often it falls out, every one commending him whom he likes, and loves best; as
it is not to be expected but that they will differ in opinion, then the general
approbation will make me prefer one before another; yet no farther than to put
him to a trial: for in case I were not satisfied with him, I would make no
difficulty of changing him for another. Now these three qualifications I desire
to find in every Master of Exercises, First, he must have a good way; for it is
not so necessary* he should Dance well, as that he should teach well, which two
things do not always meet in one; if he has both the better: but the last I
would prefer above the former: one may be an advantage of nature, which has
endued him with a good shape, and disposition; but the other is a reward of Art
and Industry. Secondly, he ought to be constant and exact, not to miss his
hours; but when there is a set one, he must be punctual therein. I would not
have them at one time to come soon, It is better to go to the Fencing and
Dancing Schools, than to learn at home.
and at another late; and sometimes not at all; for not only this is a loss to
the Scholar in that particular, but also it is a prejudice and a hinderance to
him in his other Exercises. Thirdly, I would have him civil and respectful to
his Scholars, and not ranting, nor domineering; whereby not only their person,
but the very exercise become odious: he must civilly and gently tell him where
he fails.

For the three first months, specially if he is of a weak Constitution, I would
not have him to ride the great Horse* because: at first that Exercise is
tiresome, and takes up much time; specially if it be in Summer: but if he has
but a short time to stay in Town, and he be able, without inconveniency, every
morning to rise by break of day; and he already has an introduction into the
Language, he may the sooner begin the Exercise. That which makes me advise not
to learn it at first, is, to the end he may have more time to learn the Tongue;
for all other Masters may come to his Lodging; but if he will ride, he must go
to the Academy: Indeed for those three months I would hardly have him to look
abroad, except to walk, take the air, or go out upon some necessary occasion;
for till he has something of the Language, he is unfit to go into company, or
take pleasure, or receive profit thereby. Hence one may see how necessary it is
to understand something of it before they go over; it is not very fit neither,
he should go to the Dancing and Fencing Schools till he has gotten a garb, a
posture, and the grounds of those Exercises; though the sooner he goes the
better it will be.

Having often mentioned Exercises, I must now show what they are, some being
more, and others less necessary: The Language is of the first kind, yea, the
most usual and beneficial of all; without it no society to be had, nor company
to be kept with profit and satisfaction. We go beyond Seas to learn what
general or particular good things are in the places we come to; but, who can be
better able to inform us of it than the people of the Country: but, how can we
have any access or conversation about it with them, except we understand their
Language? How can we make use of the several good Books written in their
Tongue, except we do somewhat understand it? no discoursing with Ladies (which
in France is accounted a part of a civilized life) without it? He who has it
not, finds himself exposed to daily inconveniences, is a Barbarian to them, as
they are to him, whereby he leads an unprofitable and uncomfortable life:
Wherefore I would have every other Master of Exercise to be a kind of a
Language-Master, to put him upon discourse; and the young man must neglect
nothing to get it; he must first of all talk about any thing, though trifles,
and not to the purpose: and although of ten words he could not speak two right,
yet let him not be ashamed or discouraged at it; for it is not to be expected
he should be a Master before he has been a Scholar, Qui nunquam male nunquam
been, and to every thing there is a beginning. With speaking we learn to speak*
Fabricando fabri simus. Let him not think any thing below him till he has
overcome the dif^iculty of it, which once being attained unto, then he may the
better mind his words and expressions, and more exactly observe himself and his
actions. The Language-Master must teach him to read, write true Orthography,
and to speak properly; to this effect, he must make use of some good Books,
which besides the Language, may teach substantial things, as some History,
Morality, or Politics.

As the world goes, Dancing is an Exercise becoming a Gentleman, it being one
of the essential parts of an Outlandish, French Breeding: so that as a
Gentleman who there goes into company, has daily occasions of practicing it,
it would be a shame for a young Gentleman not to have some skill in it; a
natural disposition is required to it: so let a man measure his steps never so
just or exact, except he carr^es his body well, and has a good ear to hear and
observe the Cadence, he wants that grace, which is the principal ornament of
the Dance. A good Dancer takes well, specially with Ladies; but it is not
enough to be able to Dance a Brau'e, a Gavote, a ^ourante, a Boree, etc. I will
have a Master to teach a Gentleman how to keep his body in a good posture, when
he stands, sits, or walks; how to come in or go out of a Chamber where is
company; he must be taught how to carry his head, his hands, and his toes out,
all in the best way, and with the handsomest presence: In a word, how to do
things with a Bonne grace, and in the finest and most gentile manner that the
person is capable of; but both nature and art must concur to give a man a fair
presence, which for certain is a great advantage: a Master teaches the steps,
but the grace, the carriage, and the free motion of the body must chiefly come
from us. As it argues a wild and a rude nature to despise this Exercise, so to
follow it too much, is a sign of effeminacy.

Fencing was formerly the Exercise of vile and contemptible persons, whom
Romans called Gladiatores, who, upon public and solemn occasions, were brought
in to divert and give sport to spectators; their number once was so great, that
being gathered into a body, they very much troubled the Republic. Of this, as
of many other Exercises, many things might be said in that kind, but being not
to our present purpose, I will omit it, to say that Fencing is now accounted an
honest profession, and a necessary Exercise, upon the skill of which often
depends a man's life, either in a single, or more general fight; and provided a
man does use it only in his own defense, or of his friends, it will be not only
lawful, but also commendable: as often want of skill herein joined to the
consideration of the danger, takes away man's heart, so certainly one who is
forced to use his Sword, being skilled in it, has something to trust to,
whereby his courage is raised: And although this be not universally true, yet
no doubt he who knows how to handle a Sword, has an advantage against him who
never learned it, They who have a martial spirit find this Exercise suitable to
their genius, give a great application to it, and do usually succeed in it; which
to effect, they must carefully observe, and diligently practice Lessons given
them, which at the three months end, if no sooner, they may be able to
practice, if going to the School, they Fence against other Scholars, and make
Assault as French men call it, and ^ome Masters, if you give them moneys,
before you part, will show some singular trust, and some masterpiece of their
Art.

Riding the Great Horse is a noble Exercise which ever was esteemed amongst
valiant Nations, and is so to this day: Horsemanship is a very manly thing, and
it is no small matter to manage so strong and courageous a Creature as Horses
are, so to curb and hold them in, or else so to put on, tame, and govern them,
as to make them use^ul and serviceable to us, To love and delight in horses is
accounted a Princely passion. Hence it is, that in every Kingdom there is one
of the most important Charges exercised by one of the most eminent Noblemen,
called, The Master of the Horse. Hence has sprung up that supreme charge (if I
may so call it) under Kings in Military Affairs of High Constable, or as in
some places it is called Crown Marshal for the word Constable was Comes
Stabuli, Earl of the Stable. Certainly then the Art teaching us to make use of,
and to rule Horses, must needs be esteemed e^pecially by those who have a
warlike spirit, it being known that Horsemen and Horses are the strength of
Nations, though o^ some more than of others: Herein does consist the whole
strength of the Polander, now after the Cossacks are drawn from the obedience
they owed to that Crown. To ride the Great Horse, teaches two things, one to be
a good, the other to be a fair Horsemen: the good Horseman I call him who fits
fast a horseback, whom all the turnings, running, and stopping of horses cannot
shake, nor cast down, which can be gotten by a long and constant use of riding:
but to be a fair Horseman, that is, to sit handsomely, and well, to compose the
motion of his body, according to that of the Horse, to have grace and dexterity
in the handling and managing of him: In a word, to have a martial look,
posture, and countenance a horseback, according to grounds and rules, is the
fit and proper work of an Academy.

Young men do very well to follow those Exercises, which make the body
healthful, lusty, and strong, for they are good: such are the forenamed, with
Running, Wrestling, Leaping, if decent, which are of a great use in War,
because they fit the body for hardship; yet of these last, one is to make his
pleasure more than his business; I mean, not to be too hot upon it, specially if
one be of a weak constitution and temper; for they cause (when violently used)
a great dissipation of spirits, whereby the body is much weakened: therefore
one must be moderate therein, as in other violent sports, though honest and
innocent, as may be hunting, which should not be too much followed: indeed
sometimes it puts off evil thoughts from the mind, but withal produces no
advantage: Diana the patroness of it is chaste, but barren also.

Other Exercises there are not so material as the forenamed, which yet, if a
Gentleman has a mind to, and time, he will do well to learn; such are,
Vauting, Trailing the Pike, spreading Colors, handling the Halbard, or the two
handed Sword: Also it will not be amiss to learn to play upon one Instrument or
other, of Mu^ick; as the Lute, Gittar, Violin, or other he has a mind to;
because when he is alone in his Chamber, he may use it sometimes for a
diver^ion. Some also give themselves to vocal Music, and learn to sing, which
is a fine quality, specially when they have a good voice; for Art can perfect
that good disposition of nature; and though they have no very good voice, it is
well to learn the Rules; for sometimes a man in his retirement sings to
please himself, and not others: and though he would not sing at all, yet it is a
satisfaction to know when others sing well, or when they do not, and to be able
to judge of it. A natural disposition to it, is not to be neglected, but withal,
excess therein is to be avoided, not to affect, or too much make use of it: so
as to appear in public meetings, and places, nor to abuse that gift with
singing vicious, profane, or impious Songs. In a word, a Gentleman may learn
any honest and decent bodily exercise, whether it be Tennis, or others,
provided this be no hinderance to better things; and be not followed with
excess, or too much eagerness: for else, instead of contributing to one's
health, it would endanger it, specially in Summer, when heat is great and
violent; for without that, is made a great dissipation of spirits, which makes
one weak and faint; yet I would advise him not to give himself to those sports,
which none but an in^erior sort of people are at; for thus he makes himself
contemptible to persons of Quality: therefore as long as he is abroad, and
takes any recreation without doors, let him use those of the Country he lives
in, and which are followed by his equals; for else men would conceive thoughts
of him very disadvantageous as if he were weak spirited or low minded.

Thus much concerning bodily Exercises; let us now come to those of another
nature; for he goes abroad not only to frame his body, but also to instruct his
mind, and inform his judgment: therefore he must add what he can to those Arts
and Sciences I mentioned in the first part of this work, to bring them to a
greater maturity and perfection: so that where he finds an eminent Philosopher,
there I would have him to close: the same he must do of a good Linguist, where
he happens to light upon one; for it is the good fortune of Travelers in one
place, to find a man who excels in one thing, and in another place one who is
famous for another; for those jewels are dispersed, and he is a wise man who
makes use of the advantage, and draws out of them all what he can: for when the
occasion is lost, it is not easily recovered. Front capillata est, sed post
occasio calva. Cato.
One of the things, which above all, I would have him to be careful of, is, not
to forget any thing he learned before in the Schools or University; for it were
a greater shame to do so, than if he had never learned it: and let him not
think it to be below him again to go over those things, for I have known some
eminently learned men who every year read over their Grammar.

Some think a Governor has no more to do herein, but to find good Masters of
all sorts of Exercises, and see them perform their charge; but I am not of that
mind, for I would not have him to be an idle spectator, whilst others are at
work; but in time and place I wish him to impart to his Gentleman, some of the
lights he has in himself; for be is both, Censor morum, and Doctor rerum,
teacher of things; not of Fencing, Dancing, or the Language, but of Sciences,
whether natural or moral; but this specially by way of discourse: therefore I
would have him to take pains briefly, to insinuate into the young man a general
ground of History from the Creation of the world, to the present age, out of
some good Books of his own choice: then also an Epitome of the particular
History of the Country you are in, composed by an Author of the same Nation,
esteemed the best, whether it be in France, or Italy, etc. and one treating of
the present state of things, in France they have one which is often renewed,
L'Estat de la France.
called, The State of France, containing curious and necessary things for
strangers and others.

The useof the Map will be very beneficial if he understands it, which he can
do easily; this will give a great light to some parts of History, depending
upon Geography, which he must have an insight of, till in due time he comes to
a place where he may dive farther into it: whereof I will speak in its place.
In the mean time he must endeavor to understand the use of the Terrestrial
Globe, which can much help him therein.

The Science of Mathematics is very curious, and much worth the pains of a
Gentleman: Indeed, I think this of all others to be the most* fit and proper
for a man of quality, though not every part of them; her demonstrations are so
visible, and so convincing, that of all humane Arts and Sciences this has the
clearest proofs. This is so generally received, that when we will say such a
thing is undeniable, we call it a Mathematical demonstration: but as it
requires ripeness of judgment, I would have him to learn it by degrees, till he
grows more and more fit for it: let him learn first the Principles and Elements
of it; yet, if he can, he must perfect himself in the crabby, yet very
necessary part thereof, called Arithmetic, which is of a universal necessity.
Geometry is one of the most important parts of it, necessary to many sorts of
persons, pleasant and beneficial to all: The matter of Fortification is very
important for the defense of places; and the rules of ordinary Architecture are
useful: they teach how to build well, to choose a situation, pleasant, strong,
and convenient, that is, having things necessary to subsist by, as Water, etc.
what shall I say of Astronomy, Astrology, and other lawful parts of this
curious Science, which of all humane ones are of the greatest extent, the most
consummated therein making daily new discoveries: they are so taking and
recreative, that the more one studies them, the more he is enticed to do it;
they are the delight of the greatest wits, to whom they afford matter enough to
exercise themselves.

Chemistry is another curious Art, full of secrets and rarities, very pleasant
and useful; for certainly extractions made out of Metals and Minerals can do
much good, when applied well, and, if in the practice of it men could but
confine themselves within certain bounds, it would not prove so hurtful and
dangerous to some as it is; but, indeed it is so bewitching a thing, that many
not being gone very far into it, do seek for the philosophical Stone* in the
pursuit whereof, they exhaust their brains, and purse, and hope to find it out,
which yet is harder to be done than a Quadrature in the Circle, or malleable
Glass that is harder than stones which can be broken with a hammer.

If a Traveller has time, and happens to be in a convenient place, as may be
Padoa, Montpellier, or other, it would be in him a commendable curiosity to
learn something in Physic, not to be a Doctor of, or to practice it, only to
be able to understand the grounds of it. A man having a body to look to, would
be glad to know the temper and constitution of it, what manner of diet he must
observe to keep it in health, and also to know the nature, causes, signs, and
remedies of Diseases, it would be a satisfaction and a benefit to one; for at
all times, and in all places one has not a Doctor at his elbow to consult
with: besides that, there is a great pleasure to read the strong and rational
Books of great Writers in that profession, as Avicenna's, Averroes's,
Hypocrates, Galenus's, and others; out of which here and there, I will collect
curious things, and necessary to be known concerning our inward parts, viz.
that the heart is the principle of life; that the Liver is the chief instrument
of the nutritive faculty, and the shop of Blood; that the bladder of the Gall
is a necessary sink to settle the flava bilis, or choler, that thereby the
Liver is warmed and freed from corruption, and other good offices it does, and
that the Spleen through several arteries, receiving heat from the heart,
boileth the gross blood, which through certain little ramuli's or branches it
does convey into the neighboring parts, for their nourishment, and that it
draws it self the melancholic humor to disperse it into the ventricle, to
strengthen and increase the retentive faculty, and many things more of this
nature.

He will do well when he is at Orleans, Angers, or any such places, where are
public Schools of the Civil Law, to get one of the Doctors, or Professors
thereof, to read it to him, which he will do privately in his own house; or
perhaps, if you be a man of high quality, come to your lodging: Let no man
account this to be a disparagement to himself, for Learning and Virtue are a
credit: and I have known young Noblemen, and of the greatest quality do it. And
though this Roman Law be not every where received as a Law, yet in it is much of
Reason and Equity, and contains the grounds of politics; the parts of it were
instituted by a wise Republic, and great Emperors, by the advice of judicious,
wise, and able Counselors; by the means of it several men were raised to great
honor and fortune, according to the saying, Dat Galenus opes, dat Iustinianus
honores, -- Pauper Aristoteles. This Civil Law once was received in many parts
of the world; and though at present it has not the strength of a Law in some
places, yet it is much esteemed every where, and looked upon as a thing
judiciously compiled. I could also wish the Traveller to inform himself of the
most essential, municipal Laws of Countries he comes into; much more would I
have him to understand those of his own, which he is to live under, and to be
ruled by: therefore when he is come home, or before he goes abroad, he would do
very well to settle a year or two in one of the Inns of Courts, therein to be
instructed of, and apply himself to it. A man who has an Estate, is sometimes
subject to be troubled about it, and he will be glad to know how to defend it
from cheats, nor be forced to go to Lawyers upon every trivial account for
counsel, nor always do things upon trust, and not know wherefore such and such
courses must be taken, and let it be an encouragement to those who would get
preferments by it, that in most Nations they who are eminently learned, and
versed in the Laws, are raised to great places, as to be Judges of the Land,
Lords Keepers, and Chancellors of Kingdoms, and as to Estates, within these
Dominions, many Families have been, and are daily raised to great means and
fortune by the Law.

When he has time and opportunity, he will do well to learn to draw Pictures,
which is a gentile Exercise, when one does it for his private use and
recreation, it may serve to take the Plots, Situation, and Landskips of places
he goes by; hereby imagination is much helped; so that a more perfect and more
lasting idea of things is formed within us, being conveyed through the eye. As
he goes by any Courts, he must endeavor to get the Pictures of the Princes and
Princesses, young Princes and Ministers of State, and other great men, and the
Maps of considerable Cities. Let him not neglect to see, and if possible to get
some skill in ancient and modern Curiosities, whether Pictures, Statues of
Brass, Marble, Alabaster, etc. Medals, and other fair and curious things, of
which there is abroad such a variety, that it would be tedious to name them
all; only I would wish him to endeavor to get an universal, though it were but
a superficial knowledge to be enabled upon occasion to discourse of any thing.

To the purpose of Medals I must say, the study thereof is not only pleasant,
and curious, but also beneficial for the understanding of History; by their
means we find the errors of some Authors, we learn some particulars, and
understand niceties of History, which Historians were silent in. This is better
than picture which does not last, and Sculpture which does not so much
represent to the life, the faces or actions of great men; it contains the best
parts of these two, Picture and Sculpture, and the surest of History; specially
when they come from good Masters hands. Then as to the matter, the variety of
Metals is considerable* whether Gold, Silver, Corinthian Metal, or Brass; and
of this last specially, there are several sizes, some of the greatest by
Italians, called Medaglioni, then great; Mezzane or of a middle size, and at
last those of the lesser sort, and these either Roman or Greek; the Roman
either of Families or Emperors, the Greek of Cities. Of all these, those which
are historical are the most considerable, and so worthy of the curiosity of
Princes and great men, as to have one of the best places in their Closets:
there is much learning in the knowledge of them, and sometimes one affords
matter enough to discourse a whole hour upon it: It Is true, it requires moneys,
some skill and time to put several together: in a word, it is a very enticing
curiosity, and of great extent. And this as to ancient Medals, which some other
time I may happen to enlarge upon.

But besides these, there are also modern Medals; for when Arts and Sciences
were restored within the last age, this was not forgotten; but indeed, Workmen
were so ignorant, and so followed the Gothic way, that it is lamentable to see
some of their Medals, which yet were better than those coined 4, or 500 years
ago: but of late the way has been so found out, that England and France afford
admirable ones, and Holland too, but inferior to the former. Instead that
formerly the best were of Brass, now they are of Silver or Gold. The ancient
Roman ones, since the days of Augustus were daily better and better, till the
days of Trajan and Hadrian, and so kept till Caracalla, at which time good
workmen began to fail. So modern ones, though they began to appear in the days
of Henry VII. were hardly worth looking upon till within these thirty years,
Having made an obscenous Medal of Pope Innocent the X. with Donna Olympia, he
was sent to the Pazarelli, or Bedlam, where he died.
when Corman in Rome, Warin in France, and now in England some have restored
that art to a great perfection, both as to the design and working of the Coin.
Thus by the means of twenty Medals, more or less, the whole History of a
Princes life is laid open before us. Some great men also, but Subjects are by
the means of a Medal made known abroad to the world. The inclination I have for
these things has made me enlarge upon the matter: but I return to my subject.

Every night before he goes to bed, he must recollect and repeat what he has
seen and learned that day, and also about the same time let him be sure to
learn something by heart, which will take a deep impression, because when he is
asleep, there are no objects to drive it out: this will also strengthen memory,
which is the better for being used; for like a knife it grows rusty, except it
be made use of. Let the Governor often see him do his Exercises, whose presence
will make him and the Masters more diligent and careful: and if sometimes he
happens to be ill-disposed, let him put it off till another time; provided it
falls out so but seldom; for being so released, he will return to it with more
vigor and cheerfulness. He must be taught to have a respect for all his Masters
whatsoever, and thankfully to receive their advice when they tell him of his
faults.

And now I am upon this subject, the Governor himself must be very prudent
in^t; for this is a delicate matter, most men loving to be praised, but not
corrected and censured of their faults: in this he must use a very great
dexterity, he lying between two extremes to discharge his duty in telling him
of his failings, yet not exasperate him. If the young man was sensible that
what advice is given him tends to his good, there would be no need of so many
niceties, nor of so many cautions to be used: but the temper of several being
like that of some horses, which receiving a sudden check of the bridle, draw
back, grow unruly, and play a thousand tricks; so they fly out, and cannot
endure to be told what is amiss in them, which is an infallible sign of a bad
nature: Hereupon he must observe these three things, the first must be a
protestation of his real zeal and affection to his Service, which puts him upon
telling him something for his good; having thus prepared him, he must gently
and civilly tell him what the matter is; But thirdly, he must tell it in
private, and take his time when he sees him in a good humor, and fit to
receive advise. Other times when he often sees him fall into a fault, he is to
find out some Story of one or other subject to the same fault, which he ought
to exaggerate as much as can be, and thereby make him who committed it
ridiculous, ever speaking of a third person, which a young man can hear very
patiently, and observe it too; but if he should come home and say to him, You
are the man, perhaps he could not endure it; but when he has done all that he
can, and yet he will not mend, he must be patient, knowing he has done his
Part, and remember, That which cannot be cured, must be endured, though a
prudent man will lay hold upon advantages sometimes he receives from one
occasion or other, and then he gives advice with success; but let both the
Gentleman and his Governor know this, that in every thing a decorum ought to be
observed.

As we all have failings, so we must seek to know and find them out; and when
we have, it is not enough to hide and conceal them, we ought first mend and
leave them off, for else they still remain and keep us in a continual danger.

But one of the most essential parts of the Office of a Governor is to neglect
no occasion of instructing his Charge in every thing which is fit for him to
know, whenever he is with him, whether sitting or walking, he must loose no
time, but give him good and wholesome advice, infusing into him principles of
Piety and Virtue, to make him loath and abhor Vice, improving his understanding
by the light and knowledge he imparts to him of things; when he sees him do
well he must commend and encourage him, and make him know his error when he is
in the wrong, he is to be told of so many things, and there is such a variety
of occasions to speak, that certainly an ingenious man will not want matter to
entertain him with, the Stock of a Scholar and a Traveller cannot easily be
exhausted, and though it were only certain things which may very well be told
over again and again; every thing a man sees, or any he hears will afford
matter of speech, and one may reflect upon it; and make some spiritual, natural,
moral, or political application of, and observation upon; and rather than to
say nothing, I will tell him Stories to divert him, which will make him love my
company, render my person acceptable to him, delight to be with me, and so upon
occasion to take my advice; for let others say what they please, a loving,
civil, and obliging carriage will go nigh to win him, or else he must be of a
strange humor, which yet I deny not to be possible. One thing which I would be
constantly informing of him of, is the State of Affairs in Europe in gener^l,
and of every Nation in particular, beginning at home, continuing by our
Neighbors, and ending by those who are far off

From time to time, he ought to give Parents an account of the young man's
carriage and improvement, and in case he has sometimes no good to write, he
ought to mitigate things, and not mention every petty trifle he does amiss in:
one must be very careful and tender not to make division between Father and
Son, between whom natural affection at last will awake; it is a good work to
settle a good correspondency between them, but withal the young man must help,
the Tutor alone cannot do it; for if his carriage were extravagant, it would
destroy the good opinion he is willing to give of him, and would make the
favorable Character pass for a lie, or at least a flattery; but in this are
many intrigues depending upon accidents, to be left to the Prudence of the
Governor, and which is not fit to declare, because they could not suit with the
case of every one.

Hitherto I showed what a Gentlemen being abroad, ought to learn and know: Now
I am to speak of what he must learn and do, and how he must behave himself.
Saint Paul reduces it under three Heads, To live in this World soberly, 1 Timothy
2.12.
justly, and religiously; by sobriety he understands our whole duty concerning
our selves, by justice or righteousness that which has relation to our
Neighbors, and by Religion, that which we owe to God, in whom he will have us
to end, and begin with our selves, so to continue by our Neighbors; for except
we be well disposed in our selves, we cannot be so toward others, Isa. 1.16,
17, 18.
and less toward God; Wash your selves, cleanse your hands, then draw nigh to
me, faith the Lord. These are essential Duties and necessary to be practiced by
us upon all occasions: and though this be a command affirmative, yet it
includes a negative one: not to infringe sobriety, justice, or piety at no time
nor place; which negative precepts do oblige one, semper and ad semper. All men
in what Country soever are generally obliged to the observation of this.

But other things there are more particular than this, relating only to a civil
life, consisting in some fashions and customs of Countries; for herein one
Nation differs from another, which a Traveller ought to study, follow, and
practice: this difference in some parts is greater, in others lesser; these
must be learned by him who is willing to go into company, else he would appear
absurd and ridiculous: and though it is not to be expected that a stranger
should be perfect in the customs of a Country, as he who is born and bred
in it, yet it is to be supposed they will labor to be informed of them. For a
time one ought to leave off his Country fashions, to practice those of the
Nations he conver^es with; for it is more fit and easy for one or few men, and
strangers, to conform themselves to the ways of a whole Town, Province, or
Kingdom, than for a whole Nation to learn those of a particular man, or of few,
which yet some are so unreasonable as to desire and dislike any thing which is
not exactly as they have it at home: This may well be called the disease of
their own Country, whence they brought it, and which they will have to attend
them through the whole course of their Travels. Certainly they are no wise men,
who say, what care I for such fashions and customs; which is the same as to
say, I matter not to make my self ridiculous, and to do things wh^^^ are
absurd, one thing is well in one place, and amiss in another. As for instance,
here in England the manner is for the Master of the house to go in before a
stranger; this would pass for a very great incivility in France: so here the
Lady or Mistress of the house uses to sit at the upper end of the Table, which
in France is given to strangers: so if we be many in a company, we make no
scruple to drink all out of a Glass, or a Tankard, which there they are not
used to do: and if a Servant would offer to give them a Glass before it was
washed every time they drink, they would be angry at it: Here when a man is
sneezing, we say nothing to him, but there they would look upon it as a want of
civility. Again, we use in England upon a Journey now and then to ask one
another how we do; but in France they do no such thing: amongst them that
question would answer to this, what aileth you that you look so ill? I could
make a long enumeration of such things, and other obvious, when a man has
society with people in that Country; for not only every Kingdom, but also
every Province or Shire, and almost every Town has some such particular thing,
and some reason for it, which one is not to trouble himself about, provided he
has the ground of the general customs of France, Italy, and other parts when
he is in them.

A man's carriage in the street ought to be well composed, and according to the
usual way of the place; in some, if they see one walking extraordinarily slow,
they will say he has the Gout: in others, I have seen people walk so fast,
that one might have thought they were running for a Doctor, or a Midwife. The
Italian and Spanish Nations walk with great gravity, and would see others do so
too. Some going through the streets, gaze and stare as if they were fallen from
the Clouds, or had never ^een Men, Houses, or Shops; others wag their head so
much, jugg so their hands, and are so discomposed in their whole motion, that
one would think they are wild or mad: Another sort there is of those who seem
to go o^t into the street a purpose to see what other men do, or wear; such a
man's Hat, say they, does not sit well, his Clothes ar^ not fashionable, the
Lace of his Cravate is old, his Shoes are worn out, and such busybodies
observations, that one would think they are authorized to be public censors of
these things. Others as they go, talk as loud as if they were speaking to deaf
men, and that too in their own language, as if they had a mind to make people
take notice they are strangers, and yet do not mind, or else scorn to return
civility to those who show it to them, with putting o^f their Hats, or
otherwise.

A good behavior at Table, is, to me, a strong proof of a good Education: here
a Gentleman must put a difference between him and a Clown. Grace being said,
and civility ended, about places, I mean when a man is a stranger in a place;
for else every one knows his own, or else they will indifferently seat any
where, still paying civility to him who is much above the rest, a handsome
liberty is to be used. In France they hardly admit of any Ceremonies, the
bashful countenance of some at Table ought to be put off, Forks are a neat
invention therefore to be used to avoid greasing hands, with laying them upon
the meat: having occasion of passing the hand before others, one must do it as
seldom as he can; and when he does, he is to crave pardon for the trouble from
him he gives it to, and to make clean his spoon before he puts it in the dish,
after he has taken it out of his mouth. Sometimes I have seen Gluttons, and a
rude sort of people, who, as soon as a dish is set down upon the Table, snap
all they can out of it, as if they were afraid to want and starve; one can see
often as much upon their plate, as there is in the dish; not considering that
others as well as they must have their share: then leaning one or both elbows
upon the Table, like pigs they hang their mouth over the plate, and with both
hands to the mouth, greedily devour that which so uncivilly they have taken.
Thus ^atisfying their gluttony, they mind neither decency nor their health;
little heeding whether such a kind of meat, and such a quantity of fruit will
not give a surfeit to their stomach; for some raw fruits are dangerous, as well
as meat hard to be digested: they also will sin against sobriety with
immoderate d^inking, thereby inflaming their blood and liver; and do not mind
how at Table, men ought to have good and profitable discourse. In my Travels I
have been in places where people are very neat in their houses, in linen,
plate, and dressing of meat; but as nasty in the eating as others are in the
dressing of it: but as Gentlemen are not the Cooks, they cannot help when it is
nastily dressed; but it is in their power to eat it cleanly. It is not good to
be over-nice in his diet abroad, yet it is a great satisfaction to sit at Table
with clean linen, knives, spoons, forks, and plate.

Furthermore, the Governor must be careful of his Gentleman's conversation,
which is of two sorts; one improperly called to converse with the dead, and the
other with the living, is properly so named: to converse with the dead is to
read Books; herein he must be as cautious of what Books he reads, as what
company he frequents: evil company does debauch the body, and evil Books do
corrupt the mind, causing that error in judgment which bad men do cause in the
practice. A great deal of good has been done by good Books, and much evil and
mischief caused by evil ones: Some are so dangerous, that cunningly and
inperceptibly they infuse a poison into the mind and heart of the readers. This
was a known truth to Primitive Christians, Acts 19* 19.
who being converted to the Gospel, brought all curious Books they had and
burned them. When once a man is used to read profane and dishonest things, he
will easily be brought to practice them; wherefore it should be the Governors
care to see he reads no dangerous Book to shake him in his Religion; for this,
without exception, ought to be his chief care to keep him steadfast to his
Religion, nor any profane, obscenous, and others apt to corrupt good manners.

There is abroad a sort of Books called Romances, which have been occasion of
much talk pro and con; some saying they are curious and innocent Books, which
upon several accounts may prove beneficial; for therein Virtue and Vice are set
down; the first to be followed, the other avoided: besides that, the chief
subject of them is grounded upon History; what ornaments it receives from art*
they rather add to, than take from the beauty of it, as it is with Poetry. A
modern Author in France stands much in the defense of these sort of Books, he
and his Sister having written several in that kind. Monsieur de Scudery.
On the other side, other good pens have cried them down for corrupters of good
manners; teaching Ladies to give meetings to their Gallants, run away from
their Parents, etc. But to give every one his due, the invention, elegancy,
style, and purity of the Language are to be commended, as far as I know, no
body doubts of the two last: as to the former, when the Author undertakes to
give the Character of a proud, ambitious, amorous, constant, cruel, base, and
perfidious; or of a wise, witty, generous, and valiant man, he carries on well
his design, and the Author makes him act his part well: But on the other side,
passions are so represented to the life, Guarini, Author of Pastor Fido had a
Daughter, who became debauched with the ^eading of his Book.
that it works them into the heart of the Reader, which naturally being
disposed to receive evil rather than good, entertains the first, and neglects
the last; specially when they are in the hands of weak brains; who seeing their
passions flattered with a good success, at last, though through many crosses,
they are encouraged to follow them, and will soon imagine themselves able to
perform what others are therein said to have done. But if one has a mind to
know the way of them, he must read with this caution, that many things in them
are not true, and consequently are for recreation rather than for instruction:
no doubt but that some good and some evil are to be learned out of them: but if
the harm that springs from that reading is greater than the good one can get by
it, it is prudence to forbear reading them, specially youth, which easily
receives impressions; but if they be read, let it be with moderation, seldom
and without application, except it be for the Language; for certainly, reading
of them much, steals some of our precious time, which might be better employed:
yet a Gentleman may be informed of what manner of Books these are, so as not to
be altogether ignorant of them when he happens to be in a place and company
where such things are to be spoken of: but let him do it so warily, as to fear
being poisoned therewith; and like dogs in Egypt, which never stop when they
lap in Nilus, for fear of Crocodiles that are in it.

The Tutor also is as much as in him lies to see he reads no Books which
contain unsound and Heterodox Principles, or able to lead them to sinful
practices; such are some Books of Jesuits, which hold any error in judgment,
under the Doctrine of Probability; that is, if one single Doctor has advanced
an opinion never so false, or erroneous, it is probable he was in the right,
and so, men may believe it with a safe conscience. Other Books of Jesuits do
countenance any sinful practice, and corrupt wholly morality, under the notion
and Doctrine of Directing the Intention: Thus one is allowed to steal, not to
deprive others of their own, but with an intent to serve his occasions, and
relieve his wants. These things are clearly set down in the Book, called the
Mystery of Iesuitism, and at large in another, entitled, The Morals of
Jesuits; both translated out of French.

Now I must speak of Conversation, properly so called; though to distinguish it
from the other, it was named conversation with the living: This is one o^ the
most important things a Traveller has to do; man, as I said somewhere else,
being a sociable creature, ought to seek for company to enjoy the benefit of
society: therefore it must be a Governors care to find him such company as is
good and fit for him; and by this one may see what an advantage it is for those
Gentlemen whose Governors know the Language and ways of the Country, and are
already acquainted, then they are not to seek as others, so as to need being
introduced themselves; however he ought to show him company by degrees, and not
all at once: for he would be like those, who having been a while in the dark,
when upon a sudden they come to the light, have their eyes dazzled with it; he
must begin with inferior persons, as it were, to enter him, and see how he will
behave himself in it; for with such he is more free: and it is not required he
should observe himself altogether so much as when he is with people of Quality;
but in those sorts of companies I would not have him to stop very long for fear
of contracting some of those imperfections which often do attend persons of
that kind.

But before he engages far in company, he must first know in general, the
temper of the Nation, then the particular of the persons he is to be acquainted
with: the former is known by the testimony of those who have been a long while
amongst that Nation, or out of ones own experience. Thus the temper of the
French Nation is free, bold, jovial, witty, and civil; besides, they are
branded with rashness and inconstancy. The particular temper he may get
information about from his friends who introduce him, from whom also, upon
occasion he may be instructed of particular customs, and how he ought to behave
himself upon some accounts. When he is once resolved to go into company, he
must be sure to keep neat and clean his face, hair, hands, and to have handsome
and fashionable clothes, yet without vain and superfluous singularity or
affectation, having nothing contrary to modesty or decency; for it is a general
rule, that a man's temper is commonly known by his dress, wherein is sometimes
set forth much of extravagancy, for the proverb says, The Bird is known by his
Feathers. Men by the outward show often judging of the inward inclination and
capacity: One must not be too forward to invent new fashions, or to add to
those that are already introduced: as for instance, if the mode be to wear one
single knot of Riband, he must not have twenty; if when others wear but one
Feather, he would have five or six, he would be accounted a fantastical man;
but withal, he must not follow the mode too far off, to use little narrow
bands, when others have them broad and deep, or to wear a high crowned hat,
when the fashion is to have it low: To all these things there is a middle way,
which certainly is the best and wisest, and not to be so singular as to wear
thick cloth in Summer, or silk or thin stuffs in Winter, contrary to the rule
and practice of others. By all means avoid being singular in your ways, custom
is a great tyrant, and not to be accounted a fool, a man is to follow the
common folly.

One says well, that Meditation and Reading make a man learned, Writing makes
him exact, and conversation ready: for a man used to company, has often
occasion to discourse upon several subjects, whereby he acquires a facility of
expressing himself, and confidence to see and speak with others, without
blushing or bashfulness: it inspires also a desire of pleasing and getting the
esteem and approbation of those he frequents: whence it is, that he will
observe his clothes, study his words, and compose his gestures. It is true,
that in this he will take pains, more or less, according as he likes the
company; for the tempers of men are so different, and there is such a variety
of humors, that certainly there must be, as it is, a greater conformity to, and
liking of some than others. Hence it is, and also by reason of an antipathy,
that a man will hate the company of another upon the very first sight, which
another will love the reason of this contrariety not being visible, but occult
or hidden.

It is then a beneficial thing for a Gentleman, when it can be done in a
strange Country, to see company; but let him frequent persons of Quality, by
whom he may well be informed of affairs, and of whom he will learn a gentile,
and a good behavior; and when he is known to frequent the chief and best
companies in a Town, upon this account every one will show him respect: he will
also do well to be acquainted with another sort of choice persons,
considerable, not so much for their birth and quality, as for their Virtue,
Merits, Parts, and abilities, for to learn how to carry himself well in all
kinds of company, he must see the variety of them, and learn how to comply with
all manner of humors and tempers, yet excluding a vicious and sinful
compliance; for as in every man there is some thing particular, so in every
company he will find and observe that which he will hardly meet with in
another; and to know well the several tempers of men, is, doubtless a very
considerable advantage; also to have over himself such a power as to become
grave and serious with men of that temper: on the contrary, merry and jovial
with those who are such.

But in France, they have a privilege not to be enjoyed by strangers, in
Spain, Italy, Germany, etc. which is, to converse with virtuous Women, and of
quality; the manner of French Breeding admitting a mixture of both Sexes; out
of which, for the most part, results an excellent Behavior and Education: that
Nation is so fully persuaded of this, that they believe a man cannot be well
civilized without it: this is an universal practice in that Kingdom, from the
highest to the lowest, which their wise, serious, and learned men do also
follow: this is the way there for men to be cried up; and it is observed, that
people is more courteous, a^fable, and polished, where this custom is
prevalent, than in others where it is not: upon this ground runs that French
Breeding so much approved of, and sought after by Foreign Nations, who send
thither their Children to be instructed, and receive part of their Education:
hence also arises that civility they show to strangers, who enjoy there more
privileges, and have more liberty to come to Court to public shows, and to
some other places, than several of their own Nation; so that for the most part
a stranger is admitted, when a French man, who is not well known, is excluded:
therefore let not other Nations blame this custom, because it is not their own;
for every custom does not suit with every temper or Nation: and if Spaniards
and Italians had introduced it, may be they had had not so many grounds of
jealousy as they have; for virtue and liberty not only may, but also very
often do consist together: but a Traveller or other particular man must not
undertake to condemn a custom approved by a whole Nation, received and
continued for several hundreds of years. Now whatsoever I say to this, is not
to approve or condemn that practice, seeing I am but a particular man, who must
not think to make others subscribe to his opinion: I speak only as to matters
of fact, and relate things as they are, not minding much what either licentious
or scrupulous humor will say to it.

However, not to be silent upon this subject, I will say something of it upon
these grounds: to love and have a respect for women is natural to men, and that
such a love and respect may well consist with virtue and honesty, I hope none
will be so unreasonable as to deny. Now this general inclination being
strengthened with the particular knowledge one has of the merits and virtue of
some persons of that Sex, the heart will not long be able to keep within that
esteem and affection, but will seek for some ways to express it, which begins
with a desire to please: and as the intentions are pure, so the means made use
of to please, will be innocent and commendable; otherwise they would not answer
their end and might happen to displease instead of pleasing: the usual ways to
please, are, civility, meekness, humility, generosity, compliance, etc. which
are all virtues necessary and essential to a Gentleman: besides that, this Sex
having not the ferocity and rudeness which are in many persons of ours, they
who are subject to it, must leave it before they come into the company of
Ladies; the generality of that Sex being mild and delicate, specially they who
had a good breeding, which is ordinary to most persons of quality; so that
considering the Sex, the quality and merits of those into whose company a man
comes, I leave you to judge of the care he will take to be welcome to them: and
this is not all, for most of those persons have a great deal of wit, most of
them from their infancy being used to be in the company of those who have
understanding and experience, attending on their Mothers, Sisters, etc. when
they make or receive visits; so that of necessity in time they must be brought
to a good frame, fit for a delightful and profitable conversation: besides
that, as the world goes, if one has a mind to hear news, or affairs, he can
find in women's company wherewith to satisfy himself; there being hardly any
intrigues in Towns, Provinces, Courts, and several Kingdoms, but they have a
hand in it; and sometimes a public Minister will as well speed in his Masters
concerns, by courting Ladies, as by frequenting Ministers of State. Within
these fifty years almost whole Europe has been once governed by the authority
or counsel of women; so that by their means several men have made their
fortune, which is more than a civil carriage, and the Language to be learned in
their company: who then can after this be against frequenting their company
when they are well qualified, seeing with them we also can enjoy that of men.

According to what I said somewhere else, there ought to be a choice in matter
of company; there is no society in multitude, the faces of men who meet in
numbers, make no more impression in us than of those we see in a dream; the
sound of their words can be distinguished no better than the noise caused by
the fall of great waters: one is to look for a society innocent and delightful,
able to perfect our mind and other faculties, to bring them into a good frame,
and to divert it in persons we intend often to be with: we must look for the
same qualifications which Platonical Laws require in those who pretend to
Priesthood, namely, to be whole and sound in body, mind, and manners, born of
honest Parents.

Having showed of what persons the company is necessary, I must now give ^ome
rules how the young Gentleman is to behave himself in it: First, coming into the
place where the company is, he must remember to practice the rules he was
taught by his Dancing Master, modestly, and without affectation, yet with some
difference, according to the high or low quality of the persons he salutes, the
carriage and gestures of his body, to be so well composed as to be far from any
show of vanity or bravery; the first visits usually are of ceremony, and so
short and serious, yet witty upon occasion, or of affairs, whereby it must be
regulated. In this point are several circumstances, which ought to be ordered
according to the custom of the Country wherein they do differ.

In the second place he must be careful of what he says; he must never begin
any discourse of Religion when he is with those of a contrary, for ^ear of
bringing troubles upon himself; this matter, most men being apt to be hot upon.
St. Paul exhorts to avoid vain disputes, though the subject of Religion be
the most important that can be spoken of; yet disputes of Travelers are
usually vain, as to the success of it; no good comes from such disputes, most
men being for the Religion they were born, bred, and instructed in; and after
whole days of such disputes, every one retains his own, and all that has been
said upon it are words in the air, except it be when a man seems disposed to
hear, and be better informed than hitherto he has been: but when a man
discourses of Religion merely to bring another to embrace his own, such
disputes commonly prove fruitless. When a man has such an itching desire to
talk of ^uch things, let it be of those Articles wherein we do not differ:
though we differ in theory, and about means, we agree in the practice, and
about the end; namely, that we ought to live well, if we desire to die well;
that to be saved, we must believe in Christ: and in case others would provoke
him to speak of Religion, may be with an intent one way or other to bring him
into snares, he must say he is satisfied in his own; therefore desires no
disputes about it: only he prays God to enlighten his understanding, to the
end he may more and more know his holy mind and will; saying with David, Lord
teach me thy ways, and I will walk in thy truth; teach me to fear* thy name,
and I will praise and glorify it with my whole heart.

Thirdly, he is carefully to observe the matter of his discourse; not to say
any thing that is impious, profane, dishonest, or unbecoming; let them all be
seasoned with the salt of prudence; avoid saying any thing where those who are
present or absent may be offended, and take exception: Indeed the common vice
of companies is to speak of the life, manners, and employments of our
Neighbors, and ill of it too for the most part. Beware when thou speak ill
of another, whether thou be not guilty of the same thing thou condemnest him
for: avoid also idle words which we are to give an account of. If we use to
choose our meat, let much more our words be tried; for if we examine the meat
that goes into our mouth, we ought to do the like of the word that comes out
of it; which often causes greater disturbances in families, than meat in the
^tomach: Again, let words be plain and clear without equivocation or ambiguity;
sometimes a word mis-understood and mis-reported, will cause a quarrel:
Moreover, let one's discourse upon a subject be to the purpose; for he who
speaks of that he understands not, or at random, will suffer blame instead of
the praise he expected. Others fall into this inconvenience, out of another
cause, which is, that some bring their bodies into company, but leave their
wits and minds at home; so that whilst the company speaks of one thing, they
rave of another; and often upon a sudden, returning to themselves, they will
speak to that which they hardly heard, or else have the incivility to make
others speak over again that which was spoken before. Let a man speak of things
fit, and adapted to the company he is with; it were not proper to talk of
Philosophy or Mathematics in a company of Ladies, nor of Balls, Dances, and
such pieces of Gallantry in the presence of wise and grave Senators, and
Doctors. Furthermore, let him know, Virtutum primam esse puta compescere
linguam,
Proximus ille Deo qui scit ratione tacere. Cato.

Therefore let his words be few, for there is sin in the multitude of words;
and so let too much talking be avoided. Socrates wished in his Disciples
discretion, silence, Est and fideli tuta silentio merces, Horat. lib. 3. od. 2.
and modesty, contrary to imprudence, prattling and impudence; that second Vice
usually contains the other two; Trop parler nuit, trop grater cuit, says the
French Proverb.
and it is certainly better not to speak at all, than to speak amiss. To the
nine Muses, Nima Pompilius, added one he named Tacita, or silent; to show that
though all Sciences were in one, without silence they would prove useless.
Indeed, as it is a great wisdom to hide his passions, and discover those of
other men, so it is to speak little, and hear much; for whilst fools have their
heart upon the tongue, wise men keep their tongue in the heart: These know how
to keep a secret which they are trusted with, and which to them is a sacred
thing, but the others are incapable of it. Herein I am not so unjust as to
advise one to leave off speaking, only I wish him to order his words, and
observe what he is to say, and to take his time; for there is a time to speak,
and a time to be silent, specially about certain matters. The advantage of
silence is clear; he who speaks empties himself, but he who hears fills himself.

Let his words be also true, that is, for what he knows; for to tell a lie is
one thing, and to lie is another: one may tell a lie, thinking it to be a
truth, when he has been misinformed; but to lie, implies an intention to
deceive the hearer: This distinction was well observed by Nigidius, Lib. 11.
cap. 11.
as related by Aulus Gellius, An honest man takes care not to be a liar, and
the prudent man not to tell a lie. An honest, or as Solomon says, Prove. 13.5.
A righteous man hates lying The credit of a man is the truth of his words;
without it he is accounted base and unworthy, not fit to keep company with
honest men; when he is known to be a liar, he is not believed, though he speaks
the truth. Our Savior would not suffer the Devils to confess him to be the Son
of God, for fear this truth should be suspected coming out of their mouth; ^o
that when a man is come to that, I account him lost in his reputation, having
thereby declared himself the true son of the Devil, who is a liar from the
beginning: therefore whenever a man speaks, let him say the truth, though he
be not always bound to declare it; nor the whole truth, which often it is
prudence to conceal. Charitably one must not tell the Vices of others,
specially of Parents, Patrum pudenda non detegamus, Genesis 9.22.
says a Doctor, as did Ham: A Son must not say his Father is a Drunkard,
though it be true; but still I say, let all sorts of lies be avoided, whether
it be jucundum, officiosum, or perniciosum, pleasant, profitable, or hurtful;
for if one uses himself to any of these, he will easily pass to the practice of
the rest. It is a trouble to lie, and requires much of memory; it is easier to
frame within us a real image of that which is, than a false idol of what is not
so: truth can well be expressed without art or affectation, but a lie stands in
need of both. Above all, let a man in his discourses avoid that horrid and
unprofitable sin of Swearing; all other Vices have something of profit or
pleasure to plead for, but this has no such pretenses; only a wicked mind, and
a desperate custom. But will not God be avenged on those who call him to be a
witness to a lie, with taking his name in vain, and forswearing themselves? He
is called not only to be a witness to what is agreed upon, but also to be
avenger of the perjury when it is committed. His name is called in to help one
man to cheat another, an affront which he will not forgive: Let Zedechia^, the
two of the ten, who broke their word to Annibal and Vladislaus be witnesses of
it, and let an Heathen, a Regulus shame and condemn such ones.

Let also a Gentleman avoid speaking ill or well of himself, Ne te colladdes,
nec te culpaver is ipsum* says Cato.
no great danger of the first, but much of the last: and when there is a
necessary occasion for it, let him do it modestly and sparingly. They who take a
pleasure to speak of their exploits, and to be trumpets of their own praises,
are laughed at in company, and at last are a burden to those whom they converse
with: but alas, who can make an exact enumeration of the defects creeping into
the matter of man's conversation: some trouble the head of those whose company
they keep with news of what passes in their Street and Parish; others make the
ears ring with the miseries of the times and sufferings of people; some talk of
nothing but of the weather, others of War, and in a Chamber they take Towns,
overthrow Armies, and decide of the fortune of Kings; others can speak of
nothing but of mirth, eating, drinking, or of clothes a la mode; others of
their Travels, Books, Horses, of Building, Hunting, Hawking, Coursing, and of
thousands of such things: those who constantly are talking of one thing, and
never but of that thing, are the plague and persecutors of reasonable persons.
I would have a man able to discourse upon all these, but in due time and place.
As there is no man infallible, so none ought to be too positive, peremptory, or
obstinate in his opinions.

I must not forget to warn our Gentleman to compose his body so as to commit no
absurdity in his posture, no more than in his discourse. When he is in company,
he must forbear talking to himself, muttering between his lips, often ^pitting,
nodding with his head, pointing the finger, leaning on his elbow, crossing of
his legs, sudden and frequent turning of the eyes, looking awry, shutting his
eyes, or looking upon the ground when he speaks, instead of modestly casting
them upon the person he speaks to, frowning, making mouths and faces, a
perpetual motion and disquietness of the body: and generally he ought to
forbear any thing which is sign of lightness, threatening, anger, or of an
inward fretting or disturbance. So when he walks in or out of the room, let him
handsomely carry his body, avoiding every unbecoming gesture, and that lofty
walking of some who seem to have a mind to make the ground tremble under them,
the best way is ever the most natural, which is no ways to be forced or
counterfeit, except (as it falls out with some) it be ridiculous, or has a
particular reason for it; as the office or profession of some men that requires
a greater gravity, which yet must not be affected, nor with ostentation.

Hitherto I showed how a young Gentleman may learn good, now I must teach him
how to avoid evil: this is the whole of man, to do good, and fly from evil.
Phy^icians do reduce their whole art to the practice of these two words, tene
and abstine; so there are things which a Traveller must follow, and others
which he must abstain from. I have advised him to go into good company; now my
work is to dissuade him from keeping that which is bad: many a one has been
undone by bad company, and evil counsel, which attend one another: for though a
wicked man be sometimes able to give good counsel which he takes not himself,
it is so by accident; for the spring being corrupt, the streams cannot be
wholesome: To know good is one thing, and to do it is another* the former being
easier than the later. Of things to be avoided, some are evil by accident, and
others are so of their nature: things indifferent in themselves happen through
some accident or circumstance, to produce some inconvenience upon which account
prudent men will forbear it: this happens when men fall into the extremes of
it, that is, to an excess, or to a defect, when men use a thing too much, or
too little. Thus to walk or to play at some games, is a thing which may be
done; but if a man does it too long, or follows it too much, there is an excess
in it: and this is to be avoided, because it causes him to lose other occasions;
not the use, but the abuse of it: so of eating or drinking, which are
necessary, or of eating of such a meat, or drinking of such a liquor, which are
indifferent things; there can be an excess of eating or drinking too much of
it, or a defect when some out of an extraordinary grief forbear eating, as if
they intended to starve themselves: or when a Doctor prescribes Physic, the
dose he has prescribed must not be increased nor diminished; too much, or too
little make it bad, one over-works nature, the other sets it at work, but helps
it not.

I may say the same of some companies, which may be frequented, but with
measure, and within bounds: amongst several I could name of this kind, I will
only mention that of a Traveller's Contrymen, who if they be sober and civil
Gentlemen, may well be frequented; yet with moderation: for one must not be too
often with them, which is a hinderance to the end for which we travel abroad, to
learn the language and fashions, which is not to be gotten in our Countrey-mens
company; or else one had better to stay at home, and save charges: they may be
seen and visited as much as is decent, convenient, and necessary to show we
have a respect for them; but if they be debauched, their company is absolutely
(though handsomely and civilly) to be avoided, it being more dangerous than
that of any other Nation whatsoever: and this I say generally for Travelers of
whatsoever Nation they are: for when there is abroad a familiarity and
friendship between some of the same Country, that consideration of the
Country gives them a greater influence of one upon another: and thus with
greater ease they can spoil one another; for he who gives a bad example is
capable of giving bad coun^el, but anon I intend to say more of this.

Amongst the several sorts of bad company, I would have one chiefly to be
avoided, which may be called wicked; it is of those who are known to be of, and
to profess impious, atheistical, and profane Principles, who notoriously do
give up themselves to vice, who live as if there was no God, Phil. 3.19.
or whose God is their belly; as the Apostle speaks: but withal, whose end is
destruction; a sad doom: of these a Poet says, Et quibus in solo vivendi causa
palato est. Juven.
Men who glory in their shame, who like Swine wallow themselves in their mire,
and who like Dogs return publicly to their vomit, being past shame and
feeling: the company of such is more carefully to be avoided, than of those who
have the Plague, which only can kill the body, but that infects also and
destroys the soul. After this I need not mention another loss considerable in
it ^elf, but not in comparison of this which is the loss of reputation and
approbation of honest and worthy men: a long frequentation has the same effect
as precepts: and though it were possible for one to preserve himself from their
corruption; yet still people will say, Noscitur ex sociis qui non cognoscitur
ex se, and similis simili gaudet.

There is another sort not so bad as the former, but sufficiently bad to do
mischief; they go another way to work; and at the first sight they appear not
to be what they are; but they are careful not to give a public offense, but
after a short time of acquaintance they will make themselves known to be
debauched and vicious; yea, and some cheats and trapanners: now a tender spirit
not well grounded or confirmed in the Principles and ways of Virtue, will be
shaken and perverted by the suggestions of such, and he will hardly have
strength enough to resist the violence of Vices, which in great numbers will
crowd upon him; therefore he who has a mind to be good, must not go into the
company of evil men: for Joseph himself learned in Egypt to swear by the life
of Pharaoh.

I said elsewhere that every Nation has some particular Vices and Virtues; In
the Preface of my Relation of Italy.
experience teaches us, that drunkenness is predominant in the North, and
North-east parts of Europe, as Luxury is the Master sin of the South, and
South-west parts of it. Now it is a sad case, when a North Country Gentleman
coming into Spain, or Italy; not only learns the Vices of those Countries, but
also practices those of his own: to do it, he must have some of his own
Contrymen, who have learned that fashion at home, and are loath and unwilling
to forget it: See here the inconveniency of frequenting abroad his own
Contrymen, for in all Italy and Spain you can hardly find ten men to drink
and fuddle with Strangers. When a young man has so great a mind to be with his
Contrymen, it were better for him to stay at home; but when he finds some
sober and civil person, he may sometimes keep company with such an one if they
be willing to forbear speaking their mother tongue, and falling into any evil
courses; though except they be near relations, or very good friends, they will
do well to be civil, but not very familiar one with another. Hereupon it must
be the Governors prudence to prevent such acquaintances as are attended with
inconveniences; or at least let him take heed lest his charge be the worse for
it: and as sometimes there is a necessity to remove, Parents must take care
ever to have them supplied beforehand with moneys.

Let drunkenness be avoided, and the company of those who by their example
entice one to it. This Vice not only suspends the use of reason, and makes it
forfeited for a time; but also it renders men worse than beasts: Let a Horse,
an Ox, or a Dog be led to the water, they will drink no more than they have
need of, do what you can to them; because nature is thereby satisfied: but some
men will force their own to take that which it wants not, and which it cannot
bear; and is often forced with pains to be disburthened of: Hence arise
Headaches, indigestion of Stomach, Surfeits, Gouts, Dropsies, Apoplexies, and
many other distempers, which do precipitate a man into his Grave. If men in
drink could see their faces, their looks, their reeling and staggering
postures; hear their stammerings, and non-sensical discourses, they would be
ashamed so to abuse themselves, and the creatures which God has given them to
be used with sobriety and thanksgiving. Why should they be prostituted to the
passion and inordinate lust of those who as St. Paul says, Romans 8.
make the whole work of Creation sigh and groan, and expose it to that bondage,
out of which it shall at last be delivered. Drunkenness is the cause of most or
all mischiefs: hence come quarrels, blows, wounds, bruises, and often death.
Who has woe? Prove. 23.
who has sorrow? who has contentions, babbling, wounds without cause, redness
of eyes, they that tarry long at the wine, etc. This Vice is commonly the
fomenter of Luxury; for Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, it is as the bait
to it; and what wood is to the fire, that same drunkenness and gluttony are to
Luxury: therefore one said well, Tollas ligna foco si vis extinguere flammas,
Si veneris motus, otia, vina, dapes.
Horace having said of Hercules, De Art Poet.
Multa tulit fecitque puer sudavit and alsit, adds the Verse immediattly
following, Abstinuit venere and vino. -- He abstained from women and wine, as
of two great enemies to virtuous men.

It is said of one, who one day being asked which of these three sins he
thought to be the least, Drunkenness; Murder of a Father, or Incest, answered,
Drunkenness, which he being given to, one night he went home drunk, went in and
lay with his Mother, whilst she was asleep, and then killed his Father for
censuring of him. Whether or not this was true, it matters not much; but this
is a certain truth, how a drunken man is capable of doing or suffering any
possible mischief. It is a wonder if a man given to this Vice be good in any
relation; he is apt to kill, to steal, to commit Adultery, to play his Estate
away; he is unfit for any employment: He who cannot rule himself, is not able
to govern others, nor to manage any affair, whether public or private; for he
cannot keep a secret, whether his own or another man^, in vino veritas: when he
is known to be given to drink, others will play upon him in that way, and pump
out what he has in his heart. History both ancient and modern affords us
examples of great and important designs which miscarried through this; which
although it be every where a vile vice, yet it is more dangerous abroad than at
home: for where a man is known, others will bear with him when he is in such
fits, and not much heed what he says or does; but in Foreign parts, strangers
will not suffer the extravagancies which men commit when they are in this
condition, but will chastise them for it. St. Paul says, they who are drunken,
are drunken in the night, because darkness hides the vice, and frees them from
the shame; but these seem to brave all the world, committing it in the sight of
the Sun, and go abroad only, as it were, to let other Nations see how vicious
they are, which is a great dishonor to themselves, and disparagement to the
Nation they are of; for others will be apt to think there is many such others
in their Country: wherefore as they tender the credit of their Nation, the
honor of their Family, and their own reputation; if they pretend to any, let
them avoid drunkenness, whereby their life is every day in danger, and
jeopardy: and if they will be drunk, let them be so at home, and not do that
wrong to sober persons of their own Nation, whom thus they cause to be thought
to be such as they are, being all Countrymen; if they have not the fear of God
before their eyes, who excludes drunkards from the Kingdom of Heaven; let them
tremble at the dangers which every day hang over their heads, they are loath to
break good fellowship, but matter not to venture their soul, life, health,
reputation, and estate: they will drink say they, but a glass of Wine with a
friend, then the glass is followed with another, and this with a bottle, and
many more; so that the Verse will be true. Pinta traht pintam sequitur mox,
altera pinta,
Et sic post pintas nascitur ebrietas.
Amongst the several laws made by Lycurgus, there was none against drunkenness,
which he being asked the reason of, answered, that Vice is attended with its
punishments, shame, headaches, distempers, etc.

The company of dishonest Women is also to be avoided, which is the more
dangerous, because the desire of it is so natural; yet one must strive against
Lust, which when it has conceived, James 1. Genesis 3.12.
it brings forth sin. Adam could say, the Wife which thou have given me made
me eat the Fruit of the forbidden Tree. This has been a stumbling block to
many a good and great man. David had a sore fall in the case of Bersheba; and
Women turned away Solomon's heart from following his God: He who in his Book of
Proverbs had given so excellent lessons against this sin, saying, Chap. 2.
Chap. 5. Chap. 6. Chap. 7. from 10. to 24.
Wisdom will deliver one from a strange woman, whose end is bitter as wormwood:
she is called an evil woman, by whose means a man is brought to a piece of
bread: she leads one to death and destruction, and many such places. This
caused the destruction of the Trojan Empire, which once was so flourishing. For
this the Tarquins were expelled out of Rome, and by the accident of Virginia,
the Decemvirs were turned out. And if King Rodrigo of Castille had not ravished
the honor of Count Iuliano's Daughter, this Count had not brought into Spain
the Saracens to be avenged of that injury. Solomon says, Prove. 6.
jealousy is the rage of a man, who will not spare in the day of vengeance.
Sampson and Hercules perished by these means, which made a Poet to say, Quis
Samsone fuit? quis fortior Hercule? constat,
Foemineis ambos succubuisse thoris. Verin.

Spaniards say well, Guerra, Caca, y amores,
Por un placer mil dolores.
War, Hunting, Love, give bad morrows,
For one pleasure a thousand sorrows.


Without going so far back to find in ancient Histories, examples of damages
befallen great States through an inordinate love for Women, there is a modern
one very remarkable, which has caused an unspeakable prejudice to the Spanish
Monarchy.

Philip II. fell passionately in love with Anna Mendozza, a beautiful Widow of
Ruygomez de Sylva, formerly a Minister and great Favorite of that King, and
made confident of this passion, his Secretary of State Antonio Perez, who
instead of serving his Master, spoke for himself, and had his desire, which
could not be done so secretly, but that Escovedo, Secretary to Don Iuan of
Austria, and newly arrived out of Flanders, heard of it, and acquainted the
King therewith; with a design thereby to undo Perez, who in the Council opposed
Don Iuan's concerns.

Whereupon the King incensed, took a resolution to destroy both Escovedo and
Perez: the first, because with his Counsels he encouraged Don Iuan to make
himself Master of Flanders; and the last because he was become his rival and
had betrayed the trust he had put in him: so he took Perez's advice to have
Escovedo murdered, and committed the execution to the care of the Author of
the Council, which was soon done out of a great desire he had to satisfy the
Lady incensed against the other: but after the Murder, Escovedos Children
prosecuting the business against the Lady and Perez, the first was sent to
prison, and the last suspended of his Charges, and deprived of his Pensions,
for the space of six years, living privately in Madrid; when a new accusation
being brought against him by the same Children of Escovedo; namely, that he had
received 10000. Crowns of Gold from the Grand Duke, and betrayed the King's
secrets to Don Iuan, he was condemned to pay 30000. Crowns of Gold, (worth
about nine shillings a piece) to two years imprisonment, and eight of
banishment. In the mean time, the King, by means of his Confessor, offered to
him to make the Sentence null and void, if he would but deliver back the
Letters he had under the King's hands concerning the Murder, which he refusing
to do, was cast into a close prison, yet at last with the Kings consent, he
came to an agreement with Escovedo's Family, to whom he paid 5000 l. which
according to the King's desire, impoverished him: but at last, Philip being
resolved to clear himself of the Murder, with bringing the Author to
punishment, he was put to the Wrack, confessed the fact, and excused it upon
the King's Command, whose Letters he produced: after which, knowing the King
would never forgive him, and that though he had accused his Master, yet he had
not cleared himself, he made a shift to escape out of Prison, and in one day
went a hundred and fifty miles into Arragon; his Country, where the Justice
promised him protection: but the King having brought an Army, under this
pretense to deprive that Kingdom of its privileges, and prevailed, he fled
into France, where he was well received, and found a sure Sanctuary, and
discovered to the French King all the secrets and Mysteries of State of Spain,
and how to oppose them; since which time the French have made an effectual use
thereof against that Monarchy. See how many mischiefs linked together, a great
Statesman murdered, a Lady exposed to a public infamy, another great man
undone, and brought to great troubles for that adultery and murder, the whole
Kingdom of Arragon deprived of his Rights and Privileges, and the foundation
laid of the decay of the whole Spanish Monarchy.

This has been the blemish of great persons in former and later days, who went
not unpunished, for God will not suffer them to enjoy at home, that peace which
they deprive other families of. Oddo Antonio, Duke of Urbino, was killed by his
people, for being too familiar with their Wives, Daughters, and Sisters.
No doubt it is difficult to be chaste amidst so many enticements to
voluptuousness, except through the fear of God they be overcome with a flight
from occasions, mastering of our senses, and with Job, making a covenant with
our eyes. Men ought to consider, that the beauty they so much idolize is but as
a flower of the field, which the least distemper can dry up, age wear out,
death and worms destroy and corrupt.

These kind of Women love nothing but themselves, or else love all men alike;
because their moneys are their end, and their own interest is the principle
they are acted by: who can tell how many shares are laid against young men.
Upon this account let a young Traveller seriously look to it; for in several
places it is as much as his life is worth, which upon that account lies often
at the stake; therefore he must take heed not to run into such premunires,
which often distemper or destroy their body, and endanger their soul and life.
Therefore one must carry himself with great prudence, avoiding evil and
offense, falling upon the practice of temperance; which, that it be true, ought
to receive Being from reason, whereby the appetite concupiscible must be ruled;
for if she has not the command of it to moderate the impetuosity of its
motion, man is in a sad condition; for imagination having been corrupt by that
appetite, whilst blood is young and hot, and used to please it, not being able
to shake off that habit, will take her turn to solicit him thereunto, when his
strength and vigor have failed him; so that a man shall not be free of
disquietness, caused through incontinency, although he be not in a capacity to
satisfy it: but when reason has mastered this appetite, there is a pleasant
harmony between the inward and outward parts, and a decent modesty appears in
the ordinary actions of temperate men, Against this sinned Diogenes, who used
sometimes to lie with his Wife in the open street; upon which account, as well
as any other, he deserved the name of Cynick, or doggish. Things may be lawful
at certain times and places, which are not so, nor expedient in others, but to
perfect temperance, when reason has so gotten the upper hand of Lust, and that
appetite I named before, it is necessary there should be a fixed and constant
resolution so to continue, for to be temperate at one time, and incontinent at
another, is not true temperance, but effects of an inconstant temper, seeing
virtue is ever regular, always the same, and never contradicts her self:
Farther, a man cannot be called chaste and temperate, when either distempers,
old age, or other accidents have mortified his lusts, which he left not, but
has been left by them, nor when he changes that sin into another. -- Nani
frustra vitium vitaveris illud, Horat. lib. 2. sat. 2.

Si te alio pravum detorseris --
Fables do represent sensual pleasure in the shape of a Child, naked, blind,
with wings in his back, a bow in one hand, and a torch in the other: a Child,
because that passion becomes none so well as youth, and infancy is a mark of
want of judgment; his ever being a Child is a sign of his continuing foolish,
and never growing wise: naked it strips of all, those who are given to it, and
brings no good to any; blind, because it puts out the eye of conduct, and
hinders it from seeing the imperfections of what is loved: wings on his back,
because it is inconstant and apt to fly away: a bow in one hand, and a torch
in the other, to show how incontinency, causes nothing but war and fire. Hence
also we learn, that seeing love is blind, he cannot pick us out of a crowd to
hurt us, except we draw and stand near to him: let us stand at a distance, and
with the light of his torch we shall be able to see his rash inconsiderateness
in his infancy, his shame in his nakedness, and his errors and failings in his
blindness. In the case of Paris the Trojan, we see what miscarriages it causes
men to commit; for a flower already gathered, it makes him leave the plenty of
all things, and the glory of Arms and Sciences, which he might have chosen: to
attain unto his lewd ends, it made him break the most sacred right of
hospitality, and during a War of ten years, which he was the cause of, he never
appeared in the Counsel, or in Arms but twice; once in a cowardly way to kill a
valiant man, and another himself to be overcome: who then can but abhor a
desire so filthy in its beginning, perfidious in his progress, painful in the
prosecution thereof, dangerous in its execution, whereof the end is so often
attended with distaste, shame, and utter ruin: therefore let youth, whose hot
blood boiling in their veins, are so disposed to entertain and be led by it, be
taken up with good employments: thus one will overcome the son and the mother,
a lascivious love and idleness, and bridle those violent desires: I say
lascivious, for there is an honest love, which having a good object, and being
well directed, does tend to a good end, and causes no inconveniences.

The company of Gamesters is also carefully to be avoided, because of the great
and many inconveniences caused by gaming. I intend not herein to speak against
honest sports, and lawful recreations; for this is necessary for young
Gentlemen, to divert and refresh their spirits; but I mean those Games which
have more of hazard than of skill; as are Dicing and Carding, of which there is
no end, and go extraordinarily fast; and those Gamesters who make profession of
Gaming, who live by, and cannot be without it. Sometimes one may for company
sake, and for pleasure, play one hour or two, but not to be able to forbear,
and be constantly at it, is a thing which prudent and rational men will
disapprove and condemn: These kinds of sport are so bewitching, that when once
a man is possessed with it, he cannot leave it off, specially when he plays for
much, and is concerned: for when a man loses, he is still in hopes the chance
will turn on his side: if he gets, that greediness of winning more and more,
will still make him stick to it, whereby he will be engaged to venture very
deep; so that at last his whole estate will lie at stake: all other expenses of
clothes, d^et, housekeeping, etc. may be regulated, but this has no limits,
and knows of no bounds: those who have nothing, or very little to lose, may
venture when they have advantage upon others; but for men who have good
Estates, to play whether these Estates shall be theirs or others, is (I think)
a great imprudence, if not a folly. Gaming is commonly attended with sad
effects, as Oaths, Curses, Blasphemies, Cheating, Quarrels, Ruin, and
Destruction of whole Families: In these kinds of things is a great deal of
knavery; they who are much given to it, studying tricks, and cunningly how to
trapan others: by these means, one who over night was rich, may happen to be a
beggar the next morning; neither do we see them prosper who get moneys by
gaming, the chance turning very often, so that the gain of one day shall be
lost at another; and that ^s constantly wheeling: for though many are undone
with gaming, we hardly meet with one who made his fortune by it: although there
may happen to be some very few, who having gotten something, do retire and give
over for a time; yet at last that fancy comes upon them, and cannot forbear,
but fall to it again, so they can never say any thing they have is their own;
for as it is ill gotten, so it is usually ill spent; the inconstancy of fortune
not allowing it very long to favor one man, her wheel being constantly upon a
motion. This made the Emperor Charles V. to say, but upon a more noble account,
Fortune being a Woman, loves to favor Youth more than old age: she is best
pleased with new objects, for she forsook him to favor Henry II. of France; as
of old she had left Annibals part to be on Scipio's side: it is therefore
prudence to trust to her as little as can be. That which the world calls
Fortune, we must name Providence, even in things of seeming chance; for Solomon
says, The lot is cast into the lap, but that which comes is from the Lord;
which providence men do tempt when they venture too far without grounds.

It Is therefore a thing worthy the care of Princes to stop gaming, and keep it
within bounds; thereby to prevent the ruin of particular persons: whereas in
some kind the State becomes a sufferer: therefore in some Countries Laws are
made against it, to curb those frenetical fits which some men are taken with.
There are too many of those who are so infatuated with it, that they will lose
their meat and drink, and be deprived of their rest; sitting up late, and
rising early* to humor themselves in it; their mind perpetually running upon it:
so that this exorbitant passion must needs be a great torment to them, whereby
they are kept from enjoying themselves. Whilst they are at play, ever they are
greedy of gain, and fearful to lose; still tossed with uncertainty, that proves
a pain to them: and when they do not play, they are restless, because far from
their center, and from their element.

Tennis, Bowling, the Mall, and such like, are not Games, but Exercises, which
men love according to their age, disposition, or inclination: these, as they
promote health, so the worst they can do, is to tire the body, and bring little
or no inconvenience upon the mind and purse: but for Cards and Dice it is
otherwise. If one before he be given to them, would but see Gaming-houses, and
take serious notice of the trouble and agitation of Gamesters, the disquietness
of winners, the despair of losers, the quarrels, oaths, and blasphemies that
are there, I am persuaded he would abhor them. Those sorts of sports, wherein
so much does not depend upon hazard, but part is left to conduct and skill, may
be tolerable; but withal, as out of gaming, several get means to satisfy their
pleasures so many are unfaithful in a thing whence they hope to reap much
advantage, which is the cause of much cheating, and other evils, which I
mentioned before.

After this, let every rational man judge of the weighty reasons a Governor
has to make his Gentleman avoid the company of such, when unhappily they meet
with them abroad, and this whether or not they be Contrymen; for in such a
case all ought equally to be avoided; and often Contrymen prove more
dangerous than others, by reason of the convenience of the Language, and
because they are less suspected to be cheats: yet as our Savior says, a man's
enemies are those of his own house. I have seen abroad men of other Nations,
who, in an afternoon, having lost the moneys they had, which should have served
at least half a year, and then their clothes, and what other things they had,
were dragged to prison, and left almost to rot therein. Such examples ought to
make those who come after to be the more careful and wise, at the costs of
others, not only to avoid the evil, but also the very danger and occasions; for
such things in a foreign Country do sometimes reduce a man to great straights,
so that in this one ought to know his strength, and how far he is able to go.

In the discharge of this, let the Governor be prepared to crosses, but let him
resolvedly go on, and not be moved thereat; for some of those Contrymen or
others lighting upon a raw young man, conceive thoughts to make a prey of him:
and as he is not cunning enough to deal with them, they will lay so many snares
that it will be hard for him not to fall into one or other of them; they will
play for what moneys he has, for his clothes, then upon his parole, and his
hand writing, when he has lost, they will combine, and bett against him, then
play false, when they are on his side; and in case he will not dance as they
pipe, they will go about to huff and hector him to it: but when the Governor
knows the world, and smells out these tricks, if he goes about to prevent
them, they being angry to be disappointed, and to see their designs split, will
fly out against him, raising a thousand lies and slanders, and inventing many
passionate stories to spit out their venom, which wise and prudent men will
never mind nor believe; and which at last will turn to the shame and confusion
of the authors. Let him not stumble at these blocks laid in his way, but go
through in the faithful discharge of his trust, being satisfied with the
testimony of his conscience, and the approbation of good, judicious, and
impartial men, who also will slight another aspersion which such persons would
cast upon him, that he is an enemy to the Nation, and Country, because he
hinders a young Gentleman committed to his care from going into the company of
debauched Countrymen. They who are inclined to, or guilty of such things as I
named, will take exceptions at it, when persons of noble and virtuous
principles will hate these things, and declare themselves against those who
commit them.

However some young Gentlemen are of such temper, as to receive these
impressions, and upon the consideration of some different tempers, I had rather
to deal with an ignorant, giddy young Gentleman, than with one who has a
malicious, dissembling and ungrateful nature; for there are hopes of the
former, who may be capable of good counsel when he is far from evil company, he
may learn, and know, and have his judgment informed by experience and advice;
but when the heart is rotten and false, it is beyond remedy without a miracle,
which none but God is able to effect. Upon this account it is a great
discouragement to see a young Gentleman act against his own interest; and to
prefer the evil counsels of those who have designs upon him, or are debauched,
before the advice of his Governor, whose care and interest are to keep him from
inconveniences: but the worst of all is, that when the Governor has been about
dissuading him from keeping such a man's company, for such and such causes; then
upon the next occasion, he tells the party concerned, every thing his Governor
said to him. Thus his care and faithfulness are ill requited, and instead of
becoming his friend, as thereby he is bound, he makes him sensible of his
ungratefulness, with raising new enemies against him; and when any thing
happens amiss, the Governor who used all possible means to prevent it, must be
charged with it; for some young men do sometimes think that the way to clear
themselves, is (though never so wrongfully) to father it upon the Governor,
which to bring about, they make it their whole study, and as sometimes they
engage some of their Relations to comply with them, these also do think their
credit so far engaged, as right or wrong thoroughly to concur with the young
Gentleman.

Hitherto I showed how a young Traveller ought to avoid bad company, because
through evil examples he is led to evil courses. Now I will use another reason,
viz. they give him evil counsel, which to speed in the be^ter, they will
endeavor to insinuate themselves through flattery, which is very dangerous,
because it suits with our inward desire, it being natural and ordinary for men
to love to be praised and flattered. If they see this bait like to take, if he
be prodigal they will say he is liberal; if he be covetous, they will call him
saving and frugal; to their cruelty they give the name of justice, and of
valor to their rashness and temerity: his cowardliness they will name
^^udence, his treachery a piece of wit, and his dullness a grave and serious
temper: whatsoever he says in his ordinary discourse, they will applaud unto,
and approve of all his opinions, let them be never so false, unjust or
unreasonable. I confess it is he sometimes to commend youth for what he has
not done, only to oblige and encourage him to do it, which perhaps is one of the
best ways to excite Princes and great ones (to whom directly to speak, is
dangerous) to virtue; and also because truth leans upon justice, and modesty,
as it is fit to be modest when a man speaks of himself, and just when he
speaks of others; yet I cannot approve that a man's vices shall be called
virtues, thereby to be confirmed and encouraged in evil courses. By the means
of such flatteries, men often are much lifted up; as we read of the Physician
Menecrates, who happily having cured several people, through a popular flattery
was called Jupiter; whereat he was so proud, that in the superscription of one
of his Letters, he did write Menecrates Jupiter to Agesilaus, salus, or
greeting, but that King knowing he wanted the Ellebore he gave to others,
answered him thus, Agesilaus to Menecrates, sanitas health. Indeed the two
common vices of conversation are, to commend himself, and perpetually to
applaud others: and there are those in the world, who as soon as they are in
company, begin to flatter one or other, and expect the like returns; for,
asinus, asinum fricat: but Italians wisely say, Chi me fa carezze piu di quel'
che suole,
O m'a tradito, o tradir me vuole.
that is, He who makes of me more than he u^es to do, either has betrayed me,
or has a mind to betray me: ever flatterers have some ends of their own, yet
such cannot abide to be told of their faults. A strange thing, that men would
chu^e to be obliged (if I may so say) to their enemies for reproving of their
faults, rather than to their friends, who would lovingly tell them thereof. But
they who through flattery do corrupt the nature of Princes, or men in public
places, or infuse into them any thing else that is pernicious, ought to be as
abominable as those who throw a deadly poison into a public fountain.

Compliance is a good quality, very different from flattery, though to a common
eye it appears very like: this is somewhat necessary, for it gives credit with
those whom he is to deal with, whether Princes or Subjects, and oftentimes this
is successfully used to withdraw from vice, and set one in the way of virtue;
but in it are required a great dexterity, and integrity: and I believe, hence I
may draw one of the best advices, which in relation to a civil life may be
given to a man, whether young or old, though it may be more proper to what is
called courtesy. If any one propounds to himself to win the hearts in a
commendable way, and not by flattery, let him so behave himself in his
receptions, discourses, and conversation that youth may therein find mirth,
women modesty, men civility, old people respect, and all a taking sweetness;
this is the way to be sought after for company. On the contrary, every one
^lies from those whose conversation is troublesome, peevish, tedious, and
difficult; who, under pretense of freedom and liberty, gainsay the opinions,
break the designs, and never are of the mind of others. Lucullus at last was
such a one, who thought it below a man of authority to comply with those that
were under him: so after that, as Plutarch observes in his life, he did not so
brave things as he acted before, for he lost the love of his Soldiers. No doubt
but that Alexander the Great, and Caesar owed most part of their great
achievements and conquests to that obliging carriage, whereby they got the
affection of their Armies; for it is most certain that a cheerful look, a
smiling countenance, a winning gesture, a demonstration of a desire to serve, a
care to enquire after occasions of doing pleasure and service to others, and to
save them the trouble and shame to ask, preventing their petitions with a
grant, and going about to do all good turns and offices of kindness and
humanity, will certainly get an interest in, and power over the hearts of men,
provided one does not degenerate into a sneaking flattery, and affected
demonstrations of respect and humility.

These flatteries some are able to withstand. We read of Antigonus, how a
Parasite having said to him upon a certain occasion, All things are honest and
lawful for Kings, Plutarch in Apophtegmatibus.
answered, It is so for those who rule over Barbarians; but they who are set
over civilized and rational Nations, will govern according to rules, and not in
an arbitrary way. Certainly, the superiority of some, and the subjection o^
others, is not of a natural right, but of the right of Nations; for nature
makes all men equal: also it is much for the ease and convenience of those who
command, and others who obey when there are laws known to them all; which Laws
the Sovereign has power and right to make to enlarge, and to explain which
subjects may not pretend to.

With this way of ^lattery, they who have designs upon others, dispose them to
receive their impressions; if a Governor be a rub in their way, to seem wiser
than the Parents who thought fit to give them one to direct their Travels: they
will say, What need have you of a Governor, you are wise and old enough to
govern your self? why will you any longer be ruled by such a one? Many more
malicious things they will suggest to him, who not being wise enough to find
out their end, which is to put a division between him and the Governor, thereby
to take advantage of him, will be wrought upon by such discourses; and the next
thing will be to fall out with his Director, to slight his person, reject his
advice, and gainsay him in every thing; he will neglect his Exercises, fall to
unnecessary expenses; and, out of spite to him, he will commit extravagancies,
whereby he disparages himself, and incurs his friends displeasure when they are
acquainted with it.

In the next place, this will make him to be conceited of himself, think he is
wiser than all his teachers, and able not to rule himself only, but the whole
world besides, whereat he will swell with pride, and scorn every thing but
himself; not considering, that God withstandeth the proud, and shows mercy to
the humble; and that there is no humane power but stands in want of one thing
or other (self-sufficiency being an incommunicable attribute of God) nor no
condition so low but at one time or other may prove useful to some: Schaddai.
why should a worm be puffed up as a bubble, upon no ground but the suggestions
of sycophants, and flatterers: Thus he becomes odious to God, and man; for the
proud is an abomination unto the Lord: It is the sin of Adam, and of the Devil;
for evil Angels fall through pride, which, as Solomon says, Prove. 16.
Goes before destruction: See the effects of bad counsel given to credulous
youth.

But he will go farther, and because he is of a noble and honorable family, he
will boast of his great quality and extraction, and look very big upon others;
but he ought to show it by his carriage, more than by his words, or else this
makes against him: for it is virtue and merit which first of all did put a
difference between men: by these means his Ancestors were raised to honor; not
that he should brag of, but imitate them. Certainly it is a great advantage to
be well born, for usually there runs better blood in the veins of such, than in
those of a lower extraction; because, Hor. lib. 4. od. 4. yet not always ^rue.
Fortes creantur fortibus,
Nec imbecillem feroces,
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
Then care is taken to give them a breeding suitable to their quality, and want
no means to acquire knowledge and virtue: but if they be vicious, they dishonor
their families, become rotten branches of a noble stock, and their illustrious
Ancestors do reprove, and are as many witnesses against them: Why then should
one boast of what is not his own: for, Quae genus aut proavi, aut quae non
fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco. Ovid.

They have given him an example, which he ought to follow, and to succeed in
their virtues as well as in their honors and e^tates, to have merely the title
of nobleness, and not the good qualities of a Nobleman, is but a shadow, and a
chimera in his fancy, not in reality. The denomination of a man must be from
his better part; now if his soul, which is his noblest part, be void of good
endowments, empty of noble ornaments, and stained with low, unworthy, and
vicious inclinations, what can the body contribute to make him a Nobleman
indeed, though he be begotten by noble Parents, which is sometimes
questionable; for it is very hard to prove every Mother, Grandmother, and so
upward, to have been chaste and Lucretia like. I am of the mind of Iuvenal, in
that excellent Satyr of his against those I am now endeavoring to mortify.
Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Satyr.
if one be noble, I will respect that bare quality of his, and nothing else;
but if he nobly born and virtuous, he shall receive my whole respect, esteem,
and admiration: it were better for a vicious idle man to be born amongst the
commonalty, and of obscure Parents, than amongst the Nobility; for then he
would not have so great influences upon others, so much to answer for, and his
vices amidst the crowd of people, would not be so much taken notice of, instead
that his quality makes them more conspicuous, and therewith do a greater
mischief. In a word, whosoever grows proud on this or other accounts, will find
the truth of a Proverb in an outlandish tongue, which I render in English, He
who flies higher than he should,
Can be brought lower than he would.


I will add, that they who are noble indeed, do consider they came into the
world, and shall go out of it like others; for in this, nature has made no
difference, it being the lot of all that are born, to die; and therefore
instead of growing proud of their extraction, they look upon themselves as
lights set over others to have influences, give them good examples, and to be
as much above them in virtue, as they are in nobleness of birth; and as they
are so high by it, that they see no lawful means to ascend higher, they take
another way wherein they succeed, which is, to raise themselves by humility:
the higher their extraction is, the lower they humble themselves; and this
virtue which in men of a low degree may be an effect of necessity, is in them a
voluntary action. To see poor people humble, is no great matter, but to see
illustrious persons practice humility, is worth the praises and admiration of
all. This is the secret, and the way to be honorable, and great: they who are
otherwise minded, let them remember what said a great, a rich, and as glorious
a King as ever was. Solomon more than once in his Book of Ecclesiastes, says,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, and a gnawing worm, vexation of spirit. I
speak to Christians, who ought to consider the vanity and inconstancy of
honors, by the experience of all ages, which afford us so many examples of
revolutions; and the higher the fall, the more dangerous it is: all sublunary
things being subject to change, alteration, and decay. One who is to day a
beggar, sometimes can the next day be potent and mighty. Kings themselves are
too often tumbled down from their Throne, which if Princes are subject to, what
must Subjects look for, let them be never so potent. To have honor is not in
our power, neither does it depend upon us; they who bestow it upon us when we
do not deserve, will sometimes deny it to us when we are worthy of it, or out
of a groundless suspicion deprive us thereof, after we enjoyed it for a time:
and oftentimes we owe honor to favor or fancy, more than to merit. High
charges, the Diadem, and Kingship it self are heavy burdens, subject to
inconstancy and revolutions; therefore says Maximilian an Emperor, if one knew
well how difficult it is to rule, and how many thorns are fastened to a Royal
Crown, if he see it on the ground he would not vouchsafe to take it up. And
suppose we could have a quiet possession of all these honors and dignities, and
they should not forsake us, yet at last we must leave them all, they cannot
follow us farther than the Grave; Crowns Scepters, and Thrones, at last come to
break and split at deaths feet, and between Scepters and Ploughs she makes no
difference: This the Poet knew when he said, Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede
pauperum tabernas,
Regumque turres -- Horat.

Let one seriously and with attention look into himself; and though he be never
so highly born, he will find sufficient grounds of humility. Notice may be
taken of some good French lines on this subject; they run thus, Qui bien se
mire, bien se void,
Qui bien se void, bien se conoit,
Qui bien se conoit pe^ se prise,
Qui pen se prise sage est
Qui sage est s'immortalize,
Et se rend un homme parfait.


In a word, the sense of them is this; he who looks well into himself, will
know himself well; then he will not much value himself, wherein he will prove
to be a wise and a perfect man. Thus it must be the care of a Governor to beat
out of a young man's heart that pride and behavior which arises from the
consideration of his noble birth.

And as he must not boast of his Honor and Extraction, so I would not have him
to brag of his Riches; Seeing a man has nothing but what he has received, why
should he boast o^ it, even his necessaries, as Clothes, which make the
greatest part of his pomp, though Purple and Scarlet were first upon the back^
of Brutes, or he is beholding to Brutes for them.
for the same evil flatterers will say to him, What need you to stand upon
small charges, you are a person born to a great estate; you must live highly
and according to it? which is only said to engage him to profusene^s; but first
the question is not, what estate he is born to, but what his Father, who has
the Estate in his hand is pleased to allow him, who is not to undo his other
Children to humor this in his debauchedness and prodigality: When a Governor
says to him, your Father allows but so much, therefore, according to the arm,
the sleeve; and so you must forbear such and such occasions of spending: yet
the Governor may represent to the Father, that this allowance ought to be
competent to bear his necessary charges, and those which are fit and convenient
for his necessary improvement: however he cannot positively say how much a year
will serve, there being accidental expenses, and it being uncertain how
expensive the young man will be; yet the Father is to decide how high and how
low he will have him to live. It is fit and decent for one to live somewhat
sutably to his quality; but still I say the mind and pleasure of Parents who
have the purse, must be the rule of it: as for necessary expenses, they ought
to be allowed: unnecessary ones, except one has some credit thereby; and if
they rise high, may very well be spared; for a small matter a young Gentleman
must receive no distaste or discouragement, yet he is to keep within bounds, for
to be every day at it would prove a trouble and a burden.

I will say farther, that a man does not travel to spend as an end of his
journey, but as means which he cannot travel without: and therefore let a man
be of great quality, or heir apparent to a great estate, if in a Foreign
Country he spends on all hands, and not upon good accounts, he will be laughed
at, and become ridiculous: it is no good argument to say, because they are
Noblemen or Gentlemen, therefore they must lavish and be profuse; for nobleness
and gentility are not to be known by vanity and extravagant expenses, but by
virtue and honorable actions: and that which upon this account some call
generosity or liberality, will be found to be profuseness and prodigality. A
young Gentleman under age, and in a strange Country, must not stand upon these
things, because his time for it is not come; he does not travel to make people
see he is of a generous and of a liberal disposition, but to learn frugality,
and how to manage an estate when it falls into his hands.

Matter of expenses is indeed one of the most difficult parts of a Tutors task,
youth being naturally inclined to spend, but some in an exorbitant and an
extraordinary way, who make it their whole business how to spend, who would buy
every thing they see, yet matter not how nor when it shall be paid; but as
these tender their credit, and liberty, which is in danger if they pay not, let
them buy nothing but what they are able and willing to pay; for to take and
promise to pay, yet to laugh at people when they come to ask moneys, is very
dishonest, and unbecoming a Gentleman: at least let them give good words, A
young man ought to say to his Governor, I have occasion for such things, and
then they must agree amongst them, whether or not it is fit, necessary, or
convenient it should be done, then the Governor goes with him to buy and pay
for it, or else he makes it his own debt; so that hereby the Gentleman is free
from trouble: but if he would buy himself, as he does not know the price of
things, he is in danger of being cheated: and in case the Governor refuses to
pay the debt, as being contracted without his knowledge and consent, and upon
no necessary account, then those who trusted will fall upon him, and do him an
affront; the same Governor must lay hold on such occasions to make him sensible
of the danger he runs into, and of the disparagement he brings upon himself in
so doing, and yet handsomely come off and pay the debt: but if the young man be
wholly given to expensiveness, conceals it from him, studies how to run into
debt, and gives him a perpetual trouble to go to and fro, only to hinder he
should not indebt himself, after he has tried all fair and possible means to
divert him from it, and acquainted Parents with the case, his last remedy is as
prudently and handsomely as he can to break his credit, and forbid people to
trust him; or else Fathers would lay it to his charge, and blame him for these
debts so contracted; thereupon he frees himself from farther troubles: for the
Creditors can do nothing to him, his Gentleman being considered as one under
age, who may not engage himself without his consent, and who is to him instead
of a Father, by the universal care he takes of his affairs; and the Pupil has
no just ground to complain of this, for it is a service rather than an injury
to take by the hair, one who is upon the edge of a precipice.

Out of this a young Gentleman may see what a fine pass he brings himself to,
with following evil counsel, or his own profuse inclination, he dishonours
himself, makes the rest of the time of his abode shameful and uncomfortable,
brings a discredit upon his Nation, and deprives his Countrymen who come
after him, of the marks of civility and kindness, from people in those parts,
which he has forfeited; whereof the news being brought home, he lies under the
shame and blemish also: but because out of every thing and accident, the
Governor ought to have him make observations, whether Christian, moral, or
politic, he will do well to lay hold upon this occasion, that he is born to a
great estate; and let him know the vanity and deceitfulness of riches, which
therefore he ought not to trust to, it being uncertain whether he shall ever
enjoy them, for they may be lost through so many accidents before he is able to
come to them, Matthew. 6.
Moth and rust do corrupt; and where thieves break through and steal: and
though this should not happen, there is nothing more deceitful than riches;
Prove. 23.5.
for certainly they make themselves wings and fly away: upon this account St.
Paul bids Timothy to charge them that are rich in this world, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches: very often they
prove to be snares, for the love of them is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 9.10.
and they hinder the good effect of the word, for they choke it, and becomes
unfruitful; and lastly, they exclude us from the Kingdom of Heaven; Luke 18.25.
for it is easier for a camel to go through a needles eye, than for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God; which St. Mark explains of them that trust in
riches. Mark 10.24.


Besides, the ways already named, wherewith these evil company of flatterers
use to corrupt an unexperienced young man, they have another, Judges 16.
which is, to advise him to cherish those Dalilahs which lay in his bosom, and
to give himself to his pleasures; hanged, say they, a thousand pounds of
melancholy could never pay an ounce of debts; wherefore shall we break our
hearts, and deprive our selves of the pleasures of life? but the Governor must
show him the emptiness of these, that they are but vanity, yea lighter than
vanity it self, which may well be compared to the drop in the bucket, and to
the dust in the balance: I would know when they are past, what remains of
them, nothing but grief and repenting, the dregs thereof are full of trouble
and disquietness; for to move senses, objects must be present; but when they
are, as to the pleasure, it is just as if they never had been. This the
excellent Greek Orator Demosthenes knew well; for one day being gone to see
that famous Courtezane of his time, and asking what she would have to let him
take his desire of her, she asked him a great sum, but he being come to
himself, said, I will not buy at so dear a rate, a thing, which for certain I
should repent of: but here I do not intend to speak against innocent sports,
lawful and honest pleasures, which are allowable, provided one be moderate
therein, and they take up not too much of his time; but those I mean which in
Scripture are called pleasures of sin, Heb. 11.25.
where it is said, Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; as Joseph also, who in
Egypt had rather to suffer than to sin with his Masters Wife. A Governor ought
often to tell his young Gentleman of all these things, that they may sink into
his heart, and make a deep impression upon him, for the care of his soul is
committed to him at least as much as of his body.

From these particular Instructions the Governor may proceed to more general,
out of his condition as a Traveller he can put him in mind of this, that as he
is a man, he does not go abroad to stay altogether; but still he considers
himself as a stranger in the places he comes to, only he endeavors to fit
himself to go home better qualified than when he came away: so men are but
passengers in this world, out of which they must study to go better than when
they came into it, they have here no sure habitation; like the children of
Israel, they must go through a Wilderness before they can come into the land of
promise, heaven, of which Canaan was a type and a figure; and therefore let the
young man consider of his later end, and make provision for it; for alas, what
is this but a valley of misery, where every one from the highest to the lowest,
have their crosses, sufferings, and thorns in the flesh, and of every side,
Except our souls, nothing in this world but what is mortal and corruptible,
dust which vilest creatures do trample under feet, is the matter out of which
we were framed, 1 Pet. 1.24.
All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass, says
St. Peter. He was not the first that said so, the Prophet Isaiah had told the
same long before his time, Isa. 40.6.
James 1.10, 11.
St. James his contemporary speaking of the rich man, Dispunge and recense
vitae tuae dies and vidobis paucos, quosdam and rejiculos apud te resedisse,
Seneca de brev. vitae.
says, he shall pass away as the flower of the grass; and Scripture speaking
of the greatest and best Kings, as David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Iosia, and of the
worst, all those of Israel from Jeroboam, says, he died and was buried.

And now I am upon this subject so important to all, I will somewhat enlarge
upon it; and first, let us speak of our life, which is the dearest and most
precious thing we have in this world; for herein the Devil was in the right,
and the father of lies spoke the truth when he said, Job 2.4.
Skin for skin, yea all a man has, he will give for his life: yet David calls
it his Pilgrimage, and says, in another place, Psalm. 39.5.
I am a stranger here as all my Fathers were: He reduces it to a small matter,
to a hand breadth: And the Wiseman in one verse calls it twice by the name of
vanity. Eccles. 9.9*
This is one of the vanities he had found amongst the rest. Let Jacob be heard
speaking of this, when being brought before Pharaoh in the 130. year of his
age, he speaks thus, Genesis 47.9.
The days of the years of my pilgrimage are 130, few and evil: He who was
called a man according to God's own heart, speaking of his life, said, Psalm.
102.3.
My days are consumed like smoke, Psalm. 103.
and a man's days are as grass, as the flower of the field: not a flower of the
garden sheltered behind hedges and walls, but a flower of the field exposed to
all injuries of weather; our life then is only a dream that passes away, a
shadow, a vapor of smoke, Psalm. 102*
according to Scripture phrases; and if we make a serious reflection upon it,
Psalm. 90.10*
David confining it to 70 or 80 years, out of which, if we take away the time
we sleep, of our infancy, old age, diseases, and afflictions, it will hardly
make up fifteen years: this is the time which a man may properly be said to
live.

As to the world it self, 1 John 2.17.
it passes away with the lust thereof: that which he names the lust, St. Paul
calls it the fashion, 1 Cor. 7.31*
to show that indeed it is not that which others imagine it to be, heavens not
excepted, 2 Pet. 3.10.
for the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with a fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein shall
be burnt up. Heavens and earth shall perish, Heb. 1.11.
which St. Paul does repeat, they all shall wax old as does a garment, Ps.
102.25.26.
as a vesture shall thou fold them, and they shall be changed.

Could these things be well printed in the heart of a young Gentleman, there
would be less to do for Governors than there is; their task would be easier,
and their burden the lighter; pride and vanity grounded upon the quality and
riches of Parents being left off, which are the cause of many miscarriages,
then youth would not boast of empty, pretended privileges of Family and
Ancestors. Some say Dioge^es.
Socrates whom the Oracle of Delphos had pronounced to be the wisest man then
alive, answered one who asked him, who he was, and of what Country, that he
was a Citizen of the world: Let him be where he would, he never was out of his
own Country: first, to show a man must not stand upon the place of his birth,
or some such circumstances relating to it. Secondly, that such questions to a
man, who? what Countryman? what his name is? and what Religion he is of, are
questions without a special cause, not to be made to a man; and therefore
deserve no answer: that curiosity being contrary to a good breeding and
civility: yet with ^ome particular reason, civil expressions, and a kind of
complement with it such demands in some parts beyond Seas will be well taken,
else it will thus be interpreted, Your person is so inconsiderable, that if you
will be esteemed, you must be beholden for it to your Country and Family. It
was a strange fancy of people of old in matter of quality under which men and
women thought to shelter their faults; for if a Princess or other of high
quality had been gotten with child, either before they were married, or in the
husbands absence, they presently pretended it was by one god or other of
theirs: how many such children were fathered upon Jupiter, Neptune, Mars, etc.
so when men had gotten a child of Fornication or Adultery, they said 'twas by a
Venus, Thetis, or by the like goddesses and Nymphs; and truly if we will take
pains to examine what manner of men were they who were thus begotten, we will
find that many of the bravest and most noted men in the world, were natural
Sons: such were Theseus, Hercules, Romulus, Alexander, Abimelech, Son of
Gideon, and many more mentioned in sacred and profane Histories* and since
that time, Charles Martel, William the Conqueror, and some others.

Because beyond Seas one meets sometimes with men of a rude and uncivil
carriage, who are offensive and quarrelsome; perhaps young Travelers will be
glad to know what to do, and how to behave themselves in such cases. I confess
the point is difficult, and the question ticklish, there being so many
accidents to be considered, and it depending often upon several circumstances,
which only those who then are present can judge of; most particulars must be
left to the prudence of the party; yet in general he may be advised to avoid
quarrels, and all occasions thereof: but because often it does not depend upon
him, and that sometimes they are unavoidable through the faults of others, and
not his own, whether or not must he suffer affronts, and injuries? To this I
say, that the thing ought to be examined, whether or not it be a real affront;
for there is many an imaginary one; and herein one is to consider the person,
whether a friend or a foe, a superior, or an inferior; then the way of doing it
is to be looked upon; for some do offend others out of ignorance, and without
malice or design. Thirdly, the condition the offender is in, is to be taken
notice of, whether he be drunken or sober, in a fit of anger or in cold blood;
for all these do either aggravate or extenuate the offense: then the fashion of
the Country, one is in, ought to be the judge of the thing; for in one
Country that is accounted an injury which shall not be so in another, as
pledging ones health, or not pledging of him, spilling the salt upon the table,
or wresting of a word, spoken with no bad intent: and such things which in one
Country will pass for trifles, and in others for affronts: but Sapiens
dominabitur astris, a prudent man will often dissipate those bad influences,
and the ill dispositions of some man's temper: a civil and a courteous carriage,
can for a time change another man's nature, and as it were force him out of his
mad humor: I have known men come into company with an intent to quarrel, whose
mind was soon altered by such a behavior; this wins, tameth, and disarmeth
a man, shames him because it seems to reprove him for the rudeness, injustice,
and unhandsomness of his carriage to one who is so civil, and so well deserves
of him.

After all this observe, that if a man has done you an injury, and desires
pardon, assuring he has not done it out of any ill intent, this is a
sufficient ground of forgiveness. Now it is no shame, rather praiseworthy for
me to own a fault when I have committed it, and to ask pardon when I have
offended another: whereof the contrary is obstinacy and aggravation to the
fault; yet some will still examine the nature of the offense, and whether it be
public or private; for accordingly they will desire satisfaction: But much is
depending upon the nature of the party offended, if he be gentle or hasty. Of
those who are offended, some take exceptions at nothing, and others at every
thing: these are two extremes to be avoided, one must resent affronts done to
him, yet is not to fly out upon every toy or trifle: insensibility of these is
an effect of stupidity, and a sign of a low soul, of a poor and fainting
spirit, and of a heartless man condemned by Aristotle; and truly, Eth. lib. 4.
cap. 5.
as the world goes, he who will suffer one injury upon the back of another,
will be accounted a pusillanimous creature, fitter to live in Woods, and
Wildernesses, than in the society of mankind; and he must be resolved every day
to suffer new insults: and I would not have this to be mis-named and taken for
a virtue, To do and suffer no wrong is the part of a Gentleman: yet I would
have him to know the point of honor consists in the practi^e of morals, and not
only in showing heart and courage.
which deprives man of the qualities of his nature, and makes him like a stock
or a stone, with calling it constancy or otherwise: but in good truth, can we
attribute the virtue of patience to a picture, because it answers not to
injurious words spoken against it? shall we say that Moles are stout and strong
to resist the heat of the Sun, or the coldness of the weather, because they
neither pant nor quake at it; no, because being under ground they are no ways
exposed to these things, but to call cowardliness prudence is certainly to give
a wrong name to a thing.

May be some will say it is a Divine Precept to bear injuries, which I confess,
when it is for conscience sake, and for the cause and glory of God, or upon the
account of Religion; and this too must be from those who have power and
authority over me: but for me when I go upon the street, to suffer one to take
my Sword and my Clothes, or when I am a traveling to let Highway-men to take
my purse, when I am able to defend it, and to suffer my self to be beaten when
I can help it,, what am I then a prudent man, or a coward? this would set all
earthly things in a confusion, and destroy all manner of propriety, right, and
justice; and if a man will take away my estate, my life, and reputation, which
I cannot subsist without, and which I value above all, must I sit still, be an
idle spectator, and suffer it? no, the laws and customs of every Nation have
provided against this: certainly no rational person will condemn this
resentment, only will advise me to use honest and lawful means to get
satisfaction; and herein I agree with them. By a contrary way to this, one who
suffers for impiety or blasphemy might call himself a Martyr, when it is known
how non supplicium sed causa facit martyrium, it is the cause and not the
torment which makes one to be a martyr indeed.

Then after this, Parents ought to suffer the disobedience and abuse of
Children, Princes the rebellion of Subjects, Officers of Soldiers. Seneca who
has given so excellent Rules how to subdue anger, and master all irascible
passions, yet confesses in several places of his works, that to forgive wicked
men, is to wrong those who are honest; and that he who is so indulgent to
private faults, does propagate vices to posterity; wherefore one had much
reason to complain in the days of Nerva, who fell into Domitian.
the other extremes of his predecessor, this having been too cruel, and the
other being too indulgent and remiss, Dio Cass. lib. Hist. 68.
that indeed it was an evil to have an Emperor, under whom 'twas not lawful to
do any thing, but the license of doing every thing one had a mind to, without
censure amd punishment, was a worse thing. If Magistrates must punish wrongs, I
conceive private men in some degree may be allowed to resent injuries received
from their equals and inferiors: indeed it is prudence to be silent where there
is no remedy, or when this is like to prove as bad or worse than the disease;
upon such a case one will do well to forbear.

But I believe all rational men agree in this, provided the resentment be kept
within bounds; for the case and difficulty is about getting satisfaction; when
we have good and warrantable means one is bound to make use of them; for it is
not fit a man should be judge or executioner in his own case: and as long as
there are laws to see us righted, it is our duty to appeal to them; for that
which is called Duels, or challenge into the field, is now forbidden by all
civilized Nations, though formerly it was allowed by Princes who were witnesses
and judges of these single combats. N^w great penalties being laid upon such
ways, men use to make encounters of it, and to put a cheat upon the law, they
would make it pass for being done in hot blood, and things are so shuffled,
that it is hardly known who is the aggressor; every one saying he only drew in
his own defense: if one sends or makes a challenge to another, he will receive
this answer, Sir, I dare not answer you, because Duels are forbidden at
present: but I use to walk in such places, and if you fall upon me, I wear a
Sword to defend my self.

But as these things usually fall out in point of honor, in some Countries,
they are judged by a Marshal-law, namely in France, where this fighting was
once so common, that a man was accounted low-hearted, except he had fought
several times; and when they had no just ground of quarrelling, they used to
fall out about a straw, and the most civil amongst them went to a Gentleman
when they knew him to be a good Swordman, and complemented him into the field
thus. I hear you handle well a Sword, pray give me leave to measure mine with
yours, which was thankfully accepted: And hence came the use of Seconds, to see
there was no foul play. And a Gentleman took it very kindly, upon this
occasion, to be employed by his friend, because herein he showed he esteemed
him to be a man of courage. In Henry IV. days those things were much encouraged
by a word, which he spoke; for once going to Fontain-Bleau, by the way he saw
one who had been killed in a Duel, and out of the martial temper he was bred
in, he said, This man is dead in the bed of honor; which being reported from
hand to hand, made many a one to seek to die in the same manner: but the
present King has very wisely forbidden it, with much severity against
Delinquents: And because there are affronts which cannot be well put up, they
are referred to the Court of Marshals of France, who have provided against all
ordinary cases, and made Martial Laws, which Governors of Provinces, and others
in Authority, whom it may concern, are to see put in execution within their
Jurisdiction. Thus, if a man has wrongfully received a box on the ear, the
offender is commanded to go home to the other, ask him pardon (upon his knees,
according to the quality of the offended) and receive blows with a Cane the
other has in his hand, if he has a mind to strike him (yet generous men do
not make use of this advantage) to show he has deserved it: So in other
^ingular cases they have particular ^atisfaction: and these ways of fighting
are used in Northern, more than in Westerly and Southerly parts. In Italy, the
Stiletto or Dagger, in Spain, the Scopetada or shooting of a Gun will do the
work; every where they are sensible of injuries, but several Nations use
different ways to get satisfaction; in Germany and other places with noise, but
in Italy and Spain, with more secrecy and dexterity: therefore let a stranger
who is to travel into those parts know their ways: but whether in case there
were no ways for a man to right himself, nor no laws to procure him
satisfaction, he might not take some course, and what, I leave it to every
one's prudence and genius: yet let it be the Governors care to see he does, or
suffer nothing to the prejudice of his honor, which he ought to be very tender
of. Thus much upon the point is fit to be known by a Gentleman who goes a
Traveller beyond Seas.

To prevent Challenges, one must endeavor to cure the imagination, which is
the distempered part, with making it to know that there is no offense,
whatsoever nature it be of; which for its satisfaction can deserve any man's
death, no not the lie, nor the blow. As to the first, Scripture says every man
is a liar; so if there be any offense, Scripture, and not the neighbor is the
offender. If I tell a lie, and another makes me take notice of it, it is no
crime to do it, no more than to show there is a little ink or dirt upon my face:
If I tell the truth, and another gives me the lie, the injury which he intended
against me, does wholly fall upon him. Laws have provided against all ordinary
ways of injuries, therefore he who is offended, is not to regulate it; for he
ought not to be judge and party, I find two reasons to hinder challenges, and
fighting: first, the life we venture is not ours, God has given it to us, and
to him we are to give an account of it: it is also of our Father, Mother,
Brother, Sisters, Friends, and of the State. The second is, we must not have
boldness to destroy the image of our Sovereign God, which is man, for it
reflects upon the original; and withal not to hazard the life, estate, and
reputation of a friend, for being our second. One has well observed, about
Francis the first, King of France, who introduced Duels with the Challenge he
sent to Charles V. Emperor* caused the loss of so much blood, that there
remains none of his posterity. He had three Sons, whereof two died before him.
Henry the II. his third Son had five, whereof three were married, and reigned,
but left no issue, nor the other two; and of five Daughters there appeared no
successor, except of Elizabeth married in Spain, and Grandmother to Anna of
Austria.

But I must pass to other things, and say, that as learning of Arts and
Sciences, and exercises do much contribute to make one a complete Gentleman: he
cannot be such without the practice of virtues: a thing necessary for a
Traveller to keep himself free from vices he meets with in his journey. Now to
attain unto virtue, five things are necessary; first, never to be idle.
Secondly, to be watchful over himself, and see whether in every thing we say,
do, or intend, there be any thing contrary to honesty; and whether the ways and
means we use to attain thereunto, are good and lawful. The most important
secret of a civil life is to have the prudence of handsomely and honestly
making virtue to agree with the times, and men with affairs. The third, is to
look upon the actions of others, which if good to be followed, if evil to be
avoided and abhorred. The fourth, every night before one falls to sleep, is
to call to mind every thing one has seen, heard, said or done all that day; we
give our stomach time to digest what we have eaten: the same we are bound to do
for the soul, and not deny her an hours time to make the digestion of her good
actions, and to expel her impurities. The fifth is every where, always, and in
all things to submit to God's providence; all which, if one does practice, he
may justly be called a virtuous man.

Of virtues there are three kinds, Theological, Moral, and Heroical; the
Theological, otherwise called Divine and Christian, I named heretofore as
Faith, Repentance, and Charity; to which I may add only one, which is a branch
of the last, but properly and only a Christian virtue, grounded on a Divine
precept, to love our enemies, pray for those who persecute us, and bless them
who curse us. I defy all the Morals of Heathens, to show us such a rule; the
Law is to love them that love us, and hate our enemies. Another Christian
virtue is, that voluntary submission to punishments, and that wonderful
patience amidst violent pains and torments for the cause of God. I know some
others have undergone great pains, but not in that degree of constancy, or else
did not so cheerfully run to death; which when they saw unavoidable, they did
bear it the more patiently: and for certain, of all Religions, the Christian
more than any is for suffering, yet excludes not action, so much as affirms a
great Statesman; Machiavel.
for it has virtues active and passive, which to exercise all, or in part, a
Traveller meets with occasions at one time or other.

I think I have said enough to my purpose of moral virtues, which can hardly be
acquired without many precepts, much time, and experience, though the
principles of it may more easily be inculcated; and if a Governor can but make
his Gentleman wise and prudent, he gives him thereby the Grounds, Principles,
and seeds of all moral virtues, without which they are no virtues; these being
the life and spirit of them all: and though these two seem to be but one,
expressed in two different words, which for the most part are joined together,
wisdom and prudence; yet they do much differ: for the first consists in
election, when of two things it does choose the best, and the last in foresight;
for they are prudent who foresee and prevent dangers. Farther, wisdom is an
intellectual habit of the soul; but prudence is an actual one: the propriety of
that is to know, of this to operate. We know in three ways, and do operate in
two; the three are Understanding, Science, and Wisdom; the two are Prudence and
Art: the subject of the contemplation of those are necessary, certain, and
unchangeable things; and consequently infallible, for ever they conclude the
same; because he who understands not well, is said to want understanding: he
who does not well know a thing, cannot be said to have the Science thereof: but
the subject of the operation of prudence and art, are not so well regulated;
for that often meets with passions rising against reason, which it makes use
of, and must act according to several circumstances, which of necessity do
alter her ways and method. Art indeed does not light upon so much difficulty in
its operation, nor opposition to her working, because use and custom have
prescribed what it must do: besides that, it has a sure end, with means to
arrive thereunto: Nevertheless, as it must have an organ to work by, it has
much ado to fit it for his purpose, and make it serve his turn. Wisdom is a
thing hard to be found. Diogenes with a Lanthorn at noon was seeking for a
wiseman amidst the wisest Nation that was at that time: this indeed gives the
weight to, and tries the intellectual faculties of the soul, as prudence does
to her operation, ordering our actions, and bringing them under her rules: it
gives form to moral Virtues, which are not single acts, but habits; and
therefore difficult to be acquired: so that he who will have young men attain
to it, ought betime to put them upon giving precepts, allowing time and
experience, till they be contracted.

When once they are formed, they produce admirable effects; for fidelity and
truth of word and promise, Regulus is a known and extraordinary example, who
had leave from the Carthaginians to go to Rome, to advise the Senate to make an
exchange of Prisoners on both sides; yet contrary to his particular interest,
and the expectation of his enemies, he dissuaded them from it; which being
done, he went back and suffered the cruel death prepared for him: namely, to be
put up in a Tun, full of long and sharp nails, and thus rolled to death: this
is an heroical virtue. Of which in another kind we have an example in
Fabricius, who being sent to Pyrrhus, that King in two ways attempted against
his probity. First, knowing him to be poor, he offered him great sums of money,
which he refused, afterward he thought to have frighted him with a sudden
bringing of an Elephant upon him; but he turning toward the King, and smiling,
said, Sir, yesterday I was not tempted with your Gold, nor to day frighted with
your Elephant. Of such Roman and Heroical Virtues, History does afford us many
examples; youth amongst them being framed to it with precepts and examples of
Parents, and by the care of a good Education: in which case they are said to
have sucked Virtue with the Milk. It is related in the life of a worthy
Outlandish Gentleman, Du Plessis Mornay.
that after his dispute with Cardinal du Perron in the presence of Henry IV,
his Son said, My Father has been sacrificed to the Pope. This coming to the
King's ear, he was very angry at it; whereupon one to excuse it, said, what a
child of sixteen years old has said, is not to be taken notice of: the King
replied, One of sixteen of du Plessis breeding, is as much as thirty of
another. Let this be said by the by, to show how a good Education has great
influences to make a young man knowing and virtuous. Virtue is above all things
under God and his Grace. Marmore quid melius jaspis? quid jaspide? virtus,
Quid virtute Deus? quid Deitate nihil?
Virtue is indeed a precious jewel, which they that can attain to, are very
happy: Moral virtues are millions of times more scarce than vices; but heroical
ones are certainly the scarcest of all, very extraordinary, proper to few rare
men, to a Hercules, Cyrus, Alexander, etc. whose way was, Parcere subjectis and
debellure superbos, a rare courage and valor, and an extraordinary generosity,
have been some of the virtues of Heroes. Virtue is not of one act, but of many.
Now if there be so few heroical actions in the world, how much fewer must be
the virtues? It is not enough to have a fine Wit, a good Understanding, Reason
strong, well regulated Passions, a good Nature, great Parts, and a Soul
capacious of great and heroical things; occasions of exercising these virtues
must concur with those dispositions, and capacity be put to many great trials,
or else no heroical virtue, no advantage but what accidents may happen to
afford unto a man once or twice in his life time: so that it must be concluded,
that few in the world are capable of transcendent actions, or else want
occasions to set them forth: yet this should be no discouragement to those who
would infuse a desire of it into youth; for though it be not easy to come
to it, yet it is not impossible, as it has been in some, it may be in others;
therefore nothing is to be neglected: This like seed in the ground ripeneth and
comes to maturity. Hear what a Hero AEneas says to his Son, Disce puor
virtutem, ex me verumque laborem,
Fortunam ex aliis --
Tu facito mox cum matura adoleverit aetas
Sis memor -- Et Pater AEneas and avunculus excitet hector. Virg.

This may be an argument to excite youth to virtue, to commend to them the
virtue of their Ancesto^s, whose footsteps they ought to tread upon; because
thereby they attained unto honors and dignities: Certainly, if they have any
good inclinations, it will work in them a desire of imitation. Thus Alexander
the Great attained to the perfection of Achilles, whom he took for his pattern;
therefore he was seldom without Homer's Iliads, which he used to lay under his
Pillow: and it is beneficial to take one to be his pattern, as he did. Homer
amongst the Greeks, and Virgil amongst the Latins, in matter of Heroical
Virtues ought to be consulted; for in their Books, ex professo, under several
names they have given us an exact Character of great, wise, valiant, and
virtuous men; in which kind of writing for certain they ought to be esteemed
true Masters, and best Authors: but this subject being not so proper for this
place, because Breeding and Traveling do not make youth do great things, but
fits and disposes them for it. This is only a leader and a guide to action,
when they are raised to preferments, come to riper years, and in a capacity of
doing their Country service, then directions to heroical virtues would prove
fit and seasonable; but that should be the work of another Treatise: for here I
intended only to carry him to travel, and then bring him home, and not show him
what to do, to get to a settlement, when he is come thither.

Therefore to carry on my design, I would advise the Governor after the nine or
ten months appointed to settle in a place are over, to remove; but if they have
time, I think it would not be amiss to show him the Seacoasts of Britany,
before he leaves the River Loire; for by reason of the neighborhood one cannot
tell what occasion he may meet with hereafter, thereabouts to serve his King
and Country; therefore when he travels by those parts, he must observe the
situation, and the strength or weakness of places: the same he should do of
Normandy, of all Sea-Towns there: when he is come to Rouen, so of all the
Seacoasts of France, and of other Nations he comes amongst; because our Nation
being so potent at Sea, one cannot tell what occasion hereafter he may have to
lead Fleets or Ships into those parts, either as friend or foe; for any thing
relating to Navigation may prove very necessary for every Englishman; the
situation of the Country being such, that we can have communication with no
other Nation, but by the means of the Sea.

I had almost forgotten to say, that as commonly at home in Schools young
Gentlemen are kept seven or eight years in learning that which they should be
taught within half of that time at most, whereby much of their time is lost: so
abroad they will meet with those Masters of Exercises, who for some interest of
little money will be a whole month in teaching that which they could learn in a
week: this the Governor is concerned to prevent.

But before he leaves the place he has been at, all this while, he ought to
take leave of his friends and acquaintances in it; giving them thanks for their
civility, either in receiving his visits, or making theirs to him: then in case
they can conveniently give him any Letters of commendation to their Friends, in
the places he is to go by, he may ask of them that farther favor: but let him
chiefly be careful to leave behind him no bad name, but give every one his due,
and discharge all debts he has contracted there. An honest man never loves to
go out like a snuff, and leave a stinking smell behind him, but rather he will
so depart from a Town, as that he may dare to come thither again and be welcome.

As he goes through the Country, let him (besides what I said before) exactly
enquire of the chief Families of every Province, as afterward he must do about
the greatest of the whole Kingdom, in time and place: This gives a great light
and help to understand the constitution and interests of a State, specially
that of France, where great men have much power and influences: and as that is
a large Country, he may observe the different temper of the Inhabitants of the
several Provinces; in some places they are more hasty than in others; as in
Gascony: and formerly the Forlorn Hope of their Armies consisted of Gascons,
fit for a quick and speedy execution. In other Provin^es men are fitter for
Horse than for foot. Those who are nearer the Seaside are better than others
for the Sea: those who are amidst Mountains are good to keep or force difficult
passages; so toward the Pyrenean Mountains, or other; as in the Sevenes and
the Alps, they climb up high Hills and Rocks, and are fitter to endure
hardship, not being so impatient as others are. Now out of the knowledge of
this, the use will be in case one had to do against Armies composed of these
several sorts of men, he could better know how to deal with them, with tiring
or taking other advantages over those who are impatient, drawing into level
ground those who are used to Mountains, keeping in Plains, when stronger in
Horse, or in harder places when strong in Foot: and though every one has no
occasion to be a Soldier, or is not fit for it, yet it is well for every one to
know how to defend his King and Country, how to repulse a Foreign Enemy, or how
to disturb others at home, when our Princes think fit so to do: for though
Kingdoms be not ever gotten or preserved by the Sword, yet without it they
cannot be maintained; for all Councels in the world, except they be backed with
Sword and Authority, and be in a martial posture, will be slighted, and not
cared for, Silent leges inter arma.

France is a potent Monarchy, of a large extent, very full of daring and
industrious people, from Dunkirk to Bayone, washed with the Ocean, and the
Southerly parts with the Mediterranean, defended by the Pyrenean Mountains from
Spain, by the Alps from Italy, and by strong places upon her other Frontiers it
has a door into Spain, by the ways of Perpignan, and Bayone; into Italy by
Pignerol, into Germany by Brisac, and many strong places in the Low Countries:
this Kingdom, In his Book Pietra dell' Paragons.
as Boccalini says, is a land, where at any time one can sow seed, and a Sea
where one can sail with every wind; and this so conveniently seated to disturb
so many other parts of Europe, and all commanded by an absolute Monarch, makes
it the more considerable in it self, and formidable to her enemies; and indeed
that Nation, except in case of civil Wars, or with England, has ever more
offended others, than defended her self: These general things, and others more
particular, ought exactly to be observed by Strangers when they come into those
parts, the more because of their present flourishing condition, The present war
has made some alteration in this.
which makes that Crown have so considerable influences upon most Counsels and
affairs of Europe, which through her credit, interest, and friends she does
balance.

But this subject is so vast, that the meanest capacities can observe much of
it, and have matter enough to exercise themselves about; therefore I account it
superfluous to enlarge upon so ample a subject; They who have mind to know more
of the particularities of the Grand Tour, may hereafter read some observations
of mine on the Voyage of France, which may be a guide to a Traveller into that
Country: and suppose one leaves his Winter Quarters, or the place he has been
at all this time, about the middle or latter end of March, according as the
season or company prove; in May he may be at Lions, the great Rendezvous of all
those who intend for Italy, and yet have time enough to stay and see every
curiosity by the way, and to get information of things necessary to be known:
after some few days rest at Lion, if he has a mind, he may go for Switzerland,
by Geneva, and bestow a matter of six weeks time in that journey, which he may
begin in June, and come back in July; for the Climate of those parts not being
over-hot, a man may conveniently travel there in the middle of Summer: then he
must settle at Lion, till it be time to go for Italy, which is usually in
September; for one must not be too late to pass the Alps, for fear of an early
Winter. Whilst he is at Lion, let him learn the Italian Tongue, and get the
best information he can of Italy.

There also he must see the company of discreet and virtuous Women, the better
to understand affairs of those parts; and in case he could not swim before, if
he can conveniently and without danger learn it, 'twill be very well; for
whether a man Travels in France, Solon ordered this by a Law.
Italy, Germany, or Holland, one goes by Water sometimes, and in case of a
mischance he can swim for his life, the Seine, Loire, Garonne, Saone, and Rhone
in France; Po, Ticino, Adlge, Tyber, in Italy; the Rhine, Danube, Main, Nekar,
Elbe, etc. in Germany; the Rhine, Vahal, Maes, and Issel; in the United
Netherlands, the Scheld, Lys, Sambre, Mosel, etc. In Flanders or thereabouts, a
Traveller has often occasion either to go long Journeys upon, or else to cross
them. Now when a man is upon these Rivers, and can swim well, he is neither so
fearful nor so much in danger as others are, whereby he has more pleasure in
those journeys: some when they travel, buy some of the Rarities of Towns and
Countries, which are less cumbersome and easier to be carried, to show and keep
them when they are come home: but herein they ought to be ruled by their
purses; in some places are good Arms, in others good works of several sorts; in
others perfumes, essences: so that when a Traveller comes into a place, he will
do well to enquire what things are esteemed in it, and sent to Foreign parts:
others learn what fine things are taught in such places: as for instance, in
Geneva are those who teach to carve all manner of Fowl, nimbly and neatly,
which at Table one has daily occasion to make trial of: in other places some
teach quick tricks of the hand, with Cards, and the like; whereby often one
does divert a company. Sometimes also in his travels one meets with men who
have some curious secrets, whereof some are pleasant, others profitable, and
others both. Upon such occasions I would not have one to grudge little moneys
or time to learn it, whether they are secrets of Nature, or of Art. And though
I know the genius of men to be different in this, for every thing does not
please every one; yet I believe in the great vari^ty there is of such things in
the world, every one will find one thing or other wherewith to please himself:
and let that be noted here, which I have hinted before, that to make one
succeed in things he undertakes to learn, four things are necessary; the first
is, a disposition in him, consisting in a good understanding, a quick
apprehension, and a happy memory. The second inclination, for except one has a
mind to it, he can hardly succeed in it. The third application, labor improbus
omnia vincit, and assiduity overcomes great and many difficulties. Fourthly,
there ought to be a good method in the teacher.

Our Travelers being ready to go for Italy, their care must be to know which
is the best, safest, and most convenient way, and wherein more things are to be
seen; there is more than one way from Lion, whereof some meet again not far
off; but however they differ, beyond the Alps, Turin is the usual place for a
rendezvous on the other side of Italy; there people do not account themselves
to be Italians, by reason of their neighborhood with France; nor Frenchmen
because within the limits of Italy; of which their Sovereign is one of the
Princes: they think themselves to be somewhat between both. Hence it is that in
that City they ask whether you go into Italy or into France; there they have
much of the French Language and Fashions: but this being passed, travelers
must resolve upon new fashions and customs; for the manner of life is clear
different from that of France, and a Traveller is to begin here as much as when
first of all he came out of his Country. No such thing here as society in the
way of France, no such freedom and liberty as is there, no keeping company with
virtuous Women; men themselves are not communicative, but retired and shy of
what company they come into; which before they do, they consider whether or not
they can be better for it; if so they frequent it, otherwise they forbear,
because they are very much interessed in every thing they do: there men of
business speak seldom positively to a thing, but they will have one to guess
what they mean, being careful to give no grounds to men, hereafter to tell
them, you said so and so, they speak by sign and gestures, as much as others do
with the tongue. The Italian temper is generally wary, See my present State of
Italy.
suspicious, prudent, cunning, revengeful, and covetous; but indeed many good
things are to be learned from them, wherein a great wisdom and dexterity must
be used: amongst them one ought well to look to his tongue, so as to speak no
offensive words, which is a quality necessary, not only in Italy, but every
where else; specially when great men are the subject of our discourse: of the
danger whereof are many notable examples in France, thus.

In a conversation between three great men, of which Cardinal Richelieu, then
chief Minister, was the subject, after a long censure of his actions, and
ministry, one concluded he ought to be beheaded, but the other said, his
dignity of Cardinal should secure his life, but would have him banished out of
France; but the third said, herein we could not find our security, for he would
raise us troubles from thence: therefore the best way would be to commit him to
la Bastille (the Tower of Paris.) This Conference having been reported to him
by Monmorency, whom afterward he caused to be beheaded, he remembered it, and
upon occasion retorted the Sentence upon every one of them; All three Marshals
of France
for Marshal Marillac's head was cut off, Toiras was made to run out of France,
and Bassompierre was sent to the Bastille, and kept there all the Cardinals
life time. Indeed it is very unfit for private men to speak ill of those who are
in public places, who seldom fail to hear of it, and at one time or other will
find occasions of being avenged; also it is certain that very often a private
injury done to a public person will sooner be resented than if it had been
done to him as a public one, or against the State; ever personal injuries
being more sensible than those which are against the public; as it is natural
to reward particular more than public services, so to punish particular faults
against Superiors, more than public ones; men being not so sensible of general
as of particular things: a private man can be troubled at a public loss, but
not so much as of his own: the punishment inflicted upon one for contempt of
Authority, is but politic, when vengeance for contempt of the person is
natural, and consequently more sensible: but this is the truth, there is such a
connection of the person with the office, that one is never offended, but it
does reflect upon the other.

The passage I related just now, about that great Statesman who in that Kingdom
was so potent, as to destroy his enemies, very considerable men, puts me in
mind to observe how sometimes it is dangerous to make a Minister or a Favorite
too great, for two accounts; one is, that his Fortune being raised above that
of all the rest, is envied and hated by the rest, or most great men in the
Kingdom, who ever take this as a pretense for all disturbances they go about to
raise in the State; the other is in reference to the Prince himself; for when
the Minister does distribute all graces and favors, he makes friends and
creatures to himself, and by these and other means he may so settle his
Authority, that it would prove hard for his Master to throw him down in case he
had a mind to it* and having tasted so much of the sweetness there is in
commanding, wherein he has so great a share, his ambition might raise his
thoughts to take it wholly to himself; for having already the power, it would
not be difficult to get the name of it, and to blow off that shadow of
Authority, which his Master does retain: the example of the Maires du Palais
has clearly showed this in France.

The fortune also of such extraordinary Favorites is not sure, not only from
the side of all those who strike at it, but also from the Princes part, who
sometimes conceives jealousies; ever fomented by the other's enemies. Ioab was
a wise man in this case to prevent the jealousy which David might have had in
case he had taken the City of Rabbah; for he sent word to him to come up and
take the City, which could hold out no longer, 2 Samuel 12.27, 28.
Least, said he, I take the City, and it be called after my name -- He knew how
after Saul had heard once the people say, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8.
Saul has killed his thousand, and David his ten thousands, he could never
abide him. Lysander, Alcibiades, etc. Scipio Africanus, after considerable
services done to their Country were exiled by their Republics. Justinian
after very important services received from Bellisarius, turned him off, took
away his whole Estate, and upon a mere, though groundless jealousy of State,
caused his eyes to be put out. Hernando Gonsalvez, justly called the great
Captain, who finished the Wars of Grenada, beat the French out of Naples, and
who remained true to, and stood by his Master Ferdinand of Arragon, when the
rest of the great men fell to his Son in law Philip of Austria; yet after all,
these services were forgotten, and he turned out of all employment unrewarded,
without the least reason or pretense. The consideration of this made Machiavel
advise those who, through their virtues, were raised to great fortune, either
to leave it betime, and of their own accord, or else to maintain it by force:
His ground and reason is, because usually men miscarry for following a middle
way not willing to be either very good or very bad.

Now the reason of such usage is when men are raised to such a height of
greatness, as does in the least over-shadow the sovereign authority, though
these great men do not abuse it; yet this, Princes are jealous of, and either
are forced with this jealousy of State, not to be just to them, in not
rewarding them, for fear of putting them in a posture or capacity of doing
harm; or else, if they see them unrewarded, their presence seems to upbraid
them of unthankfulness and injustice, in denying Virtue that reward which is
due to it: for every time a Prince looks upon such a one, his services do claim
what they have deserved; for as liberality and generosity, rewards and pains,
are ^ffects of the justice of Princes, those who have grounds to hope for the
one, as those who have done amiss to be afraid of the others; yet we must
always stand to this truth, that when a Subject has ventured his life, and
done all he is able for his Princes service, he has done nothing, but what was
his duty to do: only this is a bad precedent, and discourages others to do the
like, in case they were able: as it fell out to Justinian, who having undone
Bellisarius, as I said just now, as soon as Narses, another General of his, did
find he had a mind to begin with him, he left him off, and joined with the
Goths; whereby his affairs in Italy were undone; very ill done of him: Felix
quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
for though his Master had not well done by him, he ought not to have rebelled:
but'tis usual to hear men say, it is good to become wife at the costs of other
men.

Here I must observe how 'twas not only the fear in Narses of being served as
Bellisarius had been, that did work in him the resolution of acting against his
Master: It was also an effect of the contempt of the Empress, because she heard
what he had begun to act, she sent to him that a course would be taken to bring
him to spin amongst women (for he was an Eunuch, used to be a keeper of Women)
to which he returned this answer, that he would spin such a thread as her
husband and she could never untwist. This shows how those who are in power to
do hurt, may not without danger be used with contempt; for slight and contempt
are ever more sensible than injuries: For this cause Caligula was killed by
Cassius Chereas, and Quintilianus made a Conspiracy against Nero.

Here I do not intend to speak of those who abuse Princes favors; for so doing
they deserve their misfortunes: because, being from a low condition raised to a
great height of favor, they are like those men, who being used to keep in low
places, if they be lifted upon the top of a Steeple, as they look down to the
place whence they came up, their head turns, they grow giddy, and do not know
what they do: just as if they had been lifted up so high only to make their
fall the more precipitate, dangerous, and more conspicuous. Many who upon a
sudden are raised from a low to a great fortune, are like one who from a
Dungeon or any dark and blind place, being brought to a great light, have their
eyes dazzled with it, and all objects above them appear of a different color
from what they are; therefore it is the prudence of a Prince to choose those who
are fit for such places: though Subjects must acquiesce to such a choice, when
it is once made; for the Prince being the fountain of honor, may impart it to
whom he pleases, yet therein he is chiefly to aim at the public good.

But I must engage no farther upon this matter, The 4th part of this Book does
speak of it.
which is not just of my present purpose, but occasionally brought in, to
return to the Travelers, whom I left in Italy; having only hinted to them
something of that journey: but if they desire to know more about it, and how to
benefit themselves, let them peruse my Relation of that Country. That which I
made of the Republic of Venice, can show them a method how to make
observations about Principalities and Dominions; only let them know that most
mischiefs which in Italy befall Strangers, are upon the account of Women; as in
France, about certain points of honor, and in Germany about drinking; therefore
in France let him have a special care to avoid Quarrels, Women in Italy, Wine
in Germany, and Gaming every where.

To order well the journey of Italy, when one is come thither, he must be
resolved upon two things; one is, how long he intends to stay there: the second
is, which way he intends to come out of it; for as he has time in the whole
allowed him, he may accordingly distribute it into parts: for he who is to stay
two years in Italy, will be longer in some places, than if he were to be there
but one: and this as to the first. As to the second, some go only to see Italy;
and as they went into it out of France, so they come back again into France:
others go out of it into Germany. According then to the supposition I made
before, that a Traveller will be ten months in Italy* and that he intends to
come back into France, he may thus order his journey, according to the season
he comes into that Country: some come in Spring, and pass there the Summer;
others arrive in Autumn, and stay there a Winter, and part of the Spring; and
this last is the best season: because they who come from Northern and cold
Climates, will find the inconveniences of hot weather in Summer: for not being
used to so hot a Climate, this and Fruits may happen to cause Fevers,
Bloody-fluxes, and other distempers; I mean chie^ly to those who are of a weak
and tender complexion: For as to some others it is not altogether so, I can say
for my part, I never found any such inconvenience in what Climate or Country
soever I have been with the use of sobriety and temperance, which I thank God
for. Now when a man comes into it in Autumn, this and Winter being seasons more
moderate than Summer, one uses himself by degrees to the Climate and Country;
in those parts heat and dust being very troublesome in that time of year,
though in some more than in others; not only because some are hotter than
others, but also by reason of the remedies they enjoy in some places, which
others do want: for in the Dukedom of Milan, and other parts of Lombardy, there
are several channels of water, wherewith when they please they can water the
Highway, which cools it, and allays the dust: but they who travel in Summer,
do it in the night time, and rest a great part of the day; which also is
observed by those who are in Town: for Italians say in a Proverb, specially at
Rome, that none but Frenchmen, mad men, or dogs use to walk or go about
streets in Summer, about the middle of the day.

But before I show our Traveller which way to steer his course, I must give him
one advice or two; the first is, to take Bills of Health from whatsoever Town
he goes away; for being very sorely afraid of the Plague, they are very strict
in often keeping Guards to question whence one does come. Herein they are
severe, indifferently to all, and let in no body till after a tedious
quarantena. The second advice is, to make provision of a good Bridle, Saddle,
and things belonging to it; for in many places one is sadly put to it for these
three things. Thirdly, he must take heed what Books he carries; for if they be
Latin or Italian, forbidden, not only they will be lost, but also they may
bring a man to a great trouble about it. Fourthly, let him take heed what Arms
he carries; for Daggers, Stileti, Pocket-Pistols, and long Knives with points,
in most places are forbidden under pain of death. Fifthly, he must beware of
the Inquisition, and therefore ought carefully to avoid speaking against the
Pope or his Religion. Sixthly, I must add one thing more about Diet, to be
sober; for their meat and drink are hot and nourishing, and apt to give
surfeits; also to avoid drinking much of their cold and frozen waters, which
are too commonly used there against the heat of aliments and weather; but which
often prove worst than the Disease, several dying for drinking too much of
them, Lastly, because few of our Englishmen are used to Oil, they would do well
to accustom themselves to it; for most of their Sauces are made with it: Butter
there being very dear and scarce in most places.

As our Travelers did in France, so in Italy they must choose a place in which
to spend most of their time; whereof the most usual are first Rome, then
Venice; others stay at Siena or Florence: For certain Rome is the best and
fittest place of Italy for Travelers to be at, by reason of the great liberty
strangers enjoy in it, of the number of Arts and Exercises to be used there, and
of the variety of ancient and modern Curiosities to be seen, and of the pomp
and stateliness of that Court, and of the many Cardinals, Princes, Ambassadors,
and other public Ministers. Venice is remarkable for the rarity of the
situation, See my present State of Venice*
the wisdom of the Senate, the antiquity and fame of the Republic; a month or
six weeks time is enough for a ^tranger who has no business there to be in it,
according to their saying, O Venetia chi non te vede, troppo te prezza, chi
troppo te vede ti sprezza. The best time to come to it, is either in Carnaval
time, or Ascension-day. Some strangers at Siena, specially Germans, by reason
of the privileges that Nation has within all the Grand Dukes Dominions,
because the Language is good there, and by reason of the late Prince Matthias,
keeping his Court there: but most of all strangers flock to Rome, which he who
is to come back into France, and to stay ten or twelve months in Italy may do
in this way.

From Turin he may go the straight way to Asti, and other parts of Monferrat,
to Alexandria della Paglia, Novi, Gavi, Ottagio, to Genoa; thence take a
Felucca to Lerici, where take Horses through Sarzana, Massa, A kind of Boat*
and so either to Via Reggio, by the Seaside, or on the left hand to Luca,
which I think is the best, to Pisa, Legorn, back to Pisa, so to Florence; this
is the usual way: but from Genoa he may take another way through Tortona,
Voghera, Pavia to Milan; thence to Cremona, Piacenza, Parma, Regio, Modena, so
to Florence, or else to Bologna, Pistoia, Luca, Pisa, Legorn, and thence to
Florence; for a man may see both ways, thence through Siena, Viterbo, and
Caprarola to Rome: Herein I name not every petty place, but only those which
are of some note. To do all this, and to see Turin, with the Duke's
Pleasure-houses about it, he may bestow six weeks or two months; so that after
this rate, against the beginning or middle of November he will come to Rome,
which is the fit time for it; not being very safe to come to it till October be
over; because the air of Campagna Romana, through part of which he must go, is
usually corrupted, and somewhat infected in Summer, through the violence of
heat; but in October the wind beginning to blow, and rains to fall do purify
it, which it must have time to do.

After some few days refreshment at Rome, some use to go to Naples, which is a
fortnights journey to go and come, and see all curiosities thereabouts; whence
some use to go into Sicily in a Felucca to see Messina, Palermo, etc. and there
wait for some opportunity to go and see Mal^ha; which Island is a whole
Fortification: and so having seen it, to come back again the same way, which is
usually a month or five weeks journey from Naples, so back to Rome; where if
one goes no farther than Naples, he can come back about the beginning or middle
of December, and there stay till after Easter to see all Ceremonies used in the
week by them called Holy, which will be whole four Months; so he will also see
those of Christmas; but if he goes to Maltha, he can hardly come before
January: but in case it were not convenient for him to go his journey to
Naples, immediately after his being come to Rome, it may be put off till Lent,
at which time several undertake it: and indeed it is then a fitter time for
those who have a mind to go to Maltha.

Whilst the Traveller is at Rome, let him learn the Virtues, and avoid the
Vices of the place; there he may well satisfy himself, if he has a mind to
learn Picture-drawing, the Rules of Architecture, and Sculpture; of which I
would have him to know so much as to be able to judge of, what is well or ill
done in those Arts: there also he may learn Music, whether vocal, which though
at first seems not so pleasant to the ears of those who are not used to their
way of it, yet certainly it is very learned; or with instruments of Music, of
which there is a great variety; but the Gitar is the most used amongst them:
but elsewhere I have spoken at large of this, therefore I must no longer insist
upon it.

From Rome, by the way of Loretto, Ancana, Fano, Senegaglia, Pesaro, Rimini,
and other parts of Romagna, one must go to Bologna, or Ravenna; thence to
Ferrara, so to Venice; whence through Padoa, Vicenza, Verona, the Mantoan, and
some other Cities of the Republic in Lombardy, through Milan, one may return
to Turin, and into France, or else upon his leaving Venice, he may take a
progress to Mantoa, and some of the places of the Republic, as Crema, Brescia,
Bergamo: Thus before he has seen all this, the time intended to employ in
Italy, will be nigh expired, from September till June exclusively, makes just
ten months; and if he were to stay longer in that Country, I would advise him
to spend it at Rome, where if he could be a whole year, it would be the better.
When I said ten or twelve months, those two months I add in consideration of
the Voyage of Maltha, of which the time cannot be certain just to a week*
because the Seas are to be crossed.

But in case a Gentleman's journey into Italy was so ordered, as to come into
it in Spring, he must pass the Summer in Rome, where he ought to be before
June, for then it is accounted very dangerous to come into it, though at any time
one may come out, but not lie in any place within Campagna Romana, that is,
about forty miles from Rome: There in Summer time they change night into day;
for from nine of the Clock, till six at night, they read within doors, and do
something, or else sleep in the afternoon: after that time people begin to stir
abroad, to take the cool air; for as God has provided in every Country a
remedy against inconveniences felt in it, at that time commonly blows a cool
and refreshing wind, which coolness is helped with their watering of some
streets, and places, where company meets in Coaches; then they sit up, and go
to and fro a great part of the night, till two or three in the morning, and
when they are a bed at night, they dare not leave open their windows, for fear
of catching some distemper: for my part, who have been there Winter and Summer,
with the use of these things I found no alteration in me, Quando spirava il
zefiro, o quando tirava la tramontana. But I left the Traveller in Venice,
disposing himself for his journey into Germany, which he must begin either upon
the later end of June, or at the farthest the beginning of July, which is the
fittest time to Travel in Germany, specially for one who comes out of Italy:
upon which account he will feel no great inconveniency from the heat; there
being a great difference between those two Climates, specially when he goes
Northward more and more. But I must say few things concerning that journey.

Before one leaves Italy, I wish him to get what introduction he is able into
the German Tongue* as also some information of that Country, which indeed is a
very ample subject: to know the Fundamental Constitutions of the German Empire,
is a fit and a proper work for Statesmen; but something of it must be known by
Travelers; for one who goes into a Country where he has no particular
businesses, ought to put this question to himself, what is it I am going to do
or see? therefore it is necessary for one to know thus much of it. When the
Roman Empire of the world was divided into East and West, the former into the
Family of the Paleologues continued fixed in Constantinople, but the later in
the hands of Charles the Great, t^rned to be ambulatory, sometimes in France,
Italy, at last was settled in Germany; not with that glory it was in before, by
reason of divisions between Emperors and Popes; so that this was very well
represented by the Prophet Daniel with the legs of Nebuchadnezzar's Statue;
Dan. 2.33.
and with the feet partly of iron in the Turkish, partly of clay in the German
Empires; yet at present all Christian Princes give place to the Emperor; and
certainly Germany is in power and dignity, the most considerable State of any
in Christendom, by reason of the extent of its Dominions, of the number of its
Princes, which makes the Emperor to be called Rex Regum, King of Kings; and in
the martial temper of the people: but these advantages, that potent body does
not enjoy by reason of so many contrary and different interests of the Princes
and States that compose it, upon the account of Religion, States, and Families
interest, which have made a lamentable division in that Country; which through
their fears, animosities, and jealousies, is gone so far, that they have called
in strangers and foreign Powers to balance and bridle the Authority of one
another; and the Authority of the Emperor has been so curbed, that now it has
but a shadow of Authority divided between him and the States, represented in a
Diet which is fitly signified by the Imperial Arms of an Eagle with two heads,
of an equal height and bigness. This Dignity of late has been as good as
entailed upon the House of Austria, At present all Germany is united with the
Emperor upon the account of the present War, which being ended, likely things
will be a^ before,
upon the occasion of some of her hereditary Countri^s, and the Kingdom of
Hungary, and part of that of Bohemia, which are a Bulwark against the Turk, to
those parts of Christendom.

The Diets I mentioned are composed of three Bodies or Colleges; the
Electoral, that of Princes, and the third of the Imperial Cities; the Emperor
sends one there to represent him, and take care of his concerns, who is the
President or Speaker of the Assembly. Under, and next the Emperor are seven
Electors, of which the three Ecclesiastical, Mentz, Colen, and Trier have that
Dignity, only as personal, and by Election; but the four Secular are by right
of Heritage and Succession; these are the King of Bohemia, Prince Palatin,
Saxony, and the Brandenbourg, but of late that Dignity which of right belonged
to the Palsgrave has been divided and imparted to the Duke of Bavaria, with
this condition, that in case any of the two Families, or rather Branches of the
Family be extinct for want of heir males, the whole Dignity, with the Upper
Palatinate shall be devolved to the other: But this has been a sad renting,
caused by a lamentable War, which already in the last Election of the Emperor,
has been the occasion of much trouble, about the place of Vicary of the
Empire, and like to prove the division and destruction of the Empire, in case
the Electoral College should happen to be divided equally in matter of
Election; for there being now eight, the casting voice is taken off; besides
the wrong done to the illustrious Family of the Count Palatin,

After these Families come others, which though they have no vote in the
Electoral College, yet they enjoy it in the Imperial Diets; and these are of
several sorts, as Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenbourg, Wirtemberg, etc.
Markgraves or Marquesses, as Baden, etc. Landgraves, as H^ssen, etc. and
several other Princes of the Empire. There are also several Imperial Hans and
Free Towns; but of late this last sort has been diminished; for the Bishop of
Munster has subdued that City, the Elector of Mentz that of Erford,
Brandenbourg that of Magdebourg, and the Elector of Colen has more than once
threatened the City of that name with the like usage: What ornaments must so
many Princes and their Courts be to a Country: for though some be weak, others
are very considerable.

Now to see these Princes Courts and Countries, strangers go into Germany,
wherein they have a great choice; seeing there is such a variety: and as some
of these Courts are well ordered, so others are ill regulated in point of
drink, in the excess whereof they sin very much; Kettle-Drums and Trumpets are
the instruments used in those Courts: Bears, Wild-Boar-Hunting, and the like
are their Sports: so that if a stranger will be welcome to many of them, he
must drink, and seem to delight with them in these and other Martial Exercises.
When one lights upon such company, he is often forced seemingly to be drunken,
to avoid being so indeed; for then they let one alone: but withal, there are
those Courts where sobriety is practiced by several or by some. The German
temper is sincere, constant, and high (specially the Nobility) with the^r
inferiors; for the people is kept low by the Gentry, and they stand so much
upon the title of a Gentleman, that often one who is poor will scorn to marry
the daughter of one who is not such, let her be never so rich. But the
commonalty is very well in Free and Imperial Cities, because they are a kind of
Republics. And now I am upon the temper of Germans, I must not omit to set
down two excellent Distichs, or four Latin Verses, above the different temper
of some Nations, Hispanus, Gallus, Germanus, Vasco, Sabaudus,
Constans, inconstans, fidus, avarus, inops,
Victum, vestitum, promissum, furta, labores,
Temperat, alternat, servat, adauget, amat.
This is to be understood of the generality of those Nations* for it is not true
of every one in it: and withal, it is according to common opinion.

But because strangers do but go by places in Germany, and stay only to see
what curiosities are in them, I need not much to insist upon their fashions and
customs, which according to places differ much: Besides that, many who have
been in France do understand the Language, and Fashions thereof; which, if a
stranger practices, they are well satisfied with him; for of all the Nations of
Europe, this most of all esteems a French Breeding: therefore other Nations do
not use to go into Germany to learn Education, except it were in Martial
Affairs, or in point of Trade, at Hambourg, Lubeck, Franckfort, and Leipsick;
the two last both famous for the great Fairs kept there, and Franckfort
besides, for the Election of Emperors: yet in many Princes Courts are Masters
of the Horse, and of some other Exercises; as at Dresden, Berlin, etc. but to
my mind the best place in Germany for Education of Protestants, is, Heidelberg,
where is a Court; there being very few so well civilized, but none more than it
is: where sobriety reigns, all manner of Exercises are to be learned; and it
has a famous University for Learning: besides that, it is seated in a Country
(the lower Palatinate) called the Garden of Germany, most part of it lying
along or about the Rhine, with plenty, delicacy, and variety of all things,
when it is not the seat of War. Of all the Courts of German Princes that of
Brandenbourg is to my mind the more stately and numerous, and I have seen some
Royal Courts inferior to it.

Of all Rivers in Germany, the two chief, the Danube and the Rhine are most
convenient for Travelers, by reason of the depth of their water, the swiftness
of their stream, and the length of their course, and the many good Towns upon
both: others as the Wesel, Elbe, Oder, Main, Nekar, etc. are not so convenient;
for the Rhine crosses all Germany from South to North, and the Danube from West
to East. He who goes into that Country must use himself to lie upon straw, for
strangers in Summer cannot abide to lie between two great Feather-beds, as the
fashion is in those parts. In great places one is well treated, but dear; there
being a set ordinary in most parts, Landlords are not used to over-reckon:
wherefore there is no disputing with them, as in most parts of France, but will
be paid what they ask: when men of any fashion come in, the Master and Mistress
of the house bid them welcome. In Switzerland he and the Landlady shake hands
with their Guests, and he waits on them at Table; and both there and in
Germany they expect as a token they are satisfied with their house, to hear
this complement upon their going away, I will lodge here when I come hither
again. And if Erasmus was now alive, he would not find them to be so rude as he
complains they were in his time. Coll^q. diversor.
As to matter of Learning, this I must say of the Germans, their Wit is not
quick, but they are strong and patient in their Studies and Labors, so that
they know more things than others, though not ^o well, they seem to be more
desirous to teach than to learn, and do at least as much delight in Writing as
in Reading.

But I must remember I am not writing a Relation of Germans, therefore I am to
insist only upon that which is of my present purpose and compendiously too; so
that having observed, that as in France they reckon by Leagues the distance of
Places, in Italy by Miles, in most parts of Germany it is by Hours. I must now
set forwards our Traveller toward this last Country.

Venice is the usual place of Rendevous for those who intend to go from Italy
into Germany, there are daily occasions of those men who go to and fro out of
one Country into the other, and according to agreement do furnish horses and as
to Diet, defray Travelers, which is very convenient for those who do not know
the Country, and understand not the Language; some go thorough Grats in Styria,
and other parts of the Hereditary Countries of the Archduke of Austria, to
Vienna, to see the Emperors Court; they who delight to see strong Places, go
thence thorough Presbourg to see Roab and Komorrah, and other few places
belonging to the Emperor upon the frontier of the Turk of the remainder of
Hungary; thence they come back to Vienna, and so thorough Bohemia go into
Saxony, and if they please, from Dresden thorough Magdebourg to Hambourg, where
crossing the Elbe, they go into Holstein, ^o into Denmark and Sueden: others
from Vienna thorough Moravia, step into Poland as far as Cracow, thence
thorough Silesia and Lusatia to Berlin, to see the Court of Brandenburg, whence
some have the curiosity to step into Pomerania, and then to Dantzick; but
others thorough part of Brunswick, Lunenbourg and Mecklebourg, go to Lubeck,
thence to Hambourg, whence those who do not go into Sueden and Denmark, go into
the Dukedom formerly Archbishopric of Bremen, Westphalia, so into the Low
Countries.

Others do not go so far into Germany, but directly from Venice they go
thorough Trent, Inspruck, to Munichen, where the Duke of Bavaria keeps his
Court, and thence to Ausbourg; whence they either go to Vlm to take water, to
go down to Vienna, which I take to be the best way to go to that Court; or else
from Vlm to Stugard in Wirtemberg, thence to Heidelberg, to Francfurt, so to
Mentz, and then down the Rhine to Colen; Noremberg is one of the Cities of
Germany most worth seeing; from Colen either one goes by land to Brussels, or
else by water down the Rhine, and so to Vtrech and Amsterdam, or upon the Vahal
down to Nimegue, Lovestein* Vorcum, Gorcum, of which three places the Dutch
Proverb says, -- Vorcum, Gorcum, Lovestein, nam is it groet, Matched is Klein;
from these one goes to Dort, Rotterdam, so to any parts of Holand.

He who travels into those parts, must know, that Germany was divided into
upper and lower* the upper is that which now is properly called Germany, the
lower is now called Netherlands or Low Countries, part whereof was called
Belgia or Batavia; it contains seventeen Provinces, of which the seven United,
from the particular one Holland, are named Hollanders, as the ten Flemingers
from Flanders. Once all these Provinces were possessed by the House of
Burgundy, which all with both Burgundies, part of Suisserland and Lorrain,
Charles le Hardy or Bold, intended to have united and erected into a Kingdom,
under the name of the Kingdom of the Lion, because a Lion is the Arms of most
of those Provinces, but he miscarried in his design: all these Low Countries,
and the Country of Burgundy, otherwise called Franche Comte, by a Marriage fell
into the hands of the House of Austria. In the year, 1568. etc. these Countries
in the days of Philip II. King of Spain were by extraordinary oppressions in
their Consciences, Lives and Estates, forced to take Arms, and thus beginning
was given to that War which with various successes lasted till at last in 1648.
by a Treaty at Munster and Osnabru^k, 7 of these Provinces were by the
Spaniards own-to be Sovereign States; hereupon is grounded the difference of
Spanish and United Netherlands.

This Republic was founded not only upon Dutch, but also English Blood,
witnesses the Battle of Newport, the Siege of Ostend, and several other
occasions; although it be but new and modern, it is raised to a great height,
and is become very potent by Land, but especially by Sea, therefore a stranger
must see their Shipping, Storehouses, and strong Places, and be informed of
their way of Trading, for herein does consist their strength and riches; for
the Province of Holand does hardly produce any thing besides Butter and Cheese;
but they have great many Manufactures, whereby a great number of people is kept
in exercise; yet, for all this Holand is a Magazine for all manner of Wares,
there being a distribution made between the Cities, of the Trade in several
things; for every great City has her particular Staple Commodity: now this
Trade is much helped not only with the neighborhood of the Sea, but also of
many Navigable Rivers, and several Channels of Communication between places,
which are a great convenience for Travelers, carriage of Merchandise, and for
Merchants, who, at a certain hour, can be upon the Exchange in a Town, and at
another hour in another, things being so well ordered, that they are sure
within such a time to be at such a place. This people are phlegmatic, therefore
they suffered many oppressions before they could be brought to take up Arms,
though now since they have been Masters of their Liberty, and grown rich, there
are some hasty enough amongst them; they are also very patient to perfect
designs, began by French and Italians, which are hastier Nations; they are
industrious, taking great pains, and very frugal; so that whilst English
Seamen will feed well, they are satisfied with a small matter, and have but
five or six men aboard some Merchant Ships, whilst we have nine or ten in
those of the same Bulk, whereby charges being saved, they are able to afford
Wares at a cheaper rate than other Nations; and as in matter of Trading, they
are cunning and subtle, and withal rich; to destroy the Trade of others, they
will afford Wares at a cheaper rate, though with loss to them, whereby they
will tire out Merchants of other Nations, who are not so monied as they; and
experience has showed us how they have gone about (which, in part they have
effected) to engross to themselves the trade of the whole World, which they
understand as well, if not better, than any other Nation.

Those who know not these conveniences of Rivers and Channels, have admired how
they could bring so many great Guns to the Sieges they undertook; but that
which most of all was worthy of admiration is, that whilst War lasted between
them and the Spaniard, they sold Arms and Ammunition to their Enemies. The
reason is, as long as they are Masters of the Sea, they are not afraid of
wanting any thing, and they care not so much for an enemy by Land, provided
they have none at Sea, for as long as their trade goes on, they are able
enough to maintain a War. I know some have written of them, that they are of a
gentle nature, enemies to quarrels; which I will believe of several of them,
but they must give me leave not to take this as a national Character; for
though I have found there several of sweet and loving nature, yet so many faces
flashed and cut with their Steecken en snee, are signs of quarrels; besides
that, in some places without doors, they hang Knives to show that within such
houses one may find that sport if he has a mind to it; hence it is, that they
who are willing to it, do touch the Knife; and I heard of some so skilled in
this sport, that with a Crown-piece sharpened round about, they have flashed the
face of those who with Knives after this manner were fighting against them; and
though they say to me that this being to show a sport, is not an effect of
quarrels, I will add, that men who drink so hard, and are so concerned as that
Nation is, must often fall into quarrels; it is true, they do not presently run
one another thorough, because usually they wear no Swords, and carry no Pistols.

It is true, they mind not much what other Nations call point of honor, the
Motto of many being this, No Honor but Profit; and when they fall out about
greatness, they use to say one to another, If you be richer than I, you are the
better man of the two. A thing which indeed all strangers are to observe, is
their neatness and cleanness in their Cities, Marketplaces, Streets, Houses,
Goods, and Furnitures thereof, not so much as the least sign of a cobweb in any
Room, nor of the excrements of a Fly upon a Window, whereof the Glasses are
perpetually clear and shining, just as if they were new, any Keys, Locks, or
other iron Works, are as if they were newly bought from the Smiths shop, the
floors of the Rooms as well as the Roofs, are kept clean with Sand, and people
must not spit upon, but in a corner they have a pot full of Sand to that
purpose; and in some places they give Slippers to those who are to come in: In
a word, their Kitchin-stuff Vessels, their very Stables, which are but few, or
any other places in or about their Houses, are extraordinary clean, so that in
every such thing, they are as clean as any Nation in the World; yet though
their Table Clothes and Linen be very white and fine, and their Victuals very
cleanly dressed, I cannot say so of their eating of it, for promiscuously they
eat their Bread, Butter, Cheese, Dried Beef, Pork, which some will call
nastiness; yet I dare not condemn the universal practice of a Nation, though
such things be not used in other Countries, it being of the manner of eating
things as we say of the taste, de quo non disputandum.

Profit and Liberty are the two things which most of all they are taken with,
and good reason too, because the first is gotten with great care, pains, and
hazard, and the last was obtained with much difficulty, treasure, and blood;
yet, for all this, those who have Means, are rich and ^umptuous in their
houses, for this they have learned by communication with other Nations. A thing
wherein they are much to be blamed in, is, their being over indulgent to their
children, by whom they suffer to be called Thou and Thee, injurious language,
and several other abuses of that nature.

Above all* let strangers, specially those who live under Monarchies, be very
careful of two things, the one not to blame that form of Government settled
amongst them; for it suits better with the temper of the people; neither is it
fit for particular men, specially strangers, to talk against a Government
instituted by the advice and contrivance of judicious and understanding Men,
and continued by the wisest and ablest Men that have been and are there still,
much less, if a man receives protection from it, as all strangers do; even it
is not safe, in case any thing was wanting, or amiss in it (as often it falls
out in other places) to tell his mind about it, because Innovations are looked
upon as dangerous to States, and with such discourses are fomented: But the
second thing I would have strangers there to beware, is receiving principles
contrary to that form of Government which is settled at home, for fear of
causing of disturbances, and let them consider the same reasons, why Monarchy
at home should not be altered, as I used, why those Countries should continue
in a way of Republic.

This I would have the more to be minded, because of the danger there is of
receiving such impressions, and corrupt principles in relation to the authority
one is born under. This I speak, not only as to the Republic chiefly
Democratical, as Holand, but also as to those which are wholly Aristocratical,
as Venice. The cause of troubles in Nations, has usually been either the eager
desire of the Nobles to command, or else the violent love of people to their
liberty, which principles the minds of both sides being once possessed with,
every one driving on his way, rentings and disturbances are unavoidable, and
truly in such a case the parties are often so blind, that to avoid a present
inconvenience and distemper, they fall into a greater and more dangerous
disease, as it fell out in Rome, when the Nobles and the People being grieved,
the one at the Tribunes, and the other at the Consuls, which were balanced one
by another, they abolished them all, and set up the Decemvirs, whose little
finger was heavier than either Consuls or Tribunes; and certainly when
divisions in States cause such courses to be taken, there are all dispositions
in the World to Tyranny; for when one of the parties sets over himself a daring
ambitious man of interest, he makes use of that party to destroy the other,
which being done, he has so fortified himself, that it will not be difficult
to usurp over the rest. Thus if the Nobles be destroyed, the People having none
to fly to, must submit, and be kept under. Appius the Decemvir had such a fair
occasion, if he had had the wit to make use of it; for the people being
confident he would bear his interest against the Senate, chose him; but he,
instead of making use of this popular favor to undo the Nobles, begun to
oppose the People who had raised him to that Dignity, and complied with the
Senate, who were all his enemies; some because they had the same ambitious
designs as he, and all because they looked upon him as a creature and the head
of the people: they, who came after, and had the same designs, took a wiser way
to bring them about. Marius being chosen by the People, and Sylla by the
Senate, stook to their principles, and to those by whom they were to raised;
and when these divisions were come to the greatest height, and the great
revolution which not long after befell the Republic, was hanging over her head
Pompeius for the Senate, and Caesar for the People, did the like; for though
Pompeius had the worst of it, the Nobles stood to him as long as they were
able, and when they had no other way, they murdered Caesar in the Senate;
whose steps being followed by his Nephew Octavius, Augu^tus gave the mortal
wound to that party, by the overthrow of Brutus and Cassius, and he set himself
over all the People, and so reduced the Government to a single person, which
may be Pompeius or his Sons had done if they had had the better on the other
side.

Something of this is also to be observed in Monarchies, where also are the
different interests of the Nobles, and of the People, which to balance is the
Princes interest, and not to suffer one to be destroyed by the other; the
Nobillty indeed are the Props and Pillars of a Throne; but the Barons War, and
some Outlandish examples, show that they are sometimes the scourge of it and
within these very few years, we have seen a King of the North make use of the
People to bring down the power and authority of his Nobility. That Government
is certainly the most happy, and the likeliest to last, where the Nobility
encroacheth not upon the Liberties of the People, nor they on the Prerogatives
of the Nobles: Therefore if a Traveller be from amongst the Nobility, so as to
have right to hope one day to sit amongst the Noblemen, let him not learn
ambitious and tyrannical Principles, when he has been in Poland, and other
places, where the common people are no better than Slaves; or if he be born
amongst the common people, let him not be so desirous of a full liberty, such
as he has seen in Holand and other places where the supreme authority lies in
the people, so as to scorn when he comes home, to yield respect, and that
obedience, which according to the Law and customs of his Country is due to the
Nobility and Gentry; for a Noble who makes a stay in Poland, and a Commoner in
Holand, finding those Governments suitable to their quality and inclination; by
the influence of the climate, customs and conversations with people, will be
affected to it, and sometimes desire it should be so at home, which desire upon
occasion, will proceed to action, and strivings to setle it there.

What I said of the manner and customs of Holland, almost the like I may say of
those of the rest of the United Provinces, all having the same general way of
Government, so I may almost say of those Spanish Countries which are near them,
as to manners and customs, having all formerly been under the same Sovereign,
though those under Spain, have a mixture of fashions, by reason of their
constant communication with that Nation, as have with the French those of
Artois, Hainault, and others, which either belong to the French, or are their
very next Neighbors, which customs by degrees and succession, are introduced.
Now what I say, is not as to their Laws and Government, which I know are
different and particular to some Provinces; but I speak in matter of society,
conversation, and manner of life, which, as the Language, are near alike in all
the Low Countries, which being so nigh to us, their temper is the better known
to every one here, and it is less necessary to insist upon it as much as on
Countries more remote.

When a Traveller has seen most of all the Curiosities of those parts, which
for the most part consist in fair and strong Cities, I will have him to come to
Paris, there to re-collect what he has seen and learned in all his travels,
and to perfect himself in his Exercises, and take his last stamp before he
comes home.

I had said, that from Hambourg or Lubeck some go into Sueden and Denmark,
only to see the former, being for the most part a barren, vast, wild Country,
in comparison of the southerly parts of Europe, there is no pleasure, nor
hardly profit to travel in it. Stockholme, where the Court resides, is to be
seen. Vpsal, an Archbishopric, and the Seat of the Primate of Sueden, where is
also an University. Gottemburg also a great way from thence, where sometimes
the States or Diet use to meet; but chiefly one must see the Copper Mines, of
which there is much. So that Tilly used to call Gustavus Adolphus the
Copper-Smith: there are half Crowns, and Five shilling Pieces very big,
insomuch that I have seen some Countrymen carrying few of them upon the
shoulders with a stick passed thorough a hole made a purpose, and with this
sort of Coin are made their ordinary Payments, so that if sometimes one is to
receive but 25 or 30 l. worth of English Money, a horse does either draw or
carry it; the best Lands of that Crown are now what the last King but one
conquered in Germany, and what the last got from the Danes in Schonen, Holand,
and Bleking, in the former whereof is a good and convenient Harbor, The present
war has made some alteration in this.
called Landscroon: In fine it is a brave and Warlike Nation, which stands too
much upon the nicety of Honor, as they take it to be; so that if one has in
the least received an injury from another, he must fight him, or else he would
be branded for a Coward, unfit to come into any Gentleman's company, and lay
upon his reputation a perpetual blemish and note of infamy. I have taken notice
that most Gentleman of that Nation, when they are abroad; follow their
Exercises well, and succeed therein.

Of Denmark I have little to say; (that Kingdom (except what they have in
Holstein and Iutland) consisting all in Islands, which indeed are more
plentiful and better Country than Sueden; there are several little ones, as
Longland, Loyland, Femeren, and Funen, bigger than all these, whereof the chief
place is Odensea, but the greatest and best of all is Sealand, whereof
Copenhagen is the Metropolis; Elsenore is on this side the Sound, and
Cronenberg Castle is the strongest place of all those parts; upon the same
Island are also Roskildt and Fredericksburg, all worth seeing more or less: The
temper of this Nation in some things is like the Suedish, but more high and
lofty, though upon account of State there be an antipathy between the two
Nations, for the Kingdom, which was Elective, is now become Hereditary, and the
Nobility has lost the Privilege of choosing them a King; for the late King,
after the Suedish War, took an opportunity of his standing Army, to bring this
to pass, with the concurrence of the Commonalty; but as these places are not
much visited by Strangers, except in case of Ambassadors, or upon the account
of Trade, for the Sound is the inlet into the Baltic Sea, I will forbear any
longer speaking of it. From Sueden and Denmark Strang^rs come back usually to
Hambourg and Lubeck.

Something too should be said of Spain and Portugal, the former I have spoken
of elsewhere; the other is a Kingdom lying South-west of Spain, In the
character of Spain.
along the Sea Coasts, their Language is the same, except some few words, and
some difference in the pronunciation; there is an antipathy between the two
Nations, grounded upon the interest of State. After the death of King Don
Sebastian in Africa, Philip II. of Spain, took possession of that Kingdom, and
was kept by Philip III. his Successor, and by Philip IV. till the year 1640.
for that Kingdom took the first opportunity, and withdrew from the Spanish
Yoke, to yield obedience to the right Owner Don Iuan, Duke of Braganza, the
design being managed by the wisdom and courage of his Wife, of the Spanish
Illustrious Family of Medina Sidonia, assisted by some prudent and loyal
persons of quality, who contributed much to bring that design to pass, and to
make use of the general disposition of the Nation to a Revolution; Portugal and
the Algarves, are not of any great extent, but that King is Potent in A^rica
and the East Indies, where they made considerable Conquests, and drive a great
Trade, Goa being one of the most Merchant Cities of all those Indies; they
understand well the Art of Navigation, whereby that Kingdom is much enriched;
there are not many strong, or otherwise considerable Towns, Braga, Braganza,
Porto, Coimbra, Eluas, etc. are the chief, but Lisboa or Lisbon, is a good and
rich City, the Metropolis of the Kingdom; it has some things of the Spanish
temper, but not altogether so slow; there are not many Strangers there, except
those who are in the service of the Crown, Merchants, and some attending on
foreign Ministers; for Gentlemen who travel to see the World, and improve
themselves, make no long stay there, but only do go there, for in a short time
one can see the chief things there: in it, and in Spain I was about ten Months.
But now I must speak of other things.

After our Travelers are come to Paris, have refreshed themselves, and made
fashionableCloaths, the next thing must be to take Masters of Exercises; to be
perfect therein; let them at leisure see every thing they did see before, and
more too, and thereupon make exacter observation; such are the Court, and all
public Pleasures and Solemnities performed therein, whether it be Hunting,
General Musters, Balls, Plays, etc. they must renew good former acquaintance,
make what new ones they are able, specially with men of virtue and quality,
with Virtuosi and other Wits of Paris; they ought to get an exact information
of the whole Court, and of great Persons of the Kingdom, whose authority and
power therein is very great; this gives a great light to understand the
constitution and interests of States; which is a thing I could desire them to
mind, and be well versed in; to this effect, they must find ways handsomely how
to be acquainted with the Ministers of those Princes and Republics, in whose
Dominions they have been, and of others too; which will come in by degrees;
from them they can hear news of what passes all Europe and World over, learn
Wisdom, and the grounds of Policy; for though they will not acquaint one with
their secrets, yet the continual course of affairs, being apprehended well,
will teach one very much; also sometimes they reason upon things, and give
their opinion about them. Besides this, Paris affords a great variety of good
Company, wherein much is to be learned, so that six months at least can well be
bestowed there, and whole years too, if one can and has a mind to stay, and
yet loose no time.

The Languages he has learned in his travels, I would have him not to forget,
but rather to practice upon all occasions, both by reading and speaking, for
they are accomplishment for any Gentleman, and qualification necessary to a
Statesman, or to any employed in public Affairs: He will also do well, if
possible, to understand the peculiar way of speaking of other Nations: As for
instance, here in England we speak much between the teeth; for when the letter
H is pronounced after a T, the tongue lies between the teeth, which else are
close for the most part: The French speak with a whistling of the tongue: The
Italian with the lips: The German with the throat: And the Hollander with the
nose. These differences are easily perceived by those who have any skill in
those Languages, and to give an instance of the two last, the German and the
Hollanders, between which two there should be the less difference, because this
last is but a Dialect of the former; yet when one is come from Germany as far
as Colen, he will find this difference very palpable. They also who are
critical upon Languages, do find that they are adapted to Subjects; for upon
certain matters, some are more energetical and significative than others; for
not to speak of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues, which I mentioned before,
and are called dead Tongues, the Spanish is called Senatoria, for Grave
Senators; the French Oratoria, for Orators and Courtiers; the Italian Amatoria,
for Gallants and Lovers; the High Dutch Martialis Generosa, for Generous
Soldiers; the Polonish Martialis ferox, for Wild and Barbarous Ones; the
Suedish Nugatoria; for Trifles and Trivial Things; the Danish Ploratoria,
Weeping; and the Low Dutch Mercatoria, for Merchants, And now I am upon this
Subject, it will not be amiss for me here to insert a character of some
Nations, out of which a Traveller may receive some Lights and Directions how to
behave himself when he comes amongst them, which has a relations only to the
generality of the people, and does no way reflect upon the Superior Powers
over those Nations, whose Governments, Councils, and Ministers, I confess to be
much above all such kinds of observations.

In Affection.
The French loves everywhere. The Spaniard very well. The Italian knows how to
love. The German knows not how to love.
In Behavior.
French courteous. Spaniard lordly. Italian amorous. German clownish.
In Body.
French has it manly. Spaniard so, so, Italian indifferent. The German tall.
In Buildings.
French build conveniently. Spaniard meanly. Italian stately. German strongly.
In Clothes.
French inconstant and changing. Spaniard modest. Italian poor. German mean.
In Color.
French like a chestnut. Spaniard black. Italian brown. German white or readish.
In Conversation.
The French jovial. Spaniard troublesome. Italian complying. German unpleasant.
In Councils.
French hasty. Spaniard wary. Italian subtle. German slow.
In Courage.
The French as an Eagle. Spaniard like an Elephant. Italian as a Fox. German as
a Bear.
In Dancing.
The French danceth. Spaniard walks. Italian Vaults. German walloweth
himself.
In Diet.
French delicate. Spaniard sparing. Italian sober. German loves to drink.
In Favors.
French forgets good and evil. Spaniard rewards all. Italian ready to do good
but revengeful. German does neither good nor evil.
In Gaming.
The French ventures all. Spaniard makes a good show with a bad. Game. Italian
takes exceptions. German is often cheated.
In Laws.
French has good Laws, but observe them not. Spaniard has excellent Laws, and
observes them rigidly. Italian has good Laws, but is remiss in the
observation. German has Laws which are so, so.
In Learning.
The French knows a little of every thing. The Spaniard has a deep Learning.
Italian like a Doctor. German like a Pedant.
In Looks and Mien.
French looks like one inconsiderate, and is often so. Spaniard like a wise
Man, and often is so indeed. Italian looks giddy-like, but is wise. German has
seldom good look or Mien.
In Love.
The French giddy and inconsiderate. Spanish boaster. Italian noble. German
gross and rustical.
In making Love.
French diverts his Mistress. Spaniard adoreth her. Italian serves her. German
bestows Gifts upon her.
In contempt of Love.
French hasty, offends his Mistress. Spanish proud, slights her. Italian
discreet, complains of her. German rude, asks for what he gave her.
In Magnificence.
In France consists in the Court. In Spain in her Arms. Italy in Churches.
Germany in her Princes.
In Plays.
French pleasant and merry. Spanish serious. Italian Buffoon and Jester. German
unpleasant.
In Pride.
The French commends every thing. Spaniard praises none but himself. Italian
despises that which deserves it. German is no boaster.
In Promises.
French light. Spaniard deceitful. Italian advantageous. German true and
faithful.
In Religion.
French zealous. Spaniard superstitious. Italian ceremonious. German
indifferent.
In Secret.
The French tells every thing. Spaniard is very secret. Italian says not a
word. German forgets what he was told.
In Speech.
The French sings. Spaniard speaks. Italian acts the Comedy. German howls.
Again.
French speaks well, but writes ill. Spaniard speaks and writes little, but
well. Italian speaks and writes well. German speaks little, but writes much.
In Temper.
French jester and injurious. Spaniard grave and respectful. Italian pleasant
and jealous. German lofty and fantastical.
In Wit.
French has it all the body over. Spaniard in the head. Italian in the arm.
German in the fingers end.
Concerning Husbands.
In France Companions. In Spain Tirants. In Italy Goalers. In Germany Masters.
Concerning Women.
In France Ladies or Drudges. In Spain Slaves. In Italy prisoners. In Germany
Housewifes.
Of Servants.
In France Masters. In Spain Subjects. In Italy respectful. In Germany
Companions.
Of Horses.
In France good for every thing, or for nothing. In Spain noble. In Italy
handsome and good. In Germany dull and heavy.
In Diseases.
The French subject to the P -- The Spaniard to the Kings Evil. Italian to the
Plague. German to the Gout.
Some Compare
The French to a Flea. Spaniard to a -- Louse. Italian to a Punaise, a Bug.
German to a Louse.
As there is no Rule without exception, so in every Country some are of a
temper different from what is here represented; but as sometimes denomination
is made from the greater, other times from the better part; so here are
expressed the vulgar imperfections, and the particular good qualities of the
better sort; and i^ one and the same Country, men of all these different
tempers may be found out.

To this I must add some particular advice and instructions for a Traveller how
to order himself when he is beyond Seas; for he can never be too much warned of
what he must do when he is abroad, and what I am to say, I believe will do him
good, at least I am sure can do him no harm, O Traveller, whosoever you are,
pray take notice of the following Advices.

So order and regulate your time as to have certain set hours for every thing
you are to do.

Imprimis venerare Deum. Forget not morning and evening to ask God that which
is necessary for your Soul and Body, nor to give him thanks for favors
received from him. Heathens themselves can say, a Jove principium, a Jove sinis
erit. Follow wise Solomon's Council, To remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, and you know King David says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom.

Apply your self to the reading of Holy Scriptures, which is able to make you
wise unto Salvation; it will afford you Lessons whereupon to settle your Faith,
and convince the Adversaries thereof; besides this, it will furnish you with
precepts and examples of Morality, History, Politics, and other things
necessary to knowing Men: In a word, it will teach you to live in this present
World, soberly, justly, and religiously that is, to perform your duty in
relation to your self, your neighbor, and toward God.

Observe an order and method in the reading of it, every morning you may read a
Chapter in the old Testament, and another in the New, and do the like every
night; so in time you may read it all. In a special way I commend the Prophecy
of Isaiah, the Psalms of David, and above all the Proverbs of Solomon, and his
Book called Ecclesiastes, (wherein is contained much of Divine and humane
Wisdom) the Gospel according to St. John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
eighth Chapter to the Romans.

Yield respect and attention in reading of it, and have a design of being
instructed thereby, rather than to cavil and take exceptions thereat.

Verini disticha, Catonis disticha de moribus and les quatrains of Pybrac in
French; deserve to be read. Apply your self to History Ancient and Modern in
particular (as to this last) to that of the most considerable Countries of
Europe, beginning with that of England, which to you is the most necessary.
History is the eye of Times, and the ground of Policy; it shows wherein great
Men, and others, have done well, and wherein they have failed.

Do not neglect reading the Gazettes; for although they contain many trifles
and false things, yet they give the ground of History, and will acquaint you
with the most considerable places and persons of these times.

As much as in you lies, lodge in the house of honest people, and of good
report, whose conversation may be beneficial to you, and where you be not
exposed to cheats, and unnecessary expenses.

Make acquaintance with Men of Parts, and virtuous: Be civil to all, but
familiar with few.

See what curiosities, whether ancient or modern, are in places you stay at, or
as much as you can in or about those you go by; but above all endeavor to know,
and be acquainted with Men learned or famous for any thing whatsoever.

When you stay in any place, be sure ever to learn one Exercise or other of
those you are most inclined unto, and wherein the Masters are esteemed able
Men: In the mean time there are those Exercises, which to you ought to be only
a sport and recreation, but others there are which in earnest you ought to
apply your self to, such are things instructing your judgment, and solid as
Sciences, and some Arts, which you must make your study of, but Fencing,
Dancing, and the like, should be only the accessory which yet you ought not to
neglect, because not only you get thereby outward accomplishments, but also you
see company in those Schools, and thus avoid idleness the mother of Vices.

Endeavor to get the Language and Manners of the Country you are in; to that
effect inform your self of every thing, though it 'twere intrigues of the
neighbors, and interests of families; strive to be acquainted with the chief
persons of the place, and to get into their friendship; for not only you will
learn from them, but also receive good offices and services upon occasion.

Speak your Mother Tongue as seldom as you can, and not at all if it be
possible.

When you come into a serious company, speak little, and to the purpose, and be
sure not to interrupt the discourse of any man: Take heed you say nothing
whereat people present or absent may justly be offended, chiefly if the absent
be friends of those who are present.

In matter of humane Society, one of the best Rules that can be given, is to
consider men in relation to us as either our friends or our enemies, or
strangers; that is, indi^ferent to us, and we to them, neither friends nor
enemies; as to friends, we must so live with them as being possible for them to
become our enemies; that is, we must not too much trust nor so unbosome our
selves to them in every thing, for fear we should hereafter have reason to
repent of it; with our enemies we must live as with those for whom it is not
unpossible to become our friends; that is, to keep such measures, and bridle
those violent effects of our hatred, which might happen to render enmity
unreconcileable, with strangers we must so live as to endeavor to make them to
be our friends, and avoid to have them to become our enemies.

Sis quod vis haberi, says Socrates. Be indeed what you would be accounted to
be; will you be thought to be an honest man, you must really be so.

Do nothing against conscience, honor, or decency; avoid gaming, (except
sometimes for company, and out of compliance) drinking, and the company of
dishonest Women: Forbear also, if you can, falling in love with virtuous Maids
or Women; for when a man engages too deep therein, he is often brought into
great straits and difficulties, which hinders him from doing any thing, and
puts him upon many extravagancies.

Yet I advise you all the while you are in France, to frequent the company of
Women (when it is no hinderance another way) because one is polished and
civilized in their company and conversation, and the desire a man has to
please them, makes, he observes himself in his Clothes, Discourses, and
Actions, better than else he would do; their company gives some confidence
necessary to a young man (provided it recedeth not from modesty, or does not
degenerate into impudence,) In fine, that inspires civility, sweetness, and
complacency, which are all qualities necessary to a Gentleman.

Speak not about matters of Religion with those who are not of yours. Speak
with respect of Princes and Ministers of State; or at least speak not ill of
them, chiefly of those within whose Dominions you are; but ab^^e all, of your
own Prince, or of those who are about him, for fear they hear of it, and at
last be avenged of you.

Say nothing but the truth, but do not always speak it; for there is time and
place for every thing; and be careful not to discover the bosom of your heart
to those you do not know, or when there is no necessity to do it.

Be just to all, and according to your power and abilities, charitable to those
who deserve it.

In every action of yours, consider that God sees and hears every thing; and do
nothing in private whereat you might be ashamed in public: often God brings
shame on those who are afraid of that more than of his name, -- quicquid agis
prudenter agas and respice sinem.

Declare your secret to him only whose fidelity and discretion you had great
trials of, rather mistrust the world; distrustfulness is the mother of
security, but take heed not to express it; for nothing is so disobliging as
that.

In discourses about indifferent things, never gainsay what another tells,
except you be concerned therein, or your opinion be asked thereupon; and then
speak with as much gentleness and civility as you are able; and if ever you are
brought to a dispute, let it be carried on by strength of arguments, and not by
number of injuries.

In many things, audi, vide, tace, hear, see, and hold y^^r peace; for, says
Cato, -- nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.

Promise nothing of importance without deliberation, and except you have a mind
to perform it; for you are free not to promise, but when you have done it, you
are engaged to perform what you promise; express it clearly and plainly, for
fear people should think you promise more than you do.

It is not enough for you to study the fashions of a Country, except you
^reduec them to a practice; because you will thereby become more acceptable to
the people, and insensibly learn to know all manner of tempers, and agree
therewith: do the like with the several companies in those Countries; endeavor
to be serious with those who are such, and merry when you are with men of that
temper; you must also suit and fit your self to the subject of the discourses,
serious when you speak of serious things, and jovial when you speak of merry
ones.

Remember how the manner of doing or saying things gives them a great deal of
weight; so if you oblige one handsomely, thereby you lay a double obligation
upon him. One said of old, That to grant a man a favor with a frowning look*
or hard words, is to give him Bread full of Stones.

Let not your Hat stick on your head, for civility wins the heart; and
according to the Rule of Morality, Honor est magis in honorante quam in
honorato.

When you do any thing which seems to put one to the least trouble and
inconveniency, though only you passed your hand before him (which often
happens at table) ask him permission to do it, or pardon when you have done
it; and if ever you expect from others to receive respect and civility, you
must give them some with advantage; for one hand washes another, and never
stand who shall begin; even in places where the order of the World gives you
the hand, take it with so much discreetness, that though it be your rank, it
may appear you rather receive it from the civility of him who yields it.

The character of a worthy Gentleman is not only not to suffer, but also to do
no wrong, and express his repentance when he has done any; but upon some
occasions, it must be endured when it cannot be cured, nor hindered, at least
without danger; and in such a case, you do well not to seem to take notice of
it; for if you did, you will be obliged to resent it; whereupon you would make
your weakness and want of power be seen, or else you would be suspected being a
Coward.

Make not only acquaintances, but friends also, and get as many friends, and as
few enemies as you can; often one enemy may do you more harm than ten friends
can do you good; and friends do you no hurt when they have no occasion to do
you good.

Disoblige no man, unless you be forced to it, or receive thereby some
considerable advantage; yet still let it be seen to be against your mind; This
and some other things I s^y, ought to be diversified according to circumstances
of time, places, and persons.
and when you are so unhappy as to be forced thereunto, do it in the most mild
and gentle ways that are possible to you, still expressing the trouble you have
thereat.

As much as in you lies, avoid the company of quarrelsome insolent, persons,
and given to drink, for fear of becoming such as they are; from Wolves one
learns to houl, or at least thereby you shall get a bad name, Dimmi con chi
vai, ch'io te diro queli' che tu fai, say the Italians, Tell me what Company
you keep, and I can tell you what you are doing. Now Vices cause men to be
hated and slighted of God and Men.

Despise no man, and condemn nothing slightly, but upon good grounds; and when
any one is ill spoken of for some bad action laid to his charge, if it be as
probable he has not done it, as that he has done it, charity obliges you to
believe the best; therefore be more apt to believe good than evil about
another. Speak not evil of any man within his hearing in whatsoever Language,
for fear he does understand you.

Try all things, says the Apostle, and retain that which is good: By all good
and lawful means, endeavor to get and deserve the esteem of honest men; and if
it were possible, of all the World.

Do not imitate those who are so given to jesting, as trouble not themselves
about what they say, who have rather to loose much, and be exposed to dangers,
than forbear telling of a Jest when it comes into their head: that kind of
people cares not for the displeasure they cause to others, nor for the wrong
they do to themselves; for at last it falls on their head.

Take well all advices given you, and return thanks to the Givers, specially if
they be of the number of those whom you take to be your friends; then mend, and
be the better for it; if not, learn thence to know the envy and malice of some,
and the ignorance of others; ever taking well that which is told you with a
good intent, and (at least seemingly) that which is on the contrary: what
natural defects you know to be in you, strive to mend and master. Who can be
long without a Looking-glass to see what is amiss in ones Face? they who tell
us of our faults, are the Looking-glasses of our actions, which now and then
are necessary to us.

All civilized persons are agreed, that civility is every where to be
practiced. But the manner and customs of doing it are different, according to
the Countries; therefore get of them as exact an information as you can when
you are upon the places.

When you are settled in a place, every day be reading some good Latin Book or
other, Nulla dies abeat quin linea ducta supersit, and when you read good
Authors, never forget to take Notes of what does deserve it.

To benefit your self with what you have seen, heard, or read in the day time,
be sure to have a Table Book or other Paper-Book to set down that which is
remarkable in it (and this you may do thorough your whole journey) and every
night before you go to bed (specially if you make abode in a Town) take an
hours time to call it to your memory, which will much be helped, and make a
greater impression upon it, if you have time enough to meditate and make
reflections on it.

I would also advise you every day to learn something by heart; for that
exercises and strengthens your memory, and is no burden to you.

Before you leave a place to go to another, specially if this last be remote,
endeavor to find the company of one or two honest, civil, and sober Gentlemen,
which will make your way more safe, pleasant, and comfortable to you.

Another thing ought to be done before you leave a Place or Country, which is
to buy some of the best and most curious Books in that Language; by these means
you will have the newest and best of what Books are in Europe; and being come
home, you will have wherewith to entertain your self, and keep from forgetting
what Languages you learned in your travels: In the mean time observe that in
every Country, for the generality of Authors, there is a genius particular to
something; as for instance, Italians write well in Politics, the French in
Memoires and Romances, etc.

It were well also to have the Names and Pictures of the Prince, and of his
Ministers or other Magistrates, specially (this last) when you are within the
Dominions of a Republic, with the names of men famous in one Profession or
other, whether of Sciences or Arts, as are Divines, Mathematicians,
Picture-Drawers, Architects, Musicians, and the like.

Remember how difficult it is to find again occasions when once they are lost,
and time lost can never be recovered; therefore whilst you stay abroad, use
your utmost endeavors to fit your self when you are come home to serve your
King and Country.

Let there be a Rule and a Resolution in every thing you do, that is, have
reasons for every thing you do, Some of these advices I have given elsewhere up
and down, which I think fit to mention again in this, a^ improper place.
and be not fickle when you resolve upon something; and if, as I said
elsewhere, you have a good disposition, inclination, application and direction,
you need not doubt, with the Grace of God, of a good success in your
undertakings.

A Gentleman will be much the better by the knowledge and practice of these
things, which are universal Truths, not tied to any time or place, directing
him how to get Knowledge and Wisdom, if he inclines and applies himself to it
for the time he is abroad, which being expired, he must prepare to come home,
having got a good stock of learning, prudence, experience, and of Books,
necessary not only to preserve, but also to improve it; upon his leaving Paris,
he is to take leave of the chief of his acquaintances, and of all his friends,
returning them thanks for their civilities, desiring them to continue their
love to him in his absence; and of some particular, he may ask leave now and
then to trouble him or them with a Letter, and vouchsafe from time to time to
answer thereunto. Thus when he is at home, he will have news of what happens
abroad, and by this correspondency, he may more and more be informed of
affairs, the sooner, and from good hands; hereby also he can oblige any one of
his friends when they go over, commending them to those he has beyond Seas.

As soon as he is come over, let him exactly observe himself in what he says
or does; for the eyes of most that knew him will be fixed upon him and
according to the opinion which at that time people conceive of him, whether
good or bad, so he is like to be esteemed as long as he lives; a man whose
reputation is settled, may do many things, and never be thought the worse for it,
because men have a good opinion of him, which if those who have bad repute
should do, they would be condemned and cried down; it is usual to think well of
those we love and honor, so on the contrary of those we care not for; when the
person is acceptable, what he does pleases us, but when we have a prejudice
against him, we dislike every thing he does: and indeed, it is strange a thing,
yet true, that we should so much depend on the opinion of others; to obtain it
generally, one must be not only prudent, but also very ^ortunate; and yet for
all this, such is the variety of man's mind, and they so differ in their
opinion, that nequidem Jupiter omnibus placet, says one, God himself does not
please all men: therefore this universal approbation being so hard to be
obtained, one must be content with that of the best sort, and with the
testimony of his own Conscience, not minding the envying, jealousy, hatred and
other principles, which several men in the world are actuated by.

Seeing then how necessary it is to get into the good opinion of the World, and
how difficult to be obtained, one must be the more wary and careful, and labor
the harder for it, specially at home the place of ones settlement, where he is
to give a trial of his Parts, Abilities, and Improvement in his Travels; which
being known, he will be cried up in his Country, considered at Court, and
respected every where, which will last as long as his life, in case, he abuses
not that love and favor of men: but in case it should happen with him as it
does with some, who learn no good, but all the evils and vices practiced beyond
Seas, and who are not a jot the better for their travels, having only lost
their time, and misspent their moneys; to such we might apply the Story of the
Ass, which having left his ordinary Pasture to go into those that were more
remote, and having been there for a considerable time, at last being come back,
he looked about and stared, and made much ado, expecting from those fellows he
had left, a great respect and admiration; which being denied him, he
expostulated the case with them, saying, He had been very far, and had seen
many things. That may be, said others, but still you are the same you were, an
Ass when you went, and an Ass now you are come back; with this difference, that
at that time you were a little one, and now you are a great one, your Ears
being grown much longer than they were at that time. So it had been better for
some Gentlemen not to have traveled, because they come home worse than they
went. Socrates told one who asked him why he was not the better for all his
Travels, Quid miraris, nihil tibi peregrin^tiones prodesse cum te circumferas
ut animum possis continere, prius corporis tui fugam siste, aegri animi est
ista vagatio: like a Patient who lies abed restless, he thinks, but is
mistaken, to be the better with often changing place; so with some,
disquietness of mind, is often cause of traveling; to such Seneca faith,
Animum debes mutare non coelum: licet vastum trajeceris mare terraeque urbesque
recedant, sequentur te quocumque perveneris, vitio. One ought to change Mind
and Manners as well as Climate and Country. Horace spoke wisely upon this
subject, Li. 1. Epist. 11 nequam cunque Deus, etc.
and to the same effect as the former.

But he who travelleth with prudence and discretion, will mind his benefit and
reputation, the content of his Friends and Relations, and the service of his
King and Country, which by all good, lawful, and possible means he will
endeavor to procure and promote, but how, and by what means this may be
effected, it is a sufficient matter for another Book, and a particular Treatise.

FINIS.
Histories, and other Curious Discourses, fit to be Read by Young Gentlemen,
All Printed for, and sold by John Starkey in Fleet Street.
1. THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Moscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year, 1633. and finished in the year 1639.
containing a complete History of those Countries. Whereunto are added the
Travels of Mandelslo, from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638 and
finished in 1640. The whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures.
Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by I.
Davis. The second Edition, in Folio, Price bound 20 s.

2. The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel Citizen and Secretary of
Florence; containing the History of Florence, the Princ^, the original of the
Guelf and Guibilin, the Life of Castruccio, Castracani; the Murder of Vitelli,
etc. by Duke Valentino; the State of France, the State of Germany, the
Discourses on Titus Livius; the Art of War the Marriage of Belphegor. All from
the true Original, newly and faithfully translated into English. In Folio.
Price bound 18 s.

3. The History of Barbados, St. Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight:
In two Books; containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representi^g the most considerable
Rarities therein described. In Folio. Price bound 10 s.

4. The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age; but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian, by Battista Nani
Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood Knight. In
Folio, Price bound, 14 s.

5. The Present State of the Ottoman Empire, in three Books; containing the
Maxims of the Turkish Polity; their Religion and Military Discipline.
Illustrated with diverse Figures. Wr^tten by Paul Ricaut Esquire late Secretary to
the English Ambassador there; now Consul of Smyrna. The fourth Edition. In
Octavo, Price bound 6. s.

6. The Memoirs of Philip de C^mines, Lord of Agenton; containing the History
of Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
Occurrences in their particular Reigns from the year 14^4. to 1498. Revised and
Corrected from diverse Manuscripts, and ancient Impressions. By Denis Godsrey,
Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his Edition lately
Printed at Paris. Newly Translated into English. In Octavo. Price bound 6 s.

7. A Relation of Three Embassies, from His Majesty Charles II. to the Great
Duke o^ Mosoovy, the King of Sueden, and the King of Denmark. Performed by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663. and 1664. By an
Attendant on the Embassies. In Octavo* Price bound 4 s.

8. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews, from the time of
Sixtus IV. 1471. to the death of the latePope Alexander VII. 1667* Written in
Italian, and Englished by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. The second
Edition. In Octavo, Price bound 3 s.

9. A Relation of the ^iege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces to its surrender, the 27th of September, 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Volunteer in that service, and faithfully Englished, In
Octavo. Price bound 1 s.

10. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country and River
of the Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of
French. In Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

11. The Secret History of the Court of the Emperor Justinian. Written by
Procopius of Caesaria. Faithfully Rendered into English. In Octavo. Price bound
1 s. 6 d.

12. The History of the late Revolutions of the Empire of the Great Mogul;
tegether with the most considerable Passages for five years following in that
Empire; with a new Map of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of
Indostan; the Circulation of the Gold and Siver of the World to discharge it
self there; as also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same; and the
principal cause of the decay of the States of Asia. By Monsieur F. Bernier,
Physician of the Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French by H. O.
S^cretary to the Royal Society. In two Parts. In Octavo. Price bound 7 s.

13. The History of France under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. from
the death of King Lewis XIII. to the year 1664. Wherein all the Affairs of
State to that time, are exactly related. By Benjamin Priolo, and faithfully
Englished by Christopher Wase Gent. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s.

14. The History of the Twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
C. Sue^onius Tranquillus. Newly Translated into English, and illustrated with
all the Caesar's Heads, in Copper Plates. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s.

15. A New Voyage into the Northern Countries: Being a Description, of the
Manners, Customs, Superstition, ^uildin^s, and Habits o^ the Norwegians,
Laplanders, Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Samopedes, Zemblans, and Islanders.
In Twelves. ^rice bound 1 s.

16. The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government Laws, Forces, Riches Manners, Cus^oms, Revenue and Territory of the
Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society.
The second Edition. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

17. The Present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy. The second
Edition enlarged, with the manner o^ Election o^ Pop^s; and a Character of
Spain. Written originally in English, by John Gailhard Gent. In Twelv^s. Price
bound 1 s. 6 d.

18. The Policy and Government of the Ven^^i^^^, both in Civil and Military
Affairs. Written in Fren^h by the Sieur de It^liay; and saithfully Englished.
In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

19. The Voyage o^ It^ly: or, A Complete Journey thorough Italy. In two Part^.
With the Char^cter of the People, and a Description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statutes, Antiquities; as also of
the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all the Princes; with
Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassells Gent. who traveled
thorough Italy five times, as Tutor to s^veral of the English Nobility. Opus
Posthumum. Corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller, S.
W. Never before extant. In Twelves, Price bound 5 s.

20. A Relation of the French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish
Netherlands, in the years 1667. and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his
Title thereunto; and an account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May
2. 1667. Englished by G. H. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

21. A Collection of Discourses of the Virtuosi of France, upon Questions of
all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of
the Beaux Esrits at Paris, by the most ingenuous persons of that Nation.
Englished by G. Havers. In Folio. Price boun^ 12 s.

22. A Justification of the late War against the United Netherlands. In two
Parts. Illustrated with several Sculptures. By Henry Stubbe. In Quarto. Price
bound 4 s.

23. The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the Policies, Councils,
Magistrates, and Laws of that State are fully related, and the use of the
Balloting Box exactly described. Written in the year, 1675. By the Sicur
Amelott de la Houscaie, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice. In
Octavo. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

24. The Rules of Civility, or Certain ways of Deportment observed in France
amongst all Persons of Quality, upon several occasions. Faithfully Englished.
In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.

25. The Art of Complaisance, or Means to oblige in Conversation. In Twelves.
Price bound 1 s.

26. The Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier, a Nobleman of France, thorough
Turkey into Persia, and the East Indies, finished in the year, 1670. Giving an
Account o^ the State of those Countries. Illustrated with diverse Sculptures.
Together with a new Relation of the Present Grand Signiors Seraglio. By the
same Author. Made English by I. P. To which is added a description of all the
Kingdoms which encompass the Euxi^e and Caspian Seas. By an English Traveller.
Never before Printed. In Eolio. Price bound 20 s.

FINIS.

