THE Good Old Test REVIVED and RECOMMENDED To all Sincere CHRISTIANS.
SINCE God and Caesar has given us Peace, let us enjoy it. Why should any be
any longer Miserable, when a Universal Blessing bids all be Happy? We have had
enough of Persecution, enough of Sequestring, of Seizing, of Confinements, of
Prisons; enough of starving, of undoing Families, of Tortuning Consciences and
making Orphans and Widows for God's sake. These have been the Evils We have
hitherto groaned under, and which have for many years deformed Our Goshen with
an Egyptian Servitude. But now, Heaven be Blessed, and Thanks to Our Good
Sovereign, we are called from this Slavery; these Heavy Burdens are taken off
our Shoulders; We need no longer dread the Black Writ, or a Summons; but may
every one sit under his own Fig Tree, and eat of the Fruit of his own Vine.
Away therefore now with all Animosities and Hatreds, let Jealousies and
Plotting be banished from amongst us, let Factions and Riots be buried for
ever; and let an Undistinguishing Charity unite us equally to every Neighbor.
Let us have no other Test, but of Loyalty and Love. Let every one Serve God to
the best of his Knowledge: And though we cannot join in Worship, yet let no
Hatred divide us. Let Christians dread nothing, but from Infidels or Turks: If
these are taught to hate us, to Revile and Rail against us; if these have their
Chains, their Prisons and their Slavery; Let these Turkish Entertainments
remain with the Turks: For why should Christians prepare them for one another?
Let us all join our Hearts and our Hands, to purge the Nation of these
Barbary-Fashions: And let Railing and Reproching be no longer any part of Our
Religion; These may sound well enough in a Mosch; But make no good Music
within Christian Walls: Let the Test of a Christian be no other than what was
appointed by Christ. He Commanded us to Love one another: Let us all take This
Test, This Christian Test. In this let us strive to out do one another: And let
this be the chief Argument, by which we desire to prove, that We are Christ's
Disciples. Oh! what a Happy Nation would This Charity make us? How soon would
Peace and Plenty begin to overflow? How would our Neighbors abroad both Love
and admire us? How would our Enemies swell both with Envy and Dread? And why
now shall we not be thus Happy, when we may? If we hinder it not our selves,
our Guardian-Caesar will not permit it to be in the Power of others to do it.
Let us apply therefore our Minds to the Promoting this Union: Let us all
endeavor to mend every one One. Let us all search our Inclinations, and
examine our Hearts; if any one discovers there any Sowerness or Aversion to
Peace; if any Melancholy arising at this General Joy: Let him purge and
discharge it: Such Symptoms betray a corruption of Humors, and that the
Constitution is not so Christian as it should be. If any Grieve, because This
Peace has lessened their Authority, or shortened their Power; let them examine,
what this Power and Authority was: If 'twas a Power of Persecuting, a Power of
Oppressing, a Power of Afflicting their Neighbor; let them Remember, that to a
Good Man such a loss is desirable, and that Tyranny is no proper Badge of a
Christian. If any find an Inclination to be Railing against their Neighbors;
if they can never think themselves well, but when they are Trampling upon their
Fellow Christians; if they recommend their Persuasion, by making others
Ridiculous; this may pass for a Zeal, but scarce according to Knowledge; This
might do well enough, were it the Interest of Christians to destroy
Christianity; were there any virtue in Passion, in Animosity, and Malice; or
were it our Duty to Hate, instead of Love one another. But as our Gospel
stands, Meekness, Charity, Compassion and Peace, are the better Virtues, and
more Substantial Proofs of a good Religion. Since our Gospel therefore is a
Gospel of Peace, let us improve this virtue amongst us: And for all Snarling,
Quarrelling, Unneighbourly Tempers, let them be gone into Cadmus's Field, where
Fighting is all the Fashion; where no Man gets up, but it is to knock down his
Neighbor, where Ruin is all the Design. This is the proper place of such
embittering Spirits; here let them fire all their Mouth-Granados, and beat up
their Points of War upon Pulpit-Drums: But for us, let us live in Peace, we
desire no such Champain Divinity. Our Gospel instructs us to Serve God, to Give
Caesar his Due, and to Love our Neighbor; let this be our Profession and our
Practice. Let those be admired, who encourage these Virtues and Teach them. But
for others who either openly, or by Sly Insinuations promote the contrary, let
them be esteemed neither for Good Christians or Loyal Subjects.

LICENSED,

April the 2 d. 1687.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1687.


