A Winter-Evening CONFERENCE BETWEEN Neighbors. In Two Parts. PART I.

Prove. 27. 17. As iron sharpeneth iron, so does the countenance of a man his
friend.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty,
1684.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Must on the behalf of the Persons concerned in these Papers now in thy
hands, bespeak thy Candor in two or three Particulars following. First, That
thou will not suffer thy Curiosity to carry thee so far as to be very
inquisitive who they were or where they dwelt who held these Conferences; for
besides that the knowledge thereof would be of no use, there are several other
reasons why I cannot gratify thee therein, further than by giving their true
Characters, which thou will find subjoyned.

Secondly, That whereas at the entrance of these Conferences, and perhaps also
here and there in other parts of them, thou may observe some short touches of
mirth, thou will not be offended at them as ill comporting either with the
gravity of the Speakers, or the seriousness of the Design. For if thou consider
the humor of the Age, thou will not find thy self obliged to impute it to the
levity of Sebastians temper, but to his discretion and wisdom, that he does
accommodate himself to those he would gain upon; as he that will catch Fish,
must suit his Baits to their Gust and Fancy.

Thirdly, Because it is not unlikely but thou will take notice, that the
Interlocutors do now and then upon occasion use complemental Attributions
toward each other, and applaud one another Wit or Eloquence; which being now
put in print, may to a severe Censor, seem to savor of ostentation, and look
like clawing and flattering one another. Therefore thou art desired to
remember, that this was done only amongst themselves and in private
Conversation, where such kinds of Civility are usually practiced without
offense or imputation.

As for the general Design of these Conferences, I make bold to tell thee, that
it is apparently noble and generous, namely, to lead the way to more manly
Conversation, especially amongst the better ranks of men, to demonstrate that
the strictest Virtue is consistent with the greatest Prudence and Civility; and
in short, to raise the dejected and depressed Spirit of Piety in the World. The
consideration hereof encouraged the Publication, and I hope will sufficiently
recommend it to thy Acceptance.

Farewell.
The Characters of the Persons in the two following Conferences.
Sebastian a Learned and pious Gentleman, who takes all occasions of engaging
those he converses with, in sobriety and a sense of Religion.

Philander a Gentile and ingenuous Person, but too much addicted to the
lightnesses of the Age, till reclaimed by the Conversation of Sebastian.

Biophilus a Skeptical Person, who had no settled Belief of any thing; but
especially was averse to the great Doctrines of Christianity, concerning the
Immortality of the Soul and the life to come: and therefore consequently was
much concerned for the present life. Till at length awakened by the discreet
Reasonings of Sebastian, and the affectionate Discourses of Philander, he
begins to deliberate of what before he despised.

Eulabes a truly prudent and holy Man, who made his life a study of and
preparation for Death, propounded as an Example for Imitation, in the second
Conference.

The Argument of the first Conference.
Sebastian visiting his Neighbor Philander, after a little time spent in Civil
Salutations, is quickly pressed by him to the too usual Entertainment of liberal
Drinking: which Sebastian at first modestly and facetiously declines; but
afterward more directly shows the folly and unmanliness of it. He is then
invited to Gaming, which he also excusing himself from, and giving his reasons
against: Philander complains of the difficulty of spending time without such
diversions. Whereupon Sebastian represents to him sundry Entertainments of Time
both more delightful and more profitable than the forementioned, amongst which,
that of friendly and ingenuous Discourse: and from thence they are led on to
debate about Religious Conference; the Usefulness, Easiness, Prudence and
Gentility of which are largely demonstrated: of which Philander being
convinced, inquires the way of entering into it, of continuing and managing of
it. In which being instructed by Sebastian, he resolves to put it in practice.

The Argument of the second Conference.
In the former Conference, Sebastian having convinced Philander of the great
importance of Religion, and the wisdom of making it as well the Subject of
Social Communication as of retired Meditation: Accordingly they two meet on
purpose this second time to confer about it. But Biophilus, a Skeptical Person,
being in their Company, he at first diverts them from their design by other
Discourse; till after a while, under the disguise of News, he is wheedled into
this Subject before he was aware: And then he puts them upon the proof of those
Principles which they would have supposed. Upon this occasion the foundations
of Religion are searched into, and particularly that great Point concerning A
Judgment to come, is substantially proved. Which being done, and Biophilus
thereby rendered somewhat more inclinable to be serious, they then pursue their
first intentions, and discourse warmly and sensibly of another World, and of
the necessary preparations for it so long, till they not only inflame their own
hearts with devotion, but strike some sparks of it into Biophilus also.

A Winter-Evening CONFERENCE BETWEEN Two Neighbors AT PHILANDER's House.
Sebastian. A Good Evening to you, Good Philander, I am glad to find you in
Health, and I hope all your Family is so too.


Philander. I humbly thank you, Sir, we are all well (God be praised) and the
better to see you here; for I hope you come with intentions to give us the
diversion of your good Company this long Evening.


Sebast. If that will do you any pleasure, I am at your Service. For to deal
plainly, I came with the resolution to spend an hour or two with you; provided,
it be not unseasonable for your occasions, nor entrench upon any business of
your Family.


Phil. Business, Sir! at this time of the Year we are even weary with rest, and
tired with having nothing to do.


Sebast. It is a time of leisure I confess, the Earth rests, and so do we; yet
I thank God my time never lies upon my hands, for I can always find something or
other to employ my self in. When the Fields lie dead and admit of no husbandry,
I then can cultivate the little Garden of my own Soul; and when there is no
recreation abroad, I have a Company of honest old Fellows in Leathern Coats
which find me divertisement at home.


Phil. I know the Company you mean, though I confess I have not much
acquaintance with them; but do you find it a melancholy thing to converse with
the dead?


Sebast. Why should you say they are dead? no, they are immortal, they cannot
dye, they are all soul, reason without passion, and eloquence without noise or
clamor. Indeed they do not eat and drink, by which only Argument some men now
adays prove themselves to be alive, as Cyrus proved the Divinity of his God
Bell. But these are kept without cost, and yet retain the same countenance and
humor, and are always cheerful and diverting. Besides, they have this peculiar
quality, that a man may have their Company, or lay them aside at pleasure
without Offense. Notwithstanding, I must needs acknowledge I prefer the Company
of a good Neighbor before them; and particularly I am well satisfied that I
cannot spend this Evening better than in your conversation, and I am confident
I shall sleep well at night, if first some friendly Offices pass between us.


Phil. You doubly oblige me, good Sebastian, first in your great condescension
to make me this kind visit, and then in forsaking so good Company for mine.


Sebast. Your great Courtesy, Philander, interprets that to be an obligation
upon your self, which is but self-love in me: for truly I am sensible that so
great a part of the comfort of life depends upon a man's good correspondence
with those that are near about him, that I think I cannot love my self unless I
love my Neighbor also. And now, Sir, if you please, let us upon this occasion
improve our Neighborhood to a more intimate friendship, so that you and I who
have hitherto lived peaceably and inoffensively by each other, may henceforth
become mutually useful and serviceable to one another.


Phil. O good Sebastian, you talk of self-love, but I shall be so far from it,
that I must hate my self, and that deservedly too, if I lay not hold of so
advantageous a proposal.


Sebast. Dear Neighbor, no Complements I beseech you, that will spoil our
design, and continue us strangers to each other.


Phil. If I were used to Complement, yet I should be ashamed to make so
superficial a return to an overture of so much kindness and reality; but I am
plain and hearty, and heartily I embrace both your self and your motion.

Maid, make us a good Fire.

Come Sir, what will you drink?


Sebast. All in good time, Sir.


Phil. Nay never in better time; now is the season of drinking; we must imitate
the Plants, and now suck in sapp to serve us all the Year after: if you will
flourish in the Spring, you must take in good juices in the Winter.


Sebast. You seem, Philander, to dream of a dry Summer, however I Will pledge
you, for I am sure the Winter is cold.


Phil. Well, Sir, here is that will abate the edge of the weather, be it as
sharp as it can. This drink will make the Evenings warm, and the Nights short
in spite of the season.


Sebast. That would be a pleasant experiment, but have you tried it?


Phil. Yes very often, probatum est; but then you must take the full dose. Come
fear it not, this will breed good Blood, cure Melancholy, and is the only
Cement of good Neighborhood.


Sebast. Why then I hope our friendship will be lasting, The tioling humor of
the age exposed.
for the Cement (as you call it) is very strong.


Phil. You are pleasant Sebastian: but now that you and I are together, and
under the rose too (as they say) why should not we drink somewhat briskly? we
shall know one another and love one another the better ever after. For, let me
tell you, this will open our hearts and turn our very insides outward


Sebast. That trick, Philander, I confess I have seen played, but I thought it a
very unseemly one.


Phil. I doubt you mistake me, I mean only that a liberal Glass will take off
all reservedness in our conversation.


Sebast. I understand you, good Neighbor, but with your Pardon I must needs
tell you, that I have never been able to observe the Glass you speak of, to be
so exact a mirror of minds, but as often to disfigure and disguise men, as
truly to represent them. Have you not found some men, who upon an infusion in
strong liquor, have seemed for the present to be totally dissolved into
kindness and good nature; and yet as soon as ever the drink is squeezed out of
these sponges, they become again as dry, as hard, and as rough as a Pumice, and
as intractable as ever. Others you shall observe to Hector and Swagger in their
drink, as if they were of the highest Mettle and most redoubted Courage, whose
spirits nevertheless evaporating with their Wine; they prove as tame errand
Cowards as any are in Nature. Perhaps also you may have taken notice of a
maudlin kind of Soakers, who commonly relent when they are well moistened, as if
they shrunk in the wetting; and will at such times seem to be very devout and
religious, and yet for all this they continue as sottish as ever, as impenitent
as a weeping Wall, and as insensible as the groaning Plank. Contrariwise there
are some men, who in the general habit of their lives, appear to be very
discreet and ingenious persons; yet if contrary to their custom, they have the
misfortune to be surprised with drink, they become as dull as Dormice, as flat
and insipid as Pompions.

I cannot think therefore that this Drink Ordeal is so infallible a test of
men's tempers as you imagine; or if it were, yet there is no need of it between
you and me: We can heartily and sincerely lay open our bosoms to each other,
without having a confession of our Sentiments forced from us, by this
new-fashioned Dutch Torture.


Phil. I must needs confess, Sebastian, that you raille at Tippling with so good
a grace, that I cannot be sorry I gave you the occasion: but still I doubt you
mistake me, I am not for scandalous and debauched drinking, but in a civil way
between friends, to make our spirits light and our hearts cheerful.


Sebast. And, good Philander, do not mistake me, I am not of that morose humor
to condemn all cheerfulness; neither do I take upon me to prescribe to every
man his just dose, or think a man must divide by an hair, or be intemperate. I
account good Wine as necessary as good Meat, and in some cases more necessary:
neither do I doubt but a man may make use of it with a good deal of prudent
liberty; for I do not look upon the Fruit of the Vine, as the forbidden Fruit,
or think so hardly of God Almighty, as if he gave us so good a Creature only to
tempt and ensnare us. Yet on the other side, I am persuaded, that a man may
love his House, though he does not ride upon the ridge of it; and can by no
means be of their opinion, who fancy there is no freedom but in a debauch, no
sincerity without a surfiet, or no cheerfulness whilst men are in their right
wits. And I look upon the very conceit of this as reproachful both to God and
Man, but the practice of it I am sure is the bane of all manly conversation.


Phil. I have known some men oppose one vice with another as bad or worse; and
who whilst they railed at drinking, have in effect only made Apologies for ill
nature: but you, Sebastian, though you speak some very severe things, yet
attemper them with so much humanity, that I feel a kind of Pleasure, even then
when you touch me to the quick; therefore you that have so much good nature
your self, will, I presume, make some allowances to complaisance in others.


Sebast. Far be it from me to undervalue good nature which I have in so great
esteem, that I scarcely think any thing is good without it: it is the very air
of a good mind, the sign of large and generous Soul, and the peculiar Soil on
which Virtue prospers. Of good nature and complaisance.
And as for that genuine fruit of it Complaisance, I take it (if it be rightly
understood) to be that which above all things renders a man both amiable and
useful in the World, and which as well sweetens as facilitates conversation:
but the mischief is (as it generally happens to all excellent things) there is
a counterfeit which (assuming the name) passes current for it in the World, by
which men become impotent and incapable of withstanding any importunities be
they never so unreasonable, or resisting any temptations be they never so
dangerous; but as if they were cripled in their powers, or crazed in their
minds, are wholly governed by example, and sneakingly conform themselves to
other men's humors and vices; and in a word, become every man's fool that has
the confidence to impose upon them. Now this is so far from that lovely
masculine temper of true complaisance, that it is indeed no better than a
childish bashfulness, a feeble pusillanimity and silly softness of mind, which
nakes a man first the slave and property, and tien at last the scorn of his
Company. Wherefore it is the part of a good-natured man, neither so rigidly to
insist upon the punctilio's of his liberty or property, as to refuse a Glass
recommended to him by civility; nor yet on the other side, to be either
Hectored or wheedled out of his Christian name (as we say) and sheepishly
submit himself to be taxed in his drink or other indifferent things at other
men's pleasure. And if he shall fall into the company of those, who shall assume
to themselves such at Arbitrary Power, as to assess him at their own rate, and
prescribe their measures to him; I do not doubt but that with a salvo both to
good nature and civility, he may and ought so far to assert his own Dominion
over himself, a with a generous disdain to reject the imposition and look upon
the imposers as equally tyrannical and impertinent with those who would
prescribe to me to eat their proportions of Meat, or to wear my Clothes just of
their size.


Phil. O Sir, your discourse is brave and wise and virtuous, but one thing is
wanting to make me your Proselyte, which is, that I doubt it is not
practicable; you cannot certainly but ^e sensible how difficult a thing it is
for modesy and good nature to oppose the prevailing humor of the age, which in
plain truth is such, that now adays a man looks very odly that keeps any strict
measures of drinking.


Sebast. I am afraid it is too true which you say, and though I have no mind to
reproach or much less to quarrel with the Age we live in, yet I confess to you,
it is matter of regret and disdain to me to observe skill in good liquor
ambitiously pretended to, as if it were a very considerable point of knowledge,
and good drinking looked upon as so important an affair of humane life, that
that time seems to be lost, in which the Glass goes not round, and the Cap and
the Bottle seem to be the Hourglass or the only measure of time. And this I
the more wonder at, because the Air, the Climate, the constitutions of men's
Bodies are not changed, and the Laws of Temperance are the same they were wont
to be: and besides all this, I do ingenuously acknowledge the Age to be
extraordinarily polite and ingenious; I would therefore very fain know, but
have not hitherto been able to satisfy my self, from what causes this change
of men's manners in this particular has arisen, Apologies for tippling baffled.
and what has brought this Tippling humor into fashion.


Phil. You need not ask my opinion, for you have answered your self; it is a
fashion, and that you know is changeable without observable causes; but
because, perhaps, you think my unhappy experience may enable me to say
something in the case, I will tell you: Fashions, you know, are commonly taken
up for distinction sake; for men do not love to appear in the Garb of those
whom they hate or despise. Now there are a melancholy sort of People amongst
us, that are wonderfully precise in their way; men of a kind of Lessian
Conscience, that pretend to do all things by measure, and indeed weigh every
thing by scruples, and consequently (whatever they are toward themselves) are
very severe in their censures of other men; insomuch, that whatsoever is not
just after their mode and humor, especially, if it look never so little aerie
and light, they presently damn it as flat immorality and debauchery. These men
(however some of them may be well meaning and pitiable) you will easily grant
must needs be very troublesome in the World. But then there is another sort of
men, who being of a more sanguine and cheerful temper, are not so straitlaced
in their Principles, and consequently are apt to indulge themselves a far
greater liberty of conversation; and in detestation of the former, whom they
observe to be often absurd and unreasonable, but always hide-bound and
fantastical, do (as it is too usual in such cases) run out upon some extremity
on the other side; and so in short, it seems to me that unnecessary
scrupulosity has given occasion and countenance to its direct contrary; and
thus that Tippling humor, as you call it, has become the prevailing fashion.


Sebast. In truth, Philander, the account you have given is ingenious, and not
improbable: But Lord, what a misery is it that men must always be upon
extremes! is there no middle? cannot men be merry and wise too? is there any
necessity that every man must be intoxicated one way or other? if one sort be
silly, must the other be mad? or if they be mad, must these be drunk? For my
part, I cannot tell whether to call this, distinction (as you do) or imitation,
or infection, or fascination, or what you will, but sure I am, they are both
very vicious and absurd.


Phil. Nay, Sebastian, I will not take upon me altogether to justify the
practice of the one more than the other; but now I am in, I will (with your
leave) give you notice of another thing, that is thought to have a considerable
stroke in this business, and may in some measure mitigate your censure of the
Good Fellows. It is the observation of wise men, that generally the customs of
people were taken up at first upon the account of some natural necessity or
defect (as we see generally Art supplies and perfects Nature.) Now you know we
live in a cold climate, and consequently must needs have dull phlegmatic
Bodies, the influence of which upon our minds is easily discernable (amongst
other instances) by that extreme modesty and bashfulness, which is almost
equally common to us all, and peculiar to all that are of this Country, and
which ordinarily tongue-ties us in all good Company, until Wine have warmed us,
and dissolved that ligament; so that it should seem that drinking is not
altogether blameworthy, as being more necessary to us than to most other
People, if it were but to make us sprightly and conversable: for as on the one
side, you cannot expect that all men should be able to converse together like a
company of dry Philosophers; so on the other, I know you would not have
Englishmen, when they are in Company, hold a silent Quakerly Meeting.


Sebast. Now, Philander, you have mended the matter finely; to avoid my censure
of the good Fellows (as you call them) you have censured the whole Nation as a
generation of dull Sotts, and represented your Countrymen as a sort of People
newly fashioned out of clay, and just able to stand upright, but into whom God
Almighty has put no Soul at all, but left that to be extracted out of the
Spirit of Wine, by which means when we have attained it (and not till then, it
seems) we may become like other folks. But in the mean time, I wonder what
became of all our sober Ancestors, and particularly of the dry race of Queen
Elizabeth men (as they are called) I cannot find but they had as much Soul and
Spirit as the present generation (however they came by it) though they never
made Alembicks of themselves. But in earnest, Philander, I will confess
ingenuously to you, that as for such a dull sort of earthly men as you speak
of, I should not be much offended with them, if they now and then got a little
froth into their heads, to supply their defect of Brains; and if upon that
occasion, they grew somewhat conceited and impertinent, the matter was not
much, though the Metamorphosis might seem strange, for a dull Ass to become an
Ape or a Monkey: But then for the same reason, the finer Wits (and surely some
such there be) should let it alone; for that rational and ingenious men should
by this Cup of Circe, the Magical power of Wine, be transformed into such kind
of Animals, methinks it is a thousand pities. But why do you smile, Philander?


Phil. Even at my self, good Sebastian, or at least at that picture you have
drawn for me; it would look a little ambitiously, if I should compare my self
to the land of Egypt, which, they say, was fruitful in proportion to its being
overflown; but in plain truth, I am such a spot of Earth, as will bear nothing
unless it be well watered; and to countenance my self in this condition, though
I cannot pretend to learning, yet I remember I have heard that the gravest
Philosophers did use to water their Plants (as we say) and sometimes
Philosophized over a Glass of Wine.


Sebast. And why not over a Glass of Wine, as well as by a Fire side? provided
a man take care, that as by the one he does not burn his Shins, so by the other
he do not over-heat his Head; or to follow your Metaphor, provided a man only
water the soil, and do not drown it. You know it is only extremes that I find
fault with, when men will be always sipping and dabling, as if their Bodies
were nothing but Pipes made on purpose to transmit Liquors through; or as if
they had their Life and Soul transfused into them from the Hogshead.


Phil. Well, Sir, I perceive I am likely to get nothing by my fine figure; I
will therefore say no more of my self; but I have heard some others say, they
have always found their reason to be strongest, when their spirits were most
exalted.


Sebast. But sure they did not mean that their reason was strongest, when the
Wine was too strong for them; if they did, then either their reason was very
small at the best, and nothing so strong as their drink, or else we are quite
mistaken in the names of things; and so in plain English, drunkenness is
sobriety, and sobriety drunkenness: for who can imagine, that that which clouds
the head, should inlighten the mind; and that which wildly agitates the
spirits, should strenthen the understanding; or that a coherent thread of
discourse, should be spun by a shattered vertiginous brain? It is possible some
odd crotchets and whimseys may at such times be raised together with the fumes;
or it is not unlikely, but that a man may then seem wondrous wise in his own
eyes, when he shall appear very silly and ridiculous to all others that are not
in the same condition with himself; but to go about to make any thing better of
it, is a kind of liquid Enthusiasm. And that this is no wild conjecture or
uncharitable opinion of mine, I appeal to this experiment; tell me, good
Philander, what is the reason that men in those jollities (we speak of) cannot
endure the company of those that will not take their share with them, but are
most pleased with such as will rather exceed their measure, and take off their
Cups roundly; is it think you out of desire that such men should be wiser than
themselves, or the quite contrary? or what is the reason that men of this
practice are very shy of those persons that will remember and repeat afterward
the passages in those merry assignations? I make no doubt, but when you have
considered the case, you will find this to lie at the bottom, namely, that even
such persons are sensible that several things pass amongst them at such times
for wit and good humor, which when they hear of again, and reflect upon in
their sober intervals, they are heartily ashamed of, as apish and ridiculous
fooleries.

But now if (after all) I should grant you (which I do not unwillingly) that
men well whetted with Wine (as they love to speak) are very sharp and piquant,
very jocose and ready at a repartee, or such like; yet besides that this edge
is so thin and Razor-like, that it will serve to no manly purposes; it is also
very dangerous, since at that time a wise man has it not in keeping.


Phil. Well, I perceive hitherto the edge of my Arguments turns at the force of
your Replies; therefore I had best contend no longer with you on that point,
whether Wine raises men's parts or no: But one thing I have yet to say, which I
am sure you must and will grant me, viz. that it suppresses cares and
melancholy, and makes a man forget his sorrows (that great disease of humane
life) and this I suppose sufficiently commends the liberal use of it.


Sebast. That which you now say is undeniably true; and no question, for this
very end was the juice of the Grape principally ordained by the great Creator
of the World; but yet I know not how it comes to pass, that this remedy is
seldomest made use of, by those to whom it was peculiarly prescribed; I mean,
the melancholy and dejected have ordinarily the least share of it; but it is
very commonly taken by the prosperous, the sanguine and debonair, and such as
have least need of it; and these frequently take it in such large proportions,
that it makes them not only forget their sorrows (if they had any) but
themselves and their business too. The real causes of tippling intimated, and
the mischiefs of it exaggerated.
So that upon the whole matter, I see no tolerable account can be given of the
way of drinking now in fashion; for it appears to have been taken up upon no
necessity; it is recommended by no real advantage, either to the body or mind,
and therefore must owe its rise to no better causes than dullness or idleness, a
silly obsequiousness to other men's humors, or epicurism and wantonness of our
own inclination. And for the habit of it, it is no better than a lewd artifice
to avoid thinking, a way for a man to get shut of himself and of all sober
considerations.

It fills men with more spirits than it leaves them able to govern; from whence
they become great talkers, proud boasters, capricious, insolent and
quarrelsome. For it so much dilates and rarifies the Spirits, that they cannot
bear up a weighty thought; and while such as those are sunk and drowned,
nothing but the mere froth and folly of men's hearts bubbles up in their
conversation. And this insensibly growing upon men, by degrees introduces an
habitual vanity and impertinence, below the gravity and dignity of humane
nature; and by means of which, such men become fit only for toys and trifles,
for apish tricks and buffoonly discourse; which in conclusion, do so far
degrade a man below his quality, that he becomes not only a shame to himself
and his family, but the contempt of his very servants and dependants.

And touching this last, have you not sometime observed, what dry bobs, and
sarcastical jeers the most underling fellows will now and then bestow upon
their betters, when they have found them faultering in this kind: Was not
Master such a one cruelly cut last night, says one? how like a drowned Rat was
Master such a one, says another? how wisely our Master looks when he has got
his dose, says a third?

Shall I need after all this, to represent the sin committed against God
Almighty, by this vain custom in the breach of his Laws, deforming his Image,
and quenching his Spirit; or the injury it does to humane Society, in the
riotous and profuse expense of so comfortable a Cordial and support of humane
life; or, shall I but reckon up the mischiefs a man here by incurs to his own
person, the danger of his health, the damage to his fortunes, the --


Phil. O, no more, no more, good Sebastian, I am yours, you have silenced, you
have vanquished me; I am not able to resist the evidence of truth in your
Discourse, you have quite marred a Good Fellow, and spoiled my Drinking.

But how then shall I treat you? Come, you are for serious things, what say you
to a Game at Tables? Methinks that is both a grave and a pleasant entertainment
of the time.


Sebast. Truly, Sir, I am so unskilful at that, and most other Games, that I
should rather give you trouble than diversion at it. Of Gaming, and
particularly, of Chance-Games.
But what need you be sollicitous for my Entertainment? It is your Company only
which I desire: And methinks it looks as if Friends were weary one of the
other, when they fall to Gaming.


Phil. But I should think a man of your temper might have a fancy for this
Game, as upon other respects, so especially because it seems to be a pretty
Emblem of the World.


Sebast. As how, I pray you, Sir?


Phil. Why, in the first place, the casual agitation of the Dice in the Box,
which unaccountably produces such or such a Lot, seems to me to represent the
Disposal of that Invisible Hand which orders the Fortunes of Men. And then the
dexterous management of that Lot or cast by the Gamester plainly resembles the
use and efficacy of humane prudence and industry in the conduct of a Man's own
Fortunes.


Sebast. I perceive, Philander, that you play like a Philosopher as well as a
Gamester; but in my opinion you have forgotten the main resemblance of all,
which is, That the Clatter and Noise in tossing and tumbling the Dice and
Table-men up and down, backward and forward, lively describes the hurry and
tumult of this World, where one Man goes up, and another tumbles down; one is
dignified and preferred, another is degraded; that man reigns and triumphs,
this man frets and vexes; the one laughs, the other repines: and all the rest
tug and scuffle to make their advantage of one another. Let this, if you
please, be added to the Moral of your Game. But when all is done, I must tell
you, for my part I am not so much taken with the Original as to be fond of the
Type or Effigies; I mean, I am not so in love with the World, as to take any
great delight in seeing it brought upon the Stage, and acted over again: But
had much rather retreat from it, when I can, and give my self the contentment
of repose, and quiet thoughts.


Phil. However, I hope you are not offended at my mention of that Game. You do
not think it unlawful to use such diversion?


Sebast. No, Dear Phil. I am not of that austere humor to forbid delightful
Exercises; for I am sensible, that whilst Men dwell in Bodies, it is fit they
not only keep them up in necessary reparation by Meat and Drink, but also make
them as lightsom and cheerful as they can, otherwise the Mind will have but an
uncomfortble Tenancy. The Animal Life, I say, must be considered as well as the
Intellectual, and our Spirits have need to be relaxed sometimes, lest the
keeping them continually intent weaken and infeeble them so, that they cannot
serve us in greater purposes; I would therefore as soon universally forbid all
Physic, as all kind of Exercise and Diversion; and indeed rather of the two,
for I think the latter may in a great measure save the trouble of the former,
but that will do little or no good without this.

Neither do I think even those Games of Chance absolutely unlawful; I have
sometimes made use of this in particular which you mention, or the like to it,
upon some occasions: As for instance, when I took Physic, and could neither be
allowed to walk abroad, nor to be serious and thoughtful within Doors; I have
supplied both for that time, with a Game at Tables. Or, it may be, when I have
happened to be engaged in some kind of Company, I have played, not so much to
divert my self with the Game, as to divert the Company from something that was
worse. But to deal freely with you: Though I do not altogether condemn, yet I
cannot very much commend these kind of Sports; for indeed I scarce think them
Sports, they are rather a counterfeit kind of business, and weary ones head as
much as real study and business of importance. So that in the use of them a man
only puts a cheat upon himself and tickles himself to death; for by applying
himself for delight to these busy and thoughtful Games, he becomes like a
Candle lighted at both ends, and must needs be quickly wasted away between Jest
and Earnest, whenas both his Cares and his Delights prey upon him.

Besides, I observe, that Diversions of this nature having so much of Chance
and surprise in them, do generally too much raise the passions of men, which it
were fitter by all Arts and endeavors to charm down and suppress. For to say
nothing of the usual accidents of common Gaming-Houses, which (as I have heard
from those that knew too well) are the most lively Pictures of Hell upon Earth,
and where it is ordinary for men to rave, swear, curse and blaspheme, as if the
Devil was indeed amongst them, or the men were transformed into Infernal
Spirits; I have seen sad Examples of Extravagance in the more modest and
private, but over eager pursuits of these recreations. Insomuch, that sometimes
a well-tempered person has quite lost all command of himself at them. So that
you might see his Eyes fiery, his Color inflamed, his Hands to tremble, his
Breath to be short, his Accents of Speech fierce and violent; by all which and
abundance more ill-favored symptoms, you might conclude his heart to be hot,
and his thoughts sollicitous, and indeed the whole man, Body and Soul, to be in
an Agony. Now will you call this a recreation, or a rack and torture rather? A
rack certainly; which makes a man betray those follies which every Wiseman
seeks to conceal, and heightens those passions which every good man endeavors
to subdue.

And, which is yet worse, (as I was saying) this course looks like the
accustoming of the Beast to be rampant, and to run without the Rein. For by
indulging our passions in jest we get an habit of them in earnest, and
accordingly shall find our selves to be inclined to be wrathful, peevish and
clamorous, when we apply our selves to business, or more grave conversation.

To all which add, That Gaming (and especially at such Games as we are speaking
of) does insensibly steal away too much of our time from better business, and
tempts us to be Prodigals and Bankrupts of that which no Good Fortune can ever
redeem or repair. And this is so notoriously true, that there is hardly any man
who sets himself down to these Pastimes (as they are called) that can break off
and recall himself when he designed so to do. Forasmuch as either by the too
great intention of his mind, he forgets himself, or the anger stirred up by his
misfortunes, and the indignation to go off baffled, suffers him not to think of
any thing but revenge, and reparation of his losses; or the hopes he is fed
withal trolls him on, or some witchery or other transports him so besides his
first resolutions, that business, health, family, friends, and even the worship
of God it self, are all superseded and neglected for the sake of this paltry
Game.

All which considered, I am really afraid there is more of the Devil in it than
we are ordinarily aware of, and that it is a temptation of his to engage us in
that, where he that wins most is sure to lose that which is infinitely of more
value. Therefore upon the whole matter I think it much safer to keep out of the
lists than to engage, where besides the greatness of the stake a man cannot
bring himself off again without so great difficulty.

Pardon me, Dear Philander, if my zeal or indignation (or what you will call
it) has transported me in this Particular; sure I am I have no intention to
reproach your practice, nor to affront you for your motioning this sport to me,
but speak out of hearty good will, and to give you caution.


Phil. O. Sebastian! I love you dearly, and thank you heartily for the freedom
you have used with me. We good natured men (as the World flatters us, and we
love to be styled) considering little or nothing our selves, and having seldom
the happiness of discreet and faithful Friends that will have so much concern
for us as to admonish us of our imprudences and our dangers, as if we were mere
Machines, move just as other men move and prompt us, and so drink, play, and do
a thousand follies for Company sake, and under the countenance of one another
example: God forgive me; I have too often been an instance of that which you
now intimated: I therefore again and again thank you for your advice, and hope
I shall remember as long as I live what you have said on this occasion.

But that you may work a perfect Cure upon me, I will be so true to my self as
to acquaint you faithfully with what I apprehend to be the Cause of this
Epidemical Distemper. I find the common and most irresistible temptation both
to Drinking and Gaming, Want of business, the occasion of Drinking and Gaming.
is the unskilfulness of such men as my self to employ our time without such
kind of diversions, especially at this Season of the Year when the dark and
long Evenings, foul Ways and sharp Weather, drive us into Clubs and
Combinations. If therefore you will deal freely and friendly with me herein,
and by your prudence help me over this difficulty, you will exceedingly oblige
me, and do an act worthy of your self, and of that kindness which brought you
hither.


Sebast. There is nothing, Dear Phil, within my power which you may not command
me in. Nor is there any thing wherein I had rather serve you (if I could) than
in a business of this nature. But all I can do, and as I think all that is
needful in this Case, is to desire you to consider on it again, and then I hope
you will find the difficulty not so insuperable as you imagine. It is very
true, Idleness is more painful than hard labor, and nothing is more wearisome
than having nothing to do: besides, as a rich Soil will be sure to bring forth
Weeds, if it be not sowed with more profitable Seed; so the active Spirits in
Man will be sure to prompt him to evil, if they be not employed in doing good.
For the Mind can no more bear a perfect cessation and intermission, than the
World a Vacuum.

But this difficulty which you represent generally, presses young men only:
These indeed having more Sail than Balast, I mean, having a mighty vigor and
abundance of Spirits, but not their minds furnished with a sufficient stock of
knowledge and experience to govern and employ those active Spirits upon; no
wonder if such persons, rather than do just nothing, and in defect of real
business, do greedily catch at those shadows and resemblances of it, (as I
remember you ingeniously called Drinking and Gaming.) Besides, these sort of
persons seeming to themselves to have a great deal of time before them, are
easily drawn to spend it the more lavishly, as out of an unmeasurable Store.
But what is all this to men that are entered into real business, and have
concerns under their hand, and the luxuriancy of whose Spirits is taken off by
cares and experience, and especially who cannot (without unpardonable
stupidity) but be sensible how daily the time and Age of Man wears away. Now I
say why time should be so burthensom to such as these, or what should betray
them to such infrugal expenses of it, I profess for my part I can give no
account, without making severe reflections on their discretion.


Phil. Assign what causes of it you can, or make what reflections upon it you
please, however the matter of fact is certainly true in the general, That a
Gentleman's time is his burden, (whether he be young or old) and the want of
Employment for it, his great temptation to several extravagances.


Sebast. I must believe it to be as you say, because you know the World better
than I do, A Gentleman's Life as busy as other men's.
and I am confident you will not misreport it. But really, Phil, it is very
strange it should be so; and I am sure cannot be verified without very
ungrateful returns to the Divine bounty, which has made so liberal and ample
provisions for the delight and contentment of such persons far above the rate
of others. It is true, they have less bodily labor, and no drudgery, to
exhaust their time and spirits upon, (and that methinks should be no grievance)
but then the prudent management of a plentiful Fortune, (if things be rightly
considered) does not take up much less time than the poor man's labor for
necessities of Life. For what with securing the Patrimony and husbanding the
Revenue, what with letting and setting his Lands, and building and repairing
his Houses, what with planting Walks and beautifying his Gardens, what with
accommodating himself according to his Quality, and hospitably treating his
Friends and Neighbors according to theirs; and, to say no more, what with
keeping Accounts of all this, and governing a numerous and well-fed Family, I
am of opinion, that (all this taken together) the Gentleman has indeed the
more pleasant, but a no less busy Employment of his time than other men:
insomuch that I cannot but suspect that he must be deficient in some principal
Branch of good Husbandry, and defrauds his business that surfeits on leisure.

Moreover, as Divine Bounty has exempted such men as we speak of from the
common sweat and anxiety of Life, by those large Patrimonies his Providence and
the care of Parents has provided to their hands, so the same Divine Majesty
has thereby obliged them, and it is accordingly expected from them by the
World, that they be more publicly serviceable to their Prince and Country, in
Magistracy, in making Peace, and several ways assisting Government and
promoting the ends of humane Society; upon which account as it is very unjust
that others should envy and malign them for their enjoyments, so it is apparent
also, that they are so far from having less to do than their Inferiors, that on
the contrary the Gentleman's Life seems to be far the busier of the two.

Besides all this, Gentlemen having usually more ingenuous Education, and
consequently are presumed to have more exercised and improved minds, may
therefore be able to employ themselves if all other business ceased, and fill
up the vacant spaces of their time with such delightful and profitable
entertainments as others are incapable of.


Phil. That, Sir, that last Point is the thing I would fain learn, namely, how
to fill up the vacant spaces of Life (as you call it) so as to leave no room
for temptation to debauchery.


Sebast. I am heartily glad to see you of that mind; but I assure my self there
is nothing I can say to it, but what your own discretion will prevent me in.
However, if it be your desire that I should enlighten your thoughts by opening
of my own, we will then, if you please, examine this matter between us, An
estimate or account of the time and business of man's Life.
and by that time we have compared the Period of our Lives with the variety of
business that occurs in it, I am out of all doubt that you will be then
thoroughly satisfied that we have neither so much time as to be a burden to us,
nor if it was more than it is, should we be at a loss for the bestowing of it.
And this, without resorting to any of the extravagances aforementioned.

Let us then in the first place suppose that the Lives of Men at this Age of
the World, and particularly in this Climate and Country, amount commonly to
seventy years; for though it is possible here and there one out-lives that
term, yet it is pretty evident by the most probable Calculations, that there is
not above one man in thirty or thereabouts that arrives at that Age: However, I
say, let us, at present, suppose that to be the common Standard.

Now to discover what an inconsiderable duration this is, let us but ask the
opinion of those that have arrived at it, and they will assuredly tell us, that
all that whole term when it is past seems to be a very short stage, and quickly
run over; or if we had rather trust to our own experience, let us look back
upon twenty or thirty years of our own lives, which though it bear a very great
proportion toward the Lease of our whole Lives, yet when it is over seems to
be but a little while to us, and that Time, as it is usually pictured, fled
upon Wings --


Phil. I pray pardon me, if I a little interrupt the thread of your Discourse;
you may easily continue it again, and for failing I will remember where you
left off. That which I would say by the way is this, I can verify the truth of
what you were supposing, by my own experience, and have often wondered what
should be the reason of it, that men have quite different apprehensions of time
past and time to come. When we look back (as you well observe) upon twenty or
thirty years which are gone, they seem but a trice to us; but if we look
forward, and forethink of so many years to come, we are apt to fancy we have
an Ocean before us, and such a vast prospect that we can see no end of it. Now
I ask your opinion what it is that puts such a fallacy upon us, for other it
cannot be; forasmuch as the same term of years, whether it be reckoned forward
or backward, past or to come, must needs really be of the same length and
duration.


Sebast. It is verily so as you say, and the Observation is very ingenious and
pertinent to the business in hand. But to give you an account of the reason of
that different estimate, I can say but these two things, viz. Either as it is
in the nature of hope to flatter us, so all things seem bigger at a distance,
and whilst they are in expectation only, than what we can find them to be in
fruition. Or else it must be, that what is past of our lives we have fresh and
lively remarks upon, by remembering the notable passages that have fallen out
within that compass, by which means those equally remote portions of time are
brought near to our eye.

But on the contrary in the time which is to come, we can have no remarks upon
it; because not knowing what shall happen, we have nothing to fix our thoughts
upon, and so it looks like a vast Ocean to us. For you know that things which
are in confusion seem to be more than the same things when they are digested
into just order and method. And in traveling, you observe that twenty or
thirty miles which we are well acquainted with, and have frequently traced,
seem short and inconsiderable; but the same length of Journey in an unknown
Way, seems very tedious and formidable to us. Thus I think it is in the Case
you have propounded; but now, if you please, let us pass on where we were going.

I say then, suppose the term of our lives be estimated at the duration of
about seventy years, yet in the first place we must subduct from this Sum a
very considerable part, A Practical Demonstration of the littleness of our
spare time.
as taken up in Childhood and Youth, and which slips away we know not how, so
as to escape our observation, being wholly spent in folly and impertinency, but
certainly lost to all manly purposes: to which if you add the infirmities of
Old Age, which (though it do not equally in all men, yet) always more or less
renders some part of our time useless; you will think it no unreasonable
Postulatum if I suppose that both together take up a third part of the whole.

Then in the next place let us consider how great a proportion is taken up in
sleep, in eating and drinking, in dressing and undressing, in trimming and
adorning, and, to be short, in the mere necessities of the Body. I have read of
a brave Saxon Prince of this our Native Country, who allowed only eight hours
in the Day, or one third part of his time, to these uses; but I doubt few mean
men follow his example: and if we take measures from common experience, we
shall find that these meaner Offices take up near, if not altogether half the
time of most persons, And so another third of the whole is gone, and only one
poor third remaining for all other occasions.

Then again, out of that remainder a very great share will be challenged by
necessary business, the affairs of our Estate or Calling, and the concerns of
our Families; and these occasions are so importunate that they will not be
denied without culpable Ill-Husbandry, nor gratified without a large proportion
of the aforesaid remainder.

Moreover, whether we will or no, another part will be ravished from us by
Sickness and Physic, in Civility and Complement, in visiting and being
visited, in Journies and News, and a thousand impertinences; so that he must be
a very good and wary Husband indeed that suffers not great expenses this way.

And after all this, here is nothing for reading and study, for meditation and
the improvements of our own minds, nay, not for Religigion and Devotion toward
God, and the unspeakable Concerns of another World, which in all reason may
most justly put in for their shares.


Phil. All this is very true; but what do you infer from this Account?


Sebast. I dare trust your judgment to make Inferences from the Premises: For
in the first place I know you cannot fail to observe, and that with a just
indignation, that the lightest matters of our Life have the greatest share of
our time spent in them; folly and infirmity, infancy and dotage, take up the
greatest room of all; then worldly business and pleasure exhaust the most of
that which is left, and the Mind and noblest interests have least of all left
for them.

And then secondly, you cannot but note with admiration how very little share
God Almighty has even from the very best of men. And you cannot but adore his
Goodness which rewards with Eternal Life that little time in which men work in
his Vineyard; for whether men come in at the eleventh hour or sooner, it is too
plain that scarcely an eleventh part of our time is spent in his service. But
that which I aim at in this Calculation is to demonstrate to you, that there is
a great deal more reason that men should endeavor rather to redeem time from
lesser occasions than to lavish it in impertinences, that so our weightier
Concerns may have the more tolerable allowances: And to be sure he must be a
very soft and feeble man, that, after all these ends are served, can complain
that time lies upon his hands, which was the thing to be proved.


Phil. I am now amazed at my own stupidity that could think fit to put such a
case to you. Lord! what vain Fools are we, that complain of plenty when we are
rather straightened and in want? What silly Prodigals we are, that are so far from
sparing betimes, that we are not so much as frugal, when all these claims and
demands come in so thick upon us? I have often heard it said, that by keeping a
strict account of Incomes and Expenses, a man might easily preserve an Estate
from dilapidation. but I now perceive that for want of a little of your
Arithmetic to number our days, we run out our Lease of Life before we are
aware; and phansying we have enough to squander away upon every trifle, we have
ordinarily little or nothing left to defray the most weighty occasions.

And, with your pardon, let me tell you, I think now I have found where the
Shoo pinches: It is not (I perceive now) a surplusage of time that tempts us to
seek out those diversions aforesaid; but the mere vanity of our minds, which
has a fondness for them and their Custom and Example have made them so natural
and almost necessary to us that we think the time long till we are at them. Not
that we have much to spare, for God knows we have little enough; but because we
think much of all that which is otherwise employed. And this I doubt is the
true reason why we are impatient of long Prayers, and offended with a long
Sermon; which whosoever observes would perhaps charitably suppose, that the urgency
of business would not permit us to attend them; but we utterly deprive our
selves of that pretense when we complain that time lies upon our hands. To
speak truth therefore and shame the Devil and our selves too, We can hardly
spare time for God, because we love him too little: but we have abundance of
spare time for our idle diversions, only because we love them too much.


Sebast. Dear Phil, You have hit the very Mark: But let us go on, and suppose,
Innocent and pleasant employments of Time.
that our spare time were more than it is or possibly can be (upon the
premises) yet it will be no hard matter to find out more pleasant, as well as
more innocent entertainments of it, than those now in request.

For in the first place, there are some employments every whit as delightful as
recreations themselves; such as in particular, Planting and Gardening, in which
a man may not only have the pleasure to contemplate the admirable beauty and
variety of the Works of God, but by improving the nature of Plants, by altering
the species, by mixture and composition of several beauties and perfections
into one, by deducing one out of another, exalting one by another, and in a
word by giving being and continuance to several things, he becomes a kind of
Creator himself, if I may without offense use such an expression. This kind of
business ministers so many and so ravishing delights, that I remember Cato
preferred it before all the pleasure of Youth, and thought the entertainment of
his elder years herein a good exchange for the voluptuousness of younger years,
which he had now lost all use and apprehension of; nay, I think Epicurus
himself placed a good part of his felicity in the delights of his Garden. And
above all I am certain that God Almighty who knew best what satisfactions were
to be found within the whole sphere of his Creation, and was not invidious or
niggardly toward men, made choice of this for the entertainment of our First
Parents in their state of innocence, and before their folly and sin had damned
them to care and toil, and to the sweat of their Brows.

Again, There are some Exercises and Recreations both of Body and Mind, which
are very ingenious as well as divertive, such as Singing, Music, Painting, and
the like; in which a man rather puts a pleasant deception upon himself in point
of time, than wholly loses it. And they are so far from debauching his mind or
raising his passions, that they only exalt a man's fancy, but otherwise compose
his temper even to admiration.

And if you will promise not to laugh at my peculiar humor, I will refer
another Instance to this Head, and tell you, That methinks the playing with a
pretty humored Child of three or four years old, or more or less, is scarcely
inferior in delightfulness to any of the former; where you shall observe
innocence of mind, benignity of temper, sweet and gentle passions, easy and
unforced mirth, unfeigned love, pretty endearments of affection, pleasant
endeavors to speak and express it self, little dawnings of reason and fancy,
and innumerable other things, which a man can feel rather than express. I
called this my peculiar fancy, but I do not know why it should be peculiar to
me; I suppose it may be more general, however I confess to you I am much the
better pleased with it, because I find in the Gospel that our Savior himself
was not displeased with it.

Besides all these, there are some Offices of humanity and charity which afford
a man unspeakable delight in the discharge of them; such as comforting a Friend
or Neighbor in his affliction, or assisting and counselling him in his
difficulties, promoting Peace and making an end of Controversies, relieving a
poor man in his hunger, etc. In all which, besides the satisfaction a man has
in his own mind upon consideration that he has done well and worthily, he is
also sensible of a reaction, and as it were by reflection participates of the
pleasure those persons find by his good Offices toward them. For to say
nothing of any of the other, what a refreshment is it to our own bowels, to
observe the Appetite and Gusto with which a poor hungry man feeds upon that
which you charitably supply him with. And it will do a man's heart good to take
notice of the strange change wrought in such a person by a bountiful
entertainment, his countenance more cheerful, his spirits brisk, his heart
light, his whole temper more sweet and ingenuous; all which who can be
accessory to without a kind of virtuous Epicurism?

All these which I have named are sincere and manly pleasures, without noise
and without danger, which neither raise a man's passions nor drown his reason;
they are neither so fine and spiritual that the Body can have no participation
of them, nor so gross and feculent that the mind should be ashamed of them. And
in some or other of these every man that pleases may spend his vacant hours
with satisfaction.

But let me now go a little higher, and what if we take in somewhat of the
other World to sweeten the present Life? What think you, after all, Of Prayer,
and reading the Scriptures.
of Prayer to God and reading the Scripture, may not a man bestow some of his
time in these with as much pleasure as devotion? and, so to allude to the
Modern Philosophy, fill up the void spaces of his Life with Celestial matter?

As for the former of them, Prayer, I remember you well observed that several
of those men that complain as if they were over-burthened with time, yet love
to make as short work with this as they can; wherein they betray either some
measure of Atheism in their hearts, or a great deal of sensuality in their
affections: and I cannot tell whether they more contradict themselves, or
discover their shameful ignorance of the noblest pleasures of Life. For besides
that it is highly agreeable to the best reason of a man's mind, that he should
do all honor to the Divine Majesty, and daily pay his homage to his greatest
Benefactor; and nothing sure can be more delightful than the exercise of our
highest powers about their proper Object. And besides that, Prayer is the known
way to obtain the Divine Blessing, upon which all the pleasure and comfort of
our Lives depend, and never fails of success one way or other.

Besides all this, I say, and abundance of other advantages of it, it is the
very pulse of the Soul, which keeps the Spirits florid and vital; It answers to
the Motion of the Lungs in the Body, and exhales those melancholy Vapors that
would choke and suffocate our hearts: By it we put our selves under the Diviue
Protection, and our Spirits are heightened and fortified by the Patronage of so
high a Genius, who can secure us against all assaults and dangers whatsoever.
When we have commended our selves to the Divine Providence by Prayer, our
hearts are at rest; we are secure sleeping and waking; we are never alone, but
have always one to second us; whatever the issue and success of our endeavors
be, our minds are quieted; if things answer our wishes, we have a double
satisfaction, that God Almighty favors us, as well as that our labors are
successful; if things miscarry, we impute no folly, nor omission to our selves,
we have done all that was fit for us to do, but it pleased Divine Wisdom to
disappoint us. The frequent approach of the Divine Majesty puts a gravity upon
a man's countenance, checks and keeps down all exorbitancy of passions, begets
an ingenuous modesty, and makes men as well ashamed as afraid to do an unworthy
action.

To all which add, that by the advantage of our Prayers we are enabled to
become a public Blessing, and every private man a Benefactor to the whole
World; than which thing what can be either greater in it self, or more
acceptable to a great and generous mind? Consequently, what can a brave and
publick-spirited man employ his time in with more delight, than in that which
(whatsoever his Fortunes and external condition be) will make him a Blessing
not only to his Friends and Neighborhood, but to the Country and Times he
lives in, that even Kings and Princes are really beholden to him. Nor is it
necessary that much time be taken up herein to serve all these great ends, nor
much less is it my intention to commend affectedly long Prayers, a little time
and a great deal of heartiness best does the business of Religion, and that
little so employed will make all the rest pass away the more sweetly and
comfortably.

And then for reading and medltating upon the Holy Scripture, the Psalmist has
told us, that the good and blessed man's delight is in the Law of God, and that
therein he meditates day and night. And surely any man may be able to entertain
a few moments in it. If curiosity sway with us, there are as admirable things
in the Holy Scriptures as the mind of man can desire; if we affect History, we
have there the antientest and most faithful Monuments in the World, those,
without which all mankind had continued in their Nonage and Childhood to this
day, as being so far from able to give an account of the beginning of the World
and original of things, that they could not have looked backward many Ages, but
they would have been utterly bewildered in Mists and Fables as absurd as the
wildest Fictions of Poets. Besides, without this Record all the wonderful
Methods of Divine Providence, (which are the assurance and comfort of the
present Age, and the obligation to Virtue and Foundation of Piety and Religion)
had been buried in oblivion.

If we seek after Knowledge, either natural, moral or prudential, where is
there such another Treasury of it to be found, where we have not only the
Relations and Observations of the wisest men in all Ages past, but the
discoveries of the Divine Majesty, the depths of infinite Wisdom (that knows
the true reason of things) laid open.

If we are pleased with the foreknowledge of things to come, as what man of
Soul can choose but desire to see beyond the Curtain, then all the Presages,
Prognostics and Divinations, all the most rational inductions of the wisest
men, are but silly surmises and idle dreams to the Predictions of the Holy
Prophets, which give us light to the Worlds end, and a view of another World,
and have both assured their own credit, and warranted our belief of what is yet
to come by the well-known accomplishment of their former Predictions.

If we would improve our selves in Virtue, what suren Rule can we have than the
express Declarations of God himself? Who can prescribe to him what shall please
him, or prescribe to us better than he that made us, and knows what is fit for
us to do? And what more full, plain, compendious and higher Institution of
Religion can there be than the Holy Scripture?

This brings God near to us, and us near to him; here you know his mind, you
see his nature, and hear him speak; here you may stand as it were upon an
Isthmus or Promontory and take a view of both Worlds; this is the light of our
Eyes, the Rule of our Faith, the Law of our Conscience, and the Foundation of
all our Hopes. All this together sure cannot choose but make the reading of the
Scripture become a very serious, and yet a very delightful employment. And now
upon the whole matter, what think you, Dear Phil. may not a Gentleman entertain
himself and his time without the relief of Drinking and Gaming?


Phil. What think I, say you? Why, I think worse of my self than ever I did. I
do not wonder now at what you said when we first came together, viz. That you
could always find employment for your Time; but I wonder at my own folly: for I
plainly see now that no man can have time to be a burden upon him that has
come honestly by it, I mean, that has not stolen it from nobler
Entertainments to bestow it upon a Debauch.


Sebast. But yet this is not all neither. I perceive I have satisfied you both
of the pleasantness of some lighter, but innocent Exercises, which I named in
the first place; and also of the great importance of Prayer and reading the
Scripture, which I last spoke of: yet as on the one hand I would not have a man
employ all his vacant hours on the former, so neither on the other hand do I
think he is bound to exhaust them wholly upon the latter: Of Study and
Meditation, the advantages and the difficulties of it.
No, Phil, our Bodies are compounded of various humors, our Souls consist of
several faculties, God is a good and benign Being, and consults the good and
comfort of all the Powers he has created. Besides all the forementioned
therefore (and those which I have supposed without naming them particularly)
there is a way of entertaining our selves, called Study and Meditation. Study,
I say, in general, not confined to any Subject, but only directed to the
general end of improving our selves and the time God has given us in the World.

For why should we abject our selves that have rational souls, an active
vigorous Intellectual Spirit in us? Is not this able to employ it self, our
time and our bodily Spirits too? Is not our mind large enough to embrace the
whole World? Can we not bring upon the Theater of our imagination all the
occurrences of time past, as well as present. Must we needs only pore upon the
things just before our eyes! Must our understandings lie fallow and barren
unless they be continually stirred up by our senses? Are our souls only given
us for Salt to keep the Body sweet, or servilely to cater for our inferior
powers, and not rather to subdue and govern them?

Why should not we remember we are men, and improve our best Talent, sharpen
the sense of our minds, and enlarge and greaten our Spirits? What hinders but
that a man may converse with himself, and never have better Company than when
he is most solitary? How can a man want Company that has an Angelical Nature
within him, or need diversion that has the whole World before him to
contemplate?

What should discourage or hinder men from this course? is it the pains and
difficulty? Nothing in the World is pleasanter when a man is once used to it:
Is it for fear we should exhaust our selves, and like the Spider spin out our
own Bowels in our Web? There can be no danger of that, an Immortal Soul never
wears out; and if the Body goes by the worst, so long as the Spirit is
bettered, there is no loss in all this. Or say it should be to no great fruit
that we apply our selves to Study, yet at least this is gotten by it, That we
employ our time and keep our selves out of harms, which is as much as we now
seek for.


Phil. It is generally the fault of Eloquent and Contemplative Men to outshoot
the Mark they aim at, and whilst they talk finely, to deliver very
unpracticable things. Pardon me, Dear Sebastian, if I suppose this infirmity
has accompanied those great accomplishments in you at this time. No doubt but
Meditation is a noble entertainment of Time, and questionless he that has once
got the knack of it, nothing in the World is so pleasant to him: but you must
consider, there are very few who have so much command over themselves as to
hold their minds long steady and intent, and perhaps fewer that have sufficient
knowledge to employ their thoughts at home; it requires a great Stock for a man
to be able to set up this Trade by himself. Besides, many men's Spleens are so
near their Heads, and there is so great affinity between the Animal Spirits and
Vapors, that he that goes to exercise the one stirs up the other: and
oftentimes the greater the intention of mind is with which a man sets himself
to think, the greater Cloud is raised, and the more impossible it will prove
for such a man to discern any thing clearly. Your Advice therefore is very good
for them that can receive it; but this is no Catholicon, no general Receipt.


Sebast. I thank you, Sir, most heartily for the modest and seasonable check
you gave to the cariere of my Discourse: I must confess upon second thoughts
that all men are not fit for Meditation, and therefore it cannot be their Duty;
yet I must tell you withal, I suspect more are unwilling than incapable: and I
doubt some are more afraid of awakening their conscience than stirring their
spleen by it. However, I have another Expedient to propound (for the purpose we
are upon) which will supply the place of the former, and which, I am sure, can
be liable to no Objection; and that is, Of friendly Conserence, and the great
benefits of it.
Conference or Discourse: which when I have recommended to you, I shall have
delivered my whole mind.

God Almighty has given us Speech to express our selves to one another. We are
not left alone in the World so but that every man has some Friend or Neighbor
to hold correspondence with; why should we not then entertain our selves, our
friends and our time in friendly Communication, without the help of the Bottle,
etc. This requires no great intention of mind, no great Stock is required in
this Case; this will stir up no Vapors from our Spleen; and by this way we may
not only divert our selves, but elucidate our own thoughts, enlarge our
experience, resolve one another difficulties, and mutually please and profit
one another.

And the more effectually to recommend this Expedient to you, I will first take
the confidence to affirm, and do not doubt but I shall by and by make it
evidently appear, That this is not only a very gentile and creditable way of
conversation, but also (if it be rightly practiced) a most pleasant and
delightful, and (which perhaps may seem the greatest Paradox of all) one of the
most healthful Exercises in the World.

The first of these you will easily grant me when you consider, that Discourse
is that which principally distinguishes a Wise man from a Fool. For what else
do we take our measures of one another by? If a Man discourse of weighty
matters, and keep close to the Point, and speak sharply in the Case, we account
him a worthy man. But contrariwise if he talk flatly, insipidly and
impertinently, we have no esteem or reverence for such a Person, let his
outward appearance and circumstances be otherwise what they will.

It is certain we cannot know a Man's thoughts or the sense of his mind till he
express them: A Fool we say is a Wiseman so long as he holds his peace, and a
Wiseman differs nothing from a Fool till he speaks. For a man's actions may be
by rote or custom or the direction of some other person, but a man's discourse
is his own. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, said our
Savior. The tongue will betray not only the inclinations and passions of the
heart, but the very sense and capacity of the mind; and the latter much more
than the former, as the Liquor will carry the tincture of the Vessel. It Is
possible indeed for an evil and vicious man to talk virtuously, and a silly man
may get into a Road of wise Sayings; but the Lesson he has conn'd will soon be
at an end, and then he will no more be able to hold out at that rate, than a
flaw'd Vessel to make the same sound with a good one. Wisdom and folly are
widely different in their natures; but it is Discourse that lays them open and
makes the distinction conspicuous: why then should not a man by practice
endeavor to become expert at that which, if he be master of, will be his
Glory, but to be sure will make his Character.

But now for the vulgar methods of Conversation, which commonly consists of
Drinking and Gaming, they are no better than Levelling Practices, Drinking and
Gaming are Levelling Practices.
that observe no distance, nor make any distinction amongst men, the Master and
Servant are at Hail Fellow, the Gentleman and the Clown are upon the Square
with one another, the Man of Parts and Learning and the veriest Idiot and
Coxcomb are upon even Ground in those Entertainments.

As for Drinking, I cannot sufficiently wonder at that abjection of mind in
Persons of Quality, who, as if they consented to their own degradation, will
contend for Victory with their Inferiors at equal Glasses: when it is
notorious, that a Porter shall bear more than a Gentleman; and a fine Wit shall
be baffled and disordered with that which a thick scull'd dull Sot will carry
away well enough, and come off as wise a man as he entered. But suppose the
Gentleman should outdo the Clown, and the Wit the Dunce; yet as the Match was
made very imprudently, so the Victory would be inglorious.

And then for Gaming, I have heard of an Ape that has been too hard for his
Master at that most ingenious Game of Chess. But I have known one very near to
a Natural that has been a great Master at it. And certainly it is very easy
to imagine that in those other Games, which are governed by Chance, the Victory
may fall to the less worthy Person. It seems therefore a very mean thing to be
eagerly intent upon that to which a Wise man has no better title than a Fool,
and, if we believe the Proverb, much less. To be sure no man can be so vain as
to think himself the wiser or better man for his Conquest. But now Discourse
discriminates men's real abilities, and bears an impartial Testimony to a man's
worth, and the Contests of reason are therefore truly honorable, because the
wiser man is sure to have the Victory.

But then secondly, For the pleasure and delightfulness of Discourse, it cannot
be doubted but that the Higher Powers in a man are attended with the sweetest
delights, in the exercise of themselves; and the more strong and vigorous the
Constitution of those Powers is, The Pleasures of Discourse.
the more quick and ravishing must the sense of their peculiar pleasure
consequently be. This the experience of all studious men bears testimony to,
amongst whom one Truth sifted out by reason is more pleasant than all the
Entertainments of an Epicure. For in Discourse there is a very grateful relish
in the mere bandying of Arguments to and fro: Great curiosity in
distinguishing, prettiness in an hansomely dressed probability, surprise in
Paradoxes ingeniously maintained, admirable beauty in that strange variety of
Colors in which a good Wit will represent things, far beyond the hand and
skill of a Painter; all which, with a thousand other Particulars which I pass
by, render the pleasure of Discourse as much transcendent to all instances of
sensuality as Reason it self is above sense, or a Man superior to a beast.

And now in the last place for that seeming Paradox concerning the wholesomness
of Discoursing, Discoursing an healthful Exercise.
it is observed that they who are curious of the health of their Bodies, to the
end that they may invigorate all their powers and faculties, have to that
purpose found out appropriate Exercises to all the principal parts: for so they
fay, walking is peculiarly good for digestion, by gently agitating the Stomach
and Bowels; riding is singularly beneficial to the Head; playing at Bowls helps
the Reins; and the use of the long Bow, is especially commended for opening the
Breast and Lungs, etc. Now I think I may be bold to say, that whatsoever each
of these is to its respective part and member, that will smart and vigorous
Conference perform to the whole man. For as to the very bodily powers, it warms
the Heart and Stomach, dries the Brain, opens the Lungs, quickens the motion of
the blood, and brings a fresh and florid Color into the face and whole habit.
And then as for the better part of man, Discourse raises the fancy, exercises
the memory, clears the thoughts, enlightens the judgment, and improves the
reasoning of the mind. To which add, if you please, that it diverts melancholy,
puts off dozing, banishes anxious thoughts and solicitude, and in a word holds
a man so fully employed, that it leaves no room for the very temptations of the
Devil.

And now I appeal to you, judge whether I have performed my promise or no: If I
have, then besides all the aforementioned here is a manly employment of time
always at hand, an exercise that every one is capable of that has a tongue in
his head and a soul in his body. Thus we may treat our Neighbor, and cost us
nothing, but what we (it seems) have too much of, I mean Time. And thus we may
profit our selves, and oblige him too beyond all other entertainments.


Phil. I have a great reverence for your judgment; but in truth I cannot tell
what to say to this Gossipping kind of diversion, and till this moment I never
thought lip-labor had been of such value. As for thinking men, the World is
content to let them enjoy the reputation of being wise, or at least to suspend
their judgment of them till they see the contrary in the unreadiness of such
men in all the instances of gentile and pleasant conversation. But as for
talkative men (I need not tell you) they have ever been accounted troublesome
and impertinent. And for your own part, Good Sebastian, give me leave to say
that your practice confutes your Doctrine; for after all this which with great
Wit and Eloquence you have spoken in the commendation of discursive
conversation; and notwithstanding that every one who knows you, knows your
singular dexterity in managing any Subject that falls under Debate in your
Company; yet you of all men are generally observed to be the most silent and
reserved. It is true at this time you have been disposed to talk very freely
with me, (for which I am greatly obliged to you;) but at several other times it
is a hard matter to pump any thing out of you.


Sebast. I see plainly that there is a wrong as well as a right Handle to every
thing, and a continual proneness in men to mistake one another. Whenever any
Vice is censured or exposed, men presently think the contrary extreme to that
practice must needs be the Virtue; so whilst I have been recommending ingenuous
and friendly Conference, you represent me as if I had made it my design to
plead for impertinent talkativeness: which truly I am so far from, that I think
the World does that sort of men no wrong in the censure it passes upon them;
amongst whom (if it be a wise man's Lot to be cast) he will think himself in
the Region of Parrots, and for his deliverance be tempted to pray for deafness
as a great Blessing. No, Phil, no, I would neither have men say all they can,
nor much less talk whether they can or no. But I would have them first think to
direct their speaking, and then speak, that a judgment may be made of their
thoughts: I would that men should bend their minds whenever they relax their
tongues, and try the strength of one another heads in reasoning rather than in
drinking.

But then as for what your self or others have observed of my carriage in
Company, I confess the Observation is rightly taken, and I will ingenuously
assign you the occasions of it; Just occasions of Taciturnity or Reservedness
sometimes in Conversation.
which are (as far as I know my self) such as these: In the first place, it
sometimes falls out, that the Subject which other men are discoursing of, is
not very agreeable to my mind; as in these unquiet times, the common Theme is
News; which as it is usually managed is frequently attended with
pragmaticalness and censure of the Government under which we live, or at least
the effect of it is the filling one another with fears and jealousies, and the
tormenting a man's self before the time, with his own or other men's dreams and
suspicions. Now in this Case I am generally silent, at least till I can find a
fit transition, and have the good luck to turn the stream of Discourse some
other way.

Again, sometimes I am in the Company of those who are every way my Betters;
and there I think it as much more advisable to hear than to speak, as it is
better to reap than to sow.

Sometimes also I meet with a Company of desultorious Wits, who skip so hastily
from one thing to another, that they overrun me; and whilst I am meditating
what to say pertinently to the Question in hand, they are gotten into another
Subject: A man must ride Post, or be left behind by such Discoursers.

But besides all this, sometimes a mere melancholy humor seizes me; which so
benums me, that I am for that Fit altogether useless in Society. But let that
be as it may, or however my practice falls short of my counsel, I am certain my
example is not sufficient to counterbalance the Reasons I have given. Wherefore
let me again heartily recommend it to you, not only for its own benefit, but if
it were but to supersede and lay aside those other soft and silly diversions
which have of late so far usurped upon humane Society, as well nigh wholly to
ingross to themselves all men's vacant hours, and a great deal more.


Phil. You have the Ascendant of me, and may persuade me to what you will: But,
Good Sir, do not convert me from a Good Fellow to a prating Fool. If I had been
used to study, and been conversant in Books, as you have, I might have been in
a capacity to please my self, and perhaps the Company too with Discourse; but
for want of that Education, silence will generally be my best discretion.


Sebast. Books, Phil! It is neither Books nor much reading that makes a wise
man. How many shrewd men have you known, and very well accomplished in most
parts of Conversation, that never had any great matter of Clerkship. And on the
other side, amongst the great number of those that have had all the advantages
of Bookish Education, how few are those that are really the better for it! With
many men reading is nothing better than a dozing kind of Idleness, and the Book
is a mere Opiate that makes them sleep with their eyes open. It Is perverted
into an Antidote against thinking wisely, Of the use and abuse of Books and
Reading.
and made a creditable pretense for dismission of business. Such men's studying
is only an artifice to reconcile the ease and voluptuousness of sloth with the
reputation of wisdom; a gentile and wary kind of Epicurism, that surfeits
without pain or shame, and in which men spend their time without profit to
themselves or usefulness to the World.

Again, there are some with whom Bookishness is a Disease: For by overmuch
reading they surcharge their minds, and so digest nothing. They stuff
themselves so full of other men's Notions, that there is no room for their
faculties to display themselves. Such as these after all their reading can no
more be accounted learned, than a Beast of burden may that carries a Students
Books for him. Only so much Meat is properly nourishment to the Body as a man
can macerate and digest, as he can apply to the reparation of his Body, when he
can separate the superfluities, and be stronger and lightsomer after it, more
than this breeds ill humors, obstructs the passages, and impairs the state of
health instead of advancing it; and so much Study only is profitable as will
excite a man's thoughts as will afford hints or sallies to the minds, or as will
furnish him with matter for meditation and discourse, which two last things are
the two great instruments of improving our selves, and therefore are to
prescribe the measures of our study and reading.

Wherefore it was well said by a Great Man of our Country, That reading indeed
might make a full and copious man, but meditation made a profound man, and
Discourse a clear, distinct and useful man. For reading at most does but make a
man's mind equal to that of the Author he reads; but meditation sets him upon
the shoulders of his Author, by which means he sees farther than he did or
could do. Or whereas the one may fill up all the present capacity of a man's
mind, the other, viz. meditation, stretches and enlarges those capacities. And
then for Discourse (which is that we are now speaking of) besides the
advantages which it has in common with meditation, it opens and unfolds a man's
thoughts, and so brings his Notions to a Test, and makes proof of the solidity
or weakness of his conceptions: by which means, as on the one hand he shall not
run away with the shadows of things instead of the substance; so on the other
hand, when his apprehensions are sifted, and approved to be right and sound,
his mind will be confirmed against wavering, and he will become constant and
consistent with himself. I have often observed with equal pleasure and wonder,
that by the mere propounding a difficulty to another, I have presently been
able to resolve that which was too hard for me, whilst I revolved it only in my
own breast. For by that opening and unfolding of our thoughts we let in light
to our own judgments and see clearer than we did before.

Besides, a man is too apt to have a partial fondness to the issue of his own
brain; but when he has brought his conceptions to the impartial Touchstone of
other men's judgments, and as it were tried them by the light, he will neither
be apt to be upon all occasions over-confident, peremptory and dogmatical; (as
you may observe many reserved studious men to be, who when once they give vent
to their thoughts labor under a kind of incontinency of mind, and will be
continually dictating and asserting at all adventures) nor on the other side
will he stumble at every rub, and stagger at every objection, and so give up
the best Cause upon the slightest (but unforeseen) Attack.

And there is one thing more very considerable in this matter; namely, that by
Conference a man is accustomed to methodize and digest his thoughts in order;
by which means his Notions are not only rendered more beautiful, but are more at
hand, and also more perspicuous and fitter for use. Whereas contrariwise, (let
a man have read never so much, and meditated too into the bargain) without this
expedient all his Notions will lie very odly and confusedly, and come out all
in an heap or huddle. In sum, He that uses himself only to Books, is fit for
nothing but for a Book; and he that converses with no body, is fit to converse
with no body.


Phil. In truth, Sebastian, though I am very sensible of my own defects in
Point of Learning; yet in that little experience which I have had in the World,
I have seen so many instances of the ill use, or rather no use that some men
have made of it, that I am not only convinced there is some truth in what you
say, but am the better inclined to be content with my own education. I have
known some mighty Bookish men like full Vessels without vent, as if they were
troubled with the Gripes; their Notions ferment in them, but they cannot utter
them either to their own ease or the profit of others. And again, some men's
learning has served only to make them pedantick and troublesome, to make a
noise with words and terms of Art every whit as offensive the clatter of the
Table-men, which you laughed at even now. Notwithstanding, by your favor, it
cannot be doubted but Learning has mighty advantages; and I verily think you
should speak against your own conscience if you condemned it in the general:
Wherefore you must excuse me if I continue of the opinion, that it is next to
impossible, without more of it than I can pretend to, to hold such conversation
as you are putting me upon.


Sebast. Excuse me, Dear Phil. I do not in the least put any slight upon
Learning, or the means of it, Books and Study: I know well it is of admirable
use in a wise man's hand, because it gradually and insensibly opens men's minds,
and both gives them a quicker sight and affords them a larger prospect. And
even on the most ordinary parted men it has at least this effect, to calm the
Spirits, and to sweeten their temper, by subduing the fierceness and ferity of
men's constitutions. And therefore I heartily wish, that no Gentleman
(especially) were permitted to attain his State and Fortunes without this
qualification. So that all I was saying was only this, that you nor any man of
your capacity ought to discourage your selves upon the pretense of your lesser
advantages that way; forasmuch as a wise and a good man may (though perhaps not
with the same ease) with a very little of it maintain an ingenuous and
profitable Conversation.


Phil. Perhaps it may be so as you say: But then certainly a man must have very
extraordinary natural abilities to supply that defect.


Sebast. No, Phil, that needs not neither; for Discourse will both supply the
want of acquired abilities, Conversation improves a man more than Books and
Study.
and also improve the natural. I suppose you remember the Saying of Solomon, As
Iron sharpeneth Iron, so does the countenance of a man his friend. I confess I
have heard that passage of the Wise man applied to the visiting and comforting
a friend in adversity, which certainly does mightily buoy up and support a man's
Spirits when he finds that he is not altogether forsaken of his friend, but
owned by him in the lowest ebb of his Fortunes. But I think it is every whit as
true and applicable to that we are speaking of, as if he had said that the
company and conversation of a friend does as well quicken a man's wits, and
improve his understanding, as one Iron Instrument is sharpened by another. For
as I said before, Conference and Discourse give us the advantage of whatsoever
he (we converse with) has read or thought upon that Subject, and so we reap
the benefit of his reading, and of his meditations too. And then besides that,
we exercise our own judgment upon the matter so digested and prepared for us,
the very presence and attention of our friend sharpens the attention of our
minds, his Question prevents our extravagancy and wandering, and keeps us in a
method, and his expectation from us holds our thoughts close and steady to the
Point in Debate. By all which not only the Stock of our Knowledge is improved,
but the Patrimony also; I mean, the very powers of the Soul. In consideration
of all which, that Great Man of our Country, whom I cited but now, does not
stick to pronounce, That if it should be a man's hard fortune to have no body to
converse withal, it were better he should talk to a Post than not open his mind
at all.


Phil. There you nickt it, Sebastian; by that last word (whoever was the Author
of it) I perceive a Wise man may make some use of such a Tool as I am, if it be
but to reflect and Echo back his own thoughts upon himself. But in earnest,
Sir, now that you have encouraged me, I begin to think something better of my
self, and am resolved to try what may be done in the way you recommend. But
what would you have a man discourse about? I am afraid, if there be not some
care in the choice of a Subject, all will degenerate into Gossipping and
impertinent Chat.


Sebast. There is no need of solicitude in that Particular, forasmuch as any,
even the most obvious and occasional Subject, will enable us to attain the end
we aim at, provided it be followed home; I mean, talk of what matter you will,
if so be you do not talk flatly and carelessly about it, but set your thoughts
on work and they will bring forth both pleasure and profit. For the mere
exercise of our minds improves them as well as that of the body does the state
of bodily health; and whilst our thoughts are intent, though we are not
sensible how time slips away, yet we shall be sensible in the conclusion that
we have not quite lost it.

Besides, you have observed Musicians to make the most curious descant upon the
plainest ground, and have seen several of the Indian Manufactures, where the
most exquisite Art has been bestowed upon the meanest materials: It Is not
therefore the Theme, but the prosecution of it that is considerable; for, as I
said, let that be what it will, if you pursue it with a Train of thoughts, and
especially if you be vigilant to take notice of, and apprehend those hints that
will thence he occasionally started, you shall quickly be amazed to find your
self led before you were aware into some spacious and beautiful Field of
Contemplation, wherein you may at once both lose and refresh your self.

Notwithstanding, I acknowledge to you, that the pitching upon some good and
useful Subject at first is both the shortest and the surest way to attain our
end. For the very importance and concern of a weighty affair naturally rowzes
up our minds, and collects and fixes our loose and scattered thoughts; as you
shall seldom see any man drowsy and inattentive whilst a matter of consequence
to his Life or Credit or Fortunes is in agitation.

Therefore that having thus prepared you to it, I may now speak a great truth
to you, and that you may effectually shake off all the fooleries in fashion,
and make conversation profitable. And if indeed you would awaken your senses,
and improve your self and your time together, let me above all things in the
World commend to you Religious Communication, talk of the Concerns of a Soul,
and of another World. This is a Subject of that weight and moment, Discourse
about religious matters recommended.
that it cannot fail either to make you intent, or the Company you shall be in
grave and serious; and it is withal so vast and large, that you can never fear
to be run on ground; for it will always afford you fresh matter of Discourse.


Phil. It Is true the Subject is copious enough, and I may be sure to have it
all to my self, because no Body will talk with me about it. Who is there now
adays that troubles his head with Religion, or especially makes it any part of
Conversation. If perhaps any mention of it fall in by the by, it is presently
let fall again, as if it were too hot for men's fingers, and at most it is made
but a kind of Parenthesis, which may be kept in, or left out of the Discourse
without interruption of the sense. You have found me out a Subject indeed, but
now you must seek me out Company too to treat upon it. For as the World now is,
this will seem so irksom a business, that no time will be so tedious as that
which is spent upon it, and so we have lost the whole design we were levelling
at.


Sebast. Who (say you) will discourse of Religion? Why, every Body sure that
thinks of it: for it is a matter that comes so home and close to every man,
that he must be a stark Sot, and destitute of the common sense and discretion
of a man, that is not mightily affected with it.

For tell me, is there any man so absurdly vain as to think he shall not dye?
Can any man that observes the frail contexture of his Body, and the innumerable
accidents he is subject to, think himself immortal? Or can he overlook the
common condition of mankind, and when he sees men daily drop away and dye in
their full strength, and in spite of all helps and advantages of preservation;
yet be so fond as to imagine he shall escape the common lot? And seeing what
happens to another man to day, may befall himself to morrow; or however, he is
certain that he cannot be of any long continuance in this World; who, I say,
that is sensible of this can choose but pry beyond the Curtain, and bethink
himself what shall come after.

Is it not the very temper and constitution of our minds to be inquisitive of
the future? Is it not a great part of our Prerogative above Beasts, that
whereas they are wholly taken up with what is present to them, and neither mind
what is past nor to come; we by the largeness of our souls embrace both, and do
we not worthily count him an Idiot that is so short-sighted as not to see
beyond his Nose end.

Does not every Wise man provide for what may be, The importance of Religion.
and do not even the most cold and incredulous suspect at least there may some
thing concern us after the present life; and is there any man that can, if he
would never so fain, quite rid his thoughts of it? Sure therefore every man
that thinks he shall dye, (that is every man that lives) thinks something of
Religion, if it be but for fear of the Worst. Perhaps you will say there are
some men, who though they know they shall dye, yet think they shall dye as the
Beasts dye, and have no concern hereafter: but are they worthy to be accounted
men that can fancy such a thing? A Beast indeed has life and sense and
motion, and participates of some kind of fancy and memory: but does it
understand a Discourse, or weigh an Argument? Is it able to infer from
Premises, to remember things gone and past, and recall them to mind at pleasure?
Can it compare things together, gather the result, distinguish or pass a
judgment upon appearances? will any man be so ridiculous as to say, Beasts are
conscientious too, that they reflect upon their own actions, and accuse or
excuse themselves accordingly? or have they free will to determine their
elections which way they please, even against the interest of their senses? Now
he that considers all these vast differences, will, if he have the reason of a
man, conclude it very improbable that a Creature of this admirable make should
be only designed to be a Pageant for a day, and be totally dissolved at the
date of this short life; especially if he consider withal that these powers and
capacities which we have shown man to be endued with, do not only put him upon
the thoughts and expectations and desires of another state; but do render him
marvellously fit for it, and capable of it; insomuch that several of the
noblest of these endowments are wholly in vain, if there be no such thing, and
that a Man died as the Beasts do.

Besides all this, does not every man that has eyes in his head to observe the
admirable structure of the World, conclude that it must be the Workmanship of a
God, and he a great, a wise, a good and a just Being; and can he think so, and
not resolve there must be a great necessity of, and reality in Religion that is
in the reverend observance of that Great Majesty that deserves it, and who has
both made us capable of performing it to him, and obliged us thereunto.

Now if all, or but any part of this be true, who is so mad as to have no
concern for this God, Religion and another World? and who is there that having
any concern for them, can choose but think fit to make it some part of his
business, the employment of some part of his time, and the Subject of his most
serious debates? Has any man a most important Cause sub Judice, and his Trial
drawing on, and does he never think of it, or discourse his Case with his
friends? Has any man a great Estate in a Foreign Country, or a huge Patrimony
in reversion, and never speaks of it? Has any man either a considerable Friend
or a formidable Enemy, and never expresses himself concerning the one or the
other? Surely therefore seeing Religion imports all these Concernments, a man
may find those that will discourse with him on the Point.


Phil. I readily consent to you, that the business of Religion is a most
serious Affair, and worthy of the greatest consideration; but besides (as I
have said) there are very few will correspond with a man in discourse about it:
To tell you truly, I am somewhat of opinion that it is not fit for that kind of
treatment. As it is a sacred, so it is a secret thing, transacted only between
God and a man's own Conscience, and therefore is rather the Theme of a man's
thoughts, the solitary employment of his own heart, and so fit to be kept up in
the Closet of his Breast, and not so proper matter for Discourse.


Sebast. And I as readily yield to you, Dear Phil, that the soul and spirit of
Religion is very retired and inward, and so inaccessible to other men, that
they can neither see it, nor judge of it. But though the first source and
springs of it lie very deep, Religion rests not in the mind only.
yet why the streams of it should not issue forth both in words and actions I
cannot comprehend. I have read of a sort of men about the Apostolic times
called Gnostics, who gave out that it was sufficient to retain an inward
belief and a right sense of Christian Religion in their minds and hearts,
although they neither made profession of the faith with their mouths, nor
practiced the laws of it in their lives and conversations. This I look upon as
an hypocritical artifice of theirs, to the end that they might make a saving
Bargain of Christianity; a device to sleep in a whole skin, and neither run any
hazards, nor put themselves to any difficulties for Conscience sake; and if
they got nothing by Christ Jesus, they thought they would be sure to lose
nothing by him. But as I am very confident a man of your sincerity can harbor
none of their designs, so I assure my self what you have said is not upon their
Principles: Yet I must tell you, when the Apostle levelled a blow at them he
reached your fancy also: for he says expressly, With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.


Phil. O pardon me, Sir, I make no Question but that when a man is called to
make profession of his faith, and to discover what Religion he is of, then to
dissemble is to betray it, and to be silent on such a critical occasion is to
revolt and apostatize from it; and in that sense (I take it) another Apostle
has required us, To render to every man that asks us a reason of the hope
that is in us, etc. As if he had said, Be not ashamed of your Persuasion, but
own and defend your Religion, at the greatest and most adverse Tribunals
wherever it shall be impeached. But this is not the Case: We are not now
speaking of what must be done upon an authoritative inquisition into our
Consciences, or in times of persecution; but what is to be done in times of
peace, and in common conversation; and then and there I am still of opinion,
that at least it is not an express Duty to talk of Religion.


Sebast. Nor do I differ from you therein. For I do not assert it as an
universal Duty to make Religion the matter of our Discourse: But my meaning is,
that it will exceedingly become us to do so sometimes. And I verily assure my
self, that he that has a quick sense of God upon his mind, will have savoury
expressions of him sometimes upon ordinary occasions (if a foolish modesty do
not too much overcome him) as well as witness a good confession in times of
persecution. For as our Savior said, (in the passage I mentioned before) Out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And it seems to me more
easily conceiveable, that there should be a great fire without any smoke, or a
great light without any heat, than that such a man as is inwardly principled
with the fear and love of God should be wholly tongue-tyed, or be either able
or willing altogether to stifle and suppress his sentiments. Can a man carry
fire in his bosom (said the Wise man) and not be burnt? Such an holy fervor as
I speak of will assuredly both seek and find a vent for it self, and break out
upon all fitting occasions in reverend and affectionate expressions; by which
means a man in the first place eases his own breast, and besides, thus this
holy fire not only preserves it self from extinction, but propagates it self
also, warming and inflaming others.

You have heard, I suppose, of an odd Superstition among the Jews, who out of a
pretended reverence of the name of God, and to preserve it from profanation
(as they supposed) so long forbad the common pronuntiation of it, till at
length by the intermission of using it they had quite forgotten how to
pronounce it. And thus I am afraid it would fare with Religion, if men should
(out of I know not what conceit) forbear all Discourse of God and another
World, the result would be, that in time both would be forgotten. Religions
Discourse as necessary in times of prosperity as of persecution.
Not is it (as you seem to imagine) only times of persecution that ought to
rowse up our Spirits, and call for expressions of our zeal; for the Road of
business, the successively flowing Tide of variety of entertainments in this
World, the soft Charms of pleasant recreations, the blandishments of continual
prosperity, and the rust upon our minds contracted by lying still in ease and
security, do more endanger the state of Religion than those trying times you
speak of. And therefore Atheism is well known to be a Weed that thrives most in
the best Weather. The Seed that was sown upon stony ground fell away when the
hot Sun scorched it, because it had no depth of earth; but that which was sown
among the Thorns was choked too, though the Soil was never so good; in a word,
Stormy Weather in the Church may tempt men to be false and treacherous and
Renegadoes, but I believe it never made an Atheist; that and profaneness are
the ill fruit of prosperity. So that you see there is need that the Spirit of
piety should exert it self as well in the one season as in the other.

Neither will the publicly stated times or forms and exercises of Religion
sufficiently secure it against this danger, without such voluntary efforts and
fallies of it as we are speaking of: For in regard God is not to be seen, and
the World is before us, the World to come is at distance, and the present World
at hand, ill examples are numerous and good ones few and rare, and in a word,
we dwell in so cold a Region, that we had need not only to use a great deal of
exercise, but frequently to rub up one another. Therefore as Socrates is said
to have brought down Philosophy (e Coelo in urbes) from speculation to
practice, from high Notions to the common Affairs of Life; so it seems
necessary to us not only to be religious at Church, and devout in our Closets,
but to allow it a share in our daily and ordinary converse.


Phil. Nay, if you be for that, what think you of a demure sort of people
amongst us, that as if their tongues were tipped with Religion will be always
canting in a Scripture Phrase. Of Hypocritical Canting.
These men seem to think it profane to speak intelligibly and in the common
language, and account a Jewish kind of Gibberish to be the peculiar Shibboleth
of the Godly party: And some of them arrive at such a pitch either of hypocrisy
or melancholy, (I am loath to pronounce whether) that (upon the matter) they
allow no other Discourse to be lawful but what has a tincture of Religion. Now
for my part I look upon these people as very absurd and ridiculous, and
therefore I hope you do not intend to give them countenance in what you are
saying.


Sebast. So far from it, Phil, that I account the former of the two sorts of
men, which you speak of, to be no better than a Generation of nauseous
Pharisees, forasmuch as nothing betrays hypocrisy so much as overdoing, and by
that course of theirs they render Religion loathsome and ridiculous, and tempt
men to think it all Trick and Cheat. And for the other, they seem to be a
pitiable, but crack-brain'd sort of men, who render Religion very uncomfortable
to themselves, and indeed impracticable and impossible. God knows we are not
Angels but men, and have concerns for the present World as well as for the
other; and consequently it can be no fault, but a just Duty, to take care of
them, and in order thereto to deliberate, to take advice, and to discourse
about them.

And this I am so confident of, that I verily believe, the Apostle when he
forbids that any corrupt communication should proceed out of our mouths, and
enjoins that it be such as is good to the use of edifying, intended we should
interpret the latter expression by the former, viz. that instead of rotten and
filthy talk we should tend so earnestly to the contrary, that we might turn the
stream of men's Discourse to that which is virtuous and profitable. And when he
adds, That it may minister grace to the hearers, I think he requires that very
thing which I have been recommending to you, namely, that we should take all
fair opportunities of bringing Religion into Plea, and of suggesting good
Meditations to one another. But I can by no means think he restrains all
communication to that Subject, provided that which is about other matter be not
lewd or foolish, but savoury and ingenious, Common Discourse lawful.
useful and pertinent. And this I am the more confirmed in by another passage
of the same Apostle, Col. 4. 6.
where he directs that our speech be seasoned with grace as with salt. Which,
as I understand it, imports as if he said, that our most common conversation
should have some relish of our Religion; not be wholly religious, no more thon
our meat should be all salt, but seasoned with it.

Moreover, when our Savior forewarns us, that for every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account at the day of judgment, I can by no
means think his meaning was that every word that has not immediate relation to
Religion should be accounted idle, and as such incur damnation. Far be such an
Interpretation from the merciful and condescending Laws of our Savior: if this
were so, Christianity was a most anxious thing, and the lives of men must be
perpetually vexed with scrupulosity. But I take it, he intended only to
represent to us, that the Judgment to come shall be very exact and particular,
so as to take notice not only of our actions, and the greater passages of our
lives, but that our very words also shall come into estimate and consideration.

You see therefore I am so far from countenancing either an hypocritical Cant,
or a superstious Melancholy, that I do not think Religion ought importunely to
thrust it self into conversation to the exclusion of every thing besides it
self; but that it have place in our Debates, and where there is room for
choice, there it is my opinion that we give it also the precedence.


Phil. Well, so far we are agreed: But I pray give me leave to go a little
further with you. What kind of Religions Conference is it you would be at?
Would you have men enter into Disputes about Divine matters? This I the rather
ask, Of Disputes in Religion, the vanity and mischiefs of them.
because there is another sort of men (besides those we now spoke of) who seem
to be mighty zealous of Religion; but their heat breaks out wholly this way,
and they fill the place wherever they are with noise and clamor, with dust
and smoke: Nothing can be said in their presence, but instantly a Controversy
is started, the Cudgels are taken up, and to it they go: Scarcely any Body is
Orthodox enough for them; for they spin so fine a Thread, and have such
Cobweb-Divinity, that the least brush against it is not to be endured: and yet
withal they are as positive and decretal in their assertions, that the Pope
himself is no body to them. One would think they were Privy-Counsellors of
Heaven, they define with so great confidence what will and what will not please
God, and damn to the Pit of Hell all that come not up exactly to their
definitions and determinations. These, I assure you, are men that bear a great
part in the World, therefore I would fain know your opinion of them.


Sebast. Truly, Phil, I have no opinion of them at all: I fancy neither their
Faith nor their Charity; the one I account to be a great deal too big, and the
other as much too little.


Phil. Agreed again. And now I Will tell you my thoughts a little more fully on
this Point: I have always looked upon this Disputative Religiousness, as no
better than a new-fashioned Knight-Errantry, which puts men continually upon
quest of Adventures and makes Monsters of every Windmill that comes in their
way. For these men, if there do but happen to be an inconsiderate expression
let fall by any body, presently raise such a tragedy upon it, as if Faith
consisted wholly of Punctilio's, or a Line was made up of Points, and that
every petty opinion were of moment enough to overturn the World. The contrary
whereof I take to be so true that I suspect whether that be of any moment in
Religion which admits of Dispute; for methinks it is not agreeable to the
goodness of God to suffer any thing of that universal concern to all men to
remain very obscure and controversial. I should think therefore this knotty
kind of Timber never fit for edification. In plain truth (if you will pardon a
rude Similitude) I fancy these great Masters of Dispute to be like the
ordinary Professors of Rat-Catching, who commonly draw more Vermin to the
place than they destroy; so these raise more Controversies than they can
decide, start more Difficulties than they can assoil, and so beget schisms,
gratify pride, inflame differences, and foment heart-burnings amongst men,
that might otherwise live peaceably together here, and for ought I know go to
heaven hereafter.


Sebast. Most ingeniously spoken, Dear Phil, and according to my very heart. If
I thought I could match your wit I would add, That whenever I see a Knot of
these Disputants together, it puts me in mind of a Story or Fable, which you
will, of a Company of Apes that had gotten a Gloworm amongst them, upon which
they heaped Sticks and other little combustible matter, and laying their heads
together blow with all their might, as hoping to make some strange improvement
of that little shining Particle. But when they have done all they can, are
neither able to increase the light, nor much less to warm themselves by it. So
these busy disputing Wits, after all their blustering, neither bring any
useful truth to light, nor warm their own or other men's breasts with any spark
of true Piety or Charity; but contrariwise frequently obscure the one, and
extinguish the other.

It is not therefore disputing in Religion that I would provoke you to; but the
improvement of the indisputable Rules of it, to make your self and those you
converse with, sensible of the vital Principles and Powers of Christianity, not
to chafe one another into a passion, but to rub up one another Sentiments, and
mutually to warm one another hearts with Devotion. By wise and affectionate
applications to beget an equal fervor of Spirit. And in a word, that when
Friends are met together they should, like Flint and Steel, raise both light
and heat by their mutual and amicable Collisions.

And why, I pray you, Dear Phil, should not Religion have its turn in our
Conversation? What reason can be given that pious men should not discourse as
freely and favourily of holy things, as they or other men concerning common
affairs? Why should our lesser Concerns for this World, our secular business,
be the only Subject of our Communication? Why, when some talk of their Trades,
their pleasures and of News, and the like, should not we talk of our Callings
as we are Christians, of the interests of our souls, and the hopes in another
World? Why may not we discourse of our heavenly Country, whither we are going,
as well as other men busy themselves about Foreign Countries, which perhaps
they never saw, nor ever shall be concerned in?

You your self acknowledge Religion to deserve the most serious and attentive
Consideration of our minds, and upon the same account (if you be consistent
with your self) you will be induced to believe it the most worthy and
commendable Subject of Discourse, as having all those advantages that can
recommend any Subject to the Debate of ingenious men, as it were easy to make
appear if it were necessary.


Phil. Sir, I value your judgment, but must make use of my own; if therefore it
be not too troublesome to you, let me entreat you to make out that more fully
to me, and then I promise you I will either comply with the reasons you give,
or will show you mine to the contrary.


Sebast. With all my heart, Sir; and to do it with as much brevity as may be: I
will desire you to consider in the first place whether this Subject, Religion,
does not contain in it the most noble and excellent Points of enquiry, and
consequently be not the most worthy, not only to take up the affections, but to
exercise the wits of men upon. Religion the noblest Subject of Discourse.
Such as for instance, about the Nature and Attributes of God, the wisdom of
that Providence that manages and governs the World, the nature of Spirits, and
particularly of the Soul of Man, of Conscience and Freedom of Will, of the
Nature and Obligation of Laws, of the grounds of Faith and the efficacy of it,
of the nature and success of Repentance, of Redemption and the way of
propitiating God to man, of the Judgment to come, the Resurrection of the Body
and Eternal Life, with abundance more of the like nature; Points all vastly
great and copious, profound and difficult, yet equally necessary and
discoverable: such as are able to stir up and provoke the greatest capacities,
and yet invite and encourage the meanest; in a word, such things, as that there
is nothing else within the whole Sphere of Knowledge, that either requires or
deserves such serious Debates.

Now how trivial and childish a thing were it whilst we have all these wise and
concerning matters to treat of, to be taken up only with Dogs and Horses, with
Drinks and Sawces, with Fashions and News (as is too commonly the practice.)

And if you will please to consider well the aforesaid Particulars, and
especially if you make trial of the course I am advising you, you will find
these Subjects to be every whit as pleasant and delightful as they are
necessary and important. Pleasantness of religious Conference.
For what can be imagined able to minister more delight than the lively
representation of another World and Eternal Life, when men modestly reason
together, and endeavor to affect one another hearts with the certainty and
unspeakable felicity of living for ever? of the ravishing contentment of
enjoying everlasting friendship? of being out of the reach of Fate or Chance,
out of the Sphere of Mortality, Sickness and pain, care and vexation? of being
exempted from all weakness, silliness, passion and infirmity? of being exalted
above all temptation, and secured against all possibility of apostasy? If
Discourse of this nature does not affect a man beyond all other, it must be
because either he has not the sense of a man, or not the faith of a Christian.

Or suppose men should take a Subject somewhat lower, and confer together about
the Providence of God that governs the present World. What a beautiful thing is
it to observe all the variety of second causes to move in a just order under
the first, toward certain and uniform ends, the Glory of God and good of men!
And that though the Divine Wisdom may lose and confound us in that admirable
maze it seems to make, yet there is nothing defective or redundant in the whole
World, no room for Chance, nothing unforeseen, no cross accident that hinder;
the projection, the same design is all along carried on, and at last certainly
attained: But especially if we confine our Contemplations of Divine Providence
to that more peculiar Object of it, his Church, it will become yet more visible
and more comfortable; where if we wisely confer times past with the present,
and view the whole process, we shall find that even Schisms, Heresies,
Persecutions and the greatest calamities of the Church tend to its advantage in
Conclusion. But above all, that which comes nearest to a man, and must needs
affect him most in the affair of Providence, is that thereby he finds himself
under the protection of a mighty Being, that nothing befalls him without the
consent of his Great Patron, that he is not left to himself to scuffle with ill
Fortune and second Causes as well as he can; but he is the charge of God
Almighty, the Favorite of Heaven: This certainly is highly pleasant and
satisfactory above any thing in this World.

Or if we go lower yet, and make the Subject of our Discourse to be about Peace
of Conscience, of the bravery of a Victory over a man's passions or
temptations, of the unspeakable comfort and satisfaction in doing good; any of
these will afford us an entertainment beyond the flavor of Wine, or the odd
variety of Chance in a Game, and indeed (to speak to the Point) above all other
Subjects of Discourse and Conversation. And although it be true that there is
none of these but a man may contemplate with great satisfaction by himself
alone, and in solitude; yet as all social Exercises of the Body are more
refreshing than those that are solitary, so it is here, the comfort that
results from these Contemplations is doubled and multiplied by reflection in
friendly Conferences. And all this together shall be my first Argument by which
I recommend Discourse of Religion; what think you of this, Philander?


Phil. I think very well of it: But, I pray you, let me hear out the whole
Cause, and then I Will give my Answer.


Sebast. Why, then my second Plea for religious Discourse, is from the
consideration that it is far the most safe, prudent and inoffensive matter of
Communication, and that in several respects: Religious Discourse the most
prudent.
In the first place it kindles no Coals, stirs up no strife, inflames no Bodies
choler, and touches upon no man's interest or reputation. You cannot talk of
your self without vanity or envy; you can hardly talk of your Neighbors
without some suspicious reflection; nor of those that are farthest off, but we
are in danger that some Body present may be concerned for them, as being of
their Family or Acquaintance: It is very difficult to talk of News, but you
will make your self of some Party or other, and of Opinions without giving
offense where you did not intend it; and you can scarcely speak of your
Governors and Superiors, so as to avoid all imputation either of flattery or
pragmaticalness. But here you may talk securely, and have this assurance, That
if you profit no Body, you shall hurt no Body; if you do not benefit others,
you shall not prejudice your self. And then in the second place, and in
consequence of the former, this kind of Discourse will invite no Eves-Droppers
to listen and carry Tales of what passed amongst Friends in their Families and
Privacies. For although there be hardly any place so inaccessible, nor any
retirement so sacred and inviolable as to be a sufficient sanctuary against
this pestilent sort of Vermin; yet besides that matters of Religion afford them
the least hold or handle, the discoursing gravely of it is the most effectual
charm in the World to lay them, so that they shall either not be able, or not
be willing to misreport you. To which add in the third place, That this Course
is one of the most effectual and unexceptionable ways of ridding our selves of
the Company of impertinent people, which I reckon no small advantage of this
kind of Conversation. For this grave and serious way will certainly either make
them better, or make them weary of our Company; that is, we shall either gain
them, or gain our time from them; the least of which two is very desirable, and
this is the effect of my second Plea for pious Discourse.

I will trouble you but with one more, and that is from the Gentileness of this
way of Conversation; Religious Communication Gentile.
it is the most humane, civil and obliging way of treating men, and therefore
most becoming a Gentleman. We account it some degree of rudeness to talk French
or Latin, or any other Language, which the Company in which we are do not
understand; for it looks as if we were either jealous of them, and therefore
would not have them know what we say to others; or else it is as if we had a
mind to upbraid their ignorance who cannot correspond with us in such a tongue.
And methinks as it is usually accounted a Piece of Pedantry, and an Argument of
defect of generous education, for a Student to quote his Authors, to talk in
Scholastic Phrase, and to vent his Metaphysical Notions in the Company of
Gentlemen; so neither is it very decorous and civil on the other side to be
talking altogether in the peculiar Phrase of Faulconry and Hunting in the
Company of a Student: and it favors either of great defect (of other matter of
Discourse) in our selves, or of great contempt and insolence toward those
others so treated. The Law of Civility is, to be obliging and condescending, to
give fair play and scope to all we converse with: Now nothing does this like to
religious Discourse, forasmuch as this being every man's Calling and Concern,
there is no man but is or ought to be presumed to be in some measure skilful at
it. When we talk of that we talk so as we may all talk, we parley of that which
every man's profession and interest obliges him to consider, and which every
man's Conscience admonishes him of, and we speak in the true universal Dialect
which every man understands.

And this shall be my whole Apology at present for religious Conference: I
could say several things more in the Case, but I will do like a wary Advocate,
and reserve them to reply to your Objections. And now, Dear Phil, what think
you upon the whole matter?


Phil. What should I say, or what can I say, but that a good Cause has
happened upon a good Advocate, a Cause able to make an ordinary man eloquent,
and Eloquence able to make a very indifferent Cause passable.


Sebast. Thank you for nothing, Phil. Do you think I will be put off with a
stale Complement? I have, I think, demonstrated that religious Discourse is
both the most manly and rational, the most pleasant and comfortable, the most
prudent and wary, and to all this the most gentile and obliging. Deal now like
a Friend and a Gentleman with me; tell me what flaws you have observed in my
reasoning, or what Objections you have to what I have said.


Phil. To deal plainly and faithfully with you, and my self too, I think your
Reasons are unanswerable; and I have nothing to object, but to what you said in
the last place about the Gentileness of this way of Conversation: and that is
only this, Methinks you talk in this Particular, as if you came out of a
Cloister, or rather out of another World; for your Discourse is not calculated
for the Age we live in: Alas! the World is not at the pass you suppose, you
converse with Books, which fill you with fine Speculations; but had you read
men as much as I have done, you would find, as I said before, that it would be
a very difficult thing to get any body to keep you Company at that rate,
notwithstanding all the Arguments you have given or can give for it. You have
read (and so have I) of one Nicodemus, that came to our Savior on purpose to
confer with him on the business of another World; but it is observed he came by
Night, as if he was ashamed of his enterprise; and besides, his Name is upon
this occasion (for ought I know) become a byword and name of reproach to this
day. And we have heard of some other persons who in great agonies of mind have
been inquisitive into those affairs, and made Religion the principal Theme of
their Discourse: But then was then, and now is now; those men would now be
suspected as not well in their wits that affected so antic a Garb: insomuch
that even Divines themselves, who for the honor of their Profession, and upon
account of the nature of their Office and Studies, may better be allowed to
entertain such Discourses; yet (whether it be out of modesty, or deference to
the humor of the Age) it is easily observable, that they generally decline the
way you recommend, and maintain Conversation at the rate of other men. Judge
you therefore whether at this time of Day if a man in health should talk so, he
would not be counted an Hypochondriacal Person; or especially if a Gentleman
should use it, he would not be wondered at as uncouth and unfashionable.

Nay, that is not the worst of the Case neither: About Profane Discourse.
For the now modish way of treating Religion (if by chance it come in the way)
is either to find slaws in it, and by Skeptical Sophisms to undermine the very
foundations of it, or else by Drollery to burlesque and render it ridiculous.
To talk malapertly and scurrilously against it, and now and then to break a
Jest upon God Almighty, is an Argument of wit; but to speak gravely and
reverently, is dull and tedious beyond measure, the sure sign of a formal Fop
or a Phanatick.


Sebast. God forbid! Though I know you understand the World better than I do,
because (as you wittily upbraided me) my Conversation is most with the dead;
yet I am in good hope you are now mistaken, and that the state of the Living is
not so prodigiously bad as you represent it. I know there are a sort of
Tap-inspired Debauchees (whose wit is broached with the Hogshead, and runs on
tilt with it) that love to put tricks upon every man and every thing that is
graver and wiser than themselves; nor do I so much wonder at it (considering
the men) forasmuch as if Religion be true they must expect to be damned; and if
it obtain its just veneration they must expect to be the scorn of mankind. It
is not strange therefore if they (consulting their own interest) either
undermine it or blaspheme it, that they may have their revenge upon it before
hand. But take courage, Philander, for these men's tongue is no slander, neither
upon due consideration is there more of wit than of Virtue in their Ribbaldry.

As for the more cunning part of them, who will needs be skeptical, and think
to give proof that they have more wit than other men, only because they have
less faith and modesty; who knows not how easy a thing it is to carp and make
Objections? and that a triffling captious Coxcomb can ask more Questions than a
Wise man can answer? As any man may pull down faster than another can build up.
It is one sign of a good judgment to be able to ask a discreet and pertinent
Question, and another to discern what satisfaction is fit to be expected; and
then in the third place there is such a Virtue as modesty to sit down and rest
satisfied with such an Answer as the nature of the thing will admit of, all
which those captious Hypercriticks are destitute of.

And then for the profane Droll, every man of sense and good manners knows,
that Wit without Bounds is the very definition of scurrility, and that it is an
easy thing to please a man's self in the one if he have no regard to the
other, Of Drollery.
but will let fly at every thing that comes in his way. For my part, I look
upon it as every whit as great an instance of dullness, as of impiety, to need
so large a scope for wit as these men allow themselves. A good and true Wit
will find matter enough within the Bounds of sobriety, and not think himself
straightened though he spare God and Religion. The men therefore you speak of are
like blind Bayard, bold and dull; and if they now and then happen upon
something more than ordinary, who knows but the Devil may help them to it, who
is always very ready to assist in this Case?

Therefore, my good Friend, setting both these kinds of men aside, who are not
the Copy but the very scandal of the Age they live in; let us consider
impartially what else there is able to discourage such a way of conversing as
we are upon. I have made it plain already, that all the reason in the World is
for it; and it is as certain that there are no Laws against it, nor does
Authority so much as discountenance it in the least. Besides, there is, I am
confident, as quick a sense of Virtue and piety in the present times, as in the
best times of our Forefathers. And if there be some lewd and profligate men
against it; yet there are others, and those of the best Quality, who think it
so far from unbecoming their Rank, that nothing is more savoury and acceptable
to them than pious Discourse. And some of these, as I am informed, meet at one
another Houses usually every Week, or as often as their occasions permit, and
there whilst they walk in the Garden or sit together by the fire (according as
the Weather invites them) they make it their business to reinforce upon one
another minds the great Principles of Christianity, to affect their hearts
mutually with the consequences of them. And when this is done (they say) they
return home as much raised in their Spirits, and cheered in their very
Countenances, as the most jolly Good Fellows do from their merry assignations.


Phil. This is a pretty piece of News you tell me: But I pray you (by the way)
do you know any of these men well? Are they not Conventiclers? I tell you
plainly I suspect this practice looks asquint that way.


Sebast. No; very far from it I assure you. Those I know of them are persons
most observant of the Laws of their Country, constant and devout Frequenters
of their Parish Church, true Friends of the Clergy, zealously affected toward
the Common Prayers and all the Offices of the Liturgy, and do as much abominate
and discountenance every Instance of that factious Gadding, Gossipping pretense
of Godliness, as any sort of men whatsoever do or ought to do; but having a
quick sense of piety and a great concern upon them for another World, they
endeavor by the aforesaid means to preserve and improve this temper in
themselves, and to propagate it to others; and this they do the more securely,
as being condemned by no Law; and the more innocently, as condemning none of
those that do not imitate them.

But I do not mention this particular Club of persons with intention to make
them a Precedent for all others; for besides that their custom is only
voluntarily taken up, and upon no apprehensions of any necessary obligation
upon them so to do, for then it would be a great burden upon the Consciences of
men: there are also several inconveniences not unlikely to attend the practice,
if not prudently managed, which I need not name; that therefore which I aimed
at in the mention of these men's usage was (amongst other proofs) to show that
the World was not so abandoned of true zeal and piety as you suggested, that
profane Discourse has not so universally obtained, nor that godly Conference
was so antiquated and exploded; but that a Gentleman might still adventure to
be found at it, without impeachment of his prudence or dignity.

And moreover, I humbly conceive, that by how much the more there is of truth
in your observation, by so much the more are all serious and sensible men bound
to put to their endeavors to turn the stream of Conversation from froth and
folly, to this great and important Concern. For if this be out of fashion, the
more is the shame; and it is a thousand pities but that we should strive to
bring it into fashion, if it were but to run down that profane humor you
speak of. And especially to repair the dishonor done to the Divine Majesty by
those scurrilous Libertines, who with equal madness and folly let their tongues
run riot against him.

What I shall we be mealy-mouthed in a Good Cause, when they are impudent in a
bad one? Shall we be ashamed to own God, when they defy him? Is God so
inconsiderable a Being, that we dare not stand by him? Are piety and Virtue
things to be blushed at? More Arguments for religious Conference.
Is eternal salvation become so trivial a thing, that we should be unconcerned
about it? Do we yield the Cause to these half-witted Profligates? Do we
acknowledge the Gospel to be indeed ridiculous, or do we confess our selves the
veriest Cowards in the World, and judge our selves unworthy of eternal life?
For shame let us be so far from being either cowed or biased by such examples,
that we resolve to make better where we cannot find them? Why should we think
so meanly of our selves, as to follow only, and not to lead? In a word, Why may
not we begin a good fashion, rather than fall in with a bad one?

Besides, I persuade my self this will be no very hard thing to do if we
consider the Authority and Majesty of sincere and generous piety, and the guilt
and base spiritedness of Vice and profaneness; if we be soft and timorous,
that grows rampant and intolerable; but if Virtue shine out in its own rays, it
dazzles and baffles all those Birds of Night. If men will be persuaded to
assert their own Principles manfully, to talk of God worthily and courageously,
the veriest Russians will presently be gagged and tongue-tyed, as in
Conjurations (they say) name but God, and the Devil vanishes; so enter
resolutely into pious Conference, and it will presently lay all the Oaths and
blasphemies and scurrilous talk of those desperate Wretches.

And (by the way) this is the most gentile and also the most effectual way of
reproving that kind of persons, namely, to deal with them as Scholars deal by
one another, when any one speaks false Latin, they only repeat it after him in
true Latin, and as it ought to be; so here let us speak right things of God
when they speak amiss, and there needs no more to damp them; they will either
turn on your side and speak as you do, or leave the Field to you.

This, this, Philander, therefore is the only way to mend the World, and
without this it will hardly ever be done. It is not good Books and Preaching
that will retund a profane humor; for such persons will either not read and
hear them, or not consider them; nor is it Prayer and Fasting too that will
cast out this deaf (but not dumb) Devil. But when good men are as bold as evil
men are impudent, I mean as openly good as the other are bad, when piety is
daring, and (if you will pardon the expression) Hectors lewdness out of
countenance; then, I say, the World will, if not grow devout, yet at least grow
modest and civil toward Religion, when virtuous men give evidence that they
believe themselves, when they demonstrate that the Kingdom of God is not in
word only, but in power; when their Principles and pretensions appear in their
Spirit, their Discourses, their whole Life and Conversation, when they
continually breathe of God and of Heaven.

And (to say no more) by this course also a man shall gain a worthy reputation
and esteem to himself; for whereas a bashful, pusilanimous complying humor,
that will crouch to a debauch for fear of offense, and faulter and mince the
matter of profaneness to curry favor with lewd men, shall be despised and
trodden down by every body. A brave generous Assertor of his Principles, and of
God's honor, that fills the place and Company where he is with the sweet
odours of piety and devotion, procures himself a veneration wherever he goes,
he looks like Moses when he came out of the Mount, his face shines and all men
see a glory about him; insomuch that those that cannot find in their hearts to
imitate him, yet cannot choose but reverence and admire him.


Phil. I think your mind is an inexhaustible Fountain of Arguments on this
Subject. Every occasion affords you a fresh tide of Eloquence; either you have
very much studied this Point, or it is wonderfully pregnant of its own proofs:
For my own part I cannot bear up against you. I confess I thought when we first
entered on this Particular, it was impossible that I should ever be of your
opinion therein; but now I am so far from having any thing material to object,
that I protest I am clearly satisfied that it would be a very wise thing, and
well worthy of our endeavors to bring it into use and practice: I mean, as
much as possibly we can to exclude idle Tales and Drollery out of our Converse,
or at least to confine them to a narrower compass, and so to make way for this
great affair of Religion.

But yet let me tell you, though you have convinced me you have not silenced
others; there are those will elude the Arguments they cannot answer, and expose
what they are resolved not to comply withal: They will say, This talking of
Religion is a Mountebank trick to impose upon the people, that it is a design
of vainglory, or an artifice to seem better than we are: They will tell you
that sincerely good men use to be modest and silent, and to enjoy their sense
of piety in secret. In short, when you have said all you can to recommend this
way of Conversation, they will say it is no better than Puritanism or
Phanaticism; and having affixed such a name upon it, they will run both you and
it down presently.


Sebast. Hearty thanks, Dear Phil, for putting me in mind of that danger which
otherwise I should not have been aware of. I acknowledge I am so far unskilled
in the World, that I was apt to think it was sufficient to a Cause to be backed
with good Proofs, and that when a business had recommended it self to the
reason and conscience of men the work was done. I little thought men must be
wheedled into a compliance with their own judgments, and much less that they
would be so disingenuous toward themselves as to put a cheat upon their own
senses; nor did I sufficiently consider the power of Names to make good evil,
Godly Discourse not Phanatical, nor the Badge of any Sect.
and evil good, and that the best thing in the World may be run down by the
mere blast of an odious Nickname: Lord! what a venomous breath has Common
Fame, that it can change the nature of things? What an huge Leviathan is vulgar
Opinion, that it should be able to oppose it self to the best reason of
Mankind, and to God Almighty too? If this be so, who would exercise their
understanding, or dare to propound any generous thing to the World, and not
rather set himself adrift to run with the Tide.

But yet this comforts me, that it looks like a Confession of the insuperable
strength of my Arguments, when men resort to such subterfuges: It is a sign
they dare not encounter me on the Square, that use such foul play, and that men
are destitute of reason when they betake themselves to libels and reproaches.

Let us then resume a little courage, it may be we shall conquer at last
because our Adversaries despair of an honorable Victory. That which I contend
for (you know) is this, That it becomes men to take all fit and fair occasions
to speak worthily of God, and to make advantage of friendly conversation
toward the improvement of one another in morals, as well as in secular or any
other Concerns, and can any one be so absurdly malicious as to call this
Phanaticism? Does that deserve the odious Name of a Party which is the great
and universal Concern of all Mankind? Is that to be accounted the peculiar
Shibboleth of a Sect which speaks a Good Man and a Christian? Is that to be
made a mark of infamy which the best men in the World wear as a Badge of
Honor? Are we minded that this word Phanaticism should have the power of an
Ostracism, and put a disgrace upon men for being too good.

If men in their Intercourses and Communications deliberated about setting
forth of some new God, or at least of some new Religion, there were just Cause
of such an odious imputation; but to take opportunity to speak of the true God,
and the old Religion gravely and piously, it cannot be that this should be
Pruitanism, unless it be so to be in earnest in Religion, which God forbid.
Sure it is not the Character of any mere Sect amongst us to love God; and if it
be not, then neither can it be so to talk of him affectionately, since the
latter is the easy and natural issue and expression of the former. David, I
remember, called his tongue his glory; and is that alone of all the powers of
Soul and Body exempted from any part in doing honor to the Creator?

Are all men Puritans when they are sick or upon their Deathbeds? And yet then
there are very few are so modish as to wave the talk of Religion, or to talk
lightly and drollingly of it. Either therefore all dying men are Sectaries, or
else they teach us then what we ought to practice at other times, if we be not
unreasonably careless and desperate.

As for those that are really Phanatick, and are continually canting in a
loathsome manner of Religion, those Parrots, that talk without any sense or
apprehension of what they say, or those Ricketty Pharisees, that are all head
and ears and tongue, but feeble in their hands and feet, that talk but do
nothing; let these be called Puritans or Phanaticks, or what men please: But
let no dishonor be reflected upon those that understand and believe what they
say, and live up to what they believe and profess. For though it may please
those who have a mind to put a slur upon this instance of real piety which I am
vindicating, to confound it with that other hypocritical guise of it, which I
have now condemned, that so they may expose it to contempt and dishonor; yet
as it is certain these two are as different things as Sense and Nonsense, or
as Life and Varnish, so (impartial men being Judges) that very Paint and
Pageantry bears evidence of the excellency of that Sincerity which I am
recommending. For you know men do not use to counterfeit that which is of no
value, painted beauty is a great Argument of the desireableness of that which
is true and native; so there is certainly a very deserved admiration of holy
Discourse, and a great power and charm in it, otherwise it would never be so
artificially pretended to by such men, nor especially be sufficient to give
countenance (as we find it does) to their sinister purposes and designs: the
World, I say, would not be so sottish as to be imposed upon by religious Cant,
nor designing Hypocrites be so silly as to go about to abuse the World this
way, if it were not an acknowledged Case that there is a real worth in that
which they endeavor apishly to imitate. So that the Objections against us are
unanswerable Arguments for us, and we have great assurance we shall carry our
Cause when our very reproaches turn to our honor.

But what if after all this, Godly Conference an effectual way to supplant
Phanaticism.
Phil, I should take the boldness to assert that such holy intercourse as I am
speaking of, and especially under those Conditions and Qualifications I have
put upon it, is so far from Phanaticism or Puritanism, or any Sectarian Odium,
that on the contrary (if the practice of it became general amongst good men) it
would be the most effectual way in the World to dash those formal disguises out
of Countenance, and to put all Phanatical tricks out of all request and
reputation. This, I believe, will seem a Paradox to you at first; but I am very
confident you will be of my mind when you have considered, That the only, or at
least the principal thing which that sort of men support themselves by is the
Gift of tongue, a peculiar knack of talking religiously: For if you look into
their lives and temper, they have no advantage of other men; and if you examine
either their Principles or their abilities, these will not mend the matter: and
yet they have strange authority and influence in the World; they charm men into
security of their honesty by their talk, they cast a mist before men's eyes that
they are taken for godly men, let their pride and passion, their covetousness
and ambition, be otherwise as palpable and notorious as they can. This Talent
of talking is so valuable, it redeems them from suspicion, with this Passport
they go undetected, they are Saints from the teeth outward, and Fools admire
them, and so they compass their ends.

Now were all sincerely good men so sensible of this as they ought to be, and
would they in earnest apply themselves to grave and serious and pious Discourse
in the habit of their Conversations, these Jack-Daws would be deprived of their
borrowed Feathers, and those crafty men would not have a Mask or Vizard left
them to cheat the World withal.

You will say, perhaps they would outshoot those good men in their own Bow, and
talk at an higher rate in hypocrisy than the other could do in sincerity. But
for answer: Do but consider whether there be not a greater power in Life than
in mere show and pageantry, whether that which proceeds from the thoughts and
heart and Principles within be not likely to have more vigor and spirit than
that which has no root, no foundation; but is begotten and lives and dies
between the tongue and teeth. Do not you observe that nothing so much
disparages a Picture as the presence of him for whom it was drawn? Life has a
thousand vigours and beauties which no hand of the Painter can reach and
display. So has spiritual Life, when it puts forth it self, a spirit, a
warmth, an air, or whatsoever you will call it, which cannot be so imitated,
but it will shame and detect the Rival. The great mischief of the World
therefore, and the only security of hypocrisy, is, that the Truth and Life
disappears, and gives its Counterfeit the Stage entirely to act upon; but let
that appear and confront its Adversary, and Hypocrisy will be sensible of an
unequal match, and blush or withdraw it self. When, I say, men that feel the
power of Religion in their own souls will be persuaded to express themselves
habitually, manly and judiciously, they will baffle and confound all theatrical
Pretenders to Religion. And now, Phil, what is become of that formidable
Objection, as you and I thought it at first? May not we now adventure to talk
of Religion without the danger of Phanaticism?


Phil. Yes, I see clearly we may; and not only so, but you have now convinced
me that for that very reason we ought to do it, as the best way to supplant
Phanaticism. But at the worst, if there were some danger that I should incur
the rash censure of some that I value, and were likely to be called Phanatick
for my pains, I would not stick to serve so many great and excellent ends at
that hazard, if I could.


Sebast. Bravely resolved, my good Friend! now you speak like a man and a
Christian; there is the very Point of Virtue: He that is too tender and delicate
has not the courage to be good, and he that will venture nothing here will win
nothing in the other World. You know my sense already, that good nature is an
excellent and useful Companion of Virtue; but as the Case may happen, a little
morosity is necessary to preserve them both; But, I pray you, why did you put
an if at the last? after all do you question whether it be possible to
discourse piously?


Phil. No, good Sebastian, that is not it; for you have convinced me of the
fecibleness, as well as the excellency of that kind of Conversation; but you
know (as I have said before) that is out of the road of Discourse; and besides
the difficulty of bringing those one converses with to it, it is natural for a
man to follow his old Biass: If I were once entered into such a Communication,
I am sure I should embrace it, and I think I could continue it. But there is a
sheepish kind of modesty in this (as well as in other things) that checks and
restrains a man from beginning that which neither he nor his Companions have
been used to. If therefore you can help me to conquer my self as well as to
answer Objections, to overcome my temper as well as to submit my judgment, I
would then set about it as well as I could.


Sebast. With all my heart; only with this Condition, as well as I can (as you
say) But I pray give me leave to ask you a Question by the bye, and not to
decline that which you have put to me; the Case is this, It is commonly
observed that good men find such a modesty (as you speak of) to restrain them
when they are setting themselves to begin some good Discourse; insomuch that
sometimes with very great difficulty (if at all) they can screw themselves up
to it; but contrariwise, lewd and profane men rant and Hector at an
intolerable rate, they will blaspheme and burlesque Religion when they are in
their humor without regard to God and man: now seeing the former have all the
reason in the World on their side, and the other as much against them, what is
it that makes this difference in their spirit and temper?


Phil. That I may come the sooner at the solution of my own difficulty, I will
answer your Question as briefly as I can; and I think it may be resolved into
these several Causes, what makes profane men so bold in their assaults upon
Religion.
first, Profane men are generally very grossly ignorant; for I cannot imagine
that any thing else should make them bold with God Almighty. And though they
pretend to wit, yet a man to their own tooth has told us, That a certain Dose
of that thing called Wit is a necessary ingredient into the Composition of a
very ridiculous Fool. And I have heard it has been said by a better man than
he, That a smattering in knowledge (which is the measure of a Wit) disposes men
to Atheism, whereas a full proportion would carry them through to the sense of
God and Religion. The second Cause I assign is, That these men having abandoned
Virtue, they have therewith lost all good nature and civil respect; and are
delivered up to insolence and an affronting humor. And thirdly, I make no
great doubt but the Devil, whose work they do, assists them in it. And now you
will easily think there needs no other concurrence; yet I will add another, and
that is Drunkenness: for methinks it should be out of the power of the Devil
himself to tempt a sober man to such a villainy; but in the rage of Drink God
is defied, and every thing that is sacred. But now to my Question.


Sebast. First, Phil, let me kiss your hands for your ingenious Answer to my
Query: and then in the second place, I wish I could answer yours as well. The
plain truth is (as I have acknowledged to you before) I have been in that Oven,
and therefore cannot wonder to find another man there; and though I cannot
always conquer my bashfulness, yet in such Cases I always endeavor it, and I
will tell you by what methods, and so I hope the same remedies may relieve us
both.

First then when I enter into Company with design to engage them in good
Discourse, I endeavor, if it be possible, to make some Friend privy to my
Plot, who perhaps shall sit at some distance from me, but understanding his Cue
shall be always ready to second me in what I undertake; and so by an honest
Consederacy we can carry on the business. And this I do especially if I
apprehend the Company to consist either of profane persons or captious Wits.
For if a modest man should in such a Case begin an unusual Discourse, and have
no body to follow him, he will not only miscarry of his purpose, but be abashed
and confounded. But if he have one prepared to comply with him, they shall both
have time to recollect themselves, and to carry the Ball of Discourse whither
they please.

In the next place, when I am destitute of the assistance of such an Associate
to second and relieve me, then if I apprehend I have an opportunity of
discoursing usefully, I resolve to begin whatever come of it, that is, I
forcibly break silence, Means to raise our Spirits to a fit temper for
religious Communication.
though it be with trembling and paleness and faultering and without any well
contrived expressions: And when once the Ice is broken the worst is past, then
presently my color and speech and spirits will return again. For to proceed is
very easy then, because, as I have noted before, the Objects of Religion lie
so ready to a man's thoughts that he cannot be at a loss in the Sequel of his
Discourse.

In order hereto I endeavor to raise in my own heart a great zeal of God's
Glory, and a generous design of doing good to those I converse with. And
therefore I think with my self I am not only to stand upon my guard and secure
my self from infection, nor much less to be a mere Negative, and content my
self to do no hurt to my Acquaintance, but that it is expected from me I should
benefit them, and season their intercourse with something virtuous and graceful.

Moreover, I endeavor in the whole Conduct of my self, and the habit of my
life, to arrive at a seriousness of spirit and a deepness of thought, without
which neither shall I be in temper to begin or carry on any such weighty
Discourse with others, nor will they expect it from me; a light trifling
jesting Spirit is good for nothing but sport and may game. Such as can
ordinarily find in their hearts to step aside to a quibble or a clinch, are
generally men so unfit for Religion, that they are seldom useful to themselves
in any secular business: But a serious man has his thoughts about him, and his
very mien and countenance raises the expectation of the Company, and so they
are half prepared to receive his impressions. Now to bring my self to this
temper, I often represent to my self God's Omnipresence, and that I am before a
mighty, wise and most reverend Majesty, who takes notice of all my carriage and
demeanor. I think frequently of the Judgment to come, and the wonderful
accuracy and folemnity of it, of the unspeakable concerns of Hell and Heaven,
and the whole affair of another World. By these Considerations I curb the
levity and wantonness of my spirit, and so become both furnished with fit
thoughts to communicate, and also with a proper temper to communicate them.

Besides this, I make it my earnest endeavor to be as much above the World as
I can, I mean to have as indifferent an esteem of Riches and Fame, etc. as is
possible, that my heart may not eagerly and intently run upon them: For I find
by woeful experience, that whenever it warps that way, I am sure to be
listless and formal in any such enterprise as we are speaking of, but
whenever I can contemn them, then I am as it were all spirit, and have so
lively impresses of another World upon me, that I can almost make it visible to
my Companions.

Amongst all these I pray daily and earnestly for God's Grace and assistance,
that he will every where be present to me by his Holy Spirit, and put useful
thoughts into my heart, and give me courage to express them, so as to beget the
like in others.

This, Sir, is the method I take with my self; and having, I thank God, often
succeeded well with it against a Cowardly heart of my own, I cannot but expect
it will have greater and more signal effects upon you.


Phil. God verify the Omen. However, I thank you most heartily for the
Receipt, which I will keep as long as I live.


Sebast. But I pray, Good Phil, do not make it public; for though I envy no
Body the benefit of my experience, yet I would be loath the World should know
what a shameful Difease I have been sick of.


Phil. O Sir, timidity is but a natural infirmity, and has not much shame
attending it: But I must tell you, as my Confessor or Physician, which you
will, of another Disease I labor under, so shameful and scandalous, that
scarce any Body will own it; and that is ignorance, if I had courage enough
for the business (we have all this while been speaking of) yet I am afraid by
my unskilfulness I shall spoil all: let me therefore pray you to afford me your
advice in this Case also.


Sebast. Fear it not, Phil, a man of your cheerful countenance, sprightly
vigor, and benignity of temper, can never labor under any such Disease.


Phil. Good Sebastian be not too secure of me; for this is a business of that
nature, that unless it be done gracefully it had better be let alone, and
especially because the enterprise is somewhat new and unusual; therefore the
greater dexterity and management is required, to give it a good appearance at
its setting out, and so to lay a foundation for its coming into common use and
reputation: and besides, it concerns you in Point of your own credit to furnish
me out well, for seeing it is you only that have put me upon it, the dishonor
will redound to you, if I miscarry in the undertaking.


Sebast. In earnest, Sir, and without a Complement you are known to be a man of
so good Parts that you can never want Materials, and then your sweetness of
address will not fail to give great advantage and acceptance to your
Discourses. Now it is an hard thing, that because you are pleased to think me
wise, therefore I must show my self to be a Fool; but that is a small matter
between Friends: therefore since you will have it so, I will tell you the
effect of my Observation in this matter.

And the first thing to our purpose which I remark is, the example of our
Savior, (and who can we better learn of? Prudential advices about religious
Conserence.
) And he, I observe, had a dexterity of applying every accidental occurrence to
his holy purposes, as it were by a kind of Chemistry separating the gross
matter, and subliming ordinary affairs to heavenly Doctrine: insomuch, that
there was scarcely any common affair of Life, such as eating or drinking, or
recreation, no disease or infirmity of the Body, no Trade and Occupation, such
as Merchandice or Husbandry, no building or planting, plowing or sowing, nay
not so mean employments as Women's leavening their Bread, grinding at the Mill,
or sweeping an House, but he spiritualized them and applied them to his designs.

Now if we would learn of him, and endeavor to imitate this dexterity, we
might with great ease and without all violence surprise men into Religion; and
not only at every turn introduce pious Discourse, but render the Subject of it
intelligible to the meanest capacities, and withal by those sensible
resemblances give such lively touches upon the minds of men, as that what we
delivered upon those occasions would stick and remain with them.

And there is no great pains or skill required for the doing of this, the
principal requisite to it is a zeal of God's Glory, and such a constant and
fixed eye upon it as shall make us apprehensive of the opportunities that
present themselves, and then a little humility to condescend to the weakness of
people; which two things presupposed, a very small exercise of fancy would draw
the parallels, and make the application; as any man will quickly find that will
set himself about it.

As for instance, when we visit a sick Friend or Neighbor, what a fair
opportunity have we to discourse of the Immortality of the Soul, and what an
easy transition is it from a Physician to a Savior? Or why may we not as well
cheer up our afflicted Friend with the comforts of Religion, as well as amuze
or divert him with impertinent Stories? Or suppose Friends be together, and
disposed to be merry, why may not some word come in seasonably of the
everlasting friendships in Heaven, or of the continual Feast of a good
Conscience? Why may not the common Chat about News be elevated to the
consideration of the good tidings of the Gospel? What hinders but our Dishes of
Meat may be seasoned with a gracious word or two about the Food of our Souls?
When men are talking of Old Age, it would be no great strain if thence our
thoughts rise up to Eternal Life. Nor any great slight of fancy is requisite
to improve all the accidents of our lives to the contemplation of Divine
Providence, which orders and governs them. In a word, every thing is capable of
improvement if we be not wanting; we shall never want opportunity if we embrace
it; any thing will serve an intent mind and a devout heart to these purposes.

My second remark is, upon the Custom of those several persons in the Gospel,
that upon diverse occasions entered into Conference with our Savior, which I
note they always began by way of Question or Doubt, as men desirous to be
informed rather than affecting to teach or dictate. This was not only the way
of Nicodemus, Joh. 3. of the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. and of the young rich
man, Matthew. 19. who came in earnest to be instructed; but of the Scribes and
Pharisees and Sadduces, who came to dispute: And indeed I have heard, this
modest way of propounding a Question, and expecting and replying to the Answer,
was the old way of Disputation. And certainly this is of great use in our Case,
for the more easy and acceptable introduction of the serious matters of
Religion into ordinary Conversation. When we do not violently break in upon the
Company, but civilly make our way; not abruptly obtrude our Sentiments, but
insinuate them; not malapertly reprove other men's errors, or superciliously
dictate our own Opinions; not fall upon Preaching, or throw down our Gantlet,
and challenge the Company to a Combat: but modestly appear in the Garb of
Learners, and propound a Case, as to men wiser than our selves, for our own
satisfaction. This course, instead of offending, exceedingly obliges those we
apply our selves to; forasmuch as every man is glad to be accounted wise and
fit to be consulted with.

As suppose you should ask the persons you are with what they think of such or
such an Argument for the Immortality of the Soul, or for the proof of a
particular Providence; or ask their advice how to answer such an Objection that
comes in your way against either of those or any other fundamental Point of
Religion: And though such Questions may at first seem merely speculative; yet
if they be pursued wisely and with that intention, they will infallibly lead to
practice.

Or suppose you put a Case about Temperance, as namely, What are the Rules and
measures of sobriety, so as also to avoid scrupulosity; How far is worldly care
evil and vicious, and how far innocent and allowable; What is the predicament
of careless and common Swearing, and what kind of sins it is reducible to.

Or more generally, How a man may discern his own prosiciency in Virtue, and
what preparation of a man's self is flatly necessary against the uncertainty of
Life, and to secure the great stake of an interest in another World.

Or, to name no more, What the Company thinks of such or such a passage in a
Sermon you lately heard, or in such a Book. These and a thousand more such
easy inlets there are into good Discourse without imputation of
pragmaticalness, and which a little presence of mind will improve to what
purposes we desire.

Another thing that I have observed in order to this affair is, what I have
learned from the Custom of prudent men, to insinuate that by a Story which
would not be so well received if it were directly and bluntly delivered.
Telling of Stories, you know, is a common Theme of Conversation, and if a man
have any graceful way of telling them, and especially use any prudence in the
choice of them; he has the Company in his power, and may lead them to what
Discourse he will: And besides, men will admit of that to be said in the third
person which they will not bear in the second.

Now to this purpose suppose a man should have in readiness a Story of some
remarkable judgment of God upon some notorious sin, that he would by all means
deter those he converses with from, no body could take offense at the Story,
and yet every man's Conscience would make application of it. Or suppose a man
should in lively Colors describe some excellent person, he would not only put
all the Hearers into the thoughts of those Virtues that were so described; but
stir up jointly a modest shame in them for their own shortness, and an
emulation of so brave an example. But to be sure he shall hereby give himself
an introduction (without affectation) of discoursing of which soever of those
eminent Virtues he pleases. These and many such other ways there are which your
own prudence and Observation will represent to you better than I can; by which
a discreet person may engage any Company (in which it is sit for an honest man
to be found) in good Discourse.

But I will not omit upon this occasion to tell you a Story, which I have from
very good hands, of two very eminent men, both for Learning and Piety, in the
last Age (or rather the beginning of the present) the one of them a great
Prelate (indeed a Primate) and the other a Churchman of great note and
preferment. These two Great Men, as they often met together to consult the
interest of Learning, and the affairs of the Church, so when they had
dispatched that, they seldom parted from one another without such an encounter
as this: Come, Good Doctor, (says the Bishop) let us now talk a little of
Jesus Christ; Or, on the other side, said the Doctor, Come, my Lord, let me
hear your Grace speak of the goodness of God with your wonted Piety and
Eloquence, let us warm one another hearts with Heaven, that we may the better
bear this cold World. I cannot tell you the words that passed between them, nor
can you expect it from me; but I am sufficiently assured of the matter of fact.
And this they performed with that holy reverence and ardent zeal, with that
delightful sense and feeling, that afforded matter of admiration to those of
their Friends or Servants that happened to be present, or to overhear them.
Here is now an Example of holy Conference without a Preface, and yet without
exception; a Precedent not only justifying all I have said, but easy to
imitate wherever there is a like spirit of piety: a few such men would put
profaneness out of countenance, and turn the tide of Conversation.


Phil. Shall I crave of you to tell me the names of those two persons?


Sebast. Their names are so well known, that I think you might spare the
Question; but they were V -- and P --


Phil. I guess who you mean; and I would to God there were more of them. I
doubt I shall never be able to imitate, but I am resolved to write after so
fair a Copy as well as I can: therefore pray you, if you have any further
directions for the guiding of my hand, let me have them.


Sebast. I see you are in earnest; God's Blessing on your heart for it. All
that I have to say, or (as I think) can be said more, may be summed up in these
few following Cautions:

First, You must remember that (which was said before) you are not always to be
endeavoring at Discourse of Religion; other Discourse, so it be manly and
pertinent, is not only lawful, but necessary in its season. The Wiseman tells
us there is a time for all things; to overdo is to do nothing to the purpose;
and to exclude all other innocent and ingenious Converse for the sake of
Religion, is to make Religion irksome, and the certain way to shut it quite out
of the World.

Secondly, Because religious Conference is not always a Duty, therefore it is a
peculiar season and opportunity that makes it at any time become so, and
consequently that is to be watched and laid hold upon. My meaning is, that when
men are in drink or in passion, it is no fit time to enter on this Subject; for
it will be but to cast Pearls before Swine; it can do those persons no good at
such times, and it may do us hurt and Religion too. But when men are in the
calmest and soberest moods, then is the only time for this intercourse.

Thirdly, It is very advisable that we make a distinction of persons, as well
as times, for this business. You know the World is not all of a size, some are
our Superiors, others are our Inferiors or Equals; there are some very acute
and learned men, some dull and ignorant; some are captious, others sincere and
plain-hearted; some profane, and others pious; in a word, there are old and
young, rich and poor, cheerful and melancholy, and abundance other such
differences in men's circumstances: All which require a peculiar Address, if we
intend to fasten any good thing upon them. But of this I need say no more,
knowing to whom I speak.

Again, fourthly, It is a matter of prudence that our essays of this kind be
rather perfective than destructive, that is, that we do not take upon us
authoritatively to quash and control other Discourse, but rather take
advantage of any occasional passages and hints, from whence to improve and
raise it insensibly to that we would be at.

Lastly, That out of indulgence to the levity, and in compliance with the
curiosity of men's minds, we should not always harp upon one String; but
sometimes designedly lay aside our business, and then resume it again, as in
Music to sink and let fall a Note, and by and by get it up again; that by such
variety we may afford the more delightful entertainment to those that are our
Companions. And now, I doubt, I have quite tired you; therefore it is time to
bid you a good Night.


Phil. Dear Sebastian, shall I tell you a plain truth? When first we came
together this Evening, your Conversation methought was so much out of the mode,
that though I considered you as an honest Gentleman, yet I suspected I should
have uneasy Company with you: But now I fancy you are like some of those old
stately Buildings I have seen, which are a little rough and weather-beaten
without, but for all that are substantially strong, and express very admirable
art within; or as I have heard it was said of Socrates, that he was like
Apothecaries Boxes, that had the Picture of an Ape, a Satyr, or perhaps a
Serpent without side, but contained excellent Medicaments: so you, that I
feared would be my Disease, have been my Physician; and, which is more, have
set me up for one too.


Sebast. Nay then good night again, if you be for Complements: But if you have
any real value for me, I hope you will now do me the favor of your Company at
my House some other Evening.


Phil. Never doubt it, Sir, your dead men shall scarcely haunt you more than I
will do. But good night heartily.


The End of the First Conference.
A Winter-Evening CONFERENCE. PART II.

Prove. xxvii. 17. As iron sharpeneth iron, so does the countenance of a man his
friend.

1 Cor. xv. 33. Evil Communications corrupt good manners.

A Second Winter-Evening CONFERENCE AT THE House of SEBASTIAN.
The ARGUMENT of the Second CONFERENCE.
In the former Conference, Sebastian having convinced Philander of the great
importance of Religion, and the wisdom of making it as well the Subject of
Social Communication as of retired Meditation: Accordingly they two meet on
purpose this second time to confer about it. But Biophilus, a skeptical person,
being in their Company, he at first diverts them from their design by other
Discourse; till after a while, under the disguise of News, he is wheedled into
this Subject before he was aware: And then he puts them upon the proof of those
Principles which they would have supposed. Upon this occasion the foundations
of Religion are searched into, and particularly that Great Point concerning A
Judgment to come, is substantially proved: Which being done, and Biophilus
thereby rendered somewhat more inclinable to be serious, they then pursue their
first intentions, and discourse warmly and sensibly of another World, and of
the necessary preparations for it, so long till they not only inflame their own
hearts with devotion, but strike some sparks of it into Biophilus also.

Philander. YOU see, Sebastian, I am as good as my promise; and at this time so
much better, as I have brought my Neighbor Biophilus along with me.


Sebast. I always took you for a man of your word; but now you have not only
acquitted your self, but obliged me.


Biophilus. Your humble Servant, Good Sebastian: I know you are a studious
person; yet I thought Company would not be unacceptable to you, at this Season.


Sebast. You are heartily welcome, Sir: I love my Books well, but my Friends
better. Come, Gentlemen, will it please you to draw near the Fire? the Weather
is very sharp still.


Phil. The cold continues: But, thanks be to God, the Evenings are not so
tedious since I saw you last.


Bioph. How can that be, Philander? The Weather indeed may change on a sudden,
and become colder or warmer upon several accidents; but seeing the Sun keeps
his constant Course, the interim of a few days can make no discernible
difference in the length or shortness of the Evenings.


Phil. O but here is a Friend has taught me an Art for that, a way to make
time longer or shorter at pleasure, Of improvement of time.
nay (which perhaps will increase your wonder) both these seeming Contraries
shall be coincident. A man shall have more time to spend, and less to spare;
more for his use and pleasure, and none to be a burden to him.


Bioph. Can Art do that? That is a noble skill indeed, (if it be possible) to
shorten a man's time, and yet prolong his life. Sure you speak Riddles; however,
I pray, make me Partaker of the mystery.


Phil. Good Neighbor, there is no other Secret in it but this: Good Company
and profitable Conversation redeem time from folly and impertinency, and so we
really live longer, and they also spend the time very pleasantly, and so our
lives seem to be the shorter.


Bioph. That Is pretty, I confess; but I had rather it had been literally true.


Sebast. I believe Biophilus remembers a Proverbial Saying they have in Italy
to this purpose, He that would have a short Lent, let him borrow money to be
repaid at Easter. So he that forecasts the Account which every man must one day
make, how he has expended the time of this Life, will not be apt to think the
term of it to be overlong. And he on the other side who improves his time as he
ought, and has his Accounts in readiness, will not think the Day of reckoning
too soon or sudden.


Bioph. Very good again: But nevertheless, with your pardon, A touch of
Epicurean Doctrine.
Gentlemen, I should argue the quite contrary from your Premises. For if there
be a Judgment to come, (as you are pleased to suppose) and that a man must
render an account of all his actions another day; This, methinks, should curdle
all his delights, and the very thoughts of such a thing filling him with
perpetual fears and solicitude about it, must needs make Life very tedious to
him. But if there be no such thing to be feared hereafter, then Life will seem
short, because it will be sweet and comfortable: and then also a man shall in
effect live a great while in a little time, when there is nothing to disturb
his thoughts, to impeach his pleasures or interrupt the enjoyment of himself.


Phil. Yes, even in the Case which you put, Death will be sure to come shortly,
and that will spoil his sport.


Bioph. That is very true and very sad: If therefore you could find out a
remedy for that, you would do something to purpose. But whenas you cannot but
observe that there are several sorts of Brute Creatures that outlive Mankind,
(I mean though they know not what it is to live, yet) they continue longer in
the World, and have as well a quicker sense of pleasure, as a more unlimited
and uncotrolled enjoyment of it; in both which respects we have too great cause
to envy their happiness. If Mankind after all this must be perpetually
tormented too with suspicions of what may come after, they are doubly
miserable, and under the hardest fate of all Creatures.


Sebast. That very thing which you now observe, is to me a very great Argument
of what you oppose. For upon those very considerations, viz. that the Life of
man in this World is shorter than that of some other less considerable
Creatures, and that the pleasure thereof is interrupted also by the expectation
of the future; upon those very grounds (say I) there is great reason to believe
that there is such a thing as another World wherein he may have amends made him
for whatever was amiss or defective here. For it is not credible with me that
such power and wisdom as is plainly displayed in the Constitution of man,
should be so utterly destitute of goodness, as to contrive things so ill, that
the noblest Being should be finally the most unfortunate.

To which I must add, that therefore the apprehension of such a Judgment to
come as we speak of, neither is nor can be mere matter of dread and horror,
(as you seem to suppose) but is either terrible or comfortable, respectively to
men's preparations for it: Of the different prospects different men have of the
other World.
I cannot wonder if the thoughts of it do so fright and discompose evil men, so
that they could with all their hearts wish there was no such thing. But most
certainly to wise and virtuous men, it is so far from being formidable, that
contrariwise the hope of it is the very joy of their hearts, the support of
their Spirits, their greatest security against all the cross accidents of this
World, and in a word their Port and Sanctuary.


Bioph. These are sine Sayings, Sebastian; but when you have said all you can,
and made the best of the Case, when it comes to the proof, I do not find men in
love with dying, nor to have so comfortable an opinion of that other World you
speak of; but that they could with all their hearts be content to quit their
interest in the latter, so they might put off the former. I remember once when
I was present at an Execution, amongst the rest of condemned Malefactors, there
was one who either was so secure of his own innocence, or so confident of the
sufficiency of his preparations for Death, or, which I rather suspect, so
elevated and transported with the Harangues of the Priest, that he seemed to
long for his near-approaching end, and pretended he would not exchange his
condition for that of any of the Spectators there present: But by and by comes
the surprising News of a Pardon or Reprieve, and the poor man was ready to leap
out of his skin for joy.

And I have often observed men, who when they have been desperately sick, and
past all hopes of Life, then (as it is usual with men in danger of drowning to
catch hold of any thing that offers it self for their support) to set a good
face on the matter, and (as we say) make a Virtue of Necessity, and welcome the
approach of Death with seeming courage and constancy: But in this juncture, let
but a Physician appear that gives them any hopes of recovery, they presently
start back from the brink of another World, as from an horrible Precipice, and
smile upon the Messenger that brings the good tidings of Life. I cannot see
therefore that men do indeed believe themselves in this matter.


Sebast. There is no doubt, Biophilus, but that (as you say) some men may talk
only, and set a good face upon that which they have no comfortable sense of.
And no wonder if such men's courage fails them when they have most use of it:
for it is not imaginable that it should be easy to brazen it out against
Death. But this is no more reproach to true Faith in God and hopes of another
World, than it is to generous courage and valor, that now and then you shall
see an huffing swaggering Hector turn recreant when he is put to it in earnest.
It is acknowledged to be very easy to brag and vapor when no danger is near;
but it requires real bravery to stand to it when a man is briskly encountered:
Now as you will not say there is no such thing as Valor, because there are
some Cowards that pretend to it; so neither (I presume) will you think fit to
suppose there is no faith, because there is some hypocrisy.

Besides, if you were as well satisfied as I am or pretend to be of the truth
of that we are discoursing upon, namely, of another World; yet your experience
of the common course of men's lives would force you to acknowledge, that even
amongst those that do profess to believe such a thing, there are but very few
who appear to be habitually well prepared for so great a trial; and therefore
no wonder if such persons be somewhat startled and discomposed at an immediate
summons, and could be very glad to have further day given them to make up so
great an Account. For however a tolerable course of living may make a shift to
support a man's hopes whilst Death is looked upon at a distance; yet when it
comes to the Point, that a man must dye indeed, it is very reasonable to expect
that such men as we now speak of should be not a little sollicitous in such a
concern, where they know the miscarriage is fatal, and the best provision
possible will be little enough.

But notwithstanding all this, there are certainly and have been sundry persons
in the World, who though they have had the same natural affection to themselves
and to the present life with others, yet have as heartily wished and longed for
the Great Day, as it was lawful for them to do. They know it is their Duty to
maintain the station God has set them in, till they have a fair dismission;
but bating that consideration, I doubt not but many a good man would sue out
his Quietus est, and gladly embrace an opportunity of bidding farewell to the
World.


Bioph. You say well; but how shall this Case be decided? Where may a man find
any such person as you speak of?


Sebast. Perhaps you have not heard any man sing his Nunc dimittis; or if you
had, Heroes that can despise Death.
it may be you would not have believed him to be in earnest: But what think you
of St Paul, who professes he desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ?
and particularly 2 Timothy 4. 7. he foresees a violent Death approaching him, and
upon that occasion he by way of contemplation places himself, as it were, upon
a Promontory, where he could look backward and forward, and take a view of both
Worlds; and when he reflects upon that which he was leaving, he finds that he
had discharged his part well and worthily, whilst he was in it; I have fought
the good sight, (says he) I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.
But then when he looks forward and takes a prospect of what was to come, here
he triumphs and exults with joy, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me: As if he said, I
know no cause that I should either be ashamed to live, or afraid to dye; I have
no reason to be very fond of life, who have met with so many afflictions in it,
yet I that have born them so undauntedly hitherto, can have as little reason to
leave the World now in a pet of impatience: But upon the whole matter, I see
great advantage on the other side, and the other World is as much better than
the present, as Harvest is than labor, as Victory than battle, and as being at
home than in travel and on a journey.

Or what do you think of so many thousand Martyrs, who have not only gone out
of the World with smiles in their faces, and songs in their mouths, but have
chosen Death when they might have lived as freely, as happily, and as long as
other men: They were not worn out with Age, nor vexed and wearied with poverty,
nor distracted by any disaster; they had as tender and sensible Constitutions
as other men, as much natural affection to themselves, and as sound reason to
judge what was best, and yet despised the present Life and World in comparison
of that to come.


Bioph. Nay, as for those men of old, which you speak of, I cannot tell what to
make of them: But I would fain see such a man now.


Sebast. I make no Question but I could direct you to such men now; but it may
be you will not believe they despise Death, because you see them yet living;
however, what think you of the man that has the bravery to deny himself those
profits and pleasures which other men allow themselves, (so long as they see no
infamy or external danger attend them) what think you of the man that dares to
be virtuous in a lewd Age and in evil Company, and has the courage and prowess
to confront a whole World with his Example? What think you of the man that sits
so loose to the World, that he can bear Prosperity without being supercilious,
and Adversity without being dejected, that can be in want without repining, and
can be liberal without upbraiding? Or, to say no more, What think you of the
man that scorns to crouch and sneak, and parasitically to humor and flatter
others for his secular interest or security? Such men as these are to be found
in the present Age; and wherever you find any such man, assure your self
there is a person that believes himself, or rather that believes in God, and
has as real a persuasion of the World to come, as other men have of that which
they see with their eyes, and touch with their fingers.


Bioph. I believe there are some such men as you speak of, and I do account
them brave and worthy persons: but these instances come not up to the Point,
forasmuch as some of these will quail at the approach of Death as well as other
men.


Sebast. It may happen so, that a virtuous man may be a little discomposed at
the rude assaults of Death, and yet without any blemish either to his Faith or
Virtue: For in the first place, you know all men have a natural love of Life,
and an abhorrence of Death, and from hence may proceed some sudden
reluctancies, because it is neither within the power of reason, nor is it the
Office of Religion, utterly to exterminate and extinguish these first motions;
but to subdue and govern them, so as that a man may (after some conflict)
pursue the choice of his mind notwithstanding them, and this latter you shall
see them perform.

And then besides, you know there are some men of more timorous natures than
others, insomuch that a great measure of Virtue will not do the same thing in
such, as a lesser proportion, assisted by hardiness of temper, will do in
others. For Nature will be Nature still; and therefore you shall observe that
even amongst those that have no apprehension of any thing to come after Death,
(if we may believe themselves) and so consequently can have no cause of fear;
yet will be found those that are as timorous as those that expect a Judgment to
come, witness your friend Mr. H.

Moreover, you cannot but be aware that a violent Disease, or pain, or any of
those Forerunners of Death, do ordinarily infeeble the operations of the mind,
as well as of the body, and disorder men's reason so, that it is hard to
pronounce of men's prowess by the Combat they then maintain; therefore the
surest way of deciding this matter, is that which I directed you to before,
namely, when you see a man in his full strength voluntarily and understandingly
do that which will certainly draw Death after it, this has certainly more
bravery and self-denial in it, more contempt of life and the world, and more
argument of hopes in another world, than can be drawn from the contingencies in
the very agony of Death.


Bioph. Well, perhaps it may be so: But for God's sake, Gentlemen, let us wave
this uncomfortable Subject. Of News; and News-mongers exposed.
Come, what good News is there stirring?


Phil. O Sir, that is a prohibited Commodity you enquire for, neither of us
deal in it.


Bioph. Nay, truly for my part I wish it had been prohibited sooner; for there
has been so much knavery and sophistication in it, that several well-meaning
men have been cheated of their peace, their loyalty, and almost out of their
wits too by it.

But so long as we are not bound to believe all that we hear, we may hear what
men talk of, for our diversion.


Sebast. Hearing and telling of News seems to me to be just such another
diversion as tippling is. And it is much the same thing whether a man's Head be
full of vapors, or of Proclamations: Wind in the Brain makes men giddy as well
as Wine, and men reel and stagger to and fro as unseemly by the impulse of
uncertain rumors, as those that are intoxicated with the strongest Liquors.
Besides, just as he that knows not how to entertain himself at home, usually
applies himself to the Tavern or the Alehouse for his relief; so it is the
custom of idle people, and such as are negligent of their own affairs, to busy
themselves in matters that do not belong to them: And there is yet another
thing worse than all this, namely, whereas the Tavern-Drunkard sleeps and
evaporates his Wine, and comes to himself again, the Coffee-houseDrunkard
scarcely ever clearly dispells those Vapors of News that have silled his Crown.


Bioph. That is smartly spoken: But however a man shall look like a
Malcontent with the times, or at least will seem to be unconcerned for his
Country, that wholly disregards News.


Sebast. With reverence to public opinion, I should think the quite contrary
in both Particulars. For in the first place it is notorious that the
malcontent is always listening after novelty, and I cannot tell whether his
head be fuller of little Stories, or of Maggots; whereas the man in good humor
and contented, minds only his own business, and lets it alone to God and the
King to govern the World.

And then for the other Particular, it is the easiest thing in the World to
observe that your right News-Monger cares not a rush which end goes forward, or
whether the state of things be good or bad for his Country, so there be News
for his own entertainment.

But after all, now I think better of it, I have a very remarkable Story to
tell you: But you are so great a Critic you will believe nothing, and
therefore I had as good hold my peace.


Bioph. Nay, Good Sebastian, let us have it: You are a person of good
Intelligence, if you will please to communicate.


Sebast. It is so very strange and wonderful News, Sebastian's strange News of
a new foundland.
that I suspect your Faith; but yet it is such as puts me almost into an
ecstasie every time I think upon it.


Bioph. Do not Tantalize us with expectation, whilst you raise the value of
your Story, nor tempt our phancies to anticipate and deflower it.


Sebast. Why then it is the discovery and description of a certain Country,
which is (by relation) the very Garden and Paradise of the whole World, so
transcendently admirable, that Italy, Thessaly, or whatsoever you have seen or
heard of in all your life, is nothing to it.


Bioph. Puh! Who would have expected Foreign News after such a Preface? and all
but some Island of Pines, I warrant you! Or suppose it should be true, what can
it be to us? however go on, Sebastian, perhaps it may afford us some diversion.


Sebast. I presaged what entertainment my News would have with you: What can it
be to us, say you? Why, when you understand all, you will bless your self that
there is such a place in the World, which you may go to if you please, where
you may find retreat from all troubles at home, and be happy beyond
imagination; nay, let me tell you, you must, you will go to it if you love your
self.


Bioph. You speak at a strange rate, Sebastian, a man would think you were
either strangely imposed upon your self, or else that you had very mean
apprehensions of our discretion: But let it suffice to say, That, soberly
speaking, there is no Country upon the face of the Earth can deserve this
Encomium; besides, when all is said that can be said, every man's own home is
his best Country.


Sebast. Why, do you not understand me? This which I am speaking of is or will
be your home too, at least if you will but take the pains to travel thither.


Biophil. I marry, thank you for that; but I wist it is better to believe than
to go look in this Case. What! change my Native Country, transplant my self at
these years! No, I am too old, and have taken too deep root where I am, for
that.


Phil. Assure your self, Biophilus, there is something extraordinary that
Sebastian expresses himself thus; He is no Hypochondriack nor whimsical
Enthusiast, but a man of the dryest and best tempered understanding.


Biophil. I have always thought no less, which raises my wonder now: Come, pray
you, Sebastian, tell us plainly what you have to say upon good grounds
concerning this place which you are in such a rapture about.


Sebast. In earnest, Sir, I have to say all that is possible to be said, and
much more than I can express.


Bioph. So it seems; for I perceive you are so full of it, you cannot vent your
self; we must therefore broach you by degrees. In the first place let me ask
you, What is the Name of this strange Country?


Sebast. It is called Urania.


Bioph. A Romantic Name! But, I pray you, in what Longitude and Latitude is it
situate, An Allegoricai Description of the new Country.
that a man may know where to find it, if he should have a mind to go thither?


Sebast. I am not skilful in that kind of learning, neither do I remember that
it was told me in those terms how the Country lies, but perhaps this may tend
to your satisfaction; I am assured that they have no night nor darkness there,
for the Sun never goes off their Horizon, nor are there any long Evenings and
tedious nights, which we complain off in England; by this Character I suppose
you may guess at the latitude of the place.


Bioph. Well, I will consider of that at leisure, in the mean time tell us what
is said to be the temper of the Air?


Sebast. O Sir, the Air is sweet and temperate beyond compare; it is Ether
rather then Air, there is neither violent heat nor cold, no distinction of
Summer and Winter, and indeed no such things, but a perpetual Spring; so that
Flowers blossom, and Fruit ripen all the Year long; and by reason of this
serenity and constancy of the Air, the Country is so healthful, that there is
never any epidemical or reigning Disease, no man feeble and languishing, nay,
not so much as wrinkles or gray hairs upon any man's head or face, insomuch,
that you would think the Inhabitants were all absolutely immortal.


Bioph. If that one thing alone be true, I warrant you the Country wants not
People.


Sebast. O very populous, yet by reason of its prodigious fruitfulness it can
never be overstockt; for, they say, it yields a fresh Harvest of all kind of
Fruits every Month, and that a most abundant one; forasmuch as no weeds, nor
thorns and briars grow there, but only that which is good for the use of man,
and, which is most of all wonderful, all this is brought forth spontaneously,
without the toil and labor of man,

They say also there are no kind of wild Beasts there, either to affright and
annoy the people, or to devour the Fruits of the Land; nay, not so much as any
Serpents, or other venomous Creatures or troublesome Insects, and all this is
owing to the clemency of the Air, the peculiar nature of the Soil, together
with Gods Blessing upon both.


Bioph. I perceive a man may eat well, and when he has so done may sleep in a
whole skin there, that I like; and I would to God it were not a Romance which
you give us: But go on, Sebastian, what is the Polity and Government of the
Country?


Sebast. The Government is perfectly Monarchical, and the Prince is absolute;
yet I do not hear that any of his Subjects wear wooden Shoos, or feed upon
Cabbage, but all of them enjoy their liberty and property as securely and fully
as in any Commonwealth in the World.

There is no squabbling about Privileges, no interfering between Prerogative
and Immunities, Dominion and Common Right; the King commands what he will, and
the people willingly obey him: for his Wisdom and Goodness moderate his Will
and Power better than all the Boundaries of written Laws.

And this I am informed of too, that though there be several Degrees of
Subjects, as there are amongst us, because otherwise there could be no
sufficient encouragement to industry, nor no capacity in the Prince to set
marks of favor upon those that deserve extraordinarily of him; yet from hence
arise no emulations amongst the Nobility, nor any oppression of the Commons;
the people do not envy and murmur against the Great Ones, nor on the other side
do they as greater Fish devour the lesser.


Bioph. A rare temper of Government this! and not less admirable than that of
the Air you spoke of before: You amuze me strangely. But what are the staple
Commodities of the Country?


Sebast. As for that, you must know it is not with Urania as with most other
Countries, where usually one Province abounds with what another wants, and the
other needs what that can spare; and so there is a necessity of reciprocal
Intercourse between them, both to relieve their necessities mutually, and to
discharge their superstuities; and herein you know lies both the reason of
Trade, and the security of Alliances between several Countries in our Parts of
the World. But now Urania being (as was wont to be said of Egypt) a Country
selfsufficient, depends not at all upon Foreign Commerce; and therefore as it
needs nothing from abroad, so consequently it sends out few or none of those
Commodities it abounds with; but rather (as I shall tell you by and by) invites
Foreigners to come over to them, and reside amongst them, and so to partake
freely of the advantages of that happy Land.

Yet I must tell you, they have very great rarities in those Parts, and such as
are exceedingly desired by all other people that understand the worth of them;
as in particular, to specify some few which are not at all to be found any
where else.

In the first place, they have the true Elixir Vitae, a very precious Balm, far
beyond that of Gilead, that perfectly cures all Diseases, both inward and
outward, I had almost said of body and mind. This operates without any pain to
the Patient, and in outward applications, heals all kind of wounds, and leaves
no scar or mark behind it.

They have also an admirable Water, which so quickens all the fenses, and
peculiarly the sight, that a man by the help of it shall see further than by a
Telescope, and pierce into the very Secrets of Nature.

The common Food of the Country is somewhat answerable to the description of
Manna, and has that peculiar taste which every man affects, and satisfies all
the powers of Nature. They have also a delicious Wine called Lachrymae Christi,
which amongst other Virtues makes men forget all sorrows whatsoever: And this
they usually drink in an Amethyst Cup, which preserves them from Surfeits or
Intemperance, what proportions soever they drink.

Amongst the rest, they have a sort of Nitre, so very powerful and abstersive,
that it takes aaway all spots, blemishes and aspersions, and makes those that
use it so very beautiful, that they ravish the eyes of Beholders.

It were endless to go about to enumerate the Commodities of this Country,
which clearly outgoes the Holy Land, though it was said that in Solomon's days
Gold and Silver were there as common as the Stones of the Street: And for proof
of it, the Inhabitants are generally so rich and prosperous, that there is not
one poor man in the whole Land, not one to be found, that does need or will ask
an Alms. The hungry and naked, those grievous Spectacles (too sadly common in
most other places) are not to be seen there; of which, amongst other causes,
these are assigned, viz. there is no fordid and cruel Miser there, who hoards
up what others should live upon; nor is there any wastful Glutton or Epicure,
who devours his own and other folks portion too. In short, they say all
desirable things are there in such abundance, that every man is as rich, as
full, and as happy as he pleases.


Bioph. If all this was possible to be true, which I must beg your pardon to
declare I have not faith enough to believe, yet the felicity of this Country
could not be long-lived; for it will certainly derive upon it self the envy of
all its Neighbors: and the effect of that will be, that those who have the
best Iron will quickly become Masters of all this Wealth.


Sebast. Nay, Biophilus, as for that there is no danger; for the Country is
altogether inaccessible, save only by one narrow way, and that is so well
guarded and defended, that to this day no Enemy has ever had the confidence to
assail it. And besides all, the Inhabitants are in such perfect peace and amity
one with another, and maintain so inviolably their allegiance toward their
Sovereign, that as no Foreigner has any encouragement to enterprise upon them
by treachery, so neither can he without mighty folly think himself considerable
enough to prevail by force against such an united strength.


Bioph. Now you speak of that, I pray give me leave to ask you one Question
more, What is the humor of the people, both amongst themselves, and toward
Strangers?


Sebast. That is as admirable in its kind as any thing I have told you yet. The
Complexion of the people is said to be universally sanguine, and consequently
they are sprightly and cheerful, ingenious and complaisant, openhearted and yet
grave, without fraud and without jealousy; they neither intend any hurt, nor
do they suspect any. Amongst other Instances of their sedate cheerfulness, they
are exceedingly addicted to Music, and their Songs are observed to be composed
for the most part in praise of their Prince, the splendour of his Court, the
Glory of his Achievements, and the felicity of his Reign.

So far are they from wrath and choler, that in the memory of man there has
not been one Lawsuit commenced amongst them; and, which is more, not one
Theological Disputation, which usually are attended with so much heat and
animosity in these Parts of the World. But as for Tale-Bearers, Whisperers,
Backbiters, and all that melancholy and envious Brood, there is not one of them
to be found in all the Country; every man there loves his Neighbor as himself,
and is as tender of his interest and reputation as of his own.

And then for their temper and carriage toward Strangers, they are infinitely
civil and obliging: They deride not other men's habit, or mien, or language, or
customs, or complexions; but contrariwise, whenever any such come amongst
them, they welcome them heartily, treat them with all instances of Hospitality,
and by all possible obligations and indearments invite them to become one
people with themselves, and as much as in them lies are ready to contribute
their assistance toward their Voyage.


Bioph. This is a very strange Relation as ever I heard in my life: But in
plain English it is too good to be true. All this can amount to no more than to
some Vtopia or new Altantis. Pardon my freedom, Good Sebastian; I acknowledge
you a wise and a learned Gentleman, that Character all the World allows you,
but in this particular Story some Body has unworthily abused your good nature;
for it can be no better than a Fiction, a Legend, a mere Flamm.


Sebast. You do not ordinarily think a man bound to warrant the News he tells
you, Sebastian relates the grounds of the credibility of his Story.
but you used to be contented to take it as he has it; and I am sure you will
not allow me to prescribe to you what you shall believe: however, I assure you
upon the word of a Gentleman and a Christian I have not devised it of my own
head, but am as well satisfied of the truth and reality of the Relation I have
made to you, as it is possible for me to be of any thing which I have not seen
with my eyes; and I am very confident I have as good grounds for my persuasion,
as it is fit for a discreet man to require in such a Case.


Bioph. I wish you could satisfy me as well; I pray therefore do us the favor
to let us know what probabilities you go upon in this matter.


Sebast. They say we Englishmen (above all people) love to be cheated, and
encourage impostures by our credulity: But if that be the humor of our
Countrymen, I must beg their pardon if I a little vary from them in that
Particular. I confess I am not so ill-natured as to suspect that every Body I
converse with has designs upon me; nor yet am I so supinely soft and
credulous, as to be at every Bodies mercy; or so greedy of News, as to swallow
all that comes without chewing. And as to the business before us, I positively
affirm to you, I had this strange Relation (as you esteem it) from one that
came from the place, and was an Eyewitness of what he reported, and therefore
could not be deceived himself in what he related: And then his Quality was
such, as that he could have no interest to impose upon me therein; for he was
no less a man than the only Son of the Great Monarch of the Country, and he
came as Ambassador Extraordinary from the King his Father, on purpose to
invite and incline our people to participate of that happy Region, and of all
the admirable advantages aforesaid, and assured us, That all which came should
be free Denizons of Urania.


Bioph. I, Good Sebastian, he told you so; but how are you sure he was not an
Impostor; and designed to put tricks upon you and our good-natured Countrymen?


Sebast. As for that, his very Person and Mien spoke for him, both which were
so August and Grand, as that no mean man could bear out the Port he used:
besides this, he came not in a clancular way, but made his Public Entry, and
his Train and Equipage was Grave and Majestic, like himself, far beyond the
empty pomp and pageantry of a Counterfeit. His Commission and Letters
Credential also were publicly seen, read and allowed; and they were sealed
with such a Seal, as no wit of man could imitate or counterfeit.

Add unto all this, I have seen the Map or Chart of the Country, I have perused
the Digest of the Laws of the Kingdom, these eyes have read the Records of
their History, and with this mouth I have tasted the delicious fruits of the
Land. What would you have more to justify the matter of fact?


Biophil. What would I have more? Why, I think you venture too great a Stock in
one Bottom; I would not trust to any one man, whatsoever he were, in a relation
of this nature; I should require to see and speak with many about it before I
would believe it.


Sebast. You say well: But can you think it reasonable to require that so great
a Prince should send many Ambassadors on such an Errand, when he aims not at
his own Greatness, or the accommodating of his own Affairs, nor has any need
of our alliance and assistance; but merely designs our benefit? Or can you
expect that he should send every day fresh Envoys, and that not only to whole
Countries, but to every individual person too? And if you could imagine such a
Prince should condescend to this also, can you think it would be easy to find
many fit persons for such a purpose, who would be willing to forsake the
Glories of such a Court, or the contentments of home in such a Region, and to
expose themselves to the difficulties and hazards of Travel, as well as to the
change of Air and Diet, and a thousand other inconvenices attendant upon such
an Expedition? No, Biophilus, it was an instance of wonderful goodness, that
such a Prince should send one Ambassador on such an Errand, and admirable
Charity and self-denial in him that undertook and performed it.


Bioph. You speak reason, I must acknowledge, in that particular; but yet I can
never believe, that if there were any such Country as your Intelligence amounts
to, it should lie undiscovered to these Parts of the World until now. What!
Drake, Candish, Columbus, Davies, -- none of them in all their Travels take
notice of such a place, nor give the least intimation of it until now.


Sebast. That is no such strange thing as you make it, if you call to mind how
long a time it was before the World would believe there were Antipodes, and yet
it is plain that so long one full half of the World was unknown to the other.
Or if you remember, that time was, (and that not an ignorant Age neither) when
the Roman Empire was thought to embrace the whole Earth, which as now we are
certain took not in one fifth (perhaps not one tenth) of it. Do you not know
that Hercules's Pillars were accounted the Boundaries of humane Travels, and
that for a great many Ages both the torrid and frigid Zones (as they are
called) were esteemed uninhabitable, and all that time the World was ignorant
of it self? besides, you know, it is not very long since those vast Tracts of
Land, the West Indies, were first discovered by some of those persons you have
named; and, to say no more, I pray how many Ages past over the heads of Mankind
before this our Native Country of Britain (as considerable as it is, and we
justly esteem it) came into any knowledge or consideration with the rest of the
World: think it not strange therefore if Urania was so lately discovered.


Bioph. But that which I principally intended to say was this, You afford me
matter of great wonder, that you should be so much concerned for a place very
newly discovered, (if it be discovered) but especially that you should believe
so many strange things of it, before any one person has gone from hence, and
returned hither again to confirm those reports of it.


Sebast. Ifs and Exceptions are endless, and I know no way to make a man
believe that has no mind to it; yet I will give you all the satisfaction I am
able, and that which I think is sufficient in such a Case. You must know
therefore that this Country has not been wholly undiscovered till now, as you
suppose; for I my self have seen a Book of great Authority and Antiquity, which
though somewhat obscurely and figuratively written, yet certainly pointed at
such a place, and in some measure described it too, to him that attentively
read and considered it. And besides, there are some very credible relations
concerning some certain persons, that have heretofore made very fortunate
Voyages thither.

But as to that you object, that no man has gone from hence thither, and
returned again to us to bring us the Tidings; you will easily satisfy your
self therein, if you consider what I intimated before, viz. That those who once
get thither can have no inclinations to make a Change so much to their
disadvantage, as it must needs be for them to return hither again. Besides,
though they say the passage is not very long thither, yet it is no common Road;
and therefore very few will (at least unnecessarily) undertake it.


Phil. But if it be an untraced Path, Preparations for the Journey to Urania.
how shall a man find the way thither, if he have a mind to go?


Sebast. O Philander, there is no great difficulty in that, if a man be well
resolved on the business; for besides a Chart, and very punctual instructions
which the Ambassador left behind him for that purpose when he was amongst us,
there are great store of very skilful and faithful Guides and Pilots, who
freely offer their service, and will not fail with God's Blessing to land us
safe there.


Phil. I cannot tell what Biophilus thinks of this business: But for my part,
Sebastian, I am so ravished with your relation, that if there be such a place
in the World I will find it out by God's help. I thank God I am no MaleContent,
either with my Native Country, or my private Fortunes; yet I see no reason we
should like Mushromes live and dye upon the same spot, and be a mere accessio
Soli, or Heirlomes to the place where we happened to be born, especially if we
may thus much mend our selves by the change. I am a Citizen of the World, and
that shall be my Country where I an fare best.

But will you go with me, Sebastian? Then I shall not only be out of all doubt
of the truth of your Narrative, when I see you so far believe it your self, as
to adventure all upon it; but I shall with much more cheerfulness change my
Country, when I do not change my Friend, nor forego your Company.


Sebast. Obligingly spoken, and bravely resolved, Philander: By God's Grace I
will go with you; and to assure you of my intentions, I will now acquaint you
that I have been this good while in setting things in order, and in making
preparations for the Voyage.


Phil. But how shall we dispose of our Estates here? and what Commodities had
we best to furnish our selves with to carry over with us?


Sebast. As for the disposal of our present Fortunes, I can tell you there are
very sure Returns betwixt this Country and that; for the Prince himself will be
your security, if you put your Effects into such hands as he has appointed.
But as for Merchandise to carry with us, there will be no need of that; for the
Country which we have in our eye is so gloriously rich and plentiful, the
Prince is so noble and benign, and all the Inhabitants so kind and charitable,
that we shall be sure as soon as ever we come there to be furnished gratis with
all that our hearts can wish: and moreover, if we should put our selves to the
trouble of transporting our Baggage with us, it would not only incumber us in
our Journey, but would also seem to be such mere trash and lomber when we come
there, that we should be ashamed of it and of our selves too, for setting such
a value upon it.

But there is another thing, and much more material, which I must needs tell
you of, in order to our more favorable reception when we come there, that is,
we must beforehand quite alter our Habit and Garb, and not so much as smell of
the Earth we came from: amongst other things, we must disuse our selves from
Onions and Garlic, and from Flesh too, that we may the easier accord with the
Diet of the Country; and we must refine our spirits, that we may be sit to
breathe in that pure Air; and having so done, there needs no more but to carry
with us great minds and large souls, to qualify us both for the Society and
the enjoyments there.


Phil. Thank you, Dear Friend and FellowTraveller (for so I will henceforward
style you) for these instructions; I will use the best of my endeavors to be
fitted accordingly: But is there any thing else that I need to be advised in?


Sebast. O yes, there is one thing more which I doubt you do not think of, and
I am somewhat afraid lest the mention of it should discourage you; but it must
be, and there is no avoiding it.


Phil. In the name of God, what is it? Mistrust not my courage or constancy;
I Will stick at nothing that crosses my way to Urania.


Sebast. You remember I have intimated to you already, that when we come at the
Country we design, we shall be immortal, we can never dye afterward; but we
must dye beforehand, or we shall never come thither. This is the pinch of the
business, what think you of it now, Philander?


Phil. Never the worse for that, Fellow-Traveller: But, Good Lord! what a Dream
have I been in all this while? I thought verily you had spoken Historical truth
of some rare Earthly Country: but now my eyes are open, and I perceive you mean
Heaven, that is the Urania you have all this while amuzed us with: Now I can
unriddle the whole business: I have now a Clue to guide me through the maze of
your Discourse, and can decypher all the Figures you have used. I am sure it is
Heaven only can answer the Character you have given; that is the place where
there is no pain, sickness, nor death; there is no Night nor darkness, but a
perpetual Day; there is to be found the true Balsome that cures all the
Distempers and wounds both of Body and Mind; there are to be had all the other
Rarities which you have mentioned; Jesus Christ is the Ambassador from God
Almighty, that invites us thither; all is plain and easy now; how dull was I,
that I could not understand you sooner!


Bioph. And have you drolled with us all this while, Sebastian? Have you
wheedled me back again into the Subject I declined? Is your famous Urania in
another World? I thought your News was impossible to be true, and now you as
good as confess it.


Sebast. By your pardon, Biophilus, have I done you any wrong? You asked for
News, and I have told you good and true News; News of more importance, and more
comfortable than any the Coffee-House affords; not illnatured Stories of Whigg
and Tory, nor surmises about France and Italy, Turk and Count Teckley; but a
great truth of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, a Kingdom wherein there is
righteousness and justice, unity and joy, love and good will, everlasting peace
and everlasting life; a state of that felicity, that it is able to make us
weary of this World, and to render the time of our life tedious to us till we
come to the enjoyment of it; in a word, that is sufficient to make all the ways
of Virtue seem easy and delectable, and even Death it self desirable in the
way thither.

What think you of it, Philander, now you understand what Country it is I
persuaded you to? Does your mind hold for the Voyage? Will you go on with your
preparations for it, as we were discoursing before? Will you venture to shoot
the Gulf that you may arrive at it?


Phil. Yes, Fellow-Traveller, I hold my resolution. For though I find I was
mistaken in the particular, Philander transported with the contemplation of
Heaven.
yet not in the general; it was an Earthly Paradise that I had in my thoughts
all the while you were discoursing figuratively to us, and I had no other
apprehensions of your design, and therein Biophilus was more in the right than
I, who was confident there could be no such Country in this World as you
described: but I heartily thank you for the deception; you have cheated us into
our own advantage. And now that I understand you, I do not change my Course,
though I change my Port; I hope I shall not be so absurd, as to be more in
earnest for an Earthly Country than for an Heavenly.

Who would not gladly be at everlasting rest, and in an unchangeable Condition?
We are but Pilgrims and Strangers in this World, but there we shall be at home,
and in our Father's House; here we are continually tossed with Winds and Seas,
tormented betwixt hopes and fears; there we come into harbor, and shall be
safe as upon a Rock, stable and settled as the Mountains.

Who can choose but wish to live for ever, and would not be contented to dye
once, that he might be out of the reach of Chance or danger for ever after?
Everlasting Life! what an Ocean of joy and felicity is contained in it! It puts
me into an Ecstasie to think of it! Surely he does not love himself, or does
not understand himself, who would not gladly leave an uncertain, troublesome,
quarrelsome, foolish, disputing, suspicious, envious World, upon far easier
terms than the attainment of it. But to live with the Ever-Blessed Jesus, to
spend Eternity in the Society of good and wise, kind and peaceable men, to
enter into everlasting friendships, inviolable peace, unchangeable felicity! I
am ravished and transported with the thoughts of it.

When once I had the happiness to take notice of a poor man, blind from his
Mother's Womb, who never had seen the Sun, nor could have any Notion of Beauty
or Colors, nor of any of that variety of delightful Objects which the eye and
light present to us, and entertain us with; when afterward (I say) by a
strange Cure this poor man had his eyes opened, and found a Crowd of new
delights press in upon him, he thought himself surrounded with Miracles, and
was almost distracted with wonder. And certainly no less but a great deal more,
will our surprise be when we come to Heaven, where probably we shall have new
powers opened, which shall discover such Glories to us as we were not capable
of perceiving before, if they had been presented to us; but most certainly we
shall then have new Objects of delight to entertain those powers we have, and
those transcendent to all we ever had experience of before.

Or when I think of the Children of Israel first coming out of Egypt, where
they had lived for some hundreds of years in the Condition of Slaves under the
jealous eye of a barbarous Prince, treated with hardship and severity, and
exposed to all the indignities, insolences and cruelty of a faithless and
ungrateful people; and then after this, (leaping as we say out of the Frying
Pan into the Fire) were carried into a vast and howling Wilderness, and there
spending forty years more amidst Seas and Mountains, in danger of Wild Beasts,
and beset with Enemies, having no City of refuge, no Strong Holds, no Friends,
no Allies, no comfort or supplies, but from hand to mouth; when (I say) these
poor people arrived at last at the Promised Land, the Land of Canaan, a Land of
Olive-yards and Vineyards, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and the Glory of
all Lands, and found themselves peaceably possessed of it, under their own God,
their own Prince, and their own Laws, and flowing in such plenty of all good
things, that they now became the admiration and envy of all their Neighbors,
who had been the Subject of their contempt and scorn before: I can but fancy
how they were astonished at the change, what a wonder they were to themselves;
and I am apt to believe, that for some time after they could not but suspect
they were under a pleasant illusion of fancy, and that all their felicity was
no better than a Dream.

So assuredly, when we shall first come to Heaven, our spiritual Canaan, to the
enjoyment of an happiness of God's preparing, who has all the Ingredients of
felicity in his power, and infinite wisdom to contrive and compound them, and
unspeakable goodness to bestow them, and who, as the Scripture expresses it,
has from the beginning of the World been designing and preparing such a
systeme of joy and felicity as may at once both most delight his Creatures, and
display all his aforesaid Attributes; when, I say, we shall first observe the
strange change between a narrow, stingy, necessitous, unquiet, sickly, peevish
and contentious World, which we have left behind us, and the settlement and
peace, plenty and glory of that we enter upon; it will not be easy for us
(without larger minds than we have now) to know how to behave our selves; we
shall be apt to be oppressed with wonder, and, if it were possible, to dye with
excess of joy.


Sebast. You speak bravely and sensibly, Dear Phil. You seem to have gone up to
Mount Nebo, and to have fed your eyes with the prospect of the Holy Land; but
have you considered the difficulties of the way, as well as the happiness of
the Journies end? Will you not like the Israelites (you spoke of even now)
repent, and bethink your self of turning back when you encounter difficulty or
danger? Will not Death affright you when it appears in all its dismal pomp?
Will you not shrink when you shall come to be stripped naked of all your worldly
habiliments? Will you not have a lingering after your old accommodations, your
fine House, rich Furniture, pleasant Gardens, sprightly Wines, or any other
pleasures and entertainments of the Body?


Phil. No, no, Sebastian, I will go to Heaven, whatever come of it; what can
discourage a man when Heaven is at Stake? If the Journey put me to a little
trouble, there is rest at the end of it. What is it to exercise a little
patience, when a man shall be crowned at last? Who would not run, strive, do or
suffer any thing, and venture all upon such a wager?

Shall I be frighted with Death? that will come however, Christian Resolution.
and I am sure the neglecting eternal life is not the way to escape it.

Shall I be sollicitous for my estate and worldly accommodations, when I know,
whether I go to Heaven or no, I must shortly leave them all behind me? And
surely if they cannot save me from death, they ought not to hinder me of
eternal life.

Or shall I hanker after Onions and Garlic and the Fleshpots of Egypt, as you
called the pleasures of the body, which will certainly forsake me, if I do not
forsake them first. No, I have counted the cost, there is nothing shall
discourage me by the grace of God, I will go to Heaven; but I pray let us not
part company, let us go to Heaven together.


Sebast. With all my heart, dear Friend; for though I doubt we must not expect
much company with us, The advantages of good company in the way to Heaven.
yet perfect solitude is somewhat uncomfortable, and there are great advantages
of society. For if any body should be so absurd as to laugh at us on our
journey, we can the better despise them. If either of us should happen to be
heavy and weary in our way, we may animate and quicken one another. If any
difficulty befall, that may be too hard for any one of us, by our united
strength we may be able to encounter and remove it. If either of us should
swerve a little out of the narrow way, toward the right hand or toward the
left, the other may recall and rectify him. Besides, the great additional
comfort it will be when we come at our journies end, not only that we see one
another happy, and enjoy one another society, but especially when we reflect
upon the good service we have done to one another in bringing each other
thither, we shall have our joys redoubled by the reflection, and feel not only
our own individual shares, but that also of each other.


Phil. Happily thought of, Fellow-Traveller, but will not Biophilus go with us
too: what say you, Sir?


Bioph. You are honest Gentlemen, and my good Friends; but, Lord, what Romances
do you make, Skepticism displaying its humor, and checked by sober reason.
what Castles do you build in the Air, and what shadows do you feed your selves
withal! You talk of Heaven as confidently as if you had traveled an hundred
times through all the regions of it, or rather indeed as if you had visited the
World in the Moon. But when all is done, did ever you or any body else see such
a place as Heaven. For Gods sake therefore leave these Enthusiastical whimseys,
and talk like men, speak of something that is certain and visible, or probable
at least, and do not forego substance for shadows, certainties for
uncertainties.


Phil. God help you, good Neighbor, in requital of the caution you give us:
assure your self, we have the same senses and the same self-love that you have,
and only wish you had the same faith that we have. We are not willing to part
with certainties for uncertainties; for if Heaven be not certain, we are sure
nothing else is. And as for the things of this world, they are so far from it,
that nothing is more certain, than that we must part with them shortly, whether
we will or no: But as for the other world, we know whom we have believed.


Bioph. I tell you, all is but dream and fancy, there is no proof in the world
for it. All you have to say is, that men must believe; as if you should say,
shut your eyes and see, you persuade a man to find the way to Heaven blindfold.
No, give me good proof, or I Will not stir a foot, with me seeing is believing.


Phil. Remember your self, good Neighbor, are not you a Christian? Do not you
believe that Jesus Christ came from Heaven on purpose to make discovery to us
of those celestial Regions, and to show us the way thither? And did not he
confirm his report to us by undeniable Miracles? Did he not come into the world
miraculously, and return thither again visibly? Did he not from thence send
down admirable tokens of his Presence and Authority there, especially on the
famous day of Pentecost? Besides, do you not see all wise men provide for
another world, and that generally good and virtuous men, when they come to die,
are ravished with joy in contemplation of it, as if they really saw Heaven open
to receive them?


Bioph. Whether or no I believe as much as you do, yet I believe this one thing
instead of all the rest, that we are born to be cheated. For what with the
illusions of our own melancholy phancies, what by the prejudices of our
education, and the imperious dictates of others, what by the authority of
unaccountable Tradition, and public Fame, and what by the designs of
Politicians, it is an hard matter to know what else to believe.


Phil. Indeed, Biophilus, I am both sorry and ashamed to hear you talk at this
rate. And I do not wonder now, that you were so desirous to decline this kind
of discourse when we fell upon it. I hope you take me for your Friend as well
as your Neighbor, and Sebastian here for a discreet and worthy Gentleman,
suffer your self to be persuaded by us to think and speak more soberly and
becoming your self in these great matters, or if you will not think like a
Christian, yet talk like a man; for let me tell you, you seem not only to
reject Christianity, but all Religion in general, and upon those terms you will
be as little fit for this world as for that which is to come.

For what a sad creature is a man of no Religion at all? What State or Civil
Government will be able to endure him, whom no Oaths can oblige or fasten upon?
How can there be any Civil Society with him that has no Faith, that can
neither trust nor be trusted? What security can such a man give that he shall
not disturb the State, violate the person of his Prince, falsify his trust,
betray his friend, cut his Neighbors throat, if he be under the awe of no God,
the expectation of no rewards nor punishments in another world? What security
can there be, I say, in dealing with such a man, what sincerity in his
friendship, what safety in his neighborhood? For all these depend upon the
reverence of Religion, which he that is wholly destitute of, must needs become
devotum caput, a wolfes head, the pest and vermin of humane society.

Do not therefore, dear Biophilus, at once both stifle your own Conscience, and
affront the common sense and reason of mankind. Do not under the pretense of
being more witty and sagacious than other men, reason your self into brutality,
and whilst you grow over-wise in your own eyes, be the most fatally mistaken
and lost for ever.

Why should you abandon your self to desperation, and leave your self without
any refuge in adversity, we are well and cheerful here at present, God be
thanked; but the time will come when God will stand us in stead, when we shall
have need of the retreats and comforts of Religion. Above all things in the
world, leave not your self without hope in your latter end, do as becomes a
man of your parts and discretion, suspect your own suspicions, and let not the
opinion you have, that other men are under prejudices, prejudice you against
the arguments for believing. Come deal ingenuously, and open your breast,
propound the grounds of your suspicions, the objections you have against
Religion; and though I cannot promise you that I will answer them all to your
satisfaction, yet I doubt not but here is one that will.


Bioph. Look you, Gentlemen, you put me into a great strait; for if upon this
invitation of yours, I do not disclose my mind to you, I shall seem
disingenuous, and you will think worse of me than perhaps I deserve; and on the
other side, if I do discover my sentiments, it is probable, that my Creed will
fall so many Articles short of yours, that we shall break out into some heats,
and endanger the continuance of our neighbourly conversation. However since it
seems to be your desire, I will be plain with you, in confidence, that as you
are Gentlemen, you will deal ingenuously with me, and if you can do me no good,
you will do me no hurt; my meaning is, that if it should happen you do not
convince my reason, I hope you will not defame my person, nor expose me to the
insolences of the Rabble, who believe in gross and by whole Sale, and throw
dirt upon all that chew what they swallow.

Now in the first place, The Epicurean Creed.
that you may not think me a perfect Sceptick, I declare to you, that I
acknowledge the Being of a God, and that not only because the generality of
mankind, and even Epicurus himself owned so much, but because it is not
conceivable how the world should be without one; for no wit or reason of man
can evince to me, how any thing should begin to be without some necessary and
eternal Existent, to begin the motion, and to bring it into Being; or which is
the same thing in effect, there can be no second Cause, if there be no first.

But then beyond this you must pardon me, for to deal sincerely with you, I do
not think that this God minds or troubles himself about the world after he has
made it. Much less do I see any sufficient ground for that which Philander has
been talking so warmly about, namely, a world to come. And for eternal life
(which men speak such great things of) I profess I look upon it as a flat
impossibility, for as much as I see men die, but see no foundation for a
belief, that there is any life or existence out of a body.

There are some other points of affinity with these that I withold my assent
from; but because you have challenged me to a rational debate, therefore to
give fair play, and to put the business between us to an issue, I will insist
but upon one point, and that shall be the same which we fell into by chance at
our first coming together; namely, whether there be such a thing as a public
Tribunal or general Judgment, where men's actions shall be reviewed and censured
after this life. Prove me but this one point sufficiently and plainly, and I
will grant you all the rest.


Sebast. Now you show your self a man, and a shrewd one too, though not a
Christian. The great consequence and general influence of the belief of a
Judgment.
For I must acknowledge that you have with great judgment pitched upon the very
Cardinal point of Religion: and which, if it be proved (as I do not doubt but
it shall be) will infer all the rest: but if it miscarry, all falls with it The
persuasion of a Judgment to come is the great awe upon men's Consciences, the
principal motive of virtue and piety, the restraint and check upon vice and
wickedness, and indeed the sinew of Civil Government, and bond of humane
Society. This both supposes the Being of a God (which you grant) and of a
Providence also (which you deny); for if there were not a God, it is evident
there could be no Providence in this World, nor Judgment in another: and this,
if it be granted or proved, necessarily draws after it rewards and punishments
in the life to come; for otherwise a Judgment would be but a matter of
curiosity, and a trouble to no purpose. You have therefore, in making choice of
this for the critical or decisive point, given great proof of your own
sagacity, and put the matter upon a right issue.


Bioph. Well, prove it then.


Sebast. What proof do you require of this? Why should not the testimony of the
holy Scripture satisfy you? For in the first place, if there be a God (which
you have acknowledged) you cannot but think it reasonable, that if he intend to
judge the World, he should give some intimation of it to the sons of men
beforehand, since they must needs be so highly concerned in the knowledge of
it, and then in the next place the Scripture cannot be denied to be as express
and full in this particular, as it is possible for words to make it. There God
declares and consirms it innumerable times, and the more to awaken men to the
consideration of it, and preparation for it, he is said to have appointed a set
time for it, he has foretold who shall be the Judge, with what pomp and
retinue he shall come attended, what measures he shall proceed by, and what
shall be the circumstances of that great solemnity.


Bioph. Excuse me there, Sebastian, I am not to be born down by authority, but
convinced by reason; Scripture proof of a day of Judgment, justified by reason.
if you will do any good upon me, you must deal with me as a Philosopher, not a
bigoted person.


Sebast. By your favor, Sir, it is not to impose upon you, to give you Divine
authority for proof. If indeed I should urge you only with the Opinions of men,
you might complain I did you wrong; for in such a case your denial would have
as much authority as their assertion: but I hope God may be believed upon his
own word, especially in a business of this nature, which depends so much upon
the determination of his will; for who can tell Gods mind better than himself?
Who knows the mind of man, but the spirit of a man which is in him? And who can
pretend to declare what God will do, unless he be pleased to reveal his
intentions? But if he declare he will judge the World, we may be sure it shall
be done.


Bioph. I, but that is the Question, Sebastian, how shall I be assured that God
has any such intentions, or has made any such declaration?


Sebast. That which we call by the name of holy Scripture, is nothing else but
a collection of such declarations of the mind of the Divine Majesty, as he has
thought fit from time to time to make to the sons of men. And those Books,
which are so called, have been reverenced by wise men in all Ages upon that
account, as such all imaginable care has been taken to preserve them from
corruption or depravation, and several of the best of men have exposed their
lives, rather than consent to the destruction of them. Now why should you call
in question the Authority of these Books, which you cannot do without
impeaching the wisdom of the most able, and the sincerity of the most honest of
men, and upon the same terms you derogate from the Faith of all mankind, and
must (if you will be impartial) abrogate the credit of all the old Records in
the World. For as much as (besides all other considerations) these Sacred
Records, I mean the Books of the Old and New Testament, do bear an irrefragable
testimony to each other, and as a pair of Indentures, justify one another.
Which you will easily be convinced of, if you consider, that these two Volumes
were written in several very remote Ages, and consequently by persons that
could hold no correspondence one with another, and were in the custody of those
that were of such contrary interests and opinions, that it was impossible they
either would or could conspire together to put a cheat upon the World in them.
Now if notwithstanding these two Books (in the circumstances aforesaid) shall
verify one another, so as that whatsoever the Old Testament promises, the New
Testament performs, what the one foretold the other represents the
accomplishment of; what ground is or can there be to suspect the truth of them?
For if several Witnesses, and those of several Countries, and of contrary
interests, such as never saw the faces of one another before, and therefore
neither would nor could combine together and contrive their story, and
especially being examined apart too, shall notwithstanding jump in the same
matter of fact and circumstances also, there is no man so humorsome and
abounding in his own sense, but will allow their evidence to be good and
substantial; then much more is there very good ground to believe these Books,
which have all these advantages, and several other, which I will not insist
upon.


Bioph. These are pretty things which you say; but this is not that kind of
proof I expected from you: if this be all the satisfaction you can give me, I
am where I was.


Sebast. No, Biophilus, this is not all I have to say; but I thought fit to
remonstrate to you the sufficiency of this kind of proof in it self, which men
of your way are apt to make so slight of, and thence to convince you, that
those men that take up with this alone, are not such soft and credulous people
as you are wont to represent them.

But what if I had no other proof but this, It is just prudence to prepare for
a day of Judgment, thought the evidence: were less than it is.
I do not find that you are able to reply any thing to it, it is an easier
thing to hough at an Argument, than to answer it. Besides, if this way of
probation were far less considerable than it is, yet you know that any evidence
will serve against none, and the meanest Arguments will carry a cause when
there is nothing to be said on the other side. If you could but pretend to
prove on your part, that there were no such thing as a Judgment to come, you
had then some reason to be strict in your demands of proof from me of what I
assert: but in a true balance the least grain or moment in the world will cast
the scale when there is nothing against it. Now since you know well enough, you
can offer no kind of proof of an assertion contrary to this we have before us,
nothing in the earth but overwise doubts, grave suspicions, and, perhaps it may
not be so, I appeal to your impartial reason, whether it be not more fit to
suspect (at least) that it is so where there is some proof of it, than to
suspect it is not so where no Argument is given for the negative, nay indeed
where none can be given.

Negatives, you know, are hard to prove in general, but especially in such a
case as this is: For he that undertakes to prove such a Negative, has but one
of these two ways to do it, viz. either he must affirm, that he has surveyed
the whole state of Nature, and seen all the Causes that are in working, and
then must assert de facto, that there is no such thing upon the Loom as that he
denies; and also that he perfectly understands the whole mind and will of God,
and that he intends no such thing; or else he must demonstrate by reason, that
it is plainly impossible, and a flat contradiction, that any such thing should
be: either of which you cannot, without intolerable absurdity, affirm in the
present case.

So that, as I said, you have nothing but bare suspicions on your side
(whatever Arguments I have on mine.) Now besides the inequal balance of nothing
against something, be it never so small, do but consider what strange
imprudence it is to adventure so great a stake, as all your interest in another
World amounts to, upon a mere non putaram; for what if such a thing should
happen to prove true at last, what will become of you then, what a sad
condition are you cast into!

Wise men are wont to value not only certainties, but also probabilities, and
even contingencies also; now seeing it is not impossible but such a thing may
be, and it is of infinite consequence, if it should be, there is all the wisdom
in the world to be provided for it. You will say, It may not be; but that is
all that Insidelity it self can enable you to say, and then sure it is far
safer to suppose that it may be, for no hurt can come of that, but the danger
is unspeakable on the other side, if it should prove to be true. In a word, in
such a case as this is, it is a wise man's part rather to believe upon slight
evidence, than to disbelieve upon great presumptions.


Bioph. I am beholden to you for the friendly caution you give me; but it is
your reasons I expect at this time, and not your advice.


Sebast. Those you shall have presently, and do not think I trisle with you, or
decline the proof I promised, because I proceed thus gradually and slowly with
you: The true reason whereof is, because I would rather your own prudence
should incline you to believe, than that my Arguments should press you to it,
and I much more desire that you should be safe, than that I should have the
glory of a victory; it is only your concern that we go upon, have therefore a
little patience that we may rightly understand one another, and since you have
refused Scripture Proof, give me leave to ask you particularly what kind of
proof you expect of this matter under our consideration.

In the first place, I hope you do not require sensible evidence of a day of
Judgment, What kind of proof and what measure of evidence is to be expected in
the Principles of Religion.
you were saying even now, that no man had seen Heaven, and therefore you did
not believe it. Possibly those words slipped from you undvisedly, however it is
(you know) a thing future which we are now debating about, and sensible proof
cannot be required of that without flat contradiction: it is as if a man should
desire to see that which confessedly is not to be seen, and that a thing should
be that is not, or be and not be at the same time; you know you cannot have
sensible evidence to day that the Sun will rise to morrow; in short, neither of
any thing past nor future, but only of that which is present.

There are some men in this Age, and perhaps you may be acquainted with them,
who will only appeal to their senses, and accordingly they reject the notion of
God and of Spirits, merely because they can see no such things. Now if I
thought this were your Opinion, I must go another way to work than I intended;
but if it will content you that I make the point seem reasonable and clear to
the eyes of your mind, though I do not gratify your bodily eyes with a strange
prospect, then I will proceed as I designed.


Bioph. Well, we are agreed for that. I did, I confess, speak of seeing Heaven,
but there was no contradiction in that; because if there be any such place, it
is supposed to be constantly existent, and therefore may be visible: yet I do
not expect to see the Judgment till the time comes, because futures are not to
be seen, but foreseen. Go on therefore, and give me rational evidence, and it
shall suffice.


Sebast. But there is another thing I desire to be resolved of, namely, what
measure or degree of rational evidence you will be satisfied with. The reason
of my inquiry is this, some men there are who highly pretend to a readiness to
believe upon just grounds, but when it comes to trial, they are humorsome and
captious, they will require such evidence as the nature of the thing cannot
admit of (even supposing it to be true) they expect such proof as shall leave
no room for cavil and exception, such as a man can find no evasion from, but
that will extort an assent from him whether he will or no. Now I must tell you,
this is very hard and unreasonable in any case whatsoever, for as much as the
wit of man is fitter to pull down than to build up, and it is the easiest thing
in the world to find shifts and cavils, insomuch that he must believe very
little indeed, that will admit of nothing which some slight objection or other
may be made against. God himself has provided no remedy for contumacy, and
such men must go on, and perish without cure; for no Argument can escape a
captious humor.

Besides, if such strict demands of satisfaction were at any time allowable,
yet can they by no means be reasonably insisted upon in such a case as this;
for if such irresistible evidence were to be had in this matter, there would be
no room for virtue, it would then be a necessary action to believe, and no
instance of choice, nor any Argument of a virtuous mind? For what can be praise
of rewardableness of doing that which a man cannot choose but do; or what
excellency is there in Faith, when there is no pretense in the world for
unbelief?

Therefore all that you can justly and wisely expect in the present case is,
that there be sufficient ground given you for a discreet choice, and
over-weight enough in one scale to incline the judgment of a prudent man, so
far that he shall see it is more reasonable that he believe, than that he do
not. This is very properly to be esteemed conviction of our reason; this is the
just Standard of prudence, and this is the Principle that wise men govern
themselves by in weighty affairs. And indeed, if no man should determine
himself to the pursuit of a business until there were no objection, no excuse,
color, or pretense to the contrary, all the noblest projections and most
profitable and necessary undertaking of mankind, would be nipped and blasted in
the bud.


Bioph. In truth I do not see but your demand is reasonable, and I must yield
to you in this particular also.


Sebast. Then I ask no more. In order to the satisfaction of a man's judgment he
must first come to indifferency.



Phil. Yes, Sebastian, let me put you in mind of one thing more, which is, that
Biophilus will promise you to hold the scales even, otherwise an over-weight in
either of them will not be discernable; my meaning is, that he agree to be
sincerely indifferent, and willing to believe on the one side as well as on the
other: for I have found by my own experience, that whilst a man retains a
partial fondness for an Opinion, it is not all the Arguments in the world shall
beat him out of it, he will see all that which makes for him as through a
magnifying glass, and so think it great and considerable, and contrariwise all
that which is against him shall seem little and despicable. But when a man
comes to this pass, that he is content one side should be true as well as the
other, then (and not till then) the best reason will carry it. Therefore unless
you premise this, you will strive against the stream, and dispute in vain.


Sebast. Thank you heartily for that, Philander. It is very true, Biophilus,
that if you oppose resolution and prejudice against the discourse I am to make
to you, that will be Armor of proof against all the Arguments that can be
brought, and then we had as good stay here as go further and lose our labor.

But why, good Biophilus, should you not lie as fair toward the Doctrine which
I am asserting, as toward the contrary? Nay, It is greatly a man's interest
that Religion should be true.
why should you not look upon it as greatly your interest, that there should be
another World, and a Judgment at the end of this? It is certain, you and all of
us must dye, there is no peradventure in that, and it were a most sad and
dismal thing to think of it, if death put an utter end to a man, so that all
his comforts and all his hopes expire with him. And I wonder in my heart how
any man can think of death with any measure of patience upon those terms; and
that it does not make him sullen and melancholy all the days of his life. You
will say he must yield to necessity; but that is a remedy worse than the
disease (if it be possible) to seek a cure for death in desperation; to tell me
there is a necessity of dying, is only to tell me there is no help in the case,
which is the very thing I complain of.

And this consideration is so much the more sharp and cutting, by how much the
more a man's life has been pleasant and comfortable. As for a man that has all
his life time been oppressed with calamities, pinched with poverty, covered
with obloquy, or afflicted with horrible pains, etc. it may seem easy to him
to dye, that so he may have that rest in the grave which he could not have
above ground; and though he thinks he shall be sensible of no comfort there,
yet he shall fare as well as other men in that state. But for him that has had
good treatment in the world, pleasant accommodations, tempting fortunes and
enjoyments, for such a man to think of death, which will spoil him of all his
ornaments, and level him with the dust, that will interrupt all his delights,
put an end to all his designs and projections, and draw a dark veil over all
his glories: I say, if such a man has nothing to comfort him against death, if
there be no life after this, but a man must for ever forsake and be forsaken of
all his felicities, I cannot see how he can possibly avoid an unspeakable
abhorrence of it: nay, that is not all neither; for methinks it should render
all his present enjoyments not only insipid and loathsome, but even a very
torment to him whilst he is in the midst of them.

Now why should any man resist the only remedy in this case, the only
consolatory against the sum of all calamities, which is the hopes of another
life? Why should he be willing to dye as the beast dies, and to abandon himself
to the grave to rottenness and oblivion? It were certainly better never to have
been born, than both to live in perpetual fear of dying, and being dead, to be
as if a man had never lived; better never to have tasted the sweets of life,
than to be only tantalized, and by that time he begins to live, to begin to
dye, and then be eternally deprived of what he just had a smack and a sight of.

Nay farther yet, if a man had lived only like a beast, it had been no great
matter to dye like a beast: If, I say, a man looked no farther than his fodder,
had no sense of any thing but eating and drinking, and had a Soul in him that
served only for salt to keep the body from putrefaction, so that he never looked
about him, made no improvement of himself, and had no designs in his head, it
were less matter if he returned to the earth, which (like a Mole) he did
nothing but root in and turn over whilst he was upon it. But for a man of an
active Soul, of improved parts, of reason and wisdom and usefulness, to be
smothered in the grave, so that all his Notions and Discoveries, all Arts and
Sciences, nay, all his Virtues and Gallantry of mind, all his hopes and designs
shall be abruptly broken off and buried in oblivion; this is so sad and dismal
a thing, that it is able to discourage all study and industry, all care and
culture of a man's self; for why should I strive to live like a man, if I must
dye like a beast? Why should I take pains to know, when by increasing
knowledge, I should but increase my sorrow? For as much as the more I know, the
more I shall feel my self miserable, and indeed become guilty of my own
torment: so that if there were no hopes after this present life, it would be a
more advisable course for a man to abandon himself to the most dark and
squalid Barbarism, rather than to weary and wear out himself in the quest of
knowledge, and better never to apply himself to any study, or to bestow any
pains or cost upon himself, nay indeed, if it were possible, it were desirable
never to know any thing, or to think at all. For why should a man put a cheat
upon himself? Why should he take not only unprofitable, but vexatious pains? In
a word, why should he not so live as he must dye? To all which add, that if
there were indeed no other world nor life hereafter; and if there be any man
that can find in his heart to be fond of living upon those terms, he must of
necessity be a pitiable slave whilst he continues here the perpetual fears of
death cramping him, and keeping him in continual bondage, that he shall not
have the spirit or courage to dare to do any brave action; but contrariwise he
will be unavoidably tempted to be a wretched Coward and base Fellow, and become
a sordid Parasite, to flatter and humor every body merely upon the account of
self-preservation.

Why therefore should any man be fond of such an uncomfortable, nay, such a
sottish and debasing opinion? Why should not a man choose rather to erect his
own mind, and be willing to hope well of himself by cherishing an expectation,
that he may survive his body, and live eternally?


Bioph. There is no question, Sebastian, but that living for ever is very
desirable, if a man could hope for such a thing absolutely, and not clogged
with conditions. As for death it self, that would have no great matter of
formidableness in it, if it be either (as I suppose it) a perfect intercision
of all sense: or much less, if it were (as the men of your persuasion use to
speak) only a dark passage to another light. But the mischief is, that upon
your Hypothesis, a judgment must pass upon a man first, before he can arrive at
that other life. Now that is the terrible thing, if I were rid of the danger of
that, it would (as you say well) be my interest to believe all the rest, in
spite of all objections to the contrary.


Sebast. I do not design to impose upon you; for it is very true, there is no
passage into the other World, without undergoing a Test or Trial, whether we be
fit for eternal life or no. And it is most certain also, that if a man dye an
impious, a wicked and base person, it were better for him that either he had
not been born, or else that the grave and oblivion might cover him to all
Eternity. But what need this fright any man whilst he is alive, and may provide
himself accordingly? especially since the grace of God puts it in our choice
and power to be good, and so qualified, that we may be out of all danger of
miscarrying in the Judgment.

For, Biophilus, can it be thought that God Almighty should seek the ruin of
his Creatures, or that he can have any design upon them to make them eternally
miserable? If he had, there would not be the solemnities of a day of Judgment;
for he would not need to ensnare us in forms of Law, but might without more ado
have destroyed us when he pleased, and who could resist him, or dispute the
case with him? Undoubtedly he is too great a Majesty to have any little ends to
serve, and therefore we can suspect no hurt from him, and there could be
nothing but the overflowings of his own goodness that provoked him to make us
at the first; and therefore there can be nothing of envy, malignity, or cruelty
in any of his counsels and designs about us.

And that all these are not meer-sayings or sanguine conjectures of mine, but
real truth (besides all other ways of probation) you may be assured by this
consideration, that in all Gods demands from us, as the terms and conditions of
our happiness, or (which is all one) in all the duties he requires at our
hands, and in all th obligations of Religion, there is nothing severe and
discouraging, nothing extremely harsh and difficult, much less impossible: nay,
in truth, if things be rightly considered, I believe there will be nothing to
be found in any institution of Religion that ever was heard of in the world
that could go so much against the grain with men, as to tempt them to run the
hazard of dying eternally, rather than to comply with it. And if any such were
to be found, it were ground enough to assure us, that such Institutions
proceeded not from God; for such is his Wisdom and Benignity, that he can
impose nothing as a severe Taskmaster, purely to abridge our liberty, or to
break our spirits, and oppress our powers, but only to raise and improve us
according to our utmost capacities, and as necessary methods to train us up as
Candidates for eternal life.

I will not deny but there are some restraints put upon us, and some
difficulties we must expect to encounter, otherwise Religion would have no
excellency in it, nor could we have either the glory or the pleasure in
obtaining our end and happiness, if it were won without sweat and labor. But I
do confidently assert, that these difficulties (whatever they are) we shall
find just reason to undergo with all cheerfulness, if we do but compare what
Religion promises, with what it commands or imposes. And as for the Christian
Religion in particular, all this which I have said is so remarkably true of
that, that if any thing has been represented as a branch and necessary duty
thereof, which is of a contrary nature to what I have now supposed; I do not
doubt with great ease to make it appear, that such suggestion is either a
palpable mistake, or a notorious scandal. Why then, I say, should a man think
either so ill of God or of himself, as to be afraid or unwilling to fall into
his hands? You cannot forebode any evil from him, if you are satisfied that he
is perfect and happy, full and glorious, just and good; and therefore you must
condemn your self of prodigious folly, in not complying with reasonable and
equitable Laws, and of being wilfully accessory to your own calamity, if you
dare not undergo his Judgment. So that upon the whole matter there can be no
reason, why you should be unwilling to believe there is such a thing, and that
is all I desire of you at present, and I heartily conjure you to be true to
your self herein.


Bioph. Well, I am resolved to be as indifferent as it is possible to be: now
therefore prove it.


Sebast. That I will do with all possible plainness and sincerity; namely, The
moral demonstration of a judgment to come.
I will make good that there is sufficient reason to incline a prudent man to
expect and believe, that after this life God Almighty will call men to account,
and judge them according to their former actions and behavior.

Now you know it is the nature of Moral Arguments, not to depend upon one
single Evidence, but to consist of the united force of several considerations:
accordingly my present proof of a Judgment to come (as aforesaid) must comprise
these three particulars.

First, I will show, that the nature and condition of Mankind is such, as to
render them fit and capable to come to an account, and to undergo such a
Judgment as we speak of.

Secondly, That it is very agreeable to the Nature and Attributes of God
(according to those notions which we have of him) that he should call Mankind
to such an account, and judge them.

Thirdly, That God Almighty actually exercises and displays such a Providence
in this present World, as gives earnest beforehand, that he really intends to
judge it hereafter.

These three things make way for and succeed each other naturally, and all
together amount to a full proof of the Point in hand. Wherefore when I have
opened and made them out severally in the order I have laid them down, I will
leave it to you to collect the result of them.

1. I say the nature and condition of Mankind is such, Mankind is of such a
nature, and endued with such powers, as make it reasonable for him to expect
Judgment.
as renders him capable of undergoing a Judgment in another World; and
therefore it is reasonable that he expect it accordingly. This will appear by
the instances following.

In the first place it is notorious, that Mankind is endued with a large and
comprehensive mind, which is not confined to the mere objects of his senses and
things present before him, but has a vast scope and prospect, by means of
which he surveys the Universe, embraces the whole World, and takes within his
verge, as well things past and things to come, as those that are present, which
no other Creature is capable of but himself. The Beast has no kind of notice
of or concern for what was in former time, nor no solicitude about what may
come after; but only applies it self to the present exigencies or conveniences
of the body. But man is very curious and inquisitive into History, and how
things past of old long before he was born, and is also very thoughtful and
anxious what may befall hereafter when he shall be dead and gone. Now this one
consideration alone makes him look as if he were a Being that were concerned in
the whole frame of Nature, and in all the revolutions of Providence, and at
least of more consequence than to be a mere Pageant for the short time of this
life, or a Mushroom to shoot out of the earth, and return to it again, and so
be as if he had never been.

Besides, we may observe, that the mind of man does not only consider the
absolute nature of things as they lie singly and severally before it, but
compares them together, and estimates their relative natures, the mutual
respects that they have to each other, and the various aspects and influences
they have upon each other; and so comparing and conferring things together,
raises observations, makes inferences, deduces conclusions, frames general
maxims, thereby brings things into order and method, and raises Arts and
Sciences. All or any of which things no Creature below himself makes any
pretense to, or gives any token of. From whence we may conclude not only the
preeminence of his Nature, but that he is ordained to higher purposes.

Moreover, mankind is endowed with liberty of choice and freedom of will, by
virtue of which he does not only move himself by his own internal Principles
and vital Energy, but also can determine himself to this object or that, and
either pursue or desist the prosecution at his own pleasure: insomuch that he
is neither carried by the swinge of any superior causes, nor fatally allured
by the powerful charms of any objects from without, no nor by the efficacy of
any arguments arising therefrom, nor any impression whatsoever (saving that of
God Almighty) can overbear or supersede his own resolution, but that he can act
or desist, suspend prosecution or pursue his own choice, and apply himself to
this object or that, and follow this argument and motive or the other; he has
such an Helm within himself, that he can sail against Wind and Tide; he can
move himself in a calm, and stay himself in a storm: in a word, he can move
which way, when and how far he will, and stop his own carriere when he pleases.
The truth of this we find by daily experience, and we commonly please our
selves too much in this Prerogative of our Natures. We see that which is
better, and follow that which we know to be worse; we hear arguments and reject
them, because we will do so; we are persuaded to the contrary, and yet go on;
and when and whatsoever we act, we find at the same time we could have done
quite contrary, if we had pleased. Other Creatures either act merely as they
are acted by superior Causes drawn by invisible wyers, or fatally inclined by
the objects and motives before them; but we are put into the hand of our own
counsels, and wholly governed by our selves, as to our inward resolutions and
determinations. Now this, as it is a mighty discrimination of our Natures from
theirs, so it has this peculiar effect, that it renders a man's actions
properly his own, and imputable to himself and to nothing else, and
consequently fits him to undergo a Judgment for them.

But further yet, to make Mankind more capable of a Judgment, he has a
directive Rule or Law of Reason within him, whereby to govern himself both in
his elections and prosecutions, that is, he acts not only freely and
undeterminately in respect of any cause without himself, but he has a light
within to guide and direct those free powers of his, that they may not run riot
and move extravagantly, by the means of which he is enabled both to make choice
of his designs, and to select fit and proper methods of accomplishing them. For
as he is not staked down to some one particular business (as generally other
Creatures are) but has great scope to expatiate in, and variety to please
himself withal; so he has a Card or Compass given him to sail by in that vast
Ocean which lies before him: that is, he has a faculty of discerning the
difference of things, and consequently can judge what is worthy to be
propounded as his post and design, and also to measure and adjust the means
thereunto, which renders him more sit to give an account both of his elections
and prosecutions.

Nay farther yet, humane Nature by the advantage of this light within him, has
not only a capacity of apprehending and judging of natural good and evil, or
such things as are only pleasant and profitable, or the contrary, but has also
notions of higher good and evil, which we commonly call Moral; that is, he
finds himself obliged to have regard to something else besides and better than
his body, namely, either to the Deity, or to the Community of Mankind, or at
least to his own better part, his Soul and Mind. None of which are at all
considered by any creature below man, and there is hardly any part of Mankind
(at least that deserves to be so esteemed) which does not think it self
concerned in all these. For we see, whosoever has any thing of a man in him,
does think some actions to become or not become him respectively merely as he
is a man, which would admit of no difference, but be all alike in a Beast:
whereupon it is, that a man cannot dispense with himself in the doing of
several things, which are in his power to do, no not in the dark and the
greatest privacy, because every man that in any measure understands himself,
has a reverence of himself, and the effect of this betrays it self in that
quick sense which Mankind has peculiarly of shame and honor, which argues him
to be accountable to something higher than his senses.

Above all this, it is considerable that Mankind has not only a speculative
apprehension of moral good and evil, but a practical and very quick and pungent
sense of it, which we call Conscience, by which he not only remembers and calls
to mind whatsoever has past him, but reflecting also upon the ends and
circumstances of his own actions, and comparing what he has done both for
matter and manner either with the rule of Reason within him, or some other Law,
he censures and judges himself accordingly. If he has done well and
virtuously, that is, has approved himself to himself, he then applauds and
comforts himself, and feels an unspeakable satisfaction in his own mind: As for
Example, If a man have behaved himself gallantly toward his Prince and
Country; if he have carried himself ingenously and gratefully toward his
Friends, his Patrons or Benefactors; if he have been beneficent to any part of
Mankind; if he have demonstrated love to God, or goodness and good men; if he
have restrained his own rage and passions; if he have rescued an innocent from
the hand of the oppressor, or done any thing of like nature, the heart of every
man naturally in such a case feels such an inward delight as sweetens his
spirits, and cheers his very countenance. On the contrary, if he have been
false, treacherous and ungrateful; if he have been cruel and oppressive, or
have said or done any base thing, he is presently upbraided, accused, condemned
and tormented by himself. Now what is all this but Praejudicium, a kind of
anticipation of the Judgment to come?

But if any man shall pretend this thing called Conscience, which we now speak
of, to be no natural endowment of Humanity, but only the effect of Custom and
Education; such a person may easily undeceive himself, if he will but consider,
that all this which I have spoken of Conscience, both as to the matter and form
of it (or Synteresis and Syneidesis, as Learned men are wont to distinguish) is
so universal to all Mankind (at least that have not done violence to
themselves) that it can with no color be imputed to Education, but must be
resolved into the very nature and sense of the Soul. And moreover, a different
notion and apprehension of the forementioned particulars, is so deeply
implanted in the minds of men, that it is impossible any contrary Custom or
Education should absolutely and totally efface it; therefore it is the sense of
Nature, and consequently a presage of the Divine Judgment.

To all which add in the last place, That the mind of man seems plainly to be
above the body, and independent of it; for as much as we see, that not only our
Reason and the powers of our Souls, are so far from decaying with the body,
that contrariwise they grow more strong and vigorous by those very causes which
impair the body, I mean, by age, exercise and experience. Besides, it is easily
observable, that our Souls do, as often as they please, act quite contrary to
the interests and inclinations of our bodies, and frequently control the
passions thereof, as well as correct and overruled the Verdict of our Senses.
Therefore it is not at all probable, that they should perish with our bodies,
but survive to some further purposes, especially if we take in what I intimated
before, namely, the consideration of the shortness of the time of this life,
which is so very inconsiderable for so excellent a Being, as the Soul to
display it self in, that it seems unworthy of all the aforesaid perfections,
and more unworthy of the contrivance of that Wisdom which made us, to order it
so, unless it be that Mankind is placed here only in a state of probation, and
is to be tried hereafter in order to a more lasting subsistence and duration.
Which in consideration of all the premises, he cannot but be thought capable
of, at least if there be a Judge as fit to judge him, as he is fit to undergo a
Judgment. Which brings me to my second Branch.


Bioph. Hold a little, I pray, good Sebastian, you have spoken many things well
and worthily of the preeminence of humane Nature, and some of them such as are
not only sufficient to errect a man's spirits, and provoke him to hope well of
himself, but also do render it in some sort probable, that we are designed for
some higher uses, than we commonly apply our selves to. Nevertheless you have
not reached your point, nor will all you have said attain the end you
propounded, unless you go farther, and prove the Soul of man to be a Spirit or
immaterial substance (as the men of your way are wont to speak) that so there
may be a plain foundation for its existence out of the body. Without which, let
it he as excellent a Being as it can, and adorned with as many other
perfections as you can imagine, it cannot be capable of standing at a Tribunal,
and undergoing such a Judgment in another World as we are speaking of.


Sebast. I could have wished you would have given me leave to lay all the parts
of my Argument together before you, that so you might have taken a view of it
entire and all at once: and then you might have objected, as you should have
seen cause. But however I will comply with your Method, and as to that which
you have thought fit now to interpose, I answer these two things.

First I say, It is not necessary to the business in hand, that the Soul be
proved to be strictly immaterial and capable of existing and acting out of the
body; for as much as at the day of Judgment I suppose the body shall be raised
again: and then if it should be so, that all the powers of the Soul were laid
asleep by death until that time; yet now upon a reunion with their proper
Organs, they would revive again. So that I did not in my proof fall short of
the mark I aimed at, but you out-shoot the point in your demand: For whether
the Soul be a spiritual substance or no, so long as those perfections, which we
have enumerated, belong to it, there is nothing wanting to make it capable of
undergoing a Judgment. But,

Secondly, To speak my own mind plainly, and to come home to your satisfaction,
I must tell you, The Soul of man proved to be immaterial.
that as for my part I do not doubt but that the Soul of man is properly and
strictly of a spiritual Nature; so I am confident that those things which we
have ascribed to it, do sufficiently prove it to be so; seeing it is impossible
to salve those Phenomenon, or to give any tolerable account of those great
accomplishments and performances of the Soul before specified from mere matter,
let it be modified or circumstantiated how it can.

Simple perception of objects is of the lowest rank of humane perfections, and
indeed is not proper to humane Nature, but common to Brutes; yet this seems
impossible to be performed by mere matter. For the eye, though it be a very
admirable and exquisite Organ, can by no means be said to perceive the objects
of sight, but only to transmit or present them to some perceptive power. It
does, I say, only as a glass represent the Species or image of the thing, which
even a dead eye or an hole, will in some measure perform; but it makes no
judgment of the object at all, as appears by this, that all objects are
transmitted reversed, or with the heels upward, through the eye, and so left,
till some higher power sets them right and on their legs, and judges of their
distance and other circumstances.

Now if it be so, that matter thus advantageously disposed and improved, as in
the admirable structure of the eye, cannot perform that one act of simple
perception, what shall become of all those nobler actions of the Soul? and into
what shall they be resolved? Such as self-motion, the strange celerity of
thought, memory of that which is past, prudence and forecast for that which is
to come, and a thousand other strange operations. Is it imaginable that mere
matter should understand, argue, dispute, consider and confer the relation of
one thing to another, and thence infer consequences and make conclusions? Is it
likely that mere body and quantity should be sensible of shame and honor, nay
be conscientious too, and accuse, condemn, and torture it self; or which is
most wonderful of all, check, control, deny, limit, and mortify it self? He
that will undertake to show how all these things may be performed by Atoms and
motion only, is a subtle Mechanist indeed, and I do not doubt but at the same
rate such a man may be able to make a new World, when he pleases, with the same
Atoms as Materials. For it is evident, there is more intricacy in this little
world of Man, than in the whole fabric of Heaven and Earth besides.

Wherefore if matter or body cannot perform the aforesaid operations, then the
Soul of man, which does perform them, must be acknowledged to be a spiritual
substance.


Bioph. In troth you talk very shrewdly; but for my life, I cannot understand
what you mean by this thing which you call Spirit, and therefore I reject the
notion as gibberish and nonsense.


Sebast. Softly, good Biophilus, what reason is there for that hasty
conclusion? Must we needs deny every such thing to be, as is hard to
understand? Must we, like dull Boys, tear out the Lesson that is difficult to
learn? Is nothing true but what is easy, nor possible but what is facile? But
besides, let me tell you upon second thoughts, there is not more difficulty in
understanding the Nature of Spirits, than there is in conceiving how all the
aforesaid operations should be performed witout them, no nor half so much
neither; so that nothing is gotten by the objection; for it is a very vain
thing to object difficulty, when at the same time you are forced to acknowledge
the thing to be necessary. But why, I pray you, what is the cause that
spiritual substance is not as intelligible as corporeal?


Bioph. O Sir, there is a vast difference in the case. I can see and feel the
latter, but so I cannot the former.


Sebast. Nay, believe me, there you are out, you see and feel only the
accidents of a bodily substance, but not the substance it self, no more than
you can see or feel a Spirit.


Bioph. Pardon me, at least I see and feel the bodily substance by the
accidents; that is, I am assured of its presence and existence, and I can
affirm such things of it upon that testimony of my senses.


Sebast. And you may affirm as much of a Soul (if you please) though you can
neither see nor feel it, forasmuch as you plainly perceive the properties and
operations of it.


Bioph. That is close and to the purpose, I confess; but still I cannot tell
what to make of this thing called Spirit, for I can frame no image of it in my
imagination, as I can do of other things.


Sebast. Why, there is it now. I perceive now, Biophilus, you have a desire to
see with your mouth, and hear with your eyes. For as reasonably every jot may
you expect to do either of those, as to frame a sensible imagination of a
Spirit. That which we call Imagination (you know) is nothing else but the
impress of the color, bigness, or some other accidents (of a thing that has
been presented to our senses) retained in, and (it may be) a little diversified
by our fancy. But now if a Spirit have no color nor bulk, nor such other
accidents to be represented to our fancy through our outward senses, how is it
possible you should have an image of it there? No, no; spiritual Beings are
only capable of affording us an intellectual Idea, namely, our higher faculty
of Reason from observation of their effects and operations, concludes their
Essence, and takes an estimate of their Nature; and indeed it is a flat
contradiction to require any other evidence of that kind of Beings.


Bioph. This kind of discourse is very subtle, and I cannot tell what to object
farther to it; go on therefore to your second Branch, perhaps there I may
better cope with you.


Sebast. The second step which I take toward the proof of a Judgment to come
is, The natural notions men have of God, render it reasonable to expect that he
will judge the World.
that as on the one side Mankind appears to be fit and capable of being judged
hereafter; so on the other hand it is agreeable to the Nature and Attributes of
God, and to those notions we have of a Deity, that he should call the World to
such an account, and this appears briefly thus.

The most common and most natural notion which men have of the Divine Majesty
is, that he is a Being absolutely perfect, that is, (amongst other
accomplishments) that he is a most powerful, wise, just and good Being; there
is hardly any body that thinks of a God, but considers him under these
Attributes and Perfections, and he that divests him of any of these
Perfections, renders him neither an object of fear nor of love, and
consequently not a God: insomuch that were it not for politic ends, namely, to
avoid infamy or other punishment amongst men, doubtless those that deny to him
any of these Attributes, had as good flatly deny him to have any Being at all.

Now if these things be included in the natural notion of God, they not only
capacitate him to be a Judge of the World, if he pleases, but give great
assurance that he will do it; for if he be a wise Being, he cannot but see how
things go, and particularly how his Creatures carry themselves here below; if
he be powerful, he has it in his hand to rectify those disorders he observes
amongst them, and both to punish the evil and to reward the good. And if he be
good and just, it cannot but be expected from him that he will set things to
rights one time or other, when his Wisdom shall think fit; but it is evident,
this is not done exactly and answerably to those Attributes of his in this
World, therefore there is no reason to doubt but he will assuredly do it in
another World; and therefore the Scripture tells us, He has appointed a day,
wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, etc.


Bioph. Not too fast, good Sebastian. I know not certainly what apprehensions
other men may have; but for my part, though I do acknowledge a God (and that
not only politically (as you suspect) but upon the Principles of Reason) yet I
must profess to you, I do not think the natural notion of God includes those
Attributes you speak of. Why may there not be a God, and he only a necessary
Agent, and then there is no danger of an after-reckoning with him?


Sebast. Ah, Biophilus, I am heartily sorry to find so unworthy a notion of God
still to find any room in your thoughts (though it were but in suspicion only.)
It is very certain indeed, God not a necessary Agent.
that if he be only a necessary Agent, then all fear of a Judgment is
discharged, and as certain that all Religion can then be nothing else but a
groundless Superstition at the best. For then God must needs be a very tame
Deity which men may play withal, and abuse at pleasure, as the Frogs did by
their wooden King in the Fable.

But then in the Name of Goodness, what need is there of any God at all, if a
necessary Agent will serve the turn? Why can we not as well suppose the World
to be eternal, as make such a contemptible Being, as a necessary Agent is, to
be eternal, only to give beginning to the World.

Or rather, why if we attribute one Perfection, i, e. Eternity to him, why not
all the rest, which seem to be inseparable from it? For as much as it is not
imaginable how the first Cause should be the meanest of all, and he that gave
those other perfections to other things, should be destitute of them himself.

Or how can we believe that such a fettered, impotent, unthinking and unwise
Being, should make a World in that beauty and perfection which this World
consists of? Or at least how is it possible that a natural or necessary Agent
(which is like a Gally-slave chained down to his Bench, and confined to his
Task and Subject) should make a World with such curiosity and diversity of
things, yet with that exquisite order and harmony which we observe in Nature?

Do you think that the frame of things could not possibly have been any
otherwise than they are? Can you fancy that nothing could have been better
nor worse than it is now? If you see any footsteps of wisdom or choice, any
possibility that any thing should have been otherwise than it is, you forgo
your necessary Agent?

Do you not see great and manifest instances of design and contrivance in the
order of things, viz. one thing fitted to another, and one subordinate to
another, and all together conspiring to some public end and use? Now sure a
necessary Agent could not guide things so, because it has no ends or designs
of its own.

Again, if God be a necessary Agent, I would fain be resolved how it comes to
pass that we are not so too? I think you granted me even now that we choose our
own way, propound ends to our selves, and voluntarily pursue them, when we
could (if we pleased) as freely choose and act contrary, and this we justly
glory in as the perfection of our Nature. Now how to conceive that I should be
a free Agent, and that he who made me so should be a necessary one, that is,
that the effect should be more excellent than the cause, neither I nor (as I
suspect) any body else can understand?

But I need not in this place industriously set my self to confute this odd
conceit of Gods being only a necessary Agent, because in my third Branch I
shall fundamentally undermine it, and (as I think) leave neither color nor
pretense for it, and therefore with your leave I now hasten to that.


Bioph. Go on then in Gods Name.


Sebast. My third and last Point for the proof of a Judgment to come is this:
There is an actual Providence in this World, therefore there will be a Judgment
in the next.
God does actually exercise such a Providence in and over the World for the
present, as gives great assurance that he will judge it hereafter. For these
are as it were the two several ends of the same chain, a Providence here, and a
Judgment hereafter. They do naturally and mutually draw on each other. If there
be a Judgment to come, there must be a provident Eye over the World for the
present in order to it: that is, God must so mind the World, that he perfectly
understand how things go, how men carry themselves, what there is amiss amongst
them, what requires punishment, and what deserves a reward; otherwise he cannot
be said to judge, forasmuch as without this it might rather be said, there is a
day of Execution coming, than a day of Judgment. And on the other side, if
there be a Providence in this World, and it be true that God observes how men
carry themselves toward him, it must speak his intention to reward and punish
hereafter in proportion to such observation; for otherwise that Providence
would be fruitless and to no purpose, it would be a mere matter of vain
curiosity, and a needless trouble to the Divine Majesty, as the Epicureans
objected. But now that God does exercise such a Providence in this World, as
from whence we may reasonably presage a Judgment to come, I think will
abundantly appear by these three things.


1. There has been such a thing as we call Prophecy or Prediction of things
before they came to pass, which cannot be without a Providence. 2. There have
been Miracles, which could not be without the Divine interposition. 3. There
are frequent (though not altogether miraculous) instances in all Ages of a
Divine presence in, and influence upon, the affairs of the World.
1. Prophecy a certain Argument of a Providence in the World.
First, I ground the assertion of a Providence in this present World upon the
Prophecies and Predictions of things beforehand, which have been verified by
real effects in their respective times and seasons. It is evident, that
whosoever is able certainly to foretell things before they are, must see through
all the Series of Causes which produce such events: especially if he define
also the precise time and other circumstances of the accomplishment; but above
all, whoseover shall declare beforehand, not only what shall come to pass
according to the course of natural and necessary Causes, but also such things
as are casual and contingent, or subject to the choice and indifferency of free
and voluntary Agents, must have a mighty reach with him, and make a very
curious and accurate inspection into the Conjunctions and Conspiracy of all
things, as well as into their particular Natures, Tendencies and Inclinations:
for as every Effect must have its Causes before it can be; so the prediction of
such effect must depend upon a certain knowledge of those respective causes
which are pregnant of it; therefore if there ever have been such a thing as
Prophecy, there is a Providence.

Now for the matter of fact, or that there have been certain and punctual
predictions of things long before they came to pass, is the constant belief of
all Nations, and he that denies it must give the lie to the greatest and best
part of Mankind. You may remember that Tully pursues this Argument in his
Books, De Divinatione, and he there gives too many and too remarkable instances
of it, to be denied or eluded; but I shall choose to set before you only two
passages out of the holy Scripture to this purpose. For though I perceive you
have not such a reverence for those Books as they deserve, yet such palpable
matters of fact as I shall instance in, and which were of so public a concern
and general notice, as whereupon the revolution of whole Nations depended, can
afford no ground for calling in question the historical truth of them. And let
me tell you, I make choice of these instances out of those Writings, for no
other cause but for the notoriety of the fact, and the easiness of confutation,
if it had been otherwise than true.

The former of the two passages is the prediction of the slavery of the
Children of Israel in the Land of Egypt, and their miraculous deliverance
thence, above four hundred years before it came to pass, and the accomplishment
(when the time came) answering the Prediction precisely to a very day, so as to
be observed by the whole body of the people, and the remembrance of it
perpetuated by an anniversary Solemnity ever after, as you may see Exodus 12. 41.

The other instance is the Babylonish Captivity, which was foretold above
seventy years before it came to pass, and that in a time of the greatest
unlikelihood that any such calamity should befall; namely, it was prophesied of
when the Jews were in the greatest peace and prosperity. And then for the term
of this Captivity, that was foretold to last 70 years, neither more nor less;
and both these periods (as well as other circumstances) were exactly, and to
admiration, hit in the event of things.

Now in both these instances, the things were prophesied of so long
beforehand, there were so many obstacles in the way of their accomplishment,
and so much of the will of man also interested in both the cases, and yet
notwithstanding such punctual exactness is to be seen in the Event, that it is
plainly impossible that humane wit should so much as guess probably at them;
therefore the Predictions must be grounded upon Divine intimation: and then God
is so far from being a necessary Agent, that it is apparent he minds the World,
and looks narrowly into all the parts of it, from one end to another, and
governs and manages inferior Causes.

2. Miracles necessarily argue a Providence.
My second proof of an actual Providence in this World is from Miracles. By a
Miracle I mean any thing coming to pass, which is either for the matter or
manner of it above the power of natural Causes, or at least contrary to their
established course and order; whether it be effected by heightening them above
their ordinary pitch, or accelerating their motion, or by suddenly bringing
those causes together which lay at a distance; or whether it be by depressing,
suspending or superseding any of them.

And I reason thus: If any thing have ever been brought to pass above the
capacity or out of the method of the natural and common Causes, then there is
an active Deity which exerts his power in that case. Or if ever the course of
Nature has been interrupted, it must be by the interposition of the supreme
Cause: For it is neither intelligible, that Nature should go out of course of
it self, without its own decay and failure; nor possible that being once so out
of course, it should ever be able to recover it self into its former order
without the help of Omnipotency: therefore if ever there have been a Miracle in
the World, there is proof of a Providence.

Now that such extraordinary things, as we here suppose, have happened, cannot
be doubted without great ignorance, or denied without impudence. I know there
is a sort of witty men (in their way) who endeavor to put a slight upon
Miracles, and therefore are very captious and critical in such cases as this;
but if they can elude some occurrences that have been believed or pretended
miraculous, yet they will never be able to evade them all. And if there have
been but one acknowledged Miracle in all the time of this World, it will be
sufficient to prove a Providence. They will perhaps impute some Cures that have
been said to be done by Miracle, to the efficacy of some Medicine, although
they can neither tell us what that specific Remedy was, nor much less tell us
how the Symptoms should so suddenly cease upon the use of it. It may be they
will tell you in the general (with confidence enough) that the strange things
done in Egypt and in the Wilderness, were effected by the sudden application of
Actives to Passives; but cannot so much as pretend to satisfy any man how such
remote Causes were brought together and exalted to such an extraordinary degree
of efficacy, as to produce such admirable effects on the sudden as those cases
import.

Or if they could speak tolerable sense in some of those particulars, yet what
natural account can be given of the raising of the dead? or of unlearned men's
speaking all kind of Languages in an instant? What natural Cause will they
assign of the Suns standing still in Joshua's time? Or of that preternatural
Eclipse at our Savior's Passion? What could intercept the Suns light when the
two Luminaries were in opposition? Or what restored it to its motion again when
it was interrupted, as in the former instance? Or to its light again when it
intermitted, as in the latter instance? To endeavor to give natural accounts
of these things, will prove as absurd and ridiculous to reason, as to deny the
matter of fact, is void of Faith and Religion.

But if any of these instances will not pass with such men, because they were
over, long before our time, or because the truth of them depends upon the
Authority of Scripture; there are other innumerable passages in all Ages not
liable to that exception, that cannot be resolved into any Cause less than a
Supreme and Omnipotent. Amongst which, what will they say to this which happens
almost every year? Namely, that after a long wet season, it shall suddenly
clear up and be fair weather again, and contrariwise after a long dry season,
it shall unexpectedly be wet and rainy. Whereas if they look only to natural
Causes, the quite contrary must happen. Forasmuch as the more rain has been at
any time, the more may be still, because there are the more vapors from whence
Clouds are raised; and the longer a dry season has lasted, there is every day
the less reason to expect rain, because there want vapors out of which it
should be raised. Now to impute this sudden and admirable change only to the
Winds, is to beg the Question; for it is well enough known, that the Winds
depend upon vapors as well as rain; and to ascribe it to the Stars, is to
confess an humorsom resolution, that right or wrong we will shut God out of the
World. But this leads me to my

3. Third proof of a present Providence, More ordinary instances of Providence
in the World.
viz. from the more frequent and ordinary instances of a Divine influence upon
the affairs of the World. The effects of which, though they are not accounted
miraculous, because they are common, yet they give sufficient indication of
Divine administration. And of this kind, there are so many which offer
themselves to an observant mind, that to seek flaws, and go about to make
specious objections against some few of them, will be rather an Argument of
resolved unwillingness to believe, than of any just grounds of Infidelity. For
like as in a great Cable made up of several smaller cords, if perchance some of
the threads should flaw or break, yet the remainder will be able to bear the
stress of whatsoever use it shall be put to.

Now under this Head I reckon in the first place, as very observable, that
there is scarcely any great thing ever brought about in the World, which God
may not be seen to have an hand in; and that may be collected generally from
the inadequateness of the visible means to most notable productions: As when
great preparations are defeated or laid aside, and mean and inconsiderable ones
do the business. This is that which Solomon observed long ago, That the battle
is not to the strong, nor the race to the swift, nor bread to men of
understanding: And we cannot want an Example of it nearer hand, when we
remember the Restoration of his now Majesty: For it pleased God to deal in
that particular, as he did by Gideons Army, when he dismissed the greatest part
of the Forces, and did his business with a few, and those very unlikely for
such an Achievement.

But more admirable than this, is the preservation of the holy Scripture in all
Ages, both from total abolition by the flames of Persecution; and from
corruption, by the capricious phancies of such men as would neither sincerely
believe it, nor absolutely reject it. Such also is the preservation of the
Christian Religion, when all the wit and all the power of the World combined
together against it; and such was the success of the Apostles in propagating
that Religion, and planting the Christian Church, when a few Fishermen
leavened the World with a Doctrine quite against the grain of it, and naked
Truth prevailed against Authority, Art and Interest in conjunction.

Hitherto also I reduce the maintenance of Magistracy and Civil Government; and
I look upon it as a standing evidence of a Providence, that the strong bands of
wicked and refractory men should stand in awe of a single man like themselves,
only because he is invested with Authority. This, if it be duly considered, is
very strange, and can be resolved into nothing but a Providence. Nor is it less
strange, that considering the great numbers of evil men, their secrecy and
closeness, their cunning and falsehood, their envy and necessity, their activity
and selfishness, they should be able to do no more hurt in the World than they
do. Why do they not assasinate whom they please? Or what is the reason that
they do not forswear men out of their lives and fortunes, and act whatsoever
their revenge or covetousness or lust shall prompt them to? And no account can
be given of this, but the powerful restraint of Providence.

Moreover, there are remarkable Examples in all Ages of evil men dogged by
their own guilt, and tortured by their own Consciences, whenas no body else
either accused or hurt them; and on the other side, as frequent instances of
virtuous men, who have been very comfortable under great difficulties, and
whose spirits have been born up with an admirable bravery under such pressures
as would ordinarily crush and sink other men: and this, although the persons
thus carrying themselves, were otherwise of no remarkable strength or courage.
Neither of which passages can be resolved into any other Causes, than the
mighty influence of a Providence.

Nay further it is very observable, how strangely sometimes secret sins are
brought to light, especially such as Murder and Treachery, and where all Arts
and advantages were made use of for concealment; such persons becoming their
own accusers, when no body else could do it for them, and not unusually their
own Executioners too.

Above all these, there are some instances of vengeance befalling very
flagitious men, so signally, and with such pat and significant circumstances,
that (without any uncharitableness) we may be led by the suffering to the sin,
as in the famous case of Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7. whose barbarous usage of
threescore and ten Kings, cutting off their Thumbs and great Toes, and making
them, like Dogs, gather their meat under his Table, was repaid upon himself in
the same severity. Of kind to which are those pannick fears, and shiverings
that oftentimes attend blood-guilty men as long as they live: and though they
may have escaped revenge from the hand of men; yet this, as a Cain's mark set
upon them by the hand of God, indelebly sticks by them, and follows them to
their Graves.

It is needless to say any thing more on this subject, forasmuch as every man
that does not wilfully shut his eyes, may collect instances to this purpose,
both from the Government of the World in general, and from his own Fortunes in
particular. For besides the quiet serenity and comfortableness (in token of the
Divine favor) which usually attends a virtuous course of life, and the
anxiety, torment and uneasiness which as frequently (in testimony of the Divine
dislike) attends a wicked and flagitious one; it is not a very unusual, nor (to
be sure) an unpleasant sight, to behold the former crowned with signal success
and worldly prosperity, and the latter punished with shame and beggary: and
this sometimes shall happen in such circumstances, when there is nothing to
which this different success can be imputed but merely Divine Providence,
forasmuch as the latter shall otherwise be more cunning for the World, and
every whit as industrious and frugal as the former; but Divine Providence only
makes the discrimination, whilst the one is under the blessing of Heaven, and
the other is apparently blasted and cursed.

And now what think you, Biophilus, upon the whole matter: have I not acquitted
my self in all the three things I propounded? And now laying all these things
together, is not here sufficient evidence to determine a prudent man in the
case, and to satisfy him that there is a Providence in this World, and
consequently that there will be a Judgment hereafter?

Bioph. I cannot tell, Sebast. I confess you have said many very considerable
things, and some of them beyond what I could have expected in the case. But I
have one main Objection, which especially touches the last Branch of your
Argument, and which, if it stick by you, all you have said will signify
nothing; but if you come clearly off from it, I shall not know what to think of
the business. It is this, in short: I do not see any such settled and constant
method in the management of the affairs of this World, as must necessarily
argue a Providence; for in particular, A Vindication of Divine Providence in
the obscarity of some of its Dispensations in this life.
notwithstanding all you have said, it cannot be denied, that very often the
best of men are oppressed and born down by ill Fortune; and contrariwise evil men
are very happy and prosperous: therefore it may seem that those instances which
you collect in favor of your opinion, may happen by chance, rather than by the
dispensation of a Providence; and then if there be no Providence in this World,
by your own Argument, there can be no Judgment hereafter.


Sebast. If that be all, or the main of what you have to object, I am in hope
to see some good issue of this Conference: for in the first place you know,
that which is impeached by this Objection, is but one single instance out of
many which I have brought for the assertion of a Providence; and consequently
if this should fail, or if I should yield you all that the objection pretends
to, yet so long as the other are unshaken by it, that great Doctrine may stand
firm notwithstanding; for it is but as if you should peck one single stone out
of an huge building, or (as I said before) find a flaw in some one thread of a
great Cable, neither of which can weaken or endanger the one or the other. But
then besides, you cannot be ignorant that this which you now mention, is an old
threadbare exception worn out of all fashion by the old Atheists and
Epicureans, and which has been can vassed and bassted over and over by men of
all Ages and of several Persuasions, by Job, by David, by Solomon, nay, by
Tully, Seneca, Plutarch, and several others, that it is a great argument of the
poverty of your Cause to be seen in it now adays, and may justly excuse my
labor in confuting it. However because you think fit to give it countenance, I
will briefly say these three things in the case, viz.

First, That some measure of intricacy or obscurity in the dispensation of
Divine Providence, is no argument against it, but for it.

Secondly, That there are very great reasons assignable why it may please the
Divine Majesty to proceed sometimes indiscriminately, and keep no constant
visible method in the distributions of good and evil in this present life.

Thirdly, Yet however this be sometimes obscure, there are at other times
sufficient and legible instances of a distinguishing Providence.

1. Some measure of intricacy in the dispensations of Divine Providence, is so
far from being an argument against it, that it is a great argument for it. For
if we do not make God a mere necessary Agent (which I hope I have satisfied you
in) we must allow something to his Prerogative and Sovereignty, and
consequently grant that he may do some things, because he will do so, and
whereof he does not make us acquainted with the reasons; and we may very well
allow to his Wisdom, to have a reach beyond us, and to have other measures to
govern the World by, than we could have made for him. What, shall we call God
to an account of his Management? Shall he not govern the World at all, unless
he order it just as we would have him? This is apparently so far from being
reasonable, that it would be much more so to conclude on the contrary; namely,
that if there were no depths in the Divine Counsel which we could not fathom,
no Meanders in the way of Providence, which we could not trace, it would be
very suspicious, whether there were any thing of Divinity in the whole
business. For if things were constantly managed one way without any variation,
we should be apt to think all was under the rigid Laws of a fatal Necessity. If
on the other side there were no rule to be observed, no footsteps of any
method, then we should be tempted to think Chance ruled the World; but when we
observe an intermixture of these two, viz. that there is a rule, though there
be some exceptions from it, then we have reason to conclude, that all is under
a powerful and a free Agent, who if he be also infinitely wise, cannot but see
reason for several things which we cannot comprehend.

2. There are very great and weighty reasons assignable why in this particular
instance of Providence (namely in the distribution of good and evil in this
World) the Divine Majesty should not be obliged to gratify our curiosity with
a plain account of his proceedings, but make some exceptions to his general
rule; amongst which these following are considerable.

First, Because such a constant and visible exercise of distributive Justice,
as your objection seems to require, would be such an irrefragable and palpable
evidence of a Providence, as would leave no room for the discovery of ingenuity
or a virtuous disposition; it would deprive men of the liberty of their choice,
whether they would be Atheistical, or devout and religious: and consequently
there would be no excellency in Piety and Virtue. For (as I have said before in
a like case) it could be no argument of love to God or goodness, that a man
took care to serve and please God, if he constantly stood over us in a visible
and undeniable Providence, so as that every offender were taken in the very
fact, and presently led to execution; and on the other side, if every virtuous
action were forthwith rewarded and crowned. In short, it is not agreeable to
the Mind of God to overrun the freedom of our choice, since he has endowed us
with it, nor to supersede that distinctive faculty of our Nature; for should he
do so, he should act contrary to himself and to his own Glory, as well as to
the nature and condition of Mankind.

Again, Secondly, A checkered and diversified method of Divine Providence,
wherein there is an intertexture of prosperity and adversity in the fortunes of
virtuous men, tends more to their improvement than a more regular and constant
Providence would do. For as a continued course of prosperity is too apt to
tempt men to be wanton and careless; so a perpetual series of adversity would
be as apt to sink and depress their spirits: but a middle way of interchange in
their condition, balarces them on both sides, and maintains them in a more even
temper and conversation. And for this reason it pleases the Divine Wisdom to
make such false steps as you are apt to imagine them to be.

To which add in the third place, That herein lies the very secret of Divine
Wisdom, and by this very way he does most effectually assure us of the point in
question (namely, a Judgment to come) in that there is such apparent necessity
of it. For if the Divine Majesty should let the present World run at random,
and interpose himself in no case to check the hurry, or punish the disorder,
there would seem no reason to expect justice from him hereafter, who gave no
token of it all this while; and then on the other side, if he interposed so
frequently and constantly, as to leave no irregularity unpunished, nor any
brave action unrewarded, there would be no business left, nor no need of a day
of Judgment. Whereas by affording us some plain instances of his discrimination
in this World, we are satisfied that he minds how things go, and is able to
judge; and yet by permitting several other things to run riot, and seemingly to
be unanimadverted upon, he has as it were cut out work for a day of Judgment.

3. Notwithstanding all this, as I said before, there are some sufficient and
undeniable instances of a distinguishing Providence in this World, I have
granted to you, that sometimes the ways of God are intricate and involved, and
I have offered at some reasons of it, to which many others might have been
added, and amongst the rest, that by this means we may be kept humble and
modest, and taught to admire and reverence God, rather than to judge or
pronounce of him. For these, I say, and other reasons best known to infinite
Wisdom, he thinks fit sometimes to lose us in the Meander of his ways; yet I
say they are not always thus obscure, but sometimes he treads such plain and
direct paths, that we may easily follow him. And of this I have set before you
several examples already, and whosoever will diligently attend to it, may
easily collect more; but I will not omit to put you in mind of one great and
standing one, and (as far as is possible) beyond all exception, and that was in
the History of the Jewish Nation, who were infallibly sure to be happy and most
remarkably prosperous so long as they stuck to the true God and the Laws he had
given them by Moses, and as sure to be signally miserable and calamitous,
whenever they apostatized from their God, or debauched their Religion. So
that that people was placed as a light upon a mountain, and were an illustrious
instance to all the World of that great Truth we are now discoursing of; and if
there were no more instances of this kind, that alone would be sufficient for
the purpose.


Bioph. I must confess, if the story be true, there was a very strange Fate
attended that people.


Sebast. Fate, do you call it? What color or pretense in the world is there
for imputing those admirable revolutions to Fate? Could blind Fate make
distinction of persons and actions, and apply it self in the distribution of
good or evil in proportion to men's deserts or miscarriages? Do not disparage
your own discretion so much, as to use the word Fate in such a case. No, assure
your self that was a signal display of Divine Providence, and such an one as
you cannot expect or demand a greater.


Bioph. But if it were the effect of Providence, as you will needs have it, I
wonder how it comes to pass that there is no such thing now; or why all the
rest of Mankind was neglected by Divine Providence, A visible Providence over
the Jews.
and only that people, and in that age and corner of the World, so carefully
managed by it.


Sebast. O Biophilus, ask not God an account of his Prerogative, nor much less
prescribe to him how he shall govern the World. What if he pitying the dark
state of the world then, did something extraordinary to relieve and inlighten
it: and what if having once given such abundant proof of himself, he shall
think that sufficient to all after-ages? Or, to say no more, what if it pleases
him to make Faith in some respects more difficult now than it was then? Who
shall expostulate the matter with him, especially since he has not left us
destitute of sufficient grounds to determine a prudent man in the case? Which
is all I have pretended to assert all this while, and I think I have made it
good at last, though with some tediousness of discourse, for which I beg your
pardon.


Phil. Dear Sebastian, do not slander our judgments so much, as to suspect we
should think any thing tedious that is so much to the purpose. I thank you
heartily for the pains you have taken with us; for although (I thank God) I
have long lived under a firm persuasion both of a Providence here, and a
Judgment hereafter; yet I am greatly rejoiced to find all sure under me, and
when my reason encourages my devotion: and especially I think my self obliged
to you for the satisfaction you have given my Neighbor: is it not so,
Biophilus?


Bioph. I tell you plainly, Sebastian has staggered me, and I cannot tell what
to say more for the present, but I will consider further of it at leisure.


Phil. I, but do it quickly, good Biophilus, you Skeptical Gentlemen are apt to
take too long time to consider of these matters; you know, dye we must, and
that shortly too, so that we have not any long time to consider in; what an
horrible surprise would it be, if whilst we stand doubting and disputing, we
should hear the sound of the last Trump, and be summoned to that great
Tribunal? When Death once arrests us, there is no Bail will be taken, we must
come to a strict account, and await an irreversible Doom, so that there is no
dallying in this matter.

If either of us had intelligence that an Enemy were coming upon us with design
to assault us and take away our life, although it were a person of but ordinary
reputation that brought us the news, yet it would startle us, and we should not
stand disputing the truth of the relation, but presently either prepare our
selves to appease him, or arm our selves to encounter him; and then if no Enemy
appeared, we could securely expostulate the false Alarm afterward. Or if there
came a report, that the Sea had broken its banks, and overflowed the plain
whereon our houses stand, I assure my self that neither of us would stand
gravely deliberating, whether it were possible or no, or cavilling about the
neglect of repairing the banks, or least of all lose so much time as whilst we
could send Messengers, and expect their return, but first get us up to the
mountains, and there at leisure inform our selves of the truth of all
circumstances.

When Noah, for no less than one hundred and twenty years together, preached
repentance, and foretold a Flood coming to drown all the World, no question but
the generality of men laughed at him as timorous hypochondriacal person: They
could object how unusual a thing it was he talked of, a thing that no man had
seen, or had ever happened to the world before: They would discourse
philosophically in the case too, and represent it as a very absurd thing, to
imagine that the water should rise above the earth, and overflow the tops of
their stately houses; for (might they say) where shall there be water enough to
do it? from whence should it come? or how should this Fellow have notice of it
before all other men? And perhaps they would conclude, that at worst they
should have time to shift for themselves when they see it come in earnest, and
escape as well as others. Hereupon they ate and drank and feasted and made
merry, and laughed at that precise Coxcomb with his new Machine of an Ark: but
so, says our Savior, shall the coming of the Son of man be.

Alas, Biophilus, whilst we dream, the Judgment slumbers not: whilst we doubt
and dispute, God is in earnest: and the time draws on apace, when Christ Jesus,
the Judge of the World, shall come in the glory of his Father and of all the
holy Angels, the Heavens shall then melt away, and the Earth be on fire from
one end of it to another; the dead shall rise out of their Graves, and make an
huge Assembly; the Books of all men's actions shall be opened, and the Devil
together with every man's own Conscience, shall be the Accusers. Then shall all
those that are conscious to themselves to have lived virtuously and holily,
look up with joy and comfort to see their Savior become their Judge; to find a
vindication from all those unjust censures that have past upon them here below;
to come to an end of their labors, a reward of their services, the
accomplishment of their faith and hopes. Lord, what joy will be in their
countenances, what glory upon their heads! How the Angels smile upon them, and
welcome them to their journies end, and Heaven opens in an admirable Scene of
light and glory to receive them!

But on the other side, all that are privy to themselves to have lived
wickedly, basely and unprofitably, shall look pale and tremble, and call upon
the rocks and mountains to hide them from the face of the Lamb that fits upon
the Throne; for they shall see all black and dismal about them, no tears will
move pity, no Rhetoric will persuade, no excuses will be admitted, no Appeal
be allowed, no refuge to be found, nor Reprieve to be hoped for; but they shall
hear that dreadful Sentence, Depart accursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, and shall see Hell open her mouth to receive them
into unquenchable flames.


Bioph. I protest you speak with such feeling, Phil. that your discourse has
more power upon me than all the Arguments that ever I heard in my life. And I
know not what is the matter, but my heart trembles; therefore let me once more
entreat you to adjourn the remainder of this discourse till another time, and
in the mean while I Will consider of it, as I promised you.


Phil. Ah! dear Neighbor, do not prove like that unhappy Felix in the
Scripture, do not go about to elude what you cannot evade; no, put not off this
business a moment longer: now that it seems God has touched your heart, quench
not his holy Spirit, it may be you will never be in such a temper again, if you
lose this opportunity.


Bioph. I assure you I like this temper (as you call it) so well, that I do not
desire to feel more of it. But if you are resolved to go on to torment me, I
pray do me the favor first to answer me this question. If these things be so
as you represent them, how comes it to pass that men unconcerned about
Religion, dye as comfortably oftentimes as any others? The reason of my
question is this, because you will pretend that whilst men are well in health,
and swimming with the Tide of prosperity, they may either artificially put off
the thoughts of these things, though they be true; or the noise of business,
and the caresses of their senses may obscure all apprehension of another World.
But sure, when men find themselves dying, and that there is but one way with
them, it should be too late for them to flatter themselves, or to admit of the
flatteries of others; then surely prejudices cease, and men are at leisure to
think the glory of the World cannot dazzle their eyes when it is leaving them,
and they it: what then, I say, can be the reason if these things be true (which
you speak so affectionately of) that there is not as remarkable a difference in
men's temper of spirit when they come to dye, How it comes to pass that there is
no greater difference in the last act of men's lives.
as there seems to be in their conversation whilst they are alive?


Sebast. I apprehend your question very well, and the reasons of your asking it
too. And for answer to it, I pray tell me what is the reason that men that love
their health and their Estates both very well, will nevertheless be Drunkards
and Whore-masters and Gamesters, though they see by daily experience that these
are very sure methods to out them of both? You will tell me, I suppose, that
they feed themselves with absurd and unreasonable hopes which fool their
discretion, or that they are bewitched and besotted with those kind of
pleasures, and so consider nothing at all. Why, just so it is here, the things
we speak of are undoubtedly true, and the miscarriage in them is fatal; but men
are careless and incogitant, and slip into the pit of destruction before they
are aware; they live merrily, because they never think of any thing, and they
dye as sottishly as they lived.

Again, there is another sort of men that are captious and conceited, who will
chop Logic, as we say, with God Almighty; they will have not only their reason
satisfied, but their curiosity also, or they will not believe; they must see a
Spirit and Heaven and Hell, or one mush come from the dead to tell them News
out of the other World, or they will not be contented. Now God will not indulge
this humor of theirs, and they are resolved to venture him, that is, they will
be damned rather than forgo it.

Besides, there are others take a great deal of pains to disbelieve, they will
use all the Arts of Sophistry, all the tricks and evasions of wit, entrench and
fortify themselves in their Atheistical conceits; in a word, they will cheat
their own reason, outface their own Conscience, and bring upon themselves a
stupid insensibility of all that is good and virtuous, and so, in conclusion,
they dye quietly, and go silently into the bottomless pit.

To all this you must consider, that it is very probable that many of these men
may be very far from dying cheerfully, though we are not able to observe their
Agonies and torments; for it may very well be, that when they once begin to
consider what a desperate condition they are in, the very thoughts of that,
together with their bodily disease in conjunction, presently overwhelms their
spirits, and makes their passage out of the world more compendious, but never
the more comfortable.

But after all, you shall find some of the aforesaid persons, when they come to
dye, sadly bewail their folly and carelessness of this kind; but wherever did
you hear of an holy and virtuous man that ever repented of his choice or pains
in Religion, or care of his Soul, and solicitude in preparation for this
occasion? It Is possible indeed such a man may express no transpoets, because
his body is like other men's, and the strength of his disease may infeeble his
spirits and cloud his reason, and so interrupt the exercise of his faith and
hope. And on the other side, the profane and irreligious man, though perhaps
(as you suppose) he cannot or will not dissemble at the approach of death, yet
he may be sottish and insensible, and then whatsoever difference of state they
are entering upon, there may be no discernible difference in their departure
hence; and so you see your question will not serve to the purpose you
propounded it for.


Phil. Come, Biophilus, leave these skeptical artifices, these captious
questions, do not seek out ways to muzzle your own Conscience, or impose upon
your reason; a Judgment there will be, and it is all the wisdom in the world to
be prepared for it. It is in our power by the grace of God to order matters so,
The wonderful comfort and advantages of being secured against a day of Judgment.
that we shall rather hope and wish for it than fear it, and what vast odds is
there between them two? You are sensible that it is only a Judgment following
death, that makes death terrible, at least to our minds and understanding.
Indeed it is possible our bodies may be disturbed at the assaults of it; but
mere death can never shake our minds, or discompose one thought, if we are
satisfied that all will be well after it: and what an happy and desirable
condition were it, to be out of the reach of that King of terrors, to see
light through that dark Vault of the grave, to outlive all a man's fears, and
to live to his hopes? What a strange alteration will that one thing make in a
man's projections and designs, in his countenance and in his spirit, and in the
whole management of himself; for who can be afraid of any other accident that
has no cause to fear death? Who will be concerned about riches, or be much
discomposed whether his temporal affairs succeed well or ill, that is provided
for Eternity? Who will stoop so low, as to lay any stress upon fame and
reputation, that has approved himself to God and his own Conscience, and can
stand the shock of the great Trial of the day of Judgment? He that is in a
condition not to fear death, will have no reason to fear men or Devils or
Spirits or solitude or darkness, but may be as bold as a Lion, and cannot
probably be tempted either to express a mean passion, or to do a base action;
to be sure he will crouch to no body, flatter and humor no body: for no body
can hurt him, and so his life is easy as well as comfortable, forasmuch as he
has no body to please but God and his own Conscience.

But, as I was saying, this is to be prepared for; Salvation is not a matter of
course, nor the Judgment a mere piece of state and formality, but infinitely
sacred and solemn; the Judge is wise and holy and just, the Trial strict and
severe, the Doom irreversible, the misery intolerable, if a man miscarry, as
well as the felicity unspeakable, if he stand right at that Tribunal: and to
all this the critical time draws on apace; we feel our selves daily dying,
therefore it concerns us to do what is to be done out of hand.


Bioph. I am convinced that it is the wisest course to provide for the business
you speak of, if it could be done without too much trouble.


Phil. Ah! Biophilus, can any care be too great in such a concern? Can any
thing seem troublesome that may at once secure us from all other troubles? But
the trouble is not great neither, it is but being sincerely and heartily
religious, and all is done.


Bioph. That is soon said, I confess, but not so soon done. Besides, I am never
the wiser for such a general advice; for there are so many Religions in the
World, that it is hard to know which to trust to. Some sublime Religion to such
an height of Spirituality (as they call it) that a man cannot tell what to make
of it; and again, some make no more of it than honest Morality. Some dress it
up so fine and gawdily with so many Trappings and Ornaments, The different
representations of Religion, a great temptation to Seepticism.
that it is hard to find what the naked truth of the thing is; and others render
it so plain and coarse, that a man is tempted to despise it. Some represent it
so thin and subtle, that a man's reason can take no hold of it; and others
propound it so grossly and absurdly, that a man had need have a good stomach to
it, or he could not digest it. Some make it a very easy thing, a trick of Wit,
a mere Notion, but the becoming of a Party, or a bare believing; nay, a
peculiar Garb, an hair Shirt, or a Friars Girdle does the business. With others
it is a matter of infinite difficulty, and has so many nice and strict
observations belonging to it, that they are able to discourage any pretense to
it. In a word, it seems to me to be what the Painter pleases, forasmuch as I
see some describe it out of the pleasantness of their own sanguine fancy, and
others out of the black humor of their hypochondriac passions: So that upon the
whole matter, I think I had as good maintain my own Character, and withhold my
assent till men are better agreed amongst themselves upon the point.


Sebast. God forbid, Biophilus, for that you cannot do, unless you will
adventure to be damned, as certainly you must, if you be found to be of no
Religion.


Bioph. Why, have you less charity for men of my temper, than for all the world
besides? Must a Sceptist be certainly damned, if there be a Judgment?


Sebast. Far be it from me to be uncharitable toward any men, if I could help
them; but I must tell you, I have less hope for that man that has no faith at
all, than for him that has a bad one; and it must be a very bad Religion
indeed that is not better than none. For though by reason of the variety of
Persuasions (which you take notice of) a man may be fatally so misled, as to
perish in a blind Devotion; yet certainly he that is so phantastically wise, as
to be of no Religion at all, cannot be saved. But what need is there of either
of these? There are a great many false Religions, it is acknowledged, but there
is a Truth too, and that not so hard to discern as you represent it, if a man
sincerely apply himself to the search of it.


Bioph. Now you have nickt the business, you think, as if every Country had not
the true Religion, or every man's own persuasion were not the truth, at least if
they be allowed to be their own Judges.


Sebast. Good Biophilus, do not jest in these matters. I know you are a witty
man; but do not turn the edge of it against your own Soul. Come, I Will tell you
a Religion that all the World shall agree in, and my Soul for yours, you shall
be safe, if you will comply with it. Do not stare, it is no more but this, A
sure Religion.
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world; or if you will have
it in other words, resolve with your self not to do that thing (whatever come
of it) that you cannot answer to God and your own Conscience, and do every
thing within your power that may approve and recommend you to both, and
thence-forward fear not a day of Judgment.


Bioph. Now you speak to the purpose indeed, that I must needs say is good
counsel, and such as I think all the World is agreed in; therefore I thank you
for it, and I will try to follow it.


Phil. God prosper your resolution, Biophilus. And now, Sebastian, that we are
happily come to this point, I pray give me leave to put Biophilus's question a
little more home to you. I thank God I am sensible of the great day
approaching, and make some conscience of being provided for it; but because I
would not for all the world be mistaken in my measures in a business of that
moment, I crave the assistance of your judgment how far that care extends, and
particularly what it comprises. The reason of my solicitude herein (besides
the consequence of the thing it self) is, Scrupulous and fantastical rules of
preparation for the day of Judgment reproved.
because I have heard it delivered as a standing Rule by some men, That the
only sure preparation is, that a man live every day as if it were the last he
had to live. Which Doctrine has often raised scruples in my mind, and I
suspect it may have had the like effect upon others; and to tell you my
thoughts plainly, I look upon it as unpracticable and inconsistent with the
common affairs of life; for most certainly on that day, which I thought would
be the last I should live, I would not fail to dismiss all other business
whatsoever, I would scarce eat or drink or sleep, but wholly apply my self to
acts of devotion. Now if that rule be true, Religion is a more anxious thing
than I was aware; and if it be not true, I pray make me understand what is the
truth in this matter.


Sebast. I do not know why you should lay much stress upon my judgment in such
a case; but if you will have my opinion, it is plainly this, that the rule you
speak of is far more devout than judicious; for as you well observe, since God
Almighty has clothed our Souls with bodies, and placed us in a world of
business, it cannot be that he should expect we should in the whole course of
our lives so singly and solely apply our selves to the affairs of another
World, as we should think fit to do just when we are going off the stage, and
solemnly preparing our selves for an immediate appearance at Gods
Judgment Seat. If therefore those men (you speak of) had prescribed that we
should every day think of the day of Judgment, as not knowing how soon it may
be upon us, or that we should take care every day to advance in our provision
for it, they had delivered a great and a necessary Truth; but when they speak
as if they meant, that we must do nothing any day, but what we would do, if we
were sure it were our last day, they thwart the very order of Divine Providence
in the condition of men, and the constitution of the world; they condemn the
practice, and call in question the state of the best of men; they lay a snare
for the Conscience of the weak and timorous: and in a word, they obtrude an
impracticable notion for the most concerning and necessary Truth.

But you are not to wonder, or be troubled at it. For though there is generally
more defect of devotion than of knowledge in the World, yet there are some
particular men wherein the former exceeds the latter, and such men please
themselves in a pretty saying, without being able to judge of the prudence of
it; and whilst they go about to awaken some secure and careless persons to a
serious sense of their eternal concern, are not aware that they afford matter
of everlasting scruple and offense to those that are truly tender and
conscientious.

It were easy to give you sundry instances of this superfine high strained
Divinity; but there is one I will mention for its affinity with that before us,
viz. you shall find it dogmatically delivered by some seeming great Casuists,
That in certain and indisputable things, it is a man's duty to do that which is
best of the kind, and in uncertain and controverted cases to take the surer
side. Now if these things were laid down as prudential advices only, to direct
a man which way to incline himself, they were very useful; but to make them
express measures of duty, is to make more Laws than God has made, and condemn
more things for sin than he condemns, and consequently cannot choose but imbroil
the Consciences of men. For suppose Prayer be better than secular business,
then upon this Principle I must turn Euchite, and spend all my time in
devotion. Suppose there be fewer temptations in a Monastic life than in common
Conversation, then every one that is careful of his Soul, must retire into a
Cloister. If there be difficulties attending Magistracy and public Employment,
then I must fold up my hands and do nothing but go into my Cell, and pray God
to mend the World, though I be called to the other. If bodily exercises and
Games have some snares in them, I must allow my self no recreations; nay, I
shall be put endlesly and anxiously to dispute, whether it be better to give a
poor man two pence or a shilling or five shillings, etc. whether I shall pray
three times a day or seven times a day; whether an hour or two hours. And
indeed every thing I go about will afford inextricable difficulties upon these
Principles.

But that by the way only: As for the business in hand, trouble your self no
farther than to live every day well, and to be sure to do nothing you cannot
answer; be always getting ground, and growing better and better; as near as you
can, do every day something that may turn to account another day, and then
comfortably await Gods time.


Phil. I thank you heartily both for your direct answer and your digression:
and I pray pardon me, if I come a little closer to you yet. I know you live
under a comfortable prospect of the day of Judgment, and I am confident you
neither would or could enjoy that even tranquillity, if you were not upon sure
grounds. Now my request is, that you will be so free with me, as to make me
acquainted with your whole management of your self: For though I have a rule to
walk by, yet for fear I should misapply it, and either through Superstition and
Scrupulosity overgo it, or by the carelessness of my own heart fall short of it,
I should be very glad to have an example to interpret it to me.


Sebast. I clearly perceive you either love me too much, or know me not so well
as I thought you did, in that you think of making me your example. Alas! Phil.
little do you think how many follies and infirmities I labor under, and as
little what qualms and dejections of spirit I sometimes feel within my self.


Phil. I confess, I do not know you so well, but that I desire to know more of
you; and though it be a great thing I ask of you, that you should absolutely
unbosom your self to me; yet you that have done me so much good already, I hope
will not deny me this advantage of your conversation.


Sebast. Ah, dear Phil. you may command me any thing; but I tell you, my life
has too many blots in it for you to make a Copy of: in truth, such a precedent
will endanger to make you too remiss.


Phil. Now you discourage me more than ever, and make me suspect that it is an
harder thing to be saved than I imagined, since you find such difficulty in it.


Sebast. Good Phil. excuse me from saying any thing of my self; but (if it were
not too tedious for this time) I would give you the History of an holy Friend
of mine, Eulabes's History of his own Life, and preparations for Judgment.
which I had from his own mouth, and that I assure my self will be of more use
to you, than what you seem so passionately to desire.


Phil. Of whom do you mean?


Sebast. Of my dear Friend Eulabes now with God, a Person of as great Sanctity
of life and comfortableness of Spirit, as Earth can easily admit of.


Phil. I have heard much of the fame of his Piety, but I never had the
happiness to know him. For Gods sake let us have his story, since you will not
gratify me in my first request.


Sebast. I remember the time well when I made much the same request to him,
which you have now done to me. And he after he had for a good while modestly
declined, giving me satisfaction therein by such excuses as it is not necessary
I should now repeat, and I had replied to them as well as I could; at length
yielding to my importunity, he began thus.

Dear Friend (quoth he) though from the first date of our acquaintance our
conversation has been so intimate, and my breast has been so open to you,
that I scarcely know any thing by my self that you have not been privy to; yet
because you are pleased to entertain the curiosity to inquire further after me,
I will not stick to tell you as well what happened to me before the
commencement of our friendship, as also such things as (in regard they passed
only betwixt God and my own Soul) may be unknown to you, though they were
transacted since.

Know then, (said he) that about such time as I had out-grown the mere follies
and infirmities of my youth, and began, together with the advance of my bodily
strength and vigor, to make also some essays of understanding and discretion,
I quickly found that by the Springtide of my blood, and the great increase of
bodily spirits, several very impetuous passions and inclinations boiled up in
me, notwithstanding those small efforts which my reason (as yet) could make to
the contrary.

This I then thought (and do still) to be a case common to other men with my
self; and since I have considered of it, I am apt to think that our wise
Creator so ordered the matter, that these two Combatants, Sense and Reason,
should grow up and enter the Lists together, to the intent that as Reason
should not be without its Antagonist to hold it in play: so on the other side,
those bodily powers should not be left without a Guide to conduct, control and
manage them.

However, hereupon bodily inclinations growing daily stronger and stronger, and
my Reason and Conscience not being yet foiled or corrupted, there arose a very
strong conflict in me between them, and that as yet of very doubtful issue;
forasmuch as both being parts of my self, I could not easily resolve which side
to incline to.

In the mean time (as God would have it) calling to mind the solemnity of my
Baptism, I remembered that then when I was dedicated to Christ, and entered as a
Candidate of eternal Life, I had renounced the flesh with the affections and
lusts. Hereupon therefore I resolved to withstand them if I could, and to this
end begged the assistance of Gods grace, and (by the advice of my Parents and
those good persons, who having been Sureties for me, had a desire to discharge
their Consciences of that Trust which lay upon them) I applied my self to the
Bishop for Confirmation. Whereby having obtained not only the Blessing of my
Spiritual Father, but made Christian Religion now my own act and choice; and
besides, had put such a public obligation upon my self, as would render it
very shameful for me to go back or retreat, I from that time forward was under
a more awful sense of God and Religion, and felt frequent motions of the holy
Spirit within me.

Here I remember I a little interrupted him, applauding his singular felicity
in being so early engaged in the way of Heaven, by which means that course was
now grown habitual to him, and his accounts much easier at the day of Judgment.

But he proceeded, saying,

It is true indeed it was Gods great goodness to awaken me to a sense of my
duty thus early, as I have told you; but then what by the allurements of
pleasures, which have always too poinant a relish with younger years, what by
engagement in business which grew upon me afterward, and what through the
contagion of example which surrounds a man with too common instances of
carelessness in these weighty matters, I was drawn off from any close attendance
upon Religion, until it pleased God in his wise Methods of Grace to lay his
hand upon me in a dangerous fit of sickness; and this partly, as it stained all
the beauty of the World, which heretofore allured me; partly also, as it
mortified and infeebled those bodily powers which before were too potent in me,
but principally as it gave me leisure and inclination to recollect my self; I
thereupon (seeing nothing but death before me) fell into a great concern for
another life, and so by degrees came to a solemn resolution of making Religion
my chief business, and took all the care possible, that so I might be prepared
for the great day of Trial.

Now because this is the point which (I perceive) you inquire after, I will
acquaint you with the method I pursued; and to deal faithfully with you (as I
hope I did with my own Soul) the stress of my preparations lay in these three
things.

First, Because I was sure that an holy life must needs be the best Passport
for the other World; therefore I considered how I might keep my self closest to
my duty, and walk in all the Commandments of God as blameless as it was
possible.

Secondly, Because I knew that I had failed heretofore, and feared I should
again in several things fall short of my duty; therefore I bethought my self
how I might do something extraordinary, if not to make up those defects, yet to
show at least the sincerity of my love to God and Religion, and the value I had
for the World to come.

Thirdly and principally, In consideration of the Purity and Justice of God,
and the strictness of his Laws, I desired and endeavored to interest my self
in the Satisfaction and Intercession of my Savior.

1. For the first of these, namely, the approving my self to God in the
integrity of an holy life, I considered that eternal Life not being a thing of
course, or naturally due to men, but the singular gift of God, our hopes of it
and title to it must depend upon the performance of such conditions as he
should think fit to impose: and forasmuch as no man can know Gods mind, and
what he will be pleased with, unless he himself reveal it; therefore in the
first place I did not content my self with humane Writings and Moral
Discourses, nor much less to conform my self to the measures and customs of the
World, but set my self daily and diligently to study the holy Scriptures, and
took the measures of my duty, and the rule of my life thence. And to this I
joined daily and earnest prayer, that it would please Divine Goodness not only
to make me understand his Will, but guide and enable me to perform it; that he
would preserve me from prejudices, from inadvertency, from foolish opinions and
rash actions: and this I performed not customarily and formally, as if I
complemented God Almighty, but with my utmost vigor and intention of spirit,
and never thought I had acquitted my self therein till I found my heart warmed
with its own motion.

More particularly, because I found that hard study and sickliness of body, had
made me somewhat subject to disorders of the Irascible (as heretofore health
and plenty had inclined me to the Concupiscible); therefore I vehemently
implored the Divine Grace for my relief, and have been frequently constrained
to allay a storm of passion with a shower of tears.

Besides this, I took special care to keep out of vicious and licentious
Company, which I was confident if it did not taint me with some ill example,
would be sure to cool my heat, and abate my edge to Religion: and contrariwise,
I contrived as much as possibly I could to keep such Conversation as was likely
to provoke and inflame me in the course I had propounded to my self.

And lest all this should not be sufficient to secure me of my intentions,
every evening I erected a petty Tribunal within my self, and called my self to
account for the day past, if I had slipped any opportunity of doing or
receiving good; if any rash word or action had escaped me; if any earthly or
sensual affection had been stirring in me; if I had been guilty of any instance
of injustice, that hereafter might rise up in judgment against me, I repented
and made my peace with God and man, as far as it was possible, before I slept.
I examined my self also what progress I had made that day toward Heaven,
whether, now I had spent a day of my life, I was a days journey onward of my
way, and what I had to show for the expense of that day. I always took, as I
said, the Evening for this business, both in regard of the privacy and quiet of
that season, and also because I found that then the solitude and darkness of
the nights were easy, and the sleep comfortable when I had first cleared all
scores; and besides, I was cautious, lest the interposition of sleep should
have made me forget the passages of the former day, if I had deferred the
account of them till the next.

Besides all this, I found it necessary (and accordingly practiced) to set one
day aside in every month, and more solemnly and wholly dedicated it to this
business, to romage my own heart, to compare my self with my self, and to
observe how much I advanced in my great design.

2. The second part of my care (as I told you) was to efface those errors of
my life, which had either wittingly or unwillingly escaped me. Now to this
purpose, I was very desirous to do some exemplary good things, that I might
lift up the head, and raise the spirit of Piety in the World; and the rather,
to the intent, that if I had done any hurt by ill example formerly, I might,
when I could not revoke the act, yet prevent the contagion of it. And besides,
I was watchful of, and gladly embraced all opportunities of demonstrating the
sincerity of my love to God, though it was by a costly or difficult service;
for I made no doubt, but the more there was of self-denial in a virtuous
action, the greater was the evidence of Grace and Divine Love in performing it.
Upon this account I could well have been content it would have pleased God to
have given me a just occasion of some smart, but tolerable sufferings for that;
and with this prospect I have put my self upon some measures of Charity that
were to the very utmost of my ability, if not beyond it; I have interposed my
self voluntarily for the rescue of some desolate and oppressed person from a
potent Adversary, and thereby derived the trouble upon my self which I
protected that person from; I have put my self forward to reclaim some peevish
deluded Sectary or some vicious person, from whom I have had very ungrateful
treatment for my good will, that by all or some of these I might show that I
loved God as well as my self: not that I had any proud conceit or opinion of
Supererogation in any thing I could do or suffer; so far from it, that I am
sensible, that when I have done all I can, I must acknowledge my self an
unprofitable servant, and that I have not done so much as was my duty to do.
Notwithstanding, as a Subject, that has been in Rebellion against his Prince,
or some way or other disobliged him, will be glad to be employed in the most
difficult services, that he may show his Loyalty, and recover his Favor: So I
who was sensible, that in many things I had offended the Divine Majesty, could
not choose but prize an occasion of doing something more than matter of strict
duty, that I might show, that nevertheless I loved him: And indeed it seems to
me, that those who pretend so much modesty and humility, as to be scrupulous of
over-doing in this manner, are only in reality afraid of loving him too much,
which I am sure is impossible. And therefore I find that such free will
Offerings give a man's heart great assurance, and enable a man to look with the
more comfortable erection of mind toward God and the day of Judgment. So I
observed Nehemiah, Chap. 13. verse. 14. when he had shown himself
publick-spirited and generously, and with considerable difficulty and hazard to
himself had asserted the interest of the oppressed Jews and their Religion, he
then with an holy confidence addresses himself to God in these words, Remember
me, O Lord, for this, and wipe not out the good deeds which I have done, etc.
This, I take it, is laying up in store a good foundation against the time to
come, this is, making friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when we
fail they may receive us into everlasting habitations. Such actions, I say,
either of Piety or Charity aforesaid, are as it were the drawing a Bill upon
God Almighty, to be paid in the other World, and making a wise and frugal
Purchase of a Reversion in Heaven.

Wherefore (as I told you) I studied all opportunities, and consulted the
utmost of my ability to do some remarkably good things, that might be
beneficial to the World or to Religion when I was dead and gone, and
endeavored to sow such seed as whose fruit should by the grace of God be fresh
and lasting to the very day of Judgment.

3. But when all was done, I laid the greatest stress of all upon the third and
last part of my preparation, and that was in interessing my self in the
Satisfaction and Intercession of my Savior. For besides the many and great
failings I was sensible of, I considered also the purity of the Divine Nature
was such, that he found folly in his Angels, and detested sin wherever he
found it; that his Law was strict and perfect; that it was impossible any thing
should be acceptable to such a Majesty, or make amends for the breach of such a
Law, but that which was perfect too; that nothing could make atonement for sin
but a Lamb without spot; that nothing could successfully intercede for us but
the only Son of God. Therefore I set an infinite value upon the discovery of
the light and grace of the Gospel. I with all heartiness and thankfulness
embraced the Terms of the new Covenant: I endeavored to affect my self with
the highest sense of love and gratitude toward my Lord Jesus Christ. I pleaded
his Sacrifice in my Prayers, I fed my Faith with his Blood, I raised my hopes
by having so powerful an Advocate with the Father; I comforted my self against
the accusations of the Devil and my own Conscience, and all my black and
melancholy thoughts, by the consideration that he was appointed Judge of the
World, that was in humane Nature, who had been sensible of our infirmities, had
experience of our temptations, and had so much good will to us as to dye for
us. I acknowledged and adored his Divinity, I confessed him before men, I
gloried in his Cross and Sufferings, I frequently observed the Memorial of his
Death and Passion in the Sacrament, I joined my self to his Church, I honored
his Ministers, I reverenced all his Institutions; and in a word, as the highest
and truest honor I could do to him, I endeavored to be like him, by imitation
of his sincerity, purity, meekness and goodness, in confidence that upon these
terms he would own me when he comes again in his glorious Majesty.

This (said he) has been the course and care of my life, from such time as I
became in earnest sensible of the concern of another World, and this is the
sum of my constant preparations for the day of Judgment; and in this posture I
endeavor always to be found whenever God calls me. I confess I should be
right glad (if it please God to give me opportunity) to make some more special
and particular preparations against the approaches of death, if I could be
aware of it, and to trim and snuff my Lamp against the Bridegroom comes; but
for that Gods will be done: however by his Grace I hope I shall not be utterly
surprised nor dismayed, having made this habitual provision for it.

Thus far he.


Phil. Your Friend Eulabes appears to have been a most exemplary, Eulabes his
more special preparations for death toward the approaches of it.
holy, and a wise man, and the relation which you have given us, as from his
own mouth, exceedingly sits the Character of such a Person; for there is both a
lively Spirit of Piety breathing in it, and withal such a becoming and
proportionable modesty, as sufficiently assures the real truth of the whole
Narrative, forasmuch as I cannot suspect you would impose upon us herein; nor
can I believe it easy (if possible) for an evil man to draw a Scene of Virtue
with so many Arguments of probability. For my own part, I have been all along
so affected with it, that nothing has grieved me so much, as that you seemed
to draw toward an end of your story, as well as the good man to the end of his
life. And now I have a thousand questions, which I would gladly put to you
further about him, but that I am afraid of being too troublesome to you,
especially since it grows late. However I pray pardon me whilst I interrogate
you a little about the last Act of so brave a Person. I remember you said he
intended, if God gave him opportunity, to make some more particular and special
preparations at the approaches of death; now I have a great curiosity to
inquire, whether it pleased God to afford him such opportunities as he wished,
and what use he made of them. Gratify me in this, and I will detain you no
longer at this time.


Sebast. Why therein, dear Phil. I will satisfy you as well as I am able. You
must know therefore, that Eulabes having through the course of his whole life
maintained a strict temperance, and now well advanced in years, it happened to
him (as it is usual in such cases) by the good Providence of God, to have a
gradual and leisurely dissolution; he was neither racked to death by the
intolerable pains of the Gout or Stone, nor hurried out of the world in the
fiery Chariot of a violent Fever, not stabbed by an Apoplexy, nor stupefied by
a Lethargy, but was mildly and gently summoned by a lingering sickness, so that
insensibly he felt himself dying. By this means he had both time, strength and
understanding to settle every thing according to his wishes. When therefore he
saw the Harbingers of death draw on toward him, and that he could not long
maintain the little Fort of life against the Confederate force of so many
infirmities as besieged it, he then disposed himself for a Surrender.

In the first place, having formerly in better health made his Will, and settled
his temporal Affairs, he now dismissed all business, forbid all impertinent
talk, all troublesome Visitants, and discharged his Physicians also, as finding
no farther use of them; and forthwith sent for the Physician of his Soul, the
Minister of his Parish, a plain, hearty and sincerely good Man. And he being
come, my Friend addresses himself to him, giving him hearty thanks for all the
pains he had taken in the course of his Ministry in that place to do their
Souls good. Wherein (says he) it has pleased God so to order it, that you
have often come home to my case, and touched the very distemper of my heart, as
if you had been within me; for which I humbly thank Almighty God, and again and
again thank you, and pray God reward it in another World.

Now, Sir, (proceeded he) that great Judge of all the World is calling me to
account of all the actions of my life; I have therefore sent for you to audite
them beforehand, that so by your assistance I may either know my errors, and
repair whatsoever is amiss, ^^ilst yet I have a little time left me to do it
in; or if I have stated my matters rightly, may appear with the better
assurance at that Tribunal. I have always found you faithful in your Doctrine,
and I do not doubt but you will be impartial in this application.

At this point I offered to go out, and leave them private; which he
perceiving, took me by one hand, and the Minister by the other, and then
continued his discourse. I will give you (said he to the Minister) the History
of my life, at least I will not conceal from you any main passage of it, be it
for me or against me, that so you may pass a judgment upon my spiritual state;
and I desire you, my dear Friend Sebastian, to be present, who have been privy
to the most critical moments of it, to the intent that you may witness against
me before this Man of God, if I falsify in any thing. This said, he laid open
the course of his life, and amongst several other things, which either I do not
now so well remember, or think not fit to repeat, he delivered the substance of
that, whereof I have given you a large account before; and then he conjured him
in the Name of God to deal freely and plainly with him upon the whole matter.

The holy Man, like a Jury, in a manifest case, without long deliberation
quickly brought in a Verdict of comfort to him. Which when Eulabes perceived,
with his eyes fixed upon him, and a countenance somewhat cheared; Well, said
he, God be thanked, if it be so, as I hope it is; for I rest assured Almighty
Goodness despises not the meanest sincerity. But I humbly and earnestly befeech
you, Sir, give me also the Absolution of the Church, that I may go out of the
World under the comfort of so public and authentic a Testimony. Which when
the Minister had solemnly performed, he entreated him further to administer to
him the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that so (said he) seeing as it were my
Savior crucified before my eyes, and pouring out his Blood for sinners, I may
the more firmly believe the pardon of my own sins, and upon the wings of Faith
and affection raise my self toward Heaven.

This, after the interposition of Prayers and Mediation and holy discourse, was
administered to him; but, Lord, what an ecstasie of devotion was the good Man
now in! What tokens of humility, affection, thankfulness and intention of mind
were then to be read in his countenance and deportment! Most certainly Christ
Jesus was present really, though not carnally, and his Soul fed it self most
savourily upon him. These things being done, he dismissed the Minister for that
time, not without real expressions of his thankfulness to him for his pains and
assistance, nor without a liberal alms to be disposed at his discretion amongst
the Poor, earnestly entreating him to remember him constantly in the Prayers of
the Church, that thereby he might be helped on his journey toward Heaven,
where he hoped shortly to arrive.

Some time after this, when by some repose he had recovered a little strength,
his Family was called together to his Beds side, with some others of his
Friends and Relations; all whom he most earnestly cautioned against looseness of
life, and profaneness of spirit, assuring them in the words of a dying man, of
the great reality and infinite importance of Religion; he charged them, as they
would answer it at that great Day which was certainly coming, that they should
not suffer themselves either to be debauched into carelessness and lukewarmness,
nor abused and cheated into phantastry and opinionativeness in Religion, but
persist in the good old way, reverence their Minister, keep to the Church, and
make the serving of God the greatest care and business of their lives. Then he
discoursed admirably to them of the vanity of the World, the uncertainty of
life, the comforts of Religion, and the joys of Heaven, till his spirits began
to be spent, and his speech a little to falter. At other times he retreated
into himself, and entertained converse with God by Prayers and holy
Meditations, in which what were the elevations of his Faith, what the holy
raptures of his Love, what humble abjections of himself at the feet of Christ,
what resignations of himself to the will of God, what pleading of the promises
of the Gospel, and recumbency upon the Intercession of his Savior, we could
not be privy to further than as we saw his hands and eyes earnestly lift up to
Heaven, sometimes a stream of tears falling from his eyes, and other times
interchangeably a cheerful smile sitting upon his countenance; in which posture
bodily strength being now exhausted, he with a gentle sigh resigned up his Soul
to God.

Thus I have given you the last passages of this good Man (now no doubt in
Heaven) if I have not tired you with the relation, though I confess I am not
very apt to suspect that, both because I have done it in compliance with your
desire; and besides, I judge of other men by my self, and because I am never
weary of thinking or speaking of him; therefore imagine other men may be of the
same mind.


Phil. Ah! Sir, so far from being weary of such kind of discourse, that I could
willingly have forgot all other things for it, and been glad this
Evening-Conference had continued till to morrow morning; but I consider
Devotion must not too much entrench upon Civility; therefore I return you my
hearty thanks for my good Entertainment, and take my leave for this time.


Bioph. I thank you both for your good Company and your charitable offices
toward my satisfaction, and I do already assure you of this fruit of it, that
by your Conversation I have learnt that all Religion is not acting a part, and
playing the Hypocrite, which I was apt to suspect heretofore; for I see you are
so really hearty and in earnest in it, and yet men of greater sagacity than my
self, that I tell you truly I begin to think it becomes me seriously to
consider of it. Good night to you, good Sebastian.


THE END.

