Moses made Angry: OR, A LETTER WRITTEN and SENT To Dr Hill, Master of Trinity
College in CAMBRIDG, Upon occasion of some hard Passages that fell from him in
a SERMON preached at Paul's, May 4. 1651.

By John Goodwin.

Them that sin [ de Presbyteris hoc dictum accipio. Calvin.] rebuke before all,
that others also may fear.

1 Timothy 5. 20. (...). It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

Acts 9. 5. Obsequium amicos, Veritas odium parit.
Paradoxa quidem plurima, quae non paraloga.
Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?
London, Printed by J. M. for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be
sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley near Lumbard street. 1651.

Mr Doctor Hill;
I Understand by several that were your Hearers the last Lords day, (and these
not of the weakest or least intelligent of them) that in your Sermon at Paul's
before the Lord Major and Aldermen of this City, with many others, you were
pleased to vent your self with much unseemliness of Passion (which gave great
offense to the sober and most considerate part of your Auditory) against
certain Opinions, which through the violence (I in Charity presume) of the
distemper then upon you, you so far forgot your self as to call Pelagian and
Arminian; and that in the heat of your Discourse upon this Theme, you reflected
in words of much bitterness, and with height of indignation, upon a Book lately
published, which (as my Intelligence bears) you either plainly said, or
insinuated, maintains the said Opinions. That by this Book you meant that,
entitled, Redemption Redeemed, your Auditory generally conceived, and your
self (I presume) will not deny. Sir, you are a Gentleman, to whom I never (to
the best of my knowledge) gave the least offense: if unwittingly I have done it,
I am ready to make you all Christian satisfaction. For your parts of learning
and knowledge, according to what grounds I had to make an estimate of them, I
proportionably honored you: and much more, because (as I always conceived,
until now) you chiefly employed them about that most honorable and worthy work
of propagating the Glorious Gospel of God in the World. That testimony also and
report, which from many hands, time after time, I received, concerning your
Moralities, goodness of spirit, blamelessness of conversation, etc. much
advanced my esteem of you. Notwithstanding had you poured shame and contempt
upon my head alone, had you ground to powder only me, and my Name, you might
have done it without trouble or inconvenience to your self, at least from me:
such Millars in black clothing I meet with daily, and let them pass quietly by
me. But in as much as you have magnified your self, in your wrath and height of
spirit, against the Truth, yea several of the firstborn and most important
Truths of the living God, it will neither stand with that loyalty of obedience,
which I owe unto the Command of God imposed on me in that behalf, nor with that
love which I owe unto your self as a Christian Brother, to suffer such a sin to
rest upon you. The Lord God Almighty, before whom I stand, knows, that I
delight not in Contests with men: I am all desires made, for peace with all
men, and for a quiet and retired pilgrimage on Earth. So that whenever I
contend with any man, I sacrifice the darling-disposition of my Soul upon the
service of the Truth. Nor shall any man approve himself more easy to be
entreated, upon any equitable, yea or tolerable account, or more willing to
receive satisfaction from him that has offended him, then I. Therefore Sir, I
beseech you, trouble not, dishonor not your self, either with seeking out, or
with pretending to find, any other construction, meaning, or intent of this
Address unto you, then as a simple, plain-hearted, and right-christian
Application of my self, to vindicate the just right and claim of the dearly
beloved of my Soul (and I trust, of yours also) Truth.

First therefore, whereas you were pleased to take that undue liberty of
Conscience, as to affirm, That the said Book, against which you so publicly
inveighed, before you had (I fear) privately surveyed it, or that the Doctrines
or Opinions maintained therein advance carnal Reason into the Throne of God (or
words to like effect) be pleased to understand, that this was an assertion,
proceeding either from ignorance, and this extremely palpable and gross, or
else from an itching humor to asperse, and defame, though never so untruly:
both which are very evil Oracles for a Minister of the Gospel to consult about
his Pulpit affairs. And Sir, I judge that I may very Christianly expect from
you, that either you produce some passage from the said Book, wherein carnal
Reason is so magnified, as you affirmed (which I am certain you cannot do,) or
else that you make an ingenuous and free acknowledgement, that at this turn you
lost your way of dealing Christianly. That Reason, the use, exercise, and
service whereof the Preface of that Book requires of all men, in, and about
matters of Religion, is not carnal Reason, if by carnal, you mean, sensual,
worldly, blind, corrupt, or the like: but that Candle, or Lamp of the Lord (as
Solomon calls it, Prove. 20. 27.) that spiritual or inward Light, which God
himself has planted in the Souls of men, by which they are made able, though
not always willing, to search out, discover, and discern many worthy Truths, as
well concerning God himself, as, that he is, that he is good, wise, just,
powerful, etc. as in other things. It is not by carnal Reason [ i. e. by Reason
as it is made, or becomes carnal, through the wilful negligence, and sinfulness
of men] that men by the force and help of it come to discover that there is a
God, or that this God is Good, Just, etc. the carnality that cleaves to it, is
a cumber, and hinderance to it, in such actings and workings as these: but it
is by Reason, as retaining that of God in it, or such impressions of divine
Light, whereby, notwithstanding much enfeeblement and dimness contracted by the
irregularities of men in sundry kinds, it is yet able, and in some capacity,
to discover and judge of many such worthy Truths, as those mentioned. Nor does
the said Preface ascribe this ability, or capacity we speak of, unto Reason
simply considered, or as bare or mere Reason, much less, as carnal Reason, but
as super-intended, influenced, and supported, in, and about her movings and
actings, by the Spirit of God himself. Which Spirit of God seldom or never
withdraws himself, in his super-intendency over the Reasons and
Understandings of men, to such a degree, but that they are still preserved in
some capacity of searching after, finding out, and discerning aright, the
things of their eternal Peace (I mean, things essentially requisite hereunto)
until after much, and long abuse of his gracious presence and treatings with
them, by walking stubbornly against that Light of the Truth, wherewith he has
enlightened them, and those motions and secret excitements unto Righteousness,
with which he has followed them from time to time. Besides, what Reason soever
it is, which the said Preface interesseth in the discerning and judging matters
of Religion, it is so far from advancing it into the Throne of God hereby, that
it only subjecteth it to the Commands of God in this behalf, who in a thousand
places enjoyneth such duties unto men, to the performance whereof they cannot
prepare or fit themselves in the lowest degree, without the use and exercise of
their Reasons and Understandings. Therefore Sir, your Charge against the said
Book, or Preface, with the advancing of carnal Reason, in one kind or other,
but especially, into the Throne of God, is a most Unchristian, yea Unmanlike
Slander, having neither ground, nor color of ground, for the justification of
it.

Secondly, Whereas you represented (indeed, reproached) the said Opinions of
your Contest, as the great Advancers of Natures, and Adversaries to the free
Grace of God, I desire an ingenuous, fair, and Christian Account hereof also.
For certain I am (and you may readily be so too, if you please, in case you be
not as certain already) that the Scriptures lay not the least jot or tittle of
any such imputation upon them. If you plead, but Reason does; do you not give
both me and others, by this plea, just cause to judge, that you manage your
Religion by affection, or peradventure only, and reserve your Reason for
unworthy practices? But however, I shall be content to stand by the award of
Reason in the case. For certain I am, the matter being as clear as the light at
Noon day, that the said Opinions are the great Afflicters, Humblers, Abasers of
Nature (if by Nature, you mean, Nature corrupted and depraved) and withal, the
great Advancers and Magnifiers of the free Grace of God; resolving all the
shame, guilt, demerit, punishment, of all the sins that are committed under the
whole Heaven, into the corruption and depraved Wills of men; and all Acts of
Righteousness, Holiness, Faith, Repentance, etc. in the World, together with
the rewards of them, into the free, mere, undeserved Grace and Bounty of God.
Whereas your Chimerical Notions and Doctrines of a peremptory Personal
Reprobation from Eternity, of necessitating Grace, etc. do most notoriously and
manifestly burden and charge the most infinitely-pure and righteous, the most
infinitely-sweet and gracious Nature of God, both with all the shame of all the
sins and wickednesses, that are practiced in all the World, as likewise with
all the miseries, punishments, torments, which ever come to be inflicted upon
poor Creatures for such things. All the water in the Sea will not wash your
Opinions clean from the stain and horrid foulness of this abomination. They
that have attempted the washing of them, AEthiopem lavarunt, have (according to
the Proverb) but washed a Blackamoor. And as for your pretended magnifyings of
the Grace of God by your Opinions, they are nothing else but the abuse of the
simplicity and credulous weakness of inconsiderate men. For the certain Truth
is, that were the Grace of God such a thing, as you, with others of your Sense,
imperiously and importunely obtrude under that name, upon the Judgments and
Consciences of men, the Receivers of it were never the nearer Salvation for the
collation of it by God upon them. This is made manifest above all reasonable
contradiction in Page 319. of that Book which you so much abhor.

Thirdly, Whereas you, after the usual manner of those that abound in Passion,
but are scanted in Understanding, filled the ears of your Auditory with a sound
of words, purporting I know not what sad uncomfortableness in the Doctrine
about falling away (maintained in the said Book) you should have done well,
before you had condemned the innocent, not only to have heard his Cause, and
weighed his Plea, but to have given likewise some competent account (at least)
of the insufficiency and unsatisfactoriness of it. I can hardly think that you
had perused the nineth Chapter of the Book you wot of, before your definitive
sentence against the said Doctrine: because this Chapter chaseth far away that
Bugbear of uncomfortableness from before the face of that Doctrine, and lodges
it in the Heart and Soul of that Doctrine of Perseverance, which is (it seems)
the enticing Dalila of Doctor Hills Soul. I perceive that the observation of
this Rule of Christ, Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous
Judgment, is very rare amongst men.

Fourthly, Whereas you put your Auditory upon the temptation to believe, that
the nineth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, does not at all treat of
Justification by Faith, but of your Personal Reprobation from Eternity, or
(which comes to the same) of a liberty in God to choose and reprobate what
persons he pleases; and sought to make them partakers of your faith herein, by
telling them stories of v. 13, 14, etc. of this Chapter, as if they were all
words, sentences, and thoughts made for your mind in the business, I here
offer unto you in a friendly way, to confer with you at your best leisure,
about the sense and import of these Verses, either privately with your self
alone, or with two, or more, or with as few, or as many, as you please, in
presence. At this Conference I shall desire also to have the spirit of that
boasting of yours thoroughly tried, which you built upon some other Texts of
Scripture, with the slime of these, or such like words, in stead of better
mortar, viz. that whilst they stand, your Opinions cannot fall. Indeed if you
dare not trust your Reason with the managing of the Conference, but resolve to
negotiate the business with your Passion, or with affection only, I am like to
make small earnings (and your self as small) of the opportunity, were you
willing to afford it. But if you have that good Opinion of your Judgment and
Understanding, that you will allow these to treat, I make little question but
by the mediation and consent of these, I shall prevail with you, as to the
argument, or subject matter of the nineth to the Romans, to exchange your
Reprobation for my Justification, and to acknowledge, that the Apostle in this
Chapter discourses still forward that great Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, which he had (only with some occasional insertions of other matters by
the way) prosecuted (well-nigh) from the beginning of the Epistle. As for your
conceit of a Personal Reprobation from Eternity handled in the said Chapter,
you may, if you please, see the comb of the confidence thereof cut by that Hand
of Light, which is stretched forth in the 68 Page of that troublesome Book we
spoke of, where the 15 and 21 Verses of the Chapter are in part opened.
Somewhat also upon the same account is to be seen page 462. of the Book.

Fifthly, Whereas you challenged or charged your Adversaries, that they are
wont indeed to discourse other the Attributes of God, but seldom or never speak
of his Sovereignty; first, I do not remember where I ever found, no not in any
of those Authors, which you (I suppose) presume yours, the Sovereignty of God
numbered amongst his Attributes. But, 2. he his Sovereignty an Attribute, or
no, I believe it was very inconsiderately (to speak softly) affirmed by you,
that the persons you charge, seldom or never treat of it. I know none of them
(nor do you, I suppose, know any more) that omit or wave the consideration of
it, when ever any good occasion falls in their way to discourse it. Somewhat
you may find concerning the Prerogative of God (which, I presume, is either
the same, or of very near affinity, with his Sovereignty) in the Book so often
pointed at, page 67, 68 Yea the Sovereignty of God is expressly and by name
asserted in the latter of these pages.
. Indeed it is no great marvel if you find not the persons you mean speaking
much of the Sovereignty of God, as you call Sovereignty: they are not wont to
speak much of that which is not. I believe you will find that, which you
notion for Sovereignty in God, disclaimed by the great Founder and Father
himself of your Faith in your Contra-Remonstrancy, Mr Calvin I mean, in this
Passage from his own pen. Facessant ergo procul a piis mentibus monstrosae
illae speculationes, plus aliquid Deum posse, quam conveniat: vel eum sinc modo
and ratione quicquam agere. Nec vero commentum illud recipio, Deum, quia Lege
solutus sit, quicquid agat, reprehensione vacare. Deum enim qui exlegem facit,
maxima cum gloriae suae part spoliat, quia rectitudinem ejus ac justiciam
sepelit These Latin passages speak in English to this effect. Far then be such
monstrous ^culations as these from pious minds, that God can do something
more, then what is convenient; or that he does any thing without measure or
reason. Nor do I admit of that devised conceit, that God is therefore
improvable, whatsoever he does, because he is free from all Law. For he that
makes God lawless, despoileth him of the greatest part of his glory, because he
buryeth his Rectitude and justice.
Calvin. Opusc. De AEterna Dei Praedest. p. 843. I have ground to suspect, that
by your Sovereignty of God, you mean a lawlessness, or exemption from all
Reason, rectitude, or justice in acting. If so, you see you Anti Calvinize, as
well as Anti-Arminianize, yea, and that which is worse then both, you Anti
Christianize, blaspheming God by Attributing that to him, which is so
inconsistent with his glory.

Sixthly (and lastly) Whereas you reflected upon the Author of that Book, which
so torments those that dwell on the Earth, as if he falsified, wrested,
perverted Authors, after the manner of the Bishops in their days, when they
pleaded for Altars, etc. or used words of this import; the very truth is, that
this also, if it be comely to call a spade, a spade, is a pure, pute, and putid
calumny. The Authors cited in the said Book, at least the far greater part of
them, speak as clearly, as directly, as distinctly, to the heart of the main
Doctrines maintained in the Book, as the Author of the Book himself. Nor are
you, nor any other man, able to prove the least touch of any falsifying, or
perverting any one Author brought upon that stage. Si quid humanitus acciderit,
if there be any thing unwittingly mistaken (as mistakes in this kind may be
incident to the most upright of men) in any quotation, this only proves the
Author to be a man, not a falsifier. Yea, there is nothing asserted or
maintained in the said Book, especially in the two main Doctrines there
contended for, but what (for substance, and effect of matter) is plainly
affirmed, and held forth, over and over, not only by he best and most Orthodox
Fathers, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc. but by the most Orthodox Writers likewise
of later Times, as Luther, Calvin, Musculus, and others. Yea your selves, the
Preachers of this present Age, how ever by times you appear in flames of fire
against them, yet otherwhile, and sometimes in one and the same Sermon, you
give Testimony unto them. There is sufficient proof made page 561. of the Book
so impotently decryed by you, that a Jury of no fewer then 52 Preachers, and
amongst these, such as are counted Pillars, in, and about the City of London,
in the same Pamphlet, wherein (as they pretend) they give Testimony to the
Truth of Jesus Christ against Errors and Heresies, do clearly build up the
principal Doctrine avouched in the said Book, viz. that which teaches General
Redemption by Christ. Yea your self, in this very Sermon, wherein you set your
self with all the might of your indignation against it, yet gave the right hand
of fellowship unto it, in granting and affirming, that you believe and teach,
That had Judas believed, he should have been saved by Christ. See (I desire it
rather to your satisfaction, then shame) the Doctrine of General Redemption
demonstratively proved and evinced from such a Position as this, page 113, 114,
115, etc. and again, p. 135, 136. of that Truth-teaching Book, so often hinted.
Yea the Synod of Dort it self (as is somewhere observed in this Book Page 547
) acknowledges, that If Redemption be not acknowledged as a common benefit
bestowed on Mankind, that General and promiscuous Preaching of the Gospel
committed unto the Apostles to be performed among all Nations, will have no
true foundation. Therefore whilst you oppose and clamor against General
Redemption, you do not only cry down the glory of the unsearchable riches of
the free Grace of God, vouchsafed in Christ unto the World, but also quarrel
and fight your best friends, as well as those, whom you count your Adversaries,
and traduce under the Name of Pelagians, Arminians, etc. liveries made of the
same, or like cloth, which the Servants of the Truth have been compelled to
wear in all ages. Yea in such your inconsiderate Contests, you act as men
divided, in, and against your selves; and your sayings, like the children of
Ammon and Moab, when they came forth to battle against Judah and Jehosaphat,
help to destroy one another 2 Chronicles 20, 23
.

Sir, The Premises considered (with several other things of no better import,
about which notwithstanding I shall not be troublesome unto you, at the present)
I cannot but expect some Christian satisfaction from you, at least in the
behalf of those most worthy and important Truths of God, which you so
unworthily, and this standing in the place of God, traduced unto his People.
And (to deal plainly and clearly with you) the Satisfaction I expect must be
some ways commensurable to the misdemeanor, in circumstances respecting as well
the publiqueness of it, as the notoriousness and offensiveness of it, in all
particulars. I expect likewise that this Satisfaction be speedy, and without
delay: or at least that you will spedily engage your self verbo Sacerdotis,
that you will accordingly expedite the same with the first opportunity.
Otherwise I shall be necessitated to do that, which (I suppose) will not be for
your Honor; I mean, to publish in print unto the World, your Athecological
Demeanor in the Pulpit, as well in your Moral, as Intellectual Miscarriages;
and shall out of hand begin with the printing of the Contents of this Letter,
in case I hear not forthwith from you. Sir, if I knew how to relieve those
Truths of God, which you desperately affronted, there, where they suffered by
you, and may yet further suffer (I mean, in the Minds and Judgments of those
who heard you, and of those who may hear the Contents of what you delivered
upon this sad account) without making a breach upon your reputation, I should
freely pass by mine own Interest, and demand nothing of you for Personal
Reparations; although I believe that you hardly know how to provoke at much as
higher rate, then you practiced provocation upon me, in the Premises: unless
(happily) that may be some allay hereof, that you were ravished by some other
man's spirit, far worse then your own, into such a splenetique Ecstasie. For Dr
Hill has formerly worn the crown of a meek, temperate, and Christian spirit.
But we read, that Moses the Saint of the Lord, and meekest man on Earth, yet
was at the waters of strife provoked to speak unadvisedly with his lips: and I
(with many others) do believe, that Dr Hill was overshadowed with the spirit of
some Lion, or other (and which probably I could point at amongst the herd) when
he conceived those roarings (as David expresses somewhat the like carriages of
the Tongues of men, Psalm. 74. 4.) or those devouring words (another Metaphor of
the same pen) whereof he was delivered in the Pulpit, May 4. 1651. The ground
of my conjecture herein, is, partly because that which was born of him here,
had so little of his own likeness in it, partly because it had so much of the
likeness of another man. But, concerning my self, the best is, that I am
secure, that neither you, nor others, can value me at any lower rate, then I do
my self. You trod but upon the Earth, when you trampled me under your feet. If
you pursue me to the grave, you cannot hinder my Resurrection; the day whereof
will be time enough for me to become any thing. I trust you will take nothing
amiss in these lines. If there be any thing hard in them, I hope you will put
it upon your own account, not mine. The Law of Nature and Reason is, that they
who beget Children, should undergo the trouble and charge of keeping them,
prove they never so troublesome, untoward, or hard-favor'd. They that will
adventure (...) must make account to meet with that (...) which belongs to it.
Howsoever my Prayer for you is, and shall be, that God will give you Repentance
to the acknowledgment of his Truth, and your own Error.

Your Brother, and Servant in CHRIST, John Goodwin.
Colemanstreet, London, May 9. 1651.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
IF in any of the Particulars taken notice of from your Sermon, there be any
mistake in words, and much more if in substance of matter, to your
disadvantage, I shall be glad, upon better information from your self, to
rectify my self in such mistakes, and so proportionably to case your burden
of shame, and mine own of sorrow for you. I know the miscarriages of the best
and wisest of men, are too many: and far be it from me to make any man a
delinstrued with as much favor, as a good Conscience will, or can, afford. If
you can, and be willing to, disclaim, or disown, any thing in the said
Particulars, I desire to hear speedily from you upon that account: otherwise I
shall (I judge, upon sufficient ground) presume, that my Informations touching
the Premises were Orthodox and Authentic.

FINIS.

