A Plain TESTIMONY TO THE Ancient Truth AND Work of God; AND Against the
CORRUPTION of the CLERGY, And their Upholders.

By T. G.

Jer. 5. 30, 31. A Wonderful and Horrible Thing is committed in the Land; The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means, and my
People love to have it so; And what will ye do in the End thereof? Printed, and
Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1691.

A Plain Testimony to the Ancient Truth and Work of God; and against the
Corruption of the Clergy, etc.
FRiends and People every where, in all Places where this may come, this is to
let you know, there is something in my Heart and Mind for to publish, and to
make manifest unto all People that profess Christianity, and Salvation by
Christ, what the Clergymen of the World hold forth, both the Popish Clergy and
the Protestant Clergy, both in Doctrine, Principles and Practices; and also
their manner of Doings and Practices, as touching the Worship and Service of
God; and also their Persecutions and Cruelties which they and their Hearers,
and Members of their Churches have acted and done against the People of God,
who are in scorn called Quakers, and will undertake by the help and assistance
of the Lord, to prove these things to be true, which is, or may be herein, and
hereafter expressed and declared against them, which are as follows.

First, I do affirm, that neither the Popish Clergy, nor the Protestant Clergy,
nor their Hearers that are Members of their Churches, neither can, nor never
shall know Jesus Christ experimentally to be their Savior and Redeemer from
their Sins and Iniquities, as the true Ministers and People of God did know him
formerly, and as the true Ministers and People of God know him now in this our
Age and Generation, to their and our Souls true peace, joy, comfort and
satisfaction in God; neither can they ever know the Mystery of Godliness by
experience revealed in them, nor they cannot have a true belief in Christ, as
the Ministers and People of God had, and have now, so long as they live and act
in Sin, and take pleasure and delight therein, and plead for a continuance in
Sin so long as they live upon the Earth. And it is the Doctrine and Belief of
the Clergymen, before mentioned, and the People that are their Hearers, and
Members of their Churches, That none can be set free from Sin, nor be made
perfect from it in this Life; and so they preach against Perfection from Sin,
which God and Christ commanded that People should be perfect and holy; and are
God and Christ such hard Masters as to command that of People for them to do,
which cannot be done nor attained unto in this Life? But the Ministers of
Christ never preached any such Doctrine, but on the contrary, they preached
Perfection from Sin, and exhorted the People to press after Perfection; and the
Lord gave Gifts unto men, and he made some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and
some P^^ph^^^, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
and for the Work of the Ministry, and for the Edifying of the Body of Christ,
until they all came into the unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the
Son of God unto a Perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature ^f the fullness
of Christ. And many of the People of God did attain to Perfection from Sin in
this Life, and they did know an Overcoming of their Sins and Iniquities in this
Life, by the help and assistance of the Power and Spirit of Christ working in
them: And no Man nor Woman can be perfect from Sin of themselves, nor by any
Works of Righteousness which they can do of themselves, nor by their own Wills,
but by the help and assistance of the Power and Spirit of Christ working in
them; and so all things are possible with God, which may seem impossible to
men; and the Lord is the same that he was then, and he is as able, and
sufficient, and willing to do the like for us, and to work the same Works in
our Hearts by his holy Spirit, as he did in the Hearts of his People formerly,
if we do but truly believe in him, and be willing for to obey and follow him,
by taking up a daily Cross to our own Wills, and Thoughts, and Desires, and
Inclinations of nature, and so thereby we must deny our selves from doing any
thing that will please our selves, if it do offend the Lord, and displease him,
we must not do it for the gaining of the love and friendship of any people, nor
for the gaining of any outward Thing, or Treasure that is in the World: And we
are required and commanded by the Lord for to put our whole trust and
confidence in him, who has promised, that he will never leave nor forsake them
that puts their whole trust and confidence in him. And these things the Lord
commanded and required ^is people for to do formerly, which they did in Love
and in Obedience to him, and the Lord was with them, and in them, by his holy
Spirit, and he did help and (...) Spirit for to do and perform those things
(...) required of them for to do; and this he (...)d truly believe and follow
him, and for all them (...) fear and love him with all their Hearts, above all
(...)gs. And now the Lord commands and requires us for to do the (...) things;
and if we be willing and obedient to him, and fear and love him with all our
Hearts, above all visible things, I do verily believe, and I am confident in
the Lord, that he will help and assist us by his holy Spirit for to do and
perform all things which he commands and requires of us for to do and perform,
now in this our Age and Generation; but all them that do not truly believe in
Christ, nor is not willing for to obey and follow him, nor to deny themselves
as aforesaid, and counts God a hard Master, by commanding and requiring more of
them then they are able to do, or can be attained unto in this Life, as they
say; it is manifest unto the Lord and his People, that all such are slothful
Servants, and hide their Talents in their earthly Hearts, and are disobedient
to him, such neither fear nor love the Lord as they ought to do, nor as ^e
commands them for to do; and no such slothful, idle, careless people can
believe that Perfection from Sin is to be attained unto in this Life, neither
are they willing to press after such a good State and Condition; and so he who
they love and serve, which is the Enemy of their Souls in them, prevails
against them, and teaches them for to preach and speak against Perfection from
Sin in this Life; read the Scriptures following, Genesis 6. 9. 17. 1. Job 1. 1.
Luke 1. 5, 6. Mark 6. 20. Mat. 1. 19. Acts 10. 22. 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2 King. 20. 1,
2, 3. Mat. 5. 48. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Heb. 6. 1. Heb. 13. 20, 2^. Rev. 14. 2,
3, 4, 5. 1 John 2. 14. Chap 3. 4. to verse. 11. And further I do affirm, that
all that preach and speak against Perfection from Sin, and say, That there is
no Perfection from Sin can be attained unto in this Life; all such Persons and
People do encourage People for to live in Sin, and they do discourage people
from pressing after perfection, and they are a means to beget people into
Unbelief, that they may not believe that such a good state and condition is to
be attained unto in this Life; and all such deny the sufficiency of Christ, and
the end of his coming in Spirit, into the Hearts and Souls of all true
Christians, and true Believers in him; which end was, and is, for to mortify,
and to kill, and crucify Sin, and to destroy the Works of the Devil, which is
Sin and Iniquity in people; and every evil Plant which the Lord has not
planted, which has taken deep Root in people's hearts, the Lord will pluck up
by the working of his own Power and Spirit in the hearts of all true
Christians, and true Believers and Followers of Christ, who truly love and obey
him; and this great Work of Christ must be known and witnessed for to be done
and wrought by him in every true Christian, before Christ can be known
experimentally for to reign and rule in the hearts and souls of people: And
these things are a mystery unto all that live in Sin, and take pleasure and
delight therein, and unto all the proud and covetous Clergy that are in the
whole World, that preach for Tithes or Money, and are hired by people to preach
for so much Money by the Year, which the true Apostle Paul said, That the love
of Money was the Root of all Evil; And the true Ministers of Christ hated all
such covetous Practices, and declared against them; and Paul said, I have
coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; ye your selves know, said he,
that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and to them that were with
me: Who was a Tent-maker, he was not brought up at any Schools of Learning for
to be made a Minister of Christ; nor none of the Ministers of Christ were
brought up at any Schools of Learning, to be made Ministers of Christ, but
several of them were ignorant and unlearned men, as to outward Learning and
Scholarship, which people do so much boast of; but they were brought up at
Christ's School, and they were taught of him by his holy Spirit, and they were
endued with Power from on High; and they were led and guided by Christ's Spirit
into all Truth, and out of all the wicked and ungodly Ways and Practices, which
many of the Clergymen, and of their Hearers before mentioned, live and walk in
now. And the Apostle Paul said, That the Gospel which he preached, be neither
received of Man, neither was he taught it of Man, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, and he preached not unto any people with enticing Words of man's
Wisdom, nor of man's Learning; but he preached and spoke unto the people in the
Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power, that their Faith should not stand
in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God; and Christ made them able
Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the
Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life unto the Soul: And so the Ministers
of Christ never preached such a Doctrine, as these covetous Clergymen do now:
Read these Scriptures, Galatians. 1. 11, 12. Acts 2^ 33, 34. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 1
Cor. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And you that preach and
speak against Perfecti^n (...) Sin, and say, none can be set free from Sin in
this Life, can you not believe that Christ Jesus is as able, and sufficient,
and willing to save people from their Sins, and to bring them to a perfect
state from Sin, according as God created Man and Woman in the beginning, as the
Devil who is the author of all Sin and Evil, who makes his Children and
Servants perfect in Sin and Wickedness, who continue to the end of their days,
to obey and follow him, and are led and guided by his spirit into Sin and Evil,
and his evil Fruits are brought forth, and acted and done daily by his Children
and Servants, to the great dishonor of God, who made Man and Woman for to
love, fear, serve and honor, and obey him, in Truth and Righteousness, and to
live and walk before the Lord, in a holy, godly, righteous Life, in all manner
of Holiness and Righteousness, in our holy Lives and godly Conversations, so
long as the Lord is pleased that we shall live upon the Earth, that so God
Almighty may be honored and glorified in us, and by us, that so we may answer
the end for which he has made and created us, which is to fear and love him
with all our Hearts, which if we do so in Truth, then we shall be made willing
by the Lord for to obey him, and keep his commands, which is the duty of every
one so to do.

And now, all you that do not believe that Perfection from Sin can be attained
unto, and that not any can be set free from Sin in this Life, does not your
Faith and Belief stand in him who is the author of all Sin and Evil, which is
the wicked Spirit? And your faith and belief stands not in Christ, who is the
Author of Perfection from Sin, who is the good Spirit, and saves his People
from their Sins, but not in their Sins; and Christ said, Whosoever commits
Sin, is the Servant of Sin. And the Apostle Paul said, Know ye not to whom ye
yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye do obey,
whether of Sin that leads to Death and Destruction, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness, which leads to Life and Peace with the Lord. And so long as
People live in Sin, and are Servants to it, they are free from Righteousness;
and the Apostle John said, He that commiteth Sin is of the Devil: and he said,
He that is born of God sins not. Read these Scriptures, John 8. 34. Romans 6.
16, 17. to the end, 1 John 3. 4. to verse. 11. And all that believe that they
cannot be set free from Sin so long as they live in this World, they know
nothing of the New Birth experimentally, no more than Nicodemus did, which was
a Ruler of the Jews; nor no such persons nor people that plead for living in
Sin term of Life, they know nothing by expe^^ence what it is for to be
Regenerated, and Born again of Water and the Spirit, without which inward
spiritual knowledge they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and they that
are born of God by the Water and Spirit of Life, they are not Servants to Sin,
neither will any such plead for Sin, nor for a continuance in it as long as
they live; but all such Persons and People that are born of God, as aforesaid,
they hate Sin, and every appearance of it, in Thoughts, Words and Actions, both
in themselves and in all other people, where they see Sin committed, acted or
done; and those that are born of God by his Spirit, they are in Christ, and he
is in them spiritually, and they are made new Creatures by the working of
Christ's spirit in their hearts and souls; and all old things that are evil,
which is Sin and Iniquity, comes to be taken away and destroyed, and all things
are made new by the workings of the Power and Spirit of Christ in the hearts of
all the Children of Light, who are true Believers and Followers of Christ
through the Spiritual Warfare, and through great Tribulations, and Trials, and
Exercises, which the People of the Lord come to know, and to pass through,
before they attain to Perfection from all their Sins; and it is said, That many
are the Troubles of the Righteous, and through many Tribulations must they
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but the Lord is all-sufficient for to help
his People out of all their Troubles and Trials, both inward and outward, those
that puts their whole trust and confidence in him: And he has done great
things for many of his people now in our Age and Generation, which have been
under great Troubles, Sufferings and Trials, both inward and outward, for which
we have just cause, and we are bound in duty to bless and praise the Name of
the Lord, and to return unto him all Honor, Glory, Praise, Thanks, Fear,
Reverence and true Obedience; for unto the Lord alone it does belong, both from
me, and from all that knows him, who have tasted of his Love and Mercies,
blessed and praised be his great and glorious, and heavenly Name, both now,
henceforth for ever, and for evermore. Read these Scriptures, John 3. 1. to
verse. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Acts 14. 22. 2 Cor. 1. 3. 44. Chap. 10. 3. 4. 1. 45.
And so the true Way that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven, is a strait and narrow
way, for it is a way of Holiness, Righteousness and Purity, and a way wherein
all people must deny themselves of doing any evil thing that will offend the
Lord, or displease him, and therefore there are but a few that find it, and
walk in it: and Christ's Flock is but a little Flock, in comparison of the
multitude of people that are in the World, but the way that leads to Hell and
Destruction, and so into everlasting Torment and Misery which shall never come
to an end; this is a broad and wide way, and it is easy, and delightful, and
pleasant, to all fleshly carnal minded people for to walk in: And all those
people that live and act in Sin and Evil, and take pleasure and delight
therein, and deny Perfection from Sin in this Life, all such persons and people
are going on in the broad and wide way, that will lead them into everlasting Woe
and Misery, unless they repent. And therefore it is my Advice and Counsel unto
all people that now live and delight in Sin and Evil, as you tender the glory
of God, and the good and well-being of your Immortal Souls, come out of all
your ungodly ways and doings, and Repent and forsake the Evil of your ways and
doings, and desire the Lord to pardon you for all your Sins and Transgressions,
which yon have acted and done against him; and turn unto the Lord, and fear and
love him with all your hearts, and hate Sin and Evil, and every appearance of
it, both in your selves, and in all others, that thereby you may come to know a
Change, and a Reformation to be wrought in your hearts by the Power and Spirit
of Christ in you, and this is the only way and means for you to find
Forgiveness, and Mercy, and Acceptance with the Lord for your poor Souls; which
if you so do, and find, it will be of more worth and value to you that find it,
then all the outward enjoyments of Honor, or Riches, or Pleasures that are in
the World.

And now I shall mention, and lay before you some of the Cruelties and bloody
Persecutions of these Clergymen, before mentioned, and some of their Hearers,
and Members of their Churches, which have joined with them in their Cruelties,
and bloody Persecutions, and shall begin with the Popish Clergy, and some of
the Members of their Church; first, It is well known to many People what their
Doctrine, and Principles, and Practices are, and what it leads and guides them
for to do and act, in those Places and Countries where they have the Rule and
Power in outward things; as for instance, They do believet at all people which
are not of their Faith and Religion are Sectaries and Heretics, though they be
called Christians, as I can make appear by their own Books, which they have set
forth; and then this has followed by their practices, that the more Heretics
they kill and destroy, many of them think they do God more service, and count
it a Meritorious Work, although the people which they have killed and murdered
were no Heretics, but good Christians, many of them, and were faithful to God
in what he manifested and made known unto them in their Age and Time; As for
instance, How many of these good people aforesaid, have these Popish bloody
Clergymen, and the Members of their Church, caused for to be but and destroyed
in Queen Mary's Reign, because they could not for good Conscience Sake submit
and conform to their Idolatrous Ways and Worships, which were never ordained by
the Lord, nor never such a Doctrine nor Practice was ever preached, nor
practiced by any of the Ministers of Christ. And so this Doctrine and Practice,
which was and is preached and practiced by the Popish Clergy, and the Members
of their Church, was ordained and set up by the Devil and his Ministers, and
not by Christ nor his Ministers, as appears plainly by their Wicked Actions and
Practices, aforesaid. And I shall mention more of their Cruelties and Murders,
as for instance, How many Thousands of Protestants did they kill and murder in
Ireland, even at such a time when the Protestants were peaceable and quiet, and
did not lift up a hand against them; and the Devil in those Murderers did
invent such Cruel Tortures and Punishments to put them to Death, as scarce has
been heard of amongst the Heathens, which are no Christians; and yet
notwithstanding they have the boldness and confidence, for to call themselves
Christians, and say, Christ is their Savior: but Christ hates and abhors all
such Murders and Cruelties, as are found acted and done amongst them: And
Christ came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them. And here people may
see that these aforesaid, are not acted nor guided by the Spirit of Christ, but
by the spirit of the Devil, who was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning.

And now I shall mention and lay before you some of the Cruelties and great
Persecutions of the Presbyterian Clergy, and some of their Hearers and Members
of their Church, both in Old England, and in New England, which they have acted
and done against the People of God, who are in scorn called by the World
Quakers; first, they have cast many of us into Prisons, and there they have
kept several until they dyed, and by their means and doings they have taken
away the Goods and Chattels of many of our Friends, both Rich and Poor, to the
value of many Thousands of Pounds; and this they did in Oliver Cromwell's time,
and they proceeded against us for not paying of them Tithes, and Money for
Preaching, by a Law which gave them trebble Damage; and they caused evil men
for to come into our Houses and Grounds for to distrain our Goods and Chattels,
which they did several times, and sold our Goods and Chattels, and gave the
Money to those Tything Hireling-Priests; and they sold our Goods and Chattels
at an undervalue; and they took many times Goods and Chattels from us, which
were worth above five times more than they called their due; and thus they have
done to many of us. And they have cast several into Prisons for less than
eighteen Pence a piece, at their own valuation, which they said was their due;
and thus they have ruinated several of our Friends, and their Families
aforesaid, in their Estates, besides the Cruelties which they have Inflicted
upon our Bodies, in casting many of us into Prisons, and there they kept many
until they dyed; and thus Cruelly, with much more Cruelties, which are here too
tedious to mention, have they acted and done against us, because we could not
for good Conscience sake uphold them in their ungodly Ways and Practices, as to
pay them Tithes, and Money for their Preaching, as Ministers of Christ, as they
and the people that hear them, call and account them to be: but Christ came to
put an end to that Law, and Priesthood, and Covenant, by which Tithes were
paid in the time of the Law and first Covenant, and has abolished it; read
Heb. 7. 8, 9, 10. And where do ye find, or read in all the Scriptures of Truth,
that any of the true Ministers of Christ took Tithes, or Money for their
preaching? Or did ever any of the true Believers and Followers of Christ pay
Tithes? And whosoever they be that either take Tithes, or pay Tithes, denis
Christ to be come, and the end of his coming, so as to yield obedience unto
him, by doing that which he requires of them.

And now I have something more to mention of the Wickedness, and Cruelties, and
Murders of the Presbyterian Clergy, and the Professors and Members of their
Church in New England, against the people of God, called in scorn Quakers;
first, they cast many in Prison, and they Whipped many in a cruel manner, both
Men and Women, (...) their naked Bodies; and they took away the Goods and (...)
of many of the people aforesaid, and they Branded and Burnt them with Hot
^^ons, and they Cut off the Ears of some, and B^nished them; And all these
Cruelties, with much more, which are not here mentioned, which they acted and
did against the people aforesaid, would not sati^fie their blood-thirsty Spirit.

And now I desire all true Christians, who are true Believers and Lovers of
Christ, to consider and take notice of all these Cruelties and Murders
aforesaid, and see if these Clergymen and People aforesaid, be not acted and
guided by the same Spirit now that the Highpriests, and Chief Priests, and
Scribes and Pharisees were, when Christ was upon the Earth; and they had a form
of Godliness, and professed Scriptures, and they made long Prayers, and made
clean the outside, and appeared righteous in the sight of men, but their hearts
were deceitful, and full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity, as many of the Priests and
Professors of Religion are found to be now, by their evil Lives and
Conversations in this world: And was there any greater Enemies to Christ Jesus,
when he was upon the Earth, then those Highpriests and Chief Priests, and
Scribes and Pharisees were then? And they sought every way they could for to
destroy Christ and his Ministers, and sought false Witness against them for to
have them put to Death: and Christ and some of his Ministers were put to death
by means of such wicked ungodly Priests and Professors of Religion as
aforesaid, which had a form of Godliness, but they were absolute Enemies to
thse that lived in the Life and Power of Godliness; as these Priests, and
Professors, and People are now; and many of these now are absolute Enemies to
the Children of Light, and all that do truly believe and own the Spiritual
Appearance of Christ in their hearts, as to obey and follow it, who was and is
the true Light and Life of all true Christians, and true Believers in him in
all Ages and Generations that are past and gone; and all such Christians and
true Believers in him, who do obey and follow the Light and Spirit of Christ in
their hearts, they do, and will receive power daily for to forsake their Sins
and Iniquities; and the same Light and Spirit will beget a perfect hatred in
their Hearts against all Sin, and every appearance of it, both in themselves,
and in all others, where they see Sin acted or done: And whosoever does truly
love and (...) Light and Spirit of Christ in themselves, which shows them Sin,
and reproves them for it in secret, when they either think, speak or act any
thing that is Evil, it will teach and help them to forsake Sin, and every
appearance of Sin, according as the Lord does manifest Sin unto them: And
whosoever does truly believe in this Light and good Spirit of Christ, which
shows people their Sins, and reproves them in their own Hearts and Consciences,
when they do sin against God, if they do truly love, and obey, and follow this
Light and good Spirit in them, it is sufficient in its self, without the help
of vain sinful men, which preach against Perfection from Sin in this Life; I
say again, it is sufficient, and there is help and power enough in it, for to
lead and guide all people out of their Sins, and to give them power to forsake
all their Sins and Iniquities by degrees, all that are willing to deny
themselves of all their sinful Ways and Pleasures, and so become obedient to
this Light and Spirit of Christ in them; and this Light and Spirit the Lord
has given a measure of it freely to every one for to profit withal; and it is
sufficient for to teach all People that truly believe in it, and obey it, and
is willing to be taught by it, it will teach them to deny all ungodly Thoughts,
Words and Actions; and it will teach them to live soberly, justly, godly, and
righteously in this present world; and it will teach them for to do unto all
People, as they would be done unto themselves; and it will teach them for to
deal, and to do justly to all men, and to love and show mercy unto all People,
and to walk in Lowliness, and in true Humility before the Lord; and these
things the Lord requires of every one, and it is the duty of every one so to
do. And now if this good Spirit of Christ did bear rule in every ones Heart, it
would lead and guide them in all Truth and Righteousness, and it would lead and
bring them out of all the wicked and ungodly Ways, and Worships, and evil
Practices which are acted and done amongst all the Sons and Daughters of men,
which are now in the fall, and live in Sin and Transgression against God, and
so are found to be in the unregenerate state, and such are dead in their Sins
and Trespasses, though their Bodies be alive in this World: and if this good
Spirit aforesaid did bear rule in every Heart, there would not be that Killing
nor Destroying one another, neither about Religion, nor no earthly thing
whatsoever; and therefore I would have all People to take notice, that there
are two Spirits, a good Spirit, and an evil Spirit; and the good Spirit comes
from God, and the evil Spirit comes from the Devil; and the good Spirit leads
People up to God, to have fellowship and communion with him in spirit, in their
hearts and souls; and this is the only Communion which is spiritual, that is
alone necessary and needful for every one to know in truth, as to their
Everlasting Happiness with the Lord, when time here in this World shall be no
more to them. And the evil Spirit draws and leads people from God, into all
manner of Sin and Wickedness, some into one kind of Sin, and some into other
kind of Sin; so that all People upon the Earth are Sinners, and live in Sin so
long as this evil Spirit guides and bears rule in their hearts, and every one
is a Servant to whether of these two Spirits he does obey; and to whether of
these two Spirits be yields his Members servants unto, his Servants they are to
whom they do obey, whether it be unto that spirit which leads them into Sin and
Evil, which is the wicked Spirit, or it be that they do obey the good Spirit,
which leads and guides all them that are led and guided by it, into all Truth
and Righteousness, and out of all Sin and Iniquiry; And whosoever has not the
Spirit of Christ, they are none of his, let them profess what they will, or be
of what Judgment or Religion soever, if they have not the Spirit of Christ in
them for to teach, and instruct, and counsel them, they are none of Christ's
Servants nor Ministers; read these Scriptures, Romans 8. 6. to verse. 15. Romans 6.
12. to the end, 1 John 3. 4. to verse. 11. Tit. 2. 11. to the end, John 1. 1. to
verse. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 7. And all them that do love and believe in the Light and
Spirit of Christ in them, which shows them Sin, and reproves them in their own
Hearts and Consciences, many times when they do sin, insomuch that I have heard
several people say, when they have sinned, I pray God forgive me; when as at
that time no Person outwardly did speak to them; but it was the Light and
Spirit of Christ in them, that showed them that they had sinned against the
Lord at that time; and whosoever minds and takes heed to that Light and Spirit
of Christ in them, and believes in it, so as to obey and follow it, it will not
only show them their Sins and evil Deeds which they have done and committed
against the Lord; but it will beget a perfect hatred against all Sin in them,
that do truly love and believe in this Light and good Spirit aforesaid, and it
will beget secret cries and breathings unto the Lord, in their hearts and souls,
that he would be pleased to pardon them, and to give them power for the time to
come to forsake the evil of their Ways and Doings; that they might never sin
against the Lord any more; and this has been my state and con^^^ion, and many
more of the People of God; and now we can say in truth, to the praise and glory
of the Lord it is spoken, that we that were Sinners and Unbelievers, and were
dead in Sins and Trespasses in days and years that are past and gone, as well
as others; and then at that time when we were in that sad and miserable state
and condition, as aforesaid, the Lord was pleased out of his infinite love,
mercy and goodness, for to reveal and make known himself unto us, even at that
time when we were Enemies, Aliens and Strangers unto him by wicked Works, which
we had done against the Lord, notwithstanding all our Profession of Religion,
and fair pretenses which we made, that we did love the Lord, and believe in
him, and did worship and serve him, as we thought then; but it pleased the Lord
of his great love and kindness to us to appear in our hearts, by his Light and
good Spirit, which he manifested and revealed in us at that time; and the Lord
was pleased by his Light and Spirit for to search our hearts, and to let us see
the deceit and the evil that was in our hearts, by reason of Sin and Iniquity,
which the Enemy of our Souls, (which is the wicked spirit) had wrought in our
hearts, and we knew it not, when we lived in our sins, and took pleasure and
delight therein; and so instead of denying our selves from doing those things,
which did offend and displease the Lord, we did those things which did offend
him and grieve his holy Spirit, as too many do now; and when we did those
things which grieved the Lord, we did not then walk in the strait and narrow
way that leads to Life and Peace with the Lord; but we were then walking in the
broad and wide way that leads to Hell and Destruction, which many Thousands are
now walking in, that live in their sins, and take pleasure and delight therein;
but now the Lord out of his free love, and grace, and mercy has called us out
of the evil of the World, and the vain Conversation that people live and walk
in, both Professors and Profane, and he has revealed and made known his Mind
and Will unto us, what he would have us for to do, and what he requires of us,
which is to live the Lord with all our Hearts, above all visible things that
are in the World; and also to fear, serve, honor and obey him in Truth and
Righteousness, and to do justly with all men, and to love Mercy and walk Humbly
with God; and now we find that the Lord has made a Remnant of us freely
willing for to serve and obey him, and to do his Will in what he makes known
unto us, in all things which he commands and requires of us for to do. And this
great Work which the Lord has already wrought in our hearts, and the great
things which he has done for us, and in us, by his Power and Spirit, he has
not done it for any goodness, or worthiness, or any deserts which he saw in us,
nor for any Works of Righteousness which we have done, whereby to move, or to
engage the Lord for to do these great things, either for us, or in us; but he
has done all these things for his own Name sake, and in love to our immortal
Souls, and out of his free Love, and Mercy, and Kindness to us, for which we
are bound in duty, and are engaged to return unto the Lord all Honor, Glory,
Praise, Thanks, Love, Fear, Reverence and Obedience; for unto him alone it does
belong, both from me, and from all that know how good and gracious he is, and
has been unto them, who is God over and above all, blessed and praised be his
great, holy, and heavenly Name, both now henceforth, for ever, and for
evermore; Amen.

And now I would have all People to take notice, where this may come, that all
Persons and People that despise and reject the Light and Spirit of Christ in
them, which shows them their Sins, and reproves them in secret when they do
evil, and say, It is but a natural Light, and that it is not sufficient, nor
has power to save people from their sins, nor to keep and preserve them out of
sin, all such are Unbelievers, and hate Christ, and love their evil Deeds; for
Christ is that Light and good Spirit in them, and he has given a measure of it
freely to every one to profit withal: and all them that truly love and believe
in this Light and good Spirit in them, and is willing for to obey and follow
it, all such will come to know Salvation and Redemption by Christ from their
Sins and Iniquities; but all those that hate, and despise, and reject the
Counsel and Teaching of this Light and good Spirit in them, and so slight and
undervalue it, and count it a thing of naught, it will be the Condemnation of
all such, and the Lord will be found just when he comes to judge them; and this
Light and good Spirit in them will bear witness against them when they come to
Judgment, which will be more than a hundred Witnesses outwardly; read these
Scriptures, John 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. chap. 8. 12. chap. 12. 46. chap. 3. 19, 20,
21. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 3. 11. Chap. 1. 27, 28. And I do verily believe, that
there is and shall be a Resurrection, both of the Just and Unjust without
respect of Persons, w(...) just God of Heaven and Earth, for to give (...) all
their Deeds and Actions which they have (...) time, and every one shall receive
a Reward from God, (...) their Deeds which they have done in their Bodies,
whether they be good or evil. And now it concerns both me, and every one for to
prise our time, which the Lord is pleased to give to us to live upon the Earth,
that we may walk circumspectly and wisely, in the wisdom of God, before the
Evil day come, which will certainly come upon the Wicked and Ungodly, that live
and dye in their Sins and Iniquities: And it is the true desire of my Heart and
Soul, that we may all spend our time which the Lord gives us to live upon the
Earth to Gods honor and glory, by bringing forth good Works and Actions in our
holy Lives and godly Conversations, to the praise and honor of his great and
worthy Name, that so we may answer the end for which God has made and created
us, which is to love him with all our Hearts, and to fear, serve, honor and
obey him in Truth and Righteousness, whereby God Almighty may be honored and
glorified, both in us and by us, who is worthy to have all the Honor, Glory,
Praise, Thanks, Fear and true Obedience, for unto him alone it does belong,
both from me, and from all that know the Lord how good he is to them, both now
and for ever, and for evermore; Amen. Read these Scriptures, Romans 14. 12. 2
Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 22. 12.

And now I shall come to mention something of the Cruelties and Persecutions of
the Episcopal Clergy, who are Teachers of the People of the Church of England,
so called, and some of their Hearers and Members of their Church that assisted
them in their Cruelties; first, they Imprisoned many Hundreds of the People of
the Lord, called in scorn Quakers; and by their means we were put into nasty
Holes and Dungeons amongst Thieves and Murderer; and some of us were Fettered
and Chained with Irons on both Legs as they do to the worst of Malefactors; and
our Friends and Acquaintance were not suffered for to come to see us, although
some of our Friends did come a Hundred Miles or more, for to see us, and
neither they nor we could be suffered to see one another; and they have gone
away without seeing of us; nor there was not any suffered to come to relieve
us, nor to help us to such things for our Money as we stood in great need of;
nor we were not suffered to have any manner of Bedding brought in, not so much
as a little Straw to lie upon, to keep us off the cold Ground, although we
would have paid for it: and this was worse Cruelty than many use to their Dogs
and Swine: And so the Goalers would force us to buy Victuals of them at their
own rate, or else we must have none, which was dearer by half then we might
have had it of other People, if we could have been suffered to buy it at best
hand; and there many were kept in Prisons until they dyed, by reason of such
Cruel Usage as aforesaid. And these Clergymen caused many of our Houses to be
rifled, and they went into the Grounds, and took and carried away out of our
Houses and Grounds much Goods and Chattels several times, which they sold at an
undervalue, less by half than they were worth: And they took away Goods and
Chattels from many of us, which were worth above five times more than they
could prove to be their due; and they distrained all the Goods in some Houses,
and left them not a Bed to lie upon, neither for the Man of the House, nor his
Wife, Children nor Servants, although some of the men's Wives, which had their
Houses so rifled and plundered, was but newly delivered of a Child, or Children;
and so they took no Pity, nor showed no Mercy neither to Men, Women or
Children, that were in such a state and condition as aforesaid: And thus they
have Ruinated several Persons and their Families, by taking away their Goods
and Chattels, which they and their Families should have lived upon: They did
live very well and comfortably before these wicked ungodly Clergymen, and the
Upholders of them came upon them thus to destroy them. And they have taken away
Goods and Chattels from us worth many Thousands of Pounds. And all these
Cruelties and Wickedness they have done and acted against us, is only because
we could not for good Conscience Sake pay them Tithes, and Money for their
Preaching, as Ministers of Christ, which we know in our own Hearts and
Consciences, and also by the Scriptures of Truth, that neither Christ, nor his
true Ministers, never ordained any such wages, nor they never practiced any
such things, nor never took Tithes nor Money for their Preaching, nor never
preached such a Doctrine as these Tything Hireling-Priests do now: But on the
contrary, they denied all such ungodly ways and practices, and spoke against
them, and said, That Covetousness is Idolatry, and the love of Money is the
Root of all Evil; And, that these things ought not to be done, nor practiced
amongst the Ministers of Christ; and as the Apostle Paul said, so say we, If
any one Preach any other Gospel, or any other Doctrine, than that which the
Ministers of Christ preached unto the People formerly, let him be accursed. And
the Ministers of Christ were endued with Power f^^^ on High, and they were
taught of Christ; and the Gospel which they preached, they neither received is
of man, neither were they taught it of man, neither did they learn it at any
outward Schools of humane Learning; neither did they buy it for Money; but the
Lord did reveal it unto them by his holy Spirit, which He gave unto them
freely; and so they Preached freely without any Tithes or Money: neither did
they go to Law, nor compel, nor cast any sort of People into Prison, because
they gave them not Tithes nor Money for their preaching. And therefore I do
affirm, that all the Priests and Clergymen that, are in the whole World, that
either preach or teach to any sort of People for either Tithes or Money, or
both, they are all guilty before the Lord of that great Sin of Covetousness,
and the love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil; besides many other great
Sins which they are guilty of in the sight of God: And the Wicked and the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, nor any Covetous Man, who is
an Idolater, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, or of God. Read
these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. Col. 3. 5. 6. Heb. 13.
5. Luke 12. 15.

And whereas many of you Clergymen, and others, have falsely accused us, in
saying, That we deny Authority, and will not be subject nor obedient to
Authority, etc. To which I Answer, not only for my self but in the behalf of my
Friends, who are in scorn called Quakers; And this I can certainly say, and
declare unto all sorts of People, that we do really own and honor Authority in
our Hearts, such who are Men of Truth, and hate Covetousness, and all such as
punish Evil-Doors, and encourage them that do Well; and all such Magistrates as
these I do believe are ordained and appointed of God to be a Terror to the
Wicked, and them that do Evil: and such are a means to hinder the Wicked form
acting such gross Wickedness as many of them would do, if it were not for fear
of an outward Law, and of such Magistrates as they know will punish them for
their Offenses; and such Magistrates as those, that are a means for to
encourage and strengthen people in doing that which is good, and to suppress
Vice, We are willing for to be subject and obedient to them in all things that
are Temporal, which is lawful and expedient to be done: And all those
Magistrates which now bear Rule, or may hereafter come to bear Rule amongst us,
we can promise and engage unto them, That we will never Plot, nor Contrive any
Evil thing against them, nor any of them, whereby to hurt or wrong them any
manner of way: We shall never rise up in Rebellion against any Governor or
Government whatsoever, as to sight against them with any Carnal Weapon; and if
they should be su^fered to make Laws against us, as many have done formerly,
and command us to d^^ at which we know is a Sin against the Lord, if we do it;
or if they should require any thing of us, which we cannot do for Conscience
sake, yet notwithstanding we shall not resist them by force of Arms, but by the
help of the Lord, I hope, we shall be made willing by him for to give up our
Bodies and Estates to suffer for Christ's sake, whatsoever the Lord may suffer
them to do against us. And this the People of God did in all Ages, that were
and are faithful and obedient to him in what he manifested unto them; as for
instance, Did not the Rulers Imprison Peter and John, and afterward they
threatened to punish them, and commanded them, That they should not speak nor
teach to any man in the Name of Jesus; And they answered, and said unto them,
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye? And they said further, We cannot but speak the things which we have
seen and heard: And they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing
that they were worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ; and daily in the
Temple, and in every House where they came, they ceased not to Teach and Preach
Jesus Christ. And the Rulers, and Chief Priests and Pharisees, and such like
wicked People, persecuted many of the Ministers of Christ, and did imprison and
abuse them exceedingly; and some they killed, only for preaching the Gospel,
and speaking against their ungodly Ways and evil Practices which they lived and
walked in; yet notwithstanding they could not put them to silence by all their
Cruelties and Persecutions which they inflicted upon them, neither could they
hinder them that were living from preaching the Gospel. And so it is good for
every one of us to be faithful unto the Lord in what he makes known unto us,
and trust him, and be willing to give up to suffer for his sake, if he calls us
thereunto, and he will appear in his own good time for our deliverance, out of
all our Troubles and Trials, both inward and outward, wherein we shall have
cause to bless and praise the Name of the Lord, for his great love and kindness
to us, who is worthy to have all the Honor Glory, Praise and Thanks; for unto
him alone it does belong, both from me, and from all that know him
experimentally, both now and for evermore. Read these Scriptures, (...) and
Chap. (...). Acts 4. and Chap. 6. 8. verse. to the end. Ac^ 7. 5^. verse. to the
end.

And now I shall men^ion something concerning false Prophets, who they are, an^
now they may be known, because such things have been cast upon (...) that have
spoken in our Meetings, that They were false Prophets, and if it were possible,
they would deceive the very Elect, etc. To which I Answer, That there is not
any Person or People that live and walk in Sin, and take pleasure and delight
therein, and plead for a continuance in it (...) term of Life, and say, That
there is none can be set free from Sin in this Life. that can witness any thing
of their Election by the working of Christ's Spirit in them; and all such are
deceived already by the deceitfulness of Sin, which bears rule in the Hearts of
all the Children of Disobedience, who are disobedient to the Light and Spirit
of Christ in them; and suell are in the broad way that leads to Destruction,
and are in the state of Reprobation and Condemnation: But the true Prophets
which the Lord sent, prophesied freely, without either taking Tithes or Money,
and they prophesied truly that which came to pass; and they bore witness
against the false Prophets and false Shepherds, that prophesied for Money and
Hire; as for instance, read Isa. 55. 1. 2, 3. Chap. 56. 10, 11. And Isaiah was
a true Prophet, and sent of God, and he did (as I may say) comparatively, make
as it were a Proclamation, and says, Ho, every ^re that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come buy Wine
and Milk without Money and without Price. And he says unto the People,
Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for
that which satisfies not; Hearken diligently unto me, says the Lord, (by that
true Prophet) and eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self
in Fatness. Here People may see how the Lord by his true Prophet invites every
one for to come to the Waters, and buy and eat freely, that which is good for
their Souls, without Money and without Price; and he exhorts them that they
should not spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor for
that which would not satisfy their thirsty Souls. And now the generality of
people are spending and giving their Money for that which is not the Bread of
Life, neither will it satisfy any hungry thirsty Soul that truly hungers and
thirsts after the Lord and his Righteousness. And this true Prophet called the
false Prophets and false Shepherds, which spoke and prophesied for Money, dumb
Dogs, greedy Dogs, which can never have enough, and they all look to their own
way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter: And he told them that they were
blind and ignorant, and so they did not understand the things of God. And now
if people be not wilfully blind and ignorant, you may see that there is as much
difference between the true Prophets of God, and the true Ministers of Christ,
and the false Prophets and false Minstors, that either preach or prophecy for
Tithes, or Money, or both, as there is betwixt Light and Darkness.

And now I have something to propound unto all you Clergymen, before
mentioned, which do profess, and say, that you are true Believers and Ministers
of Christ, and that you follow Christ and his Ministers for your Example; and
that the Scriptures are your Rule and Guide for to walk by; first, Where do ye
find or read in all the holy Scriptures of Truth, that any of the Ministers of
Christ ever went to any Schools of outward Learning, and staid several Years
there, and did commence from one degree of Learning unto another, for to be
made Ministers of Christ, as you Clergymen did, and do now? And when you have
been several Years at such Schools or Colleges, until you think that you are
Artists, and are sufficient for to preach to People, then you get an Order to
Preach: And so you come from those Schools into the Country, and inquire where
there is a vacant place, where there is no Ministers, and then you endeavor to
get that place for to Preach at, if you like their Wages; but if not, then you
inquire for to get a better place, where there is most Tithes or Money, which
is worth so much by the Year; and this is your Call to your Ministry* But the
true Ministers of Christ were never called nor made Ministers after such a way
and manner as yours is. And is not this way of yours, in being made Ministers,
like unto a man that binds his Son to be an Apprentice with a Tradesman for
several Years to learn him his Trade, and gives him so much Money for so doing;
and when his time is expiered, his Master gives him his Indentures, and then he
becomes a free man to set up his Trade, and to trade for himself without any
opposition? But these Clergymen before mentioned, exceed all the Tradesmen in
the World, that have any Principle of Honesty ruling in them; for when an
honest Tradesman sells his Commodity, he delivers it to them, (or some for
them) that buys it and pays for it: But these Covetous Clergymen aforesaid,
sell their Sermons for Tithes, or Money, or both, and keeps them still, and do
not deliver them to those that pay for them: And when they have a mind to go to
another Town to Preach, they may have some of their old Sermons still for to
preach to that people; and if that people do not give them any Money for that
Sermon, yet notwithstanding they are paid for it by their own Hearers, which
pay them so much every Year for their Preaching, which may amount to ten
Shillings, or more, for every Sermon they preach throughout the whole year: Did
ever the Ministers of Christ do any such things as these? And further, where do
you find or read in all the Scriptures, that any of the Ministers of Christ
took either Tithes or Money for their Preaching, or went to Law with any sort
of People, and took away their Goods and Chattels, and cast them into Prisons
for not paying of them Tithes, or Money for their Preaching, as these ungodly
covetous Clergymen have done unto as these many Years, and still continues and
goes on in these wicked ungodly Practices against us, as is before mentioned?
And further, where do ye find or read in all the Scriptures, that any of the
Ministers of Christ, when they went to preach, took a Text of other Men's Words,
and from those words raised Doctrines, Reasons, Motives, Uses and Applications,
as you Clergymen do now? And further, where do you find or read in all the
Scriptures, that any of the Ministers of Christ baptized Infants, and had
Sureties to stand up for them, and to promise that they shall forsake the
Devil, and all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all
Covetous Desires of the same, the Carnal Desires of the Flesh, so that they
will not follow nor be led by them. And all this the Witnesses promise in the
behalf of that Child, or Children that they stand up for; and when the Priest
asks those Witnesses, whether they do forsake the Devil and all his Works,
and all things above expressed, they say, that They do forsake them all; which
is a Lie in the sight of God and his People. And these Persons and People which
do so promise and say as aforesaid, they are such as live and act in sin and
evil, which is of the Devil, who is the author of all sin and evil that is
committed against God by all the Sons and Daughters of men in the fall, who are
unregenerated, and not born again of the Water and Spirit of Life: and these
people which do thus say and promise, as aforesaid, they are such as do not
believe that Perfection from Sin can be attained unto in this Life; and that
none shall be set free from Sin so long as they live in this World; such as
these take upon them to be called Godfathers, and Godmothers; and the Children
which these people stand up for and promise so on their behalf, are taught to
ask them Blessing, and to call them Godfathers and Godmothers; which thing is
unwarrantable in the fight of God, the Maker and Creator of all mankind, and of
all other Creatures whatsoever. And how dare any People be so bold and wicked,
as to take upon them for to be so called, as aforesaid? And further, where do
you find or read in all the Scriptures, that any of the Ministers of Christ did
Marry any People, or did say Prayers over the Dead, or Churched any Women, as
it is called; and all these things the Clergymen aforesaid, do, and practice
for Money, besides their Tithes and Money for Preaching. And further, where do
ye find or read in all the Scriptures, that any of the true Bishops and
Ministers of Christ, that were ordained and appointed by him, did assume to
themselves, and did take upon them such high Names and Titles, as to be called
Lord and Masters, as these Bishops and Clergymen do ^ow? And where do ye find
or read in all the Scriptures, ^^at Timothy and Titus were called Lord Bishops,
which were true Bishops, and ordained of God? And where had they any
Bishoprics, and many hundreds of Pounds by the Year, as these Bishops have
now? And are not these great Names and Titles, and these rich Bishoprics,
which they own and have gotten to themselves, contrary to the mind and will of
God, and contrary to the practice of the true Bishops which were ordained of
the Lord, and contrary to the Scriptures, be not a means to beget them into
Pride and Highmindedness, and Self-exaltation, and not into Humility and
Lowliness of Heart; so as to be gifted and qualified as the true Bishops were,
that were ordained of God? And where do you find or read in all the Scriptures,
that ever any of the true Prophets or Ministers of Christ were called Master,
as a Name or Title to set up Self above the common sort of People? And did not
Christ cry Woe against all such that went in long Robes, and had the uppermost
Room at Feasts, and love Greetings in the Markets, and the Chief Seats in the
Synagogues, and are called of men Rabbi, which is Master? And Christ said unto
his Ministers, Be not ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ,
and ye are Brethren; and be that is the greatest among you, shall be your
Servant. And the Apostle Paul who was a true Minister of Christ, said, That
though I be free from all Men, yet I have made my self Servant unto all, that I
might gain the more. And so he was not called Lord, nor Master, as a flattering
Title amongst men, which upholds Pride and Highmindedness, as these Bishops and
Clergymen are now? And did ever the Ministers of Christ demand ten Shillings
for a Mortuary, and take it, as these Clergymen do now? And further, where do
you find or read in all the Scriptures, that any of the Ministers of Christ set
People to sing David's Psalms, which are put into Rhyme and Meter, by Hopkins
and S^erhould, and others? And whether they that sing David's Psalms now, and
are not in his state and condition that he was in, when he spoke those Words,
which are recorded in the Book of Psalms? do not such sing Lies in Hypocrisy,
yea or nay? For though those Sayings were true in David, because he was in that
condition which he spoke of at that time, when he spoke those Words; but those
Sayings are not true in them that know nothing of his condition; for he was in
several conditions, as may be seen in the Book of Psalms: And how can people
sing so long as their Souls are in Captivity, and they themselves in bondage to
Sin; and so people must come to know Salvation and Redemption wrought by Christ
in them from their Sins and Iniquities, before they can sing in Truth? And
further, where do you find or read that the Ministers of Christ had a Book of
Common Prayer, or a Mass Book provided for them, for to read to people for
Money, as these Clergymen do now? Or where do ye find in all the Scriptures,
that any of the Ministers of Christ, or any other People, that were true
Believers and Followers of Christ, did ever read and say their Prayers in a
Book, when the Lord moved them by his holy Spirit to pray unto him; but they
waited upon the Lord until they were endued with Power from on High; and then
they preached and prayed according as the Lord by his Spirit in them did help
and assist them, and gave them utterance for to do and perform what the Lord
did require of them, as appertaining to the Worship and Service of God. And now
I shall propound one thing more, which is of great Concernment; Where do ye
find or read in all the Scriptures, that ever any of the Ministers of Christ,
or any true Christians or Saints, who were true Believers and Followers of
Christ, that any of them did compel or demand any Money of any sort of People,
for mending and repairing those Houses and Places where the true Ministers and
People of God meet for to worship him in.

And now I have something more to declare unto all that profess Christianity,
and Salvation by Christ, which do say and believe, that they are already Saved,
and Redeemed, and Justified by Christ and his Righteousness without them,
although they be of that Faith and Persuasion, that They must live in Sin as
long as they live upon the Earth; and that none can be set free from Sin in
this Life, etc. To which I Answer; That all that are of that Faith and
Persuasion are deceived by the Deceiver, and that Faith and Persuasion was
never begotten by the Lord, but by the evil one, who is the author of all Sin
and Evil: For I do affirm, that all People that know Christ spiritually and
experimentally to be their Savior and Redeemer, and that he has already
saved, and redeemed, and justified them; then no such, persons nor (...) will
any more plead for Sin, nor a continuance in (...) term of Life; but all such
people do believe that Freedom from Sin is to be attained unto in this Life:
and all such People that are truly saved, and redeemed, and justified by
Christ, as aforesaid, they hate Sin and every appearance of it, in Thoughts,
Words end Actions, both in themselves, and in all others where they see Sin
(...)ed, acted and done against the Lord; But mark what follows, That before
any can come to know experimentally that Christ has saved and redeemed, and
justified them, they must first come to know Sin to be mortified, killed, and
destroyed in their Hea^^ by the working of the Power, and Spirit of Christ in
them; and also they must come to know Sanctification to be wrought in their
Hearts by the power of the Lord in them, before that they can come to know, or
to witness Justification by Christ, and his Righteousness: For all that are or
shall be truly saved and redeemed, and justified by Christ, they are and shall
be saved, and redeemed, and justified by Christ from their Sins, and from their
Iniquities; but not in their Sins, nor in their Iniquities; for Christ Jesus
neither saves, nor redeems, nor justifies any Man or Woman is their Sins, but
from their sins; and whosoever he, she, or they are, that live and act in Sin
and Evil, and takes pleasure and delight therein, and pleads for a continuance
in Sin term of Life, and believes that there is none that can be set free from
Sin in this Life their is no such persons nor people that are already say (...)
nor redeemed, not justified by Christ and his Righteousness. But some may
object, and say, Did not Christ come to save Sinners and to justify (...). It
is true that he did so; but he came not to save Sinners in their sins, nor to
justify the Ungodly in their Ungodliness, but from their Sins, and from their
Ungodliness; as they in love and obedience to God came to forsake their Sins
and their Ungodliness. And there is no Man nor Woman upon the Earth that can
know Christ in Truth, and experimentally to be their Savior and Redeemer, and
Justifier, any further than he does save, and redeem, and justify them from
their Sins, and from their Ungodliness, so as to mortify and destroy Sin in
them. But some may say, That the Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us. It
is true, it is so unto his people, but the Righteousness of Christ is not
imputed to any one that lives and walks in Unrighteousness, and takes pleasure
and delight therein; read these Scriptures, Mat. 1. 21. Tit. 2. 14. 1 John 1.
7. Rev. 1. 5. Gal. 2. 17. Psalm. 143. 2. Exodus 23. 7.

And now whereas I have heard many People say, That the Quakers Religion is but
a new upstart Religion, and is but of a few Years standing, etc.

To which I Answer; That I can make it appear by sufficient Grounds and
Reasons, that our Religion and Principles, and Doctrine which we preach and
hold forth unto all people where we come, it is of above sixteen Hundred Years
standing; and we are in the same Faith, Hope and Belief of God and Christ, and
walk in the same Light, Life, and Spirit of Christ, and in the same Way and
Practice, as to the Worship of God, and Christ and his Ministers, and Disciples
did Preach, and Teach, and Practice, and hold forth unto all people where they
came, above sixteen Hundred Years ago.

And now all you Clergymen aforesaid, that say you are Ministers of Christ,
and the Scriptures are your Rule to walk by, Answer all these Things which are
here laid to your Charge by plain Scriptures, without wresting or perverting
any of them to a wrong sense, and answer in plainness, without your Logic or
Syllogisms, or without using any of your Hebrew, Greek or Latin, which any
carnal earthly-minded Men may have, that are brought up Scholars at your
Schools, which are in capacity to learn humane Learning, which may be bought
for Money. And so it appears plainly, both in the sight of God, and his People,
by your wicked ungodly Actions and Practices, which you have done and acted
both against the Lord, his Truth and People, that you have received nothing
from God, as the true Ministers of Christ did, and does row; neither were you
brought up at Christ's School, nor never were taught of him, as the true
Ministers of Christ were, and are now; and so what you have you and your
Friends have bought with Money; and so you sell it again for Money to those
that are willing to be taught by you, which knows no better teaching, and so
you are a means to bring up people that are your Hearers, in Darkness,
Blindness and Ignorance, as you your selves are in; and so you all live without
the true Knowledge and Enjoyment of God in this world: And so the People of the
Lord that are taught of him by his Holy Spirit, cannot for good Conscience Sake
buy any of your deceitful Wares, nor cannot give you any Tithes, nor Money for
preaching, which speak and preach against Perfection from Sin in this Life, and
say that None can be set free from Sin in this Life; and so you deny the
sufficiency of Christ, and his Commands, and your Faith and Belief stands in
him who is the author of all Sin and Evil, which is the Devil; and so your
speaking and preaching, as aforesaid, does encourage and strengthen the Wicked
in their Wickedness, and you are a means to beget them into Unbelief, that they
may believe as you do, that their is no Perfection from Sin in this Life: And
so neither you, nor they that are your Hearers, do press after Perfection,
because you do not believe that such a good state and condition can be attained
unto in this Life; and so your Doctrine, and Principles, and Practices, are all
quite contrary to the Doctrines, and Principles, and Practices of Christ and
his Ministers, and all true Believers and Followers of Christ, and also quite
contrary to the Scriptures of Truth in every thing that you do and practice
concerning the Worship of God, and therefore you are to be disowned and denied
by all good Christians that truly fear the Lord, and loves him in Truth and in
Sincerity of heart; and all your Preaching and Praying is abomination in the
sight of the Lord, and he will not hear nor answer the Prayers of the Wicked,
that live and delight in Sin and Wickedness, and walk and act in such wicked
Ways and Practices as these Clergymen do now, which is all quite contrary to
the (...) Way of God.

And now I have something to mention and lay before you all, that are called
Christians, of all sorts of Professions and Religions, whether they be called
Quakers, or any other sort of Professions or Religions whatsoever, that do say,
and believe that God is your Father, and Christ is your Savior; I desire that
every one would seriously weigh and consider their own Ways and Doings, and
meditate and ponder the things of God in our own Hearts and Souls, that every
one may come to see, and to know what assurance they have of the Love of God to
their Immortal Souls, and of their Eternal and Everlasting Inheritance with the
Lord in his heavenly Kingdom for evermore, when Time here in this World shall
come to an End with us all: For it is not a bare outward Profession of any
Religion whatsoever that will avail any of us, as to our own Souls true Peace
and Happiness with the Lord for ever, but it must be a real Possession, and an
Enjoyment of the Love of God in our own Hearts, that does avail and satisfy
our Souls, which no Man nor Woman upon the face of the Earth can come to enjoy
the Love of God, and true Peace and Comfort in him, (which is of more worth and
value than all the outward Enjoyments that are in the whole World) so long as
they live in Sin, and take pleasure and delight therein: for God is pure, holy
and righteous, and he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, as to allow of
it in any one; and without Holiness no Man nor Woman can enjoy the Love and
Presence of God to his Soul's Comfort and true Satisfaction in him; For it is
not every one that says Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but it is he and they, that do the Will of God that shall enter into
his Kingdom: And it is not the Hearers, nor the fair Sayers, nor them that have
but an outward knowledge of God, that shall be Justified by the Lord; but it is
the Doers of the Will of God, and them only that the Lord will Justifio, and
speak Peace unto their Immortal Souls. And so I desire that none would deceive
their own Souls, in thinking better of themselves then they are; for the
Apostle Paul says, Be not deceived, for God will not be mocked, for such as
every one sows, such must they reap, whether it be Good or Evil* And now I
appeal to the Witness of God in every Heart and Conscience, of what Name or
Religion soever you are of, Whether you are come so far into the true Christian
Life, as to believe and obey the first Principle of the true Christian
Religion? And whether you are come so far into the Life of Truth, and into the
practice of the holy Scriptures, as to let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be
Nay, and do not alter nor change your Minds and Thoughts after you have said
it, but let Yea and Nay stand after you have spoken it, and do and perform what
you have said? And so every one ought-to be watchful and careful how to speak
and act, before they either speak or act, l^st they offend the Lord by so
doing; for the Apostle James says, If any man among you seem to be Religious,
and brid^eth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, this man's Religion
is vain. And whosoever they be that promise for to do such and such things,
which are just and lawful to be done, and ought to be performed; then if they
that promise for to do such things, do not mind nor regard to perform their
Words and Promises which they have spoken and promised, their Religion is vain,
let them profess what they will. For such Men and Women that make Promises one
to another, and do not mind nor regard to perform them, no such persons ought
to be believed, nor trusted, nor to be confided in; and such have not a true
Bridle for their Tongues, and so their Religion is vain and naught, and it is
not the true Christian Religion; read these Scriptures, James 1. 26, 27. Gal.
6. 7, 8. Matthew. 5. 37.

And now I desire all Civil, Sober-minded people, that profess Christianity,
and the Scriptures to be your Rule, that you would be so moderate, as to read
these Scriptures herein set down, and compare these Scriptures, and the holy
Lives and Conversations of Christ and his Ministers, and them that were true
Believers and Followers of Christ, with the Unholy Lives and Conversations of
these Clergymen aforesaid; and also their Cruelties and Persecutions against
those that truly fear the Lord; and also their Selfish Covetous Actions and
Practices which they do and practice for Tithes and Money, under pretense of
being Ministers of Christ, and Preachers of the Gospel; And if you do
understand those Scriptures in Truth, as they are, and be not partial in your
Judgment, then you may see that there it as much difference betwixt the
Doctrine, and Principles, and Practices of Christ and his Ministers, and the
Doctrine, and Principles, and Practices of the Clergymen aforesaid, as there
is betwixt Light and Darkness: And therefore I would not have you for to speak
any Evil against that Way which you know not what it is; But I would have you
first for to try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

Selby in Yorkshire, the 4th Day of the third Month, 1691. Thomas Goodaire.

THE END.

