Imprimatur,

Aug. 19th. 1687. Guil. Needham.

A REQUEST TO Roman Catholics To Answer the Queries upon these their following
Tenets. I. Their Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue. II. Their taking away the
Cup from the People. III. Their witholding the Scriptures from the Laics. IV.
The Adoration of Images. V. The Invocation of Saints and Angels. VI. The
Doctrine of Merit. VII. Purgatory. VIII. Their Seven Sacraments. IX. Their
Priests Intention in Baptism. X. The Limbo of unbaptized Infants. XI.
Transubstantiation. XII. The Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass. XIII. Private
Masses. XIV. The Sacrament of Penance. XV. The Sacrament of Marriage, with the
Clergies Restraint therefrom. XVI. Their Sacrament of extreme Unction. XVII.
Tradition. XVIII. That threadbare Question, Where was your Church before
Luther? XIX. The Infallibility of the Pope with his Councils. XX. Tho Pope's
Supremacy. XXI. The Pope's Deposing Power. XXII. Their Incharitableness to all
other Christians.


By a Moderate Son of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, MDCLXXXVII.

A REQUEST TO Roman Catholics, etc.
SECTION I. Their Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quest. 1. MAY not the Seventh Commandment be as easily reconciled to Adultery,
as the Service of the Roman Church in an unknown Tongue to 1 Cor. 14. where the
Apostle Five several Times expressly prohibits it, and gives so many pregnant
Reasons for the Inhibition?

2. If the various Gestures and Ceremonies practiced by the Priest at Mass be
sufficient to excite Devotion in the Spectators, may not a dumb Priest be as
useful for that effect; especially he who babbles with a Stentorian Voice, as
he who speaks in an unknown Language; since one who cannot speak at all, may be
as mimical as he who can speak more Languages than ever Joseph Scaliger did, or
as many as were at the Confusion of Babel?

3. Since it is possible that the Priest may be so Diabolical as to be
practicing Conjuration in an unknown Language instead of Devotion, or may be
cursing his Congregation in lieu of blessing them; would not Reason, without
the Apostolic Authority, persuade us of the necessity of understanding his
Language, that we may say Amen to what he says?

4. Since the Priest in these public Offices is the Mouth of the People in
offering up their Tribute of Honor and Adoration to God; if the Congregation
understand him not, how can he more justify himself, than if he did celebrate
the Service in a Tongue himself knows nothing of, and which neither the one nor
the other did understand?

5. Since it is given as the principal Reason of the Roman Service in Latin (by
the Rhemish Annot.) that Christians wherever they travel may find the same
Service and Priests officiating in it, as at home; it may be demanded, if for
the sake of some few that travel, the many that stay at home should be left
destitute; and for one Man's Convenience, a Thousand be exposed to eternal
Perdition; for there will not be one to a Thousand who understand Latin in the
Christian World?

6. Since in the Service in an unknown Tongue the People are wholly left to the
Ability and Sincerity of their Priest, Is not the case of that People very
lamentable? For if the Priest wants the former, he may through Ignorance turn
the most Solemn Part of their Service into Ridicule and Nonsense, or Blasphemy:
And if he want the later, he may use a Spell for Prayer, or the ancient Charm
of the Valentinians Abracadabra, for Ave Maria; nay, instead of Baptizing in
the Name of the Father, etc. he may do by the Person, as a Jew, under the
Profession of a Priest, is said to have done by a certain Man, in this last
Age, who Baptized him in the horrid Name of the Devil; there being nothing so
absurd or wicked, which according to this case, may not be practiced.

7. Since Scripture, the Reason of the Thing, the Fathers and Practice of the
Church for about Seven Hundred Years together, are for the Expedience and
Necessity of having God's Public Service in a Tongue understood by the People,
may it not justly be enquired with what Effrontory the Council of Trent has
Anathematized all those who believe the necessity of having God's Solemn
Worship in a known Tongue; as if Trent, (because a City of the Alps) were
transformed into Mount Ebal, whence they might curse that great Doctor of the
Gentiles in the first place?

8. Is it not evident from 1 Cor. 14. that in St. Paul's Judgment they deserve
to be reckoned Madmen, who Pray to God in an Unknown Tongue?

9. Is it not probable that the Romanists have borrowed their Service in an
Unknown Tongue, from some Heathens? who (as Clemens Alexandrinus reports)
thought those Prayers most effectual, which were uttered in a Barbarous
Language; or from their Neighbors, the old Cusleans (of whom Varro testifies)
that their Priests did scarcely understand their own Sacred Rites.

10. Since the English Liturgy is so agreeable to the undoubted parts of the
most ancient Liturgies, (it being a Form which has all those parcels of the
Roman Offices that were known and used in the first Three Centuries, but wants
all the Innovations and Coruptions of the present Mass) May we not truly and
pertinently challenge all Christendom to produce any public Platform (or
Solemn Church Service) so constant to the purest Primitive Devotions?

11. Since the Famous Bishop of Condam has most cunningly endeavored a
palliative Cure (by soft and smooth Words) as to many Practices in the Roman
Church, which stand in need of Amputation, yet both in his Exposition and
Exhortation, he still passes by their Service in an Unknown Tongue; Is it not,
because he had no Tongue of his own, to answer for that Practice, which is so
directly repugnant to Scripture and Antiquity, having despaired (it seems) to
find either Butter or Oil to cicatrise or soften that Wound?

SECT. II. Their taking away the Cup from the People.
Quest. 1. SInce the Council of Constance, Anno 1418. made it an Article of
Faith, That the Laity ought to receive the Eucharist only in One Kind ( non
obstante of the Institution of Christ, as it was then acknowledged, and the
constant Practice of the Catholic Church above a Thousand Years) Wherefore may
they not Christen the Laick's Children only in the Name of the Holy Ghost,
leaving out the Father and the Son by the way of Concomitancy, it being as
lawful to Baptize as to Communicate by halves, and no less certain, that since
the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity partake of the same individual Nature,
where one is, all the rest must be; suppose the Mutilation of the Eucharist
could not be disparaged by that Emblem of the Effusion of Christ's Blood, which
is necessarily required in the Sacrament?

2. Since the principal Reason assigned by Gerson (for that Canon of the
Council of Constance, which abstracts the Cup from the People) is the Danger of
spilling of the Blood of Christ; may it not pertinently be demanded, Wherefore
may not Laics in this Age have as steady hands as the Ages foregoing that
Council? Or if Priests are the best Supporters of a Chalice, Why may they not
hold the Cup to Peoples Heads, as well as put the Bread into their Mouths? (Not
to speak of that Infallible Prescience Christ behoved to have of that imaginary
Inconvenience, if we believe him to be God as well as Man.)

3. Since it is also one of the Reasons assigned by Gerson, wherefore the
Council of Constance prohibited the Cup to the People, lest the Consecrated
Wine long kept should be converted into Vinegar: How can that Fear consist with
Transubstantiation, for it is not Blood but Wine which turns into Vinegar?

4. With what Effrontory can any Romanist pretend, that the words of St. John,
chap. 6. are to be understood of the Eucharist, since the Mutilation of that
Sacrament is thereby expressly condemned; for a Man cannot be said to drink when
he eats?

5. Since the Eucharist is an Emblem of the Effusion of Christ's Blood; How can
they be said to drink of that Cup which is the New Testament of Christ's Blood
shed for us, who do not drink at all? Suppose there was Truth in
Transubstantiation, and in that of Concomitancy first divised by Th. Aquinas.

6. Since the natural Abstemiousness of some Men is likewise assigned as a
Reason of that Sacrilegious Mutilation, may it not pertinently he demanded, Why
is not the Bread taken away also, because some Persons have been found, who
could never taste of any kind of Bread?

7. It it may be farther enquired, if it were a civil Apology at an ordinary
Feast (when there are very many invited) that the Host should say, He had
provided neither Bread nor Wine, in regard one of the Guests cannot taste of
the former, and another cannot drink of the later?

8. Since it is impossible to produce one Instance (from any Authentic Record)
for a Thousand Years after Christ and more, of the Celebration of the Eucharist
in the Face of any particular Church, without giving the Consecrated Cup to all
the Communicants, does it not evidently follow, that the Catholic Church
behoved to have been in an Error so long, or that the present Roman Church has
degenerated from the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church for so many
Ages?

SECT. III. Their withholding the Scriptures from the Laics.
Quest. 1. SInce there is no Christian Church (unless it be a Society of
Blasphemers under the Notion of a Church) that pretends to more Infallibility
than Christ and his Apostles, Upon what account should the Roman Church require
more implicit Faith from its Members, than Christ and his Apostles did from
their Hearers? For notwithstanding these were unquestionably endued with an
infallible Spirit, and the Gift of Miracles, yet they still remitted their
Hearers to the search of the Old Testament, that they might find by their own
Reason and Industry, the Doctrine of the Gospel, consonant to the Prophetic
Oracles and Mysterious Types of our Savior's Incarnation and Passion, and were
commended for doing so.

2. If the Scriptures are so unintelligible, that an honest man cannot find out
the meaning of them, without the Infallible Interpretation of the Church, even
in those things which are indispensably necessary to our Salvation, (for we are
still ready to say with one of the Ancient Fathers, That as they have Flats
wherein a Lamb may wade, so they have Depths wherein an Elephant may swim) I
would desire to know, whether Christ and his Apostles preached intelligibly to
their Hearers? If not, to what purpose did they preach at all? By what means
were Men converted to the Faith? If they did, How came these Sermons to be so
unintelligible now they are written, which were so intelligible when they were
spoken? For the Gospels contain a plain History of what Christ did and said;
and the Apostles wrote the same things to the Churches when they were absent,
which they preached to them when they were present; and we reasonably suppose,
that they designed that the Churches should as much understand what they wrote,
as what they preached; and therefore that they generally used the same Form of
Words in their Writings, and in their Preachings; and this makes it a great
Riddle, How one should be very plain and easy to be understood, and the other
signify nothing without an Infallible Interpreter.

3. Where the Turkish Alcoran is permitted in English, viz. at Rome, (Vid.
Indic. Libr. prohibit. Alexandr. 7.) and the Bible in English ordained to be
burnt, (vid. ibid.) Whether do they fancy the Gospel or Alcoran better?

4. Why may not an implicit Faith in the Scripture save a Soul, as well as in
the Church; and why may not the one free from Heresy, as well as the other?

5. Since our Savior recommended the reading of the Scriptures to Laics, and
the Apostle St. Paul commended them for doing so, and that the Primitive
Fathers pressed it as a Duty on all Ranks of Persons; Must not the Reasons of
the Roman Church (in prohibiting the Laics to read the Word of God, or to have
the Bible translated into their Mother Tongue) be exceedingly weighty, if they
can preponderate all these Authorities?

6. Since it is well known from Ecclesiastical and Secular History, that the
greatest Heresies and Schisms in the Christian Church, and which gave it the
greatest and most lasting Trouble, had their Rise from Men in Holy Orders (who
were accounted great Clerks in their time) such as Marcion, Paulus Samosatenus,
Arius, Eunomius, Apollinaris, Macedonius, Photinus, Nestorius, Eutiches,
Pelagius, and many others; Novatius also and Donatius, who rent the Catholic
Church by long lasting Schisms, were Men in Holy Orders; not to speak of
Lucifer and Meletius: Is it therefore a solid Reason to withold the Scripture
from the ignorant Laics for fear of their broaching Herefies or Schisms,
seeing the sad Experience of the World does rather teach, that the learned
Clergy should be restrained therefrom?

SECT. IV. The Adoration of Images.
Qu. 1. Does not the Roman Church in picturing of God not only act directly
contrary to Sacred Scripture (where it is so frequently forbidden) but also to
the very Nature of God, who is an infinite Spirit, and can no more be
represented by a bodily Shape, than a Thought can? And how can their Practice
be re reconciled to that Canon of their Second Council of Nice, which
determined it not only unlawful, but also absurd and impossible to make an
Image of that Being which is spiritual, invisible, and incomprehensible?

2. If any Man can reconcile the Worship of Images to the Second Commandment,
may it not also be imagined that he can make Adultery, Perjury, Murder, Theft,
and False-witnessing to become Virtues?

3. How can any Man that has the use of Reason imagine, that the Ancients were
clear for the Worship of Images, since it is most apparent from the Writings of
the most Primitive Fathers, that they all condemned the making of any kind of
Image (as unlawful) much more the placing of them in Churches, and most of all
the adoring of them?

4. Since in the Jerusalem Talmud there is no mention of the Idolatry of
Christians (tho frequently of that of the Heathen) because it was written about
Two Hundred Years after Christ: But in the Babylonish Talmud, which was
compiled about Five Hundred Years after Christ's Nativity, there is scarce a
Page therein, wherein they do not inveigh against the Idolatry of Christians,
and terms their Churches Beth-havora-zada, the Houses of Idolatry: May we not
(in consideration of the infinite Malice of the Jews against the Christian
Religion) most rationally conclude (tho it be from a Negative Argument) that
the placing of Images in Churches began not any where during the Two First
Centuries, and (if we believe both Secular and Ecclesiastical History) not till
about the End of the Fifth Century (tho they were worshipped no where by public
Authority till after the Days of Gregory the Great) not to speak of that Canon
of the Council of Elliberis, and that Epistle of Epiphanius (translated by St.
Hierom) which positively holds forth, that in the Fourth Century it was judged
simply unlawful to have any Image in a Church, whether painted or graven.

5. May not Garlic and Onyons (the Egyptian Deities) be justly accounted Gods
right worshipful, when compared with the Nails, the Thorns, the Chips, and
Shreds, and many other Objects of the Roman Adoration?

6. Since the Governing Part of the Roman Church teaches and enjoyneth the
People to worship Images with an inferior kind of Adoration (as the Council of
Trent phraseth it) is it not (in some sense) charitably done by them, not to
let them know the Second Commandment (by expunging it out of their Chatechisms)
that the People may not become guilty of sinning against so plain a Law?

7. Since the Romish Schoolmen have devised many Distinctions of Religious
Worship, (no where to be found in Sacred Scripture) to obviate the Imputation
of Idolatry to the Adorers of Images, Saints and Angels, etc. (such as Latria,
Dulia, Hyperdulia; a Relative and Terminative Worship; a Mediate and Immediate;
a Direct and Indirect; a Supreme and Subordinate; a Sovereign and Subaltern; a
Transitive and Final; a Proper and Analogical, etc.) May it not justly be
demanded, if any sober Person can rationally imagine, that ignorant Laics are
sufficiently warned by these Beacons to shun the Rocks of Idolatry, when their
greatest Clerks controvert among themselves about the proper import of those
Terms, and the due Application of them, as is most evident from the contrary
Sentiments of Aquinas and Bellarmine, Vasquez and Perron concerning them?

8. Since Miracles are especially necessary to convince Unbelievers, and that
many Miracles were Recorded before the Reformation, but few or none after it;
Is it not an Argument sufficient to make a wary Man believe that there were few
real Miracles at any time, since the settlement of Christianity? And that only
the Superstitious Credulity of former Ages was apt to be abused with such
Pretenses? (well-meaning Ignorance being easily wheedled thereby into a Golden
Dream of great Advantages redounding from the Adoration of Images, etc.) in
regard that there is far more need of them since the Reformation (when so many
dis-believe the Roman Religion) than was before, when all the Nations of the
West appeared to be at the Devotion thereof.

SECT. V. The Invocation of Saints and Angels.
Qu. 1. WHen Romanists pray to Saints departed to pray for them, it may be
pertinently inquired, that these Saints do either hear their Prayers, and
become acquainted with their Desires, or they do not? If they do hear all those
Prayers that are put up to them at the same time by innumerable persons through
all the World, what is this but to ascribe to them that Omnipresence and
Omniscience which is peculiar to God alone; especially if it be considered,
that their Devotions are not only Verbal, but also Mental, (Voce vel mente
supplicare, being decreed by the Council of Trent) yea, it is necessarily
employed in every Prayer that is made to them, that they not only hear it, but
also know the disposition of the heart, from whence it proceeds; otherwise the
Hypocritical Supplicant must be supposed as likely to obtain their favors as
the sincerest Votary: if they do not hear their Prayers, then its very absurd
and ridiculous, (and a great abuse of that reason God has given Men for other
ends than to trifle with) to pray to them: As for that imaginary Glass of the
Trinity, it may be further demanded, if the glorified see all things therein,
or but some? if all, then they must share in God's incommunicable Property,
which is to be the searcher of the Heart; if but some, what assurance have we
that they see those things whereof we stand most in need? so that we cannot
pray in Faith.

2. Since the learned Men of the Roman Church (such as Bellarmin, Valentia,
Horstius, and many others) conclude their Books with Praise to God, the blessed
Virgin, and Jesus Christ; may it not be pertinently demanded, if they give her
not only an equal part with God in their Praises, but by placing her before
Christ, seem to give somewhat of pre-eminence above him?

3. Since its acknowledged by the most part of the Popish Schoolmen, that the
Invocation of Saints and Angels was not enjoined in the Old Testament, because
of the Limbo wherein these Fathers were before Christ's Resurrection; so that
not being admitted to the Beatifical Vision, they could not hear those Prayers
upon Earth: It may be pertinently demanded, 1. What should have restrained the
Worship of the Angels at that time, who since their Creation enjoyed that
blessed Vision; they being represented in the Old Testament as the constant
Attendants and Retinue of God, and the great Ministers of his Providence, and
therefore they were as capable of Divine Worship in the time of the Law as they
are now, and it may be, a little more; for the Law it self was given by the
Ministry of Angels, and their Appearances were more frequent and familiar; and
the World seemed to be more under the government of Angels then, than it is
now, since Christ is made the Head of the Church, and exalted above all
Principalities and Powers? 2. What Evasion can they find, who are of Opinion,
that the glorified Saints at all times did know the Petitions put up to them
from Earth, not by the Beatifical Vision, but by special Divine Revelation? 3.
Since the generality of the Fathers of the three first Centuries were of
Opinion, that the glorified Saints shall not enjoy the Beatifical Vision till
the day of Judgment, it may be pertinently enquired, if these Fathers practiced
or believed the necessity, or expediency of Saint-Invocation; no fewer than
Eighteen of the Fathers, being of this Opinion, by the Romanists own confession?

4. What is more in the Apostrophe of Greg. Nazianz. to his Sister Gorgonia, or
S. Ierom to his devout Paula, and S. Augustine to his Mother Monica; than in
these Apostrophes frequently found in Sacred Writings to insensate Creatures;
Hear O ye Mountains the Lord's Controversy: Praise the Lord ye Dragons, and
all Deeps, etc. And who will infer from hence, that the insensate Creatures
were hereby invoked and addressed unto; yet we must carefully distinguish
betwixt the Speeches of some particular Fathers, and the general Doctrine of
the Church, betwixt what they express in Rhetorical Strains to move Affection,
and what they lay down in plain terms to inform the Judgment: betwixt what
results from the heat of their popular Orations, and what in cool and
deliberate Debates they set down for the Truth of Christ; for its generally
confessed, that the Fathers oft-times hyperbolize, particularly St. Chrysostom;
and we must not take their flights of Fancy for the Doctrine of the Church.

5. If these words Matthew. 4. 10. taken out of Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Him only shall thou
serve; are to be understood only of the highest degree of Religious Worship as
a part of the whole, and distinguished from a lower kind; this superior degree
being Latria, and the inferior degrees Hyperdulia, and Dulia (as the Romanists
term them) it may be demanded, how could that have been a sufficient Answer to
the Devils demand? for he might thus have replied to the Son of God, I
acknowledge the Sovereign and Almighty Power of God as well as you (the same
acknowledgment being insinuated by himself, St. Luke chap. 4. 6.) therefore I
desire not thou should Worship me as God with Latria, but only with Dulia, a
lower kind; thy Heart, the most elevated conceptions of thy mind may be
reserved to God, its only the outward act I challenge of thee, that thou
would only fall down and Worship me, or by falling down, Worship me; which
our Savior simply refused notwithstanding.

6. Since the chief argument whereby the Primitive Fathers used to prove the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and of the Son, against the Macedonians and Arians;
was the Catholic practice of the Church in praying to them: what force could
have been in that argument, had they believed that any Creatures (tho never so
highly exalted in Nature and Condition) might have had that Honor paid unto
them?

7. Since the Catholics did frequently accuse the Arians of Idolatry, for
praying unto Christ (whom they conceived to be no more than an excellent and
good-like Creature) had the Catholics at the same time practiced the
Invocation of Saints, might not the Arians have returned the Charge with
greater force upon themselves; for if the Catholics had replied as the
Romanists do now, that though they did pray to the blessed Spirits, yet they
did it not with that Sovereign, Direct, and final Prayer, nor with those
sublimest thoughts and intentions of Honor wherewith they did address to God,
but only with indirect, subaltern, and relative Prayer, and with no higher
Intentions of Honor to them, than what is proportioned to the excellencies of
their finite Nature: Since the Arians might have returned upon them with great
advantage, by saying, Sirs, With the same due Limitations we Invocate the Man
Jesus Christ, who (as the Scripture assures us) is exalted above all Angels,
Principalities and Powers, and every Name which is named in Heaven and Earth;
so that tho we may not Honor the Son in the same high degree as we do the
Father, yet the Scripture enjoins us to do it with that same kind of Honor:
Which is more than can be said in defense of that Honor and Invocation you
offer to Saints and Angels.

8. Since the fancy of making the Court of Heaven resemble Princes Courts on
Earth, has brought forth that voluntary Humility of Worshipping Saints and
Angels, at least this excuse of the Romish Supplicants, that its out of an
humble sense of their own unworthiness, and an awful regard to the infinite
Majesty of God, that they address not immediately to himself, but by the
Mediation of Saints and Angels these Courtiers and Favorites of Heaven; may it
not be pertinently demanded, What wise Man on Earth, who is abundantly
satisfied of the readiness and ability of his Prince to help him, and has free
leave given him, on any occasion, to come immediately unto him, and is
frequently invited for that effect) will choose to wave this freedom of his
access, and will apply himself to some inferior Officer or Favorite to make
his Address? This is our case; God has invited all that are in Trouble to come
immediately unto himself, and has frequently promised to grant all their
requests who seek him with their whole Hearts; and has appointed his own Son
(God with himself) the Master of Requests, from time to time to receive all the
Petitions of his Subjects; and both the one and the other are infinitely more
able, and infinitely more willing to Hear and Succor them, than the best, the
wisest, and most powerful of all created Beings: And shall we now be afraid to
take that Liberty which God has given us? Shall we call that Impudence, which
God has made our Duty? And whilst we pretend Humility, shall we forfeit our
Allegiance, and distrust his Promises, and suspect the goodness of his Nature,
for fear of being found too faucy, and too bold with his Person?

9. Since Deuteronomy. 13. we are expressly forbidden to hearken to any Prophet, tho a
Worker of Miracles, who teaches the Worship of any other Being beside the one
Supreme God; may it not pertinently be demanded, if Christ and his Apostles had
taught the Worship of Saints and Angels, had it not been a just Reason for the
Unbelief of the Jews, notwithstanding of all the Miracles wrought by them?

10. If Ten thousand Miracles should convince a Christian of the Lawfulness of
Praying to Saints departed, whilst he has such a plain express Law against
believing all Miracles upon any such account: For if ever real Miracles were
wrought at the Tombs of Martyrs, it was in Testimony of the Truth of
Christianity, for which they suffered, not to betray any to a Superstitious or
Idolatrous Worship of them: tho there is most forcible reason to doubt of many
of those pretended Miracles, if ever they were in rerum natura, and to fear
that many of them were but Satanical Illusions.

11. Can there be a solid Reason assigned why Sacrifice as well as Prayer may
not be an Act of inferior, as well as superior Worship, since the Heathens
offered Sacrifice to their Inferior Demons as well as to the Supreme?

12. Since the Roman Doctors grant that the difference betwixt Supreme and
Subordinate Worship does not consist in the outward Act, and that all the
outward Acts may belong to both kinds (Sacrifice only excepted by them, which
the Spirit of God notwithstanding makes inferior to Prayer) now it may be
demanded, since the Law did forbid the external acts of Worship without any
regard to the Intention of the Worshipper, does it not appear from this, that
this Idolatrous Worship was to be punished with Death, Deuteronomy. 13? and therefore
it must be such external Idolatry as falls under the Recognizance of Humane
Judicatures, which Intention does not, unless a Man had confessed his Intention.

13. When can it be shown that those Fathers (whose Authority is urged by the
Church of Rome for the Invocation of Saints) do dogmatieally and positively
assert the Lawfulness of Praying to Saints and Angels, since many Fathers of
the same Age do positively deny the Lawfulness of it; is it not a plain
Argument, that it was not the Judgment and Practice of the Church, and a good
reasonable Presumption, that these Fathers (in their Apostrophes and
Prosopopeia's) never intended any such thing in what they said, how liable
soever their Words may be to be expounded in such a sense?

14. May it not easily be imagined, wherefore the late Latin Editions (in the
Church of Rome) of the 35th Canon of the Council of Laodicea, instead of its
prohibiting the Faithful to call on the Name of Angels, have put in Angulos
(corners) contrary to all the Greek Copies, and Fathers that writ them, and so
have made nonsense of that excellent Canon? but veritas non quaerit Angulos:
And the mischief of these Prevaricators is, that there is no resemblance in the
Greek (which is the Original Language of the Canon) betwixt the words which
signify Angels and Angles.

SECT. VI. The Doctrine of Merit.
Qu. 1. IF the Doctrine of Merit of good Works (as it is taught in the Roman
Church by an Analogy, or due proportion betwixt the Work and the Reward, as if
God were unjust if he gave it not; but not as it imports a Reward Virtute
promissi Divini, as the Fathers teach) be not perfect nonsense in Divinity?
Since our Savior has expressly said, When we have done all that we can do, we
are but unprofitable Servants; we have done nothing but what was our Duty; and
the Apostle has told us, That the light Afflictions of this Life, are not
worthy to be compared with that great measure of Glory which shall be revealed:
besides that other consideration, that all we are, and have of any goodness,
are graciously derived from that inexhaustible Fountain; so that neither Men
nor Angels can properly Merit at the hands of God.

2. Since the Popes pretend, that they have thrown into the Treasure of the
Church, the Superplus of the Merits of some eminent Saints; may it not be
pertinently doubted; if they believe the Foundation of that Treasure, I mean
the merits of Holy Jesus to be infinite, seeing what is really infinite, can
neither admit of Addition or Diminution, at least needs no Addition?

SECT. VII. Of Purgatory.
Qu. 1. IF the Pope has Power to take all Souls out of that imaginary
Purgatory; how comes it, that he is so unmerciful, as not to rid many thousands
of Poor Ones from those Flames (which are intensively no better than the
torments of Hell) is it because those tormented Wretches have not Heirs and
Executors behind them with Purses so flush as those of the Rich?

2. Is it possible to find an account of Indulgences in the Primitive Times, in
any other sense, than that of relaxation of Penances inflicted upon scandalous
Persons by the Governors of the Church?

3. Since the most Primitive Fathers by a purging Fire for Sinners, do
generally understand the Fire of Conflagration in the last Day; with what face
can it be pretended that they believed the Romish Purgatory, where poor
Creatures suffer the Torments of Hell for a time?

4. Since the Greek Church never believed the Roman Purgatory; how can it be
said with any color of Truth, that it is a Catholic Tradition of the
Universal Church, seeing the extent of the Greek Church is nothing inferior to
that of the Roman? The same Question may be proposed concerning the Pope's
Supremacy, the Mutilation of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Service in an
unknown Tongue, the Celibacy of the Clergy, and many other particulars in
Controversy at this time.

5. If we were to understand 1 Cor. 3. of Purgatory; I would demand of those
Glossators, how they reconcile the Doctrine of their Prophets and Apostles,
Confessors and Martyrs, the Blessed Virgin, with the Thief on the Cross, that
they went immediately to Heaven, or Paradise at least; since the Apostle tells
us there, that every man's Work must be tried by Fire, of what sort it is;
which note of Universality in the Eyes of a Puny Logician, comprehends the
whole Race of Adam.

6. With what Confidence can the Roman Church boast of Antiquity in Behalf of
Purgatory, or Indulgences, seeing it is not able to produce any one Prayer
(public or private) nor one Indulgence, for the Delivery of any Soul out of
Purgatory, in all the Primitive times, or out of their own ancient Missals or
Records?

SECT. VIII. Their Seven Sacraments.
Quest. SInce before Peter Lombard's time the number of Sacraments was
indefinit in the Church of Rome it self, if so be they have gathered the number
of Seven from the Fathers Writings (as they pretend, for I am sure in Scripture
they find them not) it may be pertinently demanded, wherefore not seventy
seven? seeing the Fathers call many other things Sacraments; yea, if that
general Rule assigned by St. Augustine be observed in the Computation, viz. that
all Signs, when they belong to Divine things, are called Sacraments, they would
be found no ways short of the greatest number.

SECT. IX. The Priest's Intention in Baptism.
Quest. WHat can in reason be answered to that objection of the Bishop of
Minori in the Council of Trent, who said that if they should ratify (as
afterward they most unhappily did) the Decree of the Florintin Council,
concerning the necessity of a right Intention of the Priest in the
Administration of Sacraments (especially of Baptism) it would evidently follow,
that it were in the Power of one single Priest, who came to be old in
Wickedness, to damn his whole Parish? Yea, suppose that Hellish Paroxism did
but once overtake him, that Child not rightly Baptized by him, might afterward
become a Bishop; so that not only his own Ordination, but also all the Orders
conferred by him, would become invalid, which might occasion a world of
Mischief.

SECT. X. The Limbo of Unbaptized Infants.
Quest. SInce many Infants are still-born, and some dye in their Mothers Womb,
all which, because unbaptized, must go to that Limbo of Infants, according to
the Doctrine of the Roman Church, where they are for ever to be deprived of the
beatifical Vision, which is the greatest of the Plagues of the Damned (Poena
Damni being in the Opinion of the Schoolmen and Fathers, much greater than
Poena Sensus) how can that rigid Opinion be reconciled to the infinite Goodness
and Wisdom of God, to appoint a means indispensably necessary to Salvation,
which in some circumstances cannot possibly be administered; and may not those
cruel Opiniators be justly termed Step-fathers of Infants, as St. Augustine was
named Durus Pater Infantum?

SECT. XI. Of Transubstantiation.
Qu. 1. SInce the most eminent of the Roman Schoolmen, such as Scotus,
Durandus, Alphonsus a Castro, Suarez, Vasquez, Alliado, Biel, Canus, Occam,
Cajetan, and Bellarmine himself, confess that the Doctrine of Transubstantion
cannot be evidently proved from Scripture; and that there is no absolute
necessity of understanding our Savior's Words in that Sense; may it not be
pertinently demanded, is there not a great deal of reason to understand them
otherwise, seeing that strange Sense is so directly repugnant to the Senses of
all that are endued with an animal Life?

2. Since there be so many parallel places in Scripture, which every man
understands in a figurative, and not in a strictly literal and absurd Sense; as
where the Lamb is called the Passover; Circumcision God's Covenant; the Church
Christ's Body; the Rock which followed the Israelites, called Christ; Christ
calls himself the Door, the true Vine (which the Church of Rome would mightily
have triumphed in, if he had said, this is my true Body) wherefore may we not
also understand these Words, This is my Body, in a Metaphorical Sense,
especially considering, that it is impossible to make Sense of the whole Words
of the Institution, without more Figures than one?

3. Can it rationally be presumed, that any sensible Man, who had never heard
of Transubstantiation being grounded on these Words, This is my Body, would
upon reading the Institution of the Eucharist, ever have imagined any such
thing to be meant by our Savior in these words; but rather, that this Bread
signifies my Body, and this Cup my Blood, and this which ye see me now do, do
ye hereafter for a Memorial of me? Far less would it have entered into any Man's
Mind (not blinded with gross Error or Prejudice) to have thought that our
Savior did literally hold himself in his Hand, and did eat himself, and that
he gave away himself from himself with his own Hands; especially if it be
further considered, that our Savior having pronounced these words, (This is my
Body which is broken, and my Blood which is shed) before his Passion, this
could not be true in a literal Sense; for his Body was then unbroken, and his
Blood unshed, unless they will say that Propitiation was made before Christ
suffered: Nor could the Apostles understand these words literally, since they
both saw and tasted what he gave them to be Bread and Wine; and that it was not
his Body which was given, but his Body which gave that which was given: Whence
any rational Man may infer, that St. Augustin's Phrase (in his Enarrations on
the Psalms) Christus portavit se manibus suis, is to be understood
figuratively, according to his own Rule for interpreting Scripture, given Lib.
3. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 16.

4. May not the Church of Rome as well conclude from 1 Cor. 10. 17. that all
Christians are substantially changed into one Bread, and then into the natural
Body of Christ, by the participation of the Sacrament, because they are said to
be one Bread, and one Body, as to infer Transubstantiation from the Verse
immediately foregoing, or from any other place of Scripture?

5. Suppose Justin Martyr, (who lived, An. 150.) Ireneus, (who lived, An. 180.)
Tertullian, (who lived, An. 206.) Origin, (who lived, An. 230.) St. Cyprian,
who lived An. 250.) Theodoret, (who lived An. 450.) P. Gelasius, (who also
lived in the Fifth Century,) and Facundus the African Bishop, (who lived in the
Sixth) had not written any thing against Transubstantiation (as it is simply
impossible to make sense of their Writings, if they believed that Doctrine) and
not to speak of many other Testimonies of St. Augustine against
Transubstantiation; I would demand if any Man in his right Wits that had
believed Transubstantiation, could have uttered such a Testimony against it; as
we find lib. 3. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 16. (already cited) where laying down
several Rules for the right understanding of Scripture, he gives this for one;
If (says he) the Speech be a Precept forbidding some heinous Crime, or
commanding us to do good, it is not figurative; but if it seem to command any
heinous wickedness, or to forbid that which is profitable to others, its
figurative: for Example, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink
his Blood, ye have no Life in you; this seems to command an heinous Wickedness,
therefore its a Figure, commanding us to Communicate of the Passion of our
Lord, and with delight and advantage to lay up in our Memory that his Flesh was
crucified and wounded for us.

6. Since Bellarmin (in lib. descript. Eccles. an. 118.) tells us, that
Paschasius Rabertus Abbot of Corbey, was the first who did write seriously
concerning the Truth of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist; it may be
demanded very pertinently, if any of the Fathers before him wrote in jest
concerning such a sublime Mystery?

7. Since some of the Fathers have as high Elegies of the Sacrament of Baptism,
as of the Eucharist; notwithstanding the Popish Schoolmen grant there is no
substantial Change made in that consecrated Water, and yet that the Divine
Blessing accompanying the Institution, it may be effectual to the washing away
of Sin, and Spiritual Regeneration; what reason can be given why the Elements
of Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper may not by the same Divine Blessing
accompanying this Institution, make all the worthy Receivers Partakers of all
the Spiritual Comfort designed to us thereby, without any substantial Change
made in those Elements, since our Savior has told us, that verily the Flesh
profits nothing?

8. If the Canibals be abhorred as Inhuman for eating the Flesh of their
Enemies, must it not be great Inhumanity to eat the Flesh of a Friend, and the
best in the World? If none can read without horror, the Stories of Tereus,
Thyestes, and Harpagus, their eating of their own Children, (though ignorantly)
how much more horrible must it be to feed upon the very Body of the Son of God
(that was Born of the Virgin) knowingly? ( Deum suum primo conficiunt, deinde
devorant; said Averrhoes, justly deriding that prodigious Doctrine, which a
little before his time began to be publicly taught in the Roman Church) and
with what Face could the Primitive Apologists upbraid the Heathen with one of
their Gods, who did eat his own Children, if the Christians had believed at
that time, that they did Eat their own God? and that no such thing being then
objected by the Pagans to the Christians, is to a Wise Man instead of a
Thousand Demonstrations, that no such Doctrine was then believed: for the
Impiety and Barbarousness of the thing, as it is believed and practiced in the
Roman Church, is not in truth extenuated, but only the appearance of it, by
being done under the Species of Bread and Wine; for the thing they acknowledge
is really done, and they believe, they verily Eat and Drink the Natural Flesh
and Blood of Christ: And suppose a man should eat his Son in a Pasty (where the
Figure of the Body is so altered, that it cannot be easily known to be human
Flesh; or so minced and aromatized, that the Taste can no more discern what it
is, than Minodoe could tell of what Ingredients the fifty Dishes at the Mogul's
Table were compounded, though his Curiosity led him to taste of them all) yet
if the Father know it, it can no ways excuse him from unnatural Barbarity.

9. How can any Romanist ascertain himself free of Idolatry, without Divine
Revelation? For if Transubstantiation be not true, by their own Confession,
they are certainly guilty of the most damnable Idolatry in the World, in
Worshipping a piece of Bread as God; and suppose such a change could be, they
can never be certain that it is, since according to the Councils of Florence
and Trent, the Validity of the Consecration depends on the Intention of the
Priest, which cannot be known assuredly without Divine Revelation: neither is
it sufficient to excuse them from Idolatry, that they intended to Worship God,
and not a Creature; for so all the Idolatry that ever was in the World may be
excused, which was nothing else but a mistake of the Deity; and upon that
mistake, a Worshipping of something, that was not God, as God.

10. Suppose a Miracle were produced to prove the Truth of Transubstantiation,
may it not be demanded, to what purpose is that production, seeing we cannot
believe the Miracle, unless it be obvious to some of our Senses? and then the
Argument for Transubstantiation, and the Objection against it, would just
balance one another: so that in this case, a Miracle would signify nothing,
because that would be to prove to a man by something that he sees, that he does
not see, what he sees.

11. If the Senses of all mankind may be deluded, what Evidence have we for the
Passion and Resurrection of Christ? (Suppose we had seen them with our Eyes,
and not only heard of them with our Ears) for if in the matter of Bread and
Wine, all our Senses (save one) are deceived, why might not one have been
deluded in reference to the Humiliation and Exaltation of Christ; so that we
might have as easily mistaken an Image for a living man upon the Cross, as to
imagine a piece of Bread to be the true Body of a man, and that a living Human
Body is to be found in every Atome thereof?

12. Whereas its said in the Institution, that Christ's Body is broken for us,
and yet the Doctrine of the Roman Church is, that it is broken into Wholes, and
not into Parts; does not this clearly imply a Contradiction, that Christ's Body
is broken and not broken, at the self same time, or that it is whole and not
whole.

13. Does it not involve horrible Impieties, to imagine that the glorified Body
of our Savior, should be contracted to the Crum of a Wafer? That he should be
perfectly deprived of Sense and Reason? That he should not be able to defend
himself against the Assaults of the most contemptible Vermin? That if the
Stomach of the Communicant chance to be overcharged with Wine, that he should
be Vomited up again; or if he have a Lienteria, that he should go wholly to the
Draught?

14. Since the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. tells us expressly, That the Fathers did eat
the same Spiritual Meat, and Drink the same Spiritual Drink which we do; may it
not be pertinently demanded, if the Manna, and Rock which followed them, were
Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ? Or may not Believers under
the Gospel, feed upon Christ in a Spiritual and Mystical Sense (as the Fathers
did under the Law) without any Transubstantiation of the Elements?

15. Since our Savior, John 6. says, That he who Eats his Flesh, and Drinks
his Blood, has Eternal Life; how can this be applied to Transubstantiation,
unless any be so absurd as to imagine, That all who partake of those Consecrated
Elements shall be saved?

16. Since the Cartesian Philosophers have (by irrefragable Reasons)
demonstrated, that the Nature of all real Bodies must needs consist in
extension, or (as they phrase it) the having parts extra parts; (it being
simply impossible to conceive an indivisible Atome, (or least particle of
matter) which is laid on a plain, to touch it in all parts, but that the
Superior Portion thereof, must be without the contact of that plain (where
there is no penetration) if therefore Christ's Body be reduced to an
indivisible point by Transubstantiation, it may be pertinently demanded, if
this Opinion does not reduce the Body of Christ to the Nature of a Spirit; and
consequently, is a worse Heresy than the Fantastical Body of the Marcionites?

17. Since diverse of the ancient Fathers improved the Doctrine of the Eucharist
in order to the Confutation of the Eutychian Heresy, had it not been perfect
nonsense in them to have avowed from such a Topic (if they had believed
Transubstantiation) which did apparently afford a great Instance to the
Eutychians against them?

SECT. XII. Of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass.
Qu. 1. SInce in a true Sacrifice, the Thing sacrificed must be destroyed; and
if it have Life it must be killed: it may be demanded, if Christ be truly and
properly Sacrificed (as the Romanists will have it) is he not truly and
properly put to Death as often as the Priest says Mass? which is directly
contrary to Heb. 10. and 11. Cap.

2. Whereas the Apostle argues the perfection of Christ's Sacrifice above those
of the Law, because those were offered year by year, but the Sacrifice of
Christ's Body was offered once for all; if Christ be daily Sacrificed in the
Mass, must not the Sacrifice of Christ be much more defective than those of the
Law; since one Sacrifice of Expiation for the whole Congregation of Israel, was
thought sufficient for the whole year? whereas the Sacrifice of Christ's Body
is repeated every day; yea, for one single person, he may be Sacrificed a
Thousand times over, if we may believe the Doctrine of that Church.

3. How could that be a Propitiatory Sacrifice at the first Institution, which
was previous to Christ's Death? unless they will say, that Propitiation was
made before Christ suffered: though with diverse of the ancient Fathers, we are
still ready to acknowledge the Eucharist to be a Commemorative Sacrifice; and
its possible, that the Error of the Romanists had its rise therefrom.

SECT. XIII. Of private Masses.
Quest. IS it possible to reconcile the Solitary Mass (wherein the Priest
Comumnicates alone after he has Consecrated) to the Institution of Christ, the
practice of the Primitive Church, or with the very nature and intendment of
that Sacrament; or with the Roman Office as it now stands; or if there can be
any instance given of Solitary Masses before Gregory the Great dyed, which was
600 years after Christ?

SECT. XIV. Of the Sacrament of Penance.
Qu. 1. WHen Nectarius, with his Church of Constantinople, discharged for ever
the Office of Penitentiaries, because of a scandalous Deacon; can it rationally
be presumed, that this Office was ever reputed by them a Sacrament, but rather
at the best, an Expedient to prepare men for it? for we are bound in Charity to
think, that neither the Bishop, nor that Church, would have ever consented to
the Abolition of a Sacrament, for the sake of such a Scandal as happened in the
mis-management of it; or if they had done so, much less can it be imagined that
the greatest part of the Christian Church would have concurred with them in it.
Moreover, since the ancient Church had no Form of Absolution, but only the
admitting Penitents to the Communion, where then shall the Form of that
pretended Sacrament be found among the Ancients?

2. If the Absolution of a Roman Priest has the power to convert Attrition
(that is, such a consternation of mind as fell upon Judas when he went and
hanged himself) into the Grace of Contrition (as diverse Popish Casuists aver)
had it not been an unspeakable happiness to that Betrayer of the best Master
that ever was, to have rencountred (in the way of striving) such a Priest, when
he was seeking after some Instrument to become Felo de se.

SECT. XV. Of the Sacrament of Marriage, with the Clergies restraint therefrom.
Qu. 1. IF Marriage be a Sacrament, and confer Grace, as Baptism and the
Eucharist; wherefore do they restrain their Consecrated Persons from that
supernatural Quality; since its only an Ecclesiastical Restraint they pretend
unto?

2. Since God has sufficiently declared his Approbation of the Marriage of the
Clergy, in that the whole World has been twice (by his Appointment) Peopled by
Two married Priests, viz. Adam and Noah; and that he tied the Priesthood under
the Law, to a Race of married People; and that the Scripture has told us,
Marriage is honorable in all; and places it among the Qualifications of a
Bishop, That he be the Husband of one Wife, having faithful Children (not to
speak of that Canon of the Council of Gangra, nor of the Discourse of
Paphnutius in the Council of Nice, nor of Spiridion, S. Hilary, Eucherius
Lugdunensis, and many other Primitive Bishops; who were married, beside the
Apostle S. Peter:) may it not be pertinently enquired, if the Church of Rome
borrowed their Doctrine of the unlawfulness of the Marriage of Priests, from
the Manichees, who allowed Marriage to their Hearers (as the Church of Rome
does to Laics) but forbad it to their Elect, as that Church does to her
Priests?

3. Had not Aeneas Sylvius (afterward P. Pius the 2d.) good reason to write,
that (in consideration of the vile Abuses of the Celibacy of the Clergy)
whatever reasons the Clergy had at first to restrain them from Marriage, now
for much better Reasons they ought to be restored to that which God has made
the Privilege of all men who cannot contain?

SECT. XVI. Of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
Quest. SUppose the Administration of Extreme Unction to dying persons, as a
Sacrament, had been the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church in all
Ages (though for a Thousand years after Christ we find no such thing) how can
the Practice of the Roman Church be reconciled to the Doctrine of S. James, or
S. Mark (for these are their Scripture-pretences) who manifestly show us, that
the design of that Anointing was the recovery of the Patient; (the gift of
miraculous Healing not being ceased in the days of S. James) whereas the
Romanists do not practice that Ceremony, till all hope of Recovery is past?

SECT. XVII. Of Tradition.
Qu. 1. OF those who magnify the Tradition of the Church so highly, as to
imagine that the very Credit of the Scripture depends thereon, or that it gives
the Scripture its Authority (which is as much as to say, that Man gives
Authority to Gods Word) it may be demanded, What if the Church should have
concealed or taught otherwise of those Writings, than as of the undoubted
Oracles of God, would she not have erred damnably in her Tradition?

2. Since Tradition in the Roman Church is taken in, to supply the Imaginary
defect of Scripture, and the Authority thereof to supply the defect of
Tradition; does it not hence follow, that neither Scripture nor Tradition,
signify any thing without the Churches Authority? And consequently, it must
needs be the Rule of their Faith; that is, They believe themselves.

3. Since the Doctrine of the Millenaries was unanimously received as an
Apostolic Tradition in the 2d and 3d Centuries of the Church, merely upon the
Authority and Antiquity of Papias, who lived presently after the Apostles; (and
yet by St. Hierom, and many of this present Age, looked upon as an Imposture)
and if both Irenaeus for his asserting that our Savior suffered about the
Fiftieth year of his Age, and Clem. Alexandrinus, that he died for the Sins of
the World about the Thirtieth year of his Age, are judged exceedingly mistaken,
(and not without good ground) notwithstanding they both pretended an Apostolic
Tradition, as having conversed with Apostolic Men; (Irenaeus having written
An. 180. and Clemens 190.) And in fine, since in that famous contention about
Easter (which miserably afflicted the Church in the days of P. Victor, Bishop
of Rome, by dividing the Eastern Christians from the Western; one pretending
Oral Tradition from S. John and S. Philip, and the other from S. Peter and S.
Paul) may it not be pertinently demanded, What stress can be laid upon a
pretense of Apostolic Tradition sixteen hundred years after Christ, (suppose
it were now become Universal) but especially, when it is but the particluar
Tradition of a particular Church?

4. What greater certainty can be given, of the uncertainty of Oral Tradition
(as it is contradistinguished from the Scripture) than this consideration, that
of all Christ said (and no doubt he spoke much in point of Morality, which is
not expressed in the Gospels) nothing is found in any Authentic Record (save
the Scriptures) except that one expression preserved by S. Hierom, Be thou
never merry, unless thou see thy Brother living in Charity; for which notable
expression, we have the sole Authority of S. Hierom?

5. Since its evident from the penult of S. John's Gospel at the end, as also
the close of the last Chapter, That our Savior did many great things, which
are not recorded in Holy Scripture; is it not a great Evidence of the great
incertainty of Oral Tradition, that none of all those Miracles not found in
Scripture, are conveyed to us by any warrantable Record? the Legends which
contain some of those pretended Miracles, being rejected as Fabulous by the
best Critics of the Roman Church.

SECT. XVIII. Of that Threadbare question, Where was your Church before Luther?
Qu. 1. OF those who are still harping on that Threadbare Question, Where was
your Church before Luther? May it not as pertinently be demanded, Should a
Revolt happen from the Reformed Church of England to Romanism again, (which God
forbid) where was your Religion before 86, or before such a time? Would they
not answer, at Rome, and in England also; only kept under, and obscured by
Heretics? And Christianity, though not so visible, yet was purer, when its
Professors dwelt in Mountains and Dens, (places of Obscurity and Privacy) in
the Reigns of Nero, Decius, and Dioclesian, than when some Kings were called
its Nursing Fathers, and took possession of the seven Halls, as when it groaned
under Arianism in the days of Constantius and Valens.

2. When some peremptorily require from us the Era of all the Popish Errors;
may it not be as pertinently demanded, when the Acephali began, (which was such
a ridiculous Linsy-Wolsey Heresy, as to be a Compound of these Contraries,
Nestorianism and Eutychianism, and yet gave great trouble to the Church for
many years) for Baronius and Bellarmin ingenuously acknowledge, that they know
neither the Heresiarch, or the Epoch of the Heresy; nor when Filioque was
inserted by the Latin Church, into the Creed; and if they know not the Era of
their Truths, how can it be rationally expected that we should design the
precise times when all their Errors began, since its in the Night Season, that
the Adversary Sows his Tares in the Field of the Church?

3. It may be demanded, what more pertinency (amongst Disputers) is in that old
Threadbare Question, Where was your Church, or Religion, before Luther; than in
this amongst Husbandmen, Where was the Corn before it was Weeded? For if our
Forefathers under the Papacy, embraced the true Faith, we have it still; the
Faith not being removed, but the Corruption.

4. Since the Church of England obliges none to believe any thing as necessary
to Salvation, but what is plainly proved from holy Scripture; and entirely
holds the Apostolic, Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds; and obeys more Canons of
the first general Councils, than those of Rome do; and approves that Exposition
of Scripture, which has the consent of the Fathers of the four first
Centuries: Yea, holds all that the Church of Rome held necessary for Salvation
for five or six hundred years together; so that a Romanist may turn Protestant,
without adding any Article to his Faith; but a Protestant cannot turn Romanist,
without the addition of many new ones, or novel Inventions, which have neither
Foundation in Scripture, nor genuin Antiquity: May it not then be most
rationally concluded, that the Protestant way is the surest and safest, because
both sides agree therein; and that their Church was, long before Papacy
appeared in the World?

5. Since its impossible to produce any genuin Work of any of the Fathers, who
lived within Four Hundred Years after Christ, that positively asserts the
practice or the lawfulness of Prayer in an unknown Tongue, of taking away the
Cup from the People, or withholding the Scriptures from the Laics, or Adoring
Images, or having them in Churches, the Pope's Infallibility or Supremacy,
Indulgences (in the Sense of Pope Leo the Tenth) the Doctrine of Merit, (in the
Sense of the Council of Trent) that there are neither more nor less than Seven
Sacraments, the necessity of the right Intention of the Priest for the Validity
of a Sacrament, Transubstantiation, the Limbo of unbaptized Infants, Private
Masses, the Popes deposing Power, etc. may it not more pertinently be demanded
of the Romanists, Where was Popery before Boniface the Third, than they can
enquire of the Protestants, Where was your Church before Luther?

6. Since its impossible to find any of the Primitive Fathers (or any Christian
Writer a thousand years after Christ and more,) who believed all the Twelve new
Articles of Faith, which P. Pius the Fourth has added to the Apostolic Creed;
may it not be pertinently demanded of the Romanists, Where was your Faith to be
found entirely before the Council of Trent? And is not the Modern Papacy
younger by many years than Martin Luther himself?

7. Since not one of the Twelve new Articles of the Creed of P. Pius the Fourth
is to be found in any ancient Creed or Confession of Faith generally allowed in
the Christian Church, (whence it is evident that they are Innovations destitute
of Primitive Authority) may we not more pertinently demand of them, Where was
Papacy when those Confessions were framed? than they can enquire of us, Where
was your Church before Luther?

8. Since every true Reformation necessarily pre-supposeth Corruptions and
Errors to have been before it, what Advantage can the Romanists have in
charging our Reformation with Novelty? For if a real Reformation be made, the
thing justifies it self, and a Reformation must begin sometime, and when ever
it begins, it is certainly new: Besides, it ought to be considered, that this
Objection of Novelty lies against all Reformation whatsoever; tho never so
necessary, and tho things be never so much amiss: So that tho our Reformation
was as late as Luther, our Religion is as ancient as Christianity it self; for
when the Additions which the Church of Rome has made to the ancient Christian
Faith, and their Innovations in Practice are pared off, that which remains of
their Religion is ours; and this they cannot deny to be every tittle of it the
ancient Christianity: And what other Answer, I pray, could the Jews have given
to the like Question, if it had been put to them by the Ancient Idolaters of
the World, Where was your Religion before Abraham or Moses? Or what other
Answer could the Primitive Christians have given to those Pagans, who pretended
Venerable Antiquity and Universality for their Polytheisme, but the very same
in substance, which we now give to the Church of Rome? And if any be so fond as
to brand the Protestant Religion with Novelty, because of some negative
Articles (in opposition to the Corruptions of the Roman Church, which by
accident are become a part of our Faith, occasioned by their Errors) they may
as well tax the Primitive Church with Novelty, because the renouncing of the
Doctrines of Arianism at the Council of Nice, of Macedonianism at the Council
of Constantinople, of Nestorianism at Ephesus, and of Eutychianism at Calcedon,
came a part of the Catholic Religion after the rise of those Heresies.

9. But, (to shut up this Point) if to Pray without Understanding, to obey
without Reason, and to believe against Sense, be the surest Evidences of the
Antiquity of a Church, then I pray where is that Protestant to be found, who is
so contentious for Priority, as not to yield (upon these accounts) the
Precedence to the Church of Rome above all Christian Societies in the World?

SECT. XIX. Of the Infallibility of the Pope with his Councils.
Qu. 1. IF the Pope or Church of Rome be infallible, wherefore are they so
uncharitable to the World (at least to their own Incorporation) as not to give
an infallible Comment on Scripture, but suffers her Doctors to write as
fallible Comments, and in many things as contrary to each other, as any
Protestant Divines do? And I cannot imagine what good Infallibility does, if an
infallible Church has no better means of understanding Scripture, than the
Comments of fallible Men, that is, no better means then every fallible Church
has?

2. When the Doctors of the Roman Church vye Reasons and Arguments with us
Heretics, and dispute from Scripture and Antiquity, (especially in order to
the establishing that beloved Palladium of their Churches Authority and
Infallibility, which those cross-grained Heretics deny) do they not appeal
from the Infallibility of the present Church, to every Man's private Reason and
Judgment, as much as every Protestant does? For its against the very Principles
of Philosophy, to imagine that the Churches Authority can be a sufficient Topic
to prove it self.

3. If a visible uninterrupted Succession be the Mark of such a true Church, as
is the infallible Interpreter of Scripture (as some Romanists aver) wherefore
is not the Greek Church an infallible Interpreter of Scripture, since she has
as visible and uninterrupted Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this
Day, as the Church of Rome has? yea, if we consult the Catalogues of their
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, we shall not find so many Chasma's
occasioned (in those Lists) by Schisms, as in the Sea of Rome.

4. Since P. Zachary deposed Virgilius Bishop of Saltzburge, as an Heretic,
because he truly maintained, (tho in a very ignorant Age) the Doctrine of
Antipodes; may it not be pertinently demanded, may not he who can mistake Truth
for Heresy, also mistake Heresy for Truth? as no doubt P. Liberius, Vigilius,
and Honorius did.

5. Since its confessed by Bellarmine (and diverse other eminent Champions for
that Church) that the Popes Canonizations are doubtful and subject to Error;
may it not be pertinently demanded, if his Infallibility should chance at any
time to mistake (as I am pretty sure he has done more than once) in what a
pitiful case are the Members of that Church, who are obliged to invocate such
mistaken Saints? Would not that be Idolatry?

6. Since in the first and last Ages of the Church, there were many Schisms and
Heresies, which (if we believe Irenaeus, who lived in the Second Century) were
as wild and extravagant as any of later date; now if the Fathers who lived in
these Primitive Ages believed the Infallibility of the Roman Church at that
time, may it not be pertinently demanded, Was there no Prudence amongst them
all in going so far about by their endeavors to bring those Heretics and
Schismatics to the Touchstone of the Scripture, and next to that, to the most
Orthodox and Catholic Tradition? whereas how short and easy a Decision to all
Debates might have been fetched hence, had they had the same Apprehension of
the Authority and Efficacy thereof, by referring all Controversies depending to
the determination of the Roman Church (the Mother and Mistress of all) and that
infallible Conduct settled therein? But not one word of that, which makes it
more than probable, that such holy and wise men knew no such thing; only when
they make their Appeals to her after the express word of God, its in common
with many other Churches, especially those of Apostolical Foundation, as is
evident from Irenaeus, Tertullian, and St. Augustine, when they had to deal with
such Persons.

7. How can any rational man imagine that the Popes or Roman Councils (which
they account General) are infallible, even when they are confirmed by Popes,
unless Errors become Truths, and Contradictions be reconciled when determined
by a Pope and Council? Since P. Vigilius not only confirmed the Fifth General
Council, which formerly he had condemned, but General Councils confirmed by
Popes have made Definitions and Decrees plainly contradictory one to another:
Thus the Sixth General Council confirmed by Pope Adrian the First, defined that
Marriage was dissolved by Heresy: And the Council of Trent, confirmed by P.
Pius the Fourth, that it could not be so: The Council of Constance, confirmed
by Pope Martin the Fifth, decreed, that a General Council was superior to the
Pope: The last Lateran Council, under P. Leo the Tenth, condemned this Decree;
so did it the Decree of P. Nicholas the Fifth, who ratified the Council of
Basil, as a true General Council.

8. How can any doubt that General Councils confirmed by Popes, may err? since
it is so manifest they have actually erred, by making Decrees so apparently
contradictory to the Plain Words and Sense of Holy Scripture, that no impartial
Person can any more question it, than he can, whether Theft be forbidden by the
Eighth Commandment: So did the Council of Constance, confirmed by P. Martin the
Fifth, and Trent, by P. Pius the Fourth, the former in the Decree for Laics
Communicating in one kind only, notwithstanding (as themselves acknowledge)
that Christ instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, and delivered it in both to
his Disciples: The later in decreeing, that Divine Service should not be in the
Vulgar Tongue, in plain Contradiction to what St. Paul prescribes in 1 Cor. 14.
not to speak that the Pope's Confirmation of Doctrinal Definitions, is but a
mere Ceremony; it being impossible for any man to make that become true, which
is false; or that which is false, to become true.

9. Since from the fitness of an infallible visible Judge for the Militant
Church, the Romanists are apt to pretend that God has actually appointed such
an one, without which, God (say they) had not made sufficient Provisions for
the Assurance of Man's Faith, and for the Peace and Unity of his Church (or, as
it is with a strange kind of Civility expressed in their Canon Law, Aliter
Dominus non videretur fuisse discretus, otherwise our Lord had not seemed to be
discreet) may it not be very pertinently urged from this Topic of Humane
Appearance, that it had been yet more useful for the Church, that not only the
first Patriarch, but all of them, had been infallible; yea, and all the
Bishops, and Presbyters of the Church; and if all men had been infallible,
certainly the Church of God should never have been troubled with any Error
whatsoever, but the experience of the World demonstrates that it is not so.

10. If it be a fit Argument always to conclude that God has done such a
thing, because the generality of Men judge it expedient to be done; may it not
be pertinently demanded, where is that man, who, consulting with Flesh and
Blood (I mean Humane Reason) who would not have thought it very fit, that our
Savior, after his Resurrection, should have publicly taught the People of
Jerusalem in the Temple, as he used to do, that all the Inhabitants of that
great City, (yea, all the Males throughout the Land being obliged to be there
also at the Feast of the Passover) might by an ocular Demonstration be
convinced that our Savior was not an Impostor, when he said he would rise
again the third day? yet the infinite Wisdom thought it not fit, For his ways
are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts, Isa. 55. 8, 9.

11. Since it is no less behoofful for the Purity of the Militant Church, to be
secured from Vice, than from Error, by some infallible means; and whereas the
former is not pretended to by any, is it not very reasonable to put the
Romanists to it, to show from Scripture who this Infallible Visible Judge is
who is invested with that Power, or Commission; especially when it is
considered that our Judge of Controversies in the Church is now become our
greatest Controversy? Besides that, it would puzzle any man to give a good
reason why God should take more care to secure men against Errors in Belief,
than against Sin and Wickedness in their Lives.

12. If an infallible visible Judge be such an adequate means to determine all
Controversies in matters of Religion, which happen in the Militant Church, (as
the Romanists pretend) how came it to pass that there were so many Schisms and
Heresies too in the Apostles times, when those who governed the Church were
certainly guided by an Infallible Spirit?

13. Can the fiercest Bigot of Popery prove from Holy Scripture, that the Pope
is infallible (in the Popish Sense of the World?) I know that some fly the
Absurdity, by hiding the Pope in the Church; but if the Church be Infallible,
it is so as its representative in General Councils, or diffusive in the whole
Body of Christians; and then what is Infallibility to the Church of Rome, more
than to any other particular Church? And how shall that which is common to all,
give power to one over all? And what is it to the Pope above another Bishop or
Patriarch?

14. Since the Council of Trent has determined that Infants should not be
Communicated, because they cannot examine themselves, nor discern the Lord's
Body; who can doubt but that Popes, with their Councils, and Roman Church, have
erred in their Belief and Practice of the Communion of Infants long ago, it
being past all doubt that for some Hundreds of Years it was so in the Roman
Church?

15. Was not the Apostle to blame, to say there must be Heresies and Divisions
among you, and not to tell them, there must be also an infallible Judge among
you to obviate such pertinacious Errors and Schisms, if so be that God had
appointed any such infallible visible Judge to be for ever in his Church?

16. If the many Dissentions in the Protestant Churches (as is pretended) make
this infallible visible Judge always necessary, how is it that this sole Remedy
is found so ineffectual against the Divisions in the Roman Church, and that
there are so many Differences there about Infallibility it self, the manner and
subject of it? so that many Romanists (not of the dullest brains) being ashamed
of it, have betaken themselves to Tradition instead thereof.

SECT. XX. Of the Pope's Supremacy.
Qu. 1. SInce the Reason assigned by the Council of Calcedon, giving equal
Privileges to the Patriarch of Constantinople with him of Rome, is because old
Bizantium was become Nova Roma, that is, the Emperors had fixed their
Habitations there; might not Milan and Ravenna have claimed the same
Privilege, seeing some Emperors did honor those Cities with their Presence
many years?

2. Had not the African Churches as good reason to decline the pretended
Authority of the Bishops of Rome, as the Churches of Cyprus to reject the
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Antioch (from which liberated at last by the
Third General Council) since they had still a Primat of their own; and were no
more within the Roman Patriarchat, than Cyprus was within that of Antioch?

3. Since all sober Persons hinc inde, acknowledge a Primacy of Order in St.
Peter (either for his Age, or his being first called to be an Apostle, or for
his Zeal, or some other reason best known to his Lord and Master) it being
impossible that any Society should remain long without Confusion (far less that
it should continue well ordered) which has not one appointed to be the Mouth
thereof; it may therefore be pertinently demanded if any Romanist can produce
any place of Scripture which imports a formal Jurisdiction in St. Peter, which
was not at some other time vouchsafed on the Catholic Church, at least on the
rest of the Apostles?

4. Dato sed non concesso, that St. Peter had a Primacy of Jurisdiction over
all the General Members of the Catholic Church; wherefore might not this have
been a personal Privilege and intransmissible to any Successor, no less than
the Gradus Mosaicus was to any other Prophet?

5. Upon what Grounds do Bellarmin and others call Christ's Ingemination of
these Words, Feed my Sheep, the peculiar Privilege of St. Peter, above all the
rest of the Apostles, since St. Augustine, and St. Cyril of Alexandria call it
the peculiar Penance of St. Peter for denying his Lord and Master, which none
of the rest had done?

6. Since the Primitive Fathers by Rock in the 16th. of St. Matthew, generally
understand either Christ himself, or that excellent Confession of St. Peter,
where then does his peculiar Prerogative lie in these Words?

7. Suppose our Savior did mean by St. Peter, when he said, On this Rock will
I build my Church, (alluding to his Name by way of Emphasis, not Exclusion) I
pray, where is yet the peculiarity of St. Peter's Privilege, since if we
believe either St. Paul, or St. John in his Revelation, the rest of the
Apostles were Foundations as well as he? for I hope none will call him the
Chief Cornerstone.

8. Since the generality of the ancient Fathers look upon Peter (both in his
Excellent Confession, and Promise made to him, as personating the Catholic
Church) and that what our Savior there promised, was after his Resurrection
fulfilled, as we may read, John 20. 21, 22, 23. Where, I pray you, is St.
Peter's special Privilege above the rest of the Apostles, since our Savior
said to them all alike, As my Father sent me, so send I you: (and I suppose S.
Peter could not have a Sublimer Mission than our Savior) and breathed upon
them all, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose Sins ye remit, etc.

9. But what ever Sense these Words of St. John may have, or these of St.
Matthew, does it not evidently appear, that what our Savior promised to St.
Peter, Matthew. 16. was given to the Catholic Church, at least to the rest of
the Apostles as well as Peter, in Matthew. 18. 18. in the same words of Mat. 16.
our Savior himself having expounded the Power of the Keys, by that of Binding
and loosing?

10. Since after that Promise made to St. Peter, Mat. 18. we find the Apostles
(more than once) controverting for Superiority; may it not very rationally be
presumed that H. Jesus (the Wisdom of the Father and Prince of Peace) having
taken notice of that Ambitious Debate, would once have undeceived them, by
telling them, that tho the Despotical Power of the Gentile Kings or Governors
should be far removed from them, yet their minds should be at rest, because he
had already invested St. Peter with a Paternal Authority or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction over them, when he promised to him the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; but since in our Savior's reproof we find no such Insinuation, may it
not be pertinently doubted if ever he meant any such matter?

11. I would demand, how the ensuing particulars can be reconciled to a formal
Jurisdiction of S. Peter over the rest of the Apostles, 1. The Care of all the
Churches being committed to every one of them in solidum. 2. St. Peter was sent
by the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem to Samaria (he that gave the
Commission having rather the Authority, than the Person commissionated.) 3. His
being called to an account for conversing with Cornelius the Centurion in
Caesaria, and other Gentiles, by those at Jerusalem, velut vehementur infensi
(as S. Chrysostom phraseth it.) 4. If St. Peter was then Supreme Governor,
wherefore did not the controverting Christians at Antioch address first to him
in order to the indicting of a Council? 5. Wherefore did St. James preside
therein, and by his Verdict determine the Controversy (if we believe Eusebius
and Epiphanius) and not St. Peter, on which account, and because he was the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, and of the Christian World, Epiphanius positively
asserts that St. James was invested by our Savior with a Superiority over all
the Apostles. 6. Wherefore was not that Decree issued forth in the Name of
Peter, if he was the Monarch of the Church? 7. Why was St. Paul so immethodical
to reckon James before Cephas or Peter; and so arrogant as to say, that he was,
in nothing, inferior to the chiefest Apostles (for if St. Peter was his
Superior, he came short of him in something, which is very material, and that
is Authority.) 8. Was not St. Paul a very unmannerly Vassal to rebuke his Lord
and Master for Judaizing; and so solemnly, that both Jews and Gentiles were
witness to the Reproof? 9. How could St. Cyprian say that the rest of the
Apostles were the same that St. Peter was, pari consortio praediti honoris and
potestatis? Finally, How could Eusebius aver (in his Old Editions, before they
suffered the Index Expurgatorius) that Peter, James, and John were appointed
Princes of the Apostles, and that these three were equal?

12. Since P. Leo the Tenth, with the consent and approbation of the Lateran
Council (which they account General) declares that our Blessed Savior did
institute St. Peter (and his Successors in the Roman See) his Vicars, to whom,
by the Testimony of the Book of Kings, it was so necessary to yield Obedience,
that whosoever would not, was punished with Death: (thus Binius Council. Tom.
9.) it may be pertinently demanded, if they have Five Books of the Kings, for
in the Vulgar Version (which have four of that Name) there is not any Syllable
which insinuates any such matter?

13. If the Bishop of Rome was invested Iure Divino, with an universal
Jurisdiction over the Catholic Church; or if the Roman Church, either in its
Head or Members, severally, or in all conjunctly, be endued with an infallible
Spirit; how comes it to pass that all the ancient Apologists were guilty of
such a Supine Negligence (from Justin Martyr, the first of them, who lived,
Anno 150. to Theodoret inclusively, who dyed about the middle of the Fifth
Century) as never to mention that most admirable Prerogative of the Roman
Church above all the Societies in the World, since some of them descend to many
minute Particulars, which are long ago obsolete and out of date in all the
Churches of Christ?

14. If it be a sufficient Answer for the Silence of the Apologists, to say,
that they are so succinct, that they had no room for such a matter? For though
it is easily granted, that of Asianus, Melito, Quadratus, and Aristides, we
have but Shreds in Eusebius; and that Athenagoras, Tatian, Theophilus,
Antiochenus, Minutius Foelix, Cyprian ad Demetrianum, I. Firmicus Maternus, are
very brief; not to speak of many Orations written by the Fathers against Julian
the Apostate, the Jews and Gentiles in general (which are also reckoned among
the Apologists, and are yet briefer) yet the two Apologies of Justin Martyr,
with his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, all the Works of Clem. Alexandrinus,
save his Paedagogus, the larger Apologetick of Tertullian, with his lesser ad
Scapulam, and some Books against the Jews and Gentiles, the eight Books of
Origin against Celsus, the seven Books of Arnobius contra Gentes, and so many
of Lactantius his Institutions, Eusebius de demonstratione and praeparatione
Evangelica, S. Augustine his 22 Books de Civitate Dei, Theodoret his 12 Books de
curandis Graecorum affectibus; all these are pretty Voluminous: yet ne gru
quidem, not the least word or insinuation of any such prodigious privilegeof
the Roman Church, either in its Head or Members.

15. What greater Elogy could have been given by any of the Fathers to S.
Peter, than that which S. Chrysostom applies to S. Paul, that he was the Light
of all the Churches, the Foundation of the Faith, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth?

16. Might not the Bishop of Antioch have claimed by virtue of Succession, a
Superiority over all the Organical Members of the Catholic Church, as well as
the Bishop of Rome; since it is certain, S. Peter resided seven years at
Antioch; and it cannot be proved from any Authentic Record, that he was one
year at Rome?

17. May not the Bishop of Jerusalem (which is the Mother of us all) with
better reason claim an universal Monarchy over the Church, by virtue of
Succession; since the unquestionable Head of the Church dyed there? And S.
James the Lord's Brother, was unquestionably the first Bishop of the Christian
World; whence Epiphanius concludes, that the Principality over the Church was
due to him, and not to St. Peter.

18. Since its granted by Bellarmin and others, that St. Peter's Martyrdom at
Rome was but accidental (there being no Scripture Promise, or Catholic
Tradition for it) can the Bishop of Rome, by virtue of his See, pretend to S.
Peter's Spirit and Power, upon better grounds than Vibius Rufus did to the
Genius of the Great Caesar, because he bought his Chair?

19. Could any of the Fathers have Complemented the Bishop of Rome with an
higher Hyperbole, than Synesius the Bishop of Cyrene, did his Patriarch
Theophilus of Alexandria (none of the best of men, for he was a great
Persecutor of S. Chrysostom) by calling his Advice a Divine Response, and an
Heavenly Oracle?

20. Can any Instance be given of any Bishop of Rome, who before the famous
Council of Nice, presumed to exercise any proper Act of Jurisdiction, without
the proper Bounds of his own Patriarchat, called the Suburbicarian Churches,
except P. Victor; who for attempting to Censure others without his own
Precinct, was severely reprehended by Irenaeus; and P. Stephen, who was justly
censured by S. Cyprian?

21. Since to be the ultimate Object of Appeals (or dernier besort, as the
French phrase it) is the Essential Privilege of all Monarchs, is it
accountable, that the Council of Nice believed the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy
over the Catholic Church, when it determined, that all Appeals during the
Intervals of general Councils, should be determined in the Provincial Synods,
or by the respective Patriarchs; and that there should be no Appeal from the
one to the other?

22. If the Churches of Africa believed the Popes Supremacy to be jure divino,
how could 217 Bishops in the 6th. Council of Carthage, (whereof S. Austin was
one) have opposed Three Popes successively in the matter of Appeals to Rome;
and condemned all those as Schismatics, who did thus Appeal; and made a formal
Separation of their Churches from the Roman, upon the account of its Illegal
and Uncharitable Encroachments?

23. If that Separation was unjust, how comes S. Augustine to be reputed over
all the Christian World, and at Rome too, an eminent Saint? since he died, (as
the Romanists think) in actual and unrepented Schism: since S. Augustine denied
the Popes Supremacy in matter of Appeals to Rome, no less than Henry the Eighth
of England, might not P. Coelestin as justly have Excommunicated S. Augustine,
as P. Paul the Third, did Henry the Eighth of England?

24. Since by many of the Epistles of Gregory the Great to the Emperor
Mauricius, and John the Patriarch of Constantinople, its apparent, that he
declares all those Prelates who usurp the Titles of Ecumenical Patriarch,
Universal Bishop, and Head of the Catholic Church, to be the Forerunners, or
Harbangers of Antichrist; may it not be pertinently demanded, if all those
Popes who from Boniface? the Third inclusively, have affected those Titles, do
not stand condemned by the Judgment of their Predecessor as Antichristian?

25. If it be the Popes Prerogative (as the Romanists pretend) to assemble all
the general Councils, how did it chance, that during a Thousand years after
Christ, and more, there was not an Ecumenical Synod in Italy, no not in all
the West, (unless that of Frankford be accounted one, which was indicted by
Charlemain against the Conventicle at Nice) and that they were very desirous to
have one in Italy, is most evident from the Letters of P. Leo the First, (none
of the meanest spirited Popes) to Theodosius the Younger, his Sister Pulcheria,
the Emperor Marcianus, Valentinian the Third, with Eudoxia the Empress; whom
he did Supplicate on his Knees, with many Tears, (thus he phraseth it) for a
Council to be holden in Italy against the Eutychians; but could never obtain
his desire, as to that Circumstance.

26. If the Emperors were nothing else but the Popes Mandatarij in the
indicting of Councils (as some term them) what could be the reason that P.
Vigilius, being personally in Constantinople, would not Countenance the 5th
general Council, assembled there by Justinian the Great, till he was haled
thereto by the Authority of the Emperor, and forced to obey the Mandat of his
pretended Mandatarius, in condemning the tria Capitula, which by a former
Constitution he had approved?

27. If the Confirmation of a general Council by the Pope, be so necessary,
that all its acts are invalid without it, (as some Romanists pretend) how could
the Patriarchs of Constantinople be so irregular, as to possess the place in
all succeeding Councils (where they were present) which the 2d and 4th general
Councils had allotted to them, notwithstanding of all the Protestations of P.
Leo the First, and his Successors, against those Council Acts?

28. Since the Bishops of the Primitive Church were promiscuously termed Popes,
(from the old Greek word (...) which signifies a Father) their Episcopal Sees,
Thrones, and Empires; and themselves, (how small soever their Diocese were)
were also called Princes (if we believe S. Gregory Nazianzen, and S. Hilary of
Poictiers) all were termed the Successors of the Apostles, and equal as to the
intrinsi Power of Bishops, whether it were the little Bishopric of Eugubium,
compared with that of Rome; Rhegium with that of Constantinople; Tanis with
Alexandria; (if we give Faith to S. Hierom) therefore it may pertinently be
demanded, What solid Grounds had Hildebrand to Monopolize those Titles to the
Bishop of Rome?

29. If the Romanists can produce any Authentic Author for the Decretal
Epistles of all the Popes, from Clemens to P. Sirvius, (that is to the middle,
at the least, of the 4th Century) though they have made up a considerable part
of the Canon Law, before Riculfus Archbishop of Mentz, who lived 500 years
after those Popes were dead.

30. Since the Belief of an Infallible Headship in the Bishop of Rome, is with
many Romanists, the reason why they receive their Articles of Faith; must it
not then be the fundamental Article of all others? And ought it not to be the
best attested by some plain places of Scripture; and not leave by its silence
this sole visible Vicegerent of Christ, to the Suspicion of bearing witness to
himself?

31. Since the Pope receives his Office with an Oath, to observe the Apostolic
Canons (as they are termed) with the Canons of the Eight first general
Councils; and notwithstanding, it is evident from the 35 and 36 Canons of the
Apostles, (or the 33 and 34 Canons, as Binius has them) that these are
directly against the Popes Supremacy, as also the 6 and 7 Canons of the First
general Council; the 9, 17, and 28 Canons of the Fourth general Council: the
Fifth, in condemning the Sentence of P. Vigilius, (in favor of the tria
Capitula) tho he was very vehement in the cause: the Sixth and Seventh, in
Condemning P. Honorius of Heresy: the Eighth and last, by imposing a Canon
upon the Church of Rome, and challenging Obedience thereunto, ( viz. its
Condemning a Custom of the Sabbath Fast in Lent) may we not very rationally
hence conclude, that the Fathers during eight hundred and seventy years after
Christ, knew no such thing as the Popes Supremacy by Divine Right, or any Right
at all, seeing they opposed it: And that they did not believe the Infallibility
of the Church of Rome, that they had no Tradition of either that Supremacy or
Infallibility, that it is in vain to plead Antiquity in the Fathers, or
Councils, or Primitive Church, for either: and that the Canons of these eight
general Councils, being the sense both of the ancient and the professed Faith
of the present Church of Rome, the Popes Authority must needs stand Condemned
by the Catholic Church at this day, by the ancient Church, and the present
Church of Rome her self, as she holds Communion (at least in Profession) with
the ancient? And in fine, how can the Church of Rome escape the charge of
Heresy? for he who believes the Popes Supremacy, denies in effect, the eight
first general Councils, (at least in that point) and that is Heresy; and he who
believes the Council of Trent, believes the Article of the Popes Supremacy;
therefore he who believes the Council of Trent, does not believe the eight
first general Councils, and therefore is guilty of Heresy: And how can any
Pope evade the Brand of Schism, (the foulest that ever the Church groaned
under) aggravated with the horrid Crime of Perjury; since the Pope (as such)
professes to believe, and swears to govern the Church according to the
Canons of the first General Councils, yet openly claims, and professedly
practices a Power condemned by them all: thus, quatenus Pope, he stands guilty
of Separation from the ancient Church; and as Head of a new and strange
Society, draws the Body of his Faction after him into the same Schism, in flat
contradiction to the ancient Church, and to that solemn Oath by which also the
Pope, as Pope, binds himself (at his Inauguration) to maintain the Doctrine and
Practice thereof.

SECT. XXI. Of the Pope's Deposing Power.
Qu. 1. SInce the Fourth Lateran Council, under Innocent the Third, promised a
Plenary Pardon of all their Sins, and a greater Degree of Glory hereafter, to
those who did extirpate Heretics; if it may not be presumed that this most
bountiful Proffer does animate Traitors to murder their own Princes, whom Rome
has declared Heretical?

2. What greater reason is there of expounding these words spoken to Jeremy, (I
have set thee over Kings to root out, to pluck up, and destroy) of the Pope's
Supremacy, and Deposing Power, (as both Innocent the Third, and the Canon Law
do) than had the Donatists of applying those words in the Canticles, (Tell me,
O thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flock to
rest at Noon) to the Flock of their Party in the Southern Country of Africa?

3. If any be so quick-sighted as to find the Popes Universal Monarchy and
Deposing Power in these Words, Feed my Sheep (Heretical Princes being those
Wolves which are to be driven away as hurtful to the Flock) may not such a
Lyncean Eye by a like kind of Interpretation find this other Mystery in the
Words, that all Christians are Fools, because Sheep are silly Creatures?

4. Since the Doctrine of Deposing Power in Popes (by which I mean not only
their excommunicating absolute Monarchs, but also the exposing their Dominions
as a just Prey to the first Invader) is so scandalous to the Christian Religion
in the Eyes of all sober Romanists, and has been found so mischievous to many
Sovereign Princes; wherefore was not that destructive Doctrine condemned by
some General Council, they having had many which they account such, since the
Fourth Council of Lateran, under Innocent the Third, where it was certainly
defined, let them call it an Article of Faith, a Point of Discipline, or what
they will.

5. Since it is evident from Baronius, Binius, Platina, Onuphrius, and many
others, that Gregory the 7th. (nicknamed Hildebrand) did excommunicate Henry
the 4th. Emperor of Germany: P. Paschal the 2d, Henry the 5th. Alexander the
3d, Frederick the 1st. Innocent the 4th, Frederick the 2. Boniface the 8th,
Philip the Fair of France: Julius the 2d, Lewis the 12th. with him who was King
of Navarre at that time; (on which putrid Title Ferdinand the Catholic seized
on his Kingdom) and that Alexander the 3d did also excommunicate Henry the 2d.
of England: And Innocent the 3d, King John, (Six years before the Resignation
of his Crown into the Hands of that Popes Legate;) may it not be justly doubted,
if they who can confidently aver that never any Pope presumed to excommunicate
an absolute Prince, did ever read those Histories, if so be they have put in
Print what they did think?

6. Whether that place, 1 Pet. 2. 13. which is quoted by P. Innocent the 3d. in
his arrogant Epistle to the Emperor of Constantinople, does prove that the
Pope is as much greater than the Emperor, as the Sun is greater than the Moon?
which strange Comparison is inserted by Gregory the 9th. into the Body of the
Canon Law; and ever since continued in all the Editions of that Law.

7. If Gregory the Great imagined himself superior to the Emperor Mauritius,
and not rather much his Inferior, when he wrote to that Emperor, that in
Obedience to his Commands he had published one of his Laws, which himself
judged scarce agreeable to the Law of God?

8. If (according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome) it can properly be
called Rebellion to resist and dethrone a deposed Prince, or if it can be
termed true Loyalty to defend him? Since the deposing Doctrine does import,
that when a Prince is deposed by the Authority of their Church, they absolve
their Subjects from their Fealty; and then it is no Rebellion to take up Arms.

9. Since the deposing Doctrine has been decreed and practiced by their Popes
and General Councils, and that no Pope or Council since Gregory the 7th. has
ever condemned it; and that the Jesuits do still maintain it, (their greatest
Champions, Bellarmin, Suarez, Becan, Gretzer, Mariana, Sanctarellus, and many
others, having expressly declared for it) yea, tho the present Pope (who is not
the worst of the Pack) did lately censure some other Jesuitical Doctrines (as
great Immoralities) yet he thought fit to let the deposing Doctrine escape
without Censure; may we not justly admire how some of this Age have the
Effrontory to outface all Mankind (who have Eyes in their Heads, and Skill
enough to read the Decrees of their Popes and Councils) by saying that the
deposing Doctrine is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, but of a nameless
Party?

10. As for those who Found their Loyalty upon this Supposition, that the
deposing Doctrine is not the Doctrine of the Roman Church, does not this
Hypothesis afford a shrewd Suspicion, that if it were the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, or ever should be so, or they should ever be convinced that it
is so, then they would be for the deposing of Princes, no less than those, who
at this Day believe it to be the Doctrine thereof?

11. May it not be justly doubted, whatever some little inferior People in
Communion with the Church of Rome think of these Matters, while the Governing
part of the Church believes otherwise, as they certainly do, at this day (if
the Pope and his Adherents are the Governing Part) Princes have no security
that Popes will not challenge and exercise this Authority, but their want of
Power to do it, which is wholly owing to the Reformation; for till Princes had
Subjects who valued not the Popes Authority, they themselves were the Popes
Vassals, and must necessarily be so again, could they extinguish this pestilent
Northern Heresy (as they phrase it) the great Fault of which is, that it has
given Strength and Security to Princes, by weakening the Popes Pretensions.

12. Since the Council of Constance owns the 4th. Council of Lateran for a
General Council, Sess. 39. (where the deposing Power is as expressly declared as
any thing can be, unless Men will quibble upon Words, and make Nonsense of
them) and that P. Martin the 5th. in his Bull for the Confirmation of the
Council of Constance, Sess. 45. gives the Sense of the Proposition of that
Council, Sess. 15. may it not be very pertinently asserted, that the said
Council condemns only the killing of a Tyrant, and not of an Heretic; and the
killing of a Tyrant, who is not condemned and deposed, not of one who is
excommunicated for Heresy; for that last Clause, without expecting the
Sentence and Command of a Judge, supposes that it may be a very lawful and
meritorious Act to kill such Princes as are deposed by Superior Judges, that
is, by the Pope or Council; which is the only Authority that ever pretended to
judge or depose Sovereign Princes; and therefore when Suarez was urged with
this Decree, he answered, Defens. Fidei, lib. 6. cap. 4. Where do you find in
the Acts of that Council, that this extends to Princes excommunicated or
deposed by the Pope?

13. If we may take and leave of the Roman Councils what we please, and be good
Catholics still; wherefore may we not reject the Decrees of their Councils
about Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, the Invocation of Saints, and
Worship of Images, etc. and continue as good Catholics as they are, who
renounce the Authority of their Councils as to the deposing Power?

14. Since P. Paul the 5th. (Anno 1606.) by a Breve written to the English
Catholics, declared and taught them, as Pastor of their Souls, that the Oath
of Allegiance, established by Parliament, (3 Iac. 1.) cannot be taken without
violating the Christian Faith, and injuring the Salvation of their Souls, as
containing many things which are manifestly contrary to Faith and Salvation:
Now, (as the Author of the First Treatise against the Oath of Allegiance,
called, The Jesuits Loyalty, well observes) there are not in it (multa) many
things to which this Censure is possibly applicable, unless this be one, that
the Pope has no Power to despose the King, or absolve his Subjects from the
Oath of Allegiance; now when in Obedience to the Pope, the Roman Catholics
have to this day obstinately refused this Oath (some very few excepted, who
were Anathematized at Rome for doing so) is there not reason to suspect, that
they are not clear in this Point? and that they who will not abjure so
pernicious a Doctrine, may be persuaded to practice it when time serves, and
then let any man judge what security there is of their Loyalty?

15. As for those Loyal English Romanists, who will not allow the Deposing
Doctrine to be the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, though they acknowledge it
to have been Decreed by Popes and Councils, because all the Ages before Gregory
the Seventh, were positively against the Deposing Doctrine, that this was a
Doctrine brought in in the 11th Century, against the Judgment and Practice of
Ten before, and that all the Fathers were against it; must they not needs go
upon these Principles, 1. That Popes and Councils may, and have decreed such
Doctrines as are contrary to Scripture and Catholic Tradition? 2. That no good
Catholic is bound to own such Doctrines, though decreed by Popes and Councils?
3. That this Doctrine (although so decreed) is not the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church? 4. That men are good Catholics, not by adhering to the
Doctrine of Popes and Councils, but to the Scriptures, expounded by Primitive
and Catholic Tradition? These are indeed the better Subjects, for adhering to
those Principles; for those are the very Principles on which our Reformation is
founded, and by which we justify our selves against the Innovations of the
Church of Rome: But though these Principles will justify the Reformation, yet
they will not prove, that this Deposing Doctrine is not taught by the present
Church of Rome.

16. But to shut up all these Queries concerning that vile Deposing Doctrine, I
desire only to be informed, what Roman Catholic Nation, who had all the Power
in their hands, would have suffered a Protestant Prince to Succeed quietly to
his Throne? We know how it fared with Henry the Fourth of France,
(notwithstanding the Parliament of Paris, burnt Mariana's Book) and what
Henrician Heretics in those days signified; but our Church teaches better; and
the True Sons of the Church practice better; and we hope they shall never have
reason to repent of what they have done.

SECT. XXII. Of their Incharitableness to all other Christians.
Qu. 1. HOw can they be vindicated from Hypocrisy in a very high degree
(beside their Uncharitableness) who after they have Condemned an Heretic, and
delivered him to the Secular Judge to be burnt, yet thus bespeak him; We
passionately desire you for the Love of God, and in regard of Piety, Mercy, and
our Mediation, you would free this miserable person from all danger of Death,
or mutilation of Members; How can this be reconciled to the 20 Cap. of the 25
Sess. of the Council of Trent about Reformation?

2. Since Boniface the Eighth has determined, that it is indispensably
necessary for all men, to believe the Bishop of Rome to be the Ecumenical
Patriarch, the Universal Bishop, the Visible Head and Monarch of the Catholic
Church, the Infallible Doctor of its Faith and Manners, S. Peter's Successor,
and Christ's Sole Vicar upon Earth, (which Arrogant Titles are now become a part
of their Canon Law, and occur frequently in the sixth Book of the Decretalia)
may it not be pertinently demanded, Where was their Charity to all Christians
before the time of Boniface the Third, (who dyed in the 7th Century) seeing
there is no Bishop of Rome found, who did assume, or claim those insolent
Epithets before that time?

3. What difference can be assigned betwixt the old Donatists and the present
Romanists? since the former confined the True Church of Christ to Africa, (yea,
to that Corner of it, which was ex part Donati.) and the later to Rome?

4. Let us suppose a man to walk as Conformably to the Precepts of the Gospel,
as ever any of the Sons of Adam (Christ only excepted) would it not argue the
height of uncharitableness, to Damn that man in our Imaginations, because he
cannot believe the Popes Supremacy to be jure divino, for want of Divine
Revelation; since the best Logician in the World cannot deduce it from any
place of Scripture, per decimam sextam Consequentiam?

5. Because some moderate Protestants grant, that he who is under Invincible
Ignorance of the Corruptions of the Roman Church, and makes Conscience to live
up to his Light, may through the infinite Mercy of God be saved, (though he
live and die in that Society;) hence to argue, that its best to join in
Communion with the Church of Rome, wherein (by consent of both parties)
Salvation may be had; does the force of that Argument, in the eyes of sober
persons, amount to any more than this, Come over to us, for we have less
Charity than ye? whereas a good Christian (who understands the nature of his
Holy Religion) will be ready to answer, I will rather stay in that Church which
enjoys most of that supernatural Quality, which is Essential to Christianity.

6. Because a man thinks that his Neighbor (who is of a strong natural
Constitution, highly courageous, and very temperate) may be preserved from
Death in a Pesthouse; does it hence follow, that he believes his Neighbor is
in as safe a condition, as he who lives at a great distance from any danger of
Contagion?

7. If it be a solid Argument to comply with that Tenet, wherein both parties
are agreed, wherefore does not the Church of Rome embrace the Protestant
Doctrine of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist? for all sober Christians in the
World acknowledge that he is really present, tho in a Spiritual and Mystical
manner: To this the Romanists have superadded their mode of Transubstantiation,
and the Lutherans their Consubstantiation; therefore its safest to Acquiesce in
that wherein all Dissenting parties are agreed: the same may be urged as to
many other particulars, even all their Superadditions to the ancient Creeds.

8. It may be further demanded, if there be any Solidity in this Topic, have
not the Cerinthians, the Samosatenians, the Arians, Eunomians, Photinians, and
Socinians, the better of the Orthodox by that way of arguing, since its
acknowledged hinc inde, by all, that Christ was truly a man, made like to us in
all things, Sin only excepted? but the fallacy of this Topic is so evident,
that it is lost labor to insist any more upon it.

9. Can it consist with Charity, to call those Schismatics, who are not
fugitivi sed fugati; and to Anathematize them every year (on Manday Thursday)
as Heretics, who believe the whole Scriptures of God in the sense of the
Primitive Church; and who embrace all the Creeds of the four general Councils
that were first in order?

10. Did not the leading party in the Council of Trent, discover themselves to
be Physicians of no value, and Men of no Charity, by using their utmost
endeavors to perpetuate that deplorable Breach in the Visible Church? which I
account better expressed in the words of the History thereof, which are as
follows. This Council, desired and procured by Godly Men to reunite the
Church, which began to be divided, has so established the Schism, and made the
Parties so Obstinate, that the Discords are irreconcilable: and being managed
by Princes for Reformation of Ecclesiastical Discipline, has caused the
greatest deformation that ever was since Christianity did begin; and hoped for
by the Bishops themselves, to regain the Episcopal Authority, (for the most
part usurped by the Pope) has made them lose it altogether, bringing them into
much greater Servitude: on the contrary, feared and avoided by the Sea of Rome
(as a potent means to moderate the Exorbitant Power thereof) mounted from small
beginnings, by diverse degrees, to an unlimited Excess, it has so established
and confirmed the same over that part which remained subject to it, etc.

11. Since its evident from unquestionable Records, that the Church of Rome (I
mean all of that persuasion) amounts not to the third part of Christendom (if
all the Protestants, of whatsoever denomination, the Greek Church properly so
called, with all those Christians in Asia and Africa, which are neither of the
Roman nor Greek Communion, be reckoned upon) it may be demanded, with what
Charity the Romanists monopolize to themselves the Title of the Catholic
Church?

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for Brab. Aylmer.
A Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy: to which is added, A Discourse concerning
the Unity of the Church. By Dr. Isaac Barrow.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. By Dr. Tillotson.

A Discourse concerning the Adoration of the Host, as it is Taught and
Practiced in the Church of Rome.

A Discourse of the Communion in One Kind: In Answer to a Treatise of the
Bishop of Meaux's.

A Discourse against Purgatory.


