TRUE NEWS FROM PORTSMOUTH.

BEING, Colonel Goring his Speech, delivered to the Soldiers in Portsmouth,
before his shutting up the Gates; Wherein he labors to withdraw their hearts
and minds from their fidelity to the PARLIAMENT.

Also, the Information of a Coachman, given into the House, concerning his
carrying down many Gentlemen and moneys to Portsmouth.

With the discovery of the Earl of Portland, and Sir Kenelm Digby, and Mr.
Weston his Brother as Agents and Actors in the betraying, and delivering up of
the said Town of Portsmouth.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for. John Cave. August 13. 1642.

Colonel Goring His Speech, delivered to the Soldiers in Portsmouth.
Colonel Goring having had a design to ceize upon the Town of Portsmouth,
and having admitted the number of 40. Horsemen with Carbines and Pistols into
the Town, the better to accomplish and bring to pass his intended purpose, and
having furnished himself with all kind of necessary Ammunition, which he
Ordered to be brought into the Town, which being effected, he charged that all
that bore Arms, which were about the number of three hundred, should appear in
the afternoon, at whose appearance he made this Speech unto them.

Gentlemen, and fellow Soldiers,

THe occasion of calling you together, is to let you understand and know His
Majesty's pleasure, and your duty concerning this Town and Fort, which His
Majesty does expect to find a place of singular trust and fidelity; and
therefore has commanded me to put you into such a posture, that we may be able
and ready, not only to maintain his Majesty's right in this place against any
that shall dare to attempt the contrary, but also that this place may be fit
for the guard and safety of His Majesty's person; and I hope that I shall not
need to urge many reasons to persuade or win you to a cheerful and willing
obedience herein, if we do but call to mind His Majesty's goodness and bounty
to us, and also in how great and how many obligations we stand bound unto his
Highness; For we are not only tied to obedience to His Majesty's commands, as
we are Subjects, but in a more particular relation as we are servants, and do
receive a certain recompense or reward, for our Service from His Majesty.

So that all those benefits and privileges that we or any one of us enjoy, is
from His Majesty's bounty and goodness; For our bread and drink and all that
we have, is derived, and comes from him, and in his happiness and welfare,
our lives, liberties, and fortunes do consist.

And for you that are behind of your pay, although the Parliament has made
some promise to see you satisfied, yet such is the ease and goodness of His
Majesty toward you, that He has provided you money, which I have in my
custody to distribute amongst you, so soon as you have subscribed to some few
words and conditions in writing which I shall tender unto you, testifying your
religious, honest, faithful, and ready intention to serve His Majesty in this
business. Neither will I constrain or force any to stay in the Town against
their wills, or free pleasure, but every man of what condition soever, shall
have free liberty to go and come, with his Wife and Children, servants and
goods in safety and peace. And let every man assure himself, that for his
faithful service herein, his Majesty will not see him unrewarded. Having thus
ended, some of the soldiers gave a great shout, the rest were discontented,
and a great distraction was suddenly in the Town.

Upon the 11. of August, a Hackney-Coachman came to the House of Parliament,
and acquainted them that on the 9. of this Month, some Gentlemen came to him,
and hired his Coach and six Horses, agreeing with him by the day, not telling
of him whether he should go; And likewise three Hackny Coaches more with six
Horses a piece, were hired at the same time; and he also informed the House,
that two of the Coaches went together, and the third went another way by it
self, and that there were in every Coach two Gentlemen a piece carried. He also
told the House, that he carried two of them to Portsmouth, and that the one
them was Mr. Weston, brother to the Earl of Portland. Also he further said,
that when he came to Portsmouth, he understood that these Gentlemen carried
down along with them nine thousand pounds in silver, but before he came
thither, he knew nothing thereof; but he said that one Welsh another of those
Coachmen, told him after he came to Portsmouth, that he knew of it, and did
help to tell the money in London; He declared further, that he heard there were
great store of Papists thereabouts, to the number of five or six hundred; and
that the Earl of Portland, and Sir Kenelm Digby were expected to come to
Portsmouth every hour, and that many of the Townsmen got forth of the Town as
fast as possibly they could, and that all Officers and Soldiers that were
there, who refused to take an Oath that was tendered to them, were turned out
of the Town as fast as possibly they could; and that they are very busy in
making of Works three miles out of the Town. And he also informed them, that
himself and the rest of the Coachmen, did very hardly get away from the
Cavaleers, being very desirous to detain both them and their Horses, and that
they proffered to make them Officers in their present Service and expedition,
and to allow them what pay they would desire, but they durst not stand to their
courtesy, but made shift and got away.

FINIS.

