Plain Dealing: BEING A Moderate general Review of the SCOTS Prelatical
Clergies Proceedings In the latter Reigns. With a Vindication of the present
Proceedings in Church Affairs there.

Licensed, September 11. 1689.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in
the Great Old-Bailey. 1689.

To the Right Honorable and Truly Religious Lady Jane Countess of Sutherland.
Madam,
THE publication of this little piece (at this juncture) was not the Effect of
my forwardness, but of that deference I owe to several good Men, and
Well-wishers of the present Government, by whose importunity I was induced to
take this Task upon me, without prejudice to the Rights of more Abler Men, to
whose elaborate Works on the same Subject, as ('it is here limited) this Essay
has the Honor to lead the way. Those Gentlemen my good Friends had very good
reason to be moved, when they heard the good Measures of the Government
misrepresented to Strangers by the Artifices of Designing Men, having no less
in their Aim than to divide the common Interest of Protestants. They
unanimously concurred in their judgments that it was expedient to put a stop to
the spreading of this Contagion, and urged me with Motives that were too
weighty for me to resist, having all the Inclination imaginable to show my Zeal
for Our Religion and Liberties within my Sphere. Herein is contained a true
(tho a general) Account of the Matter of Fact to undeceive Strangers of their
Mistakes, whose different Opinions as to Church Government, and other
Circumstances, ought not to remove their Christian Charity toward one another,
but (being concerned in one bottom) to promote the Common Interest and
Salvation of Mankind, (laying aside all Prejudice, Animosity and Rancour,) tho
it should tend to the removal of any Earthly thing most dear to them, that
proves a stumbling block or occasion of offense to either strong or weak
Brethren, imitating the Apostles Precept, Acts 15. concerning the difference of
the Circumcision. And the Apostle Paul's resolution in the like case, Romans,
Chap. 14. and 15. And in 1 Cor. 8. last Verse, If meat make my Brother to
offend, I will not eat Flesh while the World stands, lest I make my Brother
to offend. Which no doubt is preceptive to the Christian World, who pretend not
to Infallibility. But being it is come this length, the Dedication for its
Patronage and Encouragement is due to your Ladyship; chiefly for three Reasons.
Because,

First, That your Ancestors and Relations had not only a great share in the
Reformation, but also ever since were great Promoters of the Protestant
Reformed Religion in Scotland, and Protectors of its Ministers and Professors,
and your Charity upon that account to Suffering Ministers and Professors,
having been very considerable.

Secondly, That without any Flattery, I dare say, (and all those who have the
Honor to know your Ladyship, will confirm my Assertion) that none understands
the Matter in hand better than your self.

Thirdly, That your Honorable Husband, your Self, Eldest Son, and most of all
your Relations, were chiefly concerned in the last Efforts, and great
Enterprise made, and the signal Deliverance wrought of late for these oppressed
Nations, of which God was pleased to make our present Gracious King his
Glorious Instrument: (and for which your Endeavors, I hope your Family will
meet with its due Reward.) Your Ladyship must not expect a fine style of
Language, it being sufficient that the Matter of Fact is true, tho Design
honest, and the Language intelligible.

Madam, I might have been more plain, particular, and ad homines, but declined
that Method, designing to give offense to no good Christian, be his Profession
what it will, if his Principles be good; I don't value how Evil or Biased men
may criticize upon this matter; Provided, that moderate good men may be
pleased, and that the honest design of this little plain Piece may be any ways
serviceable to the present Government, your Ladyships Honorable Family, and
other good Subjects; Which that it may, and that, as God in his infinite Wisdom
has made our Gracious King his Glorious Instrument of our Redemption, from our
Fears of Popery and Slavery, as the Effects thereof) So the same Almighty God
would be pleased to settle the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom upon the Heads of
King William and Queen Mary in Peace and Truth, and be so transmitted from them
after they have lived a long, happy Life here (and received Crowns of Glory
hereafter) to their Posterity and lawful Successors for ever. And that your
Ladyship and Honorable Family may live happily under their Auspicious Reign,
is and shall be the constant Prayer of,


TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
I Was desired to Write the Parts of particular Ministers Acted upon the last
Theaters of Government, but judged this not to be a fit time, so that I hope
you will excuse my writing of this in so general terms, and also for laying
down some general Hypotheses and Propositions, Argumentandi Causa, (which
perhaps the more strict on either side will not allow) being no Divine* myself,
yet a Well-wisher of the Government, as well as of Moderation and Christian
Charity amongst all those of the Reformed Protestant Religion, whose
circumstantial differences occasioning some Heats and Animosities, I wish God
will be pleased to remove to the Common good of both.

Please to be as impartial and moderate in your Reading and Censures of this
little plain piece, as I have been in exposing particular men's faults to
public view, and you will not only be more able to make a judgment of the
thing, but also the impressions received of a violent Procedure in Church
Affairs in Scotland will be removed, and if this moderate and general Account
do not persuade you to the contrary Opinion, there will be a necessity to
expose particulars and particular Persons to more public view, which I desire
altogether to decline.

I did design to add to this Piece the Objections made against the settling of
the Presbyterian Government in Scotland, with the Answer to these Objections;
with a List of the Reformers from Popery in Scotland, and those that Suffered
Martyrdom upon that Account; but being importuned not to put either of them to
a public view, I have laid it by for the present, but if this have a kind
Reception, I shall publish the other.


A Moderate general Review of the Scots Prelatical Clergy's Proceedings in the
later Reigns:
With a Vindication of the present Proceedings in Church Affairs there.
IT being too much spread abroad (whether out of Ignorance of the Matter of
Fact, or Design of an Intriguing Party to divide the Interest of Protestants, I
will not divine) That the present procedure in Scotland tends to the Oppression
or Persecution of the Episcopal Ministry there: But whatever be an evil Parties
design in it, sure I am, these Surmises tend to load the good and unanimous
Designs of the present Government with unjustifiable things: And to remove
these Mistakes which might give Encouragement to an evil designing Party, (who
are always like the Salamander in the Fire, and love to fish in muddy Waters,
acting both in different Elements for the same Ends) or Discouragement to the
good Party, whose different Opinions about Circumstances, ought not to divide
them in the main. I shall first state it as my Hypothesis (as many Learned
moderate Divines under both Governments do) that Church Government, whether it
be this, or that, is a Matter indifferent; There being no Platform of
Government left in the Church, either by Christ or his Apostles, or their
Disciples, further than appointing Bishops in every Church (which word in the
common acceptance in the Originals and Translations, by both Parties is
understood to be Overseers, without mentioning any Pre-eminence to them over
their Brethren) these being Presbyters, and their Deacons and Elders; So that
Church Government in this case would seem to be left indifferent; and every
Nation or People linked together in one Body or Society, in their own Civil
Government (whether Monarchical, Democratical, Aristocratal, etc.) have it left
in their Option (being free from Engagements either to the one or the other) to
settle that Church Government, which the major part of that People or Society
judges most suitable to the Word of God, and the general Inclination and Genius
of the People.

This being granted in the general; In the next place let us consider, That
when that Nation in particular, as generally all Europe were enslaved to the
Romish Bondage, there was no other, and could no other Government be, but
Prelacy suitable to that of their Universal Bishops, whose Vassals they, as
well as all other Prelates were (as they called them) who assume to themselves
always the Title of Head of the Church, and Christ's Vicars upon Earth, which
all those of the reformed Protestant Religion, Episcopal or Presbyterial, look
upon as Blasphemous; And therefore the Pope is called by them all Antichrist,
and no doubt he is. But when that Peoples Eyes came to be opened to see
clearly, the Fundamental Errors which that Church maintained for several Ages,
and the many Cheats, Villainies, and Wickedness committed by that Clergy in
general, They began to be reformed in their Lives and Manners, by the
indefatigable pains and labor of some few Presbyters, who suffered several
kinds of Martyrdoms and other Cruelties therefore, by the Popish Clergy: And
the Romish Clergies barbarous Cruelties in those times toward those valiant
Champions in Christ's Cause, did at last animate the People to prosecute a
General Reformation in that Nation, and their Reformation being by Presbyters,
It seems gave the rise there, to that denomination of Presbyterian.

And the Romish Clergies Cheatry, and wickedness in their Lives and
Conversation, and Cruelty toward those Reformers, and those of the Reformed
Religion, occasioned the Peoples general hatred at the very Order of Bishops:
And besides, that the bulk of the Scots Clergies Opinion, being, That a well
Constitute Presbyterian Government is both more agreeable to the Word of God,
and general Inclination and Genius of the People, than any other.

And though Superintendants were appointed there at the beginning of the
Reformation (the generality of the People not being as yet well Reformed) the
Reformers that they might prevail the more readily in moderation with the
generality of the People; especially considering the nearer they came to the
last Settlement (being Governed in Civil Matters by a Popish King Regent and
Queen) in the Infancy of their Reformation, the easier the work appeared to be;
yet the Presbyterian was the first Established Government, being fully settled
in the Year 1592. by a general Meeting of the Estates, and Confirmed by
Parliament, and continued so till the Year 1606. after that King James came to
the Imperial Crown of England, when he endeavored to make an Union between the
two Nations, settled an Episcopal Government there, (though contrary to the
Inclinations of the People and Clergy in general) Expecting thereby to Unite
them as well in Trade as in Church Government; And the hopes of an Union in
Trade, and other things beneficial to Scotland, moved many of those who were
Presbyterially inclined, to go beyond their Inclinations, and Opinion, along
with that Settlement for present. But that Settlement by Bishops in Scotland
being all (it seems) that the then English Clergy and others designed (and in
which Settlement many Eminent Men of that Kingdom were too precipitant, to
their regret afterward when they could not help it) that being done the Union
was blown up, though I am of opinion, as are many Eminent Men of both Nations,
and Well-wishers to the present Government, That neither England or Scotland
can ever be truly Happy, till there be an Union in Parliaments, as well as in
Trade: For though England be more opulent and powerful by Sea and otherwise,
(by reason of their Trade) yet when England has a Powerful Enemy in the Front,
Scotland might prove as dangerous, if not a fatal Backdoor to England; and
it is not to be doubted if there were an Union, but the Product and Export of
Scotland to other Foreign Countries at present might be of equal Gain to
England to what Scotland might expect by an Union in Trade from England; which
could be made appear to a demonstration. But this not being hujus loci, I hope
to be excused for this Digression from the thing proposed, there being some
sympathy between the one and others Interest; and to come to the point in hand,
when there is any Revolution in the State of that Kingdom, as of late, and they
are so happy as to have a King and Governors that design nothing more than the
Tranquillity and Happiness of the People, the People eagerly in their
Reformation desire to Establish that Church Government which their Clergy and
People in general are of Opinion is most consonant to the Word of God, and
their own Inclination. And to make it clear that the first Reformers were not
at all for establishing the Order of Bishops, Mr. Knox being in Exile in
England, by reason of the Clergies great Persecution in King James the Fifth's
time in Scotland, King Edward the Sixth, having a great esteem for Mr. Knox, he
proffered him a Bishopric in England; but he thanked that good King heartily,
and refused it. And a long time after that Kingdom was turned to the Christian
Faith, they had no Bishops, nor does any of our own or Foreign Historians
assert that there was any that had the title of Bishop in that Church before
Paladius in the fifth Century; nor was this Paladius either a Diocesian or
Provincial Bishop, Adrian in the ninth Century, being the first Diocesian, nor
was there any Archbishop, Primate or Metropolitan to consecrate Diocesian
Bishops till the Year 1436. That Patrick Graham was made Archbishop of St.
Andrews, and yet 1200 years before this there was a Church in Scotland, ruled
by Monks and Presbyters, and not to mention many other Eminent Men, that treat
upon that subject, of undoubted Credit, I Cite only Fordon Lib. 3. Cap. 8. Ante
Paladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei Doctores de Sacramentorum
administratores, Presbyteros solummodo vel monachos ritus sequentes Ecclesiae
primaevae: And Beda, Baronius, and all others confirm that Paladius was the
first that was called Bishop in that Kingdom; Attamen S^^^l Christiani
prima^^i, says another, so that long before there was any Order of Prelatical
Bishops allowed in Scotland, even after Paladius time, there was a Church
there; and tho Foreign and Domestic Authors (favoring Prelacy) write upon
this Subject, and name many Bishops to have been in Scotland before and after
Paladius; yet none of these Authors dare have the Confidence to say, that these
Bishops had any meddling in State Affairs till that Nation was enslaved to the
Church of Rome, and even when that was, the Kings and Church of Scotland in
general would never own the Pope so much, or subject themselves to him, as
other Princes and Churches did. Look but the 43 Cap. p. 6 th. K. Ja. 3.39 Cap.
Par. 4. K. Ja. 4 th, 85 Cap. Par. 11. K. Ja. 3 d. 4 Cap. Par. 1. K. Ja. 4.119.
Cap. Par. 7. K. Ja. 5 th, etc. which were but Confirmations of K. Ja. 1 st.
Acts Cap. 13. Parl. 1 st. Cap. 14. etc. And there and elsewhere much more you
will find to prove how little respect our Kings had to the Pope's Thunders in
the time of Scotland's greatest Devotion to Rome. And a King who would rule
Wisely, and to the general Satisfaction of the People (in which case they can
and will serve him faithfully) will give Liberty of Conscience to his People in
innocent or indifferent Matters, which are perhaps Matters indifferent to
himself: and no good Man dare not but attribute the Epithetes of a Heroic
Mind, as well as of a calm well disposed Spirit to our present Gracious King
and Queen, who condescend Indulgently to any thing may make their People happy,
so far as they are rightly informed; and I am hopeful will verify Seneca's
Saying in time, Men's regnum bona possidet: Besides, That the Constitutions of
Bishops in Scotland and England, are not the same thing, and in their
dependence have not the equivalent Power or Influence in their Public and
Private managements in relation to the State; for in England, the Laws there
seem to secure Bishops so in their Offices and Benefices (when Ordained and
Consecrated) that though they should not go along with the Court in
disagreeable things, without a new Law, or ranversing the old in a
Parliamentary way, they cannot be put from their Benefices, though they should
be suspended from their Offices. But in Scotland that Order depended so
entirely upon Court Favor; that the Governors could, and actually have,
without any Supervenient Law or Statute turned out Bishops, Tam ab officio quam
a beneficio, of which there could be many Instances given, but the Matter of
Fact being so well known, we need not trouble the Reader with them here.

But certain it is, That the difference of these two Constitutions is an
encouragement to the one to own what is good, and is a bait to the other to
maintain even more dangerous things than the Doctrine of Non-resistance it self
if required: And to make a Parallel between the English and Scots Bishops in
many things, but particularly in their Practices; would be but a reproach to
our Nation, to render in Public, were it not that it clearly appears in
Matters of Fact, whether it be the fault in the Constitution of Scots Bishops,
or the Bishops own natural temper. That the old Scots Proverb holds true, That
Lordships changes Manners; For be they habit and repute never so good and
moderate Men when only in the state of Ministers, yet when once Bishops or
Prelates, for the most part they become like that Emperor who was very good till
he became Emperor, and had Power to do Evil, whose Answer upon a Question of
the alteration of his different temper and practices is well known to all
versant in History, and there was one of the Popes who proved to be of the same
temper also.

But now to come to give an account of some particular practices of their late
Bishops in Scotland in the last two Reigns, which generally created an
irreconcilable hatred in men's Minds to the Order it self (though Church
Government were a Matter indifferent to Clergymen and Laics;) and the first
step was, That when the General Assembly of Divines in Scotland, who were not
only very active to Crown King Charles the Second at Scoon in 1650. but also,
great Instruments to restore him to the Imperial Crown in the Year 1660. and
that the Presbyterian Government was confirmed Act 16. Par. 1. Chapter 2 d. They
looking upon Mr. James Sharp as one of the most violent Presbyterians in the
English time, of great Credit with the Presbyterian Clergy, and of no less fame
for his almost violent Zeal that way, which all the Presbyterian party there,
solemnly Swearing to stand by the Church of Scotland, as it was then
Established in a Presbyterial Government, was entrusted by them in the Year
1661. as their Commissioner to the King, to have that Government continued: But
the Promise and fair Prospect of an Archbishopric prevailed with his Judgment,
and gave him a new light, for which he was tainted with that Epithet of the
Betrayer of the Church of Scotland, and his Brethren, who being a politic Man,
failed not to contrive, and (with other Politicians in the State, and Laxer
Clergy who looked for Benefices) to concert the new Establishment of the Order
of Bishops in its full extent, after the Form almost of the old Popish Order,
and abolishing the Presbyterian Government in the Year 1662. It was no doubt a
failure in some of the Presbyterian Ministers, then (many of which were great
Eminent and Loyal Men, though refusing Benefices from the late King) to desert
their Churches and Vocations in the Public Assemblies, until they had been
forced from them (as no doubt they would have been without Compliance.) But
certain it is, That when some of them left their Charges, and others were
forced to quit the same immediately thereafter, by imposing new Engagements to
that Government, contrary to their former Solemn Oaths, and Vows (though it be
much my opinion, that no Oaths ought to be imposed in point of Government,
except that of Allegiance to the King in his Political Government of the
Church, as well as in the Civil State; Because good Men need not to be loaded
with Oaths, and evil Men will never keep Oaths when they find opportunity to
break them to any earthly Advantage), which others Embraced for love of the
Benefices, and the Ministers that either quit or were put from their Charges,
were not only restrained from Preaching and Praying in any Public Meetings to
their Congregations, or privately in their Houses, (though they expected
nothing for their Labors) by Imposition of Arbitrary Penalties, and contriving
Penal and Sanguinary Laws, equivalent to that which was made against Papists,
Seminary Priests, and Jesuits ad terrorem, 2 Act. Sess. 3. Parl. 1 st. Chapter 2 d.
etc. Acts 5. and 7. Par. 2 d. Sess. 2 d. Acts 9. and 17. Par. 2 d. Sess. 3 d.
but several more severe Acts were made in Parliaments 1685. and 1686. and
though none of those Laws were once put in Execution against Papists, Priests,
Jesuits, etc. yet how violently were they put in Execution against those poor
Ministers, their Flocks and Families, for the one's Preaching, and the other's
Hearing of the Word of God, without mixture or the least grains of Schism or
disloyalty? Which oppression (merely for the difference of Opinion) tended to
so great a Persecution (which verified that old Saying, That Oppression makes a
wise man Mad) that it put the People in such a terrible consternation, that
this Persecution or Oppression (call it what you will) forced the People in the
Year 1666. to gather together and rise in Arms in defense of their Preacher's,
Religion and Liberty, against those persecuting Clergymen; who not only
contrived, but forced the Statesmen and the King's Privy Council to stretch
these Penal and Sanguinary Laws, against both their Religion and Liberty in
which they were Educated: and what Devastation, Forfaultures, Cruelties and
Bloodshed followed thereupon in that poor Kingdom for several Years is so
generally known, that it is needless to relate it here, and the late King
Charles, who had nothing of violence in his Nature, considering the common Evil
their Divisions occasioned, (with the concurrence, and by a representation of
some Honest Men then in the Civil Government) did give a little respite by a
Toleration to some Ministers to Preach in several Congregations, but the
regular Clergy were so exasperated against this Indulgence, that they
themselves made terrible Clamours and Complaints to the King and Clergy of
England (who were not so immoderate, nor so immoral in their Actions against
Dissenters, nor so vicious and scandalous in their Lives and Conversations) and
to the Officers of State, and the Privy Council in Scotland, not only against
those poor People, but also against any that favored or pitied them, alleging
it was a Schism in the Church, that the Ministers Preached Rebellion, which the
Council found frequently upon Trial to be false, and that those that gave any
dissent to their violence against these People were disloyal. And many that
were vicious and the most scandalous of their inferior Clergy, not agreeing
with the abstemious lives and the singular Examples of those godly Ministers,
made it their business to harrass and malign them and the People, to the
Government; till they got their point wrought so far as to remove this Liberty
which the King graciously granted, and procured an Army of Wild Highlanders to
be sent to those Countries in Anno 1677. Which Army committed the greatest
Barbarities and Unnatural things that ever was heard tell of in a Christian
Nation, by their Oppressions, Robberies, Plunders, Rapines, etc. making no
distinction of Persons or Sexes. This being with great difficulty represented
again to the King, he out of his wonted Clemency, caused Remove his Army, and
those poor People, though left in a manner desolate, having got the least
Respite (their Religion and Profession being dearer to them than their Lives)
they frequenting those Meetings again without Tumult or Uproar, where they
thought they had the Word of God truly and more purely Preached to them: The
Episcopal Clergy (being again alarmed) made the greatest clamor that could
be, and made their Interest at Court to send Arms again (as they alleged, to
suppress them) upon which violent Persons did get Commissions, when other
moderate Men that had Commissions laid them down; and others refused them upon
such cruel Expeditions) and raised Regiments of Foot, Horse, and Dragoons, and
many of them, who having neither Principles of Religion nor Humanity, were sent
thither with those Troops, and treated the People in a most barbarous manner,
which forced those poor oppressed People to Guard their Meetings with Armed
men, till they fell in Blood with those cruel mercenary Soldiers in the Year
1679. Which Cruelty and Persecution increased their Number the more; which
verifies that old Saying, Cinis and Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, for the
more they were oppressed and persecuted, the more their Number increased. And
were there not then some of the greatest Personages in that Kingdom in disgrace
with the King by the instigation of that Clergy, and some other Ministers of
State, not only for their Dissents to their violent Proceedings against
Protestants; but also for complaining of some other mismanagements in State?
But God has at this time been pleased to honor them, so as to put them in
Capacity to be most Instrumental in settling the present Government, I hope upon
sure and lasting Foundations. But not to make a greater Digression, then was
the Duke of Monmouth sent Generalissimo to Scotland to Suppress those
Protestants; yet he was to be overruled by the Clergy, and the King's Council;
who notwithstanding of his limited Commission did, and for his favor shown to
those poor People (who he knew suffered merely upon the account of their
Religion and stricter Lives) was by the Clergy and the violent Party, their
Adherents, put in disgrace with the King, as other great Persons were, and how
many Families of all Ranks and Degrees were then and since destroyed by this
Oppression and Clergy's persecution? how many were tortured without Mercy? how
many were Banished, Drowned, Beheaded, Shot, etc. many of them without the
Liberty of once calling upon God before their Death, is incredible; but all
Europe knows it, and it cannot be denied. And who knowing, or in the least
understanding the Affairs of Scotland in those times, will deny but that these
cruel Proceedings against the Presbyterian Ministers and their Hearers, (by
Banishments, Imprisonments, Forfaultures, Intercommonings, or Outlawries,
Deaths, etc.) were the very things that forced many of the vulgar sort of
Professors to fly to the Hills and Mountains, where (though no doubt they had
opportunity to hear some good Ministers Preach) yet Popish Emissaries,
Trafficking Priests, etc. being never idle, and never neglecting occasions by
the Divisions of those of the Reformed Religion, to propagate their hellish
Designs, were not wanting to be there as Wolves in Sheeps clothing, or Devils
in Angels shapes, to seduce those of meaner Capacities to imbibe some dregs of
the Jesuitical Principles, which brought many of those poor Innocents to end
their days in Misery.

But that, when the late King James was dealt with (for Reasons best known to
his Cabin Counselors) to grant a general Toleration, doubtless out of no
respect to the Presbyterian Party; They did, it is true, take hold of that
opportunity and freedom to Preach the Gospel, and no further, (when in the mean
time the Episcopal Clergy did give their thanks to the late King, for his
Liberty and Toleration to Papists, Quakers, and all other Sects) of which they
were hindered before by the Episcopal Clergy, their procurement; and they no
doubt had reason to thank the late King, or any, for the Liberty it self
(having by it received a glimps of the Gospel by their freedom to Preach it)
though they desponded of its long continuance, but expected a greater
Persecution thereafter, which they Preached to their Hearers, and no doubt
their Prophetic Sentences had been fulfilled, had not God in his Mercy
prevented it, by preparing a fit and glorious Instrument to preserve his People
from the designed overflowing deluge of Popery and Slavery.

And what good Protestant would not thank a Turk or Pagan, nay, the Pope
himself for Life, Liberty, and Freedom of the Reformed Religion; much more a
Native Prince, especially considering what is before related about a 26 Years
Oppression or Persecution from those called the Regular Clergy then, and by
their instigation; for from that Clergy they could expect no good Tidings: for
some of them had the Impudence to say in Pulpit, That Rome should have it e're
Jack Presbyter should have it; this is a Matter of Fact, for who would not
rather receive a favor (in the acceptance innocent) from a professed Enemy,
than be oppressed or cruelly used by a counterfeit false Friend or unnatural
Relation, judge ye? And whether these Proceedings against those poor
Protestants, does not too much imitate the Romish Clergy and Missionaries
imposition on Magistrates and Governors to be their Executioners, let any
indifferent man judge: So that any impartial unbyassed person endued with
common Sense and Reason (considering what is said (which is but a Specimen of a
System that could be written on this unpleasant Subject to any good Protestant,
were it not to vindicate the generality of the Nation, unjustly aspersed of
purpose to make the Government unfavourable to Strangers, who know no better)
may conclude that this persecuted People, as well as the generality of the
Scotch Nation, have reason not to continue the Order of Bishops there; for if
the practices of particular Bishops in Scotland, were rendered public, none
would tax or reproach that Kingdom with violence, inhumanity, persecution, or
rashness in their present management of Church Affairs; especially considering
how great Instruments most of the Episcopal Clergy have been of late, by their
connivance, forwardness, or contrivance to encourage the Ministers of the late
Government to encroach so much upon the Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Properties of the Protestant Subjects, we shall only instance two; So ex ungue
Leonem. The first is, of their Behavior in the Parliament 1686. when there was
no less Design than to rescind the Penal Laws, framed and enacted against
Papists, Seminary Priests and Jesuits, Hearers and Sayers of Mass ad terrorem,
to hinder the Growth of Popery in that Nation, which was the only legal Bulwark
and Security of the Protestant Religion, these all the Bishops (excepting
three) concurred to remove; by removing of which Laws, all persons lax in their
Principles, or Evil-designing Men would be left loose, and at their full
liberty to act in the Matters of Religion as they pleased, and in which case a
prevailing Party might easily impose whatever they pleased, the Power being in
their hand, and the Prerogatives screwed up above the highest Note in the Scale
of Music: But God who did not design to destroy that Nation (merely by his
Providence as the Execution of his Eternal Decrees) wonderfully prevented all
those Hellish Designs beyond Humane Expectation, and disappointed the Actors.

The next was that when all rational foreseeing Men had a jealousy of a Popish
Contrivance, to impose a Prince of Wales to deprive the lawful Heirs of their
rightful Succession, and Men having searched more narrowly into the Affair,
they were fully convinced in their Minds of a Popish imposture, the whole
Bishops of Scotland (when in the mean time they could see no less than the
Persecution of their honest Brethren in England for Religious Matters) they
(some of them no doubt, for worldly Interest, whither that would drive them,
God knows, and others in Compliance, for fear of Suspension from, or loss of
their Offices and Benefices) did make the most solemn, though the most
unreasonable, unchristian Address, and disagreeable to the pretended Character
that ever was upon the Birth of a supposed Prince of Wales; and what
Expressions are in that Address (so generally known) cannot but be nauseous to
any good Protestant to rehearse, in which they called that Prince, The Darling
of Heaven, etc. But to come in the next place to the late Procedure of the
Convention, their Committees during their Adjournments, and the Parliament now
sitting, in relation to Church Affairs, I shall give an impartial Account of
the particulars, so much as is needful.

And first, When the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland that were here in January
last 1689. did give their Advice to the then Prince of Orange (now our Gracious
King) what Methods to take in relation to the Settlement of the Scotch Nation
then in great Confusion, having no Government, by reason of the late King's
desertion of the Government; The King did follow their Advice; and albeit that
some alleged a general Proclamation, to be published in ordinary times and
accustomary places, for calling the ensuing general Meeting of the Estates,
would be the best Method to call them together, for Reasons neither fit nor
necessary to be inserted here; yet His Majesty, to a general Satisfaction, did
take very knowing Men's Advice to dispatch his Circular Letters, which he did by
virtue of the Trust they reposed in Him, and the Advice given by the Gentry and
Nobility of Scotland to such as had right to represent the Nation in a general
Meeting, not omitting the then Bishops, their Order being as then Established
by a standing Law, which His Majesty would not Transgress. And when those
Representatives of the Nation did meet freely, frequently, and fully in a
general Meeting, by virtue of our now Gracious King's Warrant before explained,
had the Bisshops then behaved themselves as became persons of their Profession,
pretended Honor and Character, if they thought not the Call sufficiently
warrantable, they ought either not to present themselves at that general
Meeting, or when they did appear by virtue of that general Warrant, they might
have Protested and deserted the Meeting, as in their Opinion not legal, before
it were constituted so by the general Meeting it self: Otherwise, to have
complied fully upon their Meeting, and not only to have acknowledged their
Faults, Errors, and Mismanagements in the late Government, but also to have
gone on honestly, and vigorously with the other Estates, in Prosecution of the
good Designs of their meeting.

First, By concurring to heal the Breaches made in the Hedges of Religion, and
removing the Encroachments made upon its Laws.

Secondly, By restoring the wholesome Laws, Liberties and Properties of the
Estates and their Fellow Subjects, so much encroached upon by Popish
Emissaries, and any other wickedly designing Party in any of the later Reigns,
but contrary to this, being it seems conscious to themselves of some guilt,
they did all bandy together, not only with those that were too active to carry
on the Mischief in the later Governments, but also with a new designing Party
who had no Principles, not only to vindicate all the Evils that were done in
the late Government, but also to bring the Nation under more Slavery than ever;
the particulars thereof are too generally known. And considering their
Profession by their Actions, Contraria juxta se posita clarius elucescunt.

I will not be too opinionative to assert, That the generality of people in
that Nation, or the major part of this Great and Wise Council of the Nation did
incline to continue the Establishment of that Hierarchy, they finding it in a
manner very improbable, if not altogether impossible, (considering all that is
said, and much more might be said) to reconcile the Ignorance, Debauchery and
persecuting humor of the most part of the Prelatical Party in Scotland, with
the singular, exemplary strict, and orderly lives and conversations of the
Presbyterian Clergy, and most of their Adherents: But sure I am, that Clergy's
former and later Behavior were the Reasons that induced that great and wise
meeting of the Estates so suddenly to tender that Order of Bishops as a
Grievance of the Nation to His Majesty, in their Preliminaries, in order to be
abolished in the next Parliament, now Sitting, and to vindicate that Nation,
the general meeting of the Estates, and the present Parliament, from all
Aspersions which are industriously spread abroad, loading them with a
Persecution of the Episcopal Ministry there.

Take this for truth, of which no intelligent Man in Britain can be ignorant.

That the first Act the Estates made, was to secure their own Sitting.

The second material to our purpose was their declaring themselves a free
Estate, and a legal Meeting, and declaring that they would not separate, but
continue to sit by frequent meetings, till they had restored and secured their
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties; as well as that of their fellow
Subjects so much encroached upon, and till they had Established the Government
of the Church and State. Both which Acts the Bishops Voted in and approved of.

And this being done with several other things, establishing the Legality of
the Meeting, etc. too tedious to rehearse here, being intended but an
Abbreviat; Who would think that the Reverend Protestant Fathers of the Church
of Scotland would have stood in the way of any proposition that might tend to
the Security of the Protestant Reformed Religion, restoring the wholesome Laws,
and securing the Liberties and Properties of the Subject? Yet with the next
breath, they were not only for continuing professed Papists in chief Commands
of strong Fortresses, and in the Army, expecting their greater Security that
way, as it seems they had reason, considering their former Deportment; and the
then present circumstances of the Nation; but were also for recalling home the
late King, which they alleged they looked upon to be the only way to secure
Religion, to give the standing Laws their luster (no doubt there is something
understood there, and latuit anguis in herba) and to secure the Liberty and
Property of the people; these were their very Express^ons. But as I doubt not,
that there is any good Christian, but is heartily grieved for the Bigottry of
the lat^ K^ng's Religion, his Evil Council and Mismanagement of Affairs in
State and Church, and Encroachments up ^n all that was dear unto us, which
brought him to his low Estate, much more British Inhabitants, and m^st of al^
the S^ot^h Pro^e^^ants, who can endure no Government ^ut a Monarchical; whose
Love to that Government is such, that they did always undergo great burdens,
and did peaceably forbear many Faults and Infirmities in several of their Kings
for many Ages, as unquestionable good Historians make appear: Yet to give a
Call to the late King in his and our present circumstances, to return with a
French, Irish, and other cruel Popish Crew, were either to make him more
miserable, who could not but be utterly destroyed in the Attempt, or the
Protestants in Britain most miserable, by reducing of them all to Popery and
Slavery, or to the French most Unchristian Cruelty, and untolerable heavy yoke,
and our foreign Protestant Allies and their Confederates, though of different
Religions, more uneasy, if not in hazard to be destroyed by the French
Ambition and Slavery, which is more untolerable beyond doubt than that of the
Turks and Tartars, his dear Confederates; but it seems our Bishops when they
desired to recall a Popish King did not mind, or rather did not value the
verity of Claudian's Remarque, in case the late King did return with the least
favor of a reeling populace,

-- Componitur Orbis
Regis ad exemplum --
And a little after,

Mobile mutatur semper cum principe vulgus. And who doubts, but that if the
late King returned by force, the fate of all those of the Reformed Religion (if
real Protestants) whether Episcopal or Presbyterial, would be sudden in the
Execution, and if invited home, were his promises never so fair and specious,
the same fate would no doubt befall them in a short time: And the Mobile is not
always to be trusted for a Bulwark in every Exigence. But to the next Matter of
Fact.

Upon the day of April, the Estates having fully considered that it would be
dangerous, to have the Government longer unsettled, and having upon good
grounds, too tedious to relate here, resolved to declare the Crown vacant, and
the late King James's Right, etc. forfaulted, the Bishops not only urged
frivolous Arguments, but also voted against it; Notwithstanding their cheerful
voting affirmative to the former Acts.

And there being an Act ordaining the Clergy not to pray for the late King
James, etc. as King and Prince, their Right being forfaulted, and the Crown
declared vacant, the Bishops all removed without any compulsion, except 2, or
3, who were the most moderate; and one of those being desired at the rising of
the Meeting to say Prayers, he, that he might not omit his pretended Allegiance
to King James in his Prayers, omitted to say Prayer in common Form, or
extempore, but only repeated the Lord's Prayer, desiring it seems to give
offense to none: But a person present alleged, That several persons used to
conclude their Prayers with the Lord's Prayer, and so did that Bishop; for he
suspected it should be his last Prayer in that place.

At the next Sitting of the Estates it was moved, That, Considering the Bishops
behavior in the later Governments, their behavior in that general Meeting,
(where notwithstanding their being present, and voting in several Acts
Affirmative, which they contraveen'd contrary to their profession) their Order
should be declared a Grievance to the Nation; which motion being remitted to
the Consideration of the Grand Committee, they at their next meeting brought it
in as their opinion, That the Bishops were one of the greatest Grievances of
the Nation: which opinion the whole Meeting after serious Consideration
approved of, and voted them out of Doors.

After which, all the Bishops withdrew themselves in Cabals with several
disaffected people, called several of their inferior Clergy together, prompting
them to Disobedience in the present Juncture: which Principles many of the
Episcopal Clergy did then vent too much in their Preachings and public Prayers.

The Estates having emitted a Proclamation proclaiming William and Mary then
King and Queen of England, King and Queen of Scotland, without a contradictory
Vote, and only one Non liquet;

And another Proclamation enjoining the Clergy after the Proclamation to Read
the Declaration, and to pray for King William and Queen Mary; and in doing of
which, many did comply, but several refused; yet all, even those of the
Episcopal Clergy (though not complying with this) who would live peaceably and
regularly as Subjects, the Estates took into their particular protection,
putting forth another Proclamation, prohibiting all or any of the Subjects
whatsoever to trouble or molest any of them in their Lives or Estates. And none
will be so Impudent as to allege in public, that any either of the Bishops,
or their inferior Clergy, whether complying or not, were ever troubled in
their Persons or Estates since the said Prohibition, and few even before, by
the unruly Rabble, unless it be those whose Deportment no good Men can
vindicate, and those moderate Men of untainted Lives and Conversations of the
Episcopal Communion, who have cheerfully complied with the Estates, and present
Government, will declare how they were caressed by the Presbyterian party in
this Juncture, and others who might be nice and scrupulous in some points,
christianly exhorted and invited to join with them without Engagements, further
than Reading the Declaration, and Praying for King William and Queen Mary; and
I have reason to think that the present wise Parliament will impose nothing
capable to trouble their Consciences in their compliance with the present
Government. And truly it would seem to be no small reproach to the Scotch
Bishopsto hear those who were lately their inferior Clergy now declare in the
Pulpit and elsewhere, how these many years bypast, they themselves have
groaned under their Bishops Tyranny and Oppression of several kinds. But after
the Bishops were declared a Grievance to the Nation for many undeniable good
pregnant Reasons, and now voted out of Doors, the Estates took many calm
Methods by Exhortations, etc. with their Clergy, to have their Deportment
suitable to their profession in the present Juncture; but several of them
continued so obstinate, and endeavored to seduce others to the defaming of the
Government in public and private; so that they were necessitated to deprive
some of them (though they indulged some eminent Men till they advised better)
and ordered Presbyterian Ministers to Preach in their Churches: And sure I am
notwithstanding the frequent Complaints given in to the Estates, of the
Episcopal Clergy's and their Parties meeting in Cabals with Papists and other
disaffected People, to the contempt of the present Government; yet that they
were so tender of their Character, as Ministers of the Gospel, that none of
them were once prosecuted by the Estates, their Committees, the Privy Council,
or the present Parliament, since their Deprivation, except one Minister, who
was accused to have spoken some Treasonable Words; and how tenderly they dealt
with him in his Misbehaviour and Infirmities, for fear of bringing a reproach
upon any that Preached the Gospel, whether6 of one Order or another, is well
known; And it is too Public, how one of those deserting Ministers Wives, and
others of that persuasion, who converse with Papists (as the Effects of their
Cabals) were apprehended, endeavoring to get into the Castle of Edinburgh
(with fresh Meat, and other Provisions) when it was blocked up, and declared
Treason to converse with, or assist any therein; and yet how tenderly they were
proceeded against, is generally known; there are many others of their Evil
Practices in the late Conjuncture, might be spoken of, too tedious to the
Reader; but to conclude with the Episcopal Clergy's Behavior in Scotland of
late, Who have been more Active, or like to be found more guilty in a
Correspondence with, and assisting the Lord Dundee and his Party, now in
Rebellion, and committing most inhumane Actions, than several of those who are
called the Regular Clergy? which must be public to their shame; besides, that
the late Bishop of Galloway is certainly concluded to be with the late King
James in person in Ireland.

And as a further Evidence of the Estates, the present Parliament, the Council,
and other People of Scotland, their favorable Deportment and Lenity toward
the Episcopal Clergy there, it is undeniable that both the Bishops and their
inferior Clergy, who by their ill Deportment and late Obstinacy, deprived
themselves of their Benefices, do Walk and Travel in Town and Country, on Foot,
in Coach, and upon Horseback, at their pleasure, and live peaceably in their
Houses without any Trouble or Molestation whatsoever: And it will be found
unquestionably true, that neither the Episcopal Clergy, nor any other, who have
been grievous and great Persecutors and Invaders of the Religion, and
Encroachers upon the Laws, Liberties, and Properties of their fellow Subjects
in the late Government, were in the least fear of their Lives or Estates in
that Kingdom, since the first general Meeting of the Estates; Notwithstanding
of the great Clamours and false Aspersions, of purpose and industriously
invented and spread abroad by some persons for their own ends, being either
afraid to abide the Test of the Law by way of moderate Justice, or being
uneasy to themselves, and troublesome to others under any Government, were it
never so good and easy, but where they have a power to gratify their Lusts
and voracious Appetite, and to do Mischief to others. And as for that
Allegiance that the Bishops, whose Order is abolished in Scotland, and their
inferior Clergy, who have deserted their Charge, out of an ill Principle, for
the most part have not a livelihood or subsistence, it must be very gross and
ridiculous; for it is well known, that both the Bishops and those of their
Clergy, who have deserted their Charges had opulent Benefices, and are rich
(though not to satisfaction) or might have been so in a cheap Country, where,
with the least management, the half or third part of their yearly Benefices
might maintain them and their Families very well; for it is known generally
there, that several Ministers with lesser Benefices than any that quit their
Charge now, have made good Fortunes for their Children; And it is hardly known
that ever their Charity or Pious Acts was the occasion of their Poverty, though
they have had Examples enough from many of their good English Brethren
Clergymen; and if they lived too sumptuously, Sibi imputent. And certain it is,
that their Presbyterian Brethren, when they labored under the greatest Poverty
and Affliction in the World, by the Scots Episcopal or Regular Clergy (call
them what you please) their immediate procurement, none of them pitied their
Distress, or relieved them in their Wants in the name of Disciples, (when it
must be confessed they were sheltered and connived at, not only in England and
Ireland, but caressed abroad in Holland, and elsewhere) though there is good
reason to believe that these Ministers and other Presbyterians both pity these
called lately the Regular Clergy, for their Miscarriages, and pray for their
Reformation; Which God grant.

But I conclude this Point with a good Church of England Man's Saying, That the
Bishops of England were like the Kings of Judah, and the Bishops of Scotland
like the Kings of Israel; for that there were several good Bishops in England,
but never one good Bishop in Scotland. And though this be a general Rule or
Maxim of the Scots Bishops, yet no general Rule wants its Exceptions, there
being some few Eminent Men of that Order in Scotland, who disssented from, and
disapproved of their violent Procedures, and inhumane and unchristian-like
Practice; But this was Rara avis in hisce terris. And I sum up all with a
Saying of a great Father in the Church, That whoever is of a persecuting
Spirit, whatever he profess outwardly, is of the Devil; which made Persius in
the like case in his Satyrs, make that Imprecation to Tyrants in general, or
Persecutors, which is the same thing upon the matter; both being Tyrants:

Sum parens divum, saevos punire Tyrannos
Haund alia ratione velis, etc.
And tho Tyrants or Persecutors may have a time allotted them to diffuse their
venom to the terror or affliction of others; yet they will meet with their
Correction or Judgments here or hereafter, when the oppressed and afflicted
shall be released.

And now being that the Order of Prelatical Bishops is abolished in Scotland by
an Act of Parliament; It is not once to be supposed that any other Government
can be Established there in the Church but a Presbyterian; The model thereof I
submit interim, to the Consideration and the final and unanimous Resolution of
a Just and Wise King (who favored the Peoples general Inclination) and this
Wise, Loyal and free Parliament. And to make it evident to all unbyassed Men,
that it is not only the general Inclination of the People, to have the
Presbyterian Government established; But also, That that Kingdom can never be
in Peace, without the Establishment of it: Though I might urge many, yet I only
offer two undeniable proofs.

First, There being 32 Shires or Counties, and two Stewartries (comprehending
the whole Body of the Nation) that send their Commissioners or Representatives
to Parliaments, and all general Meetings of the Estates or Conventions; of
these 34 Districts or Divisions of the Kingdom, there are 17 of them entirely
Presbyterians; So that where you will find one there Episcopally inclined,
you will find 150 Presbyterians. And the other 17 Divisions, where there is one
Episcopally inclined, there are two Presbyterians.

Secondly, Make but a Calculation of the valued Rent of Scotland, computing it
to be less or more, or computed argumentandi causa, to be Three Millions, and
you will find the Presbyterian Heritors, whether of the Nobility or Gentry, to
be P^oprietors and Possessors of Two Millions and more; So that those that are
Episcopally inclined cannot have a Third of that Kingdom; and as for the
Citizens or Burgesses, and Commonalty of Scotland, they are all generally
inclined to the Presbyterian Government except Papists, and some remote, wild,
and barbarous Highlanders, who have not a true notion of a Deity, acknowledge
neither King nor Superior, but the Chief of their Tribe, and have little
Subsistence but by Rapin and Plunder, and who ought to be subdued and reduced
by force, and Garrisons placed amongst them; without which, they can never be
kept in order, or obliged to serve the Precepts of Law or Gospel. All which is
true, and can be made appear to a Demonstration.

FINIS.

