AN Amicable Accommodation OF THE DIFFERENCE Between the Representer AND THE
ANSWERER, In Return to his Last Reply against The PAPIST Protesting against
Protestant Popery.

Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty for
His Household and Chapel. 1686.

AN Amicable Accommodation OF THE DIFFERENCE Between the REPRESENTER And the
ANSWERER.
HERE is a strange Voluminous ado about the Papist Misrepresented and
Represented. First, almost Twenty Sheets by way of Answer to it; then, Ten in a
second Reply; and now, Fifteen in a Rejoinder: And after all this pother and
noise, the upshot of the Matter is come to this, That the Word Misrepresented
is an improper Expression; That the Character of a Papist Misrepresented cannot
be called a Misrepresentation in a strict and proper sense, as our
Antiprotester has it often in his last Reply: where yet he owns the proving
this, to Page 2. 4.
have been the main drift of his former Ten Sheets, and a great part of these
last Fifteen. Surely he has taken a great deal of pains; but to what purpose, I
expect to hear in other Ten Sheets yet to come: for really, I do not yet know
that I am much concerned, whether it be a Misrepresentation in a strict and
proper sense, or no. And therefore, since he has pitched upon so civil a way of
confuting my Book, I think I may, in return to his Civility, and without wrong
to my Cause, grant him the whole of his Pretensions, and then sit down and
smile with him a while, to see, how being so near of a mind, we have yet been
so long clashing Quills, as Adversaries. I am really for Peace, and a good
Correspondence; and upon a serious Consideration of this last Answer, having
great reason to think, that the most considerable part of the Contention
between us, has been about a Word, and for want of a fair Understanding, I Will
endeavor to lay open my Mind farther to him, so to remove all
Misrepresentation from between us, (I hope he will pardon the Expression, though it
be not in its strict and proper sense) and by this means accommodate our
Affair, without letting it swell farther into a Quarrel of yet greater Volumes.

And First, To take up the Matter from the beginning, If he had duly
considered all I said in the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, he might
very well have excused entering the Field against me. For though I there
complained of Papists being Misrepresented to the World, that their Faith is
exposed in a Disguise, and many things imputed to their Belief and Doctrine,
which they disown and abominate: Yet in all this Complaint I named no body, I
advanced no Accusations against any particular Party. And though I could have
filled my Margins with numbers of Authors, urging much blacker Calumnies than I
there inserted; yet still I suppressed all Names, consulting Modesty, and in
regard of Peace. Now what need here of any singling themselves, or a Party out,
to Engage with me? I left every body to to their own Conscience; and had those
who felt themselves touched, concealed the Sting within their own Breast, there
had been still a Peace betwixt us. If a Man wipes the Dirt off his Face, that
has been thrown at him in the Street, I hope he may do it without any affront
to the Passers-by. His Complaint in general of being abused, is only a Natural
Right; those that are innocent need not be much concerned to clear themselves
from the Charge; and such as are guilty avoid all Quarrel, if they but hold
their Tongues. The Papist therefore Misrepresented and Represented might very
well have passed without moving of Choler, if those who will have themselves
not concerned at all, had not been too much concerned to wipe off the
Imputation. This had been a means of preserving a mutual Peace from the
beginning.

But Secondly, Though contrary to this Method, much Dust has been raised, and not
without some Heat in the Quarrel; yet I am still persuaded our Differences may
be compounded, if a fair Condescension can win any thing upon my Adversary, and
he will allow me to purchase his Good Will by almost an entire Submission to the
Chief of his Pretensions. I Will beg his leave to state the Occasion of our
Debate, and the Reader shall soon see how much I can oblige him by my yielding.

The Occasion of my writing the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, was
this; I found that the People in England had a very false Notion of Popery, or
of the Faith and Doctrine of Roman Catholics; that there was scarce any one
Article of their Creed, any one Practice of their Church, which was not falsely
drawn in the Imagination of the Vulgar, either blackned with Calumnies, or
disfigured with prejudiced Interpretations or malicious Misconstructions; that
hence arose so great a hatred against all of that Communion, that the
Comprehensive Precept of Loving ones Neighbor, seemed now to admit with the
Zealous of a necessary Exception against all of that Profession; and the Design
of rooting out Popery, a sufficient Dispensation for the violating all other
Duties, both to God, the King, and our Neighbor.

This Uncharitable Temper I could not but look upon as ill becoming a Christian
Name; and that to endeavor to remedy it, would not be only acceptable to
Catholics, but even to Protestants too; who, I presumed, would be as willingly
prevented from doing an Injury to their Neighbors, as the others would be
willing not to be injured: it being a greater Concern of a Church not to do an
Injury, than to receive one.

For the removing therefore this Scandal from Christianity, and hindering Men
from maligning and railing against their Neighbors, for the false Conceits of
their own Imaginations, by what means soever taken up by them, I thought it no
ill Expedient, to declare sincerely what is really the Faith of a Catholic:
and to show more clearly how different it is from what it is vulgarly said to
be, I drew out two Descriptions or Characters of Popery; the one being an Idea
of Protestant Popery, or as it is generally conceived by Protestants, and
painted in the Imagination of the Vulgar of that Communion: The other being a
Draught of the Faith of Roman Catholics, as delivered and prescribed by their
Church. The former of these Characters I called A Papist Misrepresented, and
the latter A Papist Represented. And I thought these Titles justifiable enough,
in as much as the one describes a Papist otherwise than he really is,
disfigured with false Colors, and artificially turned into a Monster, by a
deformed Dress, thrown over him by such, who through ignorance or malice are
willing to render him Ridiculous: While the other sets him out divested of this
Bug bear Habit, and shows him in his own genuine Shape and Complexion.

This inoffensive proceeding of mine, as I thought and meant it, passed not
long without an Adversary, who proclaimed to the World that he had Answered and
Confuted the Book: But what, and how has he done it? He says, he has proved
that the Character page 21
of a Papist Misrepresented contains nothing in it, which in a STRICT and
PROPER sense can be called a Misrepresentation: That it contains no
Misrepresentation page 4.
PROPERLY so called. That there is nothing of Misrepresentation page 18.
PROPERLY so called. This is the way he has answered and confuted it: and for
this he is set up upon every Stall, as bidding me defiance, and with the
Character of an Adversary.

But really the World is over hasty in proclaiming men at Odds. I love Peace
too well, to fall out about such Trisles. Let those who have a mind to it,
fight for a Word; for my part, he shall never be my Enemy, who demands no more
of me than this: I Will willingly yield my right in such a Point as this, rather
than make an Adversary of one, who is so civil to ask no more. Nay rather than
fail of obliging my Answerer, I Will even crave his pardon, for putting him to the
trouble of reinforcing his proofs a Second time. He says here (p. 2.) He hoped
the talk of Misrepresenting would have been at an end: After he had proved, to
wit, in his Former Reply, that the Character of a Papist Misrepresented
contained no Misrepresentation properly so called, in its strict and proper
Sense. And really 'twas only through mistake, and not design, that I have been
so troublesome to oblige him even to the talk of Misrepresenting beyond his
expectation. For had I but imagined that that had been the utmost of his design
in his last Ten Sheets, I should certainly have so far condescended to so
Gentile an Adversary, as to have spared him the Charges and Sweat of laying
down his Proofs again.

And therefore that he may not be importuned with any farther talk of
Misrepresenting for the future, I do here in compliance with him solemnly
declare, that the Title of the Papist Misrepresented, is not to be taken in its
strict and proper Sense, as Misrepresenting signifies only downright Lying, or
falsely charging matter of Fact; the whole Character being not indeed of this
Nature: But in its larger or less proper Sense; as it comprehends both Lying,
Calumniating, Misinterpreting, Reproaching, Misconstruing, Mis-judging, and
whatever else of this kind; For in this Sense I don't find the Answerer has any
dislike to it. But in case this should not please him neither, I Will yield one
step lower, and will have Misrepresenting quite blotted out. But then he must
give me leave to see, If I can please him with something else in its stead. And
what if I should try if something borrowed from the French, would be more
suitable to his humor? That Nation speaks very politely and quaintly, it may be
a Title a-la-mode de France may be as acceptable as their Fashions. What then
if I should take Copy from the Acts of the General Assembly of the French
Clergy lately Published; and instead of that Improper English word of
Misrepresenting, prefix to my Book what they have done to their Complaint, viz.
The Calumnies, Injuries and Falsities, which the Pretended Reformd publish in
their Books and Sermons against the Doctrine of the Church? If this will agree
to the Character in a more strict and proper sense, than Misrepresenting, let
me but know his Sentiments, and we will never fall out for want of such a
Reformation.

But however that he may be sensible, how much he is to be engaged to me for
this condescension; I must assure him, that whatsoever I yield in this kind, is
purely out of good nature, and for the love of Peace; and not as obliged to it
by force of his Arguments. For really to speak freely and betwixt Friends, I do
not think he has advanced any thing in the whole matter, that has the face of a
Proof; but proceeds all along upon a Principle, supposed to be certain indeed,
but without the support of either Authority or Reason.

His Principle is this, That there can be no Misrepresenting, where there is an
agreement about matter of p. 2. and alib.
Fact; which to me has more of the Counterfeit in it, than true Standard.

For were the Anti-Protester put to prove, that there can be no proper
Misrepresentation, where there is an agreement about matter of Fact, I believe
it is not every ordinary Topic would find him matter for a Demonstration.

For Misrepresenting seems to stand in opposition to Representing; and proper
Representing being nothing more, than the Describing or showing a thing as it
is in it self: As many ways as a thing can be shown otherwise than it is in it
self; so many ways may it be properly Misrepresented. Now it is certain that for
the description to bear an exact resemblance with the thing; it must not only
agree with it in matter of Fact; but likewise in every other respect, which it
pretends to declare, as in Motive, Circumstance, Intention, End, etc. The
disagreement in any one of these, being enough to quite change the nature of
the thing, notwithstanding the matter of Fact being still the same. Nay many
times even a Grin, a Wry Face, a Shrug or a Frown is enough to Misrepresent any
man, without belying him in matter of Fact.

It Is certain the Children of Reuben, and of Gad, and the half Tribe of
Manesseh, had been foully Misrepresented, if upon sight of the Altar raised by
them on the Brink of Jordan, they had been presently declared Josh. 22.
as Rebels against God, by the other Ten Tribes, as Prevaricators of the Law of
MOSES, and as Setters up of an Altar against the Altar of God and of Israel.
This I say had been certainly a Misrepresentation of the Two Tribes and a half;
because though the matter of Fact, viz. the building an Altar, was true beyond
all exception; yet because they raised this Altar, not for Burnt Offerings or
for Sacrifice; but to be a Testimony to their Children to come, that they had a
part in the Lord; the branding them with the Title of Rebels against God, and
as Schismatics from the Altar of the Tabernacle, had been altogether
unjustifiable, and a Representing them to their Fellow-Tribes, otherwise then
they were, which is properly Misrepresenting.

And had not Hannah been Misrepresented too, if Eli had set her out amongst her
Neighbors, for a 1 King. 1. 13.
Drunken Gossip, and a Prophaner of the House of the Lord, when he saw her
muttering over her Prayers, without hearing her voice?

I know if Our Answerer had been by, neither the two Tribes, nor Hannah must
have complained in this Case of being Misrepresented. He would have told them,
whilst there was an agreement about matter of Fact, there could be no
Misrepresentation in a strict and proper Sense; that therefore they might rest
contented with this infamy upon them, since by this one Principle they had a
full Answer and Confutation of their Complaint.

And is not this an admirable expedient now for the Honestest Man in the World
to be blasted in his Credit and Reputation, and yet not to be Misrepresented
neither? If Envy or Malice can but be ingenious enough, to invent something
like a Proof against him, and with Confidence insinuate it into the populace;
it is no Misrepresenting him, to set him out for a Fool or a Knave. Let there be
only some matter of Fact, which ill Will can but interpret into a Crime, and
his Reputation is forthwith brought to the Stake. For though barely to defame an
Honest Man, would be a Misrepresentation, and a Sin: yet to Preach and Post him
up for a Rogue and a Villain, and to stand to it, and run down his Credit with
a Proof, is no proper Misrepresentation at all. If the Two Elders had cried
down Susanna for a Harlot, without offering to prove their aspersion, they had
Misrepresented her then, it seems, according to our Answerer's Doctrine: But
because their own Villainy prompted them with a Proof against her Innocence,
this so altered the Case, that a Virtuous Woman was painted out and decried for
a Strumpet, and yet the Two Elders no Misrepresenters all the while. No, by no
means; this is too foul a Character for them to bear, and they might be
reasonably concerned to wipe off the imputation; they have a Proof for what
they urge, they have a matter of Fact of her being Alone and Naked in the
Garden: and this makes her Credit a Subject of Dispute, and not of
Misrepresentation. This is admirable I confess, and though that young youth
Daniel laid open the two Sages, for Perjury and False Accusation; yet they are
beholden to this nicking Principle of our Anti-protester, for discharging them
from the Infamy of Misrepresenting.

And it is not only these Two Old Sinners are indebted to him for his
Assistance: As many as have ever made use of those Fashionable Topics of
Calumny and Slander, and maliciously plotted against Innocence by Perjury and
Desamation, must come and acknowledge their obligation, for his having found
them out a method, by which though they have turned White into Black, shown
Honest Men for Knaves, stamped Vice upon Virtue, made Wise men pass for Fools,
and always endeavored to represent things otherwise then they were; yet they
may still plausibly quit themselves from the charge of proper Misrepresenting.

And first let the Jews come; for though they clamoured against our Savior, and
painted him out, as a Breaker of the Sabbath, as a Glutton, as a Friend and
Companion of Publicans and Sinners, and that in Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils he casted out Devils; yet this was no Misrepresenting of Christ, it
seems; for as long as there was a matter of Fact in all these cases, 'twas no
Misrepresenting, thus foully to blacken Innocence, and to Represent Christ
otherwise then he was.

And may not all after Jews, Infidels, and Turks come in too? For though they
branded the Apostles as Troublers of the City, and movers of Sedition: Though
they defamed the Christians, as Superstitious Foolish and Bloody; though they
decried them for Murdering Infants, and eating their Flesh in their Assemblies,
for Worshipping the Sun, and adoring an Asses head for God, and teaching a
thousand other Absurdities and Abominations. Yet if any one be so Bold as to
call these Misrepresenters of the Christians and of their Faith, the charge is
not likely to pass many days, without a return of something which will be
certainly called an Answer.

Nay let none stay out from acknowledging their share in this favor, excepting
only such Dull Souls, who have Malice enough to calumniate, but want wit to
give a Reason for what they do, or can find no matter of Fact on which to
ground their Scandal, or which they are not able to make Criminal by
Interpretation. For as for all others, who carry on their Business by Calumny
and Scandal, and can give a reason for it, they may go on as to this point;
this Salvo is a General discharge, by which they may securely take away any
man's Good name for the future, without being Misrepresenters.

And it is by this admirable Plea, the Anti-protester has absolved all the
Ancient and Modern Protestant Character-drawers of Popery, from the infamy of
Misrepresenting. For though they expose a List of pretended Popish Doctrines to
the People, ushered in with They teach this, They Believe that, They say this,
They affirm that, and under these Preambles charge the Papists for asserting
and believing such Blasphemies and Abominations, which they would sooner lose
their Lives than assent to: Yet these are no Misrepresenters, as long as they
can find some matter of Fact, on which to ground these charges. But whether it
be with reason or without reason, that is no matter, only distinguish, says he,
(p. 4.) between matters of Representation and Dispute: And if the matter of
Fact they charge the Papists with be true, they are no Misrepresenters; as for
their Reasons and Arguments, I will not undertake to defend all the Reasonings
of Protestants. So that let them traduce the Papists and their Doctrine never
so odiously, yet they are no Misrepresenters, as long as they charge them with
matter of Fact, and can say something they call a Reason for it, though it be no
Reason at all.

This is the Doctrine of the Answerer; and thus is the Papist Misrepresented
confuted. So that for the future the Papist, though he be exposed in the most
monstrous and horrid shape imaginable, must never complain of being
Misrepresented, especially as long as those that make the show have Wit and
Malice enough to give a Reason for what they say, and can fix it upon some
matter of Fact, but whether right or wrong, that is all the same.

But now I would willingly know, whether this Explication of Misrepresenting be
absolute and universal, in regard to all Nations, Judgments and Professions; or
only Calculated for the Elevation of Popery: So that only Papists must not
think themselves Misrepresented, when they are thus represented otherwise than
they are; but not any others in the like Circumstances.

I have a little Scruple in this Matter, and therefore will explicate my self a
little, that I may be better informed concerning the nature of Misrepresenting.
I will for that end beg leave of my Answerer, to propose an Example or Two,
which may serve to give me some Light into this Affair. Suppose therefore that
some Zealous Brother, that had Separated from the Church of England, having now
his Honor and his Interest engaged in the Schism, to prevent the Reunion of
his Flock, should make it his daily Business to animate his Followers against
the Established National Church, by exposing her Doctrine and Practices, and
rendering them as odious as he can; would it be Misrepresenting or no? As now,
if he should thus in the fervor of Spirit address himself to his Congregation:

Beloved, beware of the Whore that sits upon the Seven Hills; fly from the
Abomination of Babylon; get out of the reach of the Dragon; be not contented to
get from under his Feet, but stand afar off, afar off, Beloved, out of the
Swing of his Tail: Oh, he has a long Tail, Beloved, a long Tail; and, do ye
mark me now? there is as much Poison in his Tail, as in his very Teeth. I must
explicate to you this Mystery. The Dragon's Seat is upon the Top of the Hills,
and the poor Papists lie under his very Nose. There are some others, who have
had thoughts of withdrawing themselves from this Place of Iniquity, and have
stepped a little aside, but could never yet bid Adieu to their Captivity, and
these are such who call themselves Men of the Church of England; who though they
have retired a little from the Top of the Hill, and are got from under the
Dragon's Feet, yet they are not the halfway down, but stick in the way, and
are as much under the Power of the Dragon, as if they were under his very
Belly. For, mark ye, Beloved, he has such a Sweep with his Tail, that as many
as are on the Sides of the Hills are still under his Command, and breath
nothing but the Air of the Dragon. Smell to 'em a little, my dearest Saints,
and you will soon perceive them rank with Popery, and that their Delight is in the
Fopperies and Abominations of the Whore, and their Marks are the Marks of the
Beast. For see what they are, behold their Character, Beloved.

1. They allow and maintain an intolerable Pride in their Prelates, settling on
them large Revenues and State, contrary to the Example of the Apostles, who
were poor and humble, and by the Work of their Hands got Bread for themselves
and their poor Neighbors. And these Prelates are verily nothing but Popish
Prelates, and are commanded by their Church to wear the Miter and the Crosier,
and the Cope, the most solemn Rags of the Whore: and though they generally
dissemble this Popery in their Lifetime, excepting only on their Coaches, so
to try if they can gain us; yet you may see their Claim to it at their Death;
there being scarce any of 'um buried, but with the Miter and Crosier on their
Tombs.

2. They make Gods of Dead Men, erecting Churches in their Honor, and
Dedicating them to their Names. Nay, they honor them more than God himself; of
the Hundred and thirty seven Parish-Churches of the Weekly-Bill of London,
there being only Five in Honor of Christ, or the Blessed Trinity. And how much
they honor the Virgin Mary more than Christ, you may see in the same Weekly
Bills, in which Mary has Nineteen Churches Dedicated to her Name, and Christ
only Three. And is not this to place Mary above Christ, and to make a Goddess
of her? Is not this to worship her more than God? For, what more Sovereign and
Divine Honor can there possibly be paid to any, than to raise Temples and
Churches to their Names? This is an Honor and Worship to which all others of
Bowing, Kneeling, and Praying, are much inferior. For these Actions we
lawfully use to Creatures, we Bow and Kneel to our Prince, and by humble
Petitions beg his Assistance: But to build Temples and Churches to the Honor
and Name of any Creature, is Blasphemy and Idolatry, it is to make Gods of them;
and nothing better than an Imitation of the Heathens: And therefore as they had
their Temples Dedicated to their Demy-Gods, Hercules, Vespasian, Trajan, and
Diana, etc. so amongst our Brethren you see one Temple raised to Martin,
another to Dennis, another to Bennet, another to Catherine. For this the
Papists were Idolaters, and for this the Church of England are Idolaters, and
this Idolatry they inherit of the Papists; for though these Churches were built
first by the Papists, yet the Church of England raised them out of their Ashes,
and rebuilt them with the same Titles, Invocations, and Dedications.

3. They teach and practice Idolatry on another account, and that is their
Image-Idolatry. For though they pretended an hatred to Images for some years, yet
that was only Dissimulation. For now at last they speak plain, and have given
that Abomination a place in every Leaf of their Bibles. They may pretend they
do not honor and respect them as the Papists do; but this is only before us
Schismatics: for, believe me, my Flock in Christ, they honor them in their
Hearts more than the rankest Papist in the World. For I appeal to you now, be
you Judges; What greater Honor can there be imagined, than to give a thing
place even in the very Word of God? You understand very well, that to place an
Image in the Throne of a King, is to give it Kingly Honor, and to place it in
the Imperial Seat, is to give it Imperial Honor: What then, Beloved, is it to
place Images and Pictures in the Bible, in the very Word of God, but to give
them Divine Honor, and to respect them as Gods? For certainly the Word of God
is of God, and all Divine; and to give any Image place there, is the greatest
Argument of Sovereign Honor, and open acknowledgment of its Divinity.

But this is not all, my Brethren; for besides this Abomination of thus
honoring Images and Pictures, they likewise Pray to their Pictures, as you may
see them in their most solemn Devotion of the Common Prayer. For they have them
not only on the Walls in some Churches; but look but over their Shoulders, and
you will see them in the very heat of their Devotion under their very Eyes, in the
Leaves of their Common Prayer Books.

Nay, their Altars have their Images too, and this in a more profane manner
than the Papists; for these have none but Images of Christ, of the Apostles,
and their Followers; and if any were tolerable, it ought to be These at a
Christian Altar: but to throw down these of Christ, and set up Moses and Aaron
in the place, is an Idolatry beyond all Excuse. God hid Moses's Body, and they
set up his Likeness over their Altars.

And mark ye now, Beloved, how all this is in defiance to the Commandment of
God; For the Lord has said, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image,
nor the Likeness of any thing in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath: So that
did they not honor, worship, or pray to these Pictures, yet the very Making
them is expressly forbidden by God. And let their Intention be what it will in
so doing, it is certain, there is no Intention can alter the Pap. not Misrep. by
Prot. p. 65.
Nature of Actions which are determined by a Divine Law; For then Men might
Murder, or Steal, or Forswear themselves, and yet avoid the Guilt of such
Actions, by intending to do no Evil in them. It Is therefore a very profane
Absurdity, Beloved, to see the Commandments set up in Churches, in order to the
keeping them, and yet with Moses and Aaron on each side, which is a flat
Contradiction to the very Second of them, which says, Thou shall not make the
Likeness of any thing in Heaven above, etc. What think you now, my Brethren, do
these Men love Images and worship them, or no? They professed a hatred to
Image Worship in the beginning, for the more plausibly turning the Papists out
of doors, when they pursued them with the Commination in their old
Common-Prayer-Books, of Cursed be all Worshippers of Images: but afterward
succeeding to the Errors of the Papists, as well as to their Revenues, they no
longer dared to curse the Worshippers of Images, knowing the Curse would light
upon their own Heads; but instead of that, reformed their Prayers, and have it
now, Cursed are ye Idolaters.

4. They worship Saints and Angels. For see, Beloved, besides the building
Churches to the Honor of their Names, and setting up their Pictures in them,
which are as great external Acts of Worship and Religion as can be; they
likewise set Days apart to honor them, as God has his Day set apart; they
command their Vigils to be kept, and have Prayers in their Honor, not
questioning but that they can Pray Disc. against Invocation of Saints, in the
beginning.
for as many as they know upon Earth. Nay, they likewise pray for, and depend
upon their Assistance, Help, and Protection, but especially of the Angels, as
you may see in their Common Prayer Books, where on the Day of Michael, they beg
to be defended by the Angels; as if God, who is Almighty, were not able to
defend them, that they should thus seek shelter under the Angels Wings. Is not
this to leave God and his Christ, and to make Gods of Creatures? Oh! such
abomination as this is not to be endured; it is intolerable, Beloved. For these
Churches in their honor, Days in their honor, Images in their honor, and
Prayers in their honor, is paying to them Divine Honors, it is worshipping
them as Gods: For, mark ye now, all Civil Honor is terminated on the visible
things of this World, and we have no intercourse Papist not Misrep. by Prot.
with the invisible Inhabitants of the other World, but what is Religious; now
if all Worship of invisible Beings is Divine and Religious Worship; what
abominable Idolatry are our blind Brethren fallen into, who by this Religious
Worship make as many Gods, as there are Angels and Saints in Heaven!

5. They practice Idolatry again in receiving the Sacrament; for though they
allow this to be only Bread and Wine, yet they pay it Religious Worship, and
honor it as God, by falling down to it on their Knees. They may say, they do
not this to the Bread and Wine: But what, must we not believe our Senses in so
plain a Case? Do we not see them do it with our Eyes? And let them pretend what
they please, their Practice is the best explication of their Belief.

6. They use a Book of Prayers, which is nothing but a ship of the Mass. 'Twas
called a Mass Book when it came first to light; and though it has since reformed
its Name, for the better imposing upon poor Souls; yet the Nature of it is
still the same. The Epistles and Gospels and Collects and Litanies and Hymns
are nothing but Terms of Babylon. And pray now, what are the Vigils,
Ember-days, Rogation-days, Ashwednesday, Epiphany, Sexagesima, Quinquagesima,
Septuagesima? is not all this the Language of the Beast? Yea, Beloved, from the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks; as their Language is, such is their
very Heart and Soul; they delight in an unknown Tongue, and one may as well
understand the Mass, as this Language of the Common Prayer Book. Then look in
the Calendar of the Common Prayer, and there you will find the Mass-Saints stand
in their Order; March shows you Gregory the Pope, and Benedict the Monk; April
has George that killed the Dragon; the follow Dunstan, that caught the Devil
by the Nose, and stickl'd for the Celebacy of the Clergy; and Augustine, that
brought Popery into this Nation; and thus their Saints are listed as in the
Mass Book, and as the Demy-Gods were in the Calendar of the Heathens. Then if
you listen to them in this their Devotion, you will not think them to be an
Assembly of Christians, but rather a Confusion of Misbelievers, of all sorts of
Infidels met in a Club: There you will hear them with the Persians crying out to
the Sun, with the Egyptians to the Whale, to all the Fishes and Beasts; with
the Chaldeans to the Fire; with the Syrians to the Birds; and with the Papists
too to Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, Dead Men, Men that cannot hear them; and
this in all their Churches, as if these their Saints were like God himself,
present in all Places. And this Devotion is called the Canticle of Benedicite,
taken out of the Apocrypha, which with them you may see passes for very good
Scripture. So that the whole Common Prayer Book, if not worse, is nothing but
the Mass Book in English. And all the difference is, that the Missal is of an
Ancient standing, used even in Basil and Chrysostom's time: But our
Common Prayer Book never knew light, till 'twas devised under Edward VI. And
how many Alterations has it had in this time? Some made by King Edward himself,
some by Queen Elizabeth, and several others since. Nay, have we not seen
Prayers added to this Book, in Thanksgiving for the Discovery of and
Deliverance from a Plot, which now every considering Man has reason to believe
to have been no more than a Chimera, and the Invention of Bad Men?

7. They make Gods of Men, attributing to them a Power of Forgiving Sins, the
incommunicable Attribute of the Almighty; and this is plain in their Liturgy,
in which their Priests are ordered to give Absolution to Sinners.

8. They encourage a Deathbed Repentance; permitting their Members to live as
extravagantly as they please all the time of their Health; and not a word of
Confess and Repent, but when Death is waiting for them at their Beds-Head. They
have a Power to give Absolution, they say; and their never enjoining it; but in
the last Agony, is Argument enough to conclude, there is no obligation of
Repenting amongst them, till Death looks 'em in the Face.

9. They know not what their Belief is touching this Power of Absolution. Some
of their Divines affirm, That the Sentence by which Absolution is given to the
Penitent, is an Absolute and Definitive Sentence, judicially absolving him from
the Guilt of his Offenses. Others of their Doctors say, That the Form of
Absolution is Declarative rather than Absolute, and think it a rashness to
pronounce a Definitive Sentence in Gods Name. And thus though their Faith be all
pretended to be according to the Word of God, yet it is wonderful hard to know
what it is; and whilst they thus disagree amongst themselves, how can any
embrace their Creed, who know not what they believe themselves?

10. They dispense with Vows, and dissolve the Obligation of such as are made
even to God himself. Thus you see, when any Priest, Jesuit, or Friar comes over
to their Church, though they have solemnly vowed their Virginity to God, and
promised to the Almighty never to Marry, yet they are no sooner made a Member
of this Reformed Congregation, but their Obligation is forthwith dispensed
with, they are allowed to take a Wife, and wholly released from their Vow. And
hark ye now, my Chosen of the Lord, if they can thus dispense with a Vow made
to God, what trust can be placed in them? how can we rely on them? since, after
this, there is no difficulty in pretending to a Power of releasing the
Obligation to Veracity amongst Men?

11. They are a Cruel, Bloody, and Persecuting Church, and think nothing unjust
which is for the Interest of their Cause, for the Security and Propagation of
their Doctrine. You know how they helped on this score the Low Countries to
Rebel against their Lawful Sovereign, and were the occasion of much Innocent
Blood being Spilt: and how they profer'd to assist the French in their
Rebellion against their Prince. What they did to that unfortunate Mary Queen of
Scots, you know likewise full well: She took Sanctuary here, and being Heiress
of the Crown, was made a Sacrifice upon the Scaffold for pretended Crimes, but
in good truth for nothing else but the Security of the Church of England.
Charles I. fell too upon the same account: They lay this, you know, at
Dissenters doors; but how far that War was an Episcopal War, the Lord knows.
For besides the engaging him to take up Arms on their account, you know one
Archbishop changed his Rochet for a Coat of Mail, and the greatest number of
the Convocation-House, of what Church were they?

12. They practice Cruelty again in persecuting us for not obeying their
Church, when they at the same time are as great Dissenters as we. For, look you
now, Beloved, are not their Ministers commanded by their Church to enjoy but
one Benefice: And yet how many of them possess two or three? They find no
difficulty of being dispensed in this Duty, if they can but make a Friend to
speak for them, and Forty pound for the Fees. Are not their Prelates commanded
by their Rubric to wear a Scarlet Robe, a White Rochet, and Cornered Cap:
their Ministers an Albe and Tunicle; and who is there complies with this Order?
Does not their Church command all of their Communion to Fast all Lent, the
Ember-days, Rogation-days, and all Fridays in the Year: and yet who of them
satisfies this Precept? Do we not find the contrary every where practiced? And
not only in this, but in a thousand other Instances of the like nature. And yet
while they themselves thus frankly trample the Commands of their Church under
feet, is it not a most malicious Cruelty that we should be persecuted for not
satisfying her Precepts? So that though we are Members of their Church, we can,
by their good will, enjoy no Peace amongst them. They spare us our Lives
indeed, but without Liberty or Property, the only Comforts of Life.

13. They teach Absurdities and Contradictions. First, in requiring us to
submit to the Authority of their Church, and punishing us for refusal: and then
charging such as follow them from all such Submission, and giving them liberty
of embracing nothing that is proposed to them, but what they themselves shall
judge consonant to the Word of God. And thus we must be obliged to go to
Church; and yet when we come there, the Appeal is made from the Pulpit to the
People, and we need not believe what we hear, unless we think fit our selves.
Then the Authority of Councils we must like wise allow and submit to; and yet
after all their Examinations and Determinations, we need not receive what they
Decree, unless in our own private Judgments we think it conform to Reason and
the Law. So that we must not be allowed to do what we think best, and guide our
selves; and yet when we follow them, we need believe or do no more than we
think fitting: Which is to take them for Governors and Directors, and then
afterward go alone by our selves.

14. After all this Liberty left to their Followers, it is yet the Belief of
their Church, That whosoever will follow her, must shut his Eyes, stifle his
Sense and Reason, and be led only by the Nose. And therefore we poor
Schismatics must not reform any Abuse or Superstition, which our Reason
assures us to be contrary to the Word of God, without the Thunder of
Excommunication forthwith breaking upon our Heads; but if their Church in
Parliament and Convocation makes any Reformation, there is no Appeal to be made
to Sense or Reason, but it is immediately to be received as the Sense of the
Word of God by all her Members. And therefore, Revision revis. in vindic. of
the Bish. of Winton, p. 23.
says one of their Divines, let them in the Name of God Reform on, if they
proceed according to due Course of Law, and Act with Authority. For as to What,
and How, and How far, things are to be Reformed, such as you and I are must
leave it to the Wisdom and Pleasure of Governors. So that we must lay aside our
Reason, if we intend to enter their Congregation; it is only going on blindly
without fear or care, and relying confidently on their Infallible Governors,
and we shall be forthwith True and Substantial Churchmen. And what think you,
my Brethren, does not this smell of the Infallible Chair? It Is even so. But
such is the Church from which you are happily gone out. Thus teach her Divines,
and thus are her Members allowed to believe; For you cannot Ans. to Pap.
Protest. p. 9.
doubt, but that all of them are allowed to believe that, which any Man among
them is allowed to teach.

15. By this means they are a wavering and unsettled Church, subject to
continual Variations, and turning as many ways as their Governors please to
wind them; and yet still all is according to the Word of God. In the first
Common Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth, 'twas required that Water should be
mingled with the Communion-Wine; and that in the Consecration of the Elements,
the Minister should sign them twice with the Sign of the Cross: And that the
Communion-Bread should be unleavened and round. Baptismal Water was likewise
appointed to be blessed with the Sign of the Cross; The Minister was commanded
to Exorcise and Conjure out the unclean Spirit from the Infant, to dip him
thrice in the Water, to Anoint him with Ovl upon the Head, and put on him the
White Vesture called the Crysome, and make the Cross on his Breast and
Forehead. In Consirmation the Bishops were ordered to Cross the Children on the
Forehead. In the Visitation of the Sick the Minister was to Anoint the Sick
Person on his Forehead or Breast, making the Sign of the Cross. And there was
no Command to receive the Sacrament Kneeling. This was their Church then, as
Established by Law and the Pleasure of Governors, and conform to the Scripture:
but now their Scripture and Governors say otherwise, and condemn what they then
approved. 'T was then according to Scripture to Pray for the Dead, as in the
same Book of Edward VI. Now the Scripture forbids it. The Form of Ordination
was then and many years after one thing, and now of late it is become another:
and if right then, I wonder how it can be right now. Thus you see their Church
alter and change according to the Complexion of the Times. And not only in
these things, but in a thousand others; nay, in the very Articles of their
Belief: The Apostles Creed had never more than Twelve Articles, and the
assenting to these were enough to make a Christian; but to make a Church of
England Christian, at first 'twas required to Subscribe to Forty two Articles;
and then a little after something was bated, and 'twas enough to subscribe to
Thirty nine; and in these there was so much chopping and changing, both in
Words, Expressions, and Sentences, that even the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition
never had more before it came to perfection.

These are the Marks, my Dearest ones, of that Congregation to which you are so
earnestly invited to join: but let those join with her that can, those that can
find a way to dispense with all their Sense and Reason, and admit of
Profanation, and Superstition, and Idolatry, for the Word of God. But for us,
We have the Scripture and our Reason for our Guides, and we need no better; and
we have no surer way of avoiding the Teeth of the Dragon, than to keep out of
the reach of his Tail.

If a Zealous Brother, I say, should in this manner paint out the Church of
England to his Flock, and endeavor to imprint in their Minds an Idea thus Foul
and Monstrous, of her teaching and maintaining abominable Superstitions and
Idolatries; I would fain know of the Answerer, Whether this would be
Representing or Misrepresenting the Church of England; whether 'twould be a
showing her as she is, or as she is not. I know, according to his Principles
the Charges being not false as to matter of Fact, and none being urged without
some Reason, this Character ought not to be Entitled, The Church of England
Misrepresented. And yet methinks I cannot fancy 'twill be thought like her. But
however it be, I am resolved to compound, and not quarrel upon this score. If
he will not have this to be Misrepresenting in its strict and proper sense, I
am ready to allow, that the word Misrepresented, as it stands in the Title of
my Book, is not to be taken in its strict and proper sense, as it signifies
Calumniating by Perjury only, and Lies; such as was the Story of the Pilgrims,
Screwed Guns, and Black Bills, for the hanging of the Jesuits; and that of
Stifling Sir Edm. Godfrey with a Pillow in the upper Court of Somerset House,
and Strangling him in the lower Court, before the Stables, with a twisted
Handkerchief, and laying it on the Papists: But in a less rigorous
Signification, as it implies the Representing a thing otherwise than it is, and
putting on false Colors, whether by Wry Interpretations, False Inferences,
Malicious Applications, Weak Reasonings, or any such like Topic. For by
whatsoever Method the thing is made to appear otherwise than it is, it is all
the Misrepresenting I desire, and equally fit for my purpose. And now I have so
far complied with the Answerer, I hope the Talk of Misrepresenting, as he says,
will be over. And yet if he has a mind to prove once more, in other ten Sheets,
That Misrepresenting is not to be taken in its strict and proper sense let him
do it; it is only Twelve-pence apiece more for the Curious: The Judicious will
think it only worth a Smile, if so much.

But I am yet in Arrears, and must not part thus. For it seems the Answerer has
a Complaint against me, and it is this, (page, 3.) That in my last Reply, instead
of defending my own Misrepresentations, which I so unjustly fathered upon them,
I have picked up new Misrepresentations for him to Answer. And really I was
much to blame, to look out for new Misrepresentations, when he had little to
say against the former, except that they were not to be called Misresentations
in a strict sense. But where did I father 'em upon any body? I laid them at no
bodies door; and if some appeared so solicitous in clearing themselves, that
they were suspected to be Fathers, they may thank themselves; I pointed at none.

It Is true, for the showing they were none of my own Childish Conceits, I at
length produced some eminent Protestants, describing Popery with the same ill
Features, and worse than I had drawn it in my Character of a Papist
Misrepresented: and first, the Archbishop of York. And here the Quarrel is,
because I left out the Authorities mentioned by that Prelate. And now the
Answerer has inserted those Authorities, what do they make to his purpose, or
against me? Were they all exact and true, which yet no Man will be able to make
good, is every thing to be set forth for the Faith of a Church, which can be
found in one Author, as it is by him, when he prefixes to them a He (that is,
the Papist) must believe? Can the Church of England stand this Test? Would it
not be Misrepresenting her, to Preface every extravagant Saying of her Members,
with She believes, and She teaches? What signify therefore the mentioning
those Authors, when the Question is not, What some Private Authors say; but
what the Church believes? When the Archbishop therefore brings in the Papist
professing his Faith, with this solemn Protestation, We must believe; and then
supports the Paradox with a single Authority or two; as this was in him a piece
of Artifice, not justifiable amongst Friends; so the omission of such
Testimonies was beyond the possibility of being a Design, unless it were of
Consulting the Credit of the Prelate.

And though the Books mentioned were published by Authority of Superiors; yet
from such Books cannot be fairly Represented the Faith of the Church, and
whosoever pretends to do it, is nothing less than a Misrepresenter: Nor will a
Church of England-Man, I fancy, much question this Truth, who, I believe, upon
consideration, will allow, that his Church may be easily Misrepresented, if
every idle Opinion to be picked out of Books, which come forth with an
Imprimatur, were to be inserted into the Character of her Faith. And I cannot
but wonder the Answerer should urge this Dispute now at this time, when we have
seen a Book Published by Authority of Pope, Cardinals, and other Dignitaries,
and in a particular manner approved by them, and yet questioned by some as not
Representing the Faith of the Church aright. Methinks, when a Book of this
Authority comes to be disputed, as not truly Representing, I cannot understand
how every other Author with a petty License is a sufficient ground for a
Representer. But it must be so to drive the Business on. When a Protestant
shows forth the Church of Rome, every thing that can be raked out of Books, is
authentic enough for him to put into the Character: but when a Catholic
Prelate Expounds the Doctrine of his Church, all the Authority of Pope and
Cardinals is not enough to set him up for a Representer.

Besides the Archbishop, I produced Sutcliff's Survey of Popery, in which he
had laid to the Papists charge such Tenets as are offensive to every Christian
Ear, and as much detested by Papists, as any other Society whatsoever. But I
did not, it seems, set down his Reasons and his Authorities. And this discovery
puts the Answerer upon an outcry against the Representer's Honesty. And yet
where the Scandal is I cannot find. For I undertook for no more, than to show
the Doctrines laid by Mr. Sutcliff at the Papists door, and this I did
sincerely in his own words and sense, and for his Reasons; they were no Concern
of mine, neither will the Answerer, after all his noise, put his approbation to
them, as far as I see: for having summed them up, he concludes with this open
hint, (p. 14.) If some Protestants have charged the Doctrines and Practices of
the Church of Rome with such Consequences as they cannot justify, Wiser
Protestants disown it. He must be a very fooolish Representer therefore, who
should go about to confute such Reasons which nothing belong to Representing,
and are such as Wiser Protestants are ashamed of.

But now we are come to the Point of Honesty, I cannot but admire a rare Knack
the Answerer has especially in Translating honestly: one Instance he gives us
in his former Reply, and another in this (p. 76.) where reciting a Prayer out
of the Pontifical, he has these words in the Latin, Vt orantes inclinantesque
se propter Deum ante istam Crucem; but rendering it into English, he leaves out
those two little words propter Deum, and puts it thus: That those who Pray and
Bow themselves before this Cross, without mentioning for Gods sake, or for the
honor God, as not fit for his purpose. When I have learned this Artifice of
him, he may then with reason cry out of curtailing and dishonesty: But at
present I think he has something to mend at home in this Point. And for my
part, I Will endeavor not to follow so ill an Example.

And now at length we are arrived to the Question concerning the Bishop of
Condom, and some Points Treated of by him. The Answerer has Debated the Matter
in about One hundred Pages, and fairly invites the Representer to dispute it
out, and two powerful Arguments he uses to provoke him to it. The first is, (p.
26) That there is no reason to dispute it at all: But the truth is, says he, I
know no reason there is for all this dispute. So that the Representer, if he
will be advised, must leave off Character-making, and dispute over an hundred
Pages, because there is no reason to dispute. The second Reason (ib.) is,
because I was not satisfied with his bare telling me he did not like my
Religion, now he will give me some Reasons for it. And this is a Reason like the
former: For I never was concerned with his not liking my Religion: I never told
him, I was not satisfied with his bare telling me, he did not like it, that now
he should pretend for this Reason, to give me some Reasons for it. All the
business is, dispute he is resolved, and in it must, though by head and shoulders;
the Representing Humor does not please him, and Character-making is an
aggrievance, it is too fair a way of dealing for him, and lays too open the
Mystery of Iniquity: and therefore he has no better way to quit himself of this
trouble, than to draw me into an Ocean of Disputes, that so Representing may be
at an end.

Thus he labors to change the Scene, and to tempt me out of the way; but his
weighty Reasons do not work so powerfully, as to render me incapable of
resisting. And therefore till we have other two Reasons given, I Will be no other
than Representer still. My business is matter of Fact, and not of Right, or de
jure; and since he has bulkt out his Answer with Nine Sheets of the Fifteen,
filled up with an occasional Discourse, I Will take the freedom gravely to turn
over those his hundred occasional Pages, though I fear he will take it ill; but I
cannot help him. We Wise Converts do not love to go out of our way, but upon
very good grounds; and therefore if the two Reasons he has given for this at
present, do not move us, it is because they are too sublime, and not suited to
our Capacity.

But however, he requires satisfaction as to the Points he has there handled,
and I shall remit him to such Books in which these Controversies have been
discussed at large. And for my self shall sit down contented with the Title he
often allows me of a Representer. And as to the Bishop of Condom, to whom I
appealed for the justifying the Character of the Papist Represented, he has
undertaken his own Vindication, and needs not the assistance of another Hand.

All the Concern I have, is to declare, that to assent to the Catholic Faith,
as Expounded by this Prelate, is sufficient for any to be received into the
Communion of our Church; we require no other Terms. And if the Answerer finds
different Explications given by Bellarmine and others; though the Books are
approved, yet there is no obligation of being of their mind in things that are
disputed amongst Divines. It Is in vain therefore to clamor against the
Opinions of Bellarmine, or Suarez, Scotus, etc. as loose, extravagant, harsh or
unsavory, etc. since it suffices for Catholic Communion, to subscribe to the
Points treated by M. Condom, in the sense he has expounded them; if they are
more soft or sweet than has hitherto be apprehended, or delivered formerly by
others, let them but be received in that soft and sweet manner, and no more is
required.

It Is therefore nothing more than a Cavil, to question whether Bellarmine and
other eminent approved Authors, are not as authentic a Rule for the Exposition
of the Council of Trent and the Catholic Faith, as the Bishop of Condom. We
have no concern in these Comparisons, our whole business is only this; Whether
the embracing the Catholic Faith, as expounded by the Bishop of Condom, be
sufficient for a Person to be received into the Communion of our Church. And
since this is evidently so, and that all those that believe thus, are actually
acknowledged Members of this Church upon this Assent, what needs the
Representer, who follows his Explication, any farther Apology? If any Person
therefore may be thus received a Member of our Church, upon the Terms I have
proposed in the Matters there handled, I have Represented the Papist aright.
And amongst all the Arguments that have been published, only those have
belonged to me, which endeavor to show the falsity of this. It Is no wonder
therefore I have waved the Consideration of many things that have been
published against me under the Title of an Answer, since of the Forty Sheets
that have come upon this Errand into the World, there has not been three, but
what have forgot their Business they were sent upon. If it be an Omission
therefore not to return an Answer to such things as are not spoken to me, it is
easily making a List of Omissions. But let me see where it has been proved,
that it is not sufficient for a Catholic to believe as I have proposed, as to
those Particulars. And if it has had no Answer, it shall have one.

FINIS.

