A DISCOURSE ABOUT CEREMONIES, Church Government, AND LITURGY: Humbly offered
to the Consideration of the Convocation.

By J. G. G.

But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men, Matthew. 15.9. See that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed
thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.5. LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Richard
Baldwin at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, MDCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
SOme time ago came out a Pamphlet called A fair Character of the Presbyterian
Reformlings just and sober Vindication of his Observations upon the 30th. of
January and 29th. of May, etc. wherein the Author, who cannot deny himself,
instead of arguing in a fair way, does after his usual manner, continue in his
Nonsense, and giving ill Language: We looking upon that barren Soul of his to
be like the Earth spoken of in Scripture, Heb. 6.8. which bears Thorns and
Briers, and nothing else, to condescend to that Narrowness of his, do now
afford him ample matter, and a large Field, which we never intended to have
done, if in his scribbling he had given but an indifferent Satisfaction; but in
case hereafter he does mend, we engage fairly to reply to any reasonable
Answer, he happens to give the following Papers, and therein also to take
notice of the forementioned Pamphlet, though it be not worth it in the least,
which to demonstrate I now by the by shall produce three or four Instances upon
several Heads, to the end, that they which know not his way may be informed of
the Nature of the Tree by his Fruit.

The first thing obvious is out of his Preface, and that is his fantastical
Notions and like Expressions about Ray the Madman (for Men of the same Kidney
are well acquainted one with another) to hair it about Town without his Cravat
on, or the Court Baux, to air in the Park without a Steinkirk twisted Post
Neckcloth, and this attended with a Just so perhaps for the Complete Attorney,
etc. Who can forbear applauding unto and admiring at these high and noble
Notions, fit and proper Expressions for a Divine, and in matters of this
Nature, so well compacted and handsomely coherent one with another? Surely the
Man must need be in love with his own Wit, and a great Admirer of himself; so
let him be for me, who have not been at School with him at Bedlam, nor pretend
to such an unexhaustible Stock of Nonsense as we find him to be possessed of,
as his whole Pamphlet does evince and demonstrate, after reading whereof no
Doctor, though but of indifferent Skill, can deny such an one to want a pretty
strong Dose of Hellebore.

Alas! Poor Man, he is much to be pitied, but not at all to be envied, like a
weak silly Knat, sticks at a slight Cobweb: What a foolish ado is there with
him about a Mistake in the Printer, for misquoting a Text of Scripture in the
Title Page, where John is put for Ezekiel, which if he had pleased, he might
have found rectified in the Margin of my Page 44. One that insists so much upon
such things, as about it to bestow the greatest Part of his Page 3. must needs
have little else to say. But a drowning Man lays hold on and catches at any
thing in his way.

The Bottom of that Man's Spirit against Reformers and Reformation from Popery
does more and more appear, for concerning it he has spoken not only against
Calvin, page 25, 26. but also falls upon Luther, whose Reformation he calls a
Combustion in Germany about Religion, page 27. and to be ingenuous, says he,
was set on foot through Interest and a Pique, etc. and the loss of a little
Interest more than a Religious Dislike, moved him to quarrel with Indulgences:
About this he fills up almost two of his Pages, from the latter end of Page 23.
till the Middle of page 25. Where he uses these Expressions, which in my sense
smells something of Interest: This he borrowed from Papists who said it long
before him. But what can be expected from a Man who seems to make no Difference
between John of Leyden, and that worthy Martyr Jerome of Prague, whom in his
first Page he puts together, and in the same Category or Predicament.

How pitifully does he come off in his page 25. about what I said concerning
bowing at or toward the Altar in my page 49, 50, etc. wherein he gives a
strong Proof of his Learning, as page 27. he does of his great Judgment, when
he says, the Reformer is angry that I do not prove every thing out of
Scripture, what will become of the Parliament and Westminster Hall, if we
cannot find them in the Bible? The Question is about matters of Divine Worship,
which I suppose he will own to be a Point of Religion, whereof Scripture is the
Rule, how then does he bring in over Head and Shoulders the Parliament and
Westminster Hall?

One would think he has chiefly consulted how to promote the Bookseller's, and
may be, his own Interest with turning the half of his Pamphlet into a kind of
silly Play, not to instruct, but if possible to delight the Reader, to make it
sell the better, for generally, now is a better Market for comical than for
serious things: But he must needs find himself much mistaken, for his Jests are
insipid, and if ever he thereby aimed at Gain or Credit, he is fallen very
short of his Expectation, but I find the Fool of the Play is the Part he has
taken upon him to act on this Stage, as his Enter Observator page 17. and Exit,
with Enter Reformling, page 22. do declare.

Out of these few Instances the Reader may judge I deal against no dangerous
Antagonist, and so it will be no hard Work for me upon Occasion to answer his
Libel or Pamphlet, it will be much easier for me to do it, than for him to
excuse or vindicate the seditious, nay, blasphemous Expressions in some of the
Sermons preached on these Aniversary Days, such as on the last 30th. of
January, we beard in the Chapel of Chelsey College, where one having in the
Pulpit quoted Milton, and screwed Passive Obedience to the Height, said, The
Sin of putting King Charles to death, is in some respect worse than that of the
Jews for crucifying our Savior, for the Jews never owned Jesus Christ to be
their King, such Comparisons are odious and very unbecoming, for they run not
only between the Acts, but also between the Sufferers.

It Is to be wished these matters were laid aside, specially now when there is
an Act of Indulgence, and every one should be satisfied to enjoy his own way,
but it is sad to see these things to be revived every Year, or almost every Day,
and this in a bitter and uncharitable way. But indeed being th^s provoked we
cannot and must not forsake our Cause, and be mute when called Factions,
Schismatics, Enemies to all Order in Church and State, it is but reasonable and
necessary for us to let the World know we are no such Men acted by mere Fancy,
and Turbulent, as misrepresented, and to give our Reasons why we cannot consent
and conform. May the Lord out of his infinite wisdom and mercy, be pleased in
his due time to unite us in judgment and affection for the truth.

Now something also must be added as to the subject matter of the following
Papers: We have Cause to thank God that since our late happy Revolution the
Yoke of Persecution is broke off from our Neck, and we now enjoy the Liberty of
meeting pulickly to serve God, and are secured by an Act of Parliament which I
pray God may last for ever, except it were taken off upon a better account,
namely, to unite us all voluntarily to join together in the Worship of God:
Wherefore many things as are said in this Paper must be understood according as
things were when the Laws were strict and severely put in Execution against us,
and not since the Time of Indulgence, but in relation to Laws it ought to be
taken notice of, how the Penal Laws which at first were intended only against
Popish Recusants, were thorough the Malice and Craftiness of some Men willing
to keep up Divisions, fully turned against us, as we may believe, contrary to
the Intention of the Makers thereof. I desire what I say in this short Treatise
may be so interpreted as arising (as indeed it does) out of a Principle of
Union and Peace grounded upon Truth, for without it they can never stand long,
nor be acceptable to God.

Now I desire those who are concerned in these matters to consider the
Necessity of this Union by the Greatness of the Danger which the Want of it,
does constantly expose us to from our common Enemy, does not former and latter
Experience convince us of this Truth? And were we not very lately like to have
been all swallowed up by Papists, when not thinking themselves strong enough at
home, they combined with foreign Powers to bring it about? They have too well
learned the Maxim divide and impera, and therefore all our Divisions were ever
fomented by them striving to set us together by the Ears, with one Party to
ruin another, and at last to destroy us both, so that besides the Glory of God,
if there was no other Reason but Self-preservation, we ought to be convinced of
the Necessity of laboring to come to a Reconciliation, and does not Experience
sufficiently teach us how these Matters ever have been the Occasion of
Differences in Church and State. Out of what has been said, I lay this for a
Foundation, that it is our common Interest, and for the Preservation of us all,
there is a Necessity to agree and unite.

Now it is undeniably true that these Matters have been the Causes of our
Divisions, the partition Wall which has kept us asunder, and that this
maintains still the Papist Interest amongst us, which would presently fall down
if that Door was shut upon them: As to the Doctrinal Part of the 39 Articles we
are all agreed, and as to Church. Government in the general we unite thus far,
that there ought to be a Discipline with a Ministry by way of Office, and that
none ought to take care of Souls and administer God's Ordinances, but these who
have a lawful Call to it; we agree or ought to agree how the Word of God and
Apostolical Practice therein contained, must be the Rule of Doctrine and
Worship: when afterward we come to differ, why should we not be judged by that
Law (which is the Word of an infallible God) preferrably to the Judgment of any
Man, or of all Men together, who are all subject to Error? And why upon this
Difference should the strongest go about cutting the Throat of the weakest, as
good as to say, I cannot persuade you, but will force you; a good Cause, as we
say to Papists, must never be promoted by such evil means, for it cannot be
denied but a great deal of Violence has been therein used against Dissenters.

Men who cannot agree amongst themselves, must about a Judge. Now Infallibility
and Impartiality the two necessary Qualifications for a just Judge, are not to
be had but in the Word of God, which is not wanting in giving us Directions for
the Well-being as for the Being of the Church, or else it were imperfect: All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God
may be perfect. Where Perfection is, nothing is wanting to make us wife unto
Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. We say it is against our Conscience to do the
things they would have us to do; they cannot say it is against theirs to leave
them: I do not speak to one single Person, who for his Excuse will pretend they
are commanded him, but I speak to the Law Makers. Now, is there not more Reason
for you to leave them off which does not wound your Conscience than for us to
do them, and thereby offend ours? Why do you impose such Necessity, such Oaths,
such Subscriptions as you do, which are or become mere Snares, contrary to St.
Paul's Rule? This I speak for your own Profit, not that I may cast a Snare upon
you, 1 Cor. 7.35. which Dr. Whitaker calls Aureus locus libertatis vindex, a
golden Text Asserter of Liberty.

The Question is about Ceremonies, religious in their Nature, Use, and
Signification, which we say ought not to be brought into the Worship of God
without a Warrant from the Word, the Rule of it; and I doubt what Beza and Bald
win do express is too true; it is not to be doubted but that most of the
ancient Bishops were somewhat too busy in devising Rites, -- but unhappy was
their Counsel: I suppose they had been instituted for a good End, yet being
abused, they are taken away for a better. Dr. Fulk speaks much in few Words,
Rejoinder to Martial, Art. 1. The Gates of Hell, says he, assaulted the Church
in idle Ceremonies, the Fathers in them declined from the Simplicity of the
Gospel. Bellarmin de eff. sacr. l. 2. c. 32. can condemn vain and unprofitable
Ceremonies. Lyra, another Papist says, the Memory of Idolatry is totally to be
wiped out, and the Jesuit Coster, Enchir. chap. 8. confesses, that if the
Substance of Bread remain in the Sacrament, then their Idolatry is more
intolerable than the Egyptians was in worshipping of an Ox or a Crocodile; they
agree as to the Point, but when we justly come to apply it, then they will not
hear of it, they will assert a Transubstantiation before they will own an
Idolatry worse than that of the Egyptians, or that their Ceremonies are vain,
unprofitable, and Idolatrous, and yet we are satisfied they are so, though some
of our Church would qualify things, and say, they are not so idolatrous as the
Heathenists, and all this to what purpose? Only to make ours, which we have
from Papists, not to be so bad as those very same which still are in Popery,
thus to defend our own, we are more engaged in the Defense of theirs, over Head
and Ears.

No doubt but that Place I already mentioned, 1 Cor. 2.23. is, as Beza well
notes, to be understood of Superstition, which some foolishly call indifferent
things; so are our Ceremonies, yet how can they be indifferent when joined to
God's Worship, and though Practice made so inseparable a Part of it, that one
shall be refused the Ordinance if he will not take the Ceremony with it; now we
have a learned Author, Daneus, who makes it Blasphemy to think and teach that
any outward things of Human Institution may be made a Sign in the Church of
spiritual things, because indeed it is to make of them a kind of Sacrament,
which none but Christ may institute without Blasphemy. What is it that made our
Savior speak so much against the Pharisees, though Moses had dreadfully
threatened not to add any thing, yet several Innovations have been brought in;
as for an Instance their Washings, wherein the Addition first is condemned,
then our Savior blames the Superstition because the Pharisees were not
satisfied to have made Additions contrary to the Precept, but further in these
Additions or Washings they placed something of Religious Worship, and last of
all they were so fond of these Additions, that they stood upon and pressed
their Observation more than of that Worship which God himself had instituted,
and I leave it to the Judgment of any impartial Man, whether or not these three
things are not visibly to be found in our Ceremonies? Namely, first, The
Addition or the Ceremony; secondly, The Superstition placing therein a
Religious and Spiritual Signification; Thirdly, pressing these Ceremonies more
than God's Institutions, so that the same Censure which our Savior passed upon
the Pharisees for theirs, may be passed upon us for ours, with the same Reason
for both, which he gives upon that Occasion, and in that Place, Every Plant
which my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out, Matthew. 15. from
v. 2. till 14. After God's Institution came such Teachers who did not think
themselves wise enough till they had patched something of their own to the Word
of God, yet no Addition to that Word is tolerable, to invent new Washings was
an idle Vanity: Had they rested in the Law of God, their Modesty would have
been more pleasing to him than their Forwardness in doing otherwise.

Let us assure our selves we shall ever be unruly and wild-headed, there shall
be no End to our Fancy, our Imagination shall be boundless until the Lord has
fixed us, and made us settle upon and stick to this Ground, that it is no more
lawful for us in any wise to add any thing to his Law, than it is lawful for us
to take any thing from it. Therefore it is better for Men at last to leave off
the things wherein they have too long continued, to abolish those which have
caused nothing but Troubles, Animosities, Persecutions, given Encouragement to
profane Persons, and Advantage over us to Papists, and have been amongst us a
kind of accursed thing, for God's Blessig never goes along with those
Inventions of Man's Brains, as are brought into his Worship, his Word and
Experience we have for it. I say it is better to abolish all such things which
in themselves may be called mere Fopperies rather than to fence for them, in as
much as we would do for the Gospel, and to be as loath to part with them as with
the Doctrine of Faith, and with true Religion: Let not Men therefore set all
their Wits at Work to scrue something here and there to defend these, but
rather to promote the Glory of God, the Good of his Church, the Salvation of
Souls, and the Edification of all our Neighbors, and to be for and own the
Truth.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. Line 25. read People. p. 37. l. 13. r. has not taught. p. 40. l.
ult. r. made to. p. 86. l. 30. r. Heresy and Idolatry. p. 121. l. 27. in the
Margin r. September 10th. 1571. p. 125. l. ult. r. an equal. p. 128. in the
Margin r. latomi. p. 129. l. 29. r. Island. and l. 31. first Word. p. 133. l.
first, r. Vbiquity. p. 139. l. 32. r. Contrivers. and l. 35. desirable.

A DISCOURSE ABOUT CEREMONIES, Church Government and Liturgy.
COmparisons are odious, is a common saying, and true upon several accounts; as
when some pretend to advantages and privileges above others, as may be to more
Parts, Learning, or to be Wiser, Greater, or Better: Which last is the case of
our National Church, by some of the Members called the best Protestant Church,
I shall not say the best Reformed (for we have some who love the name no more
than the thing) of any other whatsoever beyond Sea: when it is not modesty to be
so positive in our assertions, and so magisterially to decide in our own case
to the prejudice of others. The instruments of Reformation amongst us, were
good, pious and learned, but not infallible men, which they did not pretend to;
they did their best as God enabled them, and wherein they followed his Word for
their Rule, they did admirably well, but not so in some things about which they
consulted with their own Wisdom, and wherein they were guided by humane and
worldly considerations; for hereupon they all did not agree, there being those
who were for being wholly and only directed by the word, and not biassed by any
Worldly Policy.

Our Church was certainly well Reformed in the main points of Doctrine, and in
the grossest Superstitions of Popery: I say it was before Semipelagianism, or
Arminianism, had infected many of her Members, though the Doctrine, as then
received, still remains sound: but in regard of some Ceremonies and of
Ecclesiastical Government, it is not-the-best Reformed Church, seeing it does
still retain some Corruptions and Abuses of the Romish, which are unprofitable,
inconvenient, dangerous and hurtful, and therefore ought to be removed; for if
those Ceremonies that were of God's own appointment were disannulled, Heb. 7.18.
much more ought those to be taken off for the same reason, that are of Man's
Invention, which never were good (because part of Will Worship) as others were:
but abuse is a sufficient ground to have them laid aside, 2 King. 18.4.
as was the brazen Serpent; and if we are to answer for every idle word, much
more for every idle Ceremony, which may happen to prove a destructive Snare to
many Souls; in matters of Worship as in others, it is not enough to teach the
truth, but also it must be truly taught, and that is only out of God's Word,
which is to be the Rule of Worship and Discipline as of Doctrine.

As the infirmity of Men newly converted from Judaism and Gentilism did bring
into Christian Churches Customs like unto those used amongst Jews and Gentiles,
so our Men newly come out of Popery, kept several Popish Ceremonies and
Superstitions out of natural propensity in many to Superstition: Of old, Easter
brought in a superstitious Lent, to attend upon it, made Baptism wait for their
Moon, and conformed our Lord's Supper to the Jewish Passover with unleavened
Bread; so amongst us are superstitiously retained Popish Rites, which hereafter
I shall speak of in particular by God's Grace. Would to God we would here
follow good advice, (and not give way to a prejudice against advisers) as in
the beginning of Reformation it was done in Suitzerland; when Anabaptists there
opposed humane Ceremonies as unlawful, by public Authority and common Consent
they were abolished, and Thanks given them for the Advice, because the thing
was reasonable, by those who in other things were their Adversaries: so ours
ought to be removed, because they train up the People of God in subjecting
themselves in the Worship of God, uuto the pleasure of Men, they make way for
gross Superstitions, as Images, etc. and they challenge to themselves that
which is proper to God's Ordinances, which does offend many in and out of the
Church, and encourage Popery; yet for these Ceremonies they stand as stiffly as
Demetrius and his Ephesians did for their Diana, and do not care how they
disturb the Peace, not only of one City, but of the whole World besides, right
or wrong they defend them, and make a point of Honor of it more than to seek
after, to find, and own the Truth when found; though they would say it is our
Opposition to these Ceremonies, that is the Cause of the Mischief arising
therefrom, but that is no more the cause of it, than the messages of Moses and
Aaron to Pharaoh, were the Causes of his Cruelty against the Children of
Israel: The Ceremonies are unjust and unlawful, as by the Grace of God we shall
make it appear, imposing of them is that which breaks the Peace of the Church,
which consists in avoiding to give Scandal: Lay aside such Humane Ceremonies
which are the ground of Disputes, and you take away the Cause of Offense; which
to give is a kind of Murder; for St. Paul calls this, Romans 14.15.
to destroy: This is to prefer Division before Peace, and thereby also to give
Popery an inlet upon us, and hinders us from being like-minded one toward
another, Chap. 15 5, 6.
and from glorifying God with one mind, and one mouth, which is no small sin:
And I wish there be not too much of self worldly end in the case, namely, to
keep out of the Church those who by means of their laborious and fruitful
Preaching, might have many followers, and do Souls more good than others, and
so exclude them from Church Benefices, and Preferments; which they are willing
to appropriate wholly to themselves. Indeed it looks too much that way.

Ceremonies introduced into God's Worship, are a palpable breach of the Second
Commandment, wherein Will Worship is expressly forbidden, as all external
Idolatry, all Rites and Ceremonies of Man's devising in God's Worship. Now the
Ceremonies in question are Will Worship, and not the least step for them in
Scripture; yet to make them lawful they must be warranted by the Word; which
not being, they must own that whatsoever is besides the Word is against the
Word: Now those in question are significant; and teaching Ceremonies of Man's
invention stated in God's Worship, and an addition, expressly against the Rule
of the Word, and I think the dreadful threatenings against those that do so, as
expressed Rev. 22.18. should make any Man's Ears to tingle, and his Heart to
tremble. Then they are Man's Inventions, and have been and are Popish Idols,
whereby they make a Conformity between us and Idolaters in God's Worship, and
are Occasions and Appearances of Evil: In a word, they are the strange fire,
and garments spotted with the flesh: Why then should we not with Ephraim say,
What have I to do any more with Idols. Hos. 14.8.
God has taught us as formerly he did his People, Isa. 30.20.
to defile the covering of Images, to cast them away as a menstruous Cloth, and
say unto it, get thee hence. Now whatsoever is brought in without God's
Appointment, is an Idol of Jealousy in his sight.

Civil Governors may according to the Constitution of their Government make
new Laws, but in God's Worship it may not be so; it is not under their
Jurisdiction, only they are to see God's Laws put in Execution: All their
Humane Inventions are as many Snares to destroy, to adulterate the Worship of
the Lord, and to strip him of his Right, who is the only Lawgiver. And the
Tyranny of those that impose such things, exceeds the Laws of other Tyrants,
because they Tyranise over the Conscience: Besides that this is contrary to the
sufficiency and perfection of Scriptures, and makes Christians Condition
worse, and less tolerable than that of the Jews; for their Ceremonies were
imposed of God, and there was but a certain number of them; but as to ours,
though they be not many, yet it is in their power to bring in what they please.
Theirs were God's Ordinances, ours are the Traditions of Men; and yet theirs
are abolished: So that in such things from the power of God, we pass under that
of Men, and thereby become their Servants, which ought not to be, for we are
Christ's Servants by purchase; and that very reason Paul gives, Ye are bought
with a price, 1 Cor. 7.23.
be ye not the Servants of Men.

If those Rites did cease by which God himself did instruct the World, as we
said before, it is an imprudent part to press others in their place; in the
purer times they appointed no Ceremonies, but were content with that pure and
simple Form that God had commanded. One in his Work called Verbum abbreviatum,
Petrus parisiensis.
does relate how one Arnulphus in a Council of Lateran, where they were about
to make new Ceremonies, said to them, ye ought rather to take away the old
ones, which are a burden to Christians: Now they must not say ours are but
few, and theirs were many; for, though not in the same degree, yet few are a
burden as well as many; and in the beginning of our Reformation, in his
Censure of the English Liturgy, Page 458.
Bucer says, It is fit that in all outward things and actions of God's
Worship, as in Ministerial Garments, we should accommodate our selves to the
simplicity of Christ's Appointment and Apostles Practice; and we should, says
he, witness to all Men that we have no Communion with the Relics of the Romish
Antichrist: But our Teachers should teach, and we should hear only that which
Christ has commanded, Matthew. 10. and John 10. Quaeritis quomodo Vincuntur
pagani, says Austin, Ye ask how Pagans may be overcome? deserite eorum ritus,
the way is to leave off their Ceremonies, and that same consideration made
Tertullian so steady, that he would not endure Bays and Ivy at the Doors of
Christians whom he forbideth to use any of their Customs; so we may say, will
ye overcome and convince Papists, cast away their Ceremonies; for let us not
deceive our selves, Ceremonies as well Popish, Heathenish and Jewish we ought
to part with. As for instance, if to avoid the Jews Worshipping toward the
West, our Altars or Communion-Tables are toward the East, then we shall fall
into the practice of the Idolatry of the Heathens, who Worshipped toward the
East, whereof God takes notice, Ezech. 8.16. the way to avoid these two, or any
other extreme, is to have no certain affected place, but only that which is
most convenient.

But before we come to particulars, we must speak something more of Ceremonies
in general, there are such Circumstances and Ceremonies, without which nothing
can be done in any Society, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, as Times, Places
and Persons; but both these do not come within the question, nor those of
another kind as are derived from Scripture, such are Kneeling in the solemn
Duty of Prayer, and breaking Bread in the Lord's Supper, which be necessary and
instituted, nor those that are truly and only for Decency and Order, which anon
we shall have occasion to speak of: but the Dispute is of Rites not commanded
by God but devised by Man; unnecessary in the Church, yet are pressed as
necessary, though by them owned to be indifferent, and are used as analogically
Sacramental as well as properly Moral, and in their signification they make
them partake to the nature of Sacraments; also in their significative teaching
and stirring up of the Heart, and being used in Worship as external Acts of
God's Worship falsely appointed by Men, and serve not for Order, Decency, nor
Edification. In the Preface of the Common Prayer Book, discovering the intent
of the Imposers, are these words concerning Ceremonies; Such are retained which
are apt to stir the dull mind of Man to the remembrance of his Duty to God, by
some moral and special signification, whereby he might be edified. To this may
be applied that complaint of God against the People of Israel, Isa. 29.13.
Their fear toward me is taught by the Precepts of Men.

They say, they make not our Ceremonies necessary to Salvation, no more do
Papists theirs; for, say they, it is by the Church's Institution, yet they make
it sin to omit them out of the case of Scandal and Contempt; and our Church Men
say no less, I am sure their practice says so much; for they punish Men for
not practicing them, and they make them as necessary to Salvation as Men can
make them, when the ordinary means are absolutely denied to all those that
refuse them: Papists own many or most of their Ceremonies to be Humane, because
instituted by Men, as their several Garments in the Church, etc. It Is very
strange indeed, that when we press our Ceremonists to lay aside so many idle
distinctions about Humane, unnecessary, insignificant Ceremonies, that have
been and are abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and so may not lawfully be
used and imposed upon Christ's Church and People, they take up the Cudgels for
Popery, saying, their Idolatry and the Pagan's considered in themselves not to
be alike; and we say, though Popish Images be not the same as those of the
Heathens, yet they are as abominable Idols as theirs, and the Worshipping of
them as much to be abhorred by all true Christians, as the Worshipping of the
Images of the Gentiles: The wisest sort of Heathens knew well there is but one
true God, Maker of all things; but the ignorant and rudest sort of Papists,
Worship the Creature more devoutly, as Divine Objects, than those Heathens were
used to do: They who have conversed amongst them, may speak of this according
to their certain knowledge; and this I must add, how therein Papists sin
against greater Light than the Heathens. Besides, is there among the Heathens
any worse or so bad an Idolatry as that of the Mass? Heathens Worshipped pretty
Figures finely wrought by cunning Workmen; but Papists worship a Wafer, which
any Dunce can make, nothing commendable either for Matter or Workmanship.

Now the Ceremonies in question having undeniably been derived to us from
Popery, we ought to abhor them; for surely Christ has not left his chaste
Spouse so bare and naked, as to need borrowing Garments from the Whore of
Babylon. Our holy Religion is pure, why then should it be defiled with the
pollutions of the Roman Church? For none can deny but that most, if not all of
them, were invented in that Synagogue of Antichrist, and were and are still, by
them used in a Superstitious and Idolatrous way: Psalm. 4^.13.
The King's Daughter, says David, is all glorious within: The Beauty of
Christ's Church is inward and spiritual, Humility, Chastity, Sincerity,
Holiness, Faith, Charity, etc. are her proper and necessary Qualifications and
Ornaments; plain and modest Clothes and Behavior become an honest and virtuous
Wife, who proposes to her self to please only her Husband; but a Strumpet and
a Harlot who would entice and draw Adulterers to her self, puts on gaudy
Clothes, She decked her Bed with Coverings of Tapestry, Prove. 7.16, 17
with Carved Works, with fine Linen of Egypt; she perfumes her Bed with Myrrh,
Aloes and Cynamon: She painteth, and uses all imaginable Art to hide the
rottenness, stinking Breath, and every thing else amiss in her, to bring in
Custom: No Virtuous Woman will wear any Clothes that she knows to have been
used by a Whore; so the true Church will hate to make use of the Trinkets of
the Romish Harlot: And if Men separate from Churches where Images are retained,
who is the cause and in fault? they who dislike Images, or those that retain
them?

To this purpose it is observable, how although the name Baal, God, Lord,
Master, may justly be used toward God, yet in respect the same was given to
Idols, God both hated and forbad it: Hos. 2.16, 17.
Thou shall call me no more Baal; for I will take away the name of Baalim.
After he had said before, ver. 13. I will visit upon her the days of Baalim;
for God is very jealous in things relating to his Worship, as he calls himself
so in the second Commandment; whereof the sum is, that in his Worship or
Ceremonies about it, we are to devise nothing of our own Brains, or borrow any
thing of Heathenish, or other Idolatrous Rites; and the Equity of that Precept
to avoid Idolatry, is set down in Scripture. 1. By the detestation which God
bears unto all Tokens and Instruments of Idolatry. Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26.
2. We cannot be said to have repented of Idolatry, except we be ashamed of, 2 Chronicles. 33 15 Isa. 1.29. and chap. 2.20.
and cast away the Instruments and Monuments of it, else we shall be in
continual danger to be corrupted; Exo. 34.12, 15.
and there is more danger in Popish Ceremonies, because we converse with them
more than with other Idolaters: Farther, with retaining those Rites that have
been and are abused to Idolatry and Superstition, Ezech. 16.54
we thereby harden Idolaters and superstitious Men. Now to be judicially
confounded is one thing, Jer. 31.19.
and to be penitentially ashamed is another; Ezech. 16.54.
they were commanded to break down Altars, Deuteronomy. 7.5.
Images, Groves, etc. So that seeing the Pope is revealed to be the great
Antichrist, 2 These. 2.3, 4. and Rev. 17.
and at this day his Idolatry troubles the Church more than any other, and our
People converse with Papists more than with any other Idolaters, there is more
danger in retaining the Ceremonies and Relics of Popery, than of any Idolatry
whatsoever: Hence does appear the necessity of Abolishing them, whereby this
great good would arise, that our Hearts would be reunited; and as we observed
before, we might all join together to glorify God: Let any impartial Man
judge, whether it were not better to part with these old Rags, than continue
Divisions; commonly difference in Judgment makes a difference in Affections,
but unhappily, we have some who Tooth and Nail, are for such things, more than
for the most sundamental Truths of our Faith. They make a pother, and keep a
noise for they do not know what; and are not able to give any good grounds for,
only out of an implicit Faith, and it is the practice of the Church, it is by
Law Established. This was the very same Argument by the Jews in Corinth used
against St. Paul, Acts 18.13.
This Fellow persuades Men to Worship God contrary to the Law; that of
Moses's, which in matter of Religion and Conscience, ought at that time to have
been regarded more than now any merely Humane Laws, but they were in the wrong;
so are our Advocates for Ceremonies, when they ought to know, that discreetly
to interpret Humane Precepts in the Court of Conscience, does belong to every
one as touching his own practice, and this ignorance is not only far spread
amongst the Laymen, who might take pains to be informed of causes and reasons
of things, and not suffer themselves before that to receive impressions for, or
prejudices against persons and things, but also it is crept amongst some of the
Clergy, who adhere to such things only by Tradition and Custom, though on the
other side I know some of them study hardly any thing else, but those points
wherein they make Religion consist more, than in the knowledge of our Lord
Christ crucified.

It is Humane to sin, as it is Devilish to continue in sin; but it is a Divine
thing to raise from sin: the first because no single Man or any Society is
infallible; therefore it is not good to press Presidents in that case; for we
must live and do according to Rules, and not according to Examples; so that it
is no wonder to see Men in a wrong way; but it is of the Devil for them to
persevere, and go on in the same; for he engages Men deeper and deeper in the
Mire, so as to make it impossible for them to come off; and when they are in so
desperate a condition, nothing but Divine Grace can bring them out; which is
done with opening the eyes to see how one is in a wrong way, and make him
willing and able to come off. More Men are deceived by Satan under the Notion
of Devotion and Religious Worship, than with open Impiety and Atheism; because
as Paul says, Colos. 2.23.
those have indeed a show of Wisdom in Will Worship and Humility: But let Men
have a care, for there is a Snare in it, which they, except God opens their
Eyes, cannot perceive; for in those in whom the Gospel Truths are hid, 2 Cor.
4.3, 4.
the God, of this World has blinded the minds. At the beginning things appear
small; it is a harmless Ceremony which can do no hurt, some say, but that one or
many, may in time happen to degenerate into Superstition and Idolatry: The
Brazen Serpent was a good thing, yet we know how far the Devil did prevail upon
People to commit Idolatry about it. And what would not they have done about the
Body of Moses, if God had not been pleased to take care to prevent it with
concealing it from them, either burying it in an unknown place, or about, or
after his Death, transforming it from a mortal into an immortal Body, 1 These.
4.17.
as those that are alive shall be caught up: We know what is written about his
Death, Deuteronomy. 34.6.
but also we read how Moses with Elias appeared unto our Savior in the
Transfiguration; which I take to be true Moses, as Elias was true Elias; but
this only by the by. Thus to return to my Subject, to prevent Dangers and
Mischiefs, the best is, never to hearken to such suggestions; and admit into
the Worship of God nothing that can be, and is abused to Superstition and
Idolatry, as some of our Ceremonies are by Papists, if not by some of us.

Now these Ceremonies are unprofitable; for God is not better served with then
without them; and we see nothing they contribute toward Order, Decency, or
Edification,, which are the three things they can pretend they are profitable
for. The Churches that have them not want them not; for without them they
preserve Order, Decency, and Edification. In matters of Worship nothing is
profitable but what is of God's Appointment; for God knows best what may do his
Church good; and he does bless only his Ordinances and not Man's Inventions.
Nothing can be assigned that ever was introduced into the Worship by Man's
Devices, that produced a good effect: Nay, I will say, that though for the
present, and after the immediate Institution of the thing, there appeared some
good to come out of it, yet afterward it has produced great inconveniences
and mischiefs; for if sometimes God suffers his own Ordinances to be abused
by Men, much more shall Humane Devices be corrupted: Being unprofitable, they
become unnecessary and superfluous, a yoke and a burden; let Men give them
what specious Names they please, the question is not what things may be called,
but what they are in their Nature; for if some of the Ceremonies in question
may be called Holy, because used in an Holy Action, so may a Cushion used in
the Holy Act of Prayer: but instituted significant Ceremonies must have another
kind of Holiness.

But to go further, our Ceremonies are not only unprofitable, but also hurtful
and dangerous. Those Thoughts and Affections that should be wholly, and
spiritually fixed upon God, they divide and divert; part whereof, at least,
they draw upon themselves: they deprive People of their Christian Liberty,
bring in again a Ceremonial Law, by our Savior abolished; they usher in
Superstition, if not Idolatry, and produce many an Evil besides; and if to
Reason we may join Experience, we shall find they have been the cause and
occasion of a World of Mischief. They have disturbed the Peace of the Church,
given Scandal, caused Divisions and Persecutions, defiled Churches, instead of
adorning them, as pretended; broken Unity, under the Notion of settling
Uniformity: All which mischiefs might easily be prevented, if they would be
prevailed to lay them aside.

They are inconvenient; convenience is esteemed when a thing after the
consideration of all circumstances, is found at least to bring with it more
Good than Evil; but our Ceremonies by Experience, have brought more Evil than
Good: They can do hurt, says Beza, but no good: God knows, says Fox, they be
the cause of much blindness and strife amongst Men; they have been, and still
are notoriously abused unto Superstition. The sum of the second Commandment is,
that in the Worship of God, or Ceremonies thereabouts, we are to devise nothing
of our own head, or borrow any thing of Heathenish or Idolatrous Rites; our
Ceremonies have an aptness to provoke to Superstition and Idolatry; in Popish
Countries, the Cross is an Idol. Now as God has forbidden to sow the Field
with mingled Seed, Levit. 19.19
so in the Church there ought to be no mixture of Humane Inventions with God's
Institutions; Ceremonies borrowed from Idolaters, such are Papists, are vicious
and superstitious Worship, therefore not to be borrowed of them. The Jews by
God's Command, Levit. 18.3.
were not to live according to the Laws and Examples of other Nations. The
words of Pelicanus upon the place are remarkable: God, says he, by this one
Law would have them cast away, and abhor whatsoever in Worship had pleased the
Gentiles, much more care ought Christians to have of this, who being taught to
Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, ought first and last to have abhorred the
idle, unreasonable and deceitful Forms and Rites of Idolaters. which if the
ancient Bishops had well considered, the Church had never been pestered with so
many profane Rites and base Ceremonies; by which it came to pass that some
Christians differ little from Gentiles, save in the Names of their Idols. This
is home and to the purpose; this was commanded for detestation of Idolatry,
because Idolaters did so, the Israelites may not do so: In Ceremonies we must
strictly hold to the Word of God, least we transgress either in number or in
form: And the like Command is given in two several places of the New Testament,
2 Cor. 6 14. Rev. 18.4.
to show we are bound to the same under the Gospel as they were under the Law;
nay, God therein looks narrowly into the things that seems the least, only that
they should not be like the Heathens, Ye shall not round the Corners of your
Head, Levit. 19.27.
neither shall thou mar the Corners of thy Beard. We are commanded to keep our
selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21.
and from Idolatry and Appearances of it; or to have any thing to do with what
has been, or is abused to Idolatry: Such as I said before are our Ceremonies;
and so because unprofitable, unnecessary, dangerous, hurtful and inconvenient,
ought to be abolished.

But this is not all; they are unlawful, because Will Worship, which is so
expressly forbidden in the Word of God, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
which we must never add to nor diminish from. God commanded Moses, Heb. 8.5.
See that thou make all things according to the Pattern showed to thee in the
Mount: The true Worship is that appointed by God, and the false is that not
appointed by God; for there is but two kinds of Worship: First, True and Good.
Secondly, False and Evil: That is the same which he has commanded, This is
that which he has not commanded; and certainly Man's Inventions he has not
commanded, but forbidden. Tertullian says, That is forbidden which is not
permitted. That is, we must account that not to be permitted by the Word,
against which any reasons out of the Word may be given, though there be no
particular Word against it. Though there were free will Offerings, whence they
would set up Will Worship, yet they were to be of such things as were
manifestly known to be prescribed by God's revealed Will, and so not the
Offering, but the undertaking of it at such a time, or in such a measure, was
left unto the free Choice of Men according to occasion. It Is no Will Worship to
pray thrice or seven times a day, to Preach once, twice or thrice on
Sabbath Day; to Pray and Preach are necessary Duties; but how often that comes
under the necessary Circumstances of God's Worship, as to Time and Place:
Prayer is expressly allowed by God's Word, and the determination of it as to
this or that time, is to be ruled by Reason; and these are the things which
fall under that 1 Cor. 14. Such things are allowed as accessory parts of
outward Worship, but not such as Cross or Surplice: Now all Humane Ceremonies
imposed and observed as parts of God's Worship are unlawful, and this is the
true question; We must Ceremonise, says Pelicanus, only according to God's
Word; and Vrsin, all feigned Worship is forbidden; all Worship which is not of
God, but is set up by Men: when Worship or Honor is feigned to be done to the
true God in some work which he has not enjoined: And Zanchi says, We may not
Worship God with any other Worship (though it be in the kind of External and
Ceremonial) than that which he has required in the Holy Scripture to be
worshipped by us.

These Ceremonies are Superstitious, and this makes them also unlawful. Now
says Vrsin, Superstition is that which adds Humane Inventions to Divine
Precept: It Is a Will Worship which is more than is appointed by the Law of God,
On Acts 17.4.
says Dr. Fulk. And Perkins says, On the second Command.
Superstition is Worship of God without his Commandment; they cannot wipe off
the imputation of Superstition, seeing they judge them necessary in their use,
though indifferent in their nature: Thus a Minister may not read without a
Surplice, nor Baptize without the Sign of the Cross; but their Superstition
appears the more, in that they make them to be significant Ceremonies, which
we shall have farther occasion to speak of.

They divide their Ceremonies into single and double and threefold; the former
are those whose use is only for Decency and Order; the others serve also for
Edification by some profitable signification; but if all circumstances
belonging to Time, Place, Persons, Instruments of sacred Actions, be sacred
significant Ceremonies, then not only the Clock, but the leaden Weights of it,
not only the Ground which they do stand upon, but also the Rushes by occasion
strewed upon it, the Besom, the Minister's Black Cap, or Perriwig, his Beard,
etc. shall be holy, significant, dumb and speaking Ceremonies; dumb because
unprofitable, speaking idly in such a place: When an Image of the blessed
Virgin spoke to Bernard in the Church, Good morrow Bernard, good morrow, he
answered, O Madam, you forget your Sex, it is not lawful for a Woman to speak
in the Church: Just so should be silenced our idle significant Ceremonies; the
more because the Gospel is the perfect law of liberty. Jam. 1.25.


These Humane significant Ceremonies are in some kind a Sacrament, which none
but God may institute; nay, they wrong Sacraments; for it argues them of some
imperfection, as if in God's Institution something had been wanting that was
necessary to be supplied by Men: when they are used to teach any spiritual Duty
by their mystical signification, they usurp a chief part of the Nature of
Sacraments, and without those Rites the Sacraments signify the same things as
Christ and our Duty to him; so that every Humane Invention appropriated to
God's Service, ordained and instituted to teach any spiritual Duty by mystical
signification is unlawful. The second Commandment forbids to make the
likeness of any thing whatsoever for Religious Use: Now significant Ceremonies
are external acts of Religious Worship, even as they are used to further
Devotion; and therefore being invented by Man, are of the same Nature with
Images, by which and in which God is worshipped: but only such outward means
must be used in God's Worship, which he himself has allowed; no means may be
used to stir up Devotion, and to put Men in remembrance of good things, but
only those which God has ordained; and this directly brings us to the question
between Protestant and Papists, who would have Images, Crosses, etc. to be the
Books of ignorant People, and to instruct them in their spiritual Duty; though
the Prophet calls them teachers of lies; Habak. 2.18.
and another, a Doctrine of Vanities, Jer. 10.8, 15.
and the work of Errors. This made Dr. Fulk against Saunders the Jesuit, deny
this Argument, That Images are profitable, because they teach us good things;
for nothing is profitable in Religion, but that which is instituted by God; for
otherwise we might bring the Gallows into the Church; which puts us in mind of
God's Justice.

Our Savior condemns the Pharisees for three things: First, Their washing
was preferred before the Commandment. Secondly, It was Hypocritical. Thirdly,
'Twas a vain Worship; and Ceremonies become Superstitious when they are
occasion of Superstition, when we think them necessary, as if without them, the
Ordinance was imperfect, as those Washings in which they placed a Holiness and
Signification, even as it is done in our Ceremonies, which are looked upon as
Helps to Devotion, as Papists say of their Crucifixes, Images, Beads, etc. When
all is said, this matter of Ceremonies brings the question so far as to Images
in Churches; and therefore they make use against us of Bellarmin's Arguments
against Calvin: And Bishop Andrews does not mince the matter; In his answer to
the 18 chap. of Card. Per^^^ reply.
for he says the Church has power to retain as Ceremonies of Baptism,
Chrisme, Salt, Candles, Exorcisms, Ephata, and the consecration of Candles, all
Popish Trash used in Baptism: This is the same Author who in another place
says, That we are heard, not because of the prayer that is made, but because
of the place in which it is made: A strange infatuation in some Men, when once
they are engaged in a way of Superstition. If God had not raised some opposers
of Ceremonies, most Popish Ones might happen to have been brought in again; but
as Chamier says, We are to regard not only what is brought in, but what may be
brought in; for with such Authority is challenged the yoke, though not certain
yet wavering; and indeed as to Images in Bishop Laud's time under King Charles,
Crucifixes were brought into some Churches and Chapels, amongst others, into
that of Litchfield, which made so much noise on the account of the Lady Eleonor
Davies, persecuted upon that same occasion.

To palliate the use of these Popish Ceremonies amongst us, it must not be said
they are not abused in our Churches as they be amongst Papists, who can tell us
pretty Tales, when we object, they have amongst them the Idolatrous Things,
Customs and Places of the Heathens. It Is true, say they, but they abused them
to Idolatry; but we have converted them to a better use, to a better Worship of
the true God: Instead of their Mars God of War, we have our Christian
Champions; we disown their Neptune, but have St. Nicholas a Christian Saint,
who protects those that go upon Waters. Their Pantheon, or Temple of all their
Gods, we dedicated to the Virgin, and to all our Saints, and much more of such
stuff. It Is to be wished that Lesson was not appliable to us in matter of
Ceremonies: we may say, Papists abuse them, but not we; this is no good reason,
whilst in the mean while we have them in our Churches. Let us not deceive our
selves, our Alteration, Institution, Intention, or what you please, does not
alter the Nature of the thing; an Idol of Baal is an Idol, whether in Babylon,
Jerusalem or Samaria: So a superstitious Ceremony is superstitious, whether in
Rome or in London. The Nature of a Ceremony does not consist in the
Institution; it does not so much as entitle to Decency. The Whiteness or
Decency of the Communion-table-cloth, does not arise out of the Institution,
but out of the habitude of the thing; which if it was foul and nasty would not
be Decent, let all the Institution do what it could: that the Minister should
not turn his Back but his Face to the Minister when he Preaches, is not this
Comeliness in the natural aptness of the action without Institution? Is there
no Decency in this? Or can the Institution of the contrary be Decent? The same
we may say of People hearing a Sermon sitting or standing, and not all along
upon their Faces. We know there is Moral and Ceremonial Worship, but Divine
Ceremonies as such are parts of God's Worship; for every species or kind as it
is a species, is part of his genus: Divine Ceremonies as such, are species of
Religious Worship, wherefore we must have a care not to mix humane Ceremonies
with those that are Divine.

What is said about Institution, may be spoken of Intention; Papists say, the
Intention in the use of Ceremonies makes them lawful or unlawful; then they
must be sure every one that uses them has a good Intention, which it is very
difficult for them to know, they being not searchers of the Heart: Besides, we
know how foully the Doctrine of directing the Intention, is abused by Papists.
It Is to be wished this case did not come up to us, and we were not too far
engaged with them in this point; for to say Papists retain Jewish and Pagan
Ceremonies for Superstition, but we not so, is but a bare Assertion, and it is
sure we retain Popish Ceremonies, I do not see why they should not amongst us
as well as amongst them tend to Superstition: We own the Popish Religion does
chiefly consist in an outward show and superstitious Ceremonies; and if in
these things we trade with them and receive five, we might as well receive five
hundred; and it is unknown what at last we may come to: The door is open for
some, others may follow by degrees, or in a Crowd. Let us not be wiser than
God, or trust our strength too much; we give Papists advantage upon us, and
matter of bragging, with cause of hardening themselves that we borrowed our
Ceremonies from them, and this string they hung upon amongst us, or else one
way or other they had been gone: but by the same reason some Ceremonies were
taken away, all ought to have been.

We return to the Intention and say, it is not the Opinion that Men have, that
makes a true or false Worship, but the nature of the thing as already said; for
thus a Man may go to Mass, conceiving a private Opinion to himself different
from that which Massmongers have, so he may fancy he does not sin, when he
commits a gross one: Calderinus, when he was about going to Mass used to say,
eamus ad communem errorem, let us go to the vulgar Error; but going to Mass,
that is, doing all those outward actions which Massmongers use to perform, is
Idolatry; which to avoid, the three young Men would not fall down and Worship
the Image of Nebuchadnezar: Dan. 3.18.
If the Intention had made the thing lawful or unlawful, they might have fallen
down before the Image, but intentionally worshipped God, but they would not:
going to Mass with what intention you please, is to approve of and commit
Idolatry; God has made Body and Soul, and will be Worshipped in both; the
proper Nature of Worship, consists in honoring of God: so that all outward
Ceremonies, whose proper use is the honoring of God, will be external Worship.

It Is sad to see how to defend these Ceremonies retained in our Church, they
are put upon shifts; they are resolved to keep and defend them, let what will
become of it: In order to it, they call upon Sophistry for help, and to avoid
coming to the point, they make a Logomachy, a Dispute about words, coining
Definitions, Divisions, Distinctions, as Doctrinal and Ritual Ceremonies,
essential, accessory, accidental, simple, double and treble, significant,
sacred by application, mutable, ambulatory, arbitrary, reductively sacramental,
moral Ceremonies, immediate Worship, in respect of means, by virtue of
something else; in respect of the manner, and reductively, in respect of the
utmost and Divine Worship; and many more of the same stamp; so it is like to me
when I hear such words, to be with Lombard, Durandus, Occam, and other
Schoolmen, to hear of entity, quiddity, ut qui, ut quo, and such other
barbarous terms, under which they confounded the Nature of Things: Thus they
will talk of Altars commanded, and Altars permitted under the Law. Deuteronomy. 4.2^
And when out of Scripture we press them against Additions to be made unto the
Word and Worship of God, then they will tell us of corrupting Additions, but
not preserving, are there forbidden; let them show the least step in Scripture
to ground that shameful and pitiful distinction upon, as despicable as those I
heard hissed out in Philosophy Schools, ex creditis concedo, ex credendis nego;
ut soepius concedo, ut semper nego; which yet considering the matters they were
about, and only to try Man's Wits, were much more tolerable than this which
concerns things of so high a Nature: But such distinctions can never put off
the blow of these words, Ye shall not add unto the Word which I Command,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it: Besides, that these preserving
additions are an inlet for Superstition, and incongruous: Acts of Parliament
are for preservation of Religion; but they would not hear, their Laws are an
Addition to the Word and Worship of God.

All this while our Ceremonies go upon a wrong Principle, which it is necessary
to beat them off; and this is it, they think the Church has power to institute
all such things, but a preliminary question is, who that Church is? They will
say, it is the Convocation out of which most Ministers, and all the Laity, a
Chancellor excepted, are excluded, so this will be a National Church: Thus if
we ask Papists what they mean by their Church? they will say Pope and Council,
or else Pope and Cardinals. Well, that is for Papists. For us, the Convocation
decides, and then the whole Church, as well Ministers that have right to sit
there and give in their Opinions, and all the Laity must submit: But this
Convocation never concludes any thing for the common good of the Church, they
generally are servile to those whom they depend upon, and Tyrannical over those
that are subject to them; and though sometimes, some good motions be made
amongst them, it is nothing but what we may say of the Council of Trent, and of
other mercenary public Assemblies.

But does not this Convocation, except they will be above St. Paul, think that
what Authority the Church has is for edification, 2 Cor. 10.8.
and not for destruction; it is a bound power not Magisterial but Ministerial:
If they may institute Ceremonies, then Circumcision, if thought fit, may be
imposed, as well as Cross in Baptism: It may be as of the King, who was not to
multiply Horses, Wives, Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17
Silver and Gold to himself, which Solomon made a shift to go thorough: So the
Church or Convocation might in time happen to multiply Ceremonies; that which
is not grounded upon the Word, may at last be upon ill Custom, if it was
thought fit to bring in that which has been kept out, not heeding what Paul
says, if I build again things which I destroyed, I make my self a
transgressor. Gal. 2.18.


To see how in these matters they tread the steps of Popery; they assert how
some such Worship is good, which is not taught in Scripture; that many teaching
Ceremonies which God never instituted, may by Men be brought in to Worship,
Images themselves not excepted; that Additions to God's Word, so they be not
contrary to it, may and ought to be made: The sum of their Doctrine in this
point is by Hooker set down in his Book of Ecclesiastical Policy: He has these
words, much the Church of God shall always need that which the Scripture
teaches not. Page 125.
Which argues the Word of God of insufficiency, contrary to what our Savior
and Sr. Paul say, which no doubt must be supplied with Traditions. These are
rare Principles. They further say, Scripture is as perfect in giving general
Rules, as it should be in setting down of particular Instances; this is only to
make good to themselves the adding and enlarging Power: But general Rules make
only the proposition tending to particulars; and particulars are not so fully
inferred, as if they were expressly set down. General Rules for Civil Policy may
be given in the New Testament, yet not so fully and clearly taught as in the
Old, or as Religious Worship is now in the New; the Rule of clean and unclean
Beasts was general, and easily discernable without Institution of Men; as now
for Bread and Wine in the Communion, without naming of Wheat, Rye, etc. or
French, Spanish, or Rhenish Wines, etc. but Kneeling at the Sacrament, Bowing
toward the Altar, Cross and Surplice, are not so in general appointed.

Moses and the Lord Jesus were compared in Faithfulness in all God's House;
Heb. 3.2.
their Faithfulness equal, because they both did that which was Commanded them
of God: however, if it were God's revealed Will that more immediate means of
Worship had been instituted in the Christian Church, more then Christ has
instituted, who was appointed to ordain the means of Worship under the New
Testament, as Moses was under the Old; and Moses gave all such Rules of Worship
under the Old Testament which God would have: it follows that the
Faithfulness of Christ was not so extended to all the necessities of the Church
as Moses's was, which is mere Blasphemy. Wherefore we must agree, that the Lord
Jesus appointed all necessary things for the being and well-being of his
Church, so there is nothing left for Men to add unto it; and let those who
pretend to an Authority to make Additions, have a care what they do; for this
is to bring strange fire into the House of God, and let them remember the Crime
and Punishment of Nadab and Abihu. Now God will suffer unpunished Inventions of
Men in his Worship, no more then he would allow them of strange Fire; and the
reason of this terrible Judgment given in the Text is, which he commanded them
not. Levit. 10.1.
So that in this case, what is not commanded is forbidden; and to do any thing
without a Precept is an heinous sin: Thus we need no other reason against all
these Ceremonies, Additions, and Humane Inventions, then this, God has not
commanded them. The words of one of our Doctors upon the place are observable;
Bishop Babington.
We may hence learn and settle in our hearts, with what severity the Lord
challenges and defends his Authority in laying down the manner and way of
his Worship, not leaving it to any Creature to meddle with, but according to
Prescription and Appointment from him, content he is that Men shall make Laws
for Humane Matters, etc. But for his Divine Worship, he only will prescribe it
himself, and what he appointed, that must be done, and that only, or else Nadab
and Abihu their Punishment must be expected; that is, God's Wrath in such a
manner as he shall please. These Words are full, when God threatened Judah for
building the high places of Tophet, he says, Jer. 7.31.
which I commanded them not: He makes a high Aggravation to the Sin, because in
matter of Worship nothing is to be done without his express Commandment; so,
that which is without, and besides the Word is against it. Of this Nature are
their double and significant Rites, which no mere Order and Decency does
necessarily require, but only the mere Will of Men; but we mean it not of every
particular Rite belonging to Order and Decency; which are besides the
particular Determination of Scripture.

Concerning the Altar to be made unto the Lord, Exodus 20.24, 25.
he prescribed the matter, of Earth, or of Stone, and the manner too, not to
have the Stone hewn, Deuteronomy. 27.5, 6. 1 Jos. 8.31.
or to have Steps to go up to it. What may some say? if we may not conveniently
make it with Earth or Stone; we will make it of something else, as Bricks; it
will still be an Altar, to offer Sacrifices only to the Lord, and shall be
wholly dedicated to his Service: Thus man's corrupt Reason is apt to speak, and
is pleased with its Notion, but to know how heinously God takes it, let us hear
God himself, Isa. 65.3.
a People that provokes me to Anger continually to my Face, That burns
Incense upon Altars of Brick: There is an End when Men will pretend to be wiser
than God. It is strange, but true, how the Foolishness of man, would be wiser
than the Wisdom of God, as if we would take upon us to outwit him; God thinks
such and such ways are best, but men know of better; some had as good as to
say, we like not what God prescribed, we our selves know better than so, even
in those things that belong to his Worship: Did the most notorious Idolaters
ever proceed to a higher Degree of Presumption than this is? They that go so
far, would go farther if they could, they who take upon them to make Additions
or Alterations in his Service, would prescribe the whole too, and may be, at
last order his actings, and perhaps, meddle with his own Nature, for indeed, by
the same reason they meddle with one, they might do so with the other; yet,
when God speaks, the whole Earth should be silent, and hold their peace: Yet
some will not, but as it were, would be prescribing, and make in his house new
Laws, contrary to, or at least different from those he has enacted: To show
how pragmatical and peremptory our Nature is in such things, let the Case of
Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 5.
a great Man with his Master, honorable, and a mighty Man in Valor, be
observed, he comes to the Prophet Elisha to be cured of his Leprosy; one would
think, that coming so far to a Doctor, he should take the Doctor's Advice, who
bids him go to and wash in Jordan seven times; but thereupon that great man is
very angry and goes away, what says he, I thought he would surely come out to
me, and stand and call on the Name of the Lord his God, and strike his Hand
over the Place and recover the Leper: All this very plausible to Human Sense
and Reason for a man who looks upon Abana and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus
better than all the Waters of Israel, and may be, he had never been cured, if
God had not put it into the Hearts of his Servants to speak to him, If the
Prophet had bid thee to do some great thing, would thou not have done it? He
despised the Plainness and Simplicity of the Remedy, yet it proved a true one:
So, though the plain Worship, free from Ceremonies, instituted of God be the
right one, yet some look for things of a great Pomp and Show, but they are
worse than Naaman was, for he, upon the Voice of his Servants, obeyed the Word
of the Prophet, but these will not hearken to the Word of God, let him speak
never so plainly by the Mouth of his Servants, they will take no Warnings, but
rather follow their own ways.

It were well if that People, who have so great a mind to be meddling with a
legislative and institutive Power in the Church would consider this, there is
no such thing, no such Ceremony either done or instituted by Christ, therefore
let us not think our selves wiser than he or his Apostles: De Sacram.
Commonpeople, says Dr. Whitaker, are not to be taught with Ceremonies, God
has given the Scriptures, that out of them they might receive necessary
Instruction; and he adds, Austin would have us to be content with those very
few Ceremonies which are contained in the Canonical Scriptures: Another says,
Dr. Fulk in his Rejoinder to mart.
The Gates of Hell in idle Ceremonies, did assault the Church, the Fathers in
them declined from the Simplicity of the Gospel. Again, Every idle Ceremony
that prevailed, had the Prelates of the Church either for Authors or Approvers,
Christ committed his Church to them to be fed with his Word, and not with dumb
Signs, and dead Images, which things he has forbidden: The Prelates of our
Church have continued in the same Temper as those he speaks of, out of what
has been said, it appears how the Church has no Authority to institute such
Ceremonies as have no warrant in the word of God, such are ours.

But they are not content to assume and usurp that Power to themselves, but
also to impose such Constitutions of theirs upon the Church and God's People,
thus arrogating to themselves a legislative and executive Authority: but we are
persuaded they may do no such things, nor Men in Conscience obey and practice
them, yet it is a strange Opinion of theirs, as if observing or not, these
Ceremonies could make Men good or evil, honest or dishonest, they who would
require and six our Practice of such Constitutions, must first, as much as in
them lies, fix our Judgments, which all the Convocations can never do, so as to
settle other Peoples Judgment concerning things lawful or unlawful, according
to the Notions they themselves have of them, or else to impose it whether one
will or not, is no less than Tyranny: All Casuists amongst Papists, do hold it
for a Wrong done to Monks, Friars, Seculars, and Regulars of any Order, if
their Priors, Abbots, Generals, or other Superiors, should impose upon them the
Observance of any thing besides the Vow they have made to observe the Rules and
Rites instituted by their Founder: and we Christians, are we not as much by our
Vow tied unto the Lord Jesus, as they are or can be to Francis, Dominick,
Benedictus, Bruno? etc. Or, are we more subject to our Prelates than they to
their Superiors, by Vow of Obedience: Christ has purchased his Church a
Christian Liberty which she ought not to be deprived of, and it is a
presumptuous Attempt in any Man, or Society of men, to go about it, and to
institute any Religious Ceremonies to be used in God's Worship; it is unlawful
for men to add unto God's Institution in Worship, and to say this is true as to
the doctrinal, not as to the ritual Part, is as good as to say, Man may not add
unto God's Institutions, any of God's Institutions, but man's only, which is a
Piece of Nonsense: And as the Church has no Authority to add to Divine
Institutions, or to make new ones upon a religious Account, so it may not, by
its Institution, make a thing good or bad, true or false, only it may declare
it so to be according to the Rule of God's Word, except we would give it the
same Power which some Doctors of the Church of Rome give the Pope, namely, to
alter the Nature of things, as to make that to be Sin which is not Sin, and
that not to be Sin which is Sin: I hope we do not entail Infallibility upon our
Church, nor stretch her Power so as to transubstantiate things; a Prayer made
in the House of Lords or Commons, does not cease from being a religious Duty to
become a civil one: Such an Application does not alter the Nature of it.

To prove the Churches Authority, to institute their unnecessary Ceremonies
which we deny, after they have screwed up their Wits with Endeavors to prove
it out of Scripture of the New Testament; they can find but one place which
they stretch as far as they can, and under the Notion of Decency and Order,
they think they may bring into the Church what they please, not only all
Papists, but also all Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies, if the Convocation and
Rulers of the Church think them to be decent and for Order: The Place is, let
all things be done decently and in order: 1 Cor. 14.40.
Elsewhere the Objection I answered, but thus much I shall add, for all their
going about to enlarge the Commission, there is a Restriction to be admitted,
V. 26.
Let all things be done to edifying: That which is granted, is to have things
done decently and in order for Edification: Edification is the end, Decency and
Order the means, or as we may call it, a decent Order tending to Edification;
thus an holy Sacrament must be decently and orderly, or in a decent order
administered: This Decency and Order relate to Place, Time, Manner, Persons,
Number, as how many Psalms sung, Sermons preached, Chapters read, and the like
Circumstances, the Apostle leaves no more to the Churches Liberty, than to
order God's Ordinances to be performed in a decent manner: Any Constitution
beyond ordering that which before was enjoined, is properly a Law; now Christ
is the only Lawgiver of his Church, which receives no other Laws but his, and
any Laws added to God's Laws, are contrary to them which are really perfect in
themselves, in their Reason and Manner, and those of the Church are but
Directions for better observing of Divine Laws, according to the Diversity of
Times, Places, and Persons, which are occasional Circumstances, and no new
things in God's Worship: The Churches Authority, as I already observed, is but
Ministerial to see those things observed which Christ has appointed, not to
institute any new things. Decency is when God's Worship is performed with those
convenient Circumstances of Gesture, and such as I already named, agreeing not
only with God's Service, but also with any grave Assembly: In this place Order
is strictly taken in Opposition to Confusion, so is Decency opposed to the Vice
of Undecency; hence it follows, that Order does require nothing but what is
necessary to avoid Confusion, and Decency to hinder Undecency. Our Ceremonists
must give me leave to make them take notice how they are guilty of the Breach
of two things contained in that Chapter; the first of Confusion, for to speak
all together aloud, as they do in the use of the Common Prayer Book, makes a
confuse Noise, and brings in a Confusion; thus they interrupt one another
Devotion: Verse. 28.
The Apostle forbids to speak all at once: Cannot they follow the Minister
when he reads, Verse. 34.
and according to the Apostle's Order, speak every one to himself and to God;
Another Breach they are guilty of, is directly against Women keeping silence
and not speaking in Churches, yet commonly they speak the loudest. So then if
they will answer the Apostles end, they must act to edifying, which through
Persecution, they have not taken the Way to do; he tells them the right Way,
Charity, wherein they have been so wanting, Cor. 8.1.
edifyeth.

Our Ceremonies contribute nothing toward Order and Decency, Baptism is as
decently administered without, as with the Sign of the Cross, and public
Prayers as decently read without a Surplice as with it, but if they be added to
cloth Religion, it is to accuse her of Nakedness; but Christ has made a
sufficient Provision for it, without such things, which they ought not to
maintain, except they can prove God is better served with them than without.
Now the Apostle's Scope in the place, is to charge the Corinthians in their
meetings, to avoid Confusion, and what is unbecoming, as to speak in unknown
Tongues, or to prophecy all together, which would be very undecent (as in
ordinary Company, to hear all talking together) and breed Confusion, and this
is the reason, Verse. 33.
for God is not the Author of Confusion: Therefore the Church which is his
House, must be a House of Order; he does not give them leave to bring any new
thing of their own into the Church, but only to observe a Decency, and not to
speak in unknown Tongues, whereby they would be Barbarians one to another, and
others would think they are mad: And also in not prophesying all at once, V.
11. V. 23. Verse. 37.
but one after another, to observe an Order in performing the things he writes
to them, which he calls the Commandment of the Lord; and no doubt this was to
reform Abuses about these things crept into their Church. So this Text does not
in the least favor our Ceremony-mongers, and it is no Warrant for them to usurp
a Power of instituting unnecessary significant Ceremonies with such
circumstantial Appertenances as I named a little before, they may direct about
God's Worship, but not to bring Innovations into it: I say Appertenances, but
not Parts, which yet they confound, though there be a Difference, so a Rochet,
Laund Sleeves, etc. are Appertenaces, but no parts of a Bishop, a Surplice an
Appertenance, but no Part of a Reader, Hair Appertetenance, but no Part of the
Body.

A thing which prevails much upon some of them is this, these Ceremonies, say
they, in themselves are indifferent, but being commanded by Authority, they
become necessary, and we ought to obey them; this Principle they go upon, is
false upon these two Accounts. First, The things are not indifferent. Secondly,
They who institute and impose them may not do it; as to the first, that such
things are not indifferent; that is, they may not lawfully be used or not be
used. I made it appear, when I proved them to be unlawful and superstitious,
which I think to have sufficiently performed. for any thing introduced into the
Worship of God, to signify something in it, and then the Practice thereof
imposed upon People without a Warrant from the Word of God, is unlawful, and
consequently, far from being indifferent; and suppose in their Nature they were
not unlawful as they are, yet upon the acccount of the Abuse committed about
them, they become sinful in their use; the Rule of indifferent things and not
necessary is, if they be polluted with Idolatry and Superstition, ought to be
abolished: Respons. ad Versipellem.
It is most right and sound, says Calvin, to say that the Institutions of God
may not be abolished for any Abuse; but Human Institutions being defiled, and
so proving hurtful and offensive to our Brethren, are to be abstained from; the
Superstition against which true Worshippers of God do fight, came, for the most
part from unknown Puddles, and all are soiled with ungodly Error, which can
never be removed but by utter abolishing of their Use: Why then do we not
simply acknowledge that which is true, namely, that this Remedy of abolishing
their Use, is Necessary for taking off Dross from the Church: Disput. Genesis 66.
And Beza says, the Trifles which had proceeded unto manifest Superstition, we
have abolished as Will Worship: We also affirm, that they which retain the
Relics of unprofitable Ceremonies, and out of preposterous Judgment do correct
rather than abolish them, deserve ill of the Churches, yet some there are, who
would have Pastors to put on Garments, which if not by their first bringing in,
yet by their Abuses are Baal's Garments: you Papists have so abused these
Ceremonies that without violating of Religion, we cannot retain them: We see
how those first Instruments of Reformation used the same Arguments against
Papists, as we do against our Ceremony-Mongers, and Papists used the same
against them as our Ceremonists do against us, so that Cause is the same, only
there is more or less in the case, and there is no Pretense to say such things
are indifferent, which makes Beza say in another place, how that Text of 1
Cor. 7.23. is to be understood of Superstitions, which some do foolishly call
indifferent things.

Now I come to show how they who institute and impose such Ceremonies, have no
right, and may not do it, and so ought not to be obeyed: It had been well if
they had never given just Cause to question this pretended Power of theirs,
which is a mere Usurpation, they go beyond their Commission and cannot answer
it: It Is to be wished there was no ground to suspect there is in many of them
too much of self-Interest; In the Church of Rome their great Prelates and
Cardinals, though sometimes for the present they feel Inconveniences under the
exorbitant Power of Popes, yet all submit to it, and cry it up, because none of
them has cast away Hopes of raising to that Dignity, and then they will exact
from others that uncontrollable Obedience and Respect which once they yielded
their Superior; so may be some amongst us, as being fed with Hopes at one time
or other it will be their turn to have an upper hand in the Government of the
Church, are, against their Knowledge, content to stoop and submit to things
which in their Judgment they do not approve, because when they come to it, they
will use others as once they were used; if so, it is a Ministry of Iniquity,
and I appeal to the Consciences of some of them: All these Practices are
subservient to such Usurpations, but can never justify them, and in such a
case Scripture gives both Precept and Example, and with the Apostles we ought
to say; Acts. 5.29. and 4.19.
We ought to obey God rather than Men: Nay, with the same, we may boldly refer
to the Judgment of such Rulers of Synagogues, and say, Whether it be right in
the Sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye: Let them not
say that what the Apostles did, and what we do say is upon a different account;
we know there are several sorts of Truths; yea, some more important than
others; however, every Divine Truth is a Truth to be owned and maintained, and
every Divine Truth is of a high Concernment: That which we stand for in our
present Questions, concerns no less than two of the three Offices of our
blessed Lord and Mediator, the first, his Prophetical Office, whether in the
Church we may hear any other Voice but his, which is revealed in his Word? Then
his Kingly Office, whether we may receive and obey any other Laws,
Institutions, and Ordinances, but what he has himself appointed? We own no
other Law but what is in and derived from his holy Word, Gal. 6.16.
and let Peace be upon those that walk according to this Rule, and to the
Israel of God. The Determinations of the most famous Councils are to be
followed only as much as they agree with it, and the Rulers of our Church have
no more Power than they had: We allow of none such Maxims of theirs as these,
how in the things in question the Precept of a Superior does bind more than
the Conscience of the Inferior can; but we say particular men are allowed to
examine the Orders of their Superiors as much as therein their Consciences are
concerned, and choose whether or not they are to obey, for we are not to admit
of an implicit Faith and blind Obedience: Neither is it true, that the Subject
having the Command of King or Bishop for his Warrant, ought not to examine, but
only to perform what he is commanded, a fair way indeed for Men to ride upon
the Consciences of others at pleasure. Upon Colos. 2.13.
Bishop Davenant teaches us a better Doctrine, when in Opposition to Jesuitical
Blind Obedience, he she weth how Subjects may and ought to judge with the
Judgment of Discretion, the Decrees of their Superiors, so far as in particular
they are concerned.

These Matters about Ceremonies were under Debate, not only here, but also in
other Parts of Europe, in the Beginning and Progress of Reformation: Junius who
died a Divinity Professor at Leyden, says, If any Man, either by Civil or
Ecclesiastical Authority, will add things not necessary nor agreeable to Order,
we would not pertinaciously contend with him, but desire only that he would
seriously consider of three things; first, by what Authority or Example he is
led to think, that the holy Church of God, and the Simplicity of the Mysteries
of Christ, whose Voice only is heard by his Sheep, must be clothed with Human
Traditions which Christ does reject. Secondly, To what end he judges that
those things should be added unto those that are Divine, for if the End be
Conformity with others, it were more Equity that other Churches should conform
to those which come nearest to the Word of God (as Cyprian's Counsel is) than
that these should conform to the others, if the End be Comeliness, what is more
comely than the Simplicity of Christ? What is more simple than that Comeliness?
If there be no other Reason besides Will, then that of Tertullian is to be
thought of; the Will of God is the chief Necessity, and the Church of God is
not tied unto Man's Wisdom in divine things: The third thing to be thought on
is, what Event has always followed upon human Traditions, as a long Experience
does show: And as Polanus, another Author well known, Syntag. lib. 9. cap. 3,
6, 8.
says, Superstition stands in choosing Worship to God, or when one exceeds
Measure therein: True Religion worshipeth the true God in a manner prescribed
by the Word; false, that is, Superstition, worships God otherwise than he
wills, or enjoyneth, and elsewhere, whatsoever pertains to God's Worship,
must by him be required; Lib. 9. cap. 28.
in another place he adds, it is a foolish ill Zeal of the Popish Clergy to use
such Player-like Apparel in Divine Service, and thereby to be distinguished
from Laymen; that Difference and Variety under the Old Testament was Typical,
but the Substance being come, what mean they to require Types any more? And if
upon this matter we will hear few Words more of Calvin to Cassander, Opusc.
page 355.
he taught that the Ceremonies ordained by Christ are entirely and uncorruptly
to be kept, and nothing must be added to their Institution, as if thy were lame
or imperfect, which indeed is somewhat but not all, because by an indirect
Shift he would let into the Church all other Rites; but this half Truth is
overturned, when he believes a Right given to the Apostles and Successors to
institute such Ceremonies in the Administration of the Sacraments which may be
for Ornament, therefore he which before confessed nothing should be added, does
now not only admit such By-Ceremonies, but also commends them, yet will he help
himself with a subtle Shift, namely, Additions must be allowed, if the
Sacrament be not held lame and imperfect, therefore with what Mixtures you
will, Sacraments may be wholly changed, and yet all be well, provided you
charge not Christ to his Teeth that any of his Institutions go lame and halting.

These Witnesses I bring in, not only to show their rational way of arguing
upon this Subject, but also to let Men see how there were those beyond Seas who
stood in Opposition to Human Inventions in God's Worship, and consequently it
was not a Spirit of Refractoriousness, as they call it, that made here several
learned and pious Men speak and write against them from the Beginning: The
Truth is, the most wise God needs none of our Help to find out means to
excite Faith, nor would the meanest Mechanic in his Profession endure, but
would himself take his own way and not be put out of it: See then how bold are
these Men, who will prescribe to God means how to help forward our Salvation,
and that Decency which they would make a stalking Horse of, is, as Pareus
says, opposed to Vanity, Upon 1 Cor. 14.
Spots and Riot, it stands not in Hoods, Caps, or Vizards of fond Ceremonies,
Thus our Reasons we back with the Authority of some famous Men, and shall do it
farther to show we are not singular in our Opinion; they and we do all draw out
of the same Spring, the Word of God: But I now conclude this Point with those
notable Words of Calvin, It is Devilish Blasphemy to say that God has taught
Men all that it behooves them to do: In Deuter. Sermon. 85.
Common byword here has place, thou art the Devil's Servant, for thou have
done more than was commanded thee.

Of Cross in Baptism.
HAving thus briefly spoken of Ceremonies in general (for I intend, as much as
I can, to contract my Discourse) I must now speak of them in particular: We
shall begin with the Cross, whereof the aerial Sign is used in Baptism; this is
one of their significant Ceremonies, a Help to Devotion, as they say, which
signifies unto us that we should not be ashamed of Christ crucified: I would
know whether and where Christ the only Authentic Appointer of means
appropriated to God's Service, teaches this Doctrine? It Is not enough for me
to say, it is the Doctrine and Practice of the Church, I must be satisfied how
the Head and only Lawgiver of the Church has commanded it; with them it is also
a sign of Constancy, but to what purpose is this? Does not the Sacrament teach
us the same thing? Are we not with him buried by Baptism, and with him raised
in Newness of Life? Do we not in Baptism give Christ our Names, take his Livery
and Badges upon us, and as much as in us lies, make a Vow to forsake all to
follow Christ the crucified? Are we not thereby admitted into his Church to
fight under his Banners during the whole Course of our Life against all our
Spiritual Enemies? Does the Sign of the Cross signify any more than this? The
Ceremony is then a superfluous thing, seeing it can signify no more, nor do
more good than the Sacrament does: This Signification being an Engagement that
we shall not be ashamed of the Cross, must be believed, must be in Faith,
without which it is Sin, but how can there be Faith where is no Word of Precept
or Promise? As there is none at all, but I know what there is in the Practice
of this Sign of the Cross in Baptism, namely, an abominable Presumption and
Addition to the Sacrament, which is not of the Institution, this implies as if
the Ordinance was imperfect, and something in it wanting which must be added by
Man, and we have no more leave given us to add to the Sacraments, than to the
Word under the threatened Penalties. Rev. 22.18.


And though this Sign of the Cross be an ancient Custom, it is never the better
for that; Antiquity without Truth, says Cyprian, is an old Error. However the
Administration of the Sacrament without it, is much more ancient: Wherefore,
when Water, thorough the fault of the Pipe, or of some other Cause, grows bad
and corrupt, we must go to the Spring: Illud verum quod primum, says one,
that is true which agrees with the Institution; the Valentinian Heretics first
used the Cross in Baptism, and gave also the Lord's Supper to Infants, which
must be owned to be ill, because they could not examine themselves, nor discern
the Lord's Body, and as this Custom has been left, so there was as much Reason
to have left the other, as others have been too, when Men found cause for it;
'twas a Custom in Prosper's, some say in Cyprian's time, at the receiving of
the Lord's Supper, to sop the Bread into the Cup, this continued for some
hundred of Years, and lasted as long as that of Infants receiving of the Lord's
Supper, but were left off, not without good Reasons, so might Cross in Baptism
have been left with as much Reason, for sopping was not worse than it, sopping
was an Alteration, and Cross an Addition, which is as bad every jot as
Alteration if not of the things instituted, yet of the Institution, as making
it insufficient or imperfect by it self alone, for when Christ said, do this,
he meaned as well do this only, as do this all; more is to be said for sopping,
which was used by Christ at the very Table of the Supper, but the Sign of the
Cross was never used by the Lord Jesus: If crossing ought to be used in
Baptism, the Apostles in their Doctrine concerning it would have made some
mention of it, except some would think they then did not know, or cared not to
use the best way of signifying Christian Valor and Constancy in fighting under
Christ's Banner.

If this Sign of the Cross, or any other Ceremony in Baptism be referred to
Order or Decency, as it is, is it not thereby blasphemously to accuse the
Baptism of John, and of the Apostles, which was without it, of Disorder and
Uncomeliness? Whereas the Comeliness and Dignity of the Sacraments is to be
esteemed by the Word of God, by the Institution of Christ, by the Simplicity of
the Gospel, and by the Practice of the Apostles, nothing is more decent and
orderly than that which Christ commands and allows, nothing more undecent
and unseemly than that which Men invent in the Service of God, and in the
Celebration of the Sacraments, thereby inverting and perver^ing the holy
Ordinances of God; Is it not a strange thing, that though in Scripture the
Cross be neither commanded nor permitted, yet the Rule is, Cross or Baptize
not, a Child shall be deprived of the Sacrament, of the Seal of the Covenant,
if the Addition of the Cross be not with it, this is as bad, if not worse than
Anabaptism, and I think they have more to say for not baptizing Infants, than
these People have to deny Baptism upon such an account, and no doubt that has
made several Anabaptists, for some Men being in Conscience dissatisfied with
that Ceremony, would not have their Children baptized with it; thus they had
rather to keep them unbaptized, but rather than they should not be at all,
having kept them so till they were older, they inclined to have them baptized
in their way. I cannot tell how those that have a Commission from Christ to
preach and to baptize, can answer at last for refusing upon such an account to
baptize; for they disobey the Commission: it is most certain the Lord never
said, baptize with the Sign of the Cross, but baptize in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: So that except Men refuse to be
baptized in that Name which no body does, being a visible Member of the Church,
it is an abominable Wickedness and Disobedience upon such an account to deny
Baptism; with a just Cause we complain against Papists for taking away the half
of one Sacrament, and have we not much more reason to cry out against those
amongst us, who having a positive Command to baptize, do wilfully and unjustly
deprive the Children of believing Parents of the Seals of the Covenant which
God has absolutely ordered to be administered unto them?

In Popery the Cross is not only an Occasion of Superstition, but is also made
an Idol, they kneel before, and as such do Worship it; and where they pretend
to have a piece of the Wood of the Cross, they lay it up as a most holy Relick,
have Days appointed to come kiss and worship it upon their Knees, they suppose
Miracles to be done by it, and have Prayers made for it; ought not the Thoughts
of this, make any one that hates Idolatry to detest and abhor the Idol, and not
so much as to endure the Sight of it: but not only the Cross, but also the Sign
of it is abused amongst them, they believe the Sign of the Cross, Opere
operato, as they call, of it self, and being made, has the Virtue to drive
away Devils, and to this same purpose they use it in Baptism, in consecrating
Churches, baptizing of Bells, making their Holy Water, exercising, saying Mass,
and in every thing else they do in Religion, so that amongst them there is not
one Ceremony more generally abused than this; they use it also to keep off the
Thunderbolt, and if in a Morning when they go out, they do but make the Sign of
the Cross, they think themselves safe enough for the rest of the Day: And
though amongst us it be not abused to that Degree, yet still it is in some
Degree: But as I would not drink out of a Cup where I know there has been
Poison, thus in Matter of Religion, I would have nothing to do with any thing
that was and is still in the Golden Cup full of Abominations of the Mother of
Harlots. Rev. 17.4.
Away then with Popery, for of the Word Papa every Letter makes a Word, Poculum
aureum plenum Abominationum, The Golden Cup full of Abominations.

Two things more I shall add to this: First, How the Cross and Sign of it is
the chief Idol of Popery, and the thing most abused amongst them, for though
their Wafer-God be their essential Idol; yet it never becomes a God, except the
Sign of the Cross be many a time made over it, and this I may call the proper
and essential Mark of the Beast, which in Scripture is said to be in the right
hand or in the Forehead, which is thus, Rev. 13.16.
whenever they make the Sign of the Cross, it is with their Right Hand Part on
the Forehead, the right and left Arms, and Part on the Breast, pronouncing
these Latin Words, In nomine patris, etc. The first thing they teach their
Children is to make that Sign of the Cross, at their Graces before and after
Meat, they ever use the Sign of the Cross, it is the first and last thing they
do when they rise and when they go to Bed, and in a Morning before they go out,
they look upon it as an infallible Preservative against ill Accidents; and if
any Mischance befalls one, they will say it is because he did not before make
the Sign of the Cross, and that is the chief thing their Priests do commend to
Children and others, be sure whatsoever you do to make the Sign of the Cross;
and when they come into their Churches and and go out, the first and last thing
they do, is to dip a Finger into their Holy-water-pot, and to make the Sign of
the Cross: When they go to, and come from Pilgrimage to their pretended Saints,
they never are without little Crosses, either on their Hats, Cloths, in their
Pockets, or somewhere else about them, and this is one of the Merchandises they
buy in such Places. All their Soldiers, or Pilgrims, as they called
themselves, that went to their Holy Wars, either against the Saracens, or
against the poor Albigenses, Vaudois, and the like, crossed themselves, or had
a Cross on their Cloths, whence were called their Cruciada or Croisade. In few
Words, Crosses they have in their Churches, Convents, Gardens, Houses,
Highways, and every one carrys Beads and Crosses, they are to be seen in their
Pulpits, and Altar-cloths upon every Church (this we are not free from,) Cross
here, and Cross there, and Cross every where, and they look upon the Cross, and
the Sign of it as an universal Remedy against all manner of Evil: They say,
that as many as are not marked with the Sign of the Cross upon the Forehead,
are damned and reprobate, Analys. page 77.
as is noted by M. Rogers.

And more particularly, to show how this Cross and aerial Sign of the Cross is
the Characteristical Note and Mark, or Name, or Number of the Name of the
Beast, formerly, and of late, as I know it out of certain Knowledge, because
some weak Protestants beyond the Sea, would out of Fear pass for Papists;
Priests and others used two ways to find them out; first they asked whether
they had any Cross and Beads, which never are one without the other, if they
had none, then they called them Heretic, and used them accordingly; but if
they had, because it was herein an easy thing for them to counterfeit, then to
discover them they put them to this further Trial, namely, to make the Sign of
the Cross upon themselves, and hereby they commonly found them out, for Papists
have a certain Rule for it, as what Place to begin at, then where to follow,
next either right or left Arm, and where to end, but the poor Protestants, not
being used to this Ceremony, usually mistook, and this was the Shibbolet, when
they were surprised to steal away. Bellarmin and Stapleton call the Cross, one
the Character of their Glory, and the other a notable Sign whereby to know a
Catholic.

I hope this makes it clear enough, how the Cross, or Sign of it is the Mark of
the Beast, seeing within his Kingdom in Matters of Religion nothing is done
without it; why then should those that say, they are the Followers of the Lamb,
take and receive it upon themselves? Surely Scripture says, the Names of those
that have the Mark of the Beast are not written in the Book of the Lamb, why
should we have amongst us such an Idol of Jealousy, so abominably abused to
Idolatry? And this leads me to the second thing I promised to speak of, namely,
how things abused to Idolatry, though once never so good, ought quite to be
rejected; this I say not of my own Head, but out of the Word of God, and shall
out of many Instances bring only three: The first is, of the Name Baal, which
signifies Lord, a true proper Name of God, a good Name indeed, yet because it
had been abused and attributed to the Creature, and to the Idols of the
Assyrians and Caldeans, as I said before, God abhorred it, and would no more be
called by that Name, Thou shall no more call me Baali, thy Lord, Hos. 2.16, 17.
for I will take away the Names of Baalim out of her Mouth: The second Instance
is that of Groves or Altars, once they were good and acceptable things unto
God, for Abraham built one, Genesis 13.18. Chap. 35.7.
so Jacob by God's Command, did build another: But when once God had settled
the Place of Worship, all such became abominable, and those Kings who either
did set them up, or continued them, are branded for it, as those who threw them
down, are highly commended. The Third Instance is that of the brazen Serpent,
which, though set up by God's special Command, yet when the People had
committed Idolatry about it, 2 Kings 18 3.
King Hezekiah destroyed it, wherein he did that which was right in the Sight
of the Lord, he removed the high Places, brake the Images, and cut down the
Groves, and brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent.

At this time the Cross and Sign of it are no better than those things were
then, surely the Altar of Damascus, or the Copy of it, was an Idol in
Jerusalem, as well as in Damascus; 2 Kings 16. Ezech. 8.3.
and was not the Idol of Baal called the Idol of Jealousy in God's House, an
Idol still? Is the Cross an Idol amongst Papists, and shall it not be so
amongst us? Part. 1 page 33, 91, 129, 160.
What Privilege have we for it? Parker proves it according to the Tenor of the
Words, to be not only significative, but also effective, they make it a
Sacrament in effect, as Papists do Confirmation, by Baptism they bring the
Infant into the Church, and by Confirmation make it a Soldier of the Church,
so we do the same with Baptism and the Cross, yet a high Place is given it in
the Ordinances, as the daily use of it, the Canon for the use of it, Can. 30.
and the Testimony of some Writers do witness, the Canon calls it an honorable
Badg, this gives it a Place of Honor, De polit lib. 5. cap. 65. fol. 160.
and Hooker calls it a sacred or holy Sign, attributing great Virtue to it, and
affirming no means to be more powerful to preserve a Man from deserved Shame,
and to stir up Devotion, than by this signing of the Forehead with the Sign of
the Cross; thus Mountebanks use to commend their Drugs as infallible and
present Remedies for all manner of Diseases; but the very Words in Baptism are
very emphatical, and give it the Virtue of a Sacrament, thus they once having
received it, think themselves engaged to maintain, and right or wrong to defend
it, and from Papists whom they had it from, to borrow Arguments to do it. Shall
not at last such things arise up in Judgment against those who sin against so
great Lights, and also be Witnesses, as well as Stones, which are Witnesses,
and hear the Word of God, Joshua said unto all the People, Behold, this Stone
shall be a Witness unto us, Josh. 24.27.
for it has heard all the Words of the Lord which he spoke unto us. God has
given a sufficient Warning against such things. Perkins has a large Discourse
upon this, and Dr. Fulk shows how the Devil did sow the Seed of Idolatry by the
Cross of Valentinus, after him Montanus nursed it, and got it Credit in
religious and civil Uses, which he collected from Irenaeus and Epiphanius, but
both Valentinus and Montanus were Heretics.

As for England, it had no Cross at all, till Austin the Monk brought it in.
So, have we not cause to think, that there is the accursed thing amongst us as
long as we retain such things as have been, and are daily abused to Idolatry?
Wherefore, let us put it away, and give Glory to God, or else we are in great
danger of falling before our Enemies, whether Temporal or Spiritual, Psalm.
106.39.
for whoring with other Men's or our own Inventions; and if any one talks of
Peace and Happiness, then Jehu's Answer to Joram is at hand, What Peace so long
as the whoredoms of thy Mother Jesabel and her Witchcrafts be so many: 2 Kings
9.22.
As long as we uphold the Spiritual Filthiness of Jesabel and Romish Babylon,
whom we brag to be allied unto: Genesis 35.2, 3.
If like Jacob we have a mind to go to Bethel to build an Altar for God's
Worship, then, as he did, we must remove all Idols out of our House, Josh.
24.14.
and as Joshua commanded the People to do; put away the strange Gods, and
Ashtarod their beloved Idols, 1 Samuel 7.3, 4.
from among you, which they did accordingly: Here was a People over Head and
Ears in Calamity, highly oppressed by the Philistines, for the which, in them
was Humiliation, but they wanted Reformation, the Prophet Samuel bids them with
Humiliation to join Reformation, and they should have what they desired, and
the Event answered the Promise; thus all Popish Idols and Superstition by a
thorough Reformation ought utterly to be removed, if we have a mind to please
God, and to be received under his Protection.

Something more I must say to this, before I leave it: The Cross amongst
Christians is what the Brazen Serpent was amongst the Jews; 'twas good at first
of Divine Institution, and when it had ceased to produce those Miraculous
Effects, for the which it was erected, was indifferent, but when it came to be
abused, it became evil, then a good King brake it in pieces; so once amongst
Christians the Cross was good: Christ to save Mankind was appointed to suffer
on it, yet herein inferior to the Serpent, that the Wood of the Cross never
wrought any Miracle, after the Passion it was indifferent, I mean the very same
upon the which our Lord was crucified, to have it or not, but the
Multiplication or making others in Imitation, was unnecessary, but after
Idolatrous Worship was rendered to it, it became abominable, and so must be
destroyed as being an occasion of Idolatry.

They say this is an ancient Custom of the Church, well let it be, yet that
does not take away the Abuse, nor make it a jot the better, is the Devil the
better for being a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, though at first he
was a most excellent Creature? but to the Point of Baptism, of old there has
been some gross Abuses, as first, the delaying of it, which though it does
intimate, they did not absolutely believe it necessary to Salvation, yet it
argues in them a Contempt, or else a Neglect of that holy Sacrament, we read in
the Book of the Acts, how as soon as Men were converted they were baptized, as
in the case of those that heard Peter's Sermon, of the Eunuch, and of the
Centurion and his Household and Friends: But some of the primitive Christians,
Acts 2.38, 41. chap. 8.36, 37, 38. Chap. 10 47, 48.
I mean 300 Years after our Savior delayed it, as Constantine the great, who
was not baptized till he was 65 Years old, which was the 31 of his Empire, in
Nicomedia, by Eusebius; his Son Constantius was baptized only at the point of
his Death; so Theodosius the great, and the other Theodosius did put it off for
a long time, and Valentinian delayed it, being willing to have been baptized by
Ambrose, but was prevented by Death, Jerome and Ambrose were not baptized till
they were 30 Years of age, Austin was a Manichean till 31, and then and not
before, baptized by Ambrose, so amongst the Greeks, Chrysostom, Gregory,
Nazianzenus, and Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, entered into Orders before
he was baptized: This was an ancient Custom, even amongst great Men, yet I hope
now none will commend them for it, for certainly they might much sooner have
made a Confession, and given an account of their Faith, as no doubt they were
able to do.

We know some (but I think none of those I named) had a strange Reason for so
long putting off their being baptized, namely, that they might be the more at
liberty to indulge themselves in their Vices, for they used to excuse their
Failings with this, that they were not yet baptized, for they thought they were
punctually to perform their baptismal Vow to be dead to evil Works, and raised
in Newness of Life, one tells us, Cyprian.
they had this false Notion, that there was no Pardon for those who after
Baptism relapsed into Sin, which was the Error of Novatian.

In those Times there was a worse thing practiced about Baptism, On 1 Cor.
chap. 15.
for Chrysostom in one of his Homilies speaks of an absurd Practice of some,
to put a living Man under the Bed of the deceased, and then the dead person was
asked whether he would be baptized, whereupon he that was under the Bed made
answer for the dead, and desired Baptism, and him they immediately baptized in
the place of the dead, and this he justly calls there a piece of mere Mockery,
an histrionical Sacrament, aludicrious Profanation of Baptism, for thus they
did but act a Part in a Play: And indeed, I believe our Questions in Baptism to
the Child, and the God-father's Answers come very nigh to this, for the Child,
though naturally alive, yet wanting the Use of Reason and Senses, is as good as
morally dead.

Further, to see the Errors of primitive times, baptizing of the dead was
anciently used by some Christians, as it was usual to give the dead the other
holy Sacrament, as both appear to have been practiced out of two ancient
Councils, in which is a Prohibition against that Administration of Baptism, and
of the Eucharist, to the Bodies of the deceased; the Grounds of these Practices
are given by Zonara and Balsamon; 3 Conc. Carthag. Can. 6. and Conc. Trullo.
Can. 83.
and if we must believe Buxtorf, so well versed in the Tongue and Rabbinical
Learning, in his Synagoga, the Jews had the same Error about Circumcision, for
if the Child died before the eight Day, he was circumcised in the Burying-place.

After this we must agree with Scaliger, Disput. 17. De Baptismo.
who out of Lactantius and Austin, speaks of the Dotages of the primitive
Church; which he calls Ineptiae patrum and Ecclesiae Doctorum: So we must say
of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, which once was introduced into the Church,
though perhaps without an ill Design, but has, thorough Superstition, been
continued therein, and is abominably abused in the Romish Church: Hence we may
see how those things that are brought into God's Ordinances, without a Warrant
from his Word, thorough a just Judgment become a Snare, as Altars proved to
Ephraim; wherefore they ought to be left off and forsaken, Hos. 3.11.
and the Lord never blesses what he has not appointed in his Worship. Now I
say this, every Image or Likeness for a religious Use is forbidden in the
second Commandment, but the Sign of the Cross in Baptism is a Likeness for a
Religious Use, wherefore it is forbidden by the second Commandment, whose
Latitude no Man may restrain.

Of the Surplice.
NOW I proceed to another Point, which I shall be the shorter upon, because
some things I already said concerning the Cross that may be appliable to the
Surplice, which say they, signifies Purity and Righteousness required in
Ministers, yet with some Country Ministers, that Purity is very foul, as well
as their Surplice, where we have seen some make use of them as of Hankirchifs,
and so dirty that they spoiled the Decency: However, Angels appeared in white
Apparel, and in the Book of Revelation, Ministers are called Angels: This
indeed is a strange way of arguing for People who pretend to much Reason: Thus,
because God calls himself the ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9.
he may be represented as an old Man, with a gray Hair and a gray Beard, as
Papists do, so may Ananias be represented with a Surplice, because St. Paul
calls him a whited Wall: Acts 23.3.
I also should have said the Holy Ghost may be represented under the Shape of a
Dove, because he appeared so in our Savior's Baptism; Luke 3.22.
but if to prove the Surplice a Sacrament (for that is the long and the short of
the business) only it wants God's Institution, though it has Man's) and that
Sanctity wherewith Ministers ought to be endued, we have no better Grounds in
Scripture (for if we had we would fetch it) than Angels appearing in white
Raiments, we have nothing but Apparitions to ground it upon: Out of this way of
arguing we should also conclude, that every Minister should have six Wings
fastened to his Body, with certain Faces like Faces of Lions, Isa. 6. and
Ezech. 1.
Eagles, Oxen, etc. because Angels have so appeared, and nothing of black about
them, no black Caps, no Tippets, nor Hood, because Angels appeared all in white.

It cannot be denied but that this white Garment is an Invention of Popery used
in most, if not all their religious Worship, hardly any Foppery is acted
amongst them, but this is in, nay, it is ever used in the very Act of Idolatry,
for idolatrous Ends; hence one may judge how defiled it must be, but say they,
amongst Papists it is consecrated, not amongst us, as for that, it may as well
be consecrated as Altars, Churches and Churchyards, however we ought to hate
even the Garment spotted by the Flesh, Jud. 23.
not to bring them in, and make significant Ceremonies of them, this might very
well be spared, and no hurt in the case, as there is some to use it; but say
they, it is appropriated to an holy use in God's Service, reading of his Word,
etc. But the thing is never the more holy for that, or else the Pulpits,
Tables, Table-cloths, Cups, Railes, Bells, Seats would be so, for they are
appropriated to God's Service in their kind as the Surplice is; As to Decency,
is not a black Gown as decent as a Surplice? The Worship of God does not
confist in Garments or such Ceremonies, that is good for those who will make
Religion as pompous as they can, like the Romish Church, and we imitate it upon
Coronation-days, but Soundness and Purity in Doctrine, Simplicity in Worship
and Holiness of Life, is what we ought to stand upon, so then the use of
Surplice or Font in Baptism, gives them not any Sanctity no more than have the
Bottles wherein is the Wine to be used in the Lord's Supper, or the Mud and
Banks that contained the Water of Jordan, where Baptism was administered: Now
amongst the several Evils this idle Ceremony causes, this is a great one, that
it stops the Course of the Gospel, the Church is deprived of the Labors of
many a good and learned Man; the wearing of it is so necessary a Qualification,
that no Surplice no preaching, and time has been when Men, neither ignorant
nor scandalous, who had a lawful Call to the Ministry, being distressed between
two, either to be deprived of the Exercise of their Ministry, a thing more
grievous than the Loss of their Places, or else to do things contrary to their
Consciences, were put to a sad and lamentable Dilemma, either to be deprived of
all, or else to comply with the times, and become Hypocrites: We justly blame
the Violence in France offered to the Consciences of People, and yet here has
been done as ill, though in another kind, within these 30 Years, till the time
of our late Deliverance: We made nothing of above a thousand poor Ministers at
once, upon the account of these Superstitious Rags and Ceremonies, turned out
of all into the wide World, ready they and their Families to perish for Hunger
and Want; but when seven of our Bishops were sent to the Tower, where they were
in no danger to be starved, how highly were we concerned, abhorring such an
unlawful Violence, as indeed it was, but this shows great Partiality: Well,
as to the Surplice, that Garment of Baal, amongst the rest of Ceremonies, has
been the Occasion of a World of Mischief, we had it from Popery in time of
Popery, and has been continued since Reformanion. Antichr. demonstrat. cap.
11.26.
Dr. Abbot calls all the Priests Garments, whereby they are distinguished from
the rest of the Church, a special Part of the Character of the Beast, the
Surplice is the chief of them.

Upon the purpose of the Streights, which some, who involuntarily use that
Garment, are put to, I now here set down a Speech by Hooker, Page 246.
made in their Person: Brethren, our Heart's Desire is, that we might enjoy the
full Liberty of the Gospel, as in other Reformed Churches they do, upon them
the heavy Hand of Authority, has imposed no great Burden: But such is the
Misery of these our Days, that so great Happiness we cannot look to attain
unto; were it so that the Equity of the Laws of Moses, could prevail, or the
Zeal of Hezekiah could be found in the Hearts of those Guides and Governors,
under whom we live, or the Voice of God's own Prophets could only be heard, or
the Example of the Apostles followed, yea, or their Precepts be an-answered
with full and perfect Obedience, these abominable Rags, polluted Garments,
Marks and Sacraments of Idolatry, which Power as you see, constrains us to
wear, and Conscience to abhor, had long 'ere this Day been removed out of Sight
and Memory, but as now thing stand, behold to what narrow Streights we are
driven, on the one side we fear the Words of our Savior Christ, woe to them by
whom Offenses and Scandals come; on the other side, at the Apostle's Speech we
cannot but quake and tremble; If I preach not the Gospel, woe unto me: Being
thus hardly beset, we see no other Remedy but to hazard our Souls one way, that
we may the other way endeavor to save them touching the Offense of the weak,
we must therefore adventure it, if they perish they perish, our Pastoral Charge
is God's absolute Commandment, rather than that shall be taken from us, we are
resolved to take this Filth and put it on, although we judge it to be unfit and
inconvenient, that as often as we pray or preach so arrayed before you, we do,
as much as in us lies, cast away your Souls that are weak minded, and to bring
you into endless Perdition: But we beseech you Brethren have care of your own
Safety, take heed to your selves, that ye be not taken in these Snares which we
lay before you, and our Prayers, on your Behalf, is, that the Poison which we
offer you, may never have Power to do you harm. Thus Conformers of that sort,
that hold Ceremonies to be only inconvenient, but not unlawful, declare their
Minds to excuse their Practices which they are ashamed of, and that they do it
with Grief; but the Author, who is none of their Friends, has his Design, to
show, notwithstanding their violent Checks of Conscience, they did better to
conform than not to preach; but what an unwarrntable thing is it for such
Trifles to drive Men into such Anguishes, as with the Bishops of Asia, to cry
out, Nos non nostra voluntate sed necessitate, Evagr. Hist. lib. 3. c. 9.
etc. We subscribed not willingly, but upon Constraint, not with Heart, but
with Hand?

But to return to the Surplice, it is not only a Ceremony in it self, but there
is also a Ceremony in the using of it, for commonly after the Minister has
read, he puts it off before he goes up to the Pulpit, and if he comes down
again to read at the Desk, for the Pulpit is thought no fit Place for that,
then he puts it on again; though we see some to save themselves the trouble of
putting on and off, go in it up to the Pulpit, and after Sermon come down to
read at the Altar what remains to be read, let them show me any Profit
thereby arising to be compared with the Loss of one Soul thorough Offense
given: They say we have Tables, Table-cloths, and Bells, and take no Exception
thereat, but there is reason upon the account of the Difference, for such
things are of a civil use, but Cross and Surplice are not: Brightman's Answer,
which is very short to Bishop Jewel's Allegations for the Antiquity of distinct
ceremonious Apparel used by Ministers in their Ministration, may give a farther
Satisfaction about this point.

Of Kneeling at the Lord's Supper.
NOW we must come to another Head, kneeling at the Lord's Supper, any of the
three Postures, standing, sitting, and kneeling practiced by Protestants, may
be used, provided there be in it no Superstition, which we ought to avoid the
very Appearances of, the two former are not liable to Exception, but the last
is, because it is a Posture proper to Prayer and Adoration; fitting is a Posture
fit for People at Table, standing is the Posture of those who are ready for a
March, and of Passengers, as we are all in this World, which was represented by
the Rites of the Passover, Exodus 12.11.
With Loins girded, Shoes on the Feet, Staff in the Hand, and ye shall eat it
in haste: Leaning is a posture mentioned by the Evangelist according to the
manner of being at Table used in those Countries, John 21.20.
even leaning on the Breast one of another, but now this affords no matter of
Discourse, as to the other three Evangelists, they every one speak of sitting:
As near as it may be, we ought to observe the Posture used by our Savior and
his Apostles: But here we shall speak only of kneeling as the most apt to be
abused.

It is known how in the Church of Rome, the Priest, when he is about that
idolatrous Consecration as they call it, does many times bow Head and Knee,
whilst the standers by, are all upon their Knees, specially when the Mystery
of the Pageantry is finished, and the Elevation made, then all do adore the
Wafer; now to show we have Notions of the Lord's Supper, different from theirs,
and that far from approving their Idolatry and Adoration of Wafer or Bread, we
abhor and detest it; 'twere a Christian Prudence not to give them the least
ground to think we are of their Mind: Though the brazen Serpent was of God's
own Appointment, and great things had been daily done, nay, though it was a
Figure of Christ lifted upon the Cross, yet People might not kneel before it,
for it was the Work of Man's Hand: They might indeed kneel before the Ark,
because in a special manner the Glory of God was present there, but they might
not before the Cherubims of the Vail: True Worshipers must avoid the Rites of
Idolatry, for all the Difference we can make in some Circumstances: The
Heathen, out of an ancient received Custom, did in their lower Chambers in the
Forenoon hang out consecrated Boughs; what could have been said of Christians,
if they had also hanged them out, though unconsecrated, out of an upper Room,
and in the Afternoon. Would to God we had none of these heathenish Customs, as
Maypols, Green Boughs at certain times of the Year, at the Windows of our
Houses, and in the very Churches; but two great Abuses are committed about this
Posture of kneeling, the one most cruel, to deny the Sacrament to those who
believe in Conscience they may not receive it in that Posture: This, if the
Party be otherwise well qualified, I look upon as unwarrantable, at least the
Posture ought to be left indifferent; the other Abuse is, that an Ordinance of
God, instituted to be a Seal of the Pardon of our Sins, is made use of for a
profane End, namely, to qualify a Man for civil Offices, for except he
receives the Sacrament kneeling, he shall not be admitted to any public Place.

Of Altars.
IN the Celebration of the Lord's Supper we ought wholly to cast off all Popish
Ceremonies, as those that cannot be continued without nourishing that
Superstition whereunto they served of old, and this brings us to another Point
relating to the Lord's Supper, namely, to Altars; hereupon the Church is indeed
too superstitious, as if in part we would bring in the old Ceremonial Law, or
the Popish Worship, and after this rate we must call the Lord's Supper the
Sacrament of the Altar, as Papists call the Mass, for we have Priests, that is
the Name we give our Ministers, we have Altars with Steps to come up to them,
railed about, in their Situation we observe, East and West, Offerings are made
toward it, Men bow at it, that Part wherein it stands, must be holier than the
rest of the Church, for at the side of it the Ten Commandments, and some other
Part of the Service ought to be read, thence by those who are the
thorough-paced Ceremonists, blessing is given to the People, we adorn them with
the diminutive of the Name of Jesus embroidered, we have Candlesticks and
unlighted Candles upon it, we formerly had Crucifixes upon them, and nothing is
wanting but saying Mass (for we have what we call Priests) to make it perfect
Popery: Are we not ashamed to have all these Trinkets in our Churches so like
to Popery, if not so; why should we not call it the Communion Table? St. Paul
calls it the Lord's Table, 1 Cor. 10.21.
and why should we borrow all these things and Names, from the Synagogue of
Antichrist: Those who have been beyond Sea, and in Popish Countries, and have
seen their Churches, may have observed what I say.

And now I am speaking about Altars, before I leave it, I must take notice how
to prove that Men may institute things belonging to Divine Worship, they use an
Argument fetched very far off, the Altar at Jordan, built by the Children of
Reuben, Gad, Josh. 22. from 10. to 34.
and half the Tribe of Manasseth: But 'twas not upon a religious, as the other
Tribes thought it had been, which made them so stirring in the Business, but
upon a civil account, and a Memorial as they declared, no more holy than a
Landmark: I cannot but once more think upon the Fancy, to say, that Candles
upon the Altar do signify the Light of the Gospel, but our Lights are out: In
this Papists are more in the right than we, their Candles are a burning, but
can a Candle unlighted signify Light, that there is hope of Light, or that
there has been a Light, it may, but surely we are out, to think a Candle out,
is the Sign of Light? Lord heal our Blindness, this is the Effect of
instituting morally significant Ceremonies, which are condemned as well as
sacramental: And seeing God will be worshipped by the Rule of his Law, and
therefore does detest all feigned and intruded Services, it is undoubtedly
contrary to Faith, that any thing be added to his Precepts by the Judgment of
Man; so we must not wonder to see such Intrusion attended with so bad Effects.

Of bowing to the Altar.
NOW we must come to our bowings, whereof we have two, one to the Altar, which
is to bow to Wood and Stone, to the Work of Man's Hand, which is (...), not
only without, but also against Scripture; here is a Worship expressed by an
outward Act, bowing, which is not denied, only they say, they worship not the
Altar but God before the Altar, so Papists say, they worship not the Image but
God before the Image, so the Jews might say, they worshipped not the Golden
Calf, but God before the Golden Calf; however in the second Commandment God
has as expressly as can be, forbidden to bow down before any Image or Likeness
of any thing: This is performed in the Church, the Place appointed for God's
Worship But this having more at large been handled elsewhere, In the just and
sober Vindication of the Observation of the 30th. of January, etc.
I shall add these few Words, how there are different Degrees of Idolatry and
Superstition, whereof the very least is carefully to be avoided: They who
worshipped the Sun and Moon cannot be excused from Idolatry, however it is not
in such a Degree, and so grossly as of those that worshipped Kine, Calves,
Snakes, Crocodiles, etc. and rational Men will own it is a worse Degree of
Idolatry to worship Stock and Stones, than living Creatures which are God's
Works, when others are Man's: Now indeed Idolatry committed by Christians, as
we all know Papists do, is more abominable than that of Heathens, because they
sin against greater Lights: So amongst Christians, they which know most, and
are better acquainted with God's Will revealed in his Word, are more guilty
than those who know less, for they ought to act according to, and be guided by
their Light: Was it a fair and Christian-like thing for some Jesuits in the
Indies, when they found that barbarous People unwilling to forbear worshipping
their Idols, amongst them to set up Crucifixes, and then boast of that kind of
Wit, how they had brought them to adore the Crucifix? A rate Mixture, and a
fine trimming of Worship indeed, whereby they withal strengthened them in their
Idolatry; instead of removing their Idols, they only increased their Number
with bringing a new one amongst the old ones, though under a specious Pretense
of Christ crucified, but in matter of Worship all Pretenses are not worth a
Straw: Remove the Cause and the Occasion too, do neither countenance nor
encourage it in the least, if Altars be unto us a Sin, we must not make Altars
to sin, rather no Altars at all, Hos. 8.11.
if they prove Snares: False Ways are many, whilst there is but a true one to
please a God jealous of his Honor, namely, to make his revealed Will the Rule
of his Worship, and no other.

As to bowing in matter of Religion, it is an outward Act of Worship to be
performed to him that is the true Object thereof, and to none else. David,
under the Type of Solomon, speaking of the Kingdom of Christ, says, they that
dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him; which two Verses after he calls,
Psalm. 12.9, 11.
shall fall down before him, pay him that Honor which is due to God alone; so
the very Act of Idolatry is expressed by the Name of bowing, which God, as
already observed, does positively forbid in the second Commandment, and was
after repeated, not only by Moses, but also by Joshua in the very Words, nor
bow your selves unto them, Deuteronomy. 5.9. Josh. 23.16.
which is rehearsed in the 16th. v. of the same Chap. and bowed your selves to
other Gods, to Stock or Stones, and when it is observed how after the Death of
Joshua, the People did evil in the Sight of the Lord, and committed Idolatry,
Judge. 2.12.17.19.
it is represented in the same Words, and by the same Act, no less than thrice
in the same Chapter, they bowed themselves, and bow down, so that very Act
being misapplied, must need be abominable and idolatrous.

But to conclude this Point, God forbid I should charge the Church of England
with Idolatry, for their bowing to the altar, I verily believe they know and do
better, though the ignorant sort of People are apt to entertain wrong Notions
about such things, but indeed I do not know how to clear them from the
Appearance of it; they bow to an Altar as a Papist does to an Image and to a
Crucifix, whether they make this the Object of their Worship, or do worship God
before it, or before an Altar, the Lord alone the Searcher of the Heart,
knows; neither can I clear them from Superstition in their always bowing
toward a certain Place and no other: All these Prejudices conceived against
them, they might easily remove, if they would part with that Ceremony, in
leaving it off there is neither Harm nor Danger, when there may be both in the
continuing thereof: Can any rational Man deny it were better and more
Christian-like, quite to forsake it than to give Offense to so many, and
Occasion of stumbling to some that are weak, and also Ground of Suspicion, that
if there be no Idolatry, there is at least Appearance of Superstition, which by
all means ought to be avoided; this tends neither to Decency nor to Order,
because it does not edify, which ought to be the End of the other two; but
notwithstanding any Reason, they will keep it, nec possunt dicere quare,
without any true sound ground for it.

Of bowing at the Name of Jesus.
THE other bowing we have, is at the Name of Jesus, we are not satisfied to
have it at things, but at Names and Letters too: If we must bow when spoken,
why not when written; like the Pharisees that were careful to have the Name of
God and some Words of his law about them, Matthew. 23.
made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the Borders of their Garments, but
withal made the Commandments of God of none effect. We know we can never do
enough to express Honor, Veneration, and Adoration to our blessed Lord and
Savior, but this ought to be rightly placed, not upon the Sound and Letters of
his Name, but upon his Person, who is God, blessed for ever: If it be due to
the bare Name, why not to that of Christ, also to that of God, of Immanuel, and
some others given him in Scripture, at last the Cross, the Nails, the Crown of
Thorns will challenge the same: Those who are for such things as these, I
desire seriously to think upon that Scripture, when St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.16.
Though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet henceforth know we him no
more. After the Flesh, no more after the Letter, but only after the Spirit,
things must be spiritualized: if we must bow at the Name, then at the Name of
Jesus Son of Nun, of Jesus Son of Syrach, of Jesus called Justus.

To make short, though the Place of Scripture, which they bring to prove their
Practice, has sufficiently been answered, I shall say few Words to it, and all
out of the Text, That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, Phil. 2.10, 11.
and things under the Earth: It Is not literally observed, for it is said to bow
the Knee, yet People bow the Head, then in Heaven and under the Earth are no
Knees to bow, Angels and the Spirits of just Men made perfect have no Knees,
nor the Dead in their Graves have no Knees, but it is the Honor due to the
Person commanded in the Place which is explained in the next Verse, And that
every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father: Who, as it is said v. 9. Has highly exalted him, and given him a Name
above every Name; a Power and Dominion above all, for God has made him Lord of
all, and made him sit at his right hand, so that bowing at his Name is humbly
submitting to, and owning him both with Tongue and Heart, to be the blessed and
only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He has written on his Vesture, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. and 19.16.
and as such the Angels, the four Beasts, the twenty four Elders say with a
loud Voice, Rev. 5.12, 13, 14.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, and every Creature which is
in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth: Observe, these are the very
Words used by St. Paul, only Creature is put for Knee, and such as are in the
Sea, and all that are in them, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever: The bowing of the Knee is here called worshipping, as it is also in the
same Book, Chap. 15.4.
Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name? What St. Paul calls to
bow at the Name, is here rendered by glorifying his Name, and worshipping him,
for all Nations shall come and worship before thee. Thus is clearly and fully
interpreted that Phrase of bowing at the Name of Jesus: These are the high and
noble Notions we ought to have of the Name of Jesus, and not of the Sound and
Letters of it.

I think they are no better grounded out of this Place to prove their Practice,
than Papists to prove the Pope may judge all Men, and be judged by none, out of
this Text; 1 Cor. 2.15.
He that is Spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no Man,
great Logicians are they all: But if this was literally to be taken, I see no
Reason, but we may do so of all those Places where Bodily Members, as Eye,
Hand, Arm, etc. and Passions, as Anger, Fury, Vengeance, Jealousy, etc. are
attributed to God, and thus fall into the Heresies of Antropomorphites and
Antropopathites. I must not omit to say how Papists make use of this Place in
the Philippians to the same Purpose as our Men do, so that this Practice is not
free from Superstition.

Of Holy Days.
NEXT comes the Point of Feasts, by them called Holy Days, but there is no
other Holy Days besides the Sabbath, which God blessed and sanctified, and now
the Christian Sabbath, or the first Day of the Week, which our Savior
sanctified by his Resurrection, after which he at several times appeared unto
his Apostles, who constantly observed it, so that in St. John's time it was
called the Lord's Day: Rev. 1.10.
As for all other Days kept in Memory of Creatures, we disallow: Keeping of
Days has Relation to God's Worship, which ought not to be communicated to Men:
We are not satisfied to keep Apostles Days, but we must also keep All Saints,
Michael and his Angels, the Innocents, etc. All idle and superstitious
Fopperies, for which we have neither Precept nor Example in the Word of God; to
what purpose? they contribute neither to Decency, to Order, nor to Edification,
only are an Inlet to Superstition: He that keeps a Day, let him keep it unto
the Lord, and not to Man either dead or alive. An African Council condemned
certain Feasts used in Memory of Martyrs, because they were drawn from the
Errors of the Gentiles, whose Abominations Christians must not meddle or have
to do with, 1 Cor. 10.20.
for the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice it to Devils, and
I would not that ye should have Fellowship with Devils: So that when a Man
says to us, this is offered in Sacrifice to Idols, we ought not to eat. Upon
this Consideration that Council resolved on this, And this we are to seek of
the Emperor, that such Feasts as are in many Places, contrary to the Word of
God, and from the Errors of the Gentiles, be forbidden, for indeed some
Christians being too ready to draw such things from them, they transmitted them
to others. Christians, and their Guides and Pastors, instead of fencing against
these things, such was their Frailty, that they rather complied therewith.

For Proof of this, De Origin. fest. In Tertul. de Cor. Mil.
let us hear what Hospinianus says, after Beat. Renany. The old Bishops, says
he, were used, when they could not call Men from the Superstitions of the
Heathens, by the preaching of the Word, to seek at least to do it by observing
their Holy Days with their own Worship, but this was to drive out one Nail with
another, no Way to take off Superstition: Although at the Beginning, these
Solemnities seemed tolerable, yet at last they grew to such a Heap of
Superstitions, that they became the Fountain and Beginning of most horrible
things: Thus far he, and Austin, who then was alive, wished them abolished, and
he gives in a Counsel for a good End, Hom. 6. de Verb. dom. in Matthew.
If ye ask how the Pagans may be won, enlightened, called; leave all their
Solemnities, and forsake their Toys: So we may say at this time, only changing
the Word Pagans into those of Papists: Now the great Reason in those Days, used
by their learned Men, not to receive those Vanities, or if received, to abolish
them, was because they were derived from Heathens, which made Tertullian so
sharply dispute, that a Christian might not wear a Laurel Crown, for no other
Cause but that the Gentiles did so, which makes him say elsewhere, Those
Ceremonies are superstitious and vain which we used without any Authority of
Divine or Apostolical Command, and are to be accounted superstitious, and
therefore be restrained, because in some sort they make us like the Gentiles;
and we may say, they in some kind make us like the Papists, for certainly we
have it from them, as they had it from the corrupt Church, and this had it from
Pagans; so that the Springs whence they came, and the Pipes thorough which they
were conveyed, are corrupt; if there was no other Fault but this, that they are
empty Observations, to be justly upbraided with Vanity, as being done without
any Warrant out of the Word, for such things serve not to Religion, but to
Superstition, and are affected and forced, and rather over curious, than any
wise rational at all, and therefore to be restrained, because they do (some of
them) suit with the Gentiles, and all with the Papists.

Why then should we practice Ceremonial Festivals of Man's making; it is well to
take occasion of hearing the Word and praying upon any Day when it is offered,
but it is not the Day, but the Word of God that puts us in mind of the Birth,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and with Bucer we may well say, I would
to God that every Holy Day whatsoever, besides the Lord's Day, In Matthew. 12.
were abolished, that Zeal which at first brought them in, was without all
warrant from the Word, and it merely follured corrupt reason to drive out the
Holy Days of the Pagans, as one Nail drives out another: Those Holy Days have
been so tainted with Superstition, that I wonder we tremble not at their very
Names, and yet these every Year, upon certain Days are observed with Mention of
him or her whose Day it is, and with an Epistle, Collect, Gospel.

Of Fasts.
WHAT I say of Feasts, may also be spoken of Fasts: We own Fasts, public or
private, being kept out of a right Principle, in a true manner, and for a good
End, are commendable, but it must be upon occasion, either to prevent an
imminent Danger, to remove some Judgments, or to be humbled for our Sins, then
it must be joined with Prayer, for it is an Accessory and Help to it, and to
speak more generally, there is a Fast from Sin and evil Works, which we are
constantly bound to observe, it is what Scripture calls ceasing from Evil, but
here this is not the Question, it is of prescribed Fasts, which ought not always
to be upon certain Days of the Year, which are a Yoke upon the Church, but as I
said only upon Occasion, voluntary and not forced, and they ought not to
consist in the Abstinence of some Meats, but of all sorts for a time, the
better to fit us for Prayer, not to have them too frequent, as in the Church of
Rome, which looks on it as meritorious. The Heretic Montanus brought in and
promoted the stinted Fasts, which afterward did superstitiously multiply, and
to this Day Papists are full of them; from them we borrowed some, as those, by
the Church ordered to be kept upon Eves of several Holy Days so called, all to
be returned to those whom we had it from, as well as the Feasts of Innocents,
Michael and his Angels, All Saints, with the 30th. of January, and 29th. of May.

But we shall wave them all to speak of Lent, that Chaos and Complication of
Fasts; this above all is an intolerable Yoke, and yet was a greater when People
were to buy Licenses to get leave to eat Flesh brought upon their Table, as
it is in the Church of Rome whence they had it; it is strange that after Men have
bought their Meat, and so it must be their own, yet besides they are to buy a
License to eat it, but now I thank God that is over, though there be those who
out of Custom do strictly keep it; and we have seen such Formalists, as during
all Lent would wear no Lace in their Linen, none but black Cloths, as it were
putting themselves in Mourning for the Death of our Lord, without which there
had never been any Joy or Happiness for us. At first, when Lent came in, two or
three Days were kept before Easter to meditate upon the Mystery of our
Savior's Death, and with Prayer, reading and hearing of the Word to prepare to
receive the holy Sacrament, but as Superstition came in, and that ever it is
for going on, those few Days so multiplied by degrees, till it came to the
Excess it is now in, so that we hear of first, second, Matthew. 4.2.
third, fourth, fifth Sundays in Lent, and this we must pretend to be in
Imitation of our Savior's Fast, not to be imitated, for it was miraculous of
forty Days; then it is not well timed, for his Fast was immediately after his
Baptism, and not about the Time of his Death.

Of Music.
SOmething must be said about Music, not so much Vocal as Instrumental, the
Vocal is necessary to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, to the Praise of
God, according to the Advice of St. Paul and St. James, Col. 3.16. Jam. 5.13.
yet without Affectation and Nicety, as minding the Tune and rules of that Art
more than the matter, and making a pleasant Harmony to the Ear, more than the
Affection of the Heart: Sing with Grace in your Hearts, says Paul: To this
purpose, in a Distich or two Latin Verses one said well, not the Voice, but the
Affection, not the Sound of stringed Instrument, but the Heart, not he that
cries out, but he that loves, makes a sweet Harmony in God's Ear.

Non Vox sed Votum, non musica chordula, sed Cor,
Non clamans sed amans, psallit in aure Dei.
Pet. Martyr spoke well when he said, Musical Instruments belong to Jewish
Ceremonies, and agree no more to us than Circumcision: In Cathedral Churches it
makes a very confuse Noise, so improper as indifferently to sing Prayers and
Praises; I know there are Psalms of Prayer, but they ought jointly to be sung
in the Church by all the People, not appropriated to few singing Boys and Men,
who, after the Popish Way, show their good Voices and Skill, strive to tickle
the Ears of Hearers, who must be content to hear and say nothing: Should one
beg Alms in a singing Tone, some would think he is mad, or at least in a
respectless and mocking Humor; besides, that by this, people are deprived of
the Comfort of singing Psalms, which no doubt would tend more to Decency and
Edification: Those who are so fond of this kind of Music, might go to
Musick-houses, or Popish Churches, if any was now publicly in the Kingdom,
where they shall have enough, and Variety of it, and not to make of Churches
Playhouses, or a kind of Dancing-schools. In the late Reigns we heard in the
Royal Chapels, Violins, and such sorts of Instruments, fitter for a Ball-room,
than for the House of God, and therefore should be taken away.

It is not only my Opinion, but also of the thirty two grave and learned Men,
which is King Edward's Days were chosen to reform Ecclesiastical Laws; they
say, we like well to have this kind of tedious Music taken away: De divinis
officiis cap. 5.
And because I my self am a Party, I will say nothing more of my own, but bring
two or three more considerable Evidences, who will speak to the Purpose? Thom.
Aquinas is one in whose time in the Church of Rome this was not so much in
request as afterward; Quest. 22. A. 4.
he says, The Church uses no Music for Divine Praises least it should seem
to Judaize; Musical Instruments do no more stir up the Mind to delight, than
frame it in a right Disposition; in the Old Testament there was some need of
them, etc. and also because they did figure out something. Then Zuing lius
says, It is evident that that same Ecclesiastical singing and roaring in our
Temples (scarce also understood of the Priests themselves) is a most foolish
and vain Abuse, Act. Disput. 2. page 106.
and a most pernicious Hinderance to Piety: I make no Question, but all that
kind of Music was a Part of the Legal Pedagogy, in the solemn Worship of God,
I do not judge it more suitable, than if we should recall the Incense, Tapers,
and others Shadows of the Law into use: I say again, to go beyond what we are
taught, is most wicked Pervicacy. So says Calvin, but let us hear Erasmus,
whose Testimony will by some be better received than his: in 1 cor. 14.
We have brought a tedious and Player like Music into the Church, a tumultuous
Noise of many Voices, such as I think was not heard amongst the Theaters of
Grecians or Romans, for which purpose whole Flocks of Boys are maintained at
great Charges, whose Age also is spent in learning such Gibble Gabble; at such
Cost is the Church for a pestiferous thing, etc. Does not he just fit our Case,
and how many Drones are maintained at this rate? Not to speak of Prebends and
Canons, who, if they were Men of Parts and Piety, might be better employed in
preaching the Word, than they are in doing little or nothing.

Of Consecration of Churches.
SOME few Words I must speak about Consecration of Churches, which Papists make
a great Pother about, and we are their Diminutive: To set apart a Place for
God's Service, and make no other use of it but wholly and only to dedicate it
to God, is a sufficient Consecration without any farther Ceremony, a Church and
a Churchyard are never the better for being thus consecrated, wherefore it is
vain and superfluous to do it, it is appointed to an holy Use, but there is no
inherent Holiness, the true preaching of the Word, and the right Administration
of the Sacraments are that which does sanctify and distinguish it from a
common Use: If the Church is to be consecrated, Why not the Pulpit? Why not the
Bells? Which Papists baptize and have Godfathers and Godmothers for: So they
do to Ships, so this Consecration of Churches is not commanded in Scripture; an
Imitation of Popery, and an unnecessary, unprofitable, and superstitious
Ceremony, for some Men think the Church to be the better for it, or else they
would not do it; nay, they think it to be no Church till it be done, for till
then there is in it no preaching, at least no administering of Sacraments, yet
both they administer in private Houses.

Other things there are, as churching of Women after the Jewish Way of
Purification, as we keep a Day about it for the blessed Virgin, which God never
required at our Hands, nor she ever desired, but all is our Fancy after the
Pattern of Popery, there are also the private Communion, private Baptism,
Burial of the Dead at Sea; there was also a Form about healing or touching for
the King's Evil, a Popish Foppery too, but now quite out, all which we omit
speaking to, having things enough besides to discourse upon, so we must proceed
to a second general Head, namely, the Discipline of the Church.

Of Church Government.
THUS having spoken of Ceremonies, we must now say something of the Government
of the Church, which is much after that of Rome, Triplicat. art. whitak. cap.
9. Hierarch. Anachrys. lib. 2. page 45.
in the manner of Hierarcy, by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans and
Chapters; then Chancellours, Commissaries, Officials, etc. These have been the
Steps for Popes to ascend upon that Throne of Iniquity which they now sit upon;
these are of Man's Invention, whether or not the Design was good I shall not
dispute; but certainly it has proved fatal. Staplet. and Scalting.
Two of the great Champions of Rome, both highly commend, and in it do much
approve of our Constitution and Practice.

Those Offices in the Church which are of God's Institution, we have them named
in Scripture; Ephesians. 4.11. and 1 Cor. 12.28.
God gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers. The Apostles were universal Preachers of the Gospel,
immediately called by Christ, who wrought Miracles, and were infallible in
Doctrine. The Prophets did interpret and expound Scriptures by a Divine Light,
having the Gift of Tongues and of things to come; The Evangelists were the
Writers of the History of the Gospel, inspired of God, or else Preachers of the
Gospel, called by the Apostles, and attended on them in their Journeys.
Pastors, also called Bishops, that is, Overseers, were Ministers settled in
certain Churches to teach and govern them: The Doctors or Teachers were
Successors of Prophets, whose Office it was to explain Scriptures and vindicate
them from the Errors of Heretics. The Apostles instituted Elders or
Presbyters, for that is the true Signification of the Word, who also are called
Bishops, though not always, some being only to rule the Church, others also to
preach, Men chosen by the Church, endued with Gifts and Authority above others,
who with the Pastors took care of the public Doctrine, administered
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and in the Churches Name were taken up with the
Vocation of Ministers: Acts 6.
There were also Deacons to take care of the poor, to visit the sick, to
maintain Hospitality, and sometimes to preach the Word: These are all the
Offices in the Church we have in the Word of God, for all are reduced under
these Heads. No Lord Pastor and Ministerial Pastor, no Bishop of Bishop, or
Archbishop, that is, Prince Bishop, no Deacon of Deacon, or Archdeacon. This
is contrary to the Rule of Christ, so expressly forbidding his Disciples to
affect any thing of Dominion or Superiority of one over another, and indeed
those Offices named in that to the Ephesians are sufficient for the Church, as
it is said in the 12th. Verse, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ: All besides this, is of a
Humane Superstructure, Rectors, Curates, Vicars, etc. are Names, Things, and
Limbs of the Roman Church, most of the hyerarchical Officers are not for these
good Ends.

Now Bishops (which answer to Watchmen) Pastors, Ezech. 23.27.
and Elders in God's Word, are but for one and the same Office: We see it
clearly out of that place of Scripture, where it is written how St. Paul sent
for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus to come to him to Miletus, in the
Charge he gives them he says, Act. 20.17, 82.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the Church of God: In this Text we
have the three Names given to the same Persons, those he sent for, and speaks
to are called Elders: God made them Overseers, v. 17. for that is the
Sgnification of the Word in the Original, and what in other places of Scripture
is translated Bishops, is here rendered by the Word Overseers, though in the
Greek the Word be the very same, and amongst the Translators was debated,
whether or not in this Place it should be Englished by the Word Bishop, but
upon Consideration that it might prejudice the Difference they make between
Bishop and Pastor or Elder, they made use of the Word Overseer, which could not
be taken notice of by those that understand no Greek, this by the by; then
these Elders of the Church of Ephesus, the Holy Ghost had made Bishops, them he
charged to seed the Church, and do the Office of Pastors, so that in the 28th.
Verse, Pastors and Bishops are but one and the same, and here by the way I
shall make this general Observation, how in the Exposition of a Text three
things are chiefly to be taken notice of; first, The true Signification of the
Word in the Original; secondly, The Scope of the Author in the Place. Thirdly,
The Analogy of Faith and Relation to other Places of Scripture: The first I
have spoken of, the second here is a Charge of St. Paul for those Elders, to
perform their Duty of overseeing and feeding their Flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
which St. Peter asserts also to be the Duty of Elders, whereof he owns himself
to be one.

The third is the Analogy of this Place with others, as that which Paul writes
to Titus, For this cause I lest thee in Greet, that thou should ordain
Elders in every City. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7.
If any be blameless, etc. for a Bishop must be blameless: In the 5 Verse he
calls Elders, and in the 7. Bishops, the same Persons: This is the divine
Bishop of a divine Institution; for as to the Diocesian Bishop, it is but an
Humane and Prudential Institution, and there is no such thing known in
Scripture, as it appears out of that Place to the Philippians: St. Paul directs
the Epistle to all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, Chap. 1.1.
with the Bishops and Deacons; out of which Place, after Jerome, we may say
that Philippi is one Town in Macedonia, and as now Bishops are reckoned, there
is but one, not many, of one Town or City; but here are Bishops of the plural
Number of Philippi, therefore the Pastors and Elders of the Place are meaned,
which also confirms it to be the same Office as we said but just now out of
Acts 20. It Is a thing I here have no mind to discuss, Mr. Clarckson of
primitive Episcop.
one having lately done it so well, where he clearly shows how Bishops were but
Ministers of Parishes, as formerly Cardinals were but Priests of Parishes in
Rome, and to this very Day every Cardinal, as soon as he is made, has with that
Dignity the Title of one Parish or other in or about Rome.

What is said of Timothy and Titus being Bishops, one of Ephesus, the other of
Creet, is amongst some a vulgar Error, grounded upon the Subscriptions of the
second Epistle to the former; and of the only Epistle to the later: But those
do not belong to the Epistles, but are Additions to them long after the Time
when they had been written, they are no Part of those holy Writings, as it
appears out of the Subscription of that to Titus, where is a Mistake of the
Place which St. Paul could not commit, and is confuted out of the 12th. Verse
of the last Chapter, where St. Paul desires him to be diligent to come to him
to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter; if the Epistle had been
written from Nicopolis, as it is said in the Subscription, he would have said I
determined here to winter, as of a Place where he was, and not there, as of a
Place where he was not at that Time when the Epistle was written: The Truth is,
both Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, who went with him in his Journeys, and
when he had formed a Church, he left one to set things in order, whilst he was
gone to preach the Gospel in some other Place: as to Timothy it is clear when he
exhorts him to do the Work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5.
therefore in his Epistles to them he charge, exhorts, and does direct them
how to carry on the Work he had set them upon during his Absence, and then come
to him when and where he appointed them.

Here I shall not enter into a long Discussion, only in few Words shall say,
how after holy Scripture, the ancient orthodox Doctors, as Austin Jerome,
Ambrose; and some of the Papists, as Hugo, Cardinal Anselm, Lumbard Cusan,
Johan. Parisens. and others whose Words upon occasion we can produce, hold the
Distinction between Diocesian Bishops and other Ministers, Elders, or Pastors,
not to be jure divino, but only jure positivo, or Humane Right; hence all
Ministers, by Decrees of ancient Councils ought to have Voices, both
deliberative and decisive in Councils, as Gratian, Duraren. Gentilet exam.
Cone. Trid. Page 216.
and Gentiles do declare this last, alleging the Councils of Nice, Calcedon,
and Carthage, and others.

Hierom's Words are well known and very remarkable, In Tit. 1. Idem est ergo
presbiter qui Episcopus. -- Episcopi noverint se magis consuerudine quam, etc.
The Elder is therefore the same as the Bishop, and before there were in the
Church Divisions through the Devil's Instigation, and some said, I am of Paul,
others, I am of Apollo, and others, I am of Cephas: Churches were governed by
the common Consent of the Elders. -- If any one thinks it is only our Opinion,
and not of Scripture, that the Bishops and Elders are but one and the same, and
that one is a Name of Age, the other of Office, let him but read the Apostle's
Words to the Philippians: Paul and Timotheus, the Servants of Jesus Christ, to
all the Saints which are in Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons -- Let the
Bishops know that they are greater than the Elders, more by Custom than by the
Lord's Institution, and that in common they ought to govern the Church: And to
Evagrius: so upon these Matters Cyprian is to be consulted, who declares, how
from the Beginning of his being made Bishop, he resolved to do nothing without
the Advice of the Elders, and the Consent of the People.

Every Plant, says our blessed Savior, which my Heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up, Matthew. 15.13. to be understood not only of
Persons, but also of Doctrines; but now we speak of Persons. The Lord Jesus
declares by himself, how every true Commission must come from the same Hand, I
am come in my Father's Name, John 5.43. and when he gives his Disciples their
Commission, he mentions by Virtue of what, thus, as my Father has sent me, so
do I send you, John 20.21. The Commission is originally from the Father, and by
the Son to the Disciples, thence derivatively to others, any other Commission
is wrong, so void and null: This same Commission gives an equal Power to all,
and is of the same Extent for one as for the other, wherefore let Prelates show
their Commission of Authority over their Fellow-ministers; sure we are, their
Commission is not for, but against it, Luke 22.25, 26. If they pretend to any
other, we say it is not right but null, and is insignificant: Nothing of that
Lording Office in the Place where ordinary and extraordinary Offices of God's
Appointment are named, Ephesians. 4.11. A poor Woman can say, that when the Messiah
comes, which is called Christ, he will tell us all things, John 4.25. yet he
never spoke of such Offices of Superiority, as Lords, Bishops, Archbishops,
etc. He is our Lord and Master, yet gives us a wonderful Example of Humility,
John 13.13, 14, 15. elsewhere he bids us to learn of him, but what? To domineer
over others, or to be high above Fellow Servants, or to assume Names or things
of Superiority, no such thing, but Meekness of Humility, for I am meek and
lowly of Heart, Matthew. 11.29. Wherefore let Prelates be satisfied with the Rank
which civil Authority has given them as to an outward Respect, but not to
stretch out their Commission beyond Bounds, lest they give cause to renew the
Complaint of King Frederigo of Spain, An. 1300. Episcopi Ceremonias, etc. As
for Ceremonies, says he, and such things as do serve to the advancing of the
vain Glory of the Prelacy, the Bishops take solemn Care for the promoting of
these, but of the Government of Souls and their eternal Salvation, they are the
very Plagues, etc.

But we must leave off the Discourse about Diocesian Bishops, and shall not
meddle with it any further: However let them not wholly engross to themselves
all Jurisdiction and Ordination, the whole Ecclesiastical Power, and the sole
Right of Ordination, whereof the laying on of Hands, which is an essential Part
of it, is called the laying on of the Hands of the Presbitery, 1 Timothy 4.14.
which is a collective Body, not of one, but of many; so that for a Bishop
wholly to arrogate it to himself, is a great Abuse, so it is though one or two
more be called, if it be done pro forma and for Fashion sake, which is an
owning that that thing ought really to be so, though it be otherwise, like one
who is made to sign a Will or a Deed, and knows nothing of the Contents
thereof: Indeed there is such a Lordly Carriage amongst some of them, as does
not become Ministers of the Gospel, who would not so much as say Grace at their
own Table, but have their Chaplains to do it, nor to give a Visit to the sick,
to comfort the afflicted, they have Worldy Businesses to mind, besides, that
some use as Servants their Fellowministers; despising, or otherwise abusing
them in the same Degree, as they neglect their Flocks, Ezech. 34.
whereby they become liable to the Judgments of God pronounced against the
Shepherds.

But we leave that Point to come to the Abuse of their Power in Convocation
about Ecclesiastical Affairs; as to the making of Canons and Constitutions,
which if they please, may happen to be such as will endanger or bring the
Nation under Bondage, and wrong Men in their Free-holds: Some of that kind have
formerly been made, and others have encroached upon thelegislative Power of the
Nation; They who will take the Pains to peruse the Records of that worthy
Parliament in 1610, may find they took notice of such Courses as were contrary
to the Authority of Parliaments, condemned urging of Subscriptions, above that
appointed by the Statute of 13 Elizabeth, only concerning Confession of the
true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments: Farther, Prelates
kept their Courts in their own Names, silenced, deprived, excommunicated, which
is to encroach upon the Crown's Prerogative, and so thereby fall into the
Penalty of Praemunire, by the Statute of 25 of Henry VIII. except they can show
some special Warrant by Statute for so doing, which they cannot, because in
King Edward the VIth's days they were ordered to keep their Courts in the
King's Name: Canonical Oaths and Subscriptions are Tyrannical Things, so are
their more severely punishing the breach of their Laws, than of God's; and to
teach a necessity where Christ has left a Liberty, is an effect of
Arbitrariness: It cannot be denied but that several good and faithful Servants
of Christ, for refusing to submit to Ceremonies which God never Commanded, but
has forbid 'em, have through merciless and unjust Persecution been reduced to
Want and Misery, to pay Fines, be put in Prison, where some dyed; good learned
and laborious Ministers turned out for Nonconformity, and others, scandalous
and unfit, put in their place, only because they Conformed; a sign that they
minded Conformity more than the main Duties of God's Service; for rather than
to put in Nonconformists, they left Parishes unprovided: wear the Surplice or
Preach not, Cross or Baptize not, Kneel or no Sacrament for you; and the
Minister Administering to such, by the Canon to be suspended. By their 6th Canon
Nonconformists are accounted to be Schismatics, Puritans, and Excommunicated
ipso facto without Appeal. This is to make as great a difference between
Protestants, and between Men and Men, as between Men and Beasts; however, let
us give praise to whom it is due. Bishop Grindal was commanded to suppress an
exercise called Prophesying, which he constantly refused to do: There has been
but few Grindal's in that point; for commonly they turned out Preaching under
pretense of Praying, or rather reading of Prayers.

We look somewhat back; but certainly upon account of Nonconformity, here
strange things have been acted, not only of old, but also under some of the
late Reigns, and the continued succession of such hard usages have preserved
the memory of them, so that the smart thereof does last to this very day, and
cannot easily be forgotten: And though now, thanks be to God, Men live under
the favor of an Act of Indulgence, and amongst some Churchmen who have more
Moderation than others had, yet still there are too many remaining that act by
a Spirit of that kind, and if it was in their power would be as virulent as
formerly others were.

The Church was barbarously dealt with when persecuted by cruel tyrants and
Strangers, as by Egyptians, Assyrians, Caldeans; but never more than when she
turned to persecute her self, in her own Members: Heb. 11.
two Instances we have, one amongst the Jews when the Prophets and other good
Men were put to Death, then when our Savior, his Disciples, and other
Primitive Christians were cruelly butchered, so always since when one part
persecuted another; then Popery out-did all that had been done before: And
lastly, here amongst us, though not so cruelly, yet ill enough, as contrary to
greater Lights, and against the Rules of Christian Meekness and Charity; a sign
of a bad cause which makes use of such means to promote it. In the mean time,
the most important Concern has been, and is still neglected, in some parts of
the Nation. At this very time I write, People have hardly a Sermon once a
Month, no Minister in the place, upon occasion to visit and comfort the Sick;
Livings are sometimes bestowed upon those who live many Miles off, who come not
near the place, and a poor Reader, or vicar, or Curate kept, who has hardly
Bread to put in his Mouth, the People are deprived of the Right of Electing or
Approving, one fit or unfit is imposed upon them; which is quite as
unreasonable, if not worse, than if a Husband was pressed upon a Woman whether
she will or not.

Are not Bishops concerned to look to and endeavor within their Diocese to
remedy these Abuses? When a Parish is worth 80 or 100 l. a year, and yet cannot
have a Minister to live among them? In a word, for I am tired to think upon
this subject, what shall we say of Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials,
Parators, Pursuivants, and so many more Blood-suckers of the Church's income,
of calling Ministers without express consent of the Congregations, of Ministers
going to Law for their places, of Plurality, Non-residency, dumb Ministers,
Simony, profane Contemners of Religion, Carnal proceedings in Spiritual
Courts, taking Money for Ordination, Citations, change of Penances into Money,
etc. are not these abominable Abuses? This point I shall almost conclude with
the Lordly and Pompous Prelate whom we have seen usurping the sole Authority of
Jurisdiction, Ordination and Excommunication.

But now we must speak few words of his assuming wholly to himself the power of
Confirmation, though some good may come by it, yet the thing in it that is
good, might be done under another Name, which we would not borrow from Papists,
through whose hands this is passed into ours, when they so superstitiously
abuse and make a Sacrament of it, but I will not insist upon some things I
might say to the Purpose, only I must make an Observation, how strange it is,
that a Minister that has a lawful Calling to preach the everlasting Gospel, to
administer the Sacraments, and has a Right to do every thing else that belongs
to the Office of Ministry, yet may not perform this Part of it which in
Substance is to examine and Catechize Children, but this is reserved for the
Bishop: Those are sad Times when Will and Pleasure have justled out Right and
Reason, and when selling and buying, and such like evil Practices turn the
House of God into a Den of Thieves.

But this Point I shall conclude with an excellent Letter sent to the Bishops
by Dr. Humphrey, President in Magdalen College in Oxford, and Reader of
Divinity Lecture there. It is thus. Your Lordship's Letters directed unto us by
our Vice-chancelour, although written in general Words, yet has so hearted our
Adversaries, that now we are no more accounted Brethren and Friends, but
Enemies: And seeing the old Mass Attires be so straighly commanded, the Mass it
self is shortly looked for; a Sword is now put into the Enemies Hands, of those
that under Queen Mary have drawn it for Popery, and under Pretense of good
Order, are ready, without Cause, to bewreck their Popish Anger upon us, who in
this will use Extremity, in other Laws of more Importance, Partiality: I would,
my Lords, have wished rather privy Admonition than open Expulsion, yet I had
rather receive Wounds of my Brother, than Kisses of mine Enemy: If we had
privily in a convenient Day resigned, then neither should the Punisher have
been noted of Cruelty, nor the Offender of Temerity; neither should Papists in
their seditious Book have accused Protestants of Contention. Religion requires
naked Christ to be preached, professed, glorified, that graviora legis, the
most weighty things, by the most faihful Ministry of feeding Pastors should
be furthered, and after that, Orders tending to Edification, and not to
Destruction, advanced, and finally the Spouse's Friends should by all means be
cherished, favored, and defended, and not by Counterseit and false Intruders,
condemned, overborn, and defaced: But alas! A Man qualified with inward Gifts,
for lack of outward, how is he punished? And a Man only outwardly conformable,
inwardly quite unfurnished, is let alone, yea, exalted; the painful Preacher
for his Labor is beaten, the unpreaching Prelate offending in the greater is
shot-free, the learned Man without his Cap is afflicted, the capped Man without
Learning is not touched; is not this directly to break God's Law? Is not this
the Pharisees Woe? Is not this to wash the Outside of the Cup and leave the
inward Part uncleansed? Is not this to prefer Mint and Anise to Faith,
Judgment, and Mercy? Man's Tradition before the Ordinance of God? Is not this
in the School of Christ, and in the Method of the Gospel a plain Disorder? Has
not this preposterous Order a Woe? That the Catechism should be read as the
Word of God, it is the Order of the Church, to preach it, a necessary Point of
a Priest, to make quarterly Sermons is Law, to see poor Men of the poor Men's
Box relieved, Vagabonds punished, Parishes communicate, Rood Lofts pulled down,
Monuments of Superstition defaced, Service done and heard, is Scripture, is
Statute: That the Oath to the Queen's Majesty should be offered and taken, is
required as well by Ordinance of God as of Man: These are plain Matters,
necessary, Christian, and profitable; to wear a Surplice, a Coap, or a cornered
Cap, is (as you take it) an accidental thing, a Devise only of Man, and as we
say, a Doubt or Question in Divinity; seeing then all these substantial Points
are in all Places of this Realm almost neglected, the Offenders little or
nothing rebuked, and seeing the Transgressors have no Color of Conscience, it
is Sin and Shame to proceed against us first, having also reasonable Defense of
our Doings: Charity, my Lords, would first have taught us; Equity would first
have spared us, Brotherliness would have warned us, Pity would have pardoned
us, if we had been found Trespassers: God is my Witness, who is the Beholder of
a I Faith, I think of your Lordships honorably, esteeming you as Brethren,
reverencing you as Lords and Masters: Alas! Why have you not some good Opinion
of us? Why do you trust known Adversaries, and mistrust your Brethren? We
confess one Faith of Jesus, we preach one Doctrine, we acknowledge one Ruler
upon Earth, in all things, saving in this, we are of your Judgment, shall we be
used thus for a Surplice? Shall Brethren persecute Brethren for a forked Cap,
devised singularly of him that is our Enemy! Now shall we fight for the Popish
Coat, his Head and Body being banished? Shall the Controversy so fall out in
Conclusion, that for lack of this necessity Furniture (as it is affirmed)
Laborers shall lack Wages, and Churches preaching; shall we not teach? shall
we not exercise our Talents as God has commanded us, because we will not wear
that which our Enemies have desired, and that by the Appointment of Friends? O
that ever I saw this Day, that our Adversaries should laugh to see Brethren
fall together by the Ears; O that Ephraim should thus eat up Manasseh, and
Manasseh Ephraim. My Lords, before this takes place, consider the Cause of the
Church, the Triumphs of Antichrist, the Laughter of Satan, the Sorrow and Sighs
of a Number, the Misery and Sequel of the Tragedy: I writ with Zeal, without
Proof of my Matter at this present time, but not without Knowledge of it, nor
without Grief of Mind: God move your Spirit at this present to fight against
Carnem, Circumcisionem, imo, Concisionem, against Literam and Legem, which
principally is now regarded and rewarded: Speak, I humbly beseech you, to the
Queen's Majesty, to the Chancellor, and to Mr. Secretary, and the rest, that
these Proceedings may sleep, that England may understand your zealous Mind
toward the Worship of God, your Love toward the poor Well-willers, your
Hatred toward the professed Enemies, your Unity in true conformity, the other
neither be needful now, neither exacted in any good Age, so shall the little
Flock be bound to you, so shall the great Shepherd be good to you.

There appears in this Letter a Sense of Piety, Modesty, and Christian
Resolution, not to halt between two, but to suffer rather than to sin,
according to our Savior's Rule, we cannot serve God and Mammon: When one is
convinced of a Truth, he ought to adhere to it: Yet one Dr Burgess, who has
written for that Cause, would make us believe our blessed Savior was a
Trimmer, when in his Rejoinder he says, our Savior walked a middle Path
between the Excess of the Pharisees, and the Preciseness of the Sadducees,
observing many significant Ceremonies in Religion. The instituted Ceremonies
under the Law he fulfilled, but as to their Traditions, the Evangelists declare
how smartly he reproproved them; for certainly such Expressions, to speak of
them as moderately as may be, show a great Want of Reverence for our blessed
Savior; but thatStyle is no Stranger, with some of them, witness what Dr.
Morton says in his Defense. In Hezekiah's Time, says he, the Idolatry about
the Serpent could not be cured but by abolishing the Serpent, but in our most
truly Reformed Church, which does most lively express the Face and full Body of
her primitive Mother Church, this Disease would be found curable without any
such Extremity: Several things might hereupon be observed, against the Rashness
and stroug Presumption of such Writers who go about to blame that which God
approves; in this Man's Opinion, Hezekiah was a silly Man who knew nothing,
when he might have done much better, but trimming about God's Worship was not
in fashion in his time, yet he was a Prince, not wanting to ask Counsel of the
Lord upon occasion, as we read of he did after Rabshakeh's Blasphemies; surely
he acted not out of his own Head about the great Design of Reforming in the
Beginning of his Reign, seeing he had several Prophets to advise with at that
time, as Isaiah, Hosea, and Micah, he was one of the best Kings of Judah, whom
Dr. Morton blames for running into such an Extremity as to break in pieces the
brazen Serpent, yet by the Dr's leave, the Spirit of God says this is one of
the things wherein he did that which was right in the Sight of the Lord,
whether right or wrong, let the Dispute be between God and the Doctor, but
without any farther enlarging upon this, I content my self with setting down an
Observation which several Years ago an ingenious Man made upon the very Words:
The meaning, says he, is this, the Disease of Idolatry is more easily cured in
that Church which does lively express the Face and full Body of those Churches
which were infected with many Errors, and declining in many things to
Superstition, than in Hezekiah's Church at that time most purely reformed.

To vindicate our retaining a Trash of Popish Ceremonies, we could not but
therein justify that Party, and make use of their Words and Reasons, but not
being therewith satisfied, we go yet farther, and claim a near Relation with
that Mother Church which the Word of God calls a Whore, and a great one too,
and I wonder why we should brag of being her Sons, and what Profit or Honor we
may gain by owning in one respect or other to be descended from her? Yet it is
too true we do it, it is strange to see how fond some of our Churchmen are of
their Hierarchy, and what a Pother they keep about the Validity of Ordination
and Episcopal Jurisdiction, that to prove they have it amongst them in a lineal
and uninterrupted Succession from the Apostles which is a very high Pretense,
for they would some of them have their Prelacy derived from the Apostles; to
make it of a divine Right, they must assert they have it by the means of Popish
Bishops, which is to plead the some continued Descent of Bishops, as Papists do
of Continual Successors of Peter, and indeed it is a wonder to see how the
Author of the Conferences, troubles himself, and how much ado he keeps in the
second Conference against the Papist, to show the Difference about the Validity
of Ordination, and the Power of Jurisdiction, which the Papists would have to
be two different things, distinct and separable arising out of a different
Principle, but the other on the contrary would have them be together, and the
same Act that conserreth the one also to give the other, and therein great
pains are taken to show that this present Opinion of the Church of Rome and
Council of Trent is new, and much different of what it was before that time.
It Is very true, one and the same Act does confer both Ordination and
Jurisdiction, but why to trouble one self to quote a Legion of Popish Authors,
and to propose several Questions why some Popes did so and so? But to what
purpose raise so much Dust? And all this in spite of Papists, to affirm
Ordination came to us by their means, as if the Ordination which is amongst
some foreign Protestant Churches, was not valid because not derived from
Popish Bishops, which Communion of Rome, since for these several Hundred of
Years came to be so abominably corrupt with Heresy; Idolatry does not deserve
the Name of a Church, for the true Doctrine of the Gospel in many essential
Points is not preached, nor the Sacraments, another true Mark of Christ's
Church, truthem; and according to the 19th. of our 39. Art. the Romish Church
is no true Church of Christ.

But what then of all this Ordination? If we be so fond to have it of them, we
must take it for what they give it and no more, that is, for a doubtful thing,
in a word, that the Nation is on a sandy Bottom, for Papists who make a
Sacrament of it, say, the Efficacy, or its really being so, does depend upon
the Intention of the Priest, Bishop, or Administerer thereof: So then, if
during that long and continual Succession, one Bishop had not an Intention to
ordain such and such, then such and such so ordained, were not really ordained,
and all since by them ordained, had no Ordination at all themselves, so could
not ordain others: Now who can assure our Bishops that going back so many
Degrees their Predecessors were intentionally and lawfully ordained: That some
of them were ordained, without an Intention to ordain, it is very possible, and
that the strictest Papists cannot deny; now they cannot give it better than
they had it, and to speak as modestly as can be, the Case remains doubtful,
whether Ordination or no Ordination? Besides, that some Cheats may happen to
have stepped in during Confusions, pretending to have been ordained, though they
never were: Now I ask, is it worth the while for an Uncertainty, and a doubtful
thing, so much to stoop to or court the Romish Church as to say, that whether
they will or not, whether their Ancestors had an Intention or no, yet we are
their humble Servants, and have received Commission and Ordination from them:
When Water conveyed to us, is, through the Fault of the Pipes become corrupt,
is it not not lawful for us to leave it off, and go to draw at the very Spring?
So in matter of Ordination and Commission to preach the Gospel after such an
universal and abominable Apostasy and Corruption of the church of Rome, who
will give no Bread without Poison, no Ordinance of God in its Purity and
without insufferable Abuse and Depravation. Are we not allowed there to leave
it and return to the first Institution, and purge the Filth of Human
Inventions, Additions, and Defilement, have we not done so in matter of the
Lord's Supper? Have we not done so in point of Baptism, who of us would receive
the Lord's Supper after the Popish way, or have his Child christened with all
the Trash and Fopperies by them used in Baptism? The like we may say of
Ordination, when God was pleased in the time of Reformation, in an
extraordinary manner to reveal his Truth to our Forefathers; I do not say, they
that had been ordained in Popery should be reordained again, but for those whom
God raised to be Instruments to preach the Gospel, should they have gone to
Babylon for Ordination where it was so corrupt? No, they betook themselves to
the first Institution, and so settled a Ministry amongst them as at this Day
it is amongst most foreign reformed Churches.

But all this does tend to unchurch all Protestant Churches beyond Seas that
want Bishops, because for want of a right Ordination they must have no
Ministry, thus their Ministers must be Intruders, seeing they preach and
administer Sacraments without a lawful Calling: So the Marriages they bless are
but Concubinages, the Children they christen are not lawfully baptized; and to
show by Experience this is the Opinion of some here, have we not from time to
time, specially of late, invited and exhorted several Outlandish Ministers to
be, as actually they have been, reordained; and so we set our Hands to what
Papists said of them they were no Churches, a thing as uncharitable as
unpolitick, for this has been their only Way to get leave here to preach the
Gospel, and if a Popish Priest should turn Protestant here, we would not so
much as desire him to be reordained, whereby we plainly own Popish Ordination
to be good, but that amongst Reformed Churches not so. This is not the only
Abuse we have in these Matters, if Ordination and Jurisdiction be together, and
conferred by the same Act, why then are they separated in the same Subject? We
have seen lately a valid Ordination, deprived of the Power of Jurisdiction in
the Case of the Bishop of London, which at other times has also been the Case
of others: It Is known how the King, as Head or Governor of this Church, and
excepted Infallibility, a Shadow of a Pope, does suspend or command Bishops
and others to be suspended ab Officio, or a Beneficio, and sometimes of both,
for in many of these things we are so fond of the Beast as to make use of his
Language, as if the English Tongue was so barren as to want Words to express
such things.

Whilst we disown Reformed Churches to be true Churches, on the contrary, the
Church, which is become a Synagogue of Satan, and for all her abominable Errors
in Doctrine and Practice, we must own to be a true Church, with saying, she
holds all essential Points of Faith, whence they take this Advantage, that then
she may not and must not be charged with Idolatry, which is an Error, not only
in Practice, but also in Judgment, for we believe, that as there is one God,
and but one God, so he alone ought to be served with a religious Worship,
exclusively to every Creature, and it is sad to see how to defend that Diana
Hierarchy, and to show how the Communion of Rome had Right to convey to our
Bishops a valid Ordination, and a Power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; we
must, whether or not she be so, make her a true Church, or else she could not
have conveyed it; but Papists do press on, either they have not all essential
Points of Faith, which our Churchmen grant they have, or else they must be
cleared of the Charge of Idolatry: I say it again, it is sad to see them reduced
to Shifts as first to say, by that is meaned no more than that Rome owneth all
the ancient Creeds, when those Creeds are but a short Epitome of the Articles
of our Faith, for several other things are implied therein, but expressed in
several Parts of Scripture, out of which those Creeds were compiled, and though
they may be reduced under some of the Heads of these Creeds, yet they want
Enlargement. Thus we see in the Time of Arrius, when he had published his
abominable Heresy, what Enlargements upon the Apostolical Creed, were made by
the Council of Nice in their Creed, and that of Athanasius: so though no new
Creeds were compiled, when Nestorius, Eutiches, and such Arch-hereticks spread
their Poison, the Councils assembled against them, made Canons and Enlargements
upon the true Christian Faith concerning those Points: And as this shows how
the few short Articles of our Faith contain more than they express in relation
to the Person of Christ; the like may be said in Matters of his Grace, which
were so fully and clearly enlarged upon by Austin, Prosper, Fulgentius, and
other Orthodox Divines, who did write against Pelagians and Semipelagians.

See farther what another Shift we make to come off, with saying, that the
Commandments are no Articles of Faith: I well know the Distinction between
things to be done, and things to be believed, so as to say, that to honor my
Father and my Mother is not an Article of Faith, though it be a Rule of my
Obedience: But that does not hinder but that one and the same thing may be a
Commandment and an Article of my Faith, and we ought not to attempt to teach
God how to speak in his holy Word. None may deny but that to have no other God
before the Lord is a Commandment, and that not to bow down before the Likeness
of any thing in Heaven, or in Earth, or in the Waters, is a Commandment, but
also none must deny that we ought to believe there is one God, alone to be
worshipped and adored, which is the first Article of our Faith, when alas, all
these narrow Steps might easily be avoided, with laying by the Design of
holding a Succession of Ordination, and owning the Truth, in that the Church of
Rome is no Church, as wanting Purity and Truth of Doctrine and right
Administration of the Sacraments, according to the Institution, and striking at
the very Fundamentals of our Faith: We may justly call it, as our Lord calls
the Synagogue of Satan. Rev. 2.9.
Some who called themselves Jews, or the true Church, though that Name did not
in the least belong to them, So let our Friends to Popery, speak of it all the
good they can, as all the Evil against Presbyterians; the one shall never be a
jot the better, nor the other the worse for their talking against the
Unreasonableness and Injustice of such Proceedings: We appeal to some of the
true Sons of the Church, as none can deny Mr. Thomas Rogers to have been, in
his Analysis of the 39 Articles which he asserted to be the true Doctrine of
the English Church, and dedicateth it to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, he
does not, as some others, slight foreign Churches, but brings in their several
Confessions of Faith, to show how they agree and concur with him in his
Assertions, in several Places he gives them their due Title of Reformed
Churches, and is not ashamed to quote the Augustan, Saxon, Bohemian, Swevick,
Helvetick, Basil, Gallick, Belgic, Wittemb. etc. Confessions to show the
Harmony and Consent of all Protestant Reformed Churches, against that of Rome.
Now those Churches are known to agree with Presbyterians, not only in Doctrine,
but also about Church Government, Worship, and Discipline; yet none of them is
so unjust, imprudent, and uncharitable, as to say they had rather to be Papists
than Presbyterians and Dissenters. Mr. Rogers calls the foreign Churches our
Godly Brethren in foreign Countries, page 103. and the Romish Church the
Antichristian Synagogue of Rome, page 127.

Thus, whilst with one Hand we are hugging and embracing Papists, and as it
were courting them to own a Relation of our Bishops, being by means of
Ordination, descended from theirs, on the other, Endeavors were used here to
crush and destroy poor Brethren. Some, though Christians and Country men,
proved Wolves and Tigers against others. Nonconformists as were and are
submissive and obedient to Authority, who are for Order and Ministry, by way of
Office in the Church, not guilty in the least of any blasphemous Doctrine
against the Person, Offices, or Grace of Christ, nor of any Fundamental Errors,
yet merely for Consciencce sake, for nothing but Nonconformity was laid to
their Charge; they were vexed, fined, cast into Prison, where some of them
died, and otherwise cruelly persecuted, which ought to make those that have any
thing of the Spirit of Christianity to blush and be ashamed: Such Practices
ought to be left for the Children of him who is a Murderer from the Beginning:
For cruel Tyrants and Heathen Emperors, and for the Romish Antichrist, who by
any means goes about to compel Men to believe their Opinions, to believe as
they, say as they, and do as they do, a thing never practiced by the Lord
Jesus, nor by his Apostles, nor by true Christians, when they had the Power of
the Sword: For Christian Religion, and the true Doctrines of the Gospel, must
not by Men be forced, but persuaded, nor promoted by any violent ways; One Man
may have a Power over the Body of another, but no Right or Authority over the
Souls one of another, that is God's own Right and Property, and they are all
Usurpers that do encroach upon it.

Reformation began first in Saxony under Luther, but there they neither kept
nor did set up any Bishops, nor have any such Diocesian to this very Day: but
they have a Layman residing at the Elector's Court, commonly a
privy-Counsellor called the President of the Presbytery: and in those Parts of
Germany they have secularized several Bishoprics, as Bremen, Minden,
Halberstad, etc. Now to the third and last general Part about the Liturgy.

Of the Common Prayer Book.
ONE thing more I must speak of (though already this Discourse be longer than
at first I thought it would be) and that is, the Liturgy, which I shall do as
briefly as possibly I can: In order to it, 'twill not be amiss to take notice
how much that Space of Time, namely, Queen Mary's Reign, between King Edward's
and Queen Elizabeth's had altered that Spirit which appeared in the Reformation
under that pious young Prince, the Josiah of his time. That bloody Persecution
had destroyed the Lives of several of those Godly and Learned Instruments of
Reformation under the former Reign, who in that great and good Work proposed
unto themselves no Humane By-Ends, but only the Glory of God according to his
Word; and though in the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Days, there were several
worthy Instruments, yet the Spirit they were acted by, was somewhat altered, if
not in the whole, yet in part, as it will appear, if we compare the Articles as
they were set forth in King Edward's Days, in the Year 1552, with the Edition
which the Convocation under Queen Elizabeth in 1571 has left us: There are
some considerable Alterations in the Articles, as also in the
Commonprayer-book; what they are, for Brevity sake, I shall not set down, yet I
shall say they are about the Articles of Grace, of Justification, of
Sacraments, of the Lord's Supper, and of Traditions: The Expressions left out
of them has proved some Detriment to the Truth, for they were strong against
some Errors that appeared since, and to confirm the Truths therein contained.
But this in general may be observed about the Prayer Book, how the
Common Prayers are taken out of the Breviary, the Administration of Sacraments,
Burial, Marriage, Visitation of the Sick; out of the Ritual, the Consecration
of the Lord's Supper, Collects, Gospels, and Epistles out of the Missal, and
for the Book of Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops, Ministers, etc. out of the
Romish Pontifical. Two Popes, Pius 4th. and Gregory 13th. would have approved
of it; if Queen Elizabeth had been content to have taken it from their Hands,
and as to matter and manner they are such as that when the Devonshire Papists
understood it was no other but the Mass Book in English, they were pacified
about it: A rank Papist, Dr. Carrier, said, the Common Prayer Book and the
Catechism contained in it, hold no Point of Doctrine expressly contrary to
Antiquity, that is, the Romish Service, only it has not enough in it.
Considerat. page 45. sect. 8, 9.

It is observable how Secretary Walsingham hearing there was a Bull of
Excommunication to come out against Queen Elizabeth, used a politic Trick to
prevent it: He caused two of the Pope's Intelligencers, at the Pope's own
Choice, to be as it were in secret brought over, and to them he appointed a
Guide to show them in Canterbury and London, Service solemnly sung and said
with all its Pomp; which Order the Popish Intelligencers seeing and admiring,
they wondered their Master would be so unadvised as to interdict a Prince or
State whose Service and Ceremonies did so well agree with his own; so returning
to the Pope, they showed him his Oversight, affirming how they saw no Service
or Ceremonies in England but what might very well have been performed in Rome,
whereupon the Bull was presently called in.

The Prayer Book is the Beads of our high Church-People, for as Papists think
all is well with them if they do but tell their Beads so many times a Day,
hence it is that they look upon it as their great Work when they go to their
Churches, where they mutter so many Pater Nosters, or so many times the Lord's
Prayer, and Avemarias, or the Angel's Salutation to the Virgin: So we have
amongst us those who think to have performed the whole Christian Duty, if they
do but go to the Service as they call it, and hear the Prayer Book read.

Out of the Common Prayer Book, in that Part of the Litany, where it is said,
from Sedition and privy Conspiracy, the following Words are left out, From the
Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and from his detestable Enormities. I think
after the bloody Tragedy acted under Queen Mary, we had no more reason to leave
out that important Truth, than they had before to have it in.

But to speak something more in general upon this Subject, though within as
narrow a Compass as I can; because, by others much has been said to the
Purpose. We declare we are not against Liturgies, other Reformed Churches have
them, and we own they are Help upon Occasion, wherefore we be wronged when
traduced for Enemies to Liturgies, we love them full, comprehensive, and to the
purpose, but not clogged with superfluous Repetitions: It Is good to have a Form
for Administration of Baptism, of the Lord's Supper, and blessing of Marriages,
but they must not be too long nor too many, nor be a Hinderance for Ministers
to exercise the Gift of Prayer, or to make them neglect it, nor to justle out
preaching; neither must Men make the public Worship of God consist only or
chiefly in hearing Prayers read. With these Cautions we approve well of a
Liturgy; wherefore let it be known we except not against Liturgies in general
and as such, but in particular against such as we think to have just Exceptions
against, either as to the matter or to the manner of using them. As to those
Liturgies fathered upon St. Peter, St. James, and Mark; they are spurious, and
were obtruded upon the World by the Romanists.

Although I do not intend to insist upon those Places of the Common Prayer Book
which we have just Cause to except against, because others have done it before,
yet something must be said to it, and we must come to some particlars. I shall
begin with the Rubric, concerning the Order how the rest of the holy
Scripture, besides the Psalter, is appointed to be read; in the first Paragraph
is a Brand and a Slight put upon holy Canonical Scripture of the Old Testament,
for it is said, It shall be read through once every Year, except certain Books
and Chapters which be least edifying, and might be spared, yet instead of these
are read several of the Apocryphal Books, as Ecclesiasticus, the Wisdom, 2d. of
Esdras, Baruch, Judith, Tobith, etc. Whereby a visible Preference is given to
those Humane Writings, before the authentic Word of God, for they are looked
upon as best edifying and least to be spared. In the point this is worse than
Papists who give the Apocryphas and their Traditions an equal Authority to
Canonical Scripture, which is the Word of God, when the others are the Word of
Man; but this, as I already observed, gives the Preference to some of the
Apocrypha before some of the Canonical: I hope this shall be no Question
between us, we all know the Reasons we have against Papists about the Authority
of the Apocrypha. First, They were all written after the Time of Malachy the
last of the Prophets. Secondly, None of the Apocrypha is written in Hebrew
which is the Tongue used by the Prophets. Thirdly, Neither the Jews nor the
primitive Apostolical Church ever received them as Canonical. Fourthly, they
were never quoted in the New Testament by our Savior or his Apostles, tho
there be Places quoted out of every Book of the Old Testament, and our blessed
Savior mentioned the Old Testament under three Heads, The Law of Moses, the
Prophets, Luke 24.44.
and the Psalms: But the fifth and chief Reason, because in every thing they do
not agree with the Canonical Scripture, nor with themselves, as has been
showed by some of our Divines, as Whitaker, Reynolds, etc. specially in Usher's
Body of Divinity; and by Foreigners, as Polanus, Chamierus, and so many more:
And this I press the more because the Authority of it in Scripture is one of
the Fundamental Points of our Religion, and one of the greatest Controversies
between Papists and us.

In the last Paragraph of the same Rubric it is ordered thus, as often as the
first Chapter of St. Matthew is read, either for Lesson or Gospel, ye shall
begin the same at Verse. 18. and the third Chapter of St. Luke 's Gospel shall
be read unto the middle of Verse the 23d. Surely that which is ordered to be
left out is Part of Scripture as that which is read; the one as well as the
other are written for our Instruction as well as Comfort: That which is unread
is of a high Concernment, for though it consists only of proper Names, yet
contains a most important Matter, every Degree of our blessed Savior's
Genealogy, which God under the Old Testament took such Care to preserve clear,
that when the Messiah came to be born, there should be no Doubt, no Difficulty
made of his being of the Seed of Abraham, of the Family of David which St.
Matthew proves on Joseph his supposed Father's side, as St. Luke on Mary's; the
first divided into three Classes of 14 Generations, every one of which makes
undisputably a great Article of our Faith, how Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin
Mary, is the true Messiah promised to the World out of Abraham's Seed, and then
the mention amongst Christ's Ancestors made of Thamar, of Rachab, of Ruth, of
her that had been Vrias's Wife, Bersheba, whereby Christ owns for his
Relations, according to the Flesh, some branded with notorious Faults, others,
though Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants
of Promise, to show how in his Spiritual Relations he would not disown the most
notorious Sinners and never so much Gentiles: This I say affords matter of
Meditation, and so is not to be unread.

Here follows the Table of the proper Lessons to be read; at the Head whereof
we find the Word Mattens for Morning Prayer, and to have matched things well,
there should have been the Word Vespers instead of Evening Song; both Words in
that Sense used in the Church of Rome, from whom we borrow both Names and
things, as we shall have Occasion farther to speak of, now these Words are
derived from Latin and used in Italian, Spanish, French, etc. It Is no wonder if
having taken things out of their Latin Books, we also retain some of their
Names, as Advent, Epiphany, Quinquagesima, Sexagesima, Septuagesima, etc. which
are barbarous to every English Man unacquainted with the Latin Tongue, or with
the Customs of that Church, so we do continue their Mass Names and Days, as
Christmas, the Day when Mass is said for the Birth of Christ, Candlemass, the
Day of the Mass of Candles, for then Popish Churches are full of them; Lammas
Day, the Day when here in Time of Popery they said Mass for the Preservation of
Lambs, Michaelmass, the Day when Michael's Mass is said, etc. We say no Mass
upon those Days, but we have Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, some of which
Papists use upon those very Days.

Now, if we look into the Calendar, we shall there find the Names of many
Saints which either were never in Nature, or else are honored upon Earth, when
may be their Souls are tormented in Hell, Boniface, Silvester, Clement,
Dunstan, George, Martin, Denis, for there must be Champions to defend the rest,
specially the Ladies, as Margaret, Agnes, Magdalene, Katharine, Agathe, etc.
and to be merry, Cicely the Patroness of Musicians, with Nicolas, Crispin,
Blasius, Patrons of Seamen, Shoemakers, etc. Hugh, Valentine, Edward, Machal;
amongst other Inventions that of the Cross must be in too, Remige and several
other Popish Saints, whose Names should not be in our Mouths, much less in our
Common Prayer Book; we must not omit how there are five Holy Days for the
blessed Virgin, Purification, Annunciation, Visitation, Nativity, and
Conception, there should have been also her Assumption, when she was, as they
pretend, carried up to Heaven in Body and Soul, then we could have all the
Papists keep for her, when alas I defy them all together to prove any of those
Days to be the Day which they keep it for. so then they are kept at a Venture:
What shall we say of the Names of Rogations, Ember Week, and so many more to be
found in our Prayer Book, which are the Quintessence of Popish Superstitious
Holy Days. What I say is not in Relation to the civil Part of those Names, but
as to the Spiritual, as they are brought into the Church. But they will say, we
keep not all such Days, there is only a certain Number mentioned after the
Calendar, but I ask wherefore then do you set them down, yet there are Mornings
and Evenings, first and second Lessons for the very Day which I make no doubt
are read where Service is every Day. In the same Calendar we find the fasts as
well as Feasts, and those Fasts are always upon the Eves of certain Holy Days,
which are many, only I find St. Mark and St. Luke have none, whilst All Saints
have, wherein a Partiality appears; we have Good Friday, Holy Thursday, no
better nor holier than another, whole Lent, etc. But this matter of Feasts and
Fasts I have spoken of before.

Upon the first of May is the Feast by Papists dedicated to Philip and James,
but we are so fond of the Latin Tongue, that because Jacobus is the Latin for
James, in the Payer-book it is called Jacob and not James. I know no other
Reason why it should be so, only because it has a greater Affinity to the
Latin, the Latin Church we still retain a Kindness for. After the Calendar are
certain Notes belonging to it, whereof one is, that the 13th. Chapter of Daniel
is to be read until such Words. The Book of Daniel has but 12. Chapters in
all, and must the History of Susanna, against which, as an Apocrypha, are
lawful Exceptions, be fathered upon that holy Prophet, and be inserted into his
Book as a Chapter of it?

In the Morning and Evening Prayers, when the general Confession is read by the
Minister, it were well for the People within themselves or with a very low
Voice to follow him; but so loud as usually it is, is not pertinent, but makes
a Noise and Confusion; for the same Reason the Answers that follow the Lord's
Prayer, which indeed have very little Relation, if any at all, with what goes
before or what follows: In Prayer the Minister is the Mouth of the People to
God, and the People with their Hearts are to join with the Minister in his
Prayer, as with Reverence and Attention they ought to hear when he is God's
Mouth to them, that is, when he preaches. I might take notice of what is said
there of singing the Lesson in plain Tune, to sing the Collect, Epistle, and
Gospel, which are very improper things: So of their Benedicite, Magnificat,
Nunc dimittis, which I suppose might admit of English Names, of which I shall
speak hereafter; as for the Answers at the latter End, they contain good
Expressions, but ill applied without a Connection between themselves, all after
the Romish way, which it is to be wished we had not so much of as we have, we
could well enough be without it as without those Portions of Apocryphas when we
are wanting something for Instruction, Comfort, and Edification, which the Word
of God may supply us with. It Is not enough to sing our Prayers, but our Creed
and Confession of Faith must also be sung, as ordered in the Evening Prayer
upon some certain great Days therein named. We grant that it is well to have
those several things in Verses to use them; however herein Men ought not to
allow themselves oto much Liberty, for the Word of God ought always to be
handled with a great Respect and Reverence, the Tone of our Voice ought to be
adapted to the Matter, and the Occasion according to that Rule of St. James;
Jam. 5.13.
Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray; is any merry? Let him sing Psalms:
Prayer and Singing are different Duties to be used upon several Occasions, as
are Affliction and Mirth.

Before I proceed farther, one thing I must take notice of, which to me seems
unaccountable, that is, the using of the Word Priest in our Prayer Book. In the
two Places I quoted before, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.
whereunto we may join Rom 12, the Apostle mentions the several Offices
belonging to the Church, but there is no sign either of the Name or of the
Office of a Priest, under the Law there were some, because Sacrifices were to
be made, but under the Gospel no Sacrifice but of Prayer and Praise we have the
Eucharisty, or Commemoration of our Lord and Savior's Sacrifice upon the
Cross, but that is good for Papists to have Priests who pretend daily to make an
Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Living and of the Dead, but we abhor
such a thing, at least pretend to do so: We say we abolish the thing, and yet
retain the Name; the Name of Minister is in Scripture known in this Sense; 1
Cor. 44.1.
Let a Man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God: The Names Bishop, Pastor, and Elder are known in Scripture,
but if they think the Word Minister below them, which I charitably believe they
do not, because sometimes, though seldom, they use it, then they may use the
Word Elder or Presbyter which is the Greek for Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1.
Presbyter, as St. Peter calls himself, and Presbytery are Scripture Names
signifying Office in the Church, but there is a great Difference between (...)
and (...), a Presbyter and a Priest, which is the proper Signification of the
last, as Heb. 5.6. so then the Word Priest is fetched afar off, and there is no
such Office in the Christian Church.

As to the Litany the same may be said by the People at the same time with the
Minister, but with a low Voice and not not after and separately; they do it
after the manner of the Kirie Eleison used by Papists; here the People, not the
Minister make the Prayer, for they and not he, say, Spare us good Lord: Good
Lord deliver us. We beseech thee to hear us good Lord. When it is said from
Fornication and all other deadly Sin, the Word deadly does favor the Popish
erroneous Distinction of Mortal and Venial Sins: They hold but seven Mortal
Sins, whereof Fornication is one, but they hold there are Sins of their Nature
not mortal, and which do not deserve Death, which is contrary to the whole
Course of Scripture, Ezech. 18.20. Romans 6.23.
which says expressly, the Soul that sins it shall die, and the Wages of Sin
is Death. This may easily be mended with changing the Word deadly into any of
these gross, horrid, enormeous, or such like, which to deny is certainly to
refuse Peace upon easy Terms; to pray against Lightning is as good as to pray
against Rain, Snow, and the like; by thine Agony, too much like an Oath. The
Word gracious, meaned of King or Queen, is not proper in a Prayer to God, who
knows whom we mean without such Titles; in Prayer the Attribute most
gracious, which is a superlative Degree, is not well applied to Princes, we can
say no more to God, and as good to call most holy King; there ought to be a
Difference in Titles given to God, and those given to Princes, specially in
Church at the Worship of God: In God's Sight they are but Men, and the Lord is
jealous of his Honor and Glory which he declared he will not communicate to
any one. Let Men keep flattering Titles when they speak to Princes, though I
think none but due ones were better; but in Prayers to God let Names of
Blasphemy be avoided, which we all condemn in the Pope of Rome. Farther, it
were well to forbear the often unnecessary Repetitions of the same thing which
in this Litany and other Parts of the Book are frequent, and those broken Parts
of Scripture which have no relation one to another, all might be made up into
one Prayer, and not be divided into so many: Then in one of the Prayers it is
said, Turn from us all those Evils that we most righteously have deserved: We
think the Word justly is more proper the other being ambiguous; Justice and
Righteousness do differ.

Now for the Collects, there are many for several Sundays in Advent, and so
many after Epiphany and Trinity, an odd Way of reckoning the Lord's Days by; in
that on St. Stephen's Day, God is prayed to grant us to learn by the Example of
St. Stephen. The Name of the Lord Jesus is a strong Argument, and sufficient to
prevail with God, if any can, so that of any Man is not necessary, but there is
a Day appointed to be kept for that Martyr, and upon it something of him must
be said, but we take a great deal of Pains more than the Believers in his Time,
who appointed no Day for him. Who gave the Name of Innocents to the Children
killed by Herod's Order? They confessed not with speaking but with dying, and
because they were put to Death to satisfy Herod's Policy and State Jealousy,
it does not follow they died either Confessors or Martyrs, they did not lay
down their Lives for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus, for they were not able to
know and discern. Why to observe the Day of Christ's Circumcision and not of
his Baptism? No Man, as I observed before, can say for certain the Day of any
such Feasts they keep, why to keep Epiphany or Twelft Day, so much turned to
Excess in Popery and amongst us too? None of these produces Decency nor
Edification; I think amongst Christians in our public Devotion book as the
Liturgy is: The Words Lord's Day or Sabbath were more proper than Sunday, Rev.
1.10.
having as we have a Warrant out of Scripture: This is the Way of reckoning
after Popery, I pray God we be not called to an Account for too much following
after them: As to observing Days for the Apostles, I know of no Warrant we have
to believe God is pleased with it, on the contrary, nor of the Purification of
the blessed Virgin which is but a Continuation of a Jewish Ceremony, all which
are or ought to be abolished under the Gospel. As to the Collect, wherein it is
said, thine only begotten Son was this Day presented in the Temple, it
contains either a Lie which no Man can disapprove, or at least an uncertain
and doubtful thing, there being no Certainty of the Day: If by Michael the
Archangel or Prince of Angels, be meaned our Lord and Savior, for the Name
Michael signifying, who is like unto thee O strong God, is appliable to him,
then he has his Day called the Lord's Day; if Michael be an Angel, then he is
a Creature, so not to be joined with the Creator, and no Days to be kept for
Angels, there being no Warrant for it in Scripture. Honor, the Angel would
receive none. Rev. 19.10. and Chap. 22 9. Psalm. 16.4.
As for all Saints Days it is a Shame, a Day for all Popish Saints; with David
we should say, I will not take up their Names into my Lips. As for the
Apostles, whilst alive, they never thought nor desired to have Days kept for
them after their Death. St. Paul the zealous Asserter of Mercy, and sworn Enemy
to any thing of Merit in Man, would never have approved that a Day should be
kept for his Conversion, he sufficiently declares against observerving of Days,
Months, and Times, and Years, which makes him say, Gal. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor. 1.12.
and Chap. 3.5. 2 Cor. 4.7. Romans 9.21.
I am afraid of you least I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain: he would
have said, Who is Paul? Who is Apollo? Who is Cephas? But Ministers or
Servants, Earthen Vessels, And a Lump of Clay in the Potter's Hand; whilst
alive, when Instruments in God's Hand, but much less are they after their
Death, he would have said what are they? that Days should be kept for them, and
for himself? Which once was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, and the chief of
Sinners.

After this follows the Order for the Administration of the Communion, there
in the Beginning of the Rubric we read of the Curate, and in other Places of
Vicars and such inferior Limbs of Hierarchy, whereof not the least Step in
Scripture. If Prayers be appointed to be read in the Chancel for Convenience of
Reader and Hearers it is well, but if upon any Opinion of Holiness or other
Privilege of the Place then it is ill, for that Place is no better than any
other in the Church; but why the Minister should stand on the North Side of the
Table, except for Convenience, I see no Cause, for the Temple of Jerusalem
stood on the North Side of the City, but now we ought not to stand upon such
Points of the Compass. The People saying after every Precept, Lord have mercy
upon us, etc. is superfluous, specially with a loud Voice, once after the last,
as we humbly conceive might be enough: Matthew. 6.7.
Christ forbids to use vain and unnecessary Repetitions, for Men are not
heard for their much speaking: It may be observed that the two Prayers for the
King are improper upon that Occasion; it supposes a Communion without a Sermon
before, instead of which an Homily to be read, which is better than nothing,
but there ought to be a Preparatory Sermon, except in Case of Accident, or else
the Ministers are encouraged to Laziness and Neglect, and used to read rather
than to preach. After Sermon or Homily the Minister or Curate is to declare
unto the People, Popish Custom still, whether there be any Holy Days the Week
following, and if there be, what? To shut their Shops and give over working for
the Day. By a Moral Commandment of God the Week is divided into two Parts, six
Days to labor which many seem not to take notice of, the seventh is the
Sabbath to keep it holy.

After this are heaped one upon another Sentences which have no Connection with
themselves, nor Relation to the present Occasion; the thing therein most plain
is, that the People ought to make Provision for the Minister, and that is
pressed in five Paragraphs, something indeed is afterward said for the Poor,
but the gathering is, for fear of missing, made before the Communion, when
without Diversion, People ought wholly to be taken up with Meditation upon that
high Mystery; it were more proper after the Action to gather: But mention is
made of Offering Days, a Device at first of the Popish Clergy to satisfy their
Covetousness, so that every Man and Woman shall pay to the Curate the due and
accustomed Offerings, which is a mere unhandsome Trade in the Church, as if one
should say, there is such a Rate set upon the holy Sacrament which must be paid
before you receive it, for it is said there, after which done, that is, the
Money laid down, and not before, the Priest shall say, that is, shall go on,
this tends to neither Decency, Order, or Edification, rather to Scandal. If
our blessed Savior was upon Earth, here now as much as as ever, he would have
Cause to turn out many who make Simony and Merchandise in and about the Church,
Matthew. 2.12. Joh. 14, 15, 16.
as he did formerly. But to go on, in the following Prayer a third time mention
is made for the King: We as much as they can be, are for praying for Kings and
Superior Powers, but every thing ought to have its Time and Place, if you will
observe Order and Decency, once is enough, afterward our Thoughts ought to be
taken up with higher things, with the King of Kings.

Before the Confession in the Rubric a Difference is made between the Minister
and the Priest, it is said, the Confession shall be read by one of the Ministers
or the Priest himself: By the Minister may be is understood the Reader or the
Clark under the same Name; here is another Office in the Church different from
the Priest's: Thus in Convents and Monasteries, Papists have Fathers and
Brothers, Moncks and serving Friars, for these to do what the others think to
be below themselves, and the Drudgery: Then the Dialogue between Priest and
People is not very proper, it might be done without Dialogue. Of two Prayer
just before the receiving of the Communion; one is to be said (or read, for
every thing is but reading) kneeling, the other standing, why in a different
Posture? After the Prayer the Minister may rise and consecrate. In the Glory be
to God on high, is said thrice in the same Words, thou that take away the
Sins of the World, etc. In the Lord's Prayer such Repetitions are not to be
found, if it be in relation to the most holy and blessed Trinity, we have other
Ways to do it than with such Repetitions: Last of all there is this Clause, and
yearly at Easter every Parishioner shall reckon with his Parson, Vicar, or
Curate (no such Distinction in Scripture) or his or their Deputy or Deputies,
and pay to him or them all Ecclesiastical Duties; a Sabbath and Easter Day very
improper to give in and cast up Accounts, a Day or two before or after might be
fitter, but this I must not insist upon to come to more material things.

We now must come to public Baptism, and I cannot forbear taking notice of a
thing in the very Beginning, It is not convenient Baptism should be administered
but upon Sundays or other Holy Days: Here Holy Days so called are equal with
the Sabbath or Lord's Day, when a Difference ought to be made between What God
has instituted and what Men have invented; this strikes at the Morality of the
Sabbath, whereof the keeping is a Precept of the first Table, so that Men may as
well murder, commit Adultery, steal, even take the Name of God in vain, as to
break the Sabbath: Whosoever makes no Scruple to break it, will make no
Conscience of any thing in Religion. The Questions asked of Godfathers and
Godmothers with their Answers in the Child's Name, are unbecoming so holy and
so serious a Matter; to say, to forsake the Devil, etc. to believe and to
desire to be baptized, by the Mouth of those who without special Grace cannot
do it for themselves, a Child who can neither hear nor speak, is destitute of
the Use of Reason, it is a manner of jesting with and profaning that holy
Sacrament: Then follows the aerial Sign of the Cross on the Forehead, which
one may accidentally happen to make when he puts Flies out of his Face; this
Sign says the Priest is made in Token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed
to confess the Faith of Christ, and this as good as the Godfathers Promise to
forsake the Devil, for he is positive he shall not be ashamed. Something that
follows we except against, namely, these Children be regenerate and grasted,
etc. which is repeated in the following Prayer, We yield thee hearty Thanks,
that it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, etc.
Somewhat lower I shall give my Reasons; last of all it is said, the Minister
shall command; here is a Magisterial, and I thought it had been but a
Ministerial Authority, that the Children be brought to the Bishop to be
confirmed of him, etc. This makes Confirmation an Appendix to the Sacraments,
as if it had not perfectly been administered, but something had remained to be
added to it.

In the manner of Administration of private Baptism are some things which I
observed before: This private Baptism seems with Papists to argue an absolute
Necessity of the Sacrament which we deny, when Men have done what they can to
bring the Child to Baptism, and God through Sickness, Death, or otherwise
allows it not, then Men must submit to his holy Will: other things there are
which in the following Head I shall take farther notice of.

This Point of Confirmation is that which follows next; at the Beginning of
the Rubric is something that needs being explained, for though the Words be
clear, the Sense is not, these are the Words, to the end that Confirmation may
be ministered to the more edifying of such as shall receive it according to St.
Paul 's Doctrine who teaches, etc. This seems to intimate as if Confirmation
were according to St. Paul's doctrine, but no such thing as this Confirmation
is to be read in his Epistles; Prayer and laying on of the Hands may profitably
be used upon Children, but such an Act needs not to be called Confirmation
which Papists make a Sacrament of, and use it to the same purpose. Last of all
this is said, he, any Man, shall koow for truth that it is certain by God's
Word, that Children being baptized have all things necessary for their
Salvation and be undoubtedly saved: Nothing more Positive than this can be said
upon a Matter: In the two foregoing Heads something there was to this purpose,
to say it once should have been enough, but twice is too much; again, to say as
if by Baptism the Child had been infallibly adopted, etc. for our Lord Jesus
does not deny his Grace and Mercy to such Infants; this is too positive, how
can he tell it? One may charitably believe it, yet not be true, the same
Caution must be observed in the Exhortation following, doubt ye not therefore
but do earnestly believe that, etc. If this was by way of prayer as we beseech
thee to regenerate, to receive into the Number of thy Children this Child, etc.
or if it was said we charitably believe, it would be well; but to say so
peremptorily, that it is certain by the Word of God, but no such thing in the
Word of God; on the contrary, this sets up two Popish Errors, first, Necessity
of Baptism to Salvation, as if one could not be saved without it, hence they
exclude from Heaven Children that die without Baptism, the second Error, that
the visible Sign does confer the invisible Grace, so that whosoever is
baptized, opere operato is thereby regenerated: Whosoever eats the Bread and
drinks the Wine, eats and drinks the Body and Blood of Christ.

There are good Rules set in the Rubric about Matrimony, as asking of the
Banes three several Sundays, etc, which well observed would prevent abundance
of Mischief by unlawful Marriages; in the Words and Form it may be well till
the Ceremony of the Ring put upon the fourth Finger of the Woman by the Man
after it had been laid upon the Book with the Money due to the Minister and
Clark; indeed amids the Celebration it is very undecent to bring in Money which
might better be done before or after the Blessing, but they will make sure of
their Fees. Then the Words spoken when the Ring is put upon the Finger, With
this Ring I thee wed, with my Body I thee Worship, etc. are unbecoming that
holy and solemn Institution; it seems the Ring is made essential to the
Marriage; then joining together the right Hands, why the right rather than the
left called that of the Heart? The Minister may pronounce the Words, but
plighting the Troth, and joining of Hands are idle Ceremonies too much like a
Play, whether or not they be significant, though necessary for the Minister as
the Ground of his declaring them Husband and Wife: The saying or singing a
Psalm when going to the Communion Table, then the Answers after it, even the
Communion at that time is not very proper, neither repeating the Prayer after
what was said in the Beginning that Marriage signifies unto us the mystical
Union of Christ with his Church: All Forms of that Nature must be short, full,
and becoming the Gravity and Majesty of the Ordinance.

Concerning the Visitation of the sick, those Answers at the Beginning do much
smell of the Popish Priest, who hardly goes about any Part of his Office but
always has with him his Clark to answer at Mass and elsewhere: Surely upon
this Occasion it should be left to the Prudence of the Minister to use his Gift
of Prayer according to the Nature of the Disease, to the Shortness or Length of
it, and the Temper and Condition he finds the Patient in by Discourse and
Conversation, first with Comfort and Exhortations suitable with that State he
finds him in, and after with Prayer, it is strange that upon such Occasions a
Minister should be only doctus in libro, and very sad he can or must not pray,
comfort a Patient, nor hardly preach or execute any other Part of his Ministry
without Book; then it is not possible to pen a Prayer that at all times and
Places can reach every Patients Case: The special Confession required of the
Patient is too much like Popery, but the following Absolution of the Priest is
very strange amongst Protestants, specially these Words, and by the Authority
committed to me I absolve thee from all thy Sins: Upon Condition of Repentance
a Minister may declare a Sinner absolved, but not absolve him; these are the
very Words used by Popish Priests, by Christ's Authority committed to me, how
hard is it to walk upon the burning Coals and not burn his Feet? And though
the following Prayer be very good and fit for the Occasion, yet after a
positive Absolution of all Sins, it is preposterous, and had been better placed
before. Now to see a Minister coming into a sick Man's Room with a Book in his
Hand, is the true Posture of a Popish Priest upon such an occasion stinted to
it.

About the Burial of the Dead: We ought upon this account to be very shy, not
to do any thing seeming to favor Popish Errors about the dead: The Truth is
what in that and some other things we do, we have taken it from them: A Sermon
is what in such an Occasion may be allowed, or a general Discourse about
Mortality and Preparation for Death, but we exceed and go too far, as first,
for the Minister to meet the Body at (...) certain Place, then for him and his
Clark (perfectly after the Popish Way) to sing either into the Church or
toward the Grave, the Words therein set down, then when they are come to the
Grave, for Priest and Clark to sing another Tune: The Word sing is expressed,
then a third one, while the Earth is cast upon the Body, afterward a fourth
Scene; all too far and beyond the Modesty and Simplicity upon such an Occasion
to be used.

Of churching of Women: Upon this Occasion Thanks to God may be returned, but
not in that Formal Way which we retain from Popery, and which they had from the
Jewish Purification, all which kind of Ceremonies ought to be abstained from:
That Law lasted until John, and in the Time of the Apostles did wear off by
degrees, but an ill Circumstance is mentionen last of all, still there is Money
in the Case, the Woman must offer accustomed Offerings, not to God but to the
Minister, God must be satisfied with Thanks, but the Priest must have Money;
this indeed is to make a House of Merchandise of the Church: I should also have
taken notice how in the foregoing Answers, Repetitions ought to be avoided,
things follow one another with little Relation, or hardly any Connection.

All this was extracted out of a prayer book printed in 1645, but in that now
used which was published in Charles II's Days, we find some Alterations, yet
something more than in the Former. In the preface are contained some
uncharitable and unjust Reflections against Nonconformists called Men given to
Change, who always discovered a greater Regard to their own private Fancies and
Interests than to that Duty they owe to the public, and at the latter End,
they are called, Men of factious, peevish, and perverse Spirits; a very hard
Censure, so contrary to what Scripture prescribes in matter of passing a
Judgment upon others: There is nothing of an healing Spirit, which a little
before, and at the time of the Conferences in Worcester House, only to have
time to settle their Affairs, and amuse others, those Men pretended to: But in
the Head following concerning the Service of the Church, are these Words, The
Service in this Church of England these many Years has been read in Latin to
the People, whereby is meaned the Time of Popery, so it is called the same now
as it was then, namely, the Church of England, which I think is no great Credit
or Honor to the present Church, then it implies the Service now used, to be
the same as 'twas in those Days, only with this Difference, that then it was in
Latin now in English: So there is mention made of the Division of the Psalms
into several Portions called a Nocturn, and the Rules called the Pie, which
made the turning of the Book so intricate: However, though it has suffered
some Alterations, in Substance it is the same as it was in times of Popery, only
put in plainer Order, and whereas heretofore there has been a great Diversity
in saying and singing in Churches within this Realm, according to the Uses of
Salisbury, Hereford, Bangor, York, Lincoln, henceforth there shall be but one
Use, namely, the Romish, or next to it, in Cathedrals, Collegial Chapels, and
the like: In the following Rubric an unnecessary and unrequired Leave is given
to say in any Language understood Morning and Evening Prayers, by which means
the Latin is still continued, but all Priests and Deacons it is imposed upon to
say it, thus amongst Papists their Clergymen must say their Breviary, which is
meritorious; Morning and Evening to pray to God is a necessary Duty incumbent
upon all, but I see no reason why one should always be stinted to such a Form.

In the proper Lessons is a Feast called Annunciation of our Lady, it is not
sufficiently expressed by the Name of the blessed Virgin Mary, but our Lady:
Seeing they come upon those Terms, they ought to have said which of the Ladies,
either of Egypt, Loretto, Monserrat, and fifty more without Hyperbole, which we
could name, for they are all Ladies, with Churches dedicated to, and Days
appointed for them: The Word Lady is not enough, it is common to so many, though
in the Word we read of one Lord Jesus Christ, but of no Lady, she should have
been called Queen of Heaven, and those great Titles given her in her Litany. In
a due and decent manner we honor her Memory, and call her the most blessed
amongst all Women, but not in a Popish and Superstitious Way. In the Calendar
we are taught to reckon the Month after the Roman Way by Nonae, Idus, and
Calend, but to what purpose, they know best? In the manner of ordering of
Priests, and consecrating of Bishops, we have Veni Creator Spiritus, for those
Words in Latin have a greater Emphasis and Energy than in English, but not in
ordering of Deacons, that is used in the Conclave in the Election of a Pope
which brings Infallibility in the Election; Acts 24.23. and 1 Timothy 4.14. and 2 Timothy 1.6.
when Paul and Barnabas ordered Elders or Ministers in every Church they
prayed, fasted, and laid Hands upon them without any other Ceremony. I should
have said how their Way of Service in Cathedrals depriveth People of the
Comfort of singing Psalms.

But we must return back to the Calendar, there in red Letters we find King
Charles Martyr, and the 29th of May, Observations upon the 30th. of January and
29th. of May in 1694.
but I shall say nothing thereupon, one not long ago having published something
upon the matter and thus saved me that Trouble; only I take notice, he is in
the 3 d. Collect of Evening Prayer mentioned in this Style, according to the
Example of this thy blessed Martyr, if a Martyr, then of Hierarchy, as his Son
King James Confessor of Popery; in the Morning Prayer it is said, instead of
Venite exultemus, for we cannot leave off our Latin, shall the Psalm following
be used, called a Psalm, a Mixture of broken Parts of Scripture, Acts, Jonah,
Lament. and Baruch too, and this one Verse by the Minister, the next by the
People, so round about, and the last Collect of the three, the People to repeat
it after the Minister. The Service for Charles II's Birth and Restoration, as
to the Occasion, Matter, and Manner, is a fit Match for this, all alike. I
remember, one thing I shall mention now we speak of Kings, and that is about
Coronation, wherein are observed some merely Popish Fopperies which make
Westminster Abbey so much like a Church in Rome, or upon such an Occasion any
Popish Church elsewhere, the manner of laying the Regalia upon the Altar, the
bowing and cringings, etc. But I shall only speak of the anointing, an idle
Ceremony now, formerly a Jewish one; anointing of Priests, Prophets, and Kings,
under the Law were Typical, all ended in the Lord Jesus Christ, who yet, though
a Priest, a Prophet, and a King, was not anointed with Oil, but with the Gifts
and Graces thereby signified; our Ministers or Priests as they call them,
should also be anointed as well as our Kings, in this and that certain Parts of
the Body, rather than in another; it is pity but that to perform so solemn an
Action, we should also have a miraculous Bottle of Oil brought down from
Heaven, or a St. Ampoul, that is never diminished to anoint our Kings, as the
French pretend to, as also, till now, they imitated them in touching for the
King's Evil, however anointing may not be said to be essential to the
Coronation.

Now to the manner of using the Prayer Book: Why should the Minister read one
Verse and the People with a loud Voice another, which is against Decency, and
St. Paul's Rule not to speak all at once? Why should the Doxology Glory be to
the Father, be repeated so often as well as the Lord's Prayer? And why so
divided as that the Minister should ever say one Half and the People the other?
Like Priest and Clark in Popery, this to answer for the other: Why should the
Title of every Psalm be Latin? Why is Simeon's Song called the Nunc dimittis?
The blessed Virgin's to be known under the Name of Magnificat, when we speak of
the Rich Man to call him Dives? Why Simon rather Magus than the Sorcerer? If we
be so fond to call things by Names in an unknown Language, let it be in Hebrew
or in Greek which are the original Tongues of Old, and New Testament, and not
in Latin, which with their Decrees is the Language of the Beast; if in English
we wanted Words to signify things, then there would be Cause to borrow of
others, but we are not brought to such Streights; every one knows how all the
Popish Service is in Latin, wherein we still hold a Communication with, and in
some kind own a Dependency upon the Church of Rome, with using her Language,
nay, we seem so fond of it, that we use it also in Law, a Bond and some other
Deeds are in Latin, which is a shameful Subjection, as if they were our Masters
whose Tongue we ought to speak: When England was subject to the Roman Empire,
there was something to say for it, but now nothing at all, except we have a
mind to go back to Rome; all that can be pleaded for, it is an old Custom and an
evil one too, to be left off: But much having by others been said upon the
matter, I shall no further enlarge upon it, only as to the manner of using the
Prayer Book. This particular I shall add concerning the Word of God read
sometimes standing and sometimes sitting: But if to stand at the reading of
God's Word be a more reverend Posture than to sit, why do they sit when the
Epistle is read, and stand when the Gospel is? Surely there is for this
Difference not the least Shadow in Scripture, the Epistle is as much the Word
of God as the Gospel; but they not only make Epistle to differ from Gospel, but
also Gospel from Gospel, for at the second Lesson they stand when some Part of
a Chapter of the Gospel is read, and yet they sit when a whole Chapter is read
in the first Lesson; what is the meaning of all this? One Part is read with more
Reverence than the whole, for when that very same Chapter, out of which the
Part is taken, happens to be read at the first Lesson, People does sit, and
is a greater Respect to be showed at the reading of the second Lesson than at
the first? To me this seems unaccountable.

But a thing there is which I must not omit taking notice of it, being liable
to a just Exception, though not in the Common Prayer Book: At the latter End of
most of our old Bibles is a Form of Prayers for private Families, in that for
the Evening are these Expressions, That all the World may know that at what
time soever a Sinner does repent of his Sins from the Bottom of his Heart, thou will put all his Wickedness out of thy Remembrance as thou have promised by thy
holy Prophet. But, no Prophet says so; Ezech. 18.21.
we know they ground it upon the Prophet who in God's Name declares that a
holy penitent Sinner shall live: Three things are here to be observed, first,
That turning and Repentance, upon which Life is promised, is not in the Power
of Man, but a special Gift of God: The second, That the turning therein
mentioned is upon a legal Bottom, for he says, If the wicked will turn from
all his Sin that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live. To keep all God's Statutes is
impossible for Men, however there is nothing but what the Law says, do this and
thou shall live, thus our Savior does interpet it, Matthew. 19.17.
if thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments. The third thing here to
be observed, and upon which I ground what I said, is, That in the Place there
is no such thing as, at what time soever, nor nothing equivalent, nor in any
other Prophet, for out of such a Text if there was, the wicked would take
Encouragement to continue in Sin to the last, now Scripture presses Sinners not
to delay Repentance; we know some say they can repent when they will, but God
never said so in his Word; thus, though this be not in the Prayer Book, yet I
bring it under that Head.

Now after this to show we are not singular in our Judgment concerning these
Points, we will back our Reasons with the Evidence of some few eminent
Instruments of Reformation, pious and learned Men both abroad and at home;
Calvin Epist. and Protect.
Calvin is the first Forreigner in his Letter to the Lord Protector in good
King Edward's time, he says thus, I come to the other Head about abolishing
and plucking up by the very Roots Abuses and Corruptions which the Devil in
Ages passed has brought into God's Ordinances, it is evident that the
Christianity or Religion of Popery is Bastardy and false; wherefore if we
resolve to bring the People out of that Gulf, we must follow the Apostle's
Example, 1 Cor. 11. from whence it is generally taught, that when Men would
reform as they ought to do, and acceptably to God, they must then betake
themselves to the pure Word of God, for see how many Mixtures which Man's Brain
has hatched do remain; so many Pollutions are there which distract Men from
the right Use of those things which he has appointed for their Salvation:
Wherefore, while such a Sink as that is but in the Part pumpt out, things
cannot be said to be as they should be, specially when Religion appeared rather
masked than sincere and with open Face, which I therefore note, because I
perceive many now adays are of another Judgment, as if petty Abuses were to be
let alone as long as grosser matters be removed, whereas contrariwise
Experience it self shows what a fertile Soil and faithful Seed-plot of Lies
Man's Invention is, that being but thin sown, as it were with lesser Grains,
grows to such an Heap as if his Measure did intend nothing else: Now the
Scripture is far different from this, when David speaks of Idols, he
professes their Name should not go in or out at the Door of his Lips, to show
extreme Detestation; let us remove our Foot as far as we can from the Snares of
Satan, for what were all those Ceremonies but so many whorish Enticements to
let silly Souls into Mischief, yea, even Snares to catch Men in? But if we talk
that the People may be warned least they stumble, yet notwitstanding who does
not behold Men hardened by them: So little does that Warning avail to any
purpose: Therefore if any such thing be left untouched, it will be but the
Foment and Fuel of greater Mischief, and very blind, set up to hinder sincere
Doctrine from all Entrance as were fit. In his second Epistle he exhorts the
same Protector to help Hooper who stood against those Foppish Ceremonies; this
is all we shall for the present make use of out of him, though abundance more
might be produced.

Beza is the next, he often speaks much to our Purpose, specially in the Place
mentioned before, now quoted in the Margent, not to be repeated here in his
Annotations upon these Words, 1 Cor. 7.23,
Ye are bought with a Price, be not ye the Servants of Men? He condemns those
that contrary to that Part of Scripture do press superstitious Rites upon the
Consciences of Men, and from Colos. 2.20. he demonstrates how Man's corrupt
Nature is too much inclined to loose Liberty and submit to Superstition, which
with Seneca we may well call, insanus Error, a mad Error, which Superstitious
Ceremonies are Breeders of; to give them their due, they are the Burdens of
the Church, the Blemish of God's Ordinances, the Scourge of good Preachers, the
Brood and Hopes of Popery, the rejoicing of the Profane, the Grievance of the
Good, and the Seed of Dissension, so then it is an unwarrantable Presumption to
bring them in; the Case can be no better illustrated than with the Parable in
the Gospel, where the Lord Jesus is said to be like a Man taking a far Journey,
Mark 13.34.
who left his House, and gave Authority to his Servants, and to every Man his
Work, and commanded the Porter to watch. The Church we must understand to be
his House, where we observe no Authority, but that which is given, and no Work
but that which is left; and over these, the Porters must watch, that no other
Authority be intruded, nor other Work be done: To this belongs what St. Paul
says, 2 Cor. 10.13.
We will not boast of things without our Measure, but according to the Measure
of the Rule which God has distributed to us: It would be very strange, if
during the Absence of the Lord and Master of a House, some of the Servants
would introduce other Rules, and other Works to be done than what he commanded
to be observed. If such Attempts be so odious, and against Rule and Reason in
worldly things, what must it be in God's House? Thus much I could not forbear
taking notice of in my way, now we return to our Evidences.

Peter Martyr comes next, who though a Divinity Professor at Oxford, yet was a
Forreigner born, he advises the Ministers of Poland to keep such Order in the
Administration of Sacraments, as differs most from the Toys and Ceremonies of
Papists; and if from the Heart we hated Superstition, certainly we would do our
Endeavor clean to put out and deface all the Footsteps and Monuments thereof:
Further he says, there is somewhat more hard I confess of those Garments they
call holy, and which somewhat troubles me that I wonder they are so strictly
retained; and he himself refuses to wear the Surplice, for he says, when I
was at Oxford I would never use those white Garments in the Quire, though at
that time I were a Canon, I had no reason for it, but that which then moved and
does still move me, and perhaps may justly move you, is how that is not to be
done which shall confirm what my Conscience cannot allow of, and those things
he calls mere Relics of Popery.

The Wirtemburg Confession says, it is not lawful either to restore the old
Ceremonies of the Law, or to devise new ones to shadow forth the Truth already
laid open, or brought to light by the Gospel, as in the Daylight to set up
Candles to signify the Light of the Gospel, or to carry Banners or Crosses to
signify the Victory of Christ thorough his Cross: It Is added, no mystical
Rites which carry some Mystery or Signification in them, though not otherwise
impious (as namely, such as should be Parts of God's Doctrine or kind of
Sacraments) but only because such Laws as belong to Order and Decency are
lawful: But why any longer to stand upon some particular Evidences, we have
with us a whole Cloud of Witnesses, for beyond Sea, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Bullinger, to whom some Letters from Lady Jane Gray are to be seen at Zurich,
Danaeus, Sadeel, Chemnitius, Zesperus, Mullerus, Chamier, Musculus, etc.
besides some we named before, and all I shall conclude with several Passages of
that excellent Epistle a purpose and by Order from the Elector Palatine by
Zanchius written to Queen Elizabeth, which does begin thus.

Most Gracious and most Christian Queen: We have not without Grief understood
that the Fire of Contention about certain Garments, which we thought had been
quenched long ago, is now again, to the incredible Offense of the Godly as it
were arised from Hell, and kindled afresh in your Majesty's Kingdom, and that
the Occasion of this Fire is because your gracious Majesty being persuaded by
some, otherwise great Men, and carried with a Zeal (but certainly not according
to Knowledge) to retain Unity in Religion, has now more than ever before,
resolved, yea, does command that all Bishops and Ministers of the Church shall
in Divine Service put on the white and linen Garments which the popish Priests
now use in Popery, -- to the perpetual Disgrace of your renowned Majesty, --
which thing being so, I see not how your gracious Majesty can with good
Conscience propound again the Garments in Question, and other things of that
kind, smelling as yet of popish Superstition, and once banished out of the
Churches, to be taken on again, -- and therefore all things are to be called
back, as much as may be, to the Rule of God, and to the Former and Apostolical,
and to the more pure and simple Form of Religion. Finally, if as the Apostle
commands, we are to abstain, not only from all Evil, but from all Appearance
of Evil, to what End I beseech you, most Renowned and most Godly Queen, should
those things be brought in again into the Church of God by the Prince's
Commandments which are contrary to the Gravity of the Apostolical Worship,
which smell of the popish Superstition, which do not serve to the Edification
of the Godly, nor to Order, nor for Ornament, except that which is whorish
which lastly can bring no Profit, but on the contrary, many Evils to the
Church, etc? For though they be not evil or unclean in their Nature, yet
because of the former and late Abuse, they are not altogether free from
Uncleanness; certainly it cannot be denied but that at least they will give
Occasions of many Evils, and very grievous Superstitions; now the very
Occasions also of Evils are to be avoided. -- This is to tempt God. -- We
ought, most Religious Queen, to have nothing to do with the Papists in matter
of Religion, save in those things which they have common with the Apostles:
Why? I beseech you, were some things otherwise Godly, reproved and blamed in
Scripture, that they had not taken away Temples and Churches for Divine Service
in the Mountains (or high places) which were built by holy Fathers before the
building of the Temple. -- Now which is the better, to follow the Godly
Simplicity of the Apostles, or the ungodly Pomp of Papists? This recalling of
such popish Garments will be a greater Evil, then peradventure it may be seen
even to the very wise Men at the first Sight, -- therefore to recall these
stinking Garments and other Rubbish of the Popish Church into the Church of
Christ at this time, what is it but to give Papists an occasion, and the best
that may be, to confirm and harden themselves and theirs in their
Superstitions, and also to help them therein? -- And who knows not that these
Garments are a Part of the Household Stuff of the Romish Seducer, and to bring
them into the Church of Christ, What is it else but to provoke God to Anger,
and to kindle his Fury against us? And though the Epistle deserves wholly to be
transcribed, yet not to be too tedious, I shall shorten it: He calls those
Garments, unknown to the Christian World in the Times of the Apostles and of
the Apostolical Men, Garments of Godless Priests, and Slaves of Antichrist. --
So assuredly by the arguing of things indifferent to trouble the Peace of
Churches, and to cause Strife between good Men and bad, yea, between good Men
themselves, is so wicked, that it can by no means be defended. -- If your
gracious Majesty desires, as you would, to seem Apostolical, then in this
matter imitate the Apostles: Neither lay and impose this Yoke upon the Neck of
Christ's Disciples your self, nor suffer others to do it. -- For all Men know
that most part of all the Churches that are fallen from the Bishop of Rome for
the Gospel's Sake, not only have left off, but also abhor those Garments. --
It Is in vain to hope in so doing to bring in Papists over to us, who can never
amend their Doctrines, nor part with their abominable Superstitions and
Idolatries; then says he, this wounds the Consciences of private Believers,
a tender Conscience that fears God, is a most precious thing, and acceptable
to him, for if these things be imposed as necessary, we do ungodlily, because
we make those things to be necessary which Christ would have to be free, if
indifferent they ought to be left free. These are the same Arguments we use,
but here we leave off, thinking we have done enough to show the Sense of that
Learned and Famous Divine upon so solemn an Occasion.

But this Letter, nor other weighty Reasons could not prevail for any thing,
they were resolved upon another way, the Queen was young when she came to the
Throne, and they that were about her, and coming upon the Stage, were willing
to retain Part of that Pomp, and as much as they could, of that Power which
popish Predecessors in their places had enjoyed: Self denial and a perfect Zeal
for the Glory of God, did not wholly govern in the Spirits of some Men,
wherefore in that Convocation in 1571, when the Cranmers, Hoopers, Latimers,
etc. were gone, instead of following. The Reformation began in King Edward's
Days, they made those Alterations which we all know.

But I need not to insist upon these Evidences of particular, though eminent
Men, seeing we have for us that of whole Churches, I mean that the Generality
of Reformed Churches does about the Matters now in Hand, join and agree with
us, so that we are not fingular in our Opinion, but well grounded therein.

For first, we affirm that Christ has instituted a Discipline, according to
which, and no other, his Church ought to be governed: The French Reformed
Churches say, the Order which Christ has by his Authority settled in his
Church, ought inviolably to be kept; Confess. Gallic. Articl. 25.
and somewhat lower they add, we believe the true Church must be governned
according to the Rule and Order settled by the Lord. Art. 29.
And this is the Persuasion of the Church in the low Countries, how the Church
ought to be governed according to the Spiritual Policy which God has taught in
his Word, Conf. Belgica. Art. 30.
which contains three things: First, There is a Government already settled;
secondly, That Government is set down in Scripture; thirdly, The Church ought
to be governed according to that, exclusively to any other, seeing a Divine
Institution does exclude Humane Inventions: To this also agree the Churches of
Switzerland, for say they, Discipline is administered according to the Order
which the Lord has given in his Word. Helv. Conf. cap. 18. quemadmodum suo
verbo praescripsit dominus. Docemus Gubern. etc.
And a little lower, the Church Government given us by the Apostles is
sufficient to keep it in good Order. And the Church of Scotland in her
Confession of Faith published in the beginning of Reformation gives for a Mark
of the true Church, the Administration of Church Discipline, such as God has
prescribed in his Word. Conf. Scot. Art. 18.
This overthrows the prelatical Opinion, that it is left to the Prudence of
the Governors of the Church, to establish what Government they shall think fit.
Secondly, We say all Ministers of Christ have the same Authority, and by the
Commission none is to have more Power than another, and are not these the
positive Words of a Confession of Faith, we believe all true Pastors to have
one and the same equal Power among them. Gal. Conf. Art. 30.
Let this be taken notice of, how it is an Article, not only of their
Discipline, but also of their Faith, we believe; the Low Dutch Churches speak
to the same purpose, Conf. Belg. Art. 31.
whatsoever Place God's Ministers are in, they have the same Power and unequal
Authority. Helv. Conf. cap. 18.
So do those of Switzerland, all Ministers of Christ have received the same
Power and Office. Observe how as there is but one and the same Power, so there
is but one and the same Office, whereby are condemned Primacy and the Episcopal
Distinction, which they explain elsewhere, Apostolis suuis principatum,
Christus Severis sine prohibuit, etc.
Christ has most strictly forbidden his Apostles Primacy in the Church, who
then can but perceive that those who oppose this plain Truth, and do bring in a
different Government (and as it may be taken Diversity of Government) into the
Church, ought to be taken for those of whom Christ's Apostles have foretold, 2
Pet. 2. and Paul, Acts 20.29. 2 Cor. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and in several other
Places: It is also the third and chief Advice of that religious Prince, Conf.
Palate. at the latter end.
the Palsgrave in his Confession of Faith to his Children and Successors, to
take heed of those who acted by mere Ambition, as it is practiced in Popery,
dostrive for a Command over the Consciences of Magistrates and Subjects, and to
erect for themselves some new Primacy of a large Extent. And to show that
Union, Equality, and Affection which ought to be between Ministers: The ancient
Church of the Waldenses says, Discip of the Vaud. Chap. 2. about the middle.
speaking of Pastors, He that is ordained last ought to do nothing without the
Leave of him that was ordained first, and he that was first, must do nothing
without the Leave of him that was chosen last. Now all this does ruin the
superiority settled by Bishops.

We say in the third place, that no Humane Invention ought to be introduced
into God's Worship, and that Men must not impose upon Consciences the Yoke of
Ceremonies, and the Reformed, Conf. Gal. Art. 24.
reject Ceremonies partly because they are Humane Inventions, and a Yoke which
Humane Authority imposes upon Consciences: Indeed Divine Worship ought to be
practiced according to the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel, which Mind the
Vaudois are of. Compend. Conf. Art. 1.
Divine Worship ought to be performed only in Spirit and in Truth, for God is
Spirit, John 4. So that the Use of those Ceremonies ought to be abolished: Belg
Conf. Art. 25.
Also the Churches of the united Provinces do believe that amongst Christians
all Ceremonies must be abrogated. Now he that says all, excludes nothing; and
to show what kind of Ceremonies those are, elsewhere they explain it; we do
reject all manner of Humane Inventions brought into the Service of God: Art. 32.
And it is an unexcusable Presumption to introduce into the Service of God that
which he has not prescribed: The Believers of part of Switzerland express thus
much, saying, no Man may command that which Christ has not commanded, Conf.
Basil. Art. 19.
among other things therein is mention made of Days dedicated unto Saints, but
in another Place they declare more at large, when having said, how the Church
of Christ does what she can to preserve Peace and Union; it is added, therefore
she has no Communication with Sects, and receives not any Rules given to
settle a Distinction of Meats, Cloths, Days, and Ceremonies. Herein with us do
also agree the four imperial Cities in their Confession of Faith presented to
the Emperor Charles the Vth. where, after they have condemned the Impositions
of Fast Days at certain times as Lent, and on Fridays, specially that called
Good Friday, and having quoted some Places out of Ireneus and of Apollonius
against Montanus, who was the first Imposer of Fasts, and of Chrysostom, Neque
enim apud nos, leve momentum habet, etc.
they speak thus, for as we ought, we had a special Regard to what St. Paul
says to the Coloss. Chap. 2. Let no Man judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in
respect of an holy Day: And in another Place having spoken about Abuses under
Pretenses of Divine Worship introduced into the Church, it is added, Many things
are admitted subservient unto Superstition more than to Piety. This overthrows
the Ceremonies of our Prelates.

If after all this we have a Desire and Curiosity to know the Mind of the most
remote Churches from us, and which are settled in Poland, Russia, Lithuania,
etc. We shall find, though some follow the Confession of Ausburg, others that
of Bohemia, and others that of the Evangelical Cantons, Postnaniensi Conventu
art. 10. Disciplina ecclesias secundum Dei verbum ab omnibus approbatur. Ex
lib. Bucer. cui titulus scripta duo adversaria latol. p ag. 159.
they unanimously tell us, that Church Discipline which is according to the
Word of God, is approved by all. Who then can hinder ut, hence to conclude,
that all approve to have that Church Government settled, which is grounded upon
God's Word: And indeed they have, that Company of Men that excel in Prudence
and Gravity of Spirit, whom Bucer speaks of, whose Office is to warn and
correct those that commit Faults, and to compose Differences, etc. those
Elders, says he, Ambrose has written of; they are those that help in the
Administration of Church Government, to the great easing of the Minister,
whereof the Benefit is great in those Churches that have them; though they be
derived from Scripture, yet are wholly despised and rejected by the prelatical
Party: A general Synod held in Poland since the Agreement at Sandomir,
Uladislaw. Synodus, art. 12. Syn. postnan. art. 8. Syn. Xansens. cap. 2.
speaks of two Kinds of Elders, Spiritual and Secular. Another famous enough
makes mention of them, and a third, not only declares how they ought to be
chosen, but also what their Office is? It Is then past all Question that they
have ruling Elders.

Moreover we must admire at the Charity and Prudence of those Churches much
different from what we have seen here practiced at home, for though Part of
them that are united by the Agreement they made at Sandomir, be of the
Confession of Ausburg, and do retain some Ceremonies, yet they impose them not,
neither do they constrain People to submit thereunto, for, say they,
Petricoviens. Synod. art. 4. qua quidem propter externos ritus homines pios
ferire, neque domini est voluntas, neque purioris ecclesiae mos, etc.
if they were imposed, some Opposition might happen, and then it would be
necessary to make use of the Discipline; but it is neither the Will of God, nor
the Practice of the more primitive Christian Church to punish pious Men for
outward Ceremonies, therefore Ceremonies we leave to Christian Liberty. Hence
we see how they wisely avoid the Occasions of Severity and Dispute. Though
among those Churches, there be Overseers and Superintendents, whence our
Prelates would prove a Conformity with their Episcopacy, we shall find a vast
Difference between both, not only as to the Election which is made by the
Ministers, but also in relation to the Authority which is subordinate and
inferior to that of the Synoct, Xansens. Syn. cap. 1. Art. 10. see from art.
1. to the 10th.
and as to the Time assigned for it, which is from one Synod to another, and
according to the Pleasure of the Synod, he shall be confirmed, or else another
shall be chosen, if the Synod think fit: And if it will appear those Overseers
have a different Employment from that of our Bishops, if one will take the
Pains to read the Articles of that Synod from first to tenth inclusively; and
that for them it is an Addition of Care and Pain, more than of any Worldly
Honor or Gain: In a Word, they are such as Chair-men, Prolocutors, and
Moderators in Synodal Assemblies, except that the Work of these does cease at
the breaking up of the Synods, but the Labor of those does continue. This we
might strengthen with other Testimonies of the Confessions of Faith, and
Articles of the Ecclesiastical Government of other Churches: But forbear, for
we think we said enough to our present purpose.

Now to come to the Judgment of some of our home good and learned Men about
these things, Written in 1566.
we shall begin with a Letter of the general Assembly of Scotland to the
Bishops of England, for though they be of a different Kingdom, yet they make
part of the same Land. If Surplice, say they, corner Cap, and Tippet have been
Badges dies of Idolaters in the very Act of Idolatry, what have the Preachers
of christian Liberty, and the open Rebukers of Superstition to do with the
Dregs of the Romish Beast? And in their Confession of Faith are these Words: We
detest all Ceremonies and false Doctrines of the Romish Antichrist, added to
the Ministration of the true Sacraments, we detest all his vain Allegories,
Rites, Signs, and Traditions brought into the Church without and against the
Word of God. King James, when he was yet in Scotland, could tell them they had
the purest and best Reformed Church in the World, even beyond that of Geneva,
which said he, keeps some Days, yet when he had been here a while, being well
pleased with the Complement of some of our Bishops, how he was the wisest and
most learned King since Solomon's Time, which Learning and Wisdom whatsoever,
he after God owed to Buchanan, whose Principles he soon forgot here, and his
Friend's Kindness there, upon ascending on the Throne, he became another Man; a
Puritan, that is, one according to the Principles of the Church of Scotland,
was odious to him: In a public Declaration he allowed Sports upon the Lord's
Day (which afterward was revived and confirmed by his Son) and that made
Scotch men say, they had sent up a good King, but thorough Flattery he had been
spoiled, and he himself could not forbear to say, how glad he was to be here
amongst the Clergy that gave him a great Respect, when in Scotland every
Minister was allowed freely to speak to him, and may be sometimes allowed to
tell him things which he did not like.

Here we had Hooker, afterward Bishop of Gloucester, who opposed, Cap, Rochet,
and Surplice, and stood much against such things, which Opposition of his made
a great Noise in those Days; so I shall not stand upon it but come to Latimer
in his third Sermon before King Edward, he said, that the Lutherans in Germany
made a Mengle Mangle, Hotch Potch of Popery with true Religion, meaning their
Ceremonies. Bishop Jewel approved of Tertullian's Judgment against Garlands,
because they were worn by Heathens, and upon his Deathbed he declared, he
would not grieve any of his Brethren who were of contrary Opinion concerning
Ceremonies, for at that time several did so, Page 412.
and Dr. Fulk in his Repeal of Heskin's Parliament says, Jewel had no Pleasure
to minister in Coapes, for though he was a Bishop, he might condemn some
superstitious Ceremonies in in England, as Cardinal Cajetan condemned many
superstitious Ceremonies in the Church of Rome, for when he died, he said he
would not be buried in a Church as we have it in his Life prefixed before his
Commentaries upon Joh; and the same Bishop in his Epistle to Queen Elizabeth,
before the Defense of his Apology, he prays to God that she may live to abolish
all Groves and high Places in England: He was no great Approver of such things.

Bishop Pilkinton said, it is our Fault generally that we differ no more from
Papists in all our Ministry, and Dr. Bilson allows and approves those that
cannot by any means digest one Dram of Popish Ceremonies: As for Dr. Fulk, he
declares that he, which says our Form of Service, is not sufficiently
differing from the Papists, shows his Zeal in Detestation of Idolatry, and in
another place, we abhor whatsoever has but a Show of Popery, and in his
Rejoynde to Martial, he says, that the Ceremony of the Cross once taken up
with good intent, being grown into so horrible Abuses, is justly refused of us,
and it is reported of him, that rather than he would wear a Surplice, he with
his Pupils went out of St. John's College in Cambridge, and hired in Town
Chambers for them and himself. Mr. Perkins in his Explication of the Decalogue,
specially upon the second Commandment, in his golden Chain, in his Treatise of
Idolatry, is positive, how all Worship, all things obtruded under the Name of
Worship, without any Exception, if they be not commanded of God are unlawful
and superstitious Worship; some other Churchmen there are whom we omit to speak
of, and amongst them there are of another sort, who though they be for the
generality, yet they are against some particular Ceremonies, as Dr. Whitgift
against significant Ceremonies. I omit the Testimonies of those who all along
from the Beginning declared against Ceremonies, because being Parties, they
ought not to be of either side Evidences or judges.

Now to draw toward a Conclusion of the whole; we are loath to own the
Reformation of other Churches to be as good as ours, so we will stand merely
upon our own Ground, and may not we upon the Occasion say with Solomon, Ecces.
4.10.
woe be to him that is alone, we make a Difficulty to own or join (a thing as
unpolitick as uncharitable) with Reformed Churches beyond Sea, as those that
once were in France are now in Switzerland, Geneva, Holland, the Palatinate,
Hessen, Bremen, and other Parts of Germany, who agree amongst themselves and
others in Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, etc. and with the Vaudois, that Mother
Church whence the Gospel passed into most Parts of Europe, and such a Church as
was never stained with Popish Abominations, which no other Protestant or
Reformed Church can say, and so in no Necessity of Reformation; hence some
Popish Authors, as Seissel Archbishop of Turin, and others do write they were
always Heretics, for by Authentic Writings of above 800 Yerrs ago, it appears
they, as to Doctrine, Worship, and Church Government, held the same thing as
now do which is the same as in Holland and other Churches I mentioned but just
now, and we must believe they had and have the Spirit of God as well as we: And
it is to be observed they had some different Instuments in the Work of
Reformation, though they corresponded and advised one with another; so all
these embraced one and the same Way of Reformation, and we differ from them.

As to the other Way of Reformation, according to the Lutherans, we cannot
commend it as the best, neither do we in Doctrine join with them in every
thing, as Vbibuity, Consubstantiation, etc. and in Ceremonies they retain more
than we own, though to say the Truth, the Reformation in Luther's Time was
purer than after, some modern Lutherans having defaced that which was done at
first. As for Ceremonies, Luther was against, but kept some, which in time he
intended to have removed by Authority of Magistrates; as Crucifixes, Images,
but because Carolostadius stirring up the People, threw them down without
Delay, that vexed him and stopped his Resolution; his Reason was to stop the
Mouths of Slanderers who accused Protestants of Tumults and Sedition, yet in
some places amongst them, they have them not: In all such things the Glory of
God more than our Passions, is to be minded, which is not when under the Notion
of Uniformity, Unity it self is ruined; and when Tooth and Nail men stand for
such Ceremonies as ours, as much as for the Fundamental Points in Religion,
which argues neither Prudence nor Charity, rather a Spirit of wilfulness and
contradiction, you shall have and do because you will not: Why do we say that
amongst Papists it is held a greater Wickedness to omit Auricular Confession,
than to live impiously, to eat Flesh in Fasting Days, than to live in
Fornication, to work on Saints Holy Days, than to act Mischief, their Practice
shows us the cause, for they punish more severely the Breach of their
Ordinances, than of God's Laws; if we do the like about our ceremonies, if we
refuse to admit, or do deprive a Godly Learned Man, and Laborious Minister,
merely because he cannot conform, and if we take in any scandalous and ignorant
Drone, because he conformeth, as it too often happens; if Drunkards,
Swearers, Fornicators, Sabbath Breakers be let alone, if a Man for not coming
to the Offering, or refusing to pay his Groat, be fined or excommunicated, and
then the Writ de excommunicato capiendo, be issued out, yet in the mean time,
one who lives in open and notorious Drunkenness, Whoredom, and Adultery, be
winked at, do we not prefer our Tradition before the Commandment?

For Abuses in things of this Nature, I shall bring an Evidence without
Exception, a darling Son of the Church, Dr. Andrews in a Sermon of his before
he was a Bishop, preached to the Convocation, Truth forces these Words out of
him; The Church Censures now a days do only touch the Purse, Evil doers when
they have paid their Fees, return Scotfree, if no Money, then have at the
Offenders with the Episcopal Sword, presently at one Blow they are cut off from
the Church, and delivered over unto Satan, proclaimed Publicans, Heathens,
Anathema; for the most ridiculous things and against every good Man, these
brutish Thunderbolts do fly up and down, and only to be feared of the Purse, so
let become what it will of God's Law, Man's shall be executed, though contrary
to Right and Reason: Yet I think Man ought to consider that the Church is a
Society in order to Salvation, rather than to buying and selling, or
Depredation: It Is an imperfect Body, except Christ the Head be comprehended,
and his Right of Ruling and making Laws asserted: By these Laws he has left us
a Freedom from the Yoke of Ceremonies, for the Body as for the Soul, not only
an inward Liberty of Mind and Conscience, but an external Freedom of Body and
outward Man from such Rites in Worship as have not his Stamp, such are our
Popish ones that are evil from the Beginning, and most taken out of the
Mass Book and the Ceremonial: All this he says according to Truth, only we
must add how those Popish Dregs we do retain, are of the same Nature with those
we left off, and were by him condemned.

In every thing we perform about Religion, it is our Duty to obey Ordinances,
and use the means which God has appointed; God indeed can work without, but we
have no warrant to think he will: In this case we are sure to be tied by a
Commandment, and encouraged by a Promise, if we go the contrary way, it will be
with us as with the People of Israel about Manna, they were told upon the
Sabbath there would be none, they would not believe but try, they went and
found none: Exodus 16.16, 27. V. 19, 20.
They were charged upon Weekdays to leave none till the Morning, but they
would do it, but it bred Worms and stank: So it will befall any one that goes
out of God's Way, and follow their own, they shall find no Instruction, no
Wisdom, no Comfort, or if there be any, it will stink, be of no Use, and come
to-nothing; let us take notice of what the Prophet says, Isa. 1.16.
Put away the Evil of your doings: He does not enjoin to take away the Works,
but the Evil of them, as if he had said, sacrifice still according to the
prescribed Rules, choose a Sacrifice without Blemish for the matter, offer it
according to the Rites I appointed as to the manner, but bring also a reformed
Life, an humble Heart, a Submission to and Conformity to my Ordinance, and
bring nothing of your own but Obedience from the Heart, wherein hitherto ye
failed. It is a Sin not to do well, and to do ill, Ignorance excuses, though
not from the whole, yet from the measure of Punishment, but in those who sin
against Knowledge, namely, that God has not commanded, but rather forbidden
such things, it is a double Sin and with a Witness, many Stripes for the Servant
who knows the Master's Will and does it not, and I think we may truly say, no
Nation was ever more severely punished than the Jewish, because they sinned
against greater Lights, it is not enough to know the Truth, but also we must
obey it.

This whole Discourse I can no better conclude than with some few Observations
upon the 14th. Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, I wish it to be
read more than it is, and what is therein contained better observed, for it
does justly fit and reach our Case, the whole being reduced to the great Rule
of Charity; great I may call it, Romans 13.10.
for it is the fulfilling of the Law: Charity now adays is much talked of, but
little practiced; we are all agreed about the Speculation and Theory, but the
whole Difficulty lies in coming to the practicable Part thereof: Which that it
may be well, ought to be universal, in every thing we do according to that of
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.14. Gal. 4.9.
Let all your things be done with Charity; however it will never do if Men
stand upon Punctilios and Niceties, and say tell us (which has been told a
thousand times) what ye would have, and in case we think fit to grant you some
of the things you desire, will you join with us as to the rest? This is
pertinaciously to defend a barren and unprofitable Ground, and this kind of
Capitulations do not become the truly noble Spirit of Christian Religion, ye
keep the Doors shut upon us, do but level all the Rubbish of Outworks, those
Humane Buildings to make way for us to come into the Body of the Church, which
whether we come or not, it is your Duty to do, and that once being over. you
have done your Part, and if after it we do not come in, you may lay the Blame
at our Door, but not only you keep Men from Church, but also stop all
approaching to it, you shut them out of the Places that are accounted the
Springs of Learning, as Universities, to hinder them from qualifying themselves
for public Service in the Church, you will not allow them Wells to drink
Waters out of their own, but of your own; not so much as allow them to draw
together with you, but upon such hard Terms and Conditions as are unjust, and
they cannot accept of: Thus all Schools, Universities, Places, Preferments,
Offices whether, ecclesiastical or civil ye do wholly monopolise to your selves.

Well, this by the by, but to come to St. Paul, he exhorts not to despise or
condemn one another for things indifferent, he instanceth it in two things that
may serve for all of the same Nature, namely, eating or not eating some kinds
of Meats, keeping or not keeping some certain Days which were the Dispute of
the Times, and though they may be indifferent of themselves, yet by the Access
of some Circumstances, become unlawful, as may be when Men stand too much, and
lay too great a Stress thereupon, which makes the Apostle call it weak and
beggarly Elements, Gal. 4 9, 10, 11
and condemn it when he says, Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and
Years, I am afraid of you, least I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain. No
doubt the Colossians were doting upon the other Branch, eating or not eating,
which Rudiments of the World, Colos. 2.20, 21.
if they were dead with Christ, they ought to have been freed from, and not
subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not: But a Circumstance
which much alters the Case, and takes away the Indifferency is, when the Use
of such things gives an Offense, and becomes a Scandal to weak Brethren; this
Consideration makes Paul so positive with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8.9, 12, 13.
but take heed lest by any means this Liberty of yours become a Stumbling Block
to those that are weak. Whether this eating, keeping a Day, or using any such
Ceremony which some account indifferent, is to be minded? I say it is not so
small a matter as ye think, for when ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound
their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ, wherefore, if Meat, or the Use of
any Ceremony make my Brother to offend, I will eat no Flesh, nor use such
Ceremony whilst the World stands, lest I make my Brother to offend: here is
Charity, here is Christianity, for that not only gives an Offense to the weak
Brother, but also it sometimes ensnares him to do that which he does not
approve, whereby he is destroyed, Romans 14.5, 22, 23.
for if a Man be not fully persuaded in his own Mind, but condemns himself in
that thing which he allows, and doubts, he is damned if he does it, because
he does it not of Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. Tit. 1.
For to the unbelieving nothing is pure, and to him that esteems any thing to
be unclean, and unlawful, to him it is unclean and unlawful: The great Care we
ought to take is, Romans 14.14.
that no Man put a Stumbling Block or an Occasion to fall in his Brother's way,
V. 13, 15.19.
but rather follow after the things which make for Peace, and therewith one may
edify another. Now, if thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat, with thy
Ceremonies, thou walk not charitably, much more if thou enticest or as much
as in thee lies, compellest him to it, nay, persecutest him for it: I call
Persecution to deprive, to fine, and to put in Prison, for not doing such
things as his Conscience allows him not to do; this as much as in one lies is
to destroy him for whom Christ died, which in this Place the Apostle declares
so much against, and if a Man will not, because in Conscience he cannot do such
and such things, then presently a rash Censure is passed upon him, he is a
precise Man, a stubborn and refractory Spirit, why should not he do as so many
others? As preach with a Surplice, and use the Ceremonies of the Church? As
good a Way of arguing as if one would say, why should not he go to Hell as so
many others do? Let such hear what St. Paul says here, but why do thou
judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? V. 4.10.
And who art thou that judge another Man's Servant to his own Master, he
stands or falls? It Is time to give over such rash Judgments, V. 13. V. 17.
let us not therefore judge one another any more, for the Kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, or Ceremony, that Men should so strictly press it upon others,
as if the Life and Power of Religion consisted in such things, but it is
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; therefore do not destroy him
with thy Ceremonies for whom Christ died, V. 21.
for it is good, neither to eat Flesh nor to drink Wine, which yet may be
necessary for Man's Health, nor to do any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth,
or is offended, or is made weak.

And yet those things which the Church accounts to be indifferent, and we
unlawful, are pressed and imposed upon as if they were most necessary, in as
much as the thing relates to my self, must another Man's Conscience or my own
be a Judge in the Case? In our Churches and Worship we have nothing amongst us
which our Adversaries may be offended at, or take Exception against: The Cause
of Division, the Idol of Jealousy is amongst them, let it be put away and then
we will be all one; but if they prefer those Human Inventions before our Union
with them, if they have rather to keep us out than to part with their
Ceremonies, wherewith we cannot stand in the same Bottom; they say they can be
without their Ceremonies, and we say we cannot be with them; after that let God
and impartial Men judge where the Fault lies, who, they or we do hinder a
necessary Union and Reconciliation which would prove so sweet and so
comfortable to many and many Thousands of Souls, to the greater Glory of God,
strengthening of the Protestant Interest, and weakening the Enemies thereof
both abroad and at home: The Contrary of these does but foment Jealoufies and
Partialities, keep up Divisions, encourage and give Advantage to our common
Enemy, and if for Peace sake we should grant them what they say of us, namely,
that it is Weakness in us that we cannot come up to them, which we in
Conscience cannot do, though they in Conscience may do what we desire of them,
then let them know, Romans 15.1, 2.
how they that are strong ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, and not to
please themselves, but let every one please his Neighbor for his Good, to
Edification. Now when the Contrives of former Mischief against Religion, are
removed from the Throne and round about it, we have a happy Opportunity of
promoting and settling a desirabale and longed for Union which we heartily
desire to the end that all Prejudices being removed we may become but one Flock
under the great Shepherd of our Souls, the Lord Jesus, but if this blessed
Union be neglected by those in whose Power under God, it is to promote it, then
let those Men know they shall be accountable to God for the Loss of it, and
guilty of the evil Consequences that may happen to follow thereupon.

The Worst in some of those Men, is that when they want Proofs, they revile and
abound in abusive Language, to my great Grief, we find it in those that seem to
be or to have been most moderate among them, such is the Author of those
Conferences we had elsewhere Occasion to mention, though otherwise a Person of
Worth and Learning, who under the Name of a Fanatic Chaplain introduces one as
the most nonsensical Fellow in the World, but he like the Philistines was sure
not to set a right Edge to the Weapons of the Children of Israel: The Fanatic
Chaplain's Arguments must be laid down flat upon their Back: Indeed it had been
well for him to have said whom he means by Fanatic and Fanatic Chaplains,
though in the Book it appears enough whom he means, in such Disputes as this,
Reasons and not Injuries should be made use of, it is a bad Cause that uses such
means to defend it self. We own there are Fanatics in the World, but Men must
not be so peremptory as magisterially to Father it upon those who are no such
Men; they are Fanatics as before observed, who are wholly guided by Fancy
under the Notion of Inspirations and Lights of the Spirit different from, and
contrary to the revealed Will of God, who feed upon mere Appearance, and bare
Imaginations, but that Name does not belong to those who make the Word of God
the Rule of their Faith and of Divine Worship, to retort, we say it belongs to
those which make their own Inventions the Rule thereof.

There is another thing which indeed upon this Occasion I cannot avoid taking
notice of, how that Author flies out against the Writer of the Book called
Patronus bonae fidei, in few places, specially Page 231. where he uncharitably
and unjustly charges him with Rage and Madness, and not to be endured in a
christian Commonwealth, etc. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant?
I confess I am concerned to see that worthy Person so unworthily abused; if
alive, he now could have defended himself; thereby I judge the Author knew him
not, if he did, may be only by Relation, and not so well as I. He had I
confess, some Notions and few Opinions, which as I sometimes as a Friend said
to him, I did not approve of, nor could join with him in, but they did not
concern the Fundamentals of Faith or Christian Religion, only
Church Government, outward Worship, and Ceremonies, in some of which he was in
the right; as to all Essentials, very sound as far as I could find by him, but
as to Practice, Life, and Conversation, in my Opinion, one of the best and
uprightest Men that ever I knew: As to what is said, that his Friends, that is,
a Brother, assisted him, I must say, he did nothing for him, but what before he
had received from him, yet that which he gave being mixed with chidings,
brought him no great comfort: Once he showed me a Letter from that same
Brother, wherein he would have sastned upon him those very Words of Peter to
Simon, Thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, Act 8.23.
and in the Bond of Iniquity; because he went a different Way from his, and I
am sure those Supplies for a while were stopped, but whether for altogether I
cannot tell for certain: Thus far I think my self bound to vindicate his
Memory. His Words that make that Author so angry with him, as to say, like a
mad Man he leaves him to his Keeper, namely, that Egyptians pretended some
Ground for their Idolatry, as that an Ape, a Cat, or a Wolf, etc. had some
Participation of the Divinity, but those that bow down to a Wooden Table are
themselves Stocks. These Words I say deserve not so hard a censure as is passed
upon their Author.

Here I intended to have made an end, but before I do I am bound to take notice
of a thing now come to my Mind, too common abroad, a Token of the Ignorance and
uncharitableness of some of our Adversaries, and a clear Demonstration of their
Love for and Inclination to Popery, take it as it follows.

Amongst those that are so possessed with a Spirit of Violence and Persecution,
are some so depraved in their Judgment, or so perverse in their Hearts, or
both, that to express their perfect Hatred against those who in some things
dissent from them, they openly say, they had rather to be Catholics, for
that is the Name which out of respect they give Papists, than Fanatics,
Schismatics, as they are pleased to call them, and Presbyterians: That which
is bred in the Bone, never goes out of the Flesh, there is in their Hearts
still, something of the Nature and Seed of that elder Sister the Roman Church,
that savoureth the Ambition, Tyranny, and the desire of the Exercise of an
absolute Authority over the Souls and Consciences of Men, which all that oppose
must be Fanatics, but they should know that Names signify things, and ought
not to be given but to those whom the things by the Names signified do belong
unto, otherwise they be misapplied; we are guided neither by our own Fancy, or
that of others, nor are Entheusiasts led by Dreams, Visions, and mere
Appearances. I leave every impartial Man that has but common Sense and Reason
to judge whether such a Name be proper for those who make the Word of God the
only Judge of the controverted Questions, and will be by their Reason directed
no longer than it is ruled by holy Scripture, the Judge of all Controversies in
Matters of Religion: The Malice of such does not stop here against us in these
present or late Times, but they go back and would fasten upon the Persons,
tread under Feet the Ashes, and unworthily defame the Memory of the first and
eminent Instruments of Reformation, with all the ill Names and Words their
Malice can invent, making them, as St. Paul speaks of himself, pass thorough
evil Report, as better Men than they, do thorough good, a thing as unhansome as
can be, let them speak to the living, and some will be able to answer for
themselves, when none of the dead can. These Men, like those whom the Prophet
speaks of, encourage themselves in an evil Matter. They commune of laying
Snares. Psalm. 64.5.

Then they had rather to be Papists than Presbyterians, or Independents; they
need not to say so, or express themselves in those Terms, but 'twere more
proper for them to say they are Papists more than Presbyterians, and then they
will speak the Truth, and to the purpose, for such amongst us are Papists under
the Cloak of Protestants, Spies, and Emissaries of the Church of Rome, to work
Divisions, Animosities, and all possible Mischief, to promote the Interest of
that Antichrist; who would not refuse to take a fat Abbey if they were restored
among us, though they were to say Mass for it, much less Palliums, Patriarchs,
Cardinals Caps, and the rest of the proud Titles and Dignities of that
Antichristian Hierarchy: All these according to such Men's Principles could
easily and with Pleasure be swallowed up by them, and these are such grievous
Wolves entered in amongst us, which St. Paul speaks of, and our blessed Lord
had foretold before.

And to show we can never enough abhor such Notions as these for a Protestant
to say, I had rather to be a Papist than a Presbyterian, he who talks at such a
rate must either be a Papist indeed, or ought to be looked upon as such: Every
Papist must own and believe the Fundamental Points of their Religion, which by
them are thought necessary to Salvation, and which daily they are brought to
believe and to practice, and none but Papists will believe those Fundamental
Errors wherein all Protestant and Reformed Churches do differ from them: on the
other side, to say so, argues a very great Ignorance, of what Popery and
Presbitery are, as indeed it is common amongst some of our ordinary Sort of
People, which like Parrets in a Cage, have learned the Name they often heard
repeated unto them by some of the Church's passionate Teachers, who will as
confidently affirm Arminianism to be the Doctrine of the Church, though never
so false, and who sometimes have been heard to complain how the first Reformers
went too far, they might have spared several things and not have been so rigid,
to have preserved Union with the Romish Church, and not made an absolute
renting from it; does not a sensible Man believe that Men of such Principles
will be ready, when it does not cross their Worldly Interest, to meet half way
with the Church of Rome, but such, no Reason can cure, the very Springs of
their Souls are corrupt, the Disease is past Recovery, without the immediate
working of God's Spirit, wherefore I shall not trouble my self with speaking to
those that are such.

But to the unlearned that are imposed upon, and that sin out of Ignorance, I
shall give Reasons to inform and Satisfy their Judgments; no Man may with
himself to be of a Church, except he already be a Member of it, that believes,
such Fundamental Errors which a Man dying in cannot be saved, and does practice
Idolatry, if Scripture says Truth: Here I desire not to be mistaken, as if I
should say, how none that is a Papist can be saved, for God's Mercy is great
and free, and when he pleases he can reveal his Truth to some that now lie in
the Ignorance and Blindness of the Errors in Judgment, and Practice of that
Church, so the good God may do to any Jew, Mohammedan, or of any other wrong
Persuasion whatsoever, as in Practice, to the repenting Thief; but I say, that
a Papist dying in the Belief of those effential Errors, God not imparting the
Light of the Truth unto his Mind, and the Love of it into his Heart, such an
one, if God's Word speaks Truth, shall not be saved: Why so? Because the Church
of Rome has instituted several Ways of Salvation when Scripture speaks but
of one, surely all but that must be wrong and false, so Christian Religion owns
but one only Savior, namely, the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts. 4.12.
Neither is there Savation in any other: For there is none other Name under
Heaven given amongst Men, whereby we must be saved, and as there is a Savior
and but one Savior, so there is a Mediator and but one Mediator; there is one
God and one Mediator (mark, as there is but one God, so there is but one
Mediator, for in the Original the Word to express one God, is the same to
signify one Mediator) the Man Jesus Christ.

Now any one, though but little versed with the Doctrines of the Popish
Religion, knows that they have other Mediators to trust to, to intercede for
them, whom they worship and pray to, as all their Saints, specially the blessed
Virgin, and these in a high Degree, as her Litany does fully evidence, they
attribute her a Power of commanding her Son the Lord Jesus. Now as to their
other Ways of Salvation, they are many, and by Virtue whereof they pretend to
be justified before God, as are good Works, Indulgencies of Popes, See
seasonable Discourse about Religion in 1689.
Treasures of the Church, Merits of Saints, for the Favor of one Saint or
other, whose Protection they put themselves under, they do much trust to and
depend upon. It Is true, they do not exclude the Merits of Christ, but they come
in only in part and as Sharers, to what purpose this? Heb. 7.25.
Seeing Christ is able to save them to the utter most that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them, he alone has
satisfied God's Justice, and pacified his Wrath, I have trodden the Winepress
alone, Isa. 63.3.
and of the People there was none with me, says he by the Mouth of his
prophet, neither Archangel or Angel, or any Creature in Heaven or in Earth
being joined with him in that Work, and can we think that after he alone has
endured the Torments of making Atonement for our Sins, he would leave with the
Creatures, the Honor to have it applied throrough their Intercession. Heb.
12.2.
Now, he is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, take notice of both, Author
and Finisher of our Salvation, and of all things belonging thereunto, which is
more clearly explained in that other Place, he became the Author of eternal
Salvation unto all them that obey him, and he is also called the Captain of our
Salvation. Chap 2.10.


Again, I say they which for Salvation depend upon any other Sacrifice than
that which Christ made of himself upon the Cross, may not upon any good Grounds
hope for Salvation, because no Promise for it in the Word, Scripture makes
mention of none other but of that only: We shall be content with quoting some
few Places all out of one Book of Scripture, where the Point of the Lord
Christ's Priesthood is of a set purpose, and fully treated of, and therein the
pretended and abominable Sacrifice of the Mass is condemned, which Point alone,
if there was none other, is a sufficient Cause for true Christians to break off
Communion with that Church, Heb. 9.25, 26, 28.
it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Nor yet that he should offer himself
often, speaking of the Lord Jesus, for then must he often have suffered since
the Foundation of the World. Hence we see how Christ was not often to offer
himself: The Reason is, because he was not often to suffer, wherefore they that
would have him often offered, would have him also often to suffer, for whether
he offers himself, or be offered by a Priest still a Sufferer he must be: Now
to show how often this was to be, it is expressed and fixed, v. 28. so Christ
was once offered to bear the Sins of many; once and no more, and that is passed
too, Christ was once offered, and it must be of a high Concernment for us to
know it ought to have been but once, for Chap. 10. it is repeated twice, in v.
10. We are sanctified thorough the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once
for all, and v. 12. But this Man Jesus after he had offered one Sacrifice for
Sins for ever, but one Sacrifice and that for ever; that is never to be
reiterated any more, and v. 14. the Reason is given why there ought to be no
more, because there is no Necessity for it, for by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

But why should I trouble my self any longer to insist upon these essential and
abominable Tenets and Practices of the Church of Rome, which is full of Errors
in Doctrine, and of Idolatry and Superstition in Worship: I hope no true Son of
the Church can have the Face to deny the Church of Rome to be guilty of
Idolatry, for they yield a religious Worship to the Creature, as to the Pope,
whom after his Election, Cardinals do place upon the Altar, and there adore him
for that is the Word to signify the Homage which at that time they give him,
then to the Virgin, to Saints, to Images, and to their Wafer-God, whereof they
have Millions amongst them. Now I say no more, only neither Presbyterians nor
Independents believe or do so, that is, that there is any other Mediator than
the Lord Jesus, that there are other Ways of Salvation than by the only
Sacrifice he once made of himself upon the Cross, neither do they practice any
Idolatry as the Church of Rome does, and we know for certain that no Idolaters
shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

I hope these few things of many more I might have said, will satisfy any
impartial Reader, not blinded with Prejudice or with a violent Passion: As for
those that had rather to be Papists than Presbyterians, let them now with their
Mass in their Mouth, their other Savior and Saints upon their Backs, with
their Superstition and Idolatry about their Girdle, go home with Shame and hide
themselves, or rather amongst the Church of Rome where they would be in their
proper Place, and not amongst us, for we can spare them well enough.

FINIS.

