Prelatique Preachers NONE OF CHRIST'S TEACHERS: OR, A Disswasive unto the
People of God from attending the Ministry (so called) of those, who preach by
virtue of an (Apocryphal) Ordination, received from an Order of men, commonly
styled LORD BISHOPS. Wherein Arguments are tendered to their serious
considerations, by way of Motive against that practice; the unlawfulness
thereof demonstrated: and the Pretenses briefly answered, which commonly are,
or lightly can be pleaded, in justification of it.

And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of
the living God: -- Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; and
will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the
Lord Almighty,

2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel; for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. Therefore it is no great thing
if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness; whose
end shall be according to their works,

2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. -- From such turn away,

2 Timothy 3. 5. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the Leaven of
the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces, [that is, of their Doctrine]

Matthew. 16. 6, 12. He that is not with me, is against me; and he that gathers
not with me, scatters abroad,

Matthew. 12. 30. -- Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them,

Jer. 15. 9. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy flock to rest at noon; for why should I be as one that turns
aside by [or, unto] the flocks of thy Companions?

Cant. 1. 7. (...).

Ignatius, Epist. 6. Malus Ecclesiae Praepositus deseri cum sua communione
potest, imo debet.

Cyprian 1. 1. Ep. 4. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A Disswasive unto the People of God, from attending the Ministry (so called)
of those, who preach by virtue of an (Apocryphal) Ordination, received from an
Order of men, commonly styled, LORD `BISHOPS.
Take heed whom you hear.
THE Idolatrous madness of the Common-PrayerBook-worship, has of late been
made so manifest to all the Household of Faith in the Nation, that my confidence
is great, that it shall not proceed any further to ensnare and pollute any of
the Sons and Daughters of God, by joining in the offering up of such strange
fire unto him. And though there be some, who, having formerly cast it off as a
menstruous rag of Popish devotion, are of late, with the Dog, returned unto
their vomit, making themselves transgressors by building up, what once they
destroyed; yet God (I trust) will suddenly stop and heal this unclean issue in
the body of his People, and so curse the root of this bitterness, that it shall
not bring forth much fruit, nor many be defiled with it. Yea, though a second
Repentance in such cases, be not a fruit that grows very plentifully on the
Tree of flesh and blood, yet am I not without all hope but that through the
grace and mercy of God, some of those may awaken, and recover themselves out of
this Snare of Satan, whose foot has been taken, and is (at present) held in
it. I confess the World has of late given a furious onset and charge upon the
Saints of God amongst us, yea, upon all that professed any thing (almost) after
the manner of Saints, and as becomes the Gospel, to cause them to give back
from that holy ground which they had gained, and on which they stood; Neither
is it any marvel, there being so many millions of a stricter Profession in the
Nation, that all of them should not prove valiant in fight, or that some of
them, for fear of the fiery Furnace, being het seven times hotter than
ordinary, should not how down to the golden Image of that Worship, which the
Nebuchadnezzar-like Interest of the Prelatical party in the Nation had set up.
But leaving those, who tremble to make gods of men, by ascribing unto them the
incommunicable property or prerogative of God, in appointing and imposing his
own Worship, unto the safeguarding of his blessing upon those convictions of
the Truth, which have subdued their Judgments and Consciences under it; and
those that are turned aside like a deceitful [or, warped] bow, unto the mercies
of God, for the bringing of them back again from Babylon unto Sion, that they
be not surprised in the vengeance of Babylon, (which is now even at the door) I
shall proceed to tender unto the Consciences of those, whose sovereign interest
it is to approve themselves thoroughly unto God, a few Considerations, by the
light whereof they may see how unlawful it is (especially as the case now
stands) to be Hearers, where men of Episcopal Ordination, by virtue hereof
are the Teachers.

CONSIDERATION I.
That Authority of Teaching; wherewith the Teachers we speak of are invested,
by that kind of Bishop which presumes to give it, is a mere nullity and lie.
The Gospel knows no Bishop of such a character or complexion, as are
appropriately theirs, who claim and exercise a power as of obtruding upon
Christ and his Churches, on the one hand, what persons they please in the name
of Ministers, or Teachers, (only if they be desirous to accept of this sacred
investiture from their hand;) so on the other hand, to keep back such from
their Service, whom both the one and the other, most desire in this relation,
only because God has not given them Darkness for a Vision, or sent them this
strong delusion, confidently to imagine, that they see Prelates, or Diocesan
Bishops, walking like Angels in the plains of the Gospel, and Christ giving
them power to prescribe in his Church what forms of Worship, be they never so
uncouth, and what Ceremonies, be they never so apish, they please. Besides many
other Writings, both formerly, and more lately published, which demonstrate the
Generation of such Bishops to be Aliens and Strangers to the Laws and Statutes
of the Commonwealth of Israel, The Un-Bishopping of Timothy and Titus, with
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (a Book first compiled and printed, Anno
1636, and lately reprinted, with sundry Enlargements, by the Learned Gentleman,
William Prynne Esquire;) clearly vindicates the Gospel from all compliance with
them, and sends them to seek their pedigree and original, where they will be
ashamed to find it. And (doubtless) the contest about Prelatical Usurpations
had been comprimised long before this, and the Churches of Christ discharged of
such unsupportable burdens, were not all disputes against carnal Interests,
like gapings against an Oven, and the Truth, though Speaking with the tongues
of Men and Angels, a Barbarian unto those, whose Judgments and Consciences are
under an arrest by the pomp and grandeur, either in Spe, or in Re, of this
present world: For to reason Un-bewitched, it cannot (lightly) but appear an
incredibility of the first Magnitude, that Christ should appoint such an High
Officer in his Church, as the Diocesan, and especially the Metropolitan Bishop
bears himself with an importune and high hand to be; and yet neither give
them any name whereby to be known or distinguished from others, nor yet assign
them any work or Service at all, in, or for the Church. When Christ ASCENDED on
High, and gave gifts unto men, he gave some Apostles; and some Prophets; and
some Evangelists; and some Pastors and Teachers: but we hear of none given,
either Lord Bishops, Diocesans, or Metropolitans. When he DESCENDED into Hell
[or, into the lower parts of the Earth] themselves will not plead, that he
brought them up from thence. Therefore (without controversy) they are no
plants of Christ's planting; neither is there any thing in the Church for them
to do: For the whole work that concerns the spiritual welfare of the Church
from first to last, is committed to the Church Officers lately named by the
Apostle, as being every way sufficient for the effectual performance of it.
This the Context speaks plainly enough, and without a Parable: He gave some
Apostles, -- and some Pastors and Teachers; For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we
all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13, 14. So that there is no empty or void space in the spiritual
Concernments of the Church, for our Diocesan bishops to thrust in with their
importune and officious interposure; Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers; have the whole heritage of this work divided amongst them by the
Lord Christ himself. Or if there be any thing left for our Lord Bishops to do
by way of service to the Church, it is to teach them, as Gideon taught the men
of Succoth, with thorns and Briars, to perfect them through sufferings, and so
to prepare them for their glory: this service (I confess) they do them with
great diligence, and very effectually. Nevertheless, Christ never set them up
in his Church, to do either this or any other service unto it: only he
permitted them, whilst the Church slept, to convey themselves slily into it:
And because the teaching of the members hereof by Afflictions, is a necessary
work, and most proper to be done by the vilest and most unworthy of men,
therefore (I conceive) he has judged it meet to afford an opportunity to this
Generation of men, to be the Actors in chief in it. But now that kind of Bishop
we speak of, being no Gospel Creature, nor any ways derived or descended from
Christ, it is a clear case that he has no right of authority or power from him
(and from any other he cannot have it) to exercise any Ecclesiastical function
at all, much less to create, or make any Gospel Minister. It is a true rule,
Non Entis nullae sunt affectiones, nulla est efficacia; That which is not, has
not wherewith to act, or operate. So that as the Apostle Peter said to the
Criple, Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have give I unto thee. (Acts
3. 6.) Our Diocesan Bishops may on the contrary say unto those that come unto
them for Authority and Power to preach the Gospel, Silver and Gold we have in
abundance, but that which we have, we will not give unto you; but what we have
not, that we freely give unto you; Go, and preach the Gospel [although neither
do they give this their nothing very freely, unless it be in such a sense,
wherein a Merchant may be said to part with his bad commodity very freely, or
willingly, when he knows he shall receive more money for it than it is worth]
Therefore they, who embrace men Episcopally ordained, as Teachers sent by
Christ, and upon this account hear them, set their eyes upon that which is not,
yea, and do homage unto an Idol.

CONSIDERATION II.
To afford our presence and attention unto men preaching by Episcopal
Authority, is to strengthen the Hierarchical Interest, to credit and
countenance the horrid Usurpations of the Prelatical Order, in, and over the
Churches of Christ: and consequently, to involve our selves in the guilt of all
those outrages of oppression and cruelty, whereby they daily waste and wear
out the Saints of God amongst them; and so to render our selves justly liable
to partake with them in their plagues, when God shall bring the day of their
vengeance upon them. To own those for our Ministers and Teachers, who are sent
forth by them to teach (and own them for such we do, if we frequently, or
ordinarily, hear them) is to own those who send them, and to set to our seal,
and give them testimony, that they are entrusted, and invested by Christ, with
that authority and power, in the name (or by the pretense rather) of which they
so send them. For what can we (lightly) do to commend them unto the world upon
higher terms, then by such our approbation of them? Or were we desirous, as far
as lies in us, to make the mountain of their present power so strong that it
should never be moved, by what other means more probable, or promising, could
we endeavor, or attempt it? For who, though but in face a Christian, will not
fear to have a hand in the rooting out, yea, or in opposing, such men, or such
an order of men, amongst them, who have this testimony from serious and
welladvised Christians, that Jesus Christ has entrusted them with the care,
and power of providing meet and worthy Ministers for all his Churches round
about them? Verily, Verily, I say unto you, (says Christ, John 13. 20.) If I
send any, (So our former Translation, and so the Original) he that receives
him, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent me. He is
said to receive a Minister, or messenger, sent by Christ, who hears him, (as
appears by the parallel place, Luke 10. 16.) that is, who hears him, as, or
because, sent by Christ; or, who hears his Doctrine with reverence and
submission, and so as to own it. Now the receiving of Christ [in his
Messengers, or, in their Doctrine] is such an act which tends highly to the
honor of Christ, and to the confirmation and enlargment of his interest in the
world, and is mentioned under such a consideration as this, in the words now
cited: Therefore upon the same account, he that receives, or hears, persons
sent by our Apocryphal Bishops to preach, receives them, and hereby
contributeth not a little toward the establishment of them in the possession
of that exorbitant and monstrous power, by which they tyrannize over the
consciences and comforts of those, that are loyal and faithful unto Jesus
Christ, and so (as has been said) becomes accessory to all the sufferings of
the Saints, by means of that power, in those men's hands. This is another
consideration dissuading the people of God from attending upon Episcopal
Emissaries in their work of preaching.

CONSIDERATION III.
The hearing of men sent by the Bishops, being (as was now showed) a receiving
of these Bishops themselves (in the sense declared) must needs be a walking
uncharitably toward them, and a means to keep their foot fast in that snare of
death, wherein it is at present taken, and to put far from them the happy day
of repentance from their unchristian usurpations (together with many other high
misdemeanors accompanying these) whereby they might be saved. For when they
shall see the servants of God (especially the more knowing, and better advised
of them) rejoyceing in the light of Ministers of their making, and sending
forth, how shall they not applaud themselves in their office, yea, and think
they do both God, and his Churches special service, by supplying these from
time to time with men of worth, who are able to speak unto them words, by which
they hope they may, or shall be saved? Men that receive so large a testimony of
the usefulness of their callings, and goodness of their practices and walkings
in them, from persons so considerable as those mentioned, are not like to
resent, or suspect, any such evil in either, for which they need any open, or
solemn repentance. So that for the servants of God to honor, with their
attendance, the Ministry of men preaching by Episcopal authority, is (in
reality of construction) a flattering of the Bishops themselves; and (doutless)
what Solomon speaks (Prove. 26. 28.) of a flattering mouth, as viz. that it
works ruin, is altogether as true of flattering actions, by which men may be
flattered into ruin, as well as by words of like import. Now though the
Bishops we speak of be guilty of the blood of many thousands of precious souls,
for whom Christ dyed, partly by thrusting out of the Vineyard of Christ many
true and faithful laborers, which Christ himself had sent in thither; partly
by keeping out many others of like worthy character, not permitting any
entrance, but only by the polluted door of their Ordination, by which very
few, or none, qualified aright for the Ministry, can obtain leave of their
consciences to enter; but chiefly by setting over them, or obtruding upon them,
ignorant, scandalous, and profane persons, for spiritual Guides, besides many
other exemplary misdemeanors, and unworthy practices, in their own lives and
conversations? although (I say) our Bishops (so called) do by these means,
without the least regret, or remorse of conscience, bring upon their heads the
blood of many thousand precious souls, yet will not this justify, or excuse
the children of God, if they shall act any thing, which is like to further the
perdition of their souls, the salvation whereof, (the enormous wickedness of
the men notwithstanding) they stand bound, both by the Law of charity, and in
conscience toward God, not to hinder (as by encouraging, or hardening them in
any evil way) but to promote with the best of their understanding. Therefore,

CONSIDERATION. IV.
As the Apostle (2 These. 3. 6, 14.) prescribes unto the Saints, the
separating, or withdrawing of themselves from a Brother that walks
inordinately, as a proper and christian means to make him ashamed (that is, to
bring him to repentance, by occasioning him to reflect upon the evil of his way
more seriously, and so to further his salvation) in like manner, the
withdrawing of good Christians from the Prelates in their Ministers (in whose
creation, and imposition upon Churches, they walk most disorderly) being a
means of a promising and likely import, to make them ashamed of such their
Prelatical presumptions and misdemeanors, cannot in reason, or in conscience,
but be interpreted as a matter of duty lying upon them to practice: If men have
any thing of men, any spark of ingenuity in them, any sense of interest either
with God or men, they cannot but be severely jealous of such ways and doings;
upon which the Generation of the Righteous shall set the black brand of their
dis-approbation, by refusing all communion and fellowship with them, even at a
distance; and this out of Conscience toward God, and for fear of his
displeasure.

CONSIDERATION V.
To accept, with contentment and satisfaction, of spiritual means, proffered,
or conveyed unto us, by a false authority, or by persons no ways interessed,
or entrusted by Christ, is, as far as in us lies, to make void, or (however)
to discredit, the right and just title of those, upon whom Christ has (indeed)
conferred this trust and honor; and as he, who renting another man's Ground,
shall turn Tenant, and pay his Rent to a false Landlord, upon a pretended
claim made by him of right to the said Lands, much weakneth and disableth the
title of the true: In like manner, he that from time to time shall honor with
his presence and attention, a Ministry advanced by such an order of men, who
have no right, but only a frivolous and empty pretext of right, to impose
Ministers upon Christian Congregations, must needs hereby obscure and wrong the
just title and claim, which the Churches of Christ have, by the gracious
donation and grant of Christ, to choose, ordain, and set over themselves Pastors
and Teachers.

CONSIDERATION VI.
For a man not to depend upon God for such a blessing upon his diligent and
prudent endeavors in a lawful calling, which shall supply and furnish him with
things needful for this present life, or not to be content with such supplies
in this kind, which the blessing of God upon his honest labors, furnishes him
with; but to turn aside into dishonest ways, as of their, deceit, etc. through
fear of want, or of being starved, or the like; any of these practices is a
(constructive) complaining of the Providence of God unto the World (or rather,
indeed, unto the Devil:) And for Christians to seek their spiritual food at
those lips, which not God, but his enemies have opened, and polluted, by
touching them with a dead coal from their Altar, is it of any better
interpretation, than a professed jealousy, or doubtfulness of mind, whether
Christ will nourish them with the Words of eternal Life, and make them wise
unto Salvation, in case they should strictly confine and keep themselves to the
use of such means only which he has sanctified, and which are unquestionably
approved by him, especially, when like the Waters of Siloam, they run but
softly, and not embolden their Consciences to comport with such other means for
their edification, the lawfulness whereof, as themselves formerly scrupled, so
many thousands of the Saints absolutely deny at this day, not daring to accept
of any soul-provisions promised or pretended by them.

CONSIDERATION VII.
To undermine and defeat the counsels and attempts of men, who resist the Truth
(as Jannes and Jambres did Moses, 2 Timothy 3. 8.) by means and ways lawful and
suitable to the Gospel, and which are within our power, is (without
controversy) a duty lying upon all men: how much more upon all Saints? That
our Lord Bishops are deep in the condemnation of resisting the Truth; and this
much after the same manner, wherein those Egyptian Sorcerers resisted Moses
(namely, by promoting a counterfeit and false worship and service of God, like
unto the true: as those Sorcerers deluded Pharaoh and the Egyptians, by
counterfeiting those real and true Miracles which Moses wrought, and hereby
sought to frustrate Moses his Negotiation with Pharaoh about the Israelites
deliverance) is no Paradox, nor Problem [or difficult question] amongst true
and knowing Christians. Again, that a detection or discovery of the folly or
madness of those, who either thus, or in any other way, resist the truth (for
the Scripture supposes a designed resistance of the Truth to be madness, or
folly in her exaltation, in whomsoever it be found, 2 Pet. 2. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 9.)
is an effectual means to supercede their wickedness in that kind, and to
prevent their further progress in their course, the holy Ghost himself
informs us: But they [men of corrupt minds, and resisting the Truth] shall
proceed no further: for their folly [or, madness] shall be manifest unto all
men, as their also was, 2 Timothy 3. 9. Now then, if the refraining of the Saints
from those spiritual Tables, which are spread by the Bishops (I mean, from the
Preachments of men of their anointing) be a proper and likely means to manifest
their folly unto the world, in their hostile devices and attempts against the
Truth, it is (certainly) a duty incumbent upon them to use such abstinence.
That this abstinence is a means promising the happy effect mentioned, may be
conceived by that discovery, which David's absence once and again from Readiness
Table, made of Readiness wickedness, in his unreasonable malice against David, and
consequently against God himself. The Historical Passage hereof may be read, 1 Samuel 20. from verse. 24. to the end of verse. 34. For, as Saul, finding David's
accustomed place at his Table empty twice together, was hereby provoked to show
himself in his colors of wretchedness and impiety: So is it not unlike but
that sober and good men, by a constant absenting themselves from Ministers of
the Hierarchical Unction, on whose Ministry they had formerly been wont to
attend, will draw out into the view of all men, that same (...), that folly, or
madness, in their great Lords and Masters (the Bishops) which being discovered,
will render them the general abhorring of men, and so cause them to fall like
Lightning from the Heaven of their Glory and put a period to their Kingdom. And
as the providence of God delivered David from the malicious and bloody rage of
Saul, wherewith he pursued him upon his absence from his Table; so may the good
People of God expect protection from on high, in case the said Bishops, making
themselves aggrieved at their departure from they spiritual provisions, which
they have ordained for them, shall attempt to magnify themselves in wrath and
revenge against them. Besides, the general refraining of sober and
understanding Christians from the Ministry of a Prelatical erection, which many
of them had (in the simplicity of their hearts) formerly frequented, cannot but
occasion persons of ingenuous and free spirits, to enquire into the grounds and
reasons hereof; in which enquiry, very probable it is that they will discover,
or be led to somewhat, either in the Office, or Usurpations, of the Prelatical
Order, as the just occasion of it; the consideration whereof may cause them
also to turn Apostates from their former esteem and approbation of them.

CONSIDERATION VIII.
If we speak of the generality of those Ministers, who retain the Signature of
Prelatical hands laid upon them, and have not some ways or other defaced it,
we may truly say (in the Scripture Phrase, Mic. 7. 4.) The best of them is as a
Bryar, the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge. Few Sermons are preached
by them, in which something is not uttered, that is justly offensive and
grievous to the Spirits of holy and good men. Yea, of these Apothecaries, such
as are accounted both the most honest, and skilful, in their profession, and to
vend the best, and wholsomest Druggs, and Receipts, have one or other dead fly
(and commonly more then one) in their Ointment, which causes it to cast forth
a stinking savor in the Nostrils of those who have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil. (Neither can it in reason be expected otherwise:
For being sworn Vassals to the Prelatical Interest and Design, and this being
to subject the power of godliness unto the form, and so to uphold their
super-numerary Function, Dignity, and tyrannical Grandeur, in, and over the
Churches of Christ, the Ministers we speak of are ever and anon, or at times,
necessitated to act their parts in opposition to the holy desires and design of
the true and faithful servants of God, whose hearts are deeply set within them
for the advancement of the power of godliness in the world, above the form of
it, and not to acknowledge, or do homage unto any person, or persons, claiming
dominion over their faith, but unto Christ only. The particulars, by one, or
more of which, the said Ministers are wont to make the hearts of persons truly
godly, heavy and sad, are these (with their fellows) 1. They are expressly
enjoined by their Patent to show their child like (that I say, not blind)
obedience to their Grandfathers (the Bishops) by saying over their Creed, and
their Paternoster, over, and over, and over, once (at least) every month,
together with the rest of the devices comprehended under the Title of
Common Prayer, and this publicly, and in the face of their Congregation,
appearing also in their Masters Livery [I mean, the Surplice] that all men may
know to whom they belong, and whose Servants they are. This is one great
nuysance done by these men to the spirits of those who truly fear God. 2. They
bow down their necks to the yoke of Ceremonies, and yield that observance to
the fopperies of men, which is due to the most weighty precepts of God. 3.
There are few of them, who content themselves with the simple observation of
these Ceremonies, but think it their duty to take pity on them, being so
generally hated, opposed, and condemned, and to speak a good word for them now
and then, and to justify both the practice and imposition of them. 4. There
are not many of those, that are least obnoxious amongst them, but will think
it, either their duty, or their wisdom, or both, to steal an Opportunity
(sometimes) to speak honorably of their gracious Lords and Benefactors, to
commend their Function as Sacred, and of Divine Institution, and as singularly
necessary for the Peace and good Government of the Church, etc. 5. Who is there
of them, but, be he never so concise and short in his Prayer before his Sermom,
yet allows a large roomth for the mention of his Reverend, if not Right
Reverend Fathers in God; (as if they suspected that God would not know that
they meant them, unless they presented them in their Pontificalibus before him)
yea, and gives flattering and unbeseeming Titles to other great persons also?
6. They are the smallest number of them, who will not semel in anno (at least)
teach (in effect) the importune Doctrine of blind Obedience to Superiors, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil: It is like, they will not teach this Obedience under
the term of, blind, because Protestant Writers have made it infamous amongst
persons of this profession, by often charging the Doctrine of BLIND Obedience, as
Antichristian, upon the Jesuits. But when they fall upon hammering this nayl
(I mean of obedience and subjection to Superiors) they so sorge it, as that
they leave no liberty or freedom of judgment, or conscience, to inferiors, to
judge of the lawfulness, and unlawfulness of the Superiors command; but
conclude those amongst transgressors, and persons worthy severe punishment,
that refuse to conform themselves to their injunctions, though their judgments
and consciences conclude them never so (manifestly) unlawful. And what is this,
but (in effect) to preach and press the ungodly, yea, unmanly doctrine of blind
Obedience? Yea, some of them do not forbear to place the Perfection, or highest
strain of that Mortification and self-denial, which they preach, in that kind
of blind Obedience to Superiors, which has been mentioned. 7. They are not a
few of those that are of best esteem in the said party of Ministers, who will
not find, or take occasion (sometimes) to vent themselves in unworthy and base
reflections upon the Power of Godliness, and upon persons more tenderly
conscientious than themselves, and who strain at the Camels, which they
swallow. 8. (and lastly,) There is hardly one of a thousand of them, that
(according to their duty) will cry aloud, and lift up their Voice like a
Trumpet, to show their great Lords and Masters their great transgressions, in
persecuting the Servants of the living God, in suppressing their Christian and
just Liberties, in thrusting their zealous and faithful Teachers out of the
Sanctuary, in obtruding upon them dumb Dogs (or worse than dumb) or greedy
Wolves, in their stead; in exasperating the spirits of Rulers against them, and
representing them as persons dangerous to the State, and troublers of its
Peace; in assenting unto, if not procuring the making of hard and cruel Laws
against them, (with the like.) These are part of the unhappy ways and
practices, by which even our best Preachers of the Episcopal Character, are
always apt, and often wont, to make sad the spirits of holy and good men, when
they hear them: so that though they may (possibly) hear several Sermons from
them, from none of which they shall actually suffer in any of these kinds; yet
they cannot at any time go to hear them with any reasonable Security, but that
some or other of this Gall and Vinegar will be given them to drink. This then
is another Consideration to take off our edge from hearing them.

CONSIDERATION IX.
As for the generality, or far greater part of the body of that Ministry, from
which we endeavor to persuade good men to turn away, they are a company of sad
souls, men, who (according to the Proverb) Animam habent pro sale; they have
souls serving only to preserve their bodies from putrefying: Some of them
profoundly ignorant, scarce understanding their Rubric, or how to find out
the Psalms and Lessons appointed for the day in the Bishops Calender: others,
drowned in sensuality, desperately debauched, much fitter to be made Priests to
serve at the Pagan Altars of Bacchus, and Venus, than to minister the Holy
things of Jesus Christ: others possessed with a spirit of profaneness, which
makes them bold to take the Name of God in vain, and to make frothy jests and
conceits of things most sacred: Others wolfishly covetous and cruel, rigorously
exacting of their People the utmost Farthing of Wages, which the Law allows,
for the smallest pittance of Work, or Service, which the Law tolerateth. All
these have (as it were) given hostages to Satan, to secure him that they will
never make any hostile attempt upon him, nor disturb him in his possession of
any soul under his power. Now this retrimentitious party of the Ministry we
speak, are (...), fellow members of the same body of Ministers, with those,
whose Character was given in the former Consideration, and to whom we here
likewise gave the pre-eminence in worth, amongst and above all their fellows:
So that those respects, and that honor, which we cast upon these in our
attendance upon their Ministry, redound (in part at least) unto the others
also: and so by countenancing the worthiest and best, of this disordered order,
we countenance and comfort the worst and vilest likewise; For (as the Apostle
says) If one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12.
26. [viz. as being partakers of that honor which is done unto it:] In like
manner, when we confer the honor of our presence upon such of the Episcopal
Clergy, who are least obnoxious, we encourage and rejoice the heart, even of
the refuse and tail of this Clergy also, these being flesh of their flesh, and
bone of their bone, and all of them in their calling to the Ministry, descended
from the loins (or hands rather) of the same Ghostly Fathers, the Bishops. Now
for Christians to honor that (though at a distance, and in a collateral way
only) which Christ himself has pronounced to be good for nothing, no, not so
much as for the Dunghill, but only to be cast out, and txodden under foot by
men, (Mat. 5. 13. with Luke 14. 33, 34, 35.) must needs be judged a very great
dis-service unto him, and of a most ungrateful resentment with him.

CONSIDERATION X.
Whereas the Ordination of Ministers, when regularly and duly performed, is of
a very promising consequence unto their Ministry, the blessing of God (as it
were of course) following it; the Ordination of the Prelatical Clergy, being
not only contrary to the Laws established by Christ, in the Commonwealth of
Israel, for the government thereof, but also managed and transacted by men that
are no friends of God, nor lovers of his Saints, nor of the purity of his
Worship, nor of the power of Godliness, is, in respect of the success of their
Ministry, much more threatening, than promising, God being no ways like to give
any testimony from Heaven unto them, being sent forth into his work upon terms
so highly dishonorable and displeasing to him; for, the Prayers, by which the
Minister to be ordained, is recommended unto the Grace and Blessing of God, in
the work of the Ministry, by those that are present, and assisting in the
business, being (upon the matter) the All in All, of, or in, the transaction
(for laying on of hands is only a Ceremony, and questioned by some whether
necessary, yea, or fitting, to be used in these days) and the sacrifice of the
wicked being an abomination unto the Lord, as the Prayer of the upright is his
delight, (Prove. 15. 8.) we have but a quick-sand for a foundation of any hope,
that Ministers Prelaticall ordained, are sent forth unto the great work of the
Gospel, with a blessing, and not rather under a curse. Besides, suppose we (for
argument sake) that our Lord Bishops, and their Chaplains (who are the great,
if not the only doers, in the Solemnities of their Ordination) were lovers of
God indeed, and no ways disaffected against persons, truly holy and
conscientious; yet the Ministers ordained by them, not being to serve or
minister unto them in the most important affairs of their souls, it is not like
that their prayers for them, or for the blessing of God upon their labors in
preaching, would be (in any degree) so effectually fervent, as the prayers,
wherewith the Ministers, who are by the particular Churches of the Saints
chosen to serve them, in the high concernments of their eternal salvation, are,
by them solemnly assembled, with prayer and fasting for the purpose, presented
unto God in the day of their Ordination. That Charity is rate, which keeps
not her self warmer at home than abroad.

CONSIDERATION XI.
Many who at first intended nothing more in hearing the Ministers we speak of,
but their own Christian Edification and Comfort, and nothing less than to
become Proselytes to their dead forms of imposed worship, or to comport with
them in their detestable things (Ezekiel. 7. 20. I mean their Fanatic Ceremonies)
or to approve of their Hierarchical Mission into the Vineyard of Christ, etc.
yet by a frequent and familiar converse with them in their Ministry, have in
time (and some in a very short time) been so transformed in their Judgments
and Consciences, as to swallow all these Camels without straining, and to make
one spirit with them in all their Antichristian Principles and Practices. The
heat of that pleasure and contentment which we sometimes take in the
commendable and worthy sayings or doings of men, proves a snare unto us to fall
in with them in sayings and doings of a contrary import, and which are of a
very dangerous, if not destructive consequence unto us: so that in this sense
it is not only true, that (...), evil homilies, or discourses (as the Apostle
expresses himself with the heathen Poet, 1 Cor. 15. 33.) but even (...), good
and worthy communications, many times, occasionally, and from some kind of men,
corrupt good manners. The unsound and rootten Doctrines of the Pharisees (as of
the Sadduces also) were (it seems) of a leavening nature, apt to Spread, and to
insinuate themselves into the minds, and judgments, and affections of men. Our
Savior himself declares this unto us, partly by comparing them unto leaven,
but more plainly by admonishing the people; yea, his Disciples themselves, over
and over, to look to themselves that they were not ensnared with them: Then
Jesus said unto them, TAKE HEED and BEWARE of the leaven of the Pharisees, etc.
Mat. 16. 6. See also Mark 8. 15. Now one main reason why their evil and unsound
Doctrines were so catching, and likely by little and little to gain in the
approbations and consents of their Hearers (was in all probability) their
frequent teachings, and zealous pressings, of many wholesome and savory
Doctrines and Truths, according to the tenor and true intent of Moses's Law:
for as many an Horse, that is unserviceable, and worth little, by reason of
some grand defect that is not easily discerned, is yet bought and sold at a
considerable rate, Quod pulchri clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix. by
reason of some features that are curiously commendable in them: In like manner
many a man's Ministry may be approved and swallowed, root and branch, head and
tail, by the brokery and mediation of some choice Sermons, or points of
Doctrine, managed and handled effectually, or however to the high contentment
of the Hearer, although this Ministry taken in the whole body, or course of it,
be not so well and safely calculated for the saving of the Soul. I have heard
of (and, in in part, known) some, to whom, when they first became hearers of
the Prelatical Clergy, their imposed Common Prayer, their lumber of Ceremonies,
their Hierarchy, with all their implements and trinkets, etc. were Hey, Stabble
and Wood, yea, or rather, Dung and Filthiness; who notwithstanding, by the
droppings of the tongues of these men into their ears, became, after no long
time neither, so bewitched in their Judgments and Consciences, that all these
were conceited by them as Silver, Gold, and precious Stones. Good words are
oft-times too hard for good meanings, and lead men, honestly disposed, into a
snare: nor is there any Method more commodious or promising unto men, whose
design it is to work sober and good men out of a love and liking of some part
of those Truths, which at present they believe, then by giving them their fill
of satisfaction and contentment in some others of them.

CONSIDERATION XII.
Although we be in some strait yet to combine with any corrupt Interest or
Correspondency, for accommodation or help, or to fall in with men, who have not
God amongst them, however they may be otherwise of a very promising aspect unto
us, has often, if not always, been of dangerous consequence unto those, that
have attempted and expected, the bettering of their condition in such a way.
When Amaziah, King of Judah, judging himself unable to wage war against the
Children of Mount Seir, with his own strength, had hired an hundred thousand
MIGHTY MEN OF VALOR out of Israel, for an hundred Talents of Silver, there was
sent unto him a Man of God with this message; O King, let not the Army of
Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel, etc. 2 Chronicles. 25. 6, 7.
So the People of God seeking for help, first of the Assyrians, and afterward
of the Egyptians, even when they were in an afflicted and hard condition, got
nothing by these applications but sorrow and shame: God threatened them by his
Prophet Jeremy; Thou shall also be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of
Assyria, Jer. 2. 36. The Scripture is pregnant with this Truth: See Isa. 8. 6,
7. That the Prelatical Interest is Eccentrical to the Glory of God, to the
Cause and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, runs in a Channel by it self, apart from,
and in opposition to these, and consequently is carnal and corrupt, and
obnoxious to the displeasure of God, needs no anxious demonstration unto
those, the eyes of whose minds are not bewitched and blinded with it; however,
somewhat has been argued to the point already in these papers, and somewhat
more may be added before we conclude: and the question (if yet a question it
must be) has been largely discussed, and learnedly decided by others. As for
the late reviving of this Interest amongst us, after it had lain sick, and
languishing, ready to have given up the Ghost for many years together; it
cannot be looked upon with a spiritually-discerning eye, but (what is
frequently observed in long and wasting sicknesses) a lightning before death:
and as the setting up of Dagon the second time in his place, after he had once
fallen upon his face to the Earth, before the Ark of God, occasioned his second
downfall, by which he lost his head (1 Samuel 5. 3, 4.) so, according to the
course of divine Providence, the lifting up of our Bishops from the gates of
death, is like to prepare the way to their second death, or fall, from whence
there will be no redemption. Now, the Ministers of whom we speak all this
while, being of the Prelatical descent, are members, or appurtenances of this
(I mean the Prelatical) Order, and have a great venture in the same bottom with
their Ghostly-Fathers: So that suppose we should be somewhat scanted for
Soul-accomodations, or much straightened for want of spiritual provisions
otherwise, yet to have recourse unto these men (yea, be it unto the best of
them) in their Ministry, for supplies in this kind, with an expectation that
they should bless us, or befriend us in our need, is to comport with the
unhallowed Interest we speak of, and to seek help of such a Generation or
Association of men, whom God (as the Scripture says) beholds a far off,
taking no pleasure to be amongst them: and consequently, such an application of
our selves for aid and relief, is like to turn to no better an account unto us,
than a disappointment, if not a far worse inconvenience.

CONSIDERATION XIII.
As far the greater number of the good People of God in this Nation stand now
persuaded in their Judgments and Consciences, touching the hearing of Ministers
ordained by a power ill-affected to Jesus Christ and his Interest on Earth, it
is just matter of scandal and offense to the weaker sort of this people, and of
sorrow and sadness of heart to many of them that are more spiritual, and
knowing, to understand, or hear, that any of their Christian Brethren, formerly
united unto them in the same mind and judgment against all the Superstitious
and Antichristian doings amongst us, are (frequently) present in those
Assemblies, unto whom men sent unto them by the Prelates only, presume
notwithstanding to speak in the name of God, bearing themselves as the
Ambassadors of Christ, lawfully commissioned by him for the Service they
perform. Now the Scripture often speaks of scandalizing, in one kind or other,
those that are weak in the Faith, as of a very sinful and Un- Christian
misdemeanor in those who are called Christians, and of a provoking resentment
with Christ himself: But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat [when as thy
life and health may be preserved with such meats otherwise, which will not
offend, or grieve him] now walk thou not charitably. Destroy not him with
thy meat [that is, eat no such meat, the eating whereof by thee, may very
possibly through the scandal given thereby, prove his destruction] for whom
Christ dyed, Romans 14. 15. For meat destroy not the work of God. All things
indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man that eats with offense. It is
good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy Brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Have thou faith? Have it to thy self
before God. Happy is he that condemns not himself [namely by scandalizing a
weak Brother] in that thing which he allows [as lawful for him to do] Romans
14. 20, 21, 22. For if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at meat in
the Idols Temple, shall not the Conscience of him that is weak, be emboldned to
eat those things that are offered to Idols: and through thy knowledge shall the
weak Brother perish, for whom Christ dyed. But when ye sin so against the
Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ, [grieving and
indangering those, who believe in him, and therefore are dear unto him] 1 Cor.
8. 10, 11, 12. And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me, it is better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the Sea, Mark 9. 42. See also Matthew. 18. 6. Luke 17. 1, 2. The
clear result of these, and other-like sayings of the Holy Ghost, is, that to
scandalize, offend, or grieve any weak Believer, yea though it be but by an
undue exercise of our lawful liberty (lawful, I mean, otherwise,) is very
unworthy the profession of the Gospel, and an indignity offered unto Jesus
Christ, sorely threatening him that shall offer it, without repentance. It is
true, where there is any obligation upon men by way of precept, or duty, to do
that, at which a weak Christian is offended, here is no scandal, or offense
given, but only taken; and if any man be offended in this case, he must bear
the burden of his ignorance himself. God is to be obeyed, though the whole
world should be offended at it. But that it should be incumbent or necessary,
by any precept or command from God, to hear (at least ordinarily, and from day
to day) Ministers of a Lordly creation, or Prelatical tincture, never yet (I
suppose) came within the Verge of any man's thoughts, unless (happily) of some
Episcopally addicted above their fellows: nay, the practice has not found
(that I can find or hear of,) any competent Defender of so much as the
lawfulness of it, to this day. Therefore if it should be given (by way of
Charity) unto those, that have made bold to take the liberty of hearing the
Ministers we wot of, that this their practice, simply, and in it self
considered, is lawful; yet in the case of so much scandal and offense, as it
gives to many thousands of their weak Brethren in the Nation, it becomes in
them Un- Christian and Unlawful; yea, and it is the more Un- Christian and
unworthy, in as much as it further causes much sadness and grief of heart,
even unto those that are of more understanding; because, besides the scandal
given by it unto the weak, they judge it a practice altogether, and in it self,
unwarrantable, as being derogatory unto the Royalities of Jesus Christ, as Sole
King, and Lawgiver unto his Church; of which, as somewhat formerly, so a
little more may be said hereafter.

CONSIDERATION XIV.
The practice lately mentioned, and hitherto dissuaded, as it is offensive to
all good Christians, who either suspect, or conclude, the unlawfulness of it,
and in this respect is a breach of the Law of that tender Love, which we owe
unto them; so is it of no good consistence, no not with that Love, which we
stand bound to show even to those persons themselves, whom we hear in such a
way, although they be men, who without any order from Christ, receive
Ordinations and Commissions to preach, from his Adversaries; (his Adversaries,
at least in their claim and exercise of a coordinate power with his, in and
over his Churches, which is a broad incroachment upon the most sacred and high
Prerogative of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) But though this compliance
in the Ministers we speak of, with the said Adversaries of Christ, be adjudged
by us (and this according to the Truth) a sin very enormous, and of sad
consequence to the Saints, and Gospel; yet we, who stand charged by our Great
Lord and Master to love our enemies, ought not to strengthen the hand, or to
harden the heart of these men in their evil way, or to do any thing which is
likely to be a snare unto them, to put the good day of Repentance (and
consequently Salvation) far from them, but rather unfeignedly to endeavor with
the best of our understandings, to convert them from the error of their way,
and to save their soul. Now, as the Apostle Paul (as we formerly observed)
prescribes the withdrawing of our selves from a Brother that walks
inordinately, as a christian and proper means to make him ashamed of his sinful
course, (2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. and 14.) and so to move him to abandon and forsake it;
So on the contrary, to give the right hand of fellowship unto, or to frequent
the company of a person engaged in any sinful way (especially when, or whilst,
he is actually walking in this way) must needs be a direct means of
encouragement unto him to persist in his way, and to hide Repentance from his
eyes: Therefore they who customarily wait at the door (...) the lips of an
ill-procured Ministry, and frequent the Assemblies where such a Ministry is
exercised, if they be persons of any note for the knowledge and fear of God, or
for a christian and worthy conversation, cannot but stand in his light, who
officiates unto them in the way of this Ministry, so that he cannot see the
error and danger of his way. For who is like to suspect (much less to be
thoroughly convinced) that such a practice or course, is evil, (especially being
likewise commodious to the flesh) which receives such a weighty testimony that
it is lawful and good, as the approbation of persons of great esteem both for
light and heat, in matters appertaining unto God, and this testified by their
constant, at least frequent correspondings with it?

CONSIDERATION XV.
Yea, such of the Saints and Servants of God, being in any degree considerable
in their Generation, who by the practice so frequently put to rebuke in these
Papers, shall give countenance, credit, and contentment to the present
Generation of a Prelatical Clergy, hereby become generative of a succession of
birds of the same feather, and threaten Christians yet unborn, that they also
shall be served with no better then a spurious and illegitimate Ministry. For
when those young ones, who intend to serve at the Altar, and separate
themselves for the office, and work of the Ministry, shall see and understand,
that men sent forth into the Christian world by Prelatical Order and Authority,
find favor and acceptance in the eyes of good and discerning Christians, as
well as those that are set over the Churches of the Saints by the holy Ghost
himself, how shall not their consciences be hereby emboldned to accept, without
scruple, of a Prelatical mission, and through the temptation, strongly to
imagine, when they clim'd up, and got in at the window, that they came in by
the right door? Yea, upon the same account, how shall not the Prelates
themselves, though (at present) abundantly satisfied (in their affections, at
least) touching, not the lawfulness only, but even the necessity of their
needless (though not harmless) Office and Function in the Church, be made
twofold more the Sons of confidence, that they are the Stars of the first
magnitude in the hand of Christ, and that the Axle-tree of the universal Church
turns upon their shoulders? But somewhat to this effect in a former
Consideration.

CONSIDERATION XVI.
The Holy Ghost takes notice that such Teachers, unto whom the world (that is,
carnal and worldly persons, professing Christianity) are wont to resort in the
exercise of their Ministry, taking pleasure and contentment therein, are no
true Ministers of Christ; insinuating withal, that sincere Christians, and
persons spiritually-minded, more generally (at least) decline them, and deny
them their presence at their teachings. The beloved Apostle John, speaking of
false Teachers, gives these three characters of them (amongst some others)
first, That they are of the world (that is, members of the fraternity, or
brotherhood, of worldly men; or lovers of this present world:) secondly, That
they speak of the world; or, (as it might well, and more significantly, I
conceive, be translated) (...), out of the world: meaning, that they are wont
first to make enquiry into the world about them, and to inform themselves what
humors and practices, what principles, notions, and opinions, are most
predominant, and of best resentment, amongst both the great men of the world,
and the generality likewise of the People (although these commonly are at too
good an agreement in such matters;) and again, what Doctrines and Tenants will
be well enough born and endured, by both, without any disgust of him that shall
teach them; and on the contrary, what are like either to bring him into
trouble, or to cast him out of favor, etc. and when they have satisfied
themselves, and well understood the World in these particulars, they model and
mould the tenor of their Ministry and Preaching accordingly, waving those
Truths, be they never so importantly necessary to be made known, the preaching
or owning of which, they understand is like to shake and weaken (if not wholly
to annihilate or destroy) their interest in the World; and withal, cunningly
wresting and perverting the Word of God in such passages, which truly
understood, rise up with great evidence and power against those Doctrines, by
which they oblige and insure the World unto them. Upon some such account as
this, they are, or may be, said to speak (...), of, or out of, the World: This
is a second character of them. Thirdly, The third (and last) is, that the World
hears them; meaning, that carnal and earthly-minded Professors of the Gospel
(for Professors, either of Judaism, or of Paganism, cannot be here meant)
resort unto their Ministry, are their settled and accustomed hearers, and well
apaid and satisfied with their teachings, 1 John 4. 5. Whereunto the Apostle
immediately subjoyns; We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; [that is,
relisheth our Ministry, and with diligence and delight, attends on it] he
that is not of God, hears not us, etc. clearly implying, that such Teachers,
unto whose Ministry carnal Professors and loose Christians, ordinarily and in
great numbers are wont to gather themselves, sitting from time to time with
contentment and satisfaction under it, are not Teachers of that kind, or of
that spirit, with whose Ministry spiritual and sound Christians can long rest
satisfied, or care to attend upon. These are those Strangers, whom Christ says
his Sheep will not follow, but will flee from them, because they know not their
voice, John 10. 5. Therefore as the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, that he
could not speak unto them, as unto Spiritual, but as unto carnal, because they
walked in several carnal practices (1 Cor. 3. 1, 3.) So may we without any
breach, either of Charity or Truth, look upon those Christians, as savouring
the things which be of men, more than the things which be of God, who addict
themselves to such a Ministry, which is constantly frequented, countenanced,
approved, applauded, and delighted in, by such Professors of Christianity, who
by their ignorance, profaneness, and all manner of debauchery in their lives and
conversations, blaspheme their holy Profession, and stain the glory of the
ever-blessed Gospel of God. And is not this the undeniable and appropriate
character of the Prelatical Ministry? Do not the dregs and refuse of the
Nation, generally, and in all places, gather themselves unto it, and rejoice
over it, being as well apaied with it, as Micah was with his Idolatrous Priest
made of a silly wandering Levite? Now know I (says he) the Lord will do me
good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest, Judge. 17. 13. Yea, this Ministry
seems to be, both intended by the founders of it (the Prelates) and also formed
and managed by the inferior Clergy, who exercise it, for the gratification of
such persons, and this rather, by persuading them that they are truly
religious, and in favor with God already, than by making them so indeed.
Therefore they who being (not in their own eyes only, but even in the judgment
of discerning and found Christians) living members of the household of Faith,
shall notwithstanding relish and savor a Ministry calculated for the World,
and accepted by it accordingly; hereby give testimony against themselves, that
as yet they retain too much of the spirit of this World, to be filled, as they
ought, with the Spirit of God, and of the World which is to come.

CONSIDERATION XVII.
Neither may it be unworthy our consideration in the case before us, that we
read in the Scriptures, that unbelievers and persons destitute of the saving
knowledge of God, did sometime come into the Religious Assemblies of the
Saints, to partake of their Ministry, and were herein blameless: 1 Cor. 14. 22,
23, 24, etc. but do not any where find that Believers were wont to fall into
the Assemblies of Idolaters or Unbelievers, to receive instruction amongst
them, or from their Priests, in things appertaining unto God and his Worship.
Yea, the Apostle Paul adjudgeth it a practice altogether inconsistent with true
Christianity, to eat and drink with false worshippers at their Idolatrous
feasts, although it were done to escape persecution, 1 Cor. 10. from ver. 13.
to the end of ver. 23. And the sacred Author of the Epistle to the believing
Hebrews, admonishes and exhorts them, thus; And let us consider one another,
to provoke unto love, and to good works; Not forsaking the assembling of OUR
SELVES together, as the manner of some is, etc. Heb. 10. 24, 25. He admonishes
Believers to assemble with Believers, and not to withdraw themselves from
these, especially not to join or mingle themselves in the Assemblies of
Idolaters or Unbelievers, as some degenerating spirits amongst them (it seems)
did, out of fear of suffering persecution. For that these Christianiz'd Hebrews
were in a sore storm of persecution when this Epistle was written to them. and
consequently, when they were charged not to forsake the assembling of
themselves together, is evident from many passages in it: yea it is more
generally conceived by the best Expositors, that the principal intent and scope
of the Epistle was to support and comfort the Hebrews under thieir great
afflictions for the Gospel, and to encourage them unto constancy and
perseverance in their profession of it unto the end. So that fear of
persecution is no Christian ground for those that desire to approve themselves
faithful unto Jesus Christ, and the Gospel, to turn Renegadoes from the holy
Assemblies of the Saints, in which, and over which, they formerly rejoiced, and
to run to the tumultuous and disorderly conventions of carnal and profane
persons, as unto cities of refuge, hoping in these dark thickets to find covert
and shelter from those storms and tempests, which threaten those, who know God
better, and fear him more, then to shrink from him for fear of men. And great
reason there is, why Saints, who have been nourished with the sincere milk of
the Ghospel, bred, and brought up (as Christians) amongst their (Spiritual)
Peers, in their Holy Assemblies, should not dare to quit these Schools of light
and holiness, to become proselytes to the unhallowed and rude Synagogues of a
politic and worldly constitution; because they seldom, or never, change
their quarters upon these terms, but they do it to their certain damage and
great loss in their Spiritual estates, if not to the loss of their immortal
crowns, themselves in the end. For when they have for any space of time, been
influenced, and seasoned, by the Prelatical Ministry, which still superintends
these Congregations, experience shows that they are changed, not from glory
to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, but from glory to shame (I mean, from a
Christian and humble frame and temper, unto that which is worldly, sour and
supercilious) as by the spirit of the world, working effectually (for the most
part) in the Children of a Prelatical Ordination. And as Country huswives
observe that when any of their pulleyn, or hens have been trodden by Crows,
upon this unnatural copulation, they lose their native shapes, become deformed,
and seldom or never thrive, or recover after it: In like manner, when men and
women, who under a Christian Education in the congregation of the Saints, were
known to have been upright-hearted toward God, and good men, zealously
addicted to the purity of Gods worship, haters of all superstition, and
flesh-devised Ceremonies brought into this worship, lovers of the Saiuts,
asserters of their liberties, promoters of their comforts, holy, humble,
harmless, etc. when (I say) they shall forsake these assemblies, and go in to a
Prelatical Ministry, and converse familiarly with it, after a short time they
are sound to degenerate, and grow out of their kind, savouring of quite another
spirit; now they become learned Pleaders for Baal, their consciences are
enlarged to swallow Ceremonies of all sorts in the worship of God, as smoothly,
and with as little regret, as fishes drink water; to approve of the Hierarchy
in their usurpations, oppressions, and vexatious practices against the Saints,
to cry up that Idol of Jealousy [the Common-Prayer-Book] in disparagement of
the Heavenly gift of Prayer in the true Ministers of Christ, as those
Idolatrous wretches (Act. 19. 28.) cried out (in a wrothful opposition to
Paul's Doctrine concerning the true worship of the true God) Great is Diana of
the Ephesians; they become alienated in their affections toward the Saints,
choosing for their bosom converse, persons whom they judge most able, and
willing withal, to justify them in their Apostasy, and to maintain the
Prelatical cause, from the one end to the other, with greatest zeal and
dexterity; they become self-willed, self-conceited, boasting of their
knowledge, imputing it to the weakness and ignorance of all others, that they
do not sacrifice at the same Altars with them, or that they scruple, question,
or condemn any thing, which they allow and practice. In a word, these
Crow-trodden professors, (let the Metaphor offend no man) by offering and
suffering, their judgments and consciences to be ridden by a Prelatical Clergy,
become in time, not only transformed into an uncouth, strange, and hard
favored kind of Christian, much unlike unto themselves, when, and whilst they
consorted with the Sons and Daughters of God, and drank of the same waters of
life with them; but (for the most part) so intoxicated also, besotted, and
bewitched with their new wine, that they seldom, or never, recover that lovely
image of God, wherein they formerly appeared, to the comfort and joy of many a
precious Soul: For that which Solomon says concerning the woman, which
forsakes the Guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God;
namely, that none that go unto her return again, Prove. 2. 17, 19. may be said
of those that turn aside to a Babylonish Ministry: God in judgment, pours out
upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and closes their eyes (Esa. 29. 10.) so
that they hardly ever awake out of the snare until they dye.

CONSIDERATION XVIII.
Nor falls it much short of a Demonstration of the Evil, or sinfulness, of
that Way, from which, by many Arguments, we have dissuaded already; that so
much secular violence has been, and still is employed to compel and force all
men into it. How did the Prelates heretofore, before the great mountain of
their power and glory was removed by the late King and Parliament, turn every
stone of tyranny, cruelty and oppression, to constrain both men and women to
keep their Parish Churches? What troops of Summoners and Apparitors were levied
up and down the Nation, to hunt out, and pursue, like Bloodhounds, all, both
male and female, bond and free, whose Judgments were too full of Light, and
their Consciences of Goodness, to drink of the waters of those polluted
Cisterns, which they had hewn out, choosing rather (some of them) to worship God
chastely and purely, even with two or three gathered together in the name of
Christ; amongst whom he has promised his presence (Mat. 18. 20.) although in
such an attempt as this they exposed themselves to the danger of being, with
Daniel, cast into the Lions Den (I mean of being brought into their High
Commission, or some of their Antichristian Consistories) many (I say) choosing
this, rather than without any such danger, to communicate with the Parish
Assemblies, either in their adultrous worship or idol ministry: and of late,
since their deadly wound was (almost) healed, how have they, by their
sorceries, insinuated and prevailed with the Legislative Powers of the Nation,
only to legitimate Ministers of their spurious brood and conformity, and to
disinherit all others of their functions, as if they were basely descended,
because they do not call them, Fathers; and not only this, but by several
penalties also to restrain all assemblings of men for the Worship of God, and
their Christian Edification, excepting only in consort with such Congregations,
where they shall be necessitated to hear such Teachers only, who bring their
office of teaching from under their hands? Thus does the spirit of Prelacy, in
conjunction with an arm of flesh, and with the powers of this world (instead of
those of the world to come) labor in the very fire, to bring the whole trade
of hearing to the shops of their journey-men, be their wares never so braided,
slight, or deceitful: and this verifieth the saying, Superbia appetitum habet
unitatis and omnipotentiae; i. e. The Pride of man greatly affects unity, and
omnipotency. Now it can hardly be showed, that ever the real interest of the
Gospel, or true Christianity, endeavored their advancement or promotion in the
World, by threatening or inflicting secular punishments, as Fines,
Confiscations, Imprisonments, Banishments, Deaths, or the like, upon those who
refused to comply with them; but upon their service, and for their gaining upon
the world, rather offered and exposed their own proselytes and friends, upon
all occasions, to the suffering of these things from the world: Whereas (on the
contrary) it is well known that Idolatry, Superstition, and false Worships
(almost in every kind) in all ages, for the enlargement of their quarters, and
for increasing the number of their Proselytes, have, according to their
strength, warred after the flesh (in the Apostles phrase) and pleaded their
cause with Fire and Sword, and all manner of outward severities, against those
that refused compliance with them. By how authoritative, and bloody an Act of
Uniformity, did King Nebuchadnezzar endeavor a universal concurrence of all
within his vast Dominions, to join with him in his Idolatrous Worship of the
Golden Image which he had set up? Then (all his Princes, and great Officers of
State, being summoned together, and present) an Herald cried aloud, To you it
is commanded, O People, Nations and Languages, That at what time ye hear the
sound of the Cornet -- ye fall down and worship the Golden Image, which
Nebuchadnezzar the King has set up. And whosoever falls not down, and
worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace, Dan. 3. 4, 5, 6. And when only three persons in his Dominions, were
accused as Nonconformists to this his Decree, with what fierceness of
indignation does he proceed against them? First, In his rage and fury he
commanded to bring them before him: Being come, he himself examined them, or
rather expostulated with them about the crime laid to their charge, as if it
had been an high affront put upon him, or an undervaluing of his Majesty and
Power. Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abeduego? Do ye not serve my gods,
nor worship the Golden Image which I have set up? Even as our Prelates, and
great men of their Inspiration, count it an insufferable disparagement and
reproach unto them, when persons of meaner rank in the World, judge it not
safe, or well-pleasing unto God, to worship him after the same mode with them,
as with the same Ceremonies, the same Gestures or Postures of body, in the same
places and assemblies (the same, I mean, in nature or kind) and especially with
the same Liturgies and forms of Prayer, when they shall authoritatively,
solemnly, and with a borrowed visor of gravity and devotion, impose all this
upon them. When the King having re-minded the said three Servants of God, of
the tenor of his Decree, concerning the worshipping of his Golden Image, and
threatened them with the heavy doom therein expressed, in case they should
persist in their Nonconformity; after all this, understood that they
nevertheless, without any demurre in the case, stood fast and firm in their
resolution, not to comport with his Decree, in a great fury he commanded that
the Furnace should be heated seven times hotter than ordinary, and that the
strongest men in his Army should bind these three persons, and cast them into
it, ver. 13, 14, 15. etc. We may in this story, as in a glass, behold the
spirit of Idolatry and Superstition, acting, like it self, in rage and blood,
to compel, through dread and terror of outward sufferings, an universal
subjection of all persons, to all the prescripts and commands of it. In like
manner, the Beast that had two horns like a Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon [that
is, that professes the humility and meekness of Christ, the Lamb of God, but
speaks in his Bulls, and Excommunications of Kings and Princes, and whole
Nations, like the Great Red Dragon, the Devil, who boasts of a power,
delivered and given unto him, to dispose of all the Kingdoms of the World as he
pleased, Luke 4. 6.] this Beast (I say) according to that Heavenly Vision,
wherein his practices and doings were long since revealed by Christ unto his
beloved Disciple (John) causes ALL, both small and great, rich and poor, free
and bond, to receive [from him, or by his command] a mark in their right hand,
or in their foreheads: and that no man might buy, or sell, [and consequently,
have any means of livelihood, or subsistence, as far as he could hinder it]
save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the Beast [meaning his own] or the
number of his Name (Rev. 13. 16, 17.) that is (in the general; for we must not,
at present, enquire after the particulars) save only such, who should give
testimony, by one means or other, that they owned his Authority, and submitted
their Consciences to his Faith and Religion. And verse. 15. it is said, that by
his power he gave Life [or Spirit: the word is, (...)] unto the Image of the
Beast [that is, to his own Image; meaning, that what by means of his temporal,
and what by means of his spiritual power, which he should get in the world, he
would so animate and inspire his Image; that is, the Systeme, or aggregate
Body, of his Ecclesiastical Consistories, or Courts of Judicature in all
places, which in their bloody proceedings and actings against the true Worship
and Worshippers of God; resemble his Genius and frame of Spirit, and may
therefore be termed his Image] (...) this body, or Image of his: says John, He
had power to give Life, that it should both speak, and cause [that is, so
speak, as to cause] that as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast,
[that is, reverentially own and acknowledge this his Jurisdiction and Power, as
given unto him by God] should be killed. The other Interpretation of this
passage given by some, makes the result of it the same in reference to our
present purpose: And the practices of the Papal Judicatures for many Ages past,
in all places and Nations under Heaven, where the Authority and Faith of the
triple Crown prevailed, give a pregnant and loud testimony to the truth
contained in the Scriptures now cited; yea, and afford a clear light for the
right understanding of them. It were no hard matter to exemplify and confirm
the obsrvation now before us, by many more instances, as well from the
Scripture-Records themselves, as from Histories of the best credit otherwise.
So that it is a shrewd presumption, that a co-assembling with
Parish-Congregations for the Worship of God, and the ordinary or constant
hearing of a Prelatical Priesthood, have nothing of God in them, make not for
edification in Faith and Love, in that they are so rigorously exacted, and
under such severe penalties imposed upon all men by the greatness of this
World, this being the accustomed, known, and appropriate method of Idolatry,
Superstition, and humane-Inventions, to maintain and propagate themselves, and
their interest, in the World: Nor are they that ride upon the high places of
the Earth, wont to be so zealously addicted or through-hearted, to promote the
real concernments of Heaven, where they have to do. The reason why Christ shall
not deliver up the Kingdom, which at present he administreth, unto God the
Father, until he has put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, is
declared thus: For he must reign, till he has put all ENEMIES under his feet,
1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. clearly implying that persons of high interest in the World,
are seldom in any other sense, friends to the Kingdom of Christ, but only by
opposing it; their enmity and opposition to him [in his Saints and Worship]
ministers an occasion unto him, according to the projecture of the Wisdom and
Counsel of God, to continue this Kingdom so much the longer in his hand;
namely, until, in a most equitable and fair process of Justice and Judgment,
and after much patience, and a large space given for Repentance, he shall
abolish for ever their places of dignity and power from off the Earth.

CONSIDERATION XIX.
When God has vouchsafed a sufficiency of (...), and these unquestionably
lawful, though not so rank of flesh, or so highly promising (upon such an
account) as some others, for the attaining of any, good and desirable end; as
well a declining and forsaking of these means, (whether out of diffidence of
the sufficiency of them for the end desired, or upon any other reason
whatsoever) to espouse others that are more (carnally) flattering, and
pretending to more strength and efficacy, but want the feal of Divine
Approbation upon them; as the associating of means of this latter kind with
those of the former, hoping by such a Conjunction as this, to pursue our
desires with less danger of a defeat, or disappointment; I say, both the one
and the other of these projections and practices have still been displeasing
unto God, and of sad consequence unto those, that have been no better advised
than to make trial of them. Examples of the truth of this observation the
Scriptures afford many. When King Ahaz would not rest satisfied with the
strength of his own Kingdom, and men, by whom God had promised him protection
and deliverance from the two Kings his neighbors, who combined in War against
him, but judged it better policy to call in the King of Assyria to his
assistance, contrary to the mind of God made known unto him by the Prophet, in
these words, Take heed, and BE QUIET [that is, trouble not thy self in seeking
after foreign help, from one place or other: It is much the same expression,
and upon a like occasion, which we find, Isa. 30. 7. Their strength, says God,
is to sit still; meaning to depend upon him in the use of such means for their
protection and safety, as they had at home, or he should direct them unto, and
not to weary themselves, or waste their treasures, by sending abroad to court
strange Princes for their aid] Fear not, neither be faint-hearted, for the two
tails of these smoking firebrarnds, etc. This King (I say) by this prudential
course (as he supposed) for the preservation of himself and his Kingdom,
provoked the just severity of God to the great misery of both, Isa. 7. 4.
compared with verse. 17, 18. etc. and 2 Chronicles. 28. verse. 16, 19, 20. For brevity
sake, and partly because of the affinity with the subject matter of the 12th
Consideration preceding, has with the Argument of this in hand, and partly
because the Observations asserted for Truths both in the one, and the other,
are so agreeable to the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, as the Great Judge of
all the Earth, we shall forbear to argue any more Texts of Scripture upon the
service of what has been laid down as the strength of our present
Consideration, although there be very many more, which both in face and in
heart, carry the substance and effect hereof, as (by name) Isa. 8. 6, 7, 8.
-30. 1, 2, 3, 15, 17. 2 Chronicles. 25. 6, 7, 8. Jer. 2. 36, 37. Ezekiel. 16. 26, 27,
28. (with several others) I shall only instance the case of those Judaizing
Christians in the times of the Apostles, who to make all sure (as they thought)
for their Justification before God, would needs join the righteousness or works
of the Law, and more especially Circumcision, with the belief of the Gospel, or
Faith in Christ for the obtaining of it. But through a carnal diffidence of the
sufficiency of that way and means, which God has sanctified for their
justification, whilst they went about to supply the imaginary defect hereof
with an additional means suggested by their own wisdom (or folly rather) unto
them, they miserably miscarried in that so important a design, meeting with
condemnation, instead of justification, from the hand of God; according to what
the great Apostle plainly declared unto some of them: Behold, 1-Paul say unto
you, that if ye be circumcised [namely with an opinion of obtaining
justification, either in whole, or in part, by it] Christ shall profit you
nothing. And again: Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you
are justified [that is, expect, or hope to be justified] by the Law, ye are
fallen from Grace, Gal. 5. 2, 4. Let us now bind the present Consideration,
with what has been proposed and argued in it, fast and close to our present
purpose.

First, Certain it is that God has provided, yet and at all times, or at
least, ordinarily, even in times most threatening the sincere profession of the
Gospel, affords unto his Saints, means both unquestionably lawful, and
unquestionably sufficient, (if the Scripture may be Judge in the case) through
his accustomed Grace and Blessing, for their Edification, Comfort, and
Salvation.

Secondly, It is no less certain, that neither is a Prelatical Ministry, nor an
attendance hereon, any means, authorized or approved by God, for the promoting
or effecting of these ends. From hence, according to the plain tenor of the
premises laid down in this Consideration, it roundly follows, that either to
decline and forsake the means vouchsafed unto us by God for our Edification and
Salvation, to embrace others, or out of a conceit or pretense of an
insufficiency, or defectiveness in these means, for those ends to join others
with them, which he has not authorized, as (by name) the attendance upon a
Prelatical Ministry (however specious or highly promising this means may be in
our eye) is a policy or course, much more like to endammage and hinder us in
those great concernments of our souls, than any ways to bless us in promoting
them; as it is said of Tilgath Philnezer King of Assyria, of whom Ahaz King of
Judah had desired aid against his enemies, that when he came unto him, he
distressed him, but strengthened him not: Yea, it is added the second time, as a
matter worth the minding, that he helped him not, 2 Chronicles, 28, 20, 21.

Now that God affords unto his People sufficient means at all times for their
spiritual Edification and Salvation, without the help of a Prelatical Ministry,
might be proved at large from the Scriptures, if the case were doubtful enough
to require it. But the more degrees of visibility there are in the Object, the
fewer degrees of light will serve the visive faculty to discover it.

First, The Scriptures themselves, diligently read, and with a good and honest
heart searched into, are able to make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And
now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified, Acts 20. 32. But these [things] are written that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life
through his Name, John 20. 31. These places also well understood, speak (with
many others) the same thing. Luke 16, 29, 31. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, etc. 2 Pet. 1.
19. John 5. 39. Romans 15. 4. Heb. 4. 12.

Secondly, If any shall pretend, that the Scriptures, at least in many places,
are obscure, and hard to be understood aright without a learned Interpreter;
the answer is at hand: 1. The great variety of learned and profitable
Expositions on all parts of the Scripture, wherewith the good providence of God
has enriched this Nation in their native tongue, in these our days, render
such a pretense as this, in reference to the People of God amongst us, as light
as vanity it self: Nor is it like that the present Ministry founded upon the
Apocryphal Order of Prelacy, should be more Canonical or Orthodox, in giving
out the mind of God in the Scriptures, than they. Not to mention the like
variety of elaborate and solid discourses, (well nigh) upon all particular
Subjects, or Heads of matter relating to Christian Religion. 2. It is a
generally-acknowledged Truth, That in all things simply necessary unto
Salvation, the Scriptures are plain, and the sense of them obvious to every
ordinary understanding. 3. (and lastly, for this) The Judgments and
Understandings of many, if not of most Christians, have in all ages been led
aside from the mind of God in the Scriptures, (and this in things of very
material consequence) by the false lights of such their Teachers, who were in
great esteem for parts of learning, and knowledge in the Scriptures; in whom
has been verified that of the Prophet: O my people, they which lead thee,
cause thee to err; they swallow (for so the Original) the way of thy paths
[meaning, that they do not stand much to consider what they teach thee, either
to believe, or practise] Isa. 3. 12. -- 9. 16.

Thirdly, The Saints are able to build up one another in Faith, and Love: yea
and are exhortted, or commanded, by God so to do: But ye Beloved, building up
your selves on [or, in] your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost; Keep
your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord, etc. Jude
20, 21. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as
ye also do, 1 These. 5. 11. See also Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 3. 16. Romans 15. 14. Heb.
10. 24, 25. Jam. 5. 19, 20.

Fourthly, Even the smallest number of them, two, or three, meeting together
upon such terms as they may at any time, and sometimes (at least) ought, may
have the presence of Christ amongst them as often as they desire; and
consequently, need not be in any danger of miscarrying in their important
design of Salvation: for where two, or three (says Christ) are gathered
together in my Name [that is, either out of Conscience of my command in that
behalf; or rather, out of any real trust, or hope, that they may have in God
through me] there am I in the midst of them [meaning to bless them, and cause
them to prosper in any holy business they shall meet about, the presence of
God, or his being with, or amongst, any of his creatures, still importing such
a thing, Genesis 39. 2, 21, 23. Exodus 3. 12. Josh. 1. 5. Mat. 28. 20. Deuteronomy. 7. 21.
Josh. 22. 31. and elsewhere, very often] Mat. 18 20. Now so small a number of
Godly persons, as two, or three, may, with a little prudence and caution, even
in the hardest, and worst of times, meet together in the name of Christ,
without much danger from their enemies. If Christ had said, Where five, or six,
are gathered together in my name, there, etc. his presence amongst his Saints
must have been sought for by them at their greater peril, and with more
obnoxiousnesse (as it seems) to the Laws of men. So then the four means now
mentioned (to which might be added, if need were, others more of a like
character, as Prayer, Meditation, etc.) together with the use of them; are 1.
Authorized by the Broad Seal of Heaven, being confessedly on all hands approved
by God: and 2. (as has been now showed by the clear light of Divine
Revelation) are sufficient by his ordinary blessing upon them, to build up the
precious souls of the Saints in Faith and Love unto Salvation, at least when
the great Benefit and Blessing of a Christian and worthy Ministry shall, by his
providence, either operative, or permissive, be denied unto them. But

Secondly, Concerning a Prelatical Ministry, it is terrae filia, a daughter of
the earth, being the product, or fruit, of one kind of those Tares, which the
enemy took his opportunity to sow in the field of God, whilst men slept, (Mat.
13. 25.) and has no Communion with that Divine Polity of Church Government,
which the Gospel holds forth, and commends unto the Christian world; nor
has it been fed, or nourished, with the sincere milk, but with the blood of
the Scriptures; whose genuine sense in all places arrested at the suit of it,
has been sacrificed upon the service of so mischievous an Idol. And inasmuch
as it came not down from Heaven, it is not like, according to the course of
Gods standing providence observed in the present Consideration, to help any of
his Sons or Daughters thither, but rather to obstruct and hinder them in their
way: especially it being withal considered, that they are otherwise provided of
means sufficient, both for their present Comfort, and future Salvation in due
time; and then such, upon which the light of God's approbation shines clear,
yea, and which, as he has prescribed them to use, so has he promised to bless
with the attainment of their end.

CONSIDERATION XX.
When any great storm or tempest of Persecution is raised against the sincere
Profession of the Gospel; and whilst it is incumbent hereon, so that the Saints
cannot, with any liberty or freedom, meet openly in their holy Assemblies for
the Worship of God, and their Christian Edification, but if they shall attempt
it, they must do it at their peril, either of loss of their Liberties by
Imprisonment, or of their Estates by Fines or Confiscations, or of their
Country hy Banishment, or of their Lives by Death: under these and such like
exigencies, Christ is wont secretly to direct his faithful Ones unto more
private opportunities, for their spiritual repast, and religious employments,
that so they may be somewhat more out of the way of their enemies rage, and
serve their God with the less fear of men: yet he is not wont to incline them,
or to put it into their hearts to disband themselves, or break up their
respective companies, and to become as Sheep scattered, every one feeding
apart by himself, and from all his fellows, but to assemble and keep together
in such number as they shall find willing to accept of such opportunities, and
judge convenient in point of safety, to assemble together. Yea, it is the
Genius and Property of a soul devoted in Love and Loyalty unto Christ,
earnestly by Prayer to seek directions from him in such hard seasons as we now
speak of, whither to repair for its spiritual accommodations, and for his
presence amongst his Saints. Tell me (O thou, whom my soul loves, says the
religiously engaged Soul, unto Christ, Cant. 1. 7.) where thou feedest, where
thou make thy Flock to rest at noon [that is, vouchsafe to direct me how and
where I may partake of that soul-nourishment, and those spiritual refreshments,
wherewith thou art wont to support and comfort thy Saints and People in their
holy meetings at noon; that is, in the heat of Persecution, as the best
Interpreters do expound it.] From hence these two things are observable. 1.
That Christ is not wont to feed his Sheep in times of persecution, where he
usually feeds them in days of liberty and peace: If this were so, there had
been no occasion for the religious soul to have desired of him to know, where
He fed his Sheep at noon (in the sense given) she knew well enough where he fed
them in the cool and refreshing times of the day, as evening and morning; as,
viz. in open places, where every man might know and come into their Assemblies;
but in the heat and scorching time of the day, at noon, he still withdrew them
into some more shady and retired place, where the danger or troublesomeness of
the heat might not interrupt them, whilst he should be feeding them. 2. It is
further observable from the same words, that the soul-prudently Christian, and
thoroughly apprehensive of her spiritual concernments, is not wont to rest
satisfied with her closest Communion with Christ, or with his giving his loves
unto her in private, but besides, and beyond this, longs after those
Communications of himself, wherewith he is wont to entertain his Friends (his
Saints I mean) when they gather themselves in any number unto him; especially
in times dangerous, and threatening unto those that shall thus assemble, his
heart in these times being (usually) more enlarged, and his mouth wider opened,
unto them, than ordinary; even as some men count it generous to feast their
friends more sumptuously in the time of Lent, than at other seasons. The Soul
which made the request unto Christ now opened, in the latter part of the verse
gives, this reason of it; For why should I be as one that turns aside [or
rather, as the former Translation, with others, read it, to, or unto] the
flocks of thy Companions. By the flocks of Christ's Companions, are meant (as
some of the best Expositors that I have met with understand the words) the
Congregations or Assemblies relating to, and depending on such Pastors who make
themselves Christ's Companions, or Equals, by instituting new forms of divine
Worship, as well as he Socios Christi vocat ^^bitiosos (...) qui (...) cultus,
^ue ac Chri^^^s ipse, insti^^^erent. (...).
Others, not much differing from the former, by the Companions of Christ here,
understand foreign or strange Shepherds, unrelated unto Christ, and having no
Communion with him, but only in the appearance and appellation of a Shepherd
Sociorum (...) i.e. Pa^rum (...) qui nibil te (...), sed (...) (...) ^ecum
^estoris specie, appellatione. (...) in notis locum.
. So that the reason why the religious Soul desires of Christ to be directed
unto his feedings in times of Persecution and danger, is, lest she might
otherwise be tempted, and through weakness yield to fall in with such
Assemblies, which have Ministers or Shepherds only so called, set over them, by
whom she know that He took no pleasure to feed any of his Sheep.

But that Christ (as has been said) in tempestuous and foul weather, (when the
spirit of the world rages high against Church-meetings) is not wont to feed
his Sheep in the champion, or open fields, where all men use to come, but to
lead them into by-places, or solitudes, into enclosed grounds, narrow lanes of
a long time dis-used, or un-occupied, under hedg-rows, or the like, and to feed
them here; the Scriptures inform us elsewhere. When the Woman that brought
forth the manchild, was persecuted by the Dragon, there were given unto her two
wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place,
prepared for her of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two
hundred, and threescore days [the whole time of her persecution] Rev. 12. 6.
with 13, and 14. Therefore the Woman that brought forth the Man-child (that is,
the successive body of Saints, or true Believers) during the times or reign of
the Beast, is not spiritually fed and nourished in such Assemblies or
Congregations which are publicly authorized, countenanced, or approved by the
Beast, or by the World, which goes wondering after him (Rev. 13. 3.) but in
those which are retired, solitary and private, and which neither of them can
well brook or bear, but that God hides them. The Meetings of Christians for
the exercise of their Religion, being hateful unto the Jews, and which they (it
seems) would not have tolerated amongst them, had they had knowledge of them,
without doing mischief, in one kind or other, to those that thereby should have
provoked them: The Apostles themselves, by the guidance of the Spirit of God
(for they were not, doubtless, led unto it by the wisdom of the flesh) the
better to secure themselves from their rage when they assembled, 1. Made choice
of a private house to meet in. 2. Of a private time, the Evening, yea, some
what late in the Evening (as some collect from passages recorded, Luke 24. 29.
to verse. 36.) 3. Of as much privacy in that private house, as they could well
devise; for the doors of the room where they were, were shut: And in this
posture of privacy, they did enjoy the blessed Presence of Christ. Then the
same day at Evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut,
where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood
in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you, John 20. 19. We read of
another meeting of Christians for the Worship of God, under all the same
circumstances of privacy; and this, doubtless, upon the same account (I mean,
for fear of the Jews) Acts 12. verse. 6, 12, 13, 14. compared: This meeting also
had Christ in the midst of it (in the sense formerly declared) for by his
Mediation and Interposure, their Prayers fetched Peter out of a strong Prison
with an high hand. So again, we read of another religious Meeting of the
Apostles, together with a considerable number of other Christians, in an upper
room, for the greater privacy and security, comers and goers being often upon
occasion, and for civility sake, brought into one, or more of the lower rooms
of an house, when there is no occasion of their going or carrying up into the
higher. Besides, a continual voice may much more easily be heard, and
estimated, by those that only pass by an house out of allow room, then from an
high; this being more remote, and from whence, though the sound of a voice may
(possibly) be sometimes heard below, yet the articulateness of it, being
confined to a narrower Sphere, expireth and is lost by the way. And though Dr.
Hamond labors in the very fire (as his manner is when any thing occurs him
in his way, that seems to frown upon Episcopacy) to prove, that the upper room
here spoken of, was not any room in a private house, but one of the upper
Cambers of the Temple: yet he has so much of a man in him (I mean of
Ingenuity, whereof when a man suffers himself to be dispoyled, he is only a man
so called) as to acknowledge (and this twice over, for failing) that Christians
here met, did that more privately, which could not, we may persume, be done in
the Temple [he might have added, nor in any Synagogue] in any more public
place, the Christian Religion being not much favored [that is, bitterly hated]
by the Jews, [even as the Religious Worship of the true Saints of God amongst
us, is not much favored by those, that say they are Jews, and are not (in the
sense of these words, Rev. 2. 9.) And what the Doctor here grants; namely,
that believing Christians kept their holy Assemblies by, and amongst
themselves, privately, for fear of disturbance, or mischief (in one kind or
other) from those, that hated their way and manner of serving God, makes as
much for our purpose, as if the (...) or, Upper room, which he so wearieth
himself to find in the Temple, should prove to have been in a private house.
But whether the word here translated an Upper room, signifies in this place,
an upper Chamber in the Temple, or no; certain I am, that Acts 20. 8. it
signifies an upper Chamber in a private house (or at least, in an house
commonly and properly so called) where also we find another private Meeting of
Christians, and Christ (in the sense we wot of) in the midst of them: Elsewhere
it signifies (and this twice together, as Acts 9. 37. and 39.) an upper
Chamber in a private house; but no where at least in the New Testament, an
upper Chamber in the Temple. But this by the way.

From the tenor and contents of the present Consideration, it clearly
appears, that in times of trouble, when the Saints are not permitted, but
under great dangers or penalties, to assemble themselves together for their
holy occasions openly, Christ is not wont to bless them, or do any great things
for them in such promiscuous Congregations, which are of a worldly complexion
and constitution, as well Priest as People, and which, upon this account, are
publicly countenanced and rejoiced in; but his manner and good pleasure has
been, in such hard seasons as these, to allure them into the Wilderness, and
there to speak kindly and graciously unto them, or to gather them together
under his wings privately, as a hen gathers her chickens, and so to
communicate his heavenly warmth and vivifick influence unto them.

CONSIDERATION XXI.
They that keep the Word of Christ's Patience, shall be kept by him from the
hour of temptation, which will come upon others to try them, (Rev. 3. 10.)
whereas they deprive themselves of the benefit and blessing of this precious
Promise, who shall betray, forsake, or decline this Word. By the Word of
Christ's Patience, though it be with some difference, yet not great neither,
understood, may (with greatest probability, as I conceive) be meant, any
Gospel Truth, which is opposed with a strong and high hand, in the place where
we live, and can hardly be owned and professed without suffering, or at least,
without danger of suffering in one degree or other: Such a Truth as this, may
be called, The Word of Christ's Patience, because he is the occasion, by his
charge upon men in that behalf, why any man suffers for the profession and
defense of it at any time: (or more briefly) because it is for his sake that
any man, in any case whatsoever, suffers for it. In a State or Nation
professedly Pagan, and where Christianity, upon what terms soever professed, is
a reproach unto those that profess it, or matter of deeper inconvenience, the
whole Gospel, or Doctrine hereof in general, is, and may be called, The Word of
Christ's Patience. In Kingdoms or States, professing Christianity, the Doctrine
of the Gospel in general, is never this Word, because every man here may
profess that he believes this Doctrine in general, without exposing himself to
any danger of suffering. But the Word of Christ's Patience in such Communities
of men as these, is always some particular considerable and weighty Truth of
the Gospel, one or more, which either plainly and in express words, or else
constructively and by clear consequence, whether in opinion or practice, or
both, is denied or opposed, either by the Ruling Powers, or by the Ministers,
and others reputed Learned and Orthodox, or by the generality of the People
here: So that whoever shall keep this Word, that is, shall discover himself to
own such a Truth, or shall upon occasion openly plead the cause of it, renders
himself hereby obnoxious unto the hatred and ill will of the one and the other,
and consequently unto all such sufferings, both for nature and degree, which
they shall think meet, and please to inflict upon him (God permitting them so
to do;) as on the contrary they may be said to let go, sell, or betray such a
Truth, and give it up, as an Error, into the hand of the enemy, who being
convinced in their consciences that it is a Word or Truth of Christ, shall
notwithstanding, either dissemble, or deny it, when they ought and are called
to give testimony unto it, or shall comply with the Adversaries in their
opposition to it.

Now concerning the Promise made by Christ, unto those that shall keep the Word
of his Patience (in the sense given) by being kept by him from the hour of
temptation, which will come [or, may come at one time or other] upon the
generality of Christians, to try them [throughly, or with the greatest and
forest trial of all] is meant, That when other Professors of the Gospel shall,
in many places, be tried with a bloody persecution, whereby they will be
brought to this sad exigent, either to waste their consciences by denying some
manifest Truth, or else either to lay down their lives, or to undergo somewhat
that will be bitter in the next degree to it; they shall be kept or preserved
from that storm. So that this is the Rule of Equity, by which Christ declares
that he will walk toward those that profess his Name and Gospel; They that
shall show themselves loyal and faithful unto him in owning any of his Words,
when they are opposed, although their faithfulness in this kind shall expose
them unto, or bring upon them, lighter sufferings only, and, which are more
easy to be born, shall notwithstanding, upon the account of such their
faithfulness, be excused or exempted by him from greater trials, and which are
unto blood: whereas those that shall faulter with him, and turn their backs
upon any of his Words or Truths, when the danger of owning them is but little
(comparitively) shall be in danger of being exposed and left by him unto
temptations that are most fiery and grievous, and exceeding difficult to be
resisted. Let us now apply the consideration of these things to the business in
hand.

One of the Words of Christ's Patience amongst us at this day (and which, for
weight and moment, has the pre-eminence amongst some others that may pass
under the same denomination) is, That Christ is not only the Sovereign, or
Supreme, but the sole and only Lawgiver unto his Church and People, in matters
appertaining to the Worship of God. Whether the open asserting and maintaining
of this Truth in the terms now expressed, and no further, or otherwise, will
create danger or trouble unto any person amongst us, or no, I cannot affirm:
But certain I am, that both an oral and practical maintaining of it, in the
right sense and import of the said words, is of a threatening concernment
amongst us. For if the Legis-lative authority in matters of Divine worship, and
things requisite, and necessary, at all times, and in all places, hereunto, be
vested in Christ alone, then they that shall keep, own, and give testimony
unto, this word, must not consent unto, or comply with; either in word, or
deed, any model or form of praying, any ceremony, one, or more, in, or about
the worship of God, any Church-office for the regulating and ordering of this
worship, which Christ himself has not prescribed, ordered, and appointed, but
are introduced, imposed, and commanded, under mulcts, and penalties, by humane
power and authority only. For any thing by command made necessary in, or for,
the worship and service of God, and without which men are not permitted (but at
their peril) to worship him, hereby becomes essential to this worship, and so
somewhat, and a part, of it. Those circumstances, which God commanded in
relation to any main part of his worship under the Law, though they were, in
themselves considered, things indifferent, as that the beast to be sacrificed
should be killed on the side of the Altar Northward, Levit. 1. 11. that the
crop and feathers of the fowls sacrificed should be cast besides the Altar on
the East part, ver. 16. That the Priest should dip his finger in the blood of
the Bullock offered, and sprinkle it seven times before the veil, and put some
of it upon the horns of the Altar, Levit. 4. 17, 18. All these circumstances (I
say) with many others of like consideration, however indifferent in themselves,
yet being commanded by God with reference to his worship, and so that this
could not be performed, regularly and with acceptance, without the observance
of them, hereby became parts of his worship: From whence (by the way) it is
observable likewise, that for men to claim an authority, or right of power, to
make indifferent things necessary, in, for, or about, the worship of God, is to
make themselves equal in authority (at least in matters of this high and sacred
concernment) with God himself; and consequently, to deny Jesus Christ to be the
sole Lawgiver unto his Church in things appertaining to the worship of God.
And as under the Law, God himself commanded all indifferent things in, and
about, his worship, which were in any respect commodious, or comely in it, or
for it, judging all other indifferent things, which he left un-commanded in
this case, to be as necessary and fitting to be thus left (I mean,
un-commanded); in like manner it argues very unworthy (that I say not,
blasphemous) thoughts of Christ in any man, to question, either, 1. Whether he
perfectly knew what indifferent things were necessary, or in any respect, or
degree, would be comely in the worship of God under the Gospel; or 2. Whether
he neglected to prescribe by himself, or (which signifies the same) by his
Apostles, all such particular things; which he knew to be any ways needful, or
meet, in this worship, judging it better to betrust the wisdom and wills of men
with the enjoining of them, or (at least) of some of them, then his own; or 3.
(and lastly) Whether he did not well know, that it was better, and more
conducing, both to the glory of God, and to the benefit and comfort of his
Church and people, that such indifferent things, as he left free, and
un-commanded, should remain so still, and that his counsel in that behalf,
should not be defeated, or made void by men; who now by their impositions of
such things, which Christ would not impose, deal between him, and his people,
much alike as Gehazi did between his Master Elisha, and Naaman the Syrian:
Behold (says this unworthy servant) My Master has spared Naaman this Syrian,
in not receiving at his hands that which he brought: But, as the Lord lives, I
will run after him, and take somewhat of him: And being as good (or rather, as
bad) as his word, he undetermined, and disanulled, through his base
covetousness, the honorable intention of his worthy Master, which was, that
Naaman's cure should cost him nothing, 2 King. 5. So do they who
Diotrephes-like, affect a pre-eminence, and power in, and over, the Churches of
God, which are incompetent to them, (in effect) say: Our Master Christ spared
his Church and people, and was over-indulgent to them in matters appertaining
to the worship of God, left them at great liberty, imposing few external
observances upon them herein, and those easy; but as the Lord lives, our
little finger shall be thicker, or heavier, unto them, than his loins, we will
enslave them, and set taskmasters over them, Vicars-Generall, Chancellours,
Archdeacons, Officials, Commissaries, Apparitors, (who shall spoil both for
themselves and for us) Churchwardens, Sides-men, Parish Priests,
Parish-Clarks, (all, either Apostolical, or Apocryphal, Officers in the
Church;) Moreover we will lay a load of Ceremonies and Observations upon them,
we will compel them to worship and serve God with the same Liturgies, Letanies,
Collects, and other devices, wherewith we are content to worship him; to hear,
where, and whom we shall appoint them to hear; we will make them pray, when we
say, pray; bow, when we say, bow; kneel, when we say kneel; stand up, when we
say, stand up; be uncovered, when we say, be uncovered; swear, when we say,
swear; inform, when we say, inform: In a word, we will rule them with a rod of
iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel, if we find them
refractory and disobedient unto us, and not to do all things that we command
them. Doubtless those men, in whom such a spirit as this works effectually,
do not in good earnest, and with the whole heart, acknowledge Jesus Christ to be
the Sole Lawgiver unto his Church and People. For where he imposes one Law or
Observation upon them, concerning the Worship and Service of God, they impose
ten (if not a greater number than so); thus through their pride, and lust of
domineering, utterly defacing and defeating the gracious intendment of Christ
toward them, which (as was lately said) was to make the yoke of the Worship of
God, in respect of the external part of it, exceeding easy and leight, and to
leave it free and dis-incumbred, as from the rudiments of the world, so from
the Traditions, Ritual Injunctions, and Impositions of men. Therefore they who
any ways countenance or comply with, these men in their clame, or exercise of
such a power, in or over any of the Churches of Christ, or shall submit unto
any of their Injunctions issued forth, and imposed, under a pretense, or by
virtue of this power, do not keep, but give up, and betray that word of Christ's
patience, which asserteth unto him the Sole Legis-lative power over all his
Churches, (as has been declared) and consequently, lay themselves open and
naked unto far more grievous and formidable temptations, which sooner or
later they are like to fall into, if not to fall under: For the promise of
being kept by Christ from such temptations as these, is (as we have heard) made
only unto those, who have kept the word of his patience, [meaning, when the
danger of keeping it was less, and the temptation to forsake or betray it, more
easy to be resisted, and to stand upright under]. I shall not need (I suppose)
further to add, that they who do homage with their attendance and dependence
upon that Ministry, which is pretended to be erected in the Church, and upheld
by the power which magnifieth it self against the Prerogative of Christ in his
power over his Churches, do most notoriously and palpably betray that word of
his patience, which asserteth this his Prerogative unto him (the erecting of a
Ministry, being one of the most daring, insolent, and Heaven-affronting actings
of that usurped power), and so for fear of being beaten with Rods, take a
direct course to be scourged with Scorpions.

These are some of those important considerations, which being thoroughly
digested in the Judgments and Consciences of good Christians, cannot (leightly)
but so affect them, as to cause them to distaste the practice of hearing a
Prelatical Ministry. I could have increased the number of them with some
others, which (happily) might have done as good execution upon the judgments of
some, as any of them. But I am earnestly persuaded that God will ere long raise
up a better workman, who by his direction and assistance, shall hammer this
nayl to more purpose, then has yet been done. In the mean time, because
error, and sin, have their glosses and colors, as well as Truth and
Righteousness, their weight and substance; let us briefly survey some of the
fairest Pretexts, wherewith the practice hitherto censured, and dissuaded from,
may (probably) hope, yea (possibly) be confident, that she is able to justify
her self. Cities and Castles, that have been long built, and were never yet
attempted, at least never conquered, either by siege or assault, are like to
impute their freedom in this kind, and long continued safety, unto their own
strength, The Arguments then, whereby the practice condemned in the premises,
seems most desensible, are these following: And verily I shall acknowledge my
self a Debtor, as for a signal courtesy, unto him that shall either mend, or
improve these my Arguments, or offer me others of more strength.

Argument I.
Our Savior Christ, to the multitude, and to his Disciples, says thus; The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do: but etc. Mat. 23. 1, 2, 3. If it were lawful,
yea matter of duty, (for so the command, or charge of Christ makes it) for
them to observe and do whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees taught them
according to Moses's Law, then is it lawful and no less matter of duty, for
Christians to observe and do, whatsoever Prelatical Ministers teach them
according to the Gospel: For these are not, at least many of them are not, a
more unworthy Generation of men then they: And if they stand bound to do
whatsoever they thus teach, they stand bound to hear them when they teach, at
least they may lawfully hear them.

Answer.
1. The reason why Ministers of a Prelatical Edition ought not to be heard in
their public teachings, is not because they are a Generation of men more
wicked and vile then the Scribes and Pharisees were, but because their
delinquency is such, and so unhappily conditioned, that we cannot wait upon
them in their Ministerial employments, without being partakers with them
therein; and we stand expressly charged by God not to be partakers of other men's
sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Ephesians. 5. 11. (with many other places). For deriving, and
accepting, their Ministerial Function from an Antichristian Power (I mean,
such a Power, which exalts it self against, and in many things, above the
power of Jesus Christ, acted and exercised by him, in and over his Churches, as
was showed in the last Consideration) in and by every exercise and
administration of this their Function, they avouch and justify that so
highly-sacrilegious an Usurpation: and they who countenance them with their
presence, whilst they act this great unworthiness, do nothing less then justify
such their justification, and so must needs share with them in the iniquity of
it. Whereas the Scribes and Pharisees, of whom our Savior speaks in the Text
before us, according to Dr. Hamand's own Paraphrase of the place, were of the
Sanedrim, and to be looked upon by them [the people, and his Disciples
themselves] as their lawful Rulers that had Authority over them, succeeding
Moses and the seventy Elders, Numb. 11. 16. According to this notion (which is
not altogether improbable) there was no reasonable ground of any scruple about
hearing them, when they expounded and declared Moses his Law. And if it could
be proved on the behalf of the Ministers, whom we judge it unlawful to hear in
their Teachings, that they in any such sense, sit in the Seat, either of the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, or Teachers, which Christ, when he
ascended up on high, gave for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. neither should
we question the lawfulness, yea or duty (upon occasion) of hearing them. But
the conjecture of Grotius seems more rational, and better comporting with the
Scriptures; which is this, That the Jews had no Consistory of Tryers, nor any
person or persons, publicly authorized among them, to examine, or take account
who were meet, or fit to be allowed for expounders of the Law, but that it was
free for any man, whose heart served him for the work, or take it upon him, and
to instruct and teach the people accordingly: only adding, that more generally,
they who did take this profession or work upon them, were Pharisaici instituti,
of the Sect or persuasion of the Pharisees: As (says he) among the Romans, it
was permitted unto any man that would, to plead any man's Case at any Bar of
Judicature in their state. That which we read, Acts 13. 15. favors the said
conjecture: And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of
the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, ye Men and Brethren, if ye have any word
of Exhortation for the people, say on: which seems to imply, that any person
amongst them, might, without breach of any order or custom, teach the people
publicly out of the Law and Prophets. If it were thus, neither could there be
any the like reason for the Jewish people to deny their attendance upon the
Scribes and Pharisees in their teachings of the Law, which, according to the
premises, there is, why Christian people should separate themselves from
Priests of the Prelatical Unction in their preachings of the Gospel. These
pollute themselves by poluting the most Sacred and Blessed Name of Jesus
Christ, in accepting their Office, or Power of Preaching, upon the terms they
do, whereby they become irregular for this employment; whereas the other,
supposing them of competent abilities for the work, committed no offense,
offered no indignity unto God, in accepting, or entering upon it.

Argument II.
The Apostle Paul rejoiced, yea, and professed that he would rejoice, that
Christ was Preached every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Phil. 1. 18.
Therefore certainly it is lawful, yea, and more than lawful (even matter of
duty, upon occasion) to hear such (at least) of the Prelatical Teachers, who
preach Christ, which it seems hard to deny but that some of them do. For such
preaching, which no man can hear without sin, cannot be any just matter of
rejoicing unto a Christian, nor (indeed) unto any man.

Answer.
1. This general expression, every way, is to be limited and understood,
according to the Subject matter in hand. There is nothing more frequent in the
Scriptures than to deliver that in general terms, which yet admits, not of a
simple, or absolute universality in the meaning of it, but only of such, which
renders it consistent with the tenor and notion of other Scriptures, and is
(for the most part) commensurable to the present occasion, Matthew. 23. 3. Mark
1. 5. -- 11. 24. Luke 2. 1. 10. -- 6. 30. John 10. 8. Acts 5. 42. Romans 1. 5.
(to omit other instances without number). Besides, it is a common and true
Rule, Praedicata sunt talia, qualia a subjectis suis esse permituntar: In
Propositions, the sense of one part is to be regulated by, and accommodated
into the sense and import of the other. So then the Apostles meaning (in the
words before us) is not that the preaching of Christ, or that which may (in a
sense) be called, the preaching of Christ, in what way, or upon what terms, or
by what persons soever, it should, or could be performed, would be matter of
rejoicing: Such a sense as this (besides that the words no ways necessitate
unto it, but rather lead aside from it, as may be showed presently) is
inconsistent with what we find in the Scripture elsewhere. For when the Devil
preached Christ, affirming, upon his knowledge, that he was The Holy One of
God, Mark 1. 24. Luke 4. 34. And again, that he was Christ, the Son of God,
verse. 41. The Lord Christ was so far from rejoicing in being thus preached,
that he rebuked the Preacher, and commanded him to hold his peace, Luke 4. 35.
41. Mark 1. 25. Thus the Damsel that followed Paul and those with him, crying
out, and saying, concerning them, These men are the Servants of the Most High
God, which show unto us the way of Salvation, did, in effect, and after a sort,
preach Christ, by giving testimony unto those, who did truly preach him, yet
Paul rejoiced not in this her preaching of him, but on the contrary, was
grieved at it (as is expressly said, Acts 16. 18.) They also preached Christ,
who preached Justification and Salvation by him, though not by him alone, but
in Conjunction with Circumcision, and the works of the Law; yet neither did
Paul rejoice in his being preached in such a manner, or upon such terms, Acts
15. 1. Gal. 5. 2. 4. Phil. 3. 2, 3. Gal. 5. 12. compared. Nor is it like that
he would have much rejoiced in his being preached by such persons, of whom he
prophesies, Acts 20. 20. Grievous Wolves -- not sparing the Flock. Amongst
other Characters of persons, of whom God himself demands What have you to do
to declare my Statutes, or that you should take my Covenant into your mouth,
this is one; that when they saw a Thief, they consented with him, Psalm. 50. 16,
18. which in a very Emphatical sense, is found in those Preachers, whom we
judge it unbecoming a good Christian to hear. For in accepting their Office of
a Ministry from the Hierarchical Lords, they consent with them in their
sacrilegious robbing the Lord Jesus Christ of that Authority and Honor, which
God has judged meet to confer upon him, in anointing and appointing him to be
the Sole Law giver unto his Churches in things appartaining to the Worship and
Service of God, as well in things to be practiced, as in things to be believed.
But of this we have spoken formerly. By what has been said to the Argument in
hand, it is sufficiently evident, that the Apostle's general expression
concerning Christ's being preached every way, is to be understood with
limitation; and consequently, that no Argument, or Proof for any thing, can be
drawn from the generality of it.

2. In propriety and strictness of speaking, Christ cannot be said to be
preached by a Prelatical Ministry. For only then he may be properly said to be
preached, when he is preached, and set forth, like unto himself, without any
diminution, impairment, or dis-mantling of his glory: and if any person be
preached under the name of Christ, unto whom any part of that glory is denied
by those who preach him, in, or by, their act of preaching him, which is
appropriate unto the true Christ, the Christ of God, it is not this Christ, but
another, an Idol Christ, that is preached. Now the Ministers we speak of, in,
and by, their very act, or deed, of preaching, justify those, who both in
words, but especially in deeds, deny the true Christ to be the Sole Lawgiver
unto his Churches (as has been proved) which yet is one of the richest, and
most illustrious and shining Gems in that Crown of Glory, which God the Father
has set upon his head: and whilst they preach such a Christ as this (a Christ
who has no such Prerogative, or Royalty, belonging to him, as a Sole power of
Legis-lation unto his Churches, but has weak and sinful men joynt-sharers with
him in his Authority in this kind) do not preach the true, the real Christ, the
Christ of God (as Peter terms him, Luke 9. 20.) but a Christ formed in their
own imaginations, and having no existence but here only, and in the fancies of
their Proselites, and is not able to justify men from their sins, nor to save
their souls, though (it is like) they ascribe these great things unto him, as
Idolaters in all Ages have been wont to attribute the great works of God unto
their Idols. And as Christ is said to APPEAR in Heaven for us, (Heb. 9. 24.)
meaning, that his very appearance before God, considering what he has done,
and suffered on our behalf, is, without any other expression, or application of
himself unto him, as by oral request, prostration, or the like, a most
effectual interceding with him for us: In like manner the Sole appearance of a
Prelatical Minister in the Pulpit to perform the act of preaching, it being
known and considered, how, and by what, or whose, Authority, he appears upon
such an account here, is an interceding, or pleading, with all that are before
him, for that Antichristian and lawless power, which is blasphemously claimed,
and exercised, by the great Masters of the Hierchy, and consequently, against
that Most Sacred Prerogative of Christ, which gives him the honor of being
the Sole Lawgiver unto his Churches. And as the Apostle speaks of some, Who
[in words] profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, (Tit. 1.
16.) So in case such a Minister as this, should in his Doctrine, or Sermon,
affirm Jesus Christ to be the Sole Lawgiver unto his Churches, yet in, and by,
his very act of preaching he should deny it.

3. (and lastly) This distribution, Whether in pretense, or in truth, plainly
shows, that the Apostle in his general expression of Christ's being preached
every way, intended only these two; his being preached, either (...), in
pretense [or, as some render it, occasinally] or, in truth. Now Christ may be
said to be preached, (...), in pretense, when they who preach him, are acted
and moved hereunto by indirect and unworthy ends, and yet would be thought to
preach him in truth, [that is, out of a sincere and upright intention, and
desire, to serve God, and man in the work.] And inasmuch as they who preach
Christ out of sinister and by-ends, may nevertheless be free from Scandal, and
from the guilt of any such known Act, or Practice, whereby Christ is denied in
any of the Divine Royalties appropriate to his Kingly Office, or annexed to his
Mediatory Throne, their preaching of Christ, if it be according to the true
tenor and purport of the Gospel (as it may be, and as it seems, theirs was, by
whom Paul supposes he was preached in pretense) in respect of the Glory that
may hereby redound unto God, and the benefit that may accrue unto men, is just
matter of rejoicing unto a sober and considerate Christian: yea, though it
should be revealed unto him by God (as it was unto Paul in the case before us)
that such a man's aims or ends in preaching, are not honorable, or Christian.
But this makes nothing for the countenancing of their preaching him, who
openly consent unto, and are consederate with, those, who divest him of his
Glory, yea, and are publicly known to divide the spoil with them.

Argument III.
Yea but some of those Ministers, whom you would make it unlawful for us to
hear, are holy and good men, of exemplary lives and conversations, sober,
temperate, just, full of good works, given to hospitality, charitable to the
poor, etc. It seems an hard saying unto us, that it should not be lawful for us
to hear such men as these, at least if in their preaching of the Gospel; they
turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but keep close all along to
the counsel and mind of God therein.

Answer.
1. I verily believe, and this upon terms better pleasing unto those, with whom
we are in contest, than of mere Christian Charity, that there have been more
than a few of those, who have accepted their Office of Ministry from the
irregular hand of Prelacy, of that Christian and worthy Character specified in
the Argument, viz. holy and good, of exemplary lives, etc. Yea, I am not
without hope, but that there may be amongst us at this day a remnant of the
same Generation, who are sound at the heart, and love Jesus Christ in
sincerity, who (setting aside their compliance with Prelatical Usurpations and
Superstitions, the great evil whereof may not as yet be arrived at their
judgments) are Christianly Orthodox, both in their Lives and Doctrines: Nay, I
doubt not but that the Prelatical Order it self has, by it is enchantments,
tempted many of the true friends, and faithful Servants of God, into the
embracements of it. But,

2. Our English Proverb, which remindeth us, that All is not Gold, that
glistereth, may a little quallifie our credulity, without making any breach
upon our Charity, in the case in hand; considering that the great Apostle
himself, in reference hereunto, speaks as much (if not much more) where he
informs us, as of a Secret, that it is no great thing [that is, no wonderful,
or rare thing, as the word, great, often signifies in the Scriptures] if the
Ministers of Satan be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, himself
being transformed into an Angel of Light: Yea, he had spoken immediately before
of certain false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. So that men may be false Apostles,
Ministers of Satan, and deceitful workers, [that is, may, in the course of
their Ministry, slily, and subtly, drive on some Un- Christian and Satanical
design, dangerous to the Souls of those that hear them] and yet, both in their
lives, and in the ordinary and general current of their Preaching, outwardly
appear so like unto Ministers of Righteousness, and of Christ [for they must
artifically resemble them in both, to complete their transformation] that it
will be a very hard matter, till after some considerable space of time, and
without much narrow observation, to detect and discover them. And it is much to
be feared, that many of those few amongst us, whom we have ground, both from
their lives, and ordinary teachings, to judge persons of Christian worth, and
integrity in that way, will sooner, or later, bewray themselves not to be the
men in heart, which for a time they were in face. For some, who are wont to
quit themselves like Angels of Light in their usual, and more frequent
Preachings, being persons also sober and grave in all that is visible in their
Conversations, yet upon some occasions, and, for the most part, in their
Sermons on days of Public Humiliations, or Thanksgivings, and sometimes in
their Funeral Discourses, are prevented by their proper and true Genius; so
that the cloven foot now appears.

3. Amongst the Authorized Teachers of the Romish Faith, and Religion, Priests
and Jesuits, there are some (and happily a larger proportion) no ways behind, if
not before, the best approved of our Prelatical Ministers, for any thing
singular, either in their Lives, or ordinary Teachings. Therefore if we judge
it not safe, or well-pleasing unto God, constantly, or ordinarily, to seek our
edification in things appertaining unto God, and to our eternal Salvation, at
the lips of these men, in their ordinary, or settled course of Teaching, why
should we not be as conscientious and tender to seek it upon such terms at the
mouths of those amongst us, whom our Prelatical Lords are pleased to send
forth, and appoint for the same great ends, and services unto us? For
(doubtless) as well the latter, as the former, are in the great condemnation of
supporting an Antichristian Interest and Power, and this even by that which is
commendable, and pleasing unto men, either good, or bad, both in their Lives,
and in their Doctrine: and consequently go hand in hand in promoting such a
design, which counterworks the holy project and design of Jesus Christ, which
is, that his Saints may serve him without fear [as well of sufferings from men,
as from God] in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of their
lives, Luke 1. 74, 75. And it has been seldom, or never known, that any great
community, body, or party of men in the World, have long subsisted (at least
upon any competent terms of credit, peace, or safety) but by means of some few
of their Members (respectively) who by their wisdom and worth above their
fellows, have been as pillars to bear up their several Polities, or Parties,
and keep them from sinking; as Paul speaking of James, Cephas, and John, says,
they seemed [or, were counted, as our former translation had it] pillars,
(meaning, to support the Christian Interest in the world.) As though there be
some thousands of Laths, and many slight pieces for partitions, and otherwise,
in a building, yet those few Substantial and main pieces of sound Timber, unto
which the Architect coupleth and fastneth the rest of his work, are they which
give strength unto the house, and make it able to endure, and stand, all winds
and weather. So that when God (whether out of his wisdom, for the trial of
those, who profess his Name, or out of Judgment, to punish their unworthiness,
or upon what other account soever, whether known, or unknown, unto us) pleases
to give way unto Satan, by his subtle and plausible insinuations and
suggestions so far to tamper with the hearts and spirits of some Professors of
the Gospel, as between them, to raise up, and set on foot, and for any
considerable Tract of time to maintain and keep on foot, a corrupt Interest
under some Religious pretense (one, or more) in the Christian world, he is
pleased likewise to suffer the plausible pleas, and pretenses of this Interest,
together with the large portion of worldly accommodations which it promises
unto those, that shall espouse it, so to dazzle and blind the eyes of the
reasons, judgments, and consciences of some wise, learned, and good men all
along the continuance of it, that they shall not see the evil of it, nor yet be
convinced hereof by those who do see it most clearly, but shall cleave fast and
close unto it, and stand up in their might to justify and plead the cause of
it, It is said that the eyes of the two Disciples traveling to Emaus, (...)
(Luke 24. 16.) were mightily, or powerfully held; by reason whereof they did
not know the Lord Christ, though present with them in his proper countenance
and face, with which they were so familiarly acquainted: only (as it seems by
what Mark affirms, Chap. 16. 12.) he was somewhat disguised in his apparel;
yet all this while their eyes were as open to see and discern all other
objects, but only the face of Christ, as at other times. In like manner the
eyes of the minds and understandings even of men piously-learned and grave,
may, upon Gods withholding his wonted concurrence with them in reference to the
discerning of such, and such particular Truths, be so deluded, captivated, and
bewitched with the false colors and appearances of truth in the
contrary-errors, that they will without fear, or scruple, embrace these, yea
and with an high hand of confidence and importunity, rise up to justify and
maintain them: when as they may all this while approve themselves for men of an
exact judgment, and discerning spirit between truth and error, in other cases.
Men of this Character, or (at least) seemingly such (I mean, holy and good men,
generally quick-fighted, but particularly blinded) generally have been, and are
at this day, the main Props, and Supporters of all those adulterate and
Anti-Evangelical Interests, and Combinations of men, which are found in the
Christian world: (although I make a little more question, whether they also
were such, who were the first Founders, and Authors of them.) Such persons as
these now and then found within the Territories of the Romish profession, have
been, and are, the breath of the Nostrils of that Religion: Such as these,
taking part with the Admirers of, and Contenders for, the Common Prayer Book,
prescribed Liturgies, etc. Keep life and soul together in this party of men
amongst us. Some such persons likewise, have incorporated themselves with that
body of men, who dote upon the Prelatical Hierarchy (as if it had either
Scripture, or sound Reason, to friend, or both) are helpers in chief to prolong
the days of that Interest, which otherwise would soon be Aposynagogized by the
Christian world. And were there not some persons of the Character mentioned in
the numerous retinew of those, who flatter Christian Princes into formal
Antichristianisme, by teaching them to lay claim to both Swords, as well the
Spiritual, as the Temporal; neither would this Generation, or Sect of men, lift
up their heads at that rate of height and confidence, which now they do. It
were easy to add many more instances, if need were: But by what has been
lately, and formerly, discoursed in these papers, it plainly appears, that
the holy and good men, who have interessed themselves in the cause of Prelacy,
and avouched the descent of it from the Great Apostle and High Priest, of
Christian Profession, by accepting their Office of Ministry from it, are they
who have compassion on it (as the Ziphims had on Saul, when he persecuted
David, 1 Samuel 23. 21.) and in, and by, the exercise of their Ministry, are the
chief Contributers toward the maintenance of the life of it in the world.
Therefore those worthy qualifications of holiness and goodness, in such
Ministers, are so far from, being any reasonable Grounds, or Motives, unto
Christians to strengthen their hand in the way of their present standing and
relation unto Prelacy, by a conscientious attendance on them in their Ministry,
that, the evil tendency of this Ministry considered, they are rather grand
dissuasives herefrom. For strike the shores and props from under a crazie and
tottering building, the fabrique will soon fall as flat as the walls of
Jericho, to the ground. Satan by none of all his other Methods, or Devices, is
able to consult the peace of his Kingdom upon such terms of advantage, as by
tempting holy and good men with secret overtures, or promises of enjoying the
goodly and great things of the world, to fall down, and worship him. Nor has
God any means more proper to weaken this Kingdom, and prepare it for
destruction, than by opening the eyes of his Servants, that darkness be no
longer for a Vision unto them, and that they hasten out of Babylon, which,
whilst their eyes were held, they verily thought to be Jerusalem.

Argument IV.
But God himself has, from time to time, given testimony to that Ministry,
which you would persuade us to decline as being unlawful, by granting the
conversion of many souls unto himself to be wrought by it, together with the
edification of many (formerly converted) in their most holy Faith: Yea, he has
done much good by it in both these kinds, in this very Nation, since he brake
the yoke of Romish subjection from off the neck of it: Or does not such a
gracious concurrance, or cooperation, of God as this with a Ministry, amount
to as much as the setting of his Seal unto it that it is true, and such wherein
he delights, the Apostle Paul writing thus to the Corinthians, For the Seal
of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9. 2. Can it then it be unlawful
for Christians to here such Ministers, whom God himself-countenanceth, and
blesses, in their work?

Answer.
1. That voice from Heaven [that is from God] Come out of her my people,
[meaning out of Babylon, the Mother of fornications] Rev. 18. 4. shows that
there may be conversion of Souls, even in Babylon, and this (as seems not
improbable) by the Spurious Ministry that is exercised here. It is no ways
like, that those persons, whom God, by the Name of, his people, warns by a
voice from Heaven, to come out of Babylon, were his People [that is, truly
regenerate, and believing] before they entered into Babylon, and that
afterward they went, and took up their dwellings here. If conversion may be
wrought by a Babylonish Ministry, it is a clear case that it is not
universally, and in all cases, a convincing proof of a legitimate and true
Ministry. And therefore whereas the Apostle terms the Corinthians, the seal
of his Apostleship, it was not simply, or so much, in respect of their
conversion by him unto the Faith, but rather in respect of the extraordinary
manner, and high hand of divine power, which appeared with him, and in him, for
their conversion; without which he seems to imply, that in respect of their
more than ordinary indisposition to submit unto the Gospel, being a wealthy and
worldly-wise people, and under several disadvantages otherwise, there had been
little likelihood of their conversion to the Faith, especially, in such
considerable numbers, as now, by this means had embraced it. For upon some such
account as this it is, that he reminds them in these words, Truly the signs of
an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and
mighty deeds, 2 Cor. 12. 12. From this passage, and the words next following
with some others in these two Epistles it appears, that God judged it necessary
and meet that this his Apostle should make more use of his gift of Miracles
amongst this people, in order to their conversion, and confirmation in the
Faith, then in any other place, whither he was sent to preach the Gospel. This
plainly shows them to have been a Generation of men of that Character, which
our Savior points at in those, to whom he said, Except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe, John 4. 48. which temper, or complexion of mind,
argues a great estrangement in men from God, and an utter un-acquaintedness
with his Nature and Attributes. Therefore the Apostle affirming the Corinthians
to be, the Seal of his Apostleship [meaning, an effectual proof, and
confirmation of the truth of it, and that he received it from God] intends it
not in respect of their conversion by him, simply considered, but of those
miraculous appearances of God with him, for, and in, the effecting of it. So
that nothing can be concluded from hence to prove true conversion unto God, to
be always, or in all cases, an argument, or proof, that that Ministry, by
which it is wrought, is from God. For the further clearing of which it may be
considered,

2. That God, in his dispensations, and applications of himself unto the
children of men, puts a very great difference between times of ignorance,
and times of knowledge; indulging many things in way of favor, mercy, and
compassion, unto persons offending through the ignorance of his will, when this
ignorance is not affectate, or willingly, and upon a cursed design of sinning
more freely, kept and maintained in the soul, but has been, and is,
occasioned, either by the scantness of Light, or shortness of the means about
them, whereby to come to the knowledge of the truth, or else by the weakness
and flowness of their understandings, or else by mere incogitancy, or that
backwardness of making district enquiry after truth, which so easily (and
almost universally) besetteth flesh and blood; or lastly, by means of a strong
and flattering persuasion that they know the truth already, and so need not
make any such enquiry after it; God (I say) is wont to make many large
allowances in grace and favor unto those that are ignorant of his will upon
any of the occasions now mentioned, though they act contrary to it, which he
will at no hand indulge unto those, that either know, or easily may know it,
and yet will notwithstanding walk in the sight of their own eyes, and in the
ways of their own hearts. This observation (I verily believe) for both number
and clearness of Scripture testimonies, may compare with any other truth
asserted here. The places that speak to the heart of it, were they drawn
together, and a little argued, would amount to a just Volume. I shall mention
only one (a Text well known) and point to a few others. And the times of this
ignorance God winked at: but now commands all men every where to repent;
because he has appointed a day [that is, he now makes known unto the world
that he has appointed a day; for the day was appointed as much in the former
times, as now: but things in Scripture are frequently said to be done, when
they are made manifest] wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, etc.
Acts 17. 30, 31. It is evident from hence in the general (for we must not now
stand to scan particulars) that God was much more favorable to the same kind
of sinners, who sinned in times of ignorance, then he was resolved to be unto
those that should sin in times of greater light. If you question in the least
the truth of the observation now propounded, these Texts (with their fellows of
like import) are of sufficient authority to set your judgments at liberty,
Luke 12. 47, 48. Genesis 20. 5, 6. Numb. 15. 30, 31. Psalm. 94. 10. -- 97. 6, 7.
Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, etc. -- 2. 8. John 9. 41. -- 15. 22. Luke 23. 24. Titus
3. 10. -- 1 Timothy 1. 13. Heb. 5. 2. -- 6. 4, 5, 6. James 4. 17. Unto these
Scriptures, I only subjoyne (for their Sympathy in notion) a memorable saying
of an ancient Father and Martyr: The simple error [or ignorance] of men might
be pardoned [by God], but when he has inspired them with, or discovered, the
truth, if now they transgress, they sin without the pardon [or leave] of
ignorance Ignosci (...) simpliciter (...) antibus: (...) inspiratio^^m vero,
and ^^velationem ^^ctam, sine ig^^rantiae (...) peccatur. ^ypr. Ep. 63.
; meaning, that they are not like to find that favor, or mercy, which God is
wont to vouchsafe unto those, that sin out of mere ignorance.

This Consideration leads us by a straight line to this Conclusion; that
during that long tract of time, wherein God judges it meet to punish, try, and
exercise the Christian world with Prelatical encroachments, and the un-natural
swellings of Episcopal Power, and consequently to suffer the reasons and
understandings of those, who otherwise might, and (doubtless) would have
detected, and withstood, those high Usurpations over his freeborn Sons and
Daughters to be so held, or otherwise encumbered and diverted, as to overlook
the intimations of his mind in the Scriptures against those monstrous
exorbitancies in his Church; that God (I say) during the times of this
ignorance, and incogitancy, amongst Christians, might in mercy do good to the
souls of some, even by such a Ministry, which he never allowed, nor approved,
but only tolerated until the times of Reformations yea, and which he will not
allow his people to countenance, or credit, by resorting unto it, when once he
has caused the irregularity of it to be brought to light, and the Gospel to
utter and speak out that enmity, which it bears to it. Nor is it like, that
when he shall have plainly, and to the full conviction of reasonable and sober
men, discovered the nakedness and shame of it, that ever he will have to do, or
cooperate with it, either to the conversion, or edification, of any soul more.
And as Abraham lived well, enjoyed the love of God, throve in his estate, and
prospered in the world, whilst he lived in his own Country, amongst his
kindred, and in his Father's house, before God called him out from hence to
dwell in the Land of Canaan, where he intended to bless and prosper him yet
seven times more, whereas had he disobeyed the call of God, and continued in
his Father's house still, this call notwithstanding, doubtless he had highly
provoked God, neither would his own Country, Kindred, or Father's house, have
been the same unto him in comfort and peace, which formerly they had been: In
like manner, though an honest and upright soul may be in the love and favor of
God, and thrive competently in its spiritual estate, under a Prelatical
Ministry (and happily in Babylon it self) whilst it remains ignorant of the mind
and will of God concerning its removal, and wants light to discern the evil
of such standings; yet if it shall choose, and resolve, to keep these postures,
or standings, after that God shall have called unto it to forsake them, they
are not like to yield any of their former accommodations unto it, nor is God
like to take the same delight in (or rather to show the same compassion on)
this soul, which he did before: but according to the observation, and saying of
David, He turns a fruitful Land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 34. If it be demanded; but when, or how, does
God call any soul, or person, from under a Prelatical Ministry, or out of
Babylon? I answer; when by a clear light he discovers the sinfulness, or (which
is the same, in effect the danger, or threatening consequence, of a man's abiding
under the former, or in the latter. Conviction of any thing sinful, or
unlawful, in any of our ways, is a loud call from God unto repentance and
reformation. And as Abraham's obedience unto the call of God, when he called him
out from his own Country, Kindred, and Fathers house, is commended by this, that
he went out, not knowing whither he went, (Heb. 11. 8.) but sped never the
worse for this: So when God shall call us from under an unlawful Ministry, it
is not Christian-like to make any such allegation, or plea, as this, against
our ready and cheerful submission to his call; we know not where we shall mend
our selves, or find the like spiritual provisions, we are like to be losers by
the change, etc. It would be much more worthy a Son, or Daughter, of God in
this case, to consider and work upon that which David immediately subjoyneth to
the passage lately cited from him* He turns the WILDERNESS into a standing
water, and dry ground into water springs; and there he makes the hungry to
dwell, that they may prepare a City for habitation, etc. Psalm. 107. 35, 36, 37,
38. They who shall forsake a polluted Ministry, though otherwise plausible, and
in all points besides lively resembling the true Ministry of Christ, upon
divine conviction of the pollutedness of it, need not fear that they shall be
losers in their spiritual estates hereby, or suffer in their inner man. The
woman clothed with the Sun Rev. 12. when she fled from the City into the
wilderness, being (as it appears) admonished by God so to do, had a place here
prepared for her by God, where she was fed and nourished [with a more wholesome
diet, doubtless, then she should have been in the City] for many years.

3. Although for argument sake, and in part (I confess) for probability sake,
and likelihood of truth, it has been granted, that some have been truly and
savingly converted to the faith, and some edified, by a Prelatical Ministry,
yet I believe it will sorely rack the parts and learning of the greatest
Patrons of it, to make any demonstrative proof of either, especially of the
former. It was a right and useful observation of Aristotle, that to take (...),
that which follows in time for the effect of that which goes before, is a
common mistake amongst men. Those that have been converted after, or upon the
hearing of a Sermon, possibly might not be converted by it. Again, it is well
known unto those, that are but competently versed in Ecclesiastical Records, as
well of ancient, as of latter times, that great numbers both of men and women,
have been savingly wrought upon by other means and dispensations of God, and
not by hearing Ministers of a Prelatical creation. Not to insist upon
particulars in this kind, as either the conversion of Constantine by reading
the Sibylline Oracles, as some of these records report; or of Augustine,
begotten unto God (as himself in his Confession gives the Christian world to
understand) between a miracle (or the miraculous voice of Toll, et Lege, take
up, and read, heard by him in a Garden often repeated, as with a singing tone)
and the reading of those Texts of Scripture, Romans 13. 13, 14. or of Victormus,
Antonius, and several others, mentioned by him in these writings, as brought
off from Heathenisme unto God by the like, or not much unlike, means, (or of
others that might, without number, be collected out of other Authors). Baronius
reports that three whole Nations, the Franks, the Goths, the Longobards, were
converted from Paganism, and many impious errors, unto the Christian Faith,
by three women; the Franks, in Gallia, by Chrotildis (a Burgundian); the Goths,
in Spain, by Ingundes (a Frank); the Longobards, in Italy, by Theodolinda a
Bavarian. Besides the Woman clothed with the Sun, etc. (of whom we lately
spoke, and by whom we signified, according to the concurrent testimony of all
Expositors, that I have seen, or heard of, is meant the true Church of Christ,
consisting of real and true Believers) during the whole term of the grandeur of
the Beast, and whilst the world went wondering after him [that is, whilst the
Great Body, or Bulk of visible Professors throughout the Christian world round
about him, owned his spiritual, and consequently his temporal Jurisdiction
also, over them] fled (as we likewise heard) into the wilderness [namely, from
the Dragon, who had now slily, and undiscernably to the greatest part of
professing Christians, conveyed and wound himself into the said two-horn'd
Beast] here, by the gracious interposure of God, to be fed and nourished. Now
this Woman (the true Church) was not barren, but brought forth children, Sons
and Daughters unto God, during her abode in the wilderness from first to last:
but she brought not forth these children by the knowledge of a Prelatical
Ministry; the Ministers of this Order exercising their Ministry in the City [I
mean, openly, and in places prepared, and allowed, for such purposes, by the
Civil Magistrate, and so had no occasion to flee into the Wilderness, or to
seek solitary and private places for the employment of their talent in this
kind]: Unless we shall conceive, that the Woman we speak of, was all along
supplied with children out of the City, by the public Ministry here, God,
secretly admonishing, and persuading those Sons and Daughters of his, that were
begotten by such illegitimate Fathers, as soon as, or not long after, they were
spiritually born, to withdraw themselves from under the hand of such Fathers,
and to join themselves unto his true Church and People in the Wilderness, here
to be fed and nourished, that is, to be built up in their most Holy Faith, and
prepared for their Heavenly Glory. So that one of these two Propositions must
needs be yielded; either that conversion, for many ages bypast, has been
wrought by other means, and by another Ministry, than that of a Prelatical
descent, and so not necessarily by this; or in case this Ministry has
converted any, that these upon their conversion, have been required by God not
to remain, or sit still under it, but to seek their edification amongst their
Brethren in Assemblies of a beter complexion, and from a Ministry of a more
honorable and lawful extraction. The former of these granted, confirms the
Argument in hand: the latter, the main cause we have undertaken.

4. (and lastly) Concerning that great good Service in the cause of Religion,
which is pleaded to have been done in former days, by the Ministry so much
decried by us, in this our Nation: I confess that our great High Priest, who is
more able than Priests taken from among men, (...), sufficiently to
compassionate the ignorant, (...), and those that are [led] out of the way,
(Heb. 5. 2.) did so far show mercy unto some, who in the simplicity and
uprightness of their heart, suspecting no evil in such an action, comported (I
might say, compounded) with the Prelates for their Ministerial functions, that
he kept them faithful unto him in his work, and vouchsafed them the great
honor of cooperating with them to the bringing home of souls unto God. But,

1. The number of these was but small, scarce exceeding the proportion of one
of a City, and two of a Tribe. Out of the great Cloud of Prelatical Priests
(for their Ordination baptizeth them by that name, nor are they offended at it)
Satan rained upon the people, Snares of Idolatrous and Superstitious conceits,
and practices, without end: and in these snares of death the feet of the
greater part of the poor ignorant souls in the Nation, are taken, and held
fast, to this day. Nor is it any breach of charity to conceive and think, that
for the greatest part of these Ministers, were in their course of preaching,
more zealously bent to beget Sons and Daughters to the Church of England (in
their notion) than unto God; although possibly (to allay all seeming hardness
in the saying) they might suppose that men and women being made the true Sons
and Daughters of the Church of England, were hereby made the true Sons and
Daughters of God also. For what may not Ignorance, and Interest, conspiring
together, suppose? Does not the Apostle, speaking of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the Truth say, that they supposed gain to be godliness,
admonishing Timothy to withdraw himself from men of such importune and
unreasonable suppositions, 1 Timothy 6. 5. But for the Church of England, who
shall live, when either of her Sons, or Fathers, will be able to declare her
Generation, or satifie the world, who, or what kind of creature she is?

2. Those few Ministers of the Prelatical Sanction, whom Christ was pleased to
separate from their fellows, in blessing their labors to the begetting of Sons
and Daughters unto God in the Nation, were smoke in their noses, and as thorns
in the eyes, of those who had entrusted them with a Ministerial employment,
being by them looked upon as a spurious and illegitimate brood of children, and
as walking contrary to the Interest, both of the Spiritual Lords, their
Fathers, and of the Lady, the Church of England, their mysterious Mother: Yea,
for their laboriousness, zeal, and faithfulness unto God, and men, in the work
of their Ministry, which, by reason of the success that God gave unto them in
the hearts and affections of the people, their Ghostly Fathers were not able,
or rather, not willing to distinguish from Schism, Faction, Popularity, etc.
they were evil entreated, injuriously handled, vexed with Summoners and
Apparitors, cited into their Courts (where they must, at their peril, appear at
the day and hour appointed, how long and wearisome, how unseasonable, or
expersive, how tempestuous, or dangerous soever their journey hither should be)
here to be falsely charged, to be vilified, and reproached, before all that are
present, by Chancelors, Commissaries, etc. (persons who many times know not
their right hand from their left, in things appertaining unto God; as meet to
fit in judgment upon a learned and godly Minister, as in the Greek proverb,
(...), as an Ass is to play upon a Harp) and after all this, were sometimes
silenced or suspended, deprived, degraded, imprisoned, yea constrained through
an experimental sense of the implacableness of these bloody avengers, to commit
themselves unto the Seas, how inconvenient or dangerous soever, either through
age, tenderness or weakness of constitution, present indisposition of body, or
otherwise such journying were like to prove unto them, and to seek for a
Sanctuary in strange Lands. So that the Ministers that with greatest zeal and
faithfulness planted the saving knowledge of God, and promoted the Interest of
true Godliness in the Nation, though (being led out of the way by the false
light of those times) they owned the Prelates in their Usurpations, by
accepting their Office of Ministry from their unhallowed hands, yet the
Prelates soon after, namely, as soon as they saw or heard, that they held a
straight course in preaching the Gospel, disowned them, and took from them, at
least from many of them, and their will was the same toward them all, but that
prudentials hindered the sameness of execution upon some, by silencing and
suspending them, the exercise of that Ministry, and so in effect, the Ministry
it self, which they had conferred upon them. So that by this time, if we
respect the reality of things rather than the rigor or formality of words, the
Ministers we now speak of, were no Ministers of a Prelatical investure: for
they who had invested them, divested them again. Add hereunto (that which we
may, not only in charity, but according to the guidance of reason it self,
suppose their conscienciousness and loyalty unto God, in all other their ways
and actings considered) that had they known or once suspected, the great evil
of putting their heads under Prelatical hands to receive an Evangelical
function from them, they would rather have suffered them to be taken from their
shoulders, as John Baptist's head was, by the hands of the common Executioner.
This being so, they were but in a very deminutive sense Ministers of a
Prelatical Ordination, nor ought they in reason, to be simply, or absolutely,
termed such. For when the mind and will of a man are really set and bent
against the doing of any thing whatsoever, that is sinful, in case he shall
through ignorance, or mistake, do any thing which is sinful, this action is
imputable unto him only in the letter, not in the spirit of it: For so far as
his will stood against it, and was not consenting to it [that is, or as far as,
it was sinful] it was not properly, or in a moral and equitable consideration,
his action, but rather to be charged upon the ignorance that was in him;
nothing that a man does, being, in moral equity, and fairness of construction,
chargeable upon him as his action, but only what his will, and as far as his
will, was consenting unto in the doing of it; according to that of the Apostle,
(who is not wont to flatter himself, or to extenuate, or deny his sinful
infirmities at any time) Now if I do that, which I WOULD NOT, it is NO MORE I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 6. 20. Yet further, the Ministers
of whom we now speak, and by whom much real good was done to the souls of many
in the Nation, applied themselves wholly and entirely to the work of Christ in
preaching the Gospel, and did not make merchandise of the word of God
bywresting or perverting it at any time, as if it any where spoke to the heart
of the Prelatique Interest, or recommended any such Officer, or Ruler, unto the
Church of Christ, as a Prelate, or Bishop, (in the by-sense, or high sense of
the word, or gave him power to obtrude what, and what numbers, of Ceremonies,
and Apocryphal prayers, and prayers only so called, he pleased, upon the people
of God, as well Ministers, as others, upon severe penalties to be inflicted on
those whose Consciences were not wide enough to swallow them. Now such
Ministers, who, though having received their Office from Prelates; yet shall in
the course and work of their Ministry, wholly and constantly wave, and decline
their cause from the one end of it to the other, never opening their mouths to
cast respects, either upon their Office, or any thing, that has so much as one
lineament of their Image, or one letter of their Superscription, upon it, and
instead hereof, shall zealously and faithfully preach up Jesus Christ in the
glory of all his Offices, as the Gospel asserteth and declares them, which
consequentially, is the preaching down of Prelacy, as the bringing in of the
Ark of God unto Dagon's Temple, was the downfall and destruction of that Idol;
such Ministers, I say, that shall quit themselves in the way of their Ministry,
upon such terms as these, do constructively, and in effect, and with as much
advantage to the glory of God, and edification of men, renounce their
Prelatical Ordination, as if they should do it more literally and formally. So
then, all things weighed in the balance of equity, the Ministers, unto whom
God gave the honor to triumph in Christ, (as the Apostle's phrase is (2 Cor.
2. 14.) and by whom to make manifest the savor of his knowledge amongst the
Inhabitants of this Nation, were not Ministers of a Prelatical Ordination (in
any complete, direct, or thorough sense of the denomination) but only in some
such mysterious and obscure notion, as that, wherein the Beast is termed, the
Beast which is not, and yet is, Rev. 17. 8. They that were roundly, right down,
without any abatement, or need of explication, such have, amongst them, in
matters of true Religion, sound knowledge, and piety toward God, reduced the
generality of the Nation to a morsel of Bread: All those Idolatrous and
Superstitious conceits, and practices, all that bloody ignorance and
profaneness, all that customary boldness in sinning, that hatred of goodness
and good men, which are the nakedness and shame of the Land, and render it
obnoxious to divine displeasure, may justly call this Generation of men, either
Fathers, or Foster Fathers, or both.

Argument V.
Many learned and good men have been, and many such at this day, are very
confident, that ordination by Bishops, in the high sense of the word, is
regularly founded on the Scriptures; yea, and that there can be no lawful, or
true Minister any where created, where there is not the hand of such a Bishop
to sanctify the action, and to raise it to that worth and dignity, that it may
be meet to yield the sacred fruits of a Gospel Ministry. And it is generally
known, and acknowledged, that Ordination of Ministers by Bishops, in the upper
signification of the word, has been very anciently, and for many ages bypast,
practiced in the Church, scarce any man questioning, or contradicting it.
Therefore why should the hearing of such ministers be now censured as unlawful?

Answer.
This Argument calls for the consideration of sundry particulars for it is
full and due satisfaction: Others, many have largely and substantially answered
all that is pretended, and pleaded, from the Scripture, in the behalf, either
of the Order or Office of Bishops, in the sense of the word lately specified,
or of their Sole power of Ordination: So that as unto these, I shall be very
cursory and brief, chiefly pointing at the heads of some few Considerations,
whereby it will be made manifest, that although all that the Argument says and
pretends unto, should be granted as true, yet all will signify little, or
nothing, as to the proof of what is intended. Therefore,

1. Learning, is very near of kin unto knowledge, if it be not the same. Now
knowledge, though it be a very useful and commendable endowment, yet it has
one bad property, (which the Apostle himself takes, and gives notice of, 1
Cor. 1. 8.) it puffs up; that is, it is apt to lift men up into a confident
conceit that there is more worth in them, than in deed and in truth there is.
Neither will a very good degree of goodness in the same subject, at many turns,
and in many cases, prevent the operation of this evil property upon it. Learned
and knowing men, though good men, will too frequently assume more unto
themselves, than by the assignment of God, or good reason, comes to their
share. The Apostle Paul plainly signifies that God knew that he would have
been exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations vouchsafed unto
him, if the excessive heat of his propension in this kind had not been
corrected and allayed by a Messenger of Satan, sent and given unto him to
buffet him, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

2. When men of learning and knowledge more than ordinary, shall reflect upon
their own worth in this kind, and hold intelligence with their great parts and
abilities (as the best of men, thus accomplished, are apt to do, witness the
great Apostle Paul himself, who told the Corinthians, that though he was rude
in speech [meaning, as they thought, and talked of him] yet not in KNOWLEDGE, 2
Cor. 11. 6. See also Ephesians. 3. 4.) especially when they shall be conceited
withal, that their line of knowledge and understanding is raised higher, than
really it is (which is a weakness frequently incident to the strongest of this
Geration), they are precipitately disposed to presume [as our former
translation read it; or, to be wise; or, to favor, as the word, (...), often
signifieth] above that which is written (1 Cor. 4. 6.) and so to embrace
(sometimes) and to assert, with great confidence, such notions and tenants for
truths, which the Word of Truth, diligently consulted, and well understood,
absolutely disclaimeth; yea, and which sober and sound reason it self will not
brook. There is scarce any age but has yielded instances more than enough to
confirm the truth of this observation. The best Records of Antiquity, yea, the
most un-questioned writings of the most learned and devout Fathers themselves
proclaim it aloud; in which it appears that they did not always build Silver,
Gold, or Precious Stones, upon the true foundation, but sometimes, hey, stubble
and wood, in their stead. Neither is the Scripture it self barren of sayings,
and passages of story, which look the same way. But my intended brevity forbids
me to insist upon Quotations, where they may be omitted with as little damage
to the cause in hand, as they may upon the present occasion: and as for those,
which the works and writings of the Fathers afford upon the account, they have
been already drawn out, and presented unto the world by others: Yea, who is
there but either knows, or has heard from those who do know, that seldom or
never, did any error, that proved of any dangerous, or sad consequence, (...)
up amongst Christians, but might call some person of choice parts a^^ learning,
Father? The common saying (which carries a truth in it worthy more
consideration, than is by many given to it) is, Nullum est magnum ingenium sine
mixtura insaniae, There is no great wit, but has a mixture [or allay] of
madness in it. So that men of great learning and parts are no infallible
Oracles to consult about a dubious opinion, whether it be an error, or no.

3. The notion, conceit, or opinion of an Hyper-presbyterian Episcopacy, is of
such a calculation, nature, and import, that without the assistance of, or any
monitory suggestion from Satan, it is as apt to breed, and to be engendered,
between a corrupt ambitious heart, and an head rank of wit, and learning, as
the Bull-rush is to grow out of the mire. Some indeed have laid the mischievous
brat at Sathan's door, confidently avouching him, by reason of the enormous,
and even supernatural antipathy in it unto God, and true Godliness, to be the
Father of it: But herein they rather flatter, than accuse, or charge, that
unhappy parcel of flesh and blood, which first gave warmth and formation unto
it in the womb of their brain. And whereas some, expert in the Records of
Antiquity, carry up the day of the dawning of it upon the Christian world, to
the year 140 after Christ, or thereabouts; others, seeming as capable as they
of the same pretension, bring it down to about the year 300; the truth is, that
though both these calculations of the Nativity of it, especially the former,
give it the oppornity and advantage of a long and specious prescription, yet
the bewitching complexion of it considered, together with the amorous
inclinations toward such objects, so frequently found in pregnant wits, and
large endowments, which are apt to afford men lively hopes of enjoying them, it
may rather seem strange that it is not more ancient, than either of the dates
mentioned will allow it to be, and, in respect of time, nearer to some
Apostolical Institution. It seems (indeed) that even in the days of the
Apostles, there was one (whom the Apostle John call's, Diotrephes, Ep. 3. ver.
9.) that had an Episcopal Embryo, an unformed conception of a Bishopric, in
his heart; for he did (...), loved a Lordly Superiority over, or amongst his
Christian Brethren: but for want of an artificial Head (as is probable) to give
unto this natural conception its specifical and due form, it proved an
abortion, and like the untimely fruit of a woman, which never sees the light
of the Sun. It is no where found that Diotrephes ever was a formal Bishop,
although he acted the part of a Bishop in not suffering the writings of an
Apostle to take place against his own Interest, in the Church, John Ep. 3.
verse. 9.

4. The notion of Episcopacy (in the lofty sense of the word) being once
started, though by one person only, in the Church, and brought into
consideration and discourse amongst Christians, it was easy to prophecy,
Plures annabunt thynni, and cetaria crescent:
More tunies will come swimming to the bait,


and that the generality of men, whose gifts and parts of learning, wit, etc.
were paramount to those of the ordinary sort of their Brethren, understanding
themselves more capable, and likely than others, to ascend the Throne of this
honor, in case it were once built, and well settled in the Church, would be
very diligent and studious in finding out all colorable and plausible
pretenses to commend such an office unto the people, and to persuade them that
it would conduce much to their Christian welfare, if they did live under it,
and subject themselves unto it. And though there have been many, both in
ancient, and later days, conscientious and learned, that had not the metal in
their foreheads (wherewith the Prelatical Advocates amongst us, have, more
generally at least, steeled theirs) to obtrude the Office we speak of, upon the
world, under the high and indisputable title of Jus Divinum; yet were they so
far overcome with the enticing sweetness of the morsel, as to swallow it as
lawful, though of humane preparation and contrivance. Never did there a dead
body, or carcass, falling on the earth, by the scent and favor of it, more
effectually draw the Eagles together about it, than the pleasant notion and
conceit of the Episcopal dignity, having once been named in the Christian
Church, allure and engage many persons of eminent gifts and abilities, age
after age, in the maintenance, approbation, and commendation of it. They are
not like to speak evil of dignities, who live in hope and expectation of
enjoying them themselves. So that all circumstances duly weighed, the great
multitude of learned Assertors of the cause of Prelacy, is but a slender
argument to prove, either the goodness, or lawfulness of it. Who is he (says
the Son of Sirach) that has been tried by Gold, and found perfect? Ecclus. 31.
10.

5. As for the Arguments and Grounds, which these learned Disputers commonly
levy, and urge from the Scriptures, to compel the judgments and consciences of
men to a submissive and quiet acknowledgement, that their high places and
functions in the Church, are of kin to (...) (Acts 19. 35.) The Image which
fell down from Jupiter, and that they also came from Heaven, and are supported
by the stately and strong pillar of Jus Divinum; the truth is, that being
weighed in the balance, I do not say of accurate reason, but of common sense
it self, they would be found too leight to balace the floating vessel, wherein
that proud Lady, Episcopacy, with all her triobular accoutrements, is
imbarqued; yea, and were it not for some poor relief, ever and anon brought in
from the shattered and sophisticated Records of after ages, scarce one decree
above ridiculous. I shall in few words, give you a taste, though not of the
letter, or words, (this being a part that cannot be acted, but on a larger
Stage, than we are now upon) but of the spirit, strength, and substance, of
some of their chief arguings from the Scriptures; by which you may give a near
guess how little their longsome dissertations and discourses upon the point
signify. From Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, etc. they reason to no more purpose than thus:
Christ, when he ascended up on high -- gave gifts unto men: and he gave some
Apostles, -- some, Pastors and Teachers, etc. Ergo he gave some Diocesan
Bishops. But if such Bishops as these were given by Christ at his Ascension,
why should the Apostle hide them, either behind the Apostles, or behind his
Pastors, as if he were ashamed of them? For the Great Officers we now speak of,
are at a great loss amongst which of the Officers, expressly named by the
Apostle, they should seek for their divine Institution, or Donation by Christ
unto the Church. One while, when their courage is up, they claim high, and will
needs find their Institution in, and together with, the Apostles, as their
Predecessors, under whom their Successors also (as they plead) who they cannot
(being so affectionately convinced through the in-evidence of the thing) but
presume themselves, and all of their Order, to be, were comprehended in the
same Institution with them. Otherwhile, fearing such a pretense as that, to be
too obnoxious to the incredulity of all considering and un-ingaged men, they
fall lower, and judge it more passable to take up with Pastors and Teachers,
and content themselves with part and fellowship with them in their Institution.
Thus we see our Spiritual Lords wandering up and down to seek a divine
Institution for their high Functions and Dignities: but it is no marvel if they
cannot find that which is not. Notwithstanding they knock hard at several other
doors for relief, but none opens unto them, nay, they are all made fast with
bars of Iron against them. From these words of the Apostle to Timothy, (1 Timothy
1. 3.) As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, etc. In conjunction with those, Lay hands suddenly on no man, etc.
(1 Timothy 5. 22.) they conclude, Therefore Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, a
Diocesan Bishop, by Paul. Whereas the express tenor of the words, I besought
thee to abide still at Ephesus, rises up (as it were) with manifest
indignation against such an inference, as might be showed and proved at large,
but that this has been lately done to the stopping of all mouths, that have
either ingenuity or conscience, belonging to them Mr. W. Prynn, Vn-Bishoping of
Timothy, etc. reprinted with ad^itions, Anno. ^661. ^. 1, 2, 3, (...). (after
the Postscript.)
. Holy and zealous men, in both which qualifications Timothy excelled, need no
beseeching or exhorting, to abide, or reside, upon their Bishoprics, or to
attend the cure of souls committed unto them. Or if they will understand the
place either of Timothie's being made Bishop of Ephesus, or of his accepting
the Bishopric hereof, being offered unto him by Paul, they shall do well, and
un-like themselves, to follow his example, and not to be made Bishops, until
they be sought unto, and desired to accept of the honor. Besides, Timothy was
an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. and so by virtue of his Office, had a right of
power to do all those Canonical actions, as laying on of hands, etc. which our
high assuming Bishops appropriate to their Apocryphal Functions. Therefore
neither does this Scripture take any pity at all upon their miserable cause.
They show themselves the Sons of impertinency also when they discourse unto us,
Titus 1. 5. as if this Text had somewhat to say for them, the words being only
these: For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain [or rather settle, or place, (...)]
Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. It is plain from the words, that
Titus was LEFT [not seated, or setled] in Crete by Paul, for such business, or
such services unto the Churches there, which might be dispatched within the
space of a few months. And that he did not make his abode here many months, at
least with Paul's consent, and that Paul intended to send for him away from
hence, the winter following, or rather before, is evident from Chap. 3. verse.
12. And from other passages in the writings of this Apostle, it appears, that
being called back by him from Crete, he employed him otherways, sending him up
and down to several Churches, in several Countries upon occasion: nor is there
the least mention any where found of his returning again unto Crete at any time
after, nor is there (indeed) the least probability of it. Therefore our
Diocesan Advocates vex and trouble this Scripture also (as they do several
others) to no purpose; this with all the rest solicited in their cause, crying
aloud unto them with one voice, Depart from us, we know you not. He that desire
further conviction that neither Timothy, nor Titus, were ever made Bishops (in
the now-ruling sense of the word) may receive it in abundance (together with
the knowledge of many other things concerning that Generation of men, which
would much enlighten the darkness of these times) by the perusal of a Treatise
lately published by Mr. W. Prynne Esquire, under the Title of, The Vn-Bishoping
of Timothy and Titus, etc. This considered, it is no great marvel, that learned
men, more generally, who bare good will (more than enough to the Prelatical
Interest and Cause, not only in a times of a more ancient date, but even in
latter years also, yea, within less than 140. years, all the Bishops,
Archbishops, Archdeacons, and Prelatical Clergy, themselves in this very
Nation, See Mr. W. Prynne, Vn-Bishoping, etc. p. 76. 77.
esteemed it their wisdom, to stick in the inferior tenure of Jus Humanum for
the Episcopal Dignity, fearing (as it seems, or however, as they had cause to
fear) that Jus Divinum would be an adversary to it, and overthrow it. I crave
leave, upon the occasion before us, to acquaint the Reader with a very
memorable passage (if he has not heard it formerly) of an Archbishop in
Scotland, who in a Recantation publicly made in the Synod of Fisse, Anno.
1591. Professed ex animo, from his soul, That Bishops and Ministers by God's
Word were all equal, and the very same; That the Hierarchy and Superiority of
Bishops over other Ministers, has no foundation at all in the Word of God, but
was a mere humane Institution long after the Apostles times, from whence the
Antichristian Papacy of the Bishop of Rome, has both it is rise and progress:
and that for 500. years la past, it has been the chiefest instrument of
persecuting, and suppressing the Truth and Saints of God, in all Countries and
Kingdoms, as all Historians manifest. The name of this Great Exemplar (worthy
to be had in everlasting remembrance) was, if my Author. mistakes not, Patrick
Adamson. But even this man, though he was at last one of a thousand (...), in
his Repentance, yet was he first one also of many thousand (...), who suffer
themselves to be overcome of the tempting splendour of that new-divised worldly
thing under an old spiritual name, commonly called Bishopric: So that he also
bears witness, as well to the truth of the particular in hand (acknowledging
in effect, that the Scriptures are perverted and wrested by those who make them
speak, either for Bishops, or Archbishops) as of the particular last
proceeding, namely, that Bishoprics, notwithstanding the Scriptures, and they
be at odds, have yet a bewitching property in them to make great Scholars, and
learned men, who are in a capacity of enjoying them, excessively in love with
them.

6. Nor has it any thing of an argument in it worth the insisting on, to prove
the lawfulness of attending the Ministry of a Prelatical Clergy, that the
Professors of Christianity, have more generally attended such a Ministry ever
since it had a being in the Church, which is (in our English phrase) time out
of mind ten times over (as is on all hands confessed). For,

1. It being the counsel of the will of God (as we gave knowledge formerly) to
suffer that plant of bitterness, Episcopacy, (in the Anti-Canonical sense of
the word) not only to be planted in the Soil of his Church, but to take fast
root, to thrive and prosper, and spread her branches far and near, and bring
forth fruit from many Ages, before he intended the (...), that tearing of it up
by the roots, (of which our Savior prophesies as the common doom of all
plants in the Church which should be planted by men, and not by his Heavenly
Father, Matthew. 15. 13.) he judged it meet, and well comporting with that his
counsel, to suffer the generality of Christian Professors, to be so far deluded
by the fair flourishes, and enticing pretenses, of those who designed the
setting up of the Episcopal Government over them, as to yield their necks unto
the yoke, and so to conform themselves to all the constitutions, and
Magisterial injunctions thereof in matters of Religion. For unless the
multitude of Professors had been both at first, and for many after Ages, so far
bewitched, as willingly to bow dow at the feet of this exotique Government, it
could never have taken that deep rooting in the world which now it has done,
nor made so much work for the right hand of Heaven, to rid the world fairly and
fully of it, as now it is like to do. For though the compliance of many Kings,
and Princes, and Nobles, yea, and of many wise and learned men, yea, and of
some worthy and good men also, with it, were necessary (as God esteems things
necessary in such cases) to make the mountain of it so strong, as (according to
his permissive decree) it has been, for many ages bypast, in many parts of
the Christian world, and is at this day in many, yet had not the generality, or
main body of Christian people fallen in also, and made one and the same
shoulder with them to support it, it had (in David's comparison) been as grass
upon the house top, which withers before it grows up, wherewith the mower
fills not his hand, nor be that binds sheaves, his bosom. So that the
general practice of Christians in receiving their spiritual food from a
Prelatical Ministry, thought continued for many Generations, yet the practisers
having all along suffered a spirit of slumber to grow upon them, (for the tares
were sown, whilst men slept, Matthew. 13. 25.) and God not judging it meet to
awaken them, their example signifies little as to the justification of the
practice.

2. As the Apostle says of the poor Gentiles, that they were carried away to
dumb idols, even as they were led, 1 Cor. 12. 2. So (the truth is) the common
sort of Christians, through an un- Christian, yea, an unman like, oscitancy and
supiness of spirit, have been in all Ages (and are at this day) exceeding apt
to be carried away with Opinions and Tenants, even as they were, and are, led
by their Teachers. It is a right saying of an Heathen, Omnes malumus credere;
quam judicare: There is scarce any of us all but naturally had rather, even in
matters of a moral) and much more, in things of a spiritual, and religious)
concernment, believe what others, whom we can have any pretense, or color, to
think well of, shall commend for truth unto us, than put our selves to the
labor and travel of a serious and district examination whether it be truth, or
no. Offendt plerosque limae labor; and mora: to work at the file, is both
toylsome, and tedious, and few there be that love it. This was observed long
since, by him that said, Many loath to weary themselves with searching out the
truth, turn in to the errors next at hand A Multi raedio investigandae
veritatis, ad proximos divertunt errores. Minut. Felix.
Yea, it was the saying of one that had been a Teacher of the Romish Faith,
That had not God raised up, and sent Luther amongst them, they should have
persuaded, and brought the people to eat hey, So then the Spiritual Guides and
Teachers of Christian people having been (for may Generations) Ministers made
such with Prelatical hands, and justifying this Ministry before their people,
as legitimate and approved of God, both by their accepting it, and by their
acting in the virtue, and by the authority of it, (besides all occasional
pleadings for it otherwise) it is but matter of course (as it were) that their
people should swallow it, and make no question about it for conscience sake.

3. The peoples attendance upon an Episcopal Ministry anciently, and near unto
the times when Episcopacy was first conceived, and brought forth in the
Christian Church, was nothing so broadly inconsistent with the Rule of the
Gospel, as now it is, but by many degrees more tolerable, and defensible, than
that attendance upon a Ministry of the same denomination, which is in these
days exhibited unto it. The Bishop that now is, (I mean, that is now commonly
so called) is another kind of creature, specifically distinct from those that
were so called, about the times when the Name (in the high signification of the
word) was first heard in the Christian world: For if the best Records of
Antiquity signify any thing, the Bishops we speak of, at, and some while after
their first Original, were chosen by the people, who were to live under their
inspection and Government, in conjunction with their Ministers. So that those
Ministers, who were made afterward by these Bishops, were, in a sense (viz.
mediately, and remotely) made by themselves (I mean by the people themselves)
in and by that act of theirs, whereby they close their Bishops, and gave them
power (I do not mean, a lawful power, for such was not in them to give) to
ordain Ministers for them. Now then if they did attend upon Ministers
Episcopally ordained, upon the term specified, their example no ways
paralel's, no ways countenceth, much less justifies, the practice of any in
these days, who from time to time sit under a Prelatical Ministry; considering
that the Bishops, which the world now affords, are of a quite different
extraction from those in ancient times, far more spurious and degenerate, the
people of God being so far from choosing, or defiring them, that they make their
way by an high hand to make themselves Lords over them.

7. (and lastly, for this) As for those, who have dealt so effectually with
their judgments and consciences, as to make themselves both able and willing,
to conceive, that there can be no lawful Ministry, but that which springs from
under a pair of Episcopal hands; the conceit is so prodigiously importune and
unreasonable, that to engage in any solemn or serious opposition to it, may
seem to be a work proper only for him that has little else to do.
Nevertheless, because I find that there are not wanting amongst us, who have
suffered themselves to be baptized in the spirit of this conceit, (to the
disparagement of their judgments, to the ensnaring of their consciences, and
who knows to what public inconvenience besides?) to set them at liberty from
the bands of this enchantment, I mast heartily and seriously recommend unto
them the diligent perusal of that elaborate and learned Discourse of Mr. W.
Prynne lately mentioned, once and again) published the second time with some
enlargements, not long since, under the title of, The Vn-Bishoping of Timothy,
and Titus, etc. In this Discourse, besides that which is projected in chief
(the vindicating the Holiness and Honor of Jus Divinum, from having any thing
to do with the dunghill-Institution of the Episcopal Dignity; for so it
deserves to be abased for exalting it self so high as to claim Jure Divino)
the Reader shall find the privilege of ordaining Ministers, challenged by that
Order of men we speak of, as incommunicable unto all others, vested by God
himself in persons of another Order, and not at all in them considered (as they
use to consider themselves in the business) in their elevation.

Argument VI.
Some again plead; That Christ has purchased a liberty for all his, to seek,
and to receive, their Christian edification wherever they can find it, and
wherever they shall desire to seek it with any hope of finding it. So that
they are not tied in Conscience unto any one sort, or kind of Ministers, but
may as lawfully, and without sin, hear as often as they please, even such
Teachers, whose entrance into their Office of Ministry is most abominable and
hateful unto Cod, as those, who enter by that door, which he has sanctified,
and appointed for this purpose, and so come to the great work of the Ministry
with abundance of his blessing upon them: Especially they plead, that the
hearing of the vilest of Ministers is sin-free, if they deliver any thing that
is good for edification, and this be received: and in case they utter any thing
of a contrary import, that this be rejected.

Answer.
This Argument savours of a spirit that has flesh and bones relating to it,
and these covered with a skin, which it desires to keep whole to sleep in. But,

1. The liberty purchased for us by Christ, is an un-valuable treasure, a
benifit and privilege that passes all humane understanding. But as in the
true and right notion of it, it highly accommodates the Spirit, making it
abundantly fruitful, as well in righteousness, as in joy, and peace; yea, and
in some respect, accommodates the flesh also, as namely by easing it of the
insupportable burden of the Levitical Ceremonies: So in a corrupt and false
notion, it has been from the beginning, and is at this day, made a pretense of
much unworthiness, and a cloak and covering for many uncomly and sinful doings.
The Apostle admonishing the Galatians not to use that liberty whereunto they
had been called by Christ, for an occasion unto the flesh, Gal. 5. 13.
[that is, for the encouraging and strengthening of themselves in any carnal
practices, or ways unbecoming the Gospel] plainly implies, that there is a
great aptness in professors of the Gospel to stumble at this stone, and to
think they may lawfully do many things under the covert of their Christian
liberty, at which otherwise their Consciences would boggle, and stand more in
awe of the word of God restraining them. Whereas the incomparable privilege of
the liberty purchased for us by Christ, engages us unto all things, which
make, either for the honor of the Gospel, or for the comfor, peace, and
salvation of men, upon higher, and more awful, and sacred terms, than otherwise
we had been; yea, and upon the same terms, to refrain and forbear all things,
though otherwise lawful (if they be not necessary also) which are contrary
unto, either the one, or the other. This is the plain and unquestionable
Doctrine of the Scriptures, and is accordingly taught by the generality of
Ministers learned in them. Now then,

2. The hearing of a Prelatical Ministry by those, who judge themselves strong,
being a great offense, and stumbling, to their weak Christian Brethren and this
being known unto them so to be, the practice is as diametrally repugnant to the
Law of Christian liberty, as lightly a practice can be. For this Law (as the
great Apostle has drawn it up) is, that Christians by love should serve one
another Gal 5. 13.
Now what this Apostle speaks elsewhere concerning material meat, is, in the
case before us, altogether as applicable to the spiritual meat, or food, of
Christians; nay, the misdemeanor in this case, is much greater, than that
mentioned in the other. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now
walk thou not charitably Romans 14. 15.
[that is, according to the emphasis and weight of the phrase, Adverbia
necandi, ejus cui ^dhibentur contrarium significant. Mede (...) Apoc. p. 152
as Expositors observe in sundry the like in Scripture] thou walk EXCEEDING
uncharitably. For if it be objected, that we are not bound by any rule of
charity, to forbear our spiritual food, for the offense of any, as we are our
temporal; I answer, yes: in the like sense, and respect, in which we are bound
in charity toward a weak Brother, to forbear temporal meat, we stand bound to
forbear spiritual also. If a Brother were so weak, as to be offended that I
should eat any meat whatsoever in case of the utmost necessity for the support
of my life, when I cannot come at any other, in this case I were not to regard
his being offended, but to eat the meat which God has given me to relieve me
in my extremity, howsoever: The reason is, because in such a case I stand bound
in duty toward God to preserve my life, which I cannot do in any other way,
but only by eating such meat, my eating of which may (as the case supposes)
offend my Brother. But when I may relieve my hunger, and sustain my life, by
several kinds of meat, one of which my Brother judges it not lawful for me to
eat, but takes no offense at my eating any of the other, if in this case I
should eat that which offends him, I should not (as the Apostle says) walk
charitably toward him: but destroy him, and so abuse my Christian liberty, and
sin against Christ. There is altogether the same consideration in choosing our
spiritual nourishment, and means of edification. Suppose we judge that we may,
yea, and that we do edify by resorting to a Prelatical Ministry (about which
we shall notwithstanding a little demur before the close of this answer) yet
knowing that our resorting hither, is an offense and scandal to many good
Christians, though weak, God having afforded us great variety otherwise of
worthy means for our Edification (as has been proved formerly) Consideration
19.
such a practice (were it in it self lawful, yet) being against charity, is an
abuse of our Christian liberty, a kind of wanton and contemptuous trampling
upon the peace and comfort of our weak Brethren (who may be as precious in the
sight of God as our selves, notwithstanding their weakness) and consequently,
must needs be a sin highly provoking the Lord Christ, Indeed if God had
commanded us to hearken unto this Generation of Ministers, what means soever
besides he should vouchsafe unto us for our edification, or should have
threatened us with the vengeance of eternal Fire, if we did not hear them, in
this case should any person be offended at us for hearing them, he must bear
the burden of his offense himself for we should be innocent) but if under the
circumstance mentioned, we shall comport, in our attention with them, and a
weak Brother shall be offended at our comportance in this kind; God will
require his offense at our hand. An offense may be taken at the performance of
a duty; but cannot be given but by an act of liberty.

Again, The misdemeanor of offending a weak Brother by receiving our spiritual
meat from the hand of a Prelatical Servitor, is in this respect more sinful,
than to offend him in eating any material meat would be, namely, that the
offense given in the former case, is by an action or practice that is in it
self, and out of the case of scandal, unlawful (as has been proved at large)
whereas in the latter case, the offense is given by an action, which simply,
and in it self considered, is lawful: For every creature of God (says the
Apostle, speaking of material meat) is good, and nothing to be refused, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 4.

3. It has been proved in the preceding Considerations, that the frequent
recourse of Godly persons to Prelatical Ministers in the public exercise of
their Ministry, is, in several other respects, besides that of scandal and
offense given unto weak Christians, a manifest breach of the Law of Chrity; As
1. Because it encourages such Ministers in an evil way, and hides Repentance
from their eyes; whereas their withdrawing from them, is a proper means to make
them better acquainted with themselves, and to help them to be ashamed of their
Babylonian preferment. 2. Because by countenancing and strengthening the hand of
these men in their way, they help to harden the hearts of their great Lords and
Masters also in the evil of their way, which is more provoking in the sight of
God than the other. 3. Because by honoring the Ministers of the Prelatical
Creation, with their dependence on them for the words of eternal life, and high
concernments of salvation, they keep up and strengthen the Interest of the
Prelates in the hearts and minds of the people, and so make the mountain of
their power the more strong and durable; and consequently, bring upon their own
heads the guilt of being accessory to all the outrages of persecution and
cruelty, wherein this generation of men shall magnify themselves against the
Saints of the Most High. 4. Because by accepting of Ministers of an Episcopal
recommendation and investiture, they wrong and weaken the right-vested by
Christ in his respective Churches, for the choice and ordination of their
respective Ministers. These particulars we argued more at large, and brought
the truth of them into a clear light in the foregoing Considerations: therefore
we only mention them here. The Reader may please to review Consideration 2, 3,
4- 13, 14, 15. So that the liberty purchased for the Saints by Christ, is so
far from being a reasonable ground whereon to justify or warrant the practice
condemned in these papers, that it is a most sovereign disswasive and
retractive from it: For the greater love Christ has any ways manifested unto
them, he has laid so much the greater and stronger engagements upon them to
love others, and more especially those of the household of Faith; and
consequently, to refrain all ways and doings that are inconsistent with this
affection toward the one or the other.

4. (and lastly) The liberty purchased for the Saints by Christ, was intended
by him only for their comfort, welfare and peace, not for their prejudice or
loss: Therefore any man to plead this liberty to embolden himself unto any such
practice, whereby he is likely, or rather cannot but prejudice and endammage
himself, and this in matters of greatest concernment unto him, must needs be an
abuse of this liberty. Now that for the Servants of God to attend upon, or
(which is the same) to hold Communion with such a Ministry which is no where
approved, or sanctified by Christ in his Word, but obtruded upon Christians
with an high hand, by those who are confederate both in spirit and practice,
with the Scarlet Whore sitting upon the Scarlet-colored Beast, and drunken
with the Blood of the Saints Rev. 17. 3, 6.
(a description which belyeth not the Prelatical Priesthood, or Ministry) must
needs have a direct and strong tendency to their real loss and detriment, may
be thus brought out of darkness into light. The great jealousy and fierce
wrath of God are again and again reveated from Heaven, not only against the
Antichristian Beast himself, that had two Horns like a Lamb, yet Spoke as a
Dragon Rev. 13. 11.
etc. but also against all his accomplices and followers, against all his
Worshipers, and those that should communicate with him in his sins [that is, in
any of tho^^ sins which are more appropriately his, his, as he claims to be
Vicar General unto Christ, and to Umpire matters of Christian Religion and
Divine Worship, as he pleases, and by what Penalties, as well Civil, as
Ecclesiastic, he pleaseth] And the third Angel followed them, saying, with a
loud voice, If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in
his fore head, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture [that is, without any allay of mercy
or compassion] into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with
Fire and Brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever. And they have
no rest day nor night who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name Rev. 14. 9. 10. 11. elsewhere the sore
displeasure of God is declared (threatningwise) against those that shall
compo^^ with this Beast in his sins, Rev. 8. 4. Chap. 19, 17, 18, 2 These 2. 12.
. A most dreadful denunciation and warning! enough to make both the ears of him
that shall hear it, to tingle; and to prevail with any man that loves not the
vengeance of hell fire, or to have God his Enemy in the fiercest of his
Indignation, to keep off, at least, the thousand six hundred furlongs distance,
spoken of (Rev. 14. 20.) from all communion with the Beast, Babylon, the False
Prophet, and Scarlet Whore, in all their lewd and detestable doings. And
whereas several other things of moment might be observed from the passages now
cited, I shall at present) take notice of these two only. First, That the most
severe and dreadful vengeance here described, is not threatened against any
inward defection, or leaning in heart, mind or judgment, toward the ways and
practices of the Beast, but against any outward compliance with him, as in the
receiving his mark in the forehead, or in the right hand, etc. So that it is in
vain for men to plead the integrity and goodness of their heart, if in their
outward man they conform to any of his abominations. Secondly, That the Holy
Ghost expresses those compliances, or those acts of compliance, with the
Beast, against which the most heavy doom described is threatened, in words and
phrases that are obscure and of difficult interpretation (as the worshipping of
the Beast and his Image, the receiving his Mark in the Forehead, or in the
right Hand) that so the Saints might be made jealous and fearful, not only of
such actions und ways wherein they should broadly and right-down symbolize,
and comport with him, but even of those also, which have the least and lightest
appearance of such a comportment. Men use to be more circumspect in their way,
and more careful of keeping themselves at a sufficient distance from Ditches,
Precipices, and places of danger, when they walk in the twilight, the light of
the Sun is apt to make them more bold and venturous. And it is the express will
of God concerning us, that we abstain, not only from that which is really and
unquestionably evil, but from all appearance of evil 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
likewise, yea, and from whatsoever is of an inviting, tempting, and alluring
nature unto evil Prove. 23. ^1. Exodus 34. 5, 16. Deuteronomy. 2. 30. (with many other;)
; yea, and from whatsoever we are not reasonably, and well assured in our
Judgments and Consciences, that it is not evil Romans 14. 14, 23.
Now that our ordinary and frequent attendance upon persons commissioned and
sent by Prelates to preach, is a countenancing of, and consequently, a
communicating with, as well the one, as the other, in their sins (with the
Prelates in their blasphemous usurpations and encroachments upon the high
Prerogative of Christ; with the Preachers, in their consenting unto their
Masters in those sacrilegious impieties, by dividing the spoil with them, and
accepting a Ministerial Dignity from and under them) has been demonstratively
proved formerly See Consideration 2, and 4.
. And the sin of Prelates in claiming and exercising such a power in, and over
the Churches of Christ, which is competent only unto Christ himself, and
accordingly appropriated unto him by God, being (for kind) one of the most
notorious and stigmatical sins of the Babylonish or Antichristian Beast; they
who justify, or any ways communicate with the Prelates in the sin, justify
the Beast also, and communicate with him in the same, and consequently, bring
themselves under the dint of those most terrible threatenings from Heaven, which
are bent against him, and all that bird him God speed in the way of his
Antichristian Abominations (as we lately heard) neither are they who quarrel
with him, or declare themselves with the greatest zeal and passion against him,
about other matters wherein themselves are, or (probably) may be some ways
concerned, hereby either made, or declared innocent from the great offense of
complying with him, and justifying him. For thieves may fall out, and draw
swords upon one another about dividing the prey, and yet-justifie one the other
in following the same wicked course of thieving: and Sampson's Foxes were tied
together by their tails, when their heads looked contrary ways. In like
manner, men may preach and write with a keen style, yea and make most severe
Laws against him, that calls himself Christ Vicar [that is, Antichrist The
word Antichrist signifies as well Christ's Substitute, Deputy, Vicar, or one
that acts in his place or stead, as one that is an Adversary or Enemy to him:
although it be true, that he that acts in his Head, exercising such a power,
which is appropriately his, and vested in him only, is his grand Adversary, and
must needs be so, as might be showed at large. The preposition (...), as our
best Lexicons inform us, most properly signifies, pro, vice, loco; for,
instead, or place [of another] and is in this sense frequently used in the New
Testament, Matthew 2. 22. Luke 11. 11. Jam. 4. 15. Not is it (I verily believe)
here so much as once used in an adversative (...) Yea, incomposition it is used
in the like signification. Acts 18. 2. and elsewhere.
] and against those that profess a religious subjection unto him (whom we call
Papists) and yet may symbolize, and be in the same condemnation with him, if
they claim or exercise, yea, or maintain and justify that kind of power which
he claims (though over greater numbers of men) and exercises, but in much a
larger Sphere than they; a power (I mean) of imposing upon men what they please
in matters of Religion, or of Faith and Worship, under what penalties they
please also. The claim of this power over the Chrictian World, (or, I might
say, over the whole World) constitutes him that makes the claim, whoever he
be, that Notorious and Grand Antichrist, or Vice Christ, of whose coming into
the World in his season, the Christians in the days of the Apostles Paul and
John, had heard, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 5, 6. 1 John 4. 3.
and whose History (his rise, progress, exploits, continuance, together with
his most doleful and dreadful Catastrophe, or end) is prophetically set forth
by these Apostles; by the former more briefly, 2 Thessalonians. 2. by the latter, more
largely in the Book of the Revelation. And whosoever they be that claim the
like power, though it be over a smaller part of men, and over those only, who
live under their Civil Government and Power, (as most Rulers and Governors
that are called Christian, do) they justify that very power in the nature or
kind of it, the claim and exercise of which is the very life and soul, and
quickening spirit of Antichrist emphatically, and (...), to called: and
consequently, in this respect, may (with too good propriety of speech) be
termed Antichristian, or Antichrists of an inferior order. But this by the
way. From the late premises it plainly enough appears, that the lending of
our ears and understandings, from time to time, to a Ministry of a spurious and
earthly descent, and which the Prelates (rank of the spirit that breaths in
Antichrist the Great) may truly call theirs, is a constructive justification of
this Antichrist, and that in his fundamental wickedness (as was even now
hinted) and so exposes us unto danger of partaking with him in his plagues:
and therefore cannot be encouraged, or led unto it by the sweet Genius of the
liberty purchased for us by Christ; this (as has been showed) most effectually
dissuading and drawing us aside from all actions and ways, that are of any
threatening or dangerous consequence unto us.

Secondly, Whereas the Argument pleads that the benefit of Edification may
lawfully be sought after, and received, from any Ministry whatsoever, not only
in the Reformed Churches, but even among Papists themselves, as from Jesuits,
Friars, etc. I answer;

1. That evil ought not to be done, for the compassing or obtaining of any good
whatsoever. The great Apostle being reported to affirm the contrary, rejects
the report with great indignation, as an unworthy slander, Romans 3. 8. And no
marvel; it being repugnant even to the Light of Nature (as might be showed from
the Sayings of some of her Prophets) that the attainment of that which is good,
should be endeavored by unlawful ways: The reason whereof might be insisted
on, but that we are in have. Now it bath been formerly argued, and proved, by
Considerations not a few, That to attend upon any Ministry, which is of an
Apocryphal and sinful erection, and consequently derogatory unto Christ, and
his care and faithfulness over the House of God, whatsoever our ends or
expectations may be, in, or from such our attendance, is unlawful, and
displeasing unto God, and more especially, and unquestionably, in the case of
Scandal given to weak Christians. No goodness of ends or intentions, will make
atonement for a sinful action.

2. Though Edification be more necessary, and of greater concernment to be
endeavored and sought after by a Christian, than his daily bread, yet God
having provided orderly and regular means, and these every way sufficient for
his obtaining it, (as has been with greatest evidence proved from the
Scriptures See Consideration 19.
) he is not to please himself with breaking the Divine appointment on this
behalf, or to be his own Carver, when God has set out a meet and full
allowance for him; no whit more, than with seeking his daily bread by indirect
and unwarrantable practices, when as there are honest ways and means to supply
him in this kind, which have the blessing of God annexed by promise unto them,
and he well capable of the use of them. The holy Ghost charge it upon the
Saints as a special duty and service for the honor of Christ, that they
observe a Decorum, and comely Order in their Church Assemblies, and in managing
the Ordinances and holy Institutions of God. Let all things be done decently,
and in order 1 Cor. 14. 40.
. And the Apostle Paul signifies to the Colossians that he rejoiced, beholding,
though only in spirit, (for he was now absent in body) their Order Col. 2. 5
. And Titus was left by him in Crete to put things in order, or (as the word
signifies) to set matters at rights, in the Churches there Tit. 1. 5
. Now as it is a manifest breach of order, when a wife is disobedient to her
own husband, her obedience unto him being fit and comely (as the Holy Ghost
himself has adjudged it, Coloss. 3. 18.) So is it no less disorderly for any
person, who has freely embodyed himself in a Church of Christ, the members
whereof ought to submit themselves one to another in the fear of the Lord
(Ephesians. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 5. 5.) And again, to serve one another in love, Gal. 5.
13. To build up themselves in their most holy Faith, Jude verse. 20. To obey
those that are over them in the Lord, and to esteem them very highly in love
for heir work sake, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 17. Not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together, but to exhort one another, Heb. 10. 25. Not
to make rents or Divisions in their body, 1 Cor. 1. 10. or to cause offenses,
Romans 16. 17. (with several other things of like import with these) it is (I
say) disorderly in the highest for any Member being under such sacred
obligations as these, unto his body, or fellow members, to turn his back upon
them, to abandon their communion, to forsake their holy Assemblies, and under a
pretense of Christian liberty to seek after edification, to betake himself from
time to time unto strange Teachers (especially being of an infamous and
polluted Order) and to frequent Congregations of a Politic Constitution, and
worldly complexion, in the name of Churches of Christ. Now for any man to
expect edification by violating the Order, which Christ has established in his
Churches, is with as little reason, as to expect to gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of chistles.

3. (and lastly, for this) Were it granted, or supposed, that a person might
gather as much, yea, or more, knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel, from
the lips of strange Teachers in their Ministry, than he was like to do by the
teachings in his own Church, and amongst those, from whom he has sperated
himself; yet neither will this prove that he edifieth, as much, or more, as, or
than, he might have done, by waiting upon God at the door of the lips of him,
or them, who speak from God, in his own Congregation. The Silver, and Gold,
which an ungodly man possesses, may be of the same kind of metal, and of the
same allay, and refining, with that, which is possessed by one that is
righteous: yet the Prophet David says, that a little that a righteous man
has, is better [that is, is serviceable to the owner upon a better account]
than the riches of many wicked Psalm. 37. 16.
. The reason is, or may be, because the righteous man's little, being honestly
gotten, or obtained, has the blessing of God upon it, and is sanctified unto
him: Whereas the riches of wicked men, being either unjustly obtained, or
unconscionably detained and kept up, or both, are polluted unto the owners, and
have the curse of God cleaving to them, according as he threatens, Mal. 2. 2.
I will curse your blessings. In like manner, the knowledge in things
appertaining unto God, and relating unto the saving of the soul, which is
obtained by breach of Gospel Order, and by attending upon a Ministry of an
unclean Parentage and descent, may, in the letter and notion of it, be
altogether the same (yea and possibly exceed it) with that, which is gained by
keeping close to God in his Gospel-Institutions and Appointments, and received
from those Teachers, which the Holy Ghost has set over us, or is dispensed in
our own Christian Assemblies; and yet come far short of it in the matter of
true Edification [I mean, in building men up in Faith and true holiness.] For
there is an aptness in knowledge, in conjunction with the weakness and vanity
of the heart of man, to puff men up (as the Apostle speaks) which is as
contrary to Edification, as contrary may be, unless the flatulency and
windiness of it be corrected by the Grace and Blessing of God. Besides, the
Scripture in many known places, informs us, that knowledge and ungodliness
agree too well together (many times) in the same subject and soul. Now though
God may (as has been argued, and granted, formerly) sometimes countenance and
bless a Ministry of a foreign plantation, to the conversion of some, and
edification of others [namely when, and whilst, the irregularity and unlawfuess
of it remains un-discovered, so that people in the simplicity of their hearts
resort unto it, and whilst other means of Grace are scant, and Gospel Churches
few, and remote] yet there is little question to be made but that he much more
rejoices over a Ministry of his own contrivance and establishment, to work
gracious and great things by it for the precious souls of men. And Ministers,
who receive their Commission for their work from him, or in his way, are often
found Ministers of the Spirit, when as those of an exotique and earthly
protrusion, though of greater gifts, and parts of learning, prove (in
comparison) Ministers only of the Letter. Therefore they that go wondering, or
wandering, after such Teachers as these, upon a design or desire of Christian
edification, expose themselves by a like course, unto a like curse or
disappointment, with those Jews of old, concerning whom the Prophet said, They
shall commit adultery [that is, they shall take unto them many wives] and shall
not increase Hosen 4. 10.
And as it is recorded of Daniel and his three Companions, who refused to
defile themselves with the portion of the Kings meat, or with the wine which he
drank, choosing rather to eat pulse, and to drink water; that their countenances
appeared fairer, and fatter in flesh, then all the children that did eat the
portion of the Kings meat Dan. 1 8, 12, 13
: In like manner they, who out of Conscience, shall content themselves with that
spiritual diet, though it seems but spare and thin, which God judges meet to
provide for them, are like to thrive better in the inner man, and to grow
faster in Grace, than those Teachers, by whom the souls of the Princes, and
Great men of the Earth delight to be served. So the Israelites in the
wilderness, being dissatisfied with Manna (which yet was Angels bread Psalm. 98
25
) villifying it as a light bread Numb 21. 5
, and complaining, that their soul was dried away for want of better
nourishment Numb 11. 6.
, fell a lusting after flesh: wherewith though God was greatly provoked, yet
they were not disappointed of their lust Psa. 78 30
, flesh was given them in great abundance Numb 11. 31.
: But while the flesh was yet between their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against them, and the Lord smote them with an exceeding great plague
Numb 11. 33.
. And it is greatly to be feared, that such Members of Christian Congregations,
who kick against the spiritual provisions in those Houses of God, to which they
relate, as if there were neither marrow, nor fatness, nor any good nourishment
in them, and think to feast sumpiuously with the World in their Synagogues, and
Assemblies; greatly (I say) it is to be feared, that the sweet morsels they
shall eat here, will never digest kindly with them, nor breed any good blood,
but turn to wind and water, and bring the displeasure of God upon them.
Therefore if Edification be the end which men propose unto themselves in taking
a liberty to travel to drink of the waters of Abanah and Pharpar, they might
with much more wisdom, and likelihood of success, have consulted the obtaining
of their desire in this kind, by staying at home, and contenting themselves
with the streams of Jordan.

Argument VII.
Lastly, Some conceive they may lawfully hear those Ministers whom these Papers
all along have endeavored to persuade all good men to decline and turn away
from, if they hear them only as men well furnished by God with gifts and
abilities for the preaching of the Gospel, and shall not at all mind, or
regard, their Ordination; neither whence it comes, nor whither it goes, nor by
what, or whose, Authority they stand forth to preach. For that it is lawful to
hear any man preach the Gospel, even without any Ordination by men at all, if
we perceive, or understand, him competently qualified for the work, is more
generally, if not universally, acknowledged by knowing and understanding men.

Answer.
1. There is little question to be made but that it may be lawful to hear, yea
often, and from time to time, to hear such a man preach, or declare in words, and
in a continued discourse (for this I call preaching) the counsel and mind of
God in the Gospel, who never received Ordination (in the common, and best known
Notion of the word) from men; yet under these Conditions, or Proviso's.

1. That he pretends not to an Ordination, having never received any, true, or
false, and the falsehood of his pretense, or his lie in this case, is either
known to us, or justly suspected. It is not worthy a Christian, to countenance
a liar, or a person justly suspected for such, in so sacred a work, as the
dispensing the Oracles of God.

2. That he has not submitted to any Mock Ordination, or such which is
irregular (in the principal, or main of it) for such an Ordination is a mere
nullity (as was showed soon after the beginning of this Discourse) in which
respect, he that walks under it, may well be taken for a Non-Ordained man.
Yet such a man is not to be countenanced, or honored, with the presence of a
Christian, when he presumes (not having first, by one means or other, testified
his Repentance for such a miscarriage) to minister the Glorious Gospel of
Christ. For it is not meet that the sheep of Christ should give ear to such a
Shepherd, who enters not by the door (that is, by Christ, and according to his
appointment) into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up another way, Joh. 10. 1, 5.
compared. But this is the main part argued hitherto.

3. That we find him to be, in some degree at least, (...), enabled by God to
teach: which requires, 1. Some good acquaintance in the Master Veins of the
body of the Gospel: And 2. A convenient utterance, so as to be able to
communicate the conceptions of his mind, unto the minds and understandings of
those that hear him. To encourage any private Christian to the exercise of
Prophesying, in any more public way than amongst those of his own family, whom
God has not recommended unto his Brethren, by the common Donation of both
these Gifts unto him, especially the former, in some considerable proportion
above the generality of his fellows, tends rather to the dishonor of the
Gospel, and to the disparagement of him that is encouraged upon such terms,
than otherwise.

4. That he be a person of a modest, humble, sober, and grave spirit, of an
inoffensive and exemplary behavior, not under any observation or reproach for
any thing scandalous or unchristian, in his course. If they shall undertake to
preach Christ, who are enemies unto him, (as all those are who obey not his
Gospel, or will not suffer him to reign over them, Luke 19. 27.) they are not
to be honored or encouraged in such their undertaking, by those who are his
friends.

5. (and Lastly) That whilst we honor a private Christian in his exercise of
those good Gifts, which God has given him for our Edification and Comfort, we
do not prejudice (in the least) that greater and more solemn Ordinance of the
Ministry, which Christ has given as a singular blessing unto his Churches; nor
any ways discourage or grieve those, who are over us in the Lord, and must
give an account for our souls. The Ordinances of Christ are all necessary in
their (respective) seasons, and amicably affected toward one another: there is
employment enough, and this honorable, for them all; so that one needs not
endamage or entrench upon the privileges of another. These Cautions and
Conditions observed, there is little question but that it is very lawful to
attend upon the Gospelexercises of a private person, or a man nor ordained (in
the common sense of the word) for the Work of the Ministry, or of Preaching:
Yet this proves not (as was even now briefly showed) that it is in like manner
lawful to hear he preachings of a person, who has so far neglected the honor
and pleasure of his great Lord and Master CHRIST, as to purchase leave and
liberty, to preach the Gospel, of those who have neither power to grant, nor
power to deny, and least of all, power to sell, any such thing, but are
intruders upon, and usurpers, yea, and prophaners of the holy Privileges both
of Christ and his People.

2. If it be unlawful to hear such Ministers as these, as, or because they are
Prelatically Ordained, it cannot be lawful to hear them as gifted men, or as
persons well qualified, in respect of knowledge and utterance, to preach the
Gospel. For it is a general and true Rule, That no particular or individual
action, which is unlawful in respect of any one circumstance, can be made
lawful by the innocence of never so many circumstances otherwise. Nor is there
any particular action so broadly unlawful, but has some circumstance (happily,
many) lawful enough relating to it, according to the saying, Malum semper
habitat in alieno fundo, Evil always dwells in a soil that is none of its own;
meaning, that it still cleaves unto somewhat that is (naturally) good.

3. (And lastly,) In case he that thinks it lawful to hear the Ministers we
speak of, as men well accomplished with Gifts for the work of Preaching, though
not as men sinfully ordained, should openly and publicly declare and profess,
that he hears them only in the former consideration, and at no hand in the
latter, his act in hearing them (I conceive) would be much more excusable, both
with God and good men; but whether it would be wholly justified hereby, I
somewhat doubt. If a man should bow down to, or before an Image, although he
should never so seriously protest and say, that he boweth not down to it, or
before it, as it is silver, gold, wood, stone, or the like, nor as it is the
workmanship of men's hands, but only as it puts him in mind of God; I believe
this would not make him innocent of the great offense of violating the second
Commandment, where bowing down to an Image is expressly forbidden: for no
consideration put by man upon such an action, which is a direct breach of any
Commandment of God, can alter the property of it, or cause it to be no such
breach. Therefore if it be against the mind of God, that we should with our
presence honor the Teachings of such Ministers, who come in this Name unto us,
from under Prelatical hands, it is not our considering them as persons gifted
for the Ministry, when we do thus honor them, that will reconcile our acting
in this kind with the mind, or will of God; how much less, if we shall keep
this our consideration to our selves, and within our own breasts? For in this
case, how shall our weak brother, who is offended at our hearing such
Ministers, come to know, but that we hear them upon the worst, and most
offensive terms of all, namely, as Preaching by virtue of their Episcopal
Ordination, and so be offended much more? Again, How shall the Ministers
themselves whom we hear, not think but that we hear them as Ministers of
Christ, rightly Ordained, and so be strengthened or hardened in the evil of
their way, upon a supposal of our concurrence in Judgment with them, touching
their Ordination, and the goodness of the Way by which they have entered into
the Ministry, if we hear them from time to time, without declaring or
protesting against their Ordination? So that whoever they be, that judge it
unlawful to hear them as Prelatical Ministers, have no reasonable ground to
think that they may notwithstanding lawfully hear them as gifted men, unless
they shall make their tongues the Interpreters of their minds and intentions in
the case. Neither dare I warrant them that the loudest declaring of themselves
in this kind, will warrant their practice in hearing them: But I really
believe, that they will find it much cheaper of the two, and every way more
commodious for them, wholly to wave the hearing of the men they wot of, than to
make any such Declaration.

FINIS.

