Holy and Profitable SAYINGS Of Mr. J. G. who departed this life the Third day
of this instant October, 1678.
1. WERE the World to write a Catalogue of its Mercies, that of our Redemption
ought to be placed in the front of them.

2. The least Interest in the Blood of Christ, is more truly valuable than our
firmest claims to the greatest Temporal Felicity.

3. A young Christian, like a young Soldier, may at first be afraid to enter
into Spiritual Warfare, but when, through a faith in Christ, he has once
repelled Temptations, he will never after leave fighting under his Banner.

4. It is but reason we should trust God for Temporal Mercies, since, upon
performance of the conditions of the Covenant, he assures us of those which are
Aeternal.

5. They pray in vain for pardon of Sin, who endeavor not to prevent Sin by
Prayer.

6. The strictness of Christianity ought not to be computed by the abundance of
parts; it being often seen, that Men who have a large share in Natural
Accomplishments, have a resembling quantity of Corruptions to balance them; so
that it is certainly to be concluded, that it is the illiterate Saint, not the
elaborate Sinner, which at the last day shall be justified.

7. Sin ought to be more terrible to us than Death, since there is nothing at
our desolution truly worthy our fear, but what the Impiety of our lives has
made so.

8. As Body and Soul are kept distinct in their Essence, though they be united
to make a Man, so are the Godhead and Manhood of Christ distinct in their
natures; notwithstanding the Union of them in one person.

9. He who thirsts after Christ, as the Heart after the Water-brook, or truly
longs for him, shall not be long without him.

10. Private Prayer is often rewarded with a public Blessing, Mat. 6. 6.

11. It is the Practicer, not the Prater, of Religion shall be saved.

12. Our Relation to Christ is a most high Prerogative: We are his Servants,
Rom, (...) gloried in it: yea, his Friends, Christ acknowledges it, Joh. 15.
14. yea, his Brethren, Christ blushes not to call us so, Heb. 2. 11. yea, his
Spouse, for Christ and his Church are Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 5. 32. yea,
Members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, Ephesians. 5. 30. 1 Cor. 6. 15.

13. He who is diligent for heaven, shall be rewarded with a delightfulness in
Heaven. The puling Soldier offers at the prize, whilst the pursuing one
carries it away.

14. He who has much wealth, has generally as much trouble mixed with it; he who
has none, has more; Lord! grant me that suitable competency which may supply my
necessities here, and debar me from that superfluity which may wed me to this
troublesome World, and make me unwilling to part with it to go to thee
hereafter.

How vainly do we set our affections on things below, since there is as much
happiness in not desiring, as in enjoying the greatest temporal Felicity.

15. He who would dye without fear, must endeavor to live without Sin.

16. The common partakers of all outward comforts, cannot distinguish the
Righteous from the Wicked; the friends of Christ and his People, from their
Enemies; the Heirs of Heaven, or Sons of Love, from the Children of Wrath.
Because Eccles. 9. 1. 2. All things come alike to all; and no man knows
either Love, or Hatred, by all that is before them.

17. Since Christ shed his Blood by reason of our Sins, how ought we to forgo
our Sins, in consideration of his Blood!

18. It is very strange, but very true, that a Real Christian has more
satisfaction in Persecution, than a Sinner in Prosperity.

19. When, in the various progress of Human Life, I had seriously considered
the little satisfaction, and certain afflictions was to be had therein, Lord!
(said I) how happy am I that my hopes bound at the things here below.

20. Nothing but the hopes of Heaven are sufficient to bribe me to undergo the
troubles on Earth.

21. A Man had better not be, than not be a Christian.

22. There Is no Man on Earth shares so small a Portion of Gods Blessings, or is
so unacquainted with his power, but if he looks into the particulars of his
preservation, and will but consult Gods dealings with him in his necessities,
how some times he is pleased to supply him even beyond his expectations, and at
other times miraculously frames his contentment to his condition; but ought to
fly from Despair as that most nigardly Sin. which, by confining his power,
contracts his indignation, and if it were possible to alter his decree, were
enough to close that liberal hand which was intended to be open before.

23. It is not the faint but the faithful; it is not the suspicious, but the
circumspect Christistian that gains his assurance and evidence for Heaven.

24. As the way to dye well is to live well, so the way to live well is to
conceit we are always dying whilst we are living.

25. Were it not for the hopes of future happiness, no man would be hired to
undergo the Penance of Humane VVretchedness.

26. Afflictons are mercies when they draw us toward Heaven.

27. And Prosperitie's a curse when it tempts us from it.

28. Pleasures, Riches, and Honors, and the rest of the Worlds trivial
enjoyments, in the meridian of his Age, may seemingly render a man happy, but
there is nothing but Piety, and a good Conscience can perfume his end.

29. Little do the Wicked think how many mercies the Godly enjoy, as the sweet
earnests, or returns of their Prayers, with a satisfaction which the other are
never capable of.

30. Experience is an Art of knowing well, which is learnt by observation:
Religion is an art of living, or doing well, which is learnt (at least
perfected) by Experience. If Gods dealings with us escape our observation, they
cannot come into our minds, much less enter into our hearts to consider them.
It is a great Judgment of God to have an unseeing Eve, an unconsiderate mind,
and an unaffected heart with his works. Experience in matters of God, helps to
bring the Trade of Christianity to maturity and perfection; yea it is a stock
to let up the Trade of Religion, which otherwise might impair without it.

31. Make good Thoughts your nightly, daily, and continual Companions.

32. Whilst you are going, walk as to your Graves; and when you lie down,
conceit your Couches your Deathbeds. A military Christian has no interval in
his Warfare, his Condition, like that of a Kingdoms, when it ceases to be
happy, retrogrades into destruction.

33. Most men would live Atheists, but none would dye so; but he that would be
a Christian in deed and in truth, must live one.

34. It Is a hard thing to part with the world, but should not be so to a
Christian who considers his advantageous Exchange.

35. It Is the Holy man that alone is the Happy man.

36. It Is a hard work to dye, but when death is in order to life eternal,
methinks it is easy.

37. What a vast advantage have the godly, of the wicked, when the righteous
man's Meditations are a Sacrifice, and even the carnal man's Prayers are but as
sins, Prove. 15. 8.

38. The unworthy contempt of Gods Word and Ministers, is a most provoking sin
to God, and a presaging symptom of ruin to a People.

39. He who is negligent in his Duty toward God, may reasonably expect that
God will be as careless or oblivious in his preservation of him: And indeed he
is infinitely unvvorthy the gracious privileges of the Gospel Covenant, who
is vvilfully guilty of the breach of it, when the advantages thereby only
redound to his proper interest.

40. The Life of man is a Riddle, which when Death unfolds, Heaven rewards
^^^^^ding to its demerits, whether it be (...) evil.

FINIS.
With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for D. M. 1678.


