A DISCOURSE OF The True Nature OF THE GOSPEL; DEMONSTRATING That it is no NEW
LAW, but a pure DOCTRINE of GRACE. In Answer to the Reverend Mr. Lorimer's
Apology.

Levique certamine docet vanam esse sine viribus Iram.

Live. Hist. Lib. 1. By THO. GOODWIN, Pastor of a Church of Christ at Pinnor in
Middlesex.

Phil. 2. 3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vainglory, but in
lowliness of Mind let each esteem other better than themselves.

London, Printed by J. Darby. 1695.

To the READER.
I Had so honest a Design in writing the following Discourse, which I have
endeavored to compose in cool and calm Thoughts undisturbed with Heat or
Passion, as I am armed against their Censures, who will perhaps resent it very
ill to see their Darling Notions exposed. My poor Labors are recommended by
the alone consideration of the Truths, in whose Defense they are employed, and
this is abundantly sufficient; and therefore I need only to desire thee to
consider the Arguments with an impartial Mind. If thou love the Gospel, do
not suffer thy Thoughts, looking on it, to be distorted by Prejudice or
Passion. As the Truths here asserted are of great moment, so they deserve thy
most serious Attention. If they were only subtle Niceties for a trial of Wit,
or to make an Experiment who could make Words to dance most nimbly, I would
never have misimploy'd my self in writing this Discourse, nor caused thee to
mispend so much time in reading it. But since I can assure thee that I have
asserted nothing but what I not only really believe to be true, but to be of
high Importance to the Salvation of my own Soul, (which is very clear Evidence
that a Man is in good Earnest) I hope thou will consider, whether it may not
concern thine too. There are two great Rocks which threaten the hazard of a
Shipwreck, Popery and Arminianism; and for my own part I am terribly afraid of
coming in any nearness to the danger. Popery has been so uncas'd of its
Disguise, that it appears in its natural figure; and those who know any thing
of the Gospel, startle at the first Entrance of its affrighting Shape: But
Arminianism surprises the Vncautious, appearing with a fairer Face and more
specious Color; and yet really, if the Holy Ghost speaks truly to us in the
Epistles of the Apostle Paul, (as I am sure he does) this almost generally
beloved Doctrine is as contrary to the Gospel as Popery it self; and if God
speaks true, it is undoubted, that what the Arminians tell us is false. God
tells us, that in him we live, and move, and have our being: The Arminians
would dispute us out of this great Privilege, and endeavor to persuade us,
that when God has once formed us and thrown us out of his Hands, we may move
alone without him. God teaches us, that he effectually accomplisheth the
Counsels of his Will, and that nothing can obstruct or frustrate the success:
The Arminians tell us, that God is heartily desirous of the Salvation of all
Men, but cannot save the greatest part of them, because they are unwilling. God
plainly tells us his own Mind, that none are saved, but whom he has eternally
ordained to that happy State: But the Arminians insinuate, that those may be
saved whom God never thought of for such a Design, and that he will be
surpised at the arrival of new Colonies in Heaven, which he never appointed to
come thither. God, who justifies the Ungodly, expressly declares, that we must
be justified freely of his Grace, not by our own but Christ's Righteousness.
The Arminians bring us to a new Court of Judicature, where God sits not, nor
has any thing to do; for there our Faith in obedience to the Gospel, is
pleaded instead of perfect Obedience owing to the Law, and the Plea is
admitted; for (as that Prodigy of Learning Grotius speaks) as a Work grateful
to God, it meets with acceptance. In a Word, their Opinions tear the Volume of
God's Word to pieces, and un-God God himself: They pull him out of his Throne,
and strike the Scepter out of his Hands, and snatch the Crown from his Head.
Their Opinions take aim to destroy the very Being of the Divinity; for take
away his Perfections and Attributes of absolute Power and Wisdom, and God is an
imaginary Nothing: Who can conceive of him but as an independent Sovereign? and
yet their Doctrine allows less Power to him in the disposal of his Creatures,
than a petty Negro Prince has over his Subjects within the Compass of his
narrow Dominions. Who can think of God but as All-knowing, and having at one
view a certain Prospect of all Persons and Things, past, present, and to come?
and yet their Doctrine makes him to guess at the Future, as an Astrologer by
the Stars.

Ay but it will be said, What is all this to the Purpose of the present
Controversy, wherein we have not to do with Arminians? It Is true we have not,
but it concerns every Minister of the Gospel, to put a stop to any Opinion
which has the least tendency to Arminianism. We are not as idle Spectators, to
stand by with patience to see the Truths of the Gospel, either openly invaded,
or secretly supplanted; but as long as we are able to frame a Thought, or hold
a Pen, it is our Duty to make a vigorous Opposition. We have the Example of
those worthy Divines in France, the old Du Moulin, and others, to animate and
encourage us. When Testard and Amyrault advanced some new Opinions to meet
Arminianism in the middle Course, which were soon, by an unhappy Wind, wafted
over into England; these worthy Persons (who were as firmly resolved that the
old Gospel should not be altered, as we English are zealous that our old
Fundamental Laws be not changed) presently took the Alarm, and resisted the
Invasion. Complaints were made in their Synod against Testard and Amyrault, as
Corrupters of the Protestant Doctrine, and they were Mr. Quick's Synod. in
Gall. Reform. vol. 2. in the Acts of the Synod of Alanson, Chap. XV. page 353,
354.
openly censured. The Pastors Ibid. Chap. 28. page 397 to 405.
and Professors of the Church of Geneva, Ibid. Chap. 29. page 40^ to 40^.
the Professors of Divinity in the Universities of Leyden and Groningen sent
their Letters, protesting against these Innovations in the old Protestant
Doctrine. And the Famous Ibid. Chap. 30. page 309 to 321.
Du Moulin, who with so much Wit and Learning wrote against Popery and
Arminianism, sends a Letter particularly to the same Synod, and with an
Apostolical Zeal and Plainness, complains that these Innovators corrupted the
Ancient Faith, and changed the very Nature of God, of the Law, and of the
Gospel. These Examples should teach us to be earnest for the same Truths which
they maintained so vigorous and I have endeavored to be zealous for them
without being angry.

A DISCOURSE OF THE GOSPEL.
CHAP. I.
The general Design of this Discourse, is not to promote Controversies, or to
propagate Quarrels, but to maintain the Truths of the Gospel in their first
native Purity. The State of the Question concerning the Gospel's being a Law.

I Am so far from inventing, or defending any new dividing Opinions, to trouble
the Peace of the Churches, that I heartily lament the fatal Disturbances which
are produced by them; and instead of fomenting the prevailing Heat of our
Contentions, or blowing a Fire which is but too great, I would willingly
contribute all my poor Endeavors to quench the Flames. It is not therefore out
of an humor of Disputing that I engage in this Debate, nor to promote the
Interest of a Party: I know no Interest, and by the Grace of God will never
espouse any, but that of Christ and his Gospel. It is an apprehension of the
Injury offered to this, which is the Motive of my undertaking its Defense. It
is the Interest of wronged Truth that I assert, which all who love, have
indispensable Obligations to vindicate. It is the pure Gospel, by so many
various Attaques assaulted, that I stand to guard; and which being Eternal, tho
it may be invaded, yet can never be oppressed nor sink for want of Support, tho
my Strength prove unequal to so great a Performance. It is that Gospel which
was taught by our Lord Christ, and his Apostles, which was owned in the first
and best Ages of the Primitive Church, and is now professed in all the
Confessions of Faith of the Reformed; which not all the Arts, and Power,
neither of Rome Heathen, nor which is worse, Antichristian, were able to
extirpate; which not two Ages ago was recovered out of the Darkness of
Antichrist by the first Reformers, and vigorously asserted by them, against all
the Subtleties and cunning Evasions, both of Papists and others, to shift off
the Force of Truth; and is from those our worthy Ancestors of the Protestant
Religion delivered down to us; which was sealed by the Blood of Martyrs, which
was maintained against all the Powers of the Earth armed for its Ruin; and is,
and will be (I doubt not) by a greater Power preserved to survive the Ashes of
the World, though it is in more danger of being betrayed by its pretended
Friends, than ever it was of being conquered by an open War of its declared
Enemies. Credita Res, captique dolis, Lachrymisque coactis, Quos neque Tydides,
nec Larissaeus Achilles, Non Anni domuere december, non mill Carinae. Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 2. V. 196.
And indeed the Antichristian Party gain a greater Advantage by Protestants
starting such new Opinions, which seem to favor their Errors, than ever they
could by their open and undisguised opposition to the Truth. For not to debate
whether the Jesuits have not a great Hand in promoting these Controversies, who
can easily turn themselves into all Shapes to gain their Ends; yet it is certain
they rejoice, and triumph in our Dissentions; where, whatever the Success be,
they are sure of an Advantage. For if these Erroneous Doctrines of
Justification prevail among the People, they are brought so much the nearer to
Popery; or, if Truth prove victorious, as (I do not at all doubt) it will in
the End, yet by the first starting these disputable Opinions, a hopeful Union
among Protestants is broken, and those troublers of Israel have shattered us to
pieces, and may bring us within a Point of our Ruin; and so what they
unsuccessfully attempted by Power and Persecution, they will effect (if God
does not avert) by our own sad Divisions.

It is this opposed Gospel which I love and value above all things, and by the
help of my Lord Jesus Christ, I will defend its pure Truths entire and
unmangled. And as it is this Gospel which teaches me not to treat any of its
Ministers with insolent Contempt, however I may differ from him, in my
Sentiments, so I will endeavor to observe its Dictates, in avoiding all base
and scurrilous Reflections (being but the Follies of an impotent Passion) when
I write for those Truths which are calm, peaceful, and gentle, Jam. 3. 17. And
indeed ever since the Light of common Reason began to dawn upon my Mind, as
well as since God gave me a greater, I always abhorred that Method of managing
Controversies in Religion, wherein Arguments are mingled with Invectives, and
the Deficiences of Reason made up with Calumnies and Reproaches. Tho the double
injury done both to Truth, and my Friend, the one of which is equally insulted
with an haughty fierceness, as the other is openly affronted, might tempt a Man
of the greatest Moderation to some passionate Resentments; yet nothing shall
move me from my fixed Resolution of not being angry. I write not from an Humor
of Strife, nor for Pride and vain Glory, but for Truth, and therefore shall
concern my self no further than I find that to be interested; which if I
thought to be on my Learned Brother's Side, I should be so far from contesting
it with him, that I would join in the Defense. This Truth lies between us, and
should not be lost in a crowd of angry Words; tho this is the Fault of most
Disputes in Religion, and is a Reproach to what we all profess, that when
Philosophers and Heathens discoursed their different Opinions with a Calmness
of Mind, we Christians, for whom our Great Lord died, that God might be
reconciled to us, and we to one another, are inflamed with all Passions,
because we do not think and speak the same Things. We every one of us dispute,
because we think we are in the right, when we so order the loud Disputation,
that Truth which speaks softly cannot be heard, its still Voice being drowned
in the Clamor of our Contentions. Now then that nothing may disturb a Serenity
of Mind, which ought to be in a Person who argues not for Interest, but purely
for the Truth, I shall only consider in my Reverend Brother's Discourse, what
carries the Face and Appearance of Reason, without suffering my Thoughts to be
diverted or rufled by his Invectives. In a Word, I will not change a Defensive
War for the common Interests of our Christian Religion, into a private Quarrel,
since it is not any Man's Person, but the Truth which I have undertaken to
vindicate. And indeed the Reputation for Piety and Learning of those whom he
insults, is so glorious, that any Attempt to defend them is altogether
needless. As for Bradwardine and Dr. Owen, on whom he is pleased to bestow some
disadvantageous Remarks, they are so great Names, and have deservedly obtained
such an high Esteem among Men, that they are equally above his little
Reflections, as beyond any Endeavors I can employ for their Vindication. They
are both known Champions against two the most malignant Heresies which ever
infected the Church, Pelagianism, (to which that of the Arminians is very
nearly related) and Socinianism. And as for Mr. Marshal, that very Book which
our Author so much vilifies, discovers a pious Heart, joined with a closeness
and consistency of Thought. And all who know that other worthy Person, against
whom his Passion is more furiously fired, must give his Character very
different from that, by which, with an unsuccessful attempt of Wit, he
endeavors to represent him. But as in Debates of Religion, all little Efforts
of Wit (if I had any) would be very unsuitable and impertinent; I shall only
seriously argue the Cause in question by Scripture and Reason, since also I do
not think that People are obliged to mispend their Time to read long
Discourses, to entertain themselves unprofitably with those personal
Reflections, with which such are usually stuffed, more than with Arguments;
since it does not concern them to know, whether such or such a Man be so wise
and so rational as he is apprehended to be, or silly and ridiculous, but only
what is Truth, and the Danger of (...) in the Faith, which may be cleared to
them in very few words: I (...) accordingly study brevity and plainness as much
as ever I can; and shall reduce my following Discourse to as narrow a Compass
as possible, and so consider in that of the Learned Mr. Lorimer no more than
what seems most to the Purpose. I will not at all affect Niceties, or subtle
Evasions; and indeed any Opinion which needs them, and I know not how many
perplexing Distinctions to maintain it, may very well be suspected: for Truth
never seeks Corners to hide in, nor can endure to be set in a false Light, but
loves to appear in its pure native Brightness. And it is our Duty, who by
Office and Commission, as Ministers of Christ, are to teach the Gospel to the
People, that we do not scatter Mists about them, as if throwing Dust in their
Eyes was the way to clear their Sight; that we do not amuse them with new Terms
fetched from the Civil Law, and make it necessary for them to study Justinian,
Bartolus, and Cujacius; to read the Pandects and the Codes, that they may know
how they are justified. This, instead of instructing, would be to confound
those whom we are to lead into the Truth, by the clearest Expressions of God's
Holy Word, and to inform them in the plainest manner that we can.

What I have proposed to my self to debate in the present Discourse, is,
Whether the Gospel be a new Law? Without multiplying words, which does but
obscure the clearness of Things, the Question in dispute is not, Whether the
Gospel be a new Law, if by that Word is meant a Doctrine of Grace newly
revealed, after the Covenant of Works was broken, wherein God has declared in
what Order and Manner he will save guilty condemned Sinners. If by a new Law no
more is meant than this, it is presently granted, and the Controversy is at an
end. What is denied is this, That the Gospel is a Law commanding new Precepts,
as Conditions of obtaining its Blessings, and established with a Sanction,
promising Life and Happiness to the observance of them, and threatening the
Neglect.

Tho according to the Laws of a Discourse, I should first urge Arguments to
prove, that the Gospel is not such a Law; yet my first Design being to answer
the Reverend Mr. Lorimer's Apology, I shall first show how little to his
Purpose he eagerly catches at the word Law, wherever he can meet with it in
the Scriptures, or in the Writings of Men.

And first I shall demonstrate, that wherever the Gospel is named a Law,
either in the Old or New Testament, only a Doctrine of Grace is to be
understood by it.

CHAP. II.
That the word Law is of a various and doubtful meaning. From the original
Signification of the Heb. (...) it is proved, that then the Gospel is called a
Law in the Old Testament, no more is intended than a Doctrine. This is evinced
and confirmed from the Interpretation of several Scriptures, Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm.
19. 7. Psalm. 119. 97, 98, etc. Jer. 31. 33. Isa. 2. 3. Micha 4. 2.

THE word Law is of such various Signification, that it is not at all strange
if we find the Gospel called by that Name, both in the Scriptures, and among
the Ancient Fathers, and later Protestant Writers; when yet neither the Holy
Ghost nor any of those Authors, meant to describe the Gospel as a new Rule of
Works enacted with a milder Sanction.

When that stated Order of Things, whereby the Actions even of inanimate
Creatures are regulated according to the Appointment of the great Creator's
Will, (when he first framed them, and pushed them into Motion) is called the
Law of Nature; we cannot apprehend it as a Precept, or Rule of Duty established
with a Sanction to those things, which being without Sense or Life, know
nothing of the Matter. This Law is not a Precept given to such Creatures (...).
(...) Declam. 18. Page 483. Tom. 1. Oper. Ed. Morelli, Paris. 1606.
, but the Power of God working in them, and acting them to move according to
that Order which he has set for the Administration of all things in the
Universe. Who will say, that the Sun does its Duty in performing its constant
laborious Course, or that a Reward is due when it has done its Work? And yet
it is by a Law, tho not any Precept, that it moves so orderly; and a Law it is,
without any promise of Recompense for observing and keeping duly the mark'd-out
Course, or threatening a Penalty for deviating from it. It is by the same Law of
Nature that the Fire always burns, the Planets perpetually move, the Earth
never totters from its Center, and yet they are not to be recompensed for such
their exact Observance. And if on the contrary, the Fire should freeze us, the
Planets stop their orderly Dance, or march so irregularly as to break all their
Ranks, and the Earth shake and fall from its placed Foundation, they would not
be liable to undergo any Punishment. And now, Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, and
the Heavenly Bodies, are well enough said to act by a Law, tho they have no
Rule of Duty given them, nor are obnoxious either to Rewards or Punishments.
Well then, as the settled Order of the Universe is called a Law, the Gospel may
obtain the same Name in that Sense. It is without doubt a most certain
established Order The Hebrew word (...) Tor, which in the Feminine Gender is
(...) Torah, signifies a fixed and disposed Order of things, as Esth. 2. 12.
and Ver. 15. Schindler in Lex. Pentaglot. and Cocceius in Lexic. Heb. remark in
voce (...).
of our Salvation by Christ alone, and this more unchangeable and irreversible
than all the Laws of the Creation, since it is more impossible to be pardoned
and justified in any other Method, than that set by God of applying Christ's
Blood, and having his Righteousness imputed, than for all the Heavenly Bodies
to move contrary to their stated Courses. In this sense the Gospel is a Law,
without being a Rule of Duty, since it only tells us the Order God has set of
our being saved purely by his Grace: And a Law it is too, like that of the
Medes and Persians, unalterable, and which will not admit of the least Change,
not so much as to compose the Differences of contending Parties, with prejudice
to any of its Truths.

If we take the word Law in a farther meaning, as it signifies any Doctrine
published and made known to the People, it will be easily granted that the
Gospel is such a Law, since there is nothing more sure, than that it is a
Doctrine of Grace. Now every one knows that the word Law is used in this
comprehensive Sense.

First, For the Hebrew (...) Torah, Law, it denotes any Instruction given us;
not only by the Precepts, but the Promises of God. The Root from which it is
derived, proves this to be its genuine meaning; for (...) Jarah, signifies to
cast or throw Darts, or any other thing: and metaphorically in the Conjugation
Hiphil, the word (...) Horah, signifies to cast the Meaning of one's Mind, or a
Doctrine and Instruction, into the Thoughts of the Hearers, as Mercer In Addit.
ad Pagn. Lex. Heb. in Rad. (...) Page 1057. Edit. Lugd. 1577.
a Critic beyond exception in this Language, very well observes. And what is
God's teaching us effectually, but the throwing the quick and powerful Darts of
his Truths into our Souls, and his fastening them in our Hearts? not to give us
any mortal Wound, but only a vital piercing Sense to rouse us out of our
Lethargy in pernicious Errors and Sin. Whereas it is the fiery Darts of the
Devil of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6. 6. corrupt Doctrines, which he is so
diligent to throw into our Souls, which give us our Death's Wounds. This is
enough to show how natural the Metaphor is, that from. (...) Jarah, he casts
Darts, in Hiphil (...) Horah, should signify he teaches or scatters any
Doctrine: And thus it is used in 2 King. 12. 2. and in Ps. 119. 102. And from
hence (...) Moreh, a Doctor, or Teacher, Job 36. 22. And from hence too is the
Name of a Place (...) Moriah, Genesis 22. 2. Which as Mercer notes, signifies the
Doctrine of the Lord God, which from that Hill (it being situated at one side
of Mount Sion where the Temple was built) was to spread through the World. And
indeed it was at Mount Zion, nay in the Temple it self, that our Lord Jesus
taught his Glorious Doctrine of the Gospel; and there also it was preached by
the Apostles before they had a particular Commission to go to the Gentiles. And
suitable to this, is that place in Isa. 2. 3. And many People shall go and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God
of Jacob; and he will teach us of his Ways, and we will walk in his Paths: for
out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem;
that is, a Doctrine showing to Sinners the Way of Justification.

Thus from (...) Horah he teaches, the word (...) Torah, used in the Old
Testament for Law, proceeds by a free and unforced derivation, which is enough
to evince, that in its original and native Meaning, it signifies no more than a
Doctrine which is taught us: and to confirm it, I shall produce several places
of Scripture where it is used in this Sense.

By this word (...) Torah, sometimes is expressed any Doctrine or Instruction,
which Parents give to their Children, or a Man to his Friend. Thus in Prove. 3.
1. Prove. 4. 2. Prove. 7. 3. Prove. 13. 14.

In other places it is employed to signify the whole Doctrine of Truth
contained in God's Word, both of the Old and New Testament. Thus in Psalm. 1. 2.
But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate Day
and Night. The Design of the Psalmist being to give the entire Character of a
Person truly blessed, the Description must be so comprehensive, as to take in,
not only his delighting in the Precepts of the Moral Law, (which a Turk or
Heathen may do, and the old Philosophers really did) but an inward feeling of a
ravishing Pleasure in the Knowledge of the Gospel, and in meditating on the
admirable free Grace of God displayed in the Salvation of a Sinner. And it is
this pleasing Sense, resulting from the Apprehension of the Doctrine of Grace,
which is the distinguishing Mark of that blessed Believer, whom the Psalmist
with such wonderful Eloquence describes. So then the Law in which the Believer
delights, is not the old Law of Works, nor a new one of a resembling Nature,
but it is the Doctrine of the Gospel, as opening the hidden and unsearchable
Riches of God's Grace and Love in Christ Jesus. And thus the most Learned
Cajetan, Lorinus in Psalm. 1. 2. Musculus, Piscator, Geierus in Psalm. 1. 2.
Commentators, both Papists, as well as those of the Reformed Religion, explain
the word Law in this extensive Meaning, as not merely signifying Precepts, and
Commands, but that delightful Instruction which the Knowledge of Evangelical
Truths affords the happy Believer.

More expressly the Doctrine of Grace in the Gospel is called a Law, Psalm. 19.
7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul: the Testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the Simple. That it is not a Law of Works, but the
Word of Grace, is evident from Scripture, which is the best interpreter of it
self. For the Apostle Paul, who best knew the Psalmist's meaning, applies the
4th Verse of this Psalm 19. to illustrate the swift spreading of the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and the Teaching and Instruction of it coming to all Nations;
Romans 10. 17, 18. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of
God. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their Sound went into all the
Earth, and their Words unto the Ends of the World. That as the Sun, and Moon,
and Stars, in a Day and Night's Journey look round all the Earth, and tell to
all the Nations the Power and Wisdom of the Creator, tho they say not a Word of
his Mercy and Grace: So the Preaching of the Gospel shall give a Sound through
the whole World, not merely to proclaim the Great Majesty and Goodness of God
who made it, but his Infinite Grace undiscernable by Reason; and the Love of
our Savior, which is above all our Thoughts. Now then, as the plain Intention
of the Psalmist is by a Comparison to show, that as the Heavens manifest God's
Adorable Perfections, so his Law, verse. 7. has a more excellent Sound and
Instruction, in the Discoveries which it makes of his Grace: the Apostle's
taking one part of this Comparison, and applying it to the Word, or Doctrine of
the Gospel, necessarily infers, that he understood the Psalmist to intend by
his Law no other, than this Doctrine of Grace, which as the Sun, and all the
other Lights of Heaven, spreads so swiftly and universally. If we consider too
the Psalmist's Sense as expressed by himself, we shall find that the Effects
which he ascribes to his Law, cannot be produced but by a pure Doctrine of
Grace.

From these Effects, of converting the Soul, and making wise the Simple, it is
evident, that it cannot be understood a Law of Works in any Sense, for that
instead of converting the Sinner, would but frighten him from God; and so far
is it from driving the guilty Criminal to Christ, that without the Gospel
proclaimed, the natural Tendency of it is to hurry him into Despair. It could
not let into the Soul the least Glimmerings of Hope; for such a Law proposes
Salvation upon the Condition of Obedience to it, and yet at the same time
convinces the poor wretched Sinner of his own utter Disability to perform it.
It is then the pure Doctrine of Grace, encouraging the Soul to trust and hope
in Christ, by directing him to that perfect Savior for Pardon, and
Righteousness, and Life; which is in the properest Sense the converting Law:
And this Virtue and Efficacy our Lord Christ appropriates to his Gospel, John
17. 17. Sanctify them through thy Truth; thy Word is Truth. By Truth there is
more emphatically meant the Doctrine of Free Grace, which Christ was sent into
the World to teach unto Men; and this, and this only, is the effectual Means
which God uses to turn Sinners to himself, and really to sanctify them.

And in other places where David (the Man after God's own Heart, because of
that Evangelical Spirit which was in him) speaks of the Delight which he took
in God's Law, and the inconceivable Pleasure which sprung up in his Soul, when
his Thoughts were employed in meditating on it, by the word Law he understands
the Gospel, and that not as a new Law of Works, but a Doctrine of Grace: For as
such it reveals those astonishing Mysteries concerning the Redeemer, and makes
those surprising Discoveries of Grace, which only are capable of giving that
pleasing entertainment of Mind, which the Psalmist so much magnifies as having
enjoyed it in his own. Thus in Psalm. 119. 97, 98. O how love I thy Law! it is
my Meditation all the Day. Thou, through thy Commandments, have made me wiser
than mine Enemies; for they are ever with me. Where it is evident, that he
speaks of a Doctrine, by the Knowledge of which he had arrived to a higher
Degree of the most excellent Wisdom, than any who lived in the same Age and
Nation with him, a Wisdom which he pursued with the most eager and inquisitive
Search; and the discovery of one Mystery did but animate him to an impatient
enquiry after more, and make him earnest in his Petitions, that God would
reveal to him higher Measures of that admirable and most useful Knowledge, Psalm.
119. 18. Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things out of thy Law.
By which especially is meant (as Mr. In his Annot. on Psalm. 119. 18.
) Clark very well remarks) the Mysteries of the Gospel. Here then we have the
Gospel called a Law, not as a System of Precepts, or a Statute-Book of a new
Edition; but as it at once instructs and amazes us in the Wonders of our
Redemption, and affects our Hearts with the thoughts of the Redeemer's Love.

When the Psalmist also expresses those refreshing Comforts, which slow'd into
his Soul from the inexhaustible Spring of God's tender Mercies, he uses the
same word Law; and consequently means by it, not a Doctrine of Works, which can
in no sense give any Solace to a guilty Mind, but a Doctrine of Grace, such as
the Gospel, which displayed those Riches of Grace to the Psalmist's Sight, and
in which he so cheerfully hoped, and rejoiced, Psalm. 119. 77. Let thy tender
Mercies come unto me, that I may live; for thy Law is my Delight; i. e. Let me
experience thy tender Mercies, let me feel my own Part and Interest in them,
that I may live joyfully: for my most fervent Desire, O Lord, is to search into
the Depths of thy Mercy and Love; and therefore my whole Delight is in that
Word of Truth which contains these inestimable Treasures of thy Mercy, and
exposes them all open to the view of my Faith. Thus again the Gospel is called
a Law, but no otherwise than as it is a comfortable Instruction to poor
convinced Sinners, what Riches of Mercy there are in store, and as it teaches
them how they may trust and hope in the God of all Grace.

In another place we read the Psalmist informing us what supported his Spirit
under inward Troubles and outward Afflictions which oppressed him; And what was
it but the Law of God? not the Precepts or Commands, for how could they have
sustained his sinking Spirit, since they only tell us our Duty, but offer us no
help in the sad Circumstances of our Case? They show us indeed what God would
have us to do, but declare nothing what he will do for us, and so discover not
any support to our languid Spirits fainting under a Calamity. This is the
Nature, and the proper and peculiar Office of the Promises, and the Gospel
consequently, as a Body of them, is called by the Psalmist a Law, in which he
delighted, because it thus sustained him under his Afflictions, Psalm. 119. 92.
Unless thy Law had been my Delights, I should then have perished in mine
Affliction. A Law, that is (as the beforementioned Mr. Clark's Annotat. on
Psalm. 119. 92.
judicious Annotator observes) the whole Word of God, chiefly the Promises of
Support and Deliverance.

If we consider those Places which are more expressly urged to prove the Gospel
to be a new Law, it will appear that they only evince it to be a new Doctrine
of Grace. As,

1. That clear Place in the Prophet Esa, where by Law is expressed solely the
Doctrine of Grace in the Gospel, Isa. 2. 3. And many People shall go and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us of his Ways, and we will walk in his Paths: for
out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. It
is manifestly the Design of the Prophet, in the first and second Verses, to
show how large a Church, not straightened within the narrow Confines of Judea,
but spreading through all Nations of the Universe, should be gathered and
established. Then he tells us by what Way and Means such a great and wonderful
Work should be accomplished. Christ does not raise Armies to subdue the Earth
to himself, nor come to give new Laws to the conquered People, but he sends his
Apostles to preach the glad Tidings of Salvation by him: And the Light of this
glorious Doctrine of Grace breaks forth from Zion with such Swiftness and
Violence, as suddenly to illuminate all Parts of the Earth, and with a
ravishing Sweetness irresistibly to draw every Mind and Heart, whom God has
appointed to Salvation, to assent to it and embrace it, ver. 3. It is the
Doctrine of Grace alone, and not any new Precepts or Commands, or any new
Sanction of a Law, which carries in it so admirable Force able to produce these
astonishing Effects. This is the Law which goes forth out of Zion so
succesfully: It is the Doctrine of Grace which is thus victorious, and
invincibly prevails, when the Doctrine of Works, in the Experience of many
Ages, could not subject one stubborn Sinner to God's Kingdom, nor make one
stiff and hardened Heart to bow to his Scepter of Righteousness. And that by
the Law out of Zion, he means this effectual Doctrine of the Gospel, the next
words, [And the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem] as explanatory of the former,
undeniably prove Bullinger. Homil. 9. in Esa. 2. 3. Fol. 13. Tiguri 1567.
.

If we look next on that place of Scripture in Micah 4. 2. which is not merely
parallel to the forecited in Esa, but perfectly agreeing with it, we shall see
it imports Christ, not as a new Legislator, to have given a new Law of Works on
more moderate Terms, but to have taught a pure Doctrine of Grace. The words of
Micah 4. 2. are these, And many Nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us
go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his Ways, and we will walk in his Paths: for the Law shall go
forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. The Hebrew (...) Torah,
in our English Version translated Law, is by Junius and Tremellius, as well as
by Piscator, rendered Doctrine; Out of Zion goes forth the Doctrine. And
Piscator in his short Notes on the Text, critically observes, that however the
word Torah is rendered by others Law, yet it will not accord with the genuine
meaning of this Text, because it speaks of the Gospel. And in his brief
Exposition on the next Words, [ And the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem]; This,
says he, is the Word of Grace, i. e. concerning the Grace toward those who
believe on Christ: Which way of explaining of the former Expression Law to be
the Doctrine of the Gospel, by the following Words, [ the Word of the Lord] as
exegetical of those other, Calvin, that Apostle of the Reformed Religion, also
takes; Est repetitio ejusdem sententiae, quae passim occurrit. Ergo per (...)
nihil aliud intellexit Propheta, quam Doctrinam. Calvin. Comment. in Mic. 4. 2.
in Part. 2. Tom. 2. oper. Genev. 1617.
This (says he) is but the Repetition of the former Sentence as it is usual.
Therefore by (...) Torah, the Prophet intended nothing else but Doctrine. But
further, to show, that all but Papists, Socinians and Arminians, harmoniously
agree in explaining such places, after such a manner, as may not give the least
color to the Opinion of the Gospel's being a new Law, in the sense of the
three mentioned Parties, Tarnovius a Lutheran (between whom, and the
Calvinists, what great, and at present irreconcilable Differences in other
Points of Religion there are, all the World knows) perfectly accords with
Calvin in this Interpretation of the Prophet Micah; Talis Lex, quae dicitur
Hebraice (...) quae vox vi (...) omnem doctrinam notat, cum sit a Radice (...)
quae in Hiphil [ docuit] significat: ut frivolum sit hinc velle probare
Evangelium esse novam and perfectiorem a Christo in Novo Testamento latam, cum
quidem ex hoc Hebraismo Evangelium Lex vocetur Apostolo, Romans 8. 2. sicut and a
Psalte, Psalm. 19. 8. sed cum restrictione; Lex vero nunquam Evangelium
appellatur. Tarnov. Comment. in Mic. 4. 2. Page 104. Rostoch. 1626.
It is such a Law, ( of which the Prophet speaks) that in the Hebrew ( says he)
is called (...) Torah; which word, by the Force of its Etymology, notes all and
every Doctrine, since it is from the Root (...) Jarah, which in Hiphil
signifies, he has taught: that it is frivolous to design from this Text to
prove the Gospel to be a new and more perfect Law made by Christ in the New
Testament, whenas tho indeed by this Hebraism the Gospel is called a Law by the
Apostle, Romans 8. 2. as also by the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 8. yet with a
Restriction; but the Law is never called a Gospel. And the latter Words [ the
Word of the Lord] he makes consonantly with Calvin, to be exegetical of the
former Law, etc. as demonstrating, that nothing but the Doctrine of the Gospel
is thereby signified. But really there need no more than carefully to review
the Context, to be satisfied, that by the word Law here is meant the Doctrine
of Grace in the Gospel: For all this 4th Chapter of Micah is a Word of
Consolation to an afflicted People, from the refreshing Springs of its gracious
Promises, as Annotat. in Mic. 4. 1, 2.
Junius notes. The Law then by consequence must signify the Doctrine wherein
those are contained: And the Acclamations too of the rejoicing People proclaim
the same thing, who mutually exhort one another in the second Verse, to go up
to this glorious Mountain, because there Christ would teach them this Doctrine
of Grace, Micah 4. 2. And many Nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go
up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his Ways, and we will walk in his Paths: for the Law shall go
forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. I know it may be
objected, that the Phrase [ And we will walk in his Paths] seems to imply a
Precept and Command, and so a Law in the strictest Sense, to which they vowed
Obedience: But this may as easily be denied, as it is asserted precariously: for
since, according to the usual Language of God's Word, to walk in God's Paths,
is to observe his Orders and Appointments, the Expression here may denote no
more than that they would punctually keep to the Way of Salvation, marked out
by him, (which I wish, with all my Soul, was the hearty Resolve of all who hear
the Gospel) and seek to be justified no otherwise than by Christ's Blood and
Righteousness, as the Law or Doctrine of the Gospel prescribes.

There is a Difficulty remains, arising from the third Verse; which at first
sight seems to point to us, that the Gospel is such a Law, by which Christ
exercises Judgment as on a Tribunal, and executes Justice. But the Appearance
of Difficulty is so slight and thin, that it will vanish as soon as seen, if we
do but consider that the word Judge may very well import no more, than that
Christ will judge what Course of Salvation is best for us to take, that he will
determine the Case; and it is better for us to acquiesce in the Decision of his
unerring Judgment, which cannot be deceived, nor ever will mislead us, than to
pursue our own mistaken Apprehensions, which bewilder us continually.

But if we take his Judging, as having an Influence or Effect upon those who
are under his Kingdom and Judgment; it may be considered, not as the Act of a
Judge pronouncing Sentence, and Condemning, but as the Nam verbum Judicandi
Hebraeis per Synecdochen, pro gubernare, vel regere accipitur. Calvin. Comment.
in Esa. 3. 2, 4. Page 22. Tom. 4. oper. Genev. 1617.
Administration of a Wise, Good, and Gracious King preserving and protecting
his Subjects, and defending them against their Enemies. That the word Judging
is taken in such a large Sense in the Hebrew Language, there needs no more to
prove it, than that the Princes of Israel, whom God raised up, and spirited to
be the Liberators of his People from the Tyranny of Moab, Ammon, and Midian,
and to defend them against those cruel and implacable Enemies, are not only
called Judges, but the Book which contains the History of their Administration
and Government, is titled by that Name. Or if we attribute to Christ the
rigorous Administration of a severe Judge, and that he comes in all the terrible
Solemnities of Justice; yet this does not belong to the Dispensation of his
Gospel, but to the Economy of his Laws, when he comes to avenge the Violation
of them by Sinners. To those who live and die under a Covenant of Works, he is
a Judge to be sure, and a dreadful One too; and they who seek Righteousness by
the Works of any Law, he will deal with in that way of Trial, which they have
put themselves upon, and they shall stand at the Bar of Judgment, which by
their own Consent they have so foolishly chosen. Thus Christ will be all
Justice, without any mixture of Mercy, to the Despisers of his Grace, and to
those who refuse him as a Savior, and as the Lord their Righteousness. But
this is no measure belongs to the Administration of his Gospel, as any part of
it, nor appertains to the Office of a Redeemer, but is the proper Royalty and
Authority of a Creator, of him who is the Sovereign, the supreme Lord, and God
the Judge of all. If we consider the Scope and Design of the Text, it will seem
very much to look toward such a Meaning, that Christ will not judge those to
whom he has made such a promulgation of his Law, or Doctrine of his Grace,
which he had spoke of ver. 2. if by Faith they had received it, and answerably
embraced the Redeemer. But for their sakes he would execute Justice on the
Nations, who are their Enemies, and who know him not, or hate him. That he will
break their Force and Power, or turn the Points of those Swords upon their own
Breasts, which were before employed against his People; so that now these shall
not need Armies or Fleets to defend them, but may change their Weapons of War
into Instruments of Husbandary, or the Utensils of a Family, and other
Implements of Peace. Thus Christ for his Church's Safety, governs in the midst
of his Enemies, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 5, 6. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at
my right Hand, until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. The Lord shall send
the Rod of thy Strength out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies.
The Lord at thy right Hand shall strike through Kings in the Day of his Wrath.
He shall judge among the Heathen, he shall fill the Places with the dead Bodies:
he shall wound the Heads over many Countries. And he so rules, that when they
have an hearty Will, and designed Malice, yet it shall not be in their Power to
destroy in all his Holy Mountain, Isa. 65. 25.

Or what if we understand it, that Christ will so judge among the Nations, as in
his Providence to manage Affairs, and order in that manner the Spirits of the
Troublers of his Churches, as to dispose them unto peaceful Counsel, which may
move them universally to lay down their Arms, that his People may enjoy an
undisturbed Repose in the public Tranquillity of the World? At Christ's first
appearance among Men, thus calm and smooth was the Face of Things throughout
the whole Earth, and the Prince of Peace was born in such a Time, as there were
not the least Tumults to disquiet the Beginnings of his Reign. A little before
Christ's Birth, all the World was up in Arms, and nothing was heard but the
shrill sound of Trumpets, and the Alarms of War: But the Prince of Peace no
sooner makes his Entrance, than the Scene is quite altered, and an universal
Calm succeeded the foregoing Disorders and Confusion. Thus Christ began to judge
among the Nations, at his first appearance on Earth, by settling their Affairs
in a quiet and peaceful Posture; and the Time will surely come, when the
Effects of this his judging will be more openly illustrious. Thus in whatever
Sense we understand Christ to judge among the Nations, his being a new
Legislator, and his governing them by new Laws, is entirely excluded.

CHAP. III.
That by the word Law, when applied to the Gospel, may be understood a
Doctrine, proved from the signification of the Greek (...), Nomos, a Law, as
used by Grecian Authors, and by the Sacred Writers of the New Testament. Gal.
2. 19. explained.

AS I have proved, that when the Gospel is named a Law in the Old Testament,
according to the signification of the Hebrew word, a Doctrine only may be
understood; so if we consider how the Greek word is used by Authors who have
wrote in that Language, it will appear, that it is with no certainty concluded
by my Reverend Brother, from the Gospel's being called a Law in the New
Testament, that it is a Rule of Works established with Promises to the
Performers, and with Threatenings against the Disobedient.

I know very well that it is inferred from the Etymology of the Greek word
(...), Nomos, a Law, that a Rule of Duty, enacted with a Sanction of Penalty or
Recompense, is signified by it. But I know, that as no great weight can be laid
on Arguments drawn from an Etymology; so if that derivation of the Greek (...),
Nomos, Law, from (...), Nemo, signifying the distribution of what is due,
(which is pleaded) be the most natural, yet nothing can be argued from it: For
suitable Doctrine may be distributed among Men, as well as Rewards and
Punishments. But this commonly received Derivation is not perhaps the truest:
for if we may give Credit to Plato in his own Language, in which he was equally
famed for Eloquence as for Philosophy and Reason, (...) Nomos, a Law, is more
fitly deduced from (...) Noos, the Mind Plato de Leg. lib. 12. page 957. Tom.
2. oper. Edit. Serrani, 1578.
; which as it seems very natural, there wanting only the interposition of the
Letter (...) to make it the same Word; so it plainly denotes a Law, in its
original meaning, to be a Doctrine or Instruction, of which the Mind is the
principal Subject and Seat. There is no need of Criticisms to prove a Truth of
the Gospel, and therefore I wave them. I shall neither insist on that Sense
which is assigned to the Greek (...) Nomos, as signifying the Measures of a
Verse, or Tune Etymol. Magnum, in voce (...). Aristot. page 159. Tom. 4. oper.
Edit. Du Val. Par. 1639.
, tho from thence it is probable, the Word was transferred to signify the
Statutes established among Men, to regulate the Actions of their Lives, since
the most ancient Laws were written in Verse, that they might be more readily
committed unto, and be more faithfully retained in Memory. I need only hint
these things, as also that the Greek Tragedian (...). Sophocles in Ajace, page
33. Edit. H. Stephan. 1568.
uses the word (...) Nomos, Law, to express the Inclinations and Manners of a
Person, to show that no valid Reason can be raised from the mere sound of the
word Law, to convince us that the Gospel, when described by that Name, is a
Rule of Works with a Sanction since the Word admits of so many other
Sgnifications.

I may however urge it as very natural to my Purpose, of proving the Gospel to
be a pure Doctrine of Grace; that the Septuagint, when they translate those
places of Scripture, wherein I have proved that the Hebrew (...) has this
signification, render that word by (...) Nomos, as most fitting to express such
a Sense. We may then very well conclude, that the Greek word (when the Gospel
is named by it) has the same Sense in the New Testament, as the Hebrew had in
the Old.

We answerably find that the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, as revealed in
the Old Testament, is expressed by this Name, John 12. 34. The People answered
him, We have heard out of the Law, that Christ abides for ever: and how say
thou, The Son of Man must be lift up? Who is this Son of Man? Where not the
Decalogue, or Levitical Book of Statutes is intended, but the Doctrine
concerning the Redeemer to come; as appears from those Texts in Psalm. 110. 4,
5. Isa. 9. 6. to which John 12. 34. has a manifest regard. It is then plain
from this Place of the Evangelist, that among the Jewish People, when our
Savior lived on Earth, not only Exodus and Leviticus, but the Instructions
which they had concerning their so much desired and expected Messiah, and
Salvation by him, in any of the Books of the Old Testament, were called and
known by the Name of a Law.

And to this common Notion of the People, according to which they named the
whole Doctrine revealed by God, whether it were Precepts or Promises, a Law,
the Apostle Paul accommodates his way of writing, in stiling the Gospel a Law,
in Romans 3. 27. (which I shall afterward more fully vindicate from my Reverend
Brother's imposed meaning) and in Gal. 2. 19. which I now shall consider.

These are the Apostle's Words, Gal. 2. 19. For I through the Law am dead to
the Law, that I might live unto God. He writes to the Galatians, among whom it
was a prevailing Opinion, that tho Christ had abated the too rigorous
observation of the Law of Works, yet Justification was to be obtained by some
lower degrees of Obedience. To show them how opposite this Doctrine was to the
Gospel preached by him, the Apostle tells them what were the Experiences of his
own Soul; I am dead, says he, to the Law of Works, and have not the least Heart
to seek Justification by it. And how was he thus mortified to the Law of Works?
What, by a new Law of Works lowered to more moderate Conditions? No; for such
an one would rather have cherished and encouraged the Life of his Hopes in his
own Obedience. By the Law then, that is, by the pure Doctrine of Grace in the
Gospel revealing Christ's Righteousness as that alone by which a Sinner can be
justified, the Apostle is quite deaden'd as to any hopes of Justification by
his own Righteousness, and has not the least motion in his Soul to seek it in
that manner.

What very much weighs with me, is, That Luther (who so excellently has wrote
on this Epistle, and who successfully prevailed against the Errors of
Antichrist, about Merit of Works, by subverting the great Foundation of them,
which is this Assertion of the Gospel's being a milder Law of Works) interprets
the Apostle to mean by that Law, which had such a mortifying Efficacy upon him,
the pure Doctrine of Grace in the Gospel. Lex Decalogi ligabat me, contra illam
nunc habeo aliam Legem scilicet gratiae quae non est mihi Lex, neque ligat, sed
liberat me; est autem Lex contra damnatricem Legem; hanc ligat, ut amplius non
possit me ligare. Luther. Com. plenior in Gal. 2. Ed. An. 1538. Fol. 45. page
2. Tom. 4. oper. Jenae 1611.
The Law of the Decalogue (says he) did bind me, against it I have now another
Law, viz. of Grace, which is not a Law to me, neither binds me, but frees me.
But it is a Law against the damning LAW. THIS it binds, that it may no longer
bind me. If Luther thus calls the Gospel a Law, signifying no more by that Name
than a pure Doctrine of Grace; it is no wonder that others of the Reformed
Religion, cited by my Reverend Brother, call it so too, tho not in his Sense;
but designing Luther's Meaning, who ruined the greatest Strength of Popery, by
denying the Gospel to be a new Law of Works, and by asserting it on all
Occasions to be merely a Doctrine of Grace.

But it is not the Authority of this Great Man which solely prevails with me;
the Design and Scope of the Apostle in this second Chapter of his Epistle to
the Galatians, has the greatest Force to persuade me, that by the Law which
made him dead to the Law of Works, he intends the sincere and unmuddied
Doctrine of free Justification by Christ's Righteousness alone. His Design is
plainly to refute an Error prevailing among the Galatians; who tho professing
the Gospel, and to be justified by Faith in Christ, yet would make this Gospel
to be a new Law, exacting Works as necessary to Justification. He answerably
disclaims every Law of Works, whether the old Jewish, or that new Evangelical
One so lately invented among these Christians, and made to look with the
polished and smooth Face of the Gospel. He excludes the Observances of any
Duties, or any Act of Obedience, from having an Interest in our Justification,
assigning the whole Business of it to Faith alone; ver. 16. Knowing that a Man
is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ:
even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith
of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law; for by the Works of the Law shall
no Flesh be justified. It is thus he demonstrates this Proposition, [That we
are not justified by the Works of any Law] That they who were Jews, to whom the
Law was more especially given, yet they having been instructed by the Doctrine
of Grace, that they could not be justified by Obedience to the Law; and having
by the Gospel, which brings in a better Righteousness, been convinced of the
Defects of their own; and therefore knowing that God had not appointed any Law
whereby he would justify a Sinner, they answerably had believed on Christ, that
so according to the Doctrine of the Gospel they might be justified by his
Righteousness alone. This is undoubted that we must be justified by some
Righteousness or other; not by our own, for then Justification would be by the
Works of a Law; and so our Faith in another's Righteousness would be
insignificant, and to little or no purpose: For why should we entirely trust in
another Person, for that which we could so well accomplish our selves? If then
not our own, it must be Christ's Righteousness only that can have this desired
Effect; and knowing this by the Law or Doctrine of the Gospel, we have (says
the Apostle) for this very purpose believed on Jesus. This, without any
Shuffles or intricate Windings, is the plain Sense of this 16th Verse. And
among other Causes which mortified in him, and the other Believers, any
Inclinations to seek Justification by the Law, Pareus numbers the Doctrine of
the Gospel, as that which had the strongest and most efficacious Influence
Pareus in Gal. 2. 19. in part. 2. oper. exeget. Calvin. in Gal. 2. 19.
Eilhardus Lubinus in Gal. 2. 19. in Tom. 1. Exercit. Theol. in Epistolas.
Francof. 1612.
. It is now then very agreeably, that the Apostle says of himself, That this
Law or Doctrine of Grace had made him dead to the Law of Works, but alive unto
God. What is it to be dead to the Law? To renounce it in the Matter of our
Justification, to be freed from its galling Yoke of Servitude and Bondage,
whereby it keeps guilty unbelieving Sinners perpetually under the Tortures of
slavish Fears and amazing Terrors. To be dead to the Law, is to disclaim our
Justification by Works of our own, and not to trust in any Obedience which we
can perform to it; and being convinced that it condemns and dooms us to Death,
not to seek Life by it any more, and no longer to have the least Commerce with
it in the Affairs of our Justification: or to be dead to the Law, is no more to
be obnoxious to its condemning Sentence, in that it cannot exact from thee its
threatened Punishments; tho indeed as a Rule of Duty it always unalterably
requires Obedience. To be dead to the Law, is no longer to be under its
Dominion and Reign, as it is a Covenant of Works. Thus a King has no Authority
over a Subject, whom Death has transported out of his Territories into the
Regions of another World; nor can the Power of the Greatest reach beyond the
Confines of the Grave. In all these Meanings the Apostle asserts himself to be
dead to the Law: And what was it made him so? What! but the Law or Doctrine of
Grace revealed in the Gospel, which so happily instructed him in the knowledge
of free and complete Justification by Christ. This Sun no sooner rises, but
all those little wandering Stars, which as false Lights had before so
wretchedly misled him, do set presently; and all his natural and rooted
Inclinations, to seek Justification by the Works of the Law, lessen, and at
last wholly vanish and disappear at the glorious Appearance of the Sun of
Righteousness, who comes with healing in his Wings. All those treacherous Hopes
which he reposed before in his Obedience to the Law, in the severe Observance
of its Precepts, and strict Performances of Duties, are utterly extinguished;
and all the Sparks of them being quite dead, do not scatter any longer the
least Glimmerings in his Soul. Thus the Law, or Doctrine of the Gospel,
teaching him, how that Christ his Surety being made under the Law for him, has
redeemed him from its Curse, answered all its Demands, and silenced every
Accusation, has stopped its Mouth, and taken away its Strength; and not only
so, but deprived it of Life as well as Voice: the Apostle's Mind being thus
illuminated with the Light of his new Law, or Heavenly Doctrine, to know more
than ever he did before, that Christ has slain the Law as it is a Covenant of
Works, as well as the Enmity which Sin had caused between God and miserable
Sinners; he accordingly looks on the Law as a dead Thing, which can neither
hurt in respect to Condemnation, nor do him any good as to Salvation and Life.
He answerably regards it with other Eyes than before; and his former Zeal and
Affection he had to it for the Purposes of Justification, are not only abated,
but extirpated out of his Heart; not merely cooled and damped, but perfectly
quenched and dead.

Now then that the Gospel is called a Law by the Apostle, not in the strict
Sense, as importing Works of any kind, but as a mere Doctrine of Grace, is
evident from all these Effects which it produced. It perfectly mortified him to
a Law of Works, and therefore could not be one it self, unless we can imagine
that the Apostle became dead, as to seeking Justification by the Works of any
Law whatever; and that no otherwise than by giving entertainment to, and
putting himself under the Conduct of a new Law of Works; which things do not
seem very well to agree.

And that by Law, when the Gospel is so named in this Gal. 2. 19. the Apostle
means a pure Doctrine of Grace, and not a more moderated Law of Works, appears
from ver. 21. I do not frustrate the Grace of God: for if Righteousness come by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. It is as if he should have said, However
others despise the Grace of God, and think it too mean and ignoble to owe their
Life to it, it shall be my great Zeal to magnify it, to illustrate its Glory,
and to pay unto it the highest Honor. However others are Obstacles to its
Progress, and endeavor to put a stop to its Victories and Triumphs, or attempt
to render all its Power and Force vain and ineffectual, yet for my part I will
neither say nor do any thing to frustrate it; and none of my Actions, nor any
Article of Doctrine which I teach, shall in the least degree have such a
Tendency. I will not let fall a Word, which may but seem to lessen or disparage
the Favors of my blessed Redeemer, who loved me, and gave himself for me. And
can there be a greater Slight, than when he has done, and suffered so much to
save me, not to rest satisfied with his Undertaking and Work as complete, but
to be solicitously endeavoring how to supply the Deficiencies, and to perfect
it my self? To esteem Christ as insufficient, is certainly to despise him in
the highest measure, and he does not suffice me Nihil tam apertum, quia si per
Legem potuisset homo justificari, Christum non oportuerat mori. Sed quia Lex
dare remissionem peccatorum non poterat, neque secundam mortem detriumphans
expoliare captivis, quos tenebat causa peccati, idcirco Christus mortuus est,
ut ea praestaret, quae Lex non poterat, ac per hoc non gratis mortuus est. Mors
enim ejus justificatio peccatorum. Ambros. in Gal. 2. page 327. in Tom. 5.
oper. Edit. Froben. Basil. 1538. Non debeo illi esse ingratus, qui me tantum
dilexit, ut pro me etiam moreretur; abjecta enim est gratia, si sola non
sufficit. Comment. in Gal. 2. Incert. Aut. sed Antiqui inter opera Hieronymi.
Fol. 216. page 2. Tom. 9. Edit. Froben. Basil. 1526.
, if I join my own Righteousness to his, or add Works done by me in Obedience
to any Law unto his great Performances: Nay, if I should assert Righteousness
to come by any Law, whether New or Old, I should dishonor Christ so much as to
insinuate, that he died very unwisely or unadvisedly: For what could be more
unadvised, than to come and suffer all sorts of Miseries, and at last to expire
in Torments, and that only to the Purpose of effecting what might have been
done very well without such expense of his inestimable Blood? For if by my
Obedience to some Law I may be justified, and the Works of that can be my
Righteousness, why should Christ die? or to what purpose was he obedient, since
no other Ends of his Death and Obedience are assigned, but the Justification of
a Sinner? And if this Business can be effected by this Sinner's own Works of
what Nature soever, the Blood and Righteousness of Christ comes in uncalled
for, and when there is no great or urgent need of them Those Errors with which
Crellius the Socinian has corrupted this Text, when he asserts the Gospel to
be a new Law, and that to be justified by our Faith, as our Evangelical
Obedience to it, is not excluded here by the Apostle. This Fundamental Error of
Socinianism, is excellently refuted by Cocceius, whom I would have transcribed,
had the designed brevity of this Discourse permitted it; I therefore refer the
Learned Reader to that Author himself. Cocceius in Gal. 2. 21. in Tom. 4. oper.
Amstel. 1673.
. But far be it from me to defeat the Designs of the God of all Grace, to
misprize the greatest Favors which can be bestowed upon a Creature, or to
darken and obscure the Glory of the Grace it self; and therefore I am firm to
it, and will unmoveably maintain it, that Righteousness comes by no Law
whatever; nor are Sinners justified by the performance of any Conditions in
obedience to it. And therefore when I before, ver. 19. called the Gospel a Law,
you must by no means understand it to be a softened and milder Law of Works,
but a Doctrine of Grace; in which Sense I also used the word Law in my Epistle
to the Romans; where I call the Gospel a Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27. Thus I have
endeavored to give briefly the Apostle's Sense in this Text, which proves his
Meaning in the other, where he calls the Gospel a Law, that he understands only
a Doctrine of Grace by that Word.

CHAP. IV.
That the Fathers of the Primitive Church, when they called the Gospel a Law,
meant only a Doctrine by it, proved by a few Instances out of Clemens
Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Theodoret, Origin, and Chrysostom.

THIS might be enough, if my Learned Brother did not appeal to other
Authorities than that of the Holy Scriptures, which is the greatest: But since
he leads me into the numerous Volumes of the Fathers, I will follow him too
there. And if I show that those Ancient Writers of the Church who wrote in the
Greek Language, (as for the Latin Fathers, I shall afterward consider them)
used the word (...) Nomos, Law, to signify a Doctrine by it; then the
uncertainty of Citations from those Authors for his Purpose, will be abundantly
demonstrated. Clemens Alexandrinus calls the Law, (...). Clem. Alexand. Strom.
lib. 1. page 356. op. Paris. 1629.
the Light of our Way; and the Gospel as a pure Doctrine of Grace is such
beyond all dispute. He also defines a Law (...). Ibid. page 250.
to be a true and good Opinion of a Thing, whereby any Doctrine of Truth and
Goodness may be signified.

Eusebius, who lived above an hundred Years after him, having occasion to
mention those Texts of the Old Testament, which speak of Christ as the Great
Author of the Gospel; and particularly explaining that Text in Isa. 2. 3.
speaks in these words, (...). Eusebius. Demonstrat. Evangel. Lib. 1. cap. 4. page
8, 9. Edit. Paris. 1628.
What Law is that going out of Zion, and differing from that coming from the
Desert promulgated by Moses in Mount Sinai, but the Evangelical Word going
forth out of Zion by the Ministry of our Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
and passing through all Nations? For it is manifest, that from Jerusalem, and
Mount Sion adjacent to that City, (where our Lord and Savior delivered most of
his Discourses and Doctrines) the Law of the new Covenant beginning its
Progress, and going from thence to all Men, shined with the greatest
brightness. Which very well agrees to the Doctrine of the Gospel, that so
swiftly spread, and with such diffusive Beams, that in a few Years after
Christ's Death, it illuminated the whole Earth.

Chrysostom also, who calls the Gospel a Law very often, and particularly in
his Sermon on Gal. 2. 19. which I have before cited, if we may think (as we
ought to do of the greatest Preacher in the Primitive Church) that he speaks
consistently with himself, means no more by this Phrase than a Doctrine of
Grace: For when in his Sermon on Psalm. 49. he draws the dividing Lines between
the Law of Works and the Gospel, he in these Words gives his Judgment, (...).
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 49. Tom. 3. oper. Ed. Front. Ducaei Paris. 1601.
That the Law of Works was the Rudiments of Children, and an Introduction, and
also the Ministry of Condemnation and Death: But this (says he, speaking of the
Gospel) is Grace and Peace. There is nothing can be more plain than his
meaning, that the Law requiring Works, denounced nothing but Death to a Sinner
unable to perform them; but the Gospel, as a Doctrine of Grace, relieved him,
by proclaiming Peace.

To evince that among the Fathers, the word (...) Nomos, Law, did not always
signify a System of Precepts and Commands, I may also introduce Origin, who, as
a competent Judge in the Case, declares that (...), etc. -- (...), etc. Origin.
Philocal. cap. 19. page 35. Edit. Spenceri, Cant. 1677.
he very well knew the Psalms to be called a Law, as also the Prophecy of Esa:
And to prove it, he brings in those Texts of Scripture, John 15. 25. Psalm. 35.
19. 1 Cor. 14. 21. And his Authority is to be the more regarded, as to the
Decision of the Question in present Debate, because, as he complains (in the
beginning of this his 9th Chapter cited by me) of the Confusion which the
ambiguousness of the Word Law did breed in Men's Minds, (which is the Case now
too) so he employs this whole Chapter to clear its various Significations.

But I need give no other Instances, than from what Theodoret writes in his
short Exposition on Isa. 2.

(...). Theodoret. Interpret. in Esa. 2. page 13. Tom. 2. oper. Ed. Sirmondi,
Paris. 1642.
It is ( says he) therefore very well manifest, that he intends the New
Testament from thence ( that is Sion, of which the Prophet speaks) delivered by
the first Apostles, and by the same afterward exhibited to all Nations. He does
not therefore only prophesy that the Law, but that the Word should go out from
thence, giving this Name to the preaching of the Gospel: For this also blessed
Luke teaches us, Luke 1. 2. Even as they delivered them unto us, which from
the beginning were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word. By the Word then
in that place, he does not name God the Word, but the Doctrine of God's Word:
For God the Word did not go out of Sion, but he taught the Truth in Zion.

Photius, who lived in the 9th Century, was not more famous for his Learning,
than for that firm Resistance he made against the Usurpations of Antichrist,
who designed, and strongly endeavored to have spread his Wings as far over the
Eastern, as he had over the Western World. By what this Patriarch of
Constantinople writes, it appears, that however in the Course of so many Ages,
very great Corruptions had wrought for themselves an entrance into the Grecian
Churches; yet the Doctrine of Grace, not as establishing a Law of Works, but
displacing it, was preserved among them: Or at least we may know what his own
Belief was from his own Words, which are these. He first tells Sergius, (in an
Epistle wrote to him) that (...). Phot. Epist. 50. page 104. Edit. Land. 1651.
the Law was not contrary to Grace, as he surmis'd it was; and then shows its
use in subserviency to Grace, That it was a Preparation, and made way for the
discovery of Grace, and leads us to it. But when Grace comes, the Law (says he)
departs, as the Stars when the Sun appears, or as the Night the Day shining.
And having illustrated it with many other Similitudes, Thus (says he) Grace
having an Existence, the Law is vacated, tho not perfectly dissolved. It
cease, but is not disannulled. Christ fulfilled it, not violating the least
Tittle of it; and performing it, entirely removed it.

It is against my Inclination that I thus summon Men, tho of deserved Repute,
to bear Witness for the Truth of the Gospel. The Testimony of the Holy Ghost in
his own Word, is infinitely greater than ten thousand such Evidences. It was
therefore to him that I first appealed; but since my Reverend Brother brings
the Cause into a lower Court, I am very willing that it should there also be
tried. The Proofs which I gave out of God's Word, have (as I think)
sufficiently demonstrated, that this new Law of Works is not the Everlasting
Gospel; and these Testimonies from Humane Writings may evince, that it is not
only far distant from Eternity, but neither so venerable for Age, as he fancies
it: for it was a Doctrine unknown in the first Years of Christ's Church, and
had its Original only with the Birth of Antichrist, and (I am very well
assured) will end with the Period of that Man of Sin.

CHAP. V.
How uncertain an Argument is framed, from the sound of the word Law, to prove
the Gospel to be such, evinced from the various significations of that Word as
used by Roman Authors. That the Latin Fathers named the Gospel a Law, as it is
the Doctrine of Christ.

I Now should heartily rejoice to be excused from searching any other Records
but those of the Bible, if my Learned Brother did not bring me from Greek to
Latin Authors, whom he musters in greater multitudes. To rescue them therefore
from his Abuse, in fastening on them a Meaning of which they never had a
thought, it will be needful to state the Sense of the word Law in the Roman
Language, as well as I have done it in the Hebrew and Greek.

That Lex, or Law, may signify any Doctrine, as well as a Precept, appears from
the Derivation of it given by Isidore, a Legendo, from Reading Isidor. Orig.
lib. c. 10. inter Autores Ling. Lat. Genev. 1622. page 863. and lib. 5. c. 3.
page 925. and Perot. Sypontinus. Comment. Ling. Lat. page 656, and 757. Edit.
Ald. 1513.
, which agrees very well to a Doctrine: And among the Romans, their Laws were
inscribed on Brass Tables, and publicly hung up that they might be read by the
People Paulus Merula de Legib. Roman. cap. 1. page 1. Lugd. B. 1684. and
Brison. de Formul. and Solemn. P. R. verbis, lib. 3. page 363. Edit. Fol.
Paris. 1583.
; and I wish the Doctrine of the Gospel was more commonly read and known. The
same Word is also sometimes employed to signify the Rules of any Science or
Art, which are purely instructive, but not obliging by the Force of any
Sanction. Thus Juvenal, Sat. 6. v. 450, 451, 452.

-- Odi
Hanc ego quae repetit, volvitque Palemonis Artem
Servata semper Lege, and ratione loquendi.
And speaking of himself, that he seemed to transgress the Rules of Satyr, by
inserting such affrighting Instances of Vice, which were fitter for a Tragedy,
he says, Sat. 6. v. 634, 335.

Scilicet, and finem egressi, Legemque priorum
Grande Sophocleo carmen bacchamur hiatu
Montibus ignotum Rutulis, coeloque Latino.
And yet I am confident the Poet was not apprehensive of his having violated
any enacted Law, or of being obnoxious to a Penalty, did not at all fear the
Roman Axes, or Fasces, tho his Verses did a little deviate from the generally
approved Doctrine of Satyr. Another Roman Poet, by the same Word, expresses
the due disposition, or orderly placing of things.

Vitta coercebat positos sine Lege Capillos.
Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 1. v. 477. Innumerable Examples might be given, but a
few may suffice to show how little stress is to be laid upon the uncertain
sound of a Word, which in all these Languages is so variously used; and to
direct us, that wherever we find the Gospel named a Law, in the Hebrew of the
Old Testament, or in the Greek of the New, or in the Greek and Latin Fathers,
or Protestant Divines, we must not, unless we would suffer our selves to be
easily imposed on by an ambiguous Phrase, presently imagine it to mean a new
Rule of Duty enacted with a Sanction.

I shall only add, that Cicero when he defines a Law in the general Notion of
it, as comprehending the Law of Nature, as well as others, makes no mention of
a Sanction, but describes it only to be the Lex est ratio summa infita in
natura, quae jubet ea quae facienda sunt, prohibetque contraria. Cicero de Leg.
lib 1. page 312. Tom. 4. oper. Edit. in Fol. R. S. 1538.
highest Reason implanted in Nature, which commands what is to be done, and
forbids the contrary.

Thus also the Roman Lawyers, of whose vast Volumes lost by the Injuries of
Time we have a Breviate in the Pandects, define a Law, without mentioning a
Sanction; Lex est commune praeceptum, virorum prudentium consultum. Papinian,
lib. 1. Pes. in lib. 1. Digest. Tit. 3. l. 1. page 9. Tom. 1. Corp. Jur. Civil.
Edit. Gothofr. in 8o. Lugd. 1589
The Law (says Papinian) is a common Instruction, the Decree of prudent Men. By
which no more can be understood, than a Doctrine which teaches us what is best
for us to do, if we will be taught by the Counsel of those who are wiser than
our selves. And in this Sense I will easily grant the Gospel to be a Law; for
it is the Instruction of God (whose Wisdom is, beyond all denial, infinitely
superior to ours) to our perishing Souls; and thrice blessed is that Person
whom his enlightening Grace has made so wise as to follow it. It is too the
Decree of God's Eternal Counsel, that we shall not be justified by any
Righteousness, but that of Christ alone.

Thus also the published Will of the Sovereign may be called a Law, tho the
Sanction is wanting: And the Decrees of the Roman Senate might be styled by
that Name, before the Consent of the People obtained, which was necessary to
enact them. Nay, a Statute is a Law, tho no Duty be prescribed, but only
Benefits conferred, and some Privileges ratified. And when the Emperors had the
absolute unlimited Power, those Edicts which declared a Donative, Codex
Justinian. lib. 1. Tit. 2, and 3. in Tom. 2. Jur. Civil. Edit. Gothofred.
or which gave and confirmed any Privileges to the People, were as well called
Laws, as those which were all Commands, and filled with Threats against
Disobedience.

Now these are the properest Judges to decide the Signification of a Word in
that Language, wherein they not only wrote, but it was their native Tongue,
which their Mothers taught them as soon as they were able to form a Voice.

There then nothing more remains needful to remove my Learned Brother's
multiplied Citations out of the Latin Fathers, and Protestant Writers, which he
thinks to be very much to his Purpose, but to show that they frequently by the
word Law mean no more than a Doctrine; and when I shall have, by some few
Instances, done this, all his Authorities will be easily answered.

Cyprian, whom he summons as a Witness for his Cause, (and the mistaken
Evidence we shall afterward examine) means no more by the Evangelical Law, than
the Doctrine which Christ has given us. For having before expressed, how
Christ had by his Example and Word taught us the manner of administering the
Lord's Supper, this our Instruction from our Savior he calls the Evangelical
Law. Et de hoc quoque ad collegas nostros literas dirigamus, ut ubique Lex
Evangelica and Traditio Dominica-servetur, and ab eo quod Christus docuit, and
fecit, non recedatur. Cyprian. Epist. 63. page 177. oper. Edit. Goulartii,
Genev. 1593.
And concerning this thing also, (says he) we may send our Epistles to our
Brethren, that the Evangelical Law, and the declared Doctrine of our Lord, may
be observed, and that they may not depart from what Christ has taught and
practiced.

Augustine, the next Testimony who is called, tells us, Augustine. Retract. lib.
1. cap. 25. Fol. 8. page 2. Tom. 1. oper. and de Trinit. lib. 15. Fol. 105.
page 1. Tom. 3. oper. Edit. Paris. 1571.
That by the word Law we may apprehend, not merely a Statute, but any other
Doctrine; since he styles, not only the five Books of Moses, but the Prophets,
(in whose Writings there are so many gracious Promises of the Gospel) by that
Name.

CHAP. VI.
That the Divines of the Reformed Religion assert the Gospel to be a pure
Doctrine of Grace. When they call it a Law, they intend the Word in that Sense.

I Will now prove, that when the Reformed Divines call the Gospel a new Law,
they mean no more than a fresher and clearer Discovery of God's Mercy and
Grace. I shall produce Testimonies from their own Words of two forts; first, To
manifest that when they professedly define, or describe the Gospel, they bring
nothing into their Definition, but that it is a Revelation of our Salvation,
and free Justification by Christ; and then I shall bring plain Instances, that
when they sometimes call the Gospel a new Law, they tell us also at the same
time, in express words, they mean by it only a Doctrine of Grace.

First, Then if nothing but Grace is expressed in their Definitions of the
Gospel, it is but reasonable to require that it should be granted me, that they
never thought the Gospel to be a Law in the strict Sense, as including Works in
it, and being established with Sanction. For since it is one of the Rules of a
Definition, that it should contain the whole Nature of the Thing; if it be
known to us, or can be comprised, we may be assured that these truly venerable
Persons for Learning, as well as Piety, and the true Knowledge of Christ, knew
so well all the Arts of Reason, as they would not leave out of their
Definitions of the Gospel, any of the Parts constituent of its Being. But
neither is the word Law, as the Genus, or the general Notion wherein all that
are so, agree, put into the Definition, nor any mention made of Works. Thus
those who compiled the Confession of Faith, which was subscribed by seven
Protestant Princes of Germany, and the Senates and Magistrates of two Cities,
and presented to Charles V. Emperor, An. 1530. after having declared their
Belief concerning Justifying Faith, and how it is wrought by the Holy Ghost in
those who hear the Gospel; the Sum of this Gospel they give in these few words,
In iis, qui audiunt Evangelium, scilicet quod Deus non propter nostra merita,
sed propter Christum, justificet hos qui credunt, se propter Christum in
gratiam recipi. Conses. Fidei exhib. Imp. Car. V. Art. 5. Fol. 162. p. 2. in
Tom. 4. oper. Luther. Edit. Jen. 1611.
That God, not for our Merits, but on the account of Christ justifies those who
believe that they are received into favor for Christ's sake. And in the
Apology for that Confession published by Melancthom, the Gospel is described,
that it is properly the Promise of Pardon of Sins, and of Justification on
Christ's Account.

Luther plainly described the Gospel to be a pure Doctrine of Grace without
Works. And as he had before divided the whole Word of God into these two Parts,
of Precepts and Promises, and the former he entitled purely to the Law; so he
then defines the Gospel to be the other Part of God's Word, distinct from the
Law: And how? Only as it is a complete System of gracious Promises to us, that
we shall possess all these inestimable Blessings in Christ. And he very sutably
a little after says, Ideo promissa Dei pertinent ad Novum Testamentum, imo sunt
Novum Testamentum. Lutherus de Libert. Christian. Fol. 388. page 1, and 2. Tom.
oper.
Therefore the Promises of God belong to the New Testament, yes, and are the
New Testament it self. Which is in few words to express his Sense to be, That
the Nature of the Gospel, and Covenant of Grace, strictly and properly taken,
consists only in Promises. And the more deference is to be given to what this
Great Man says here, because it was a Discourse which he composed on purpose to
clear himself of those vile Aspersions which the clamorous Monks perpetually
bawled out to the People, That he was an Enemy to Holiness, disparaged good
Works, and by his preaching and writing the pure Doctrines of Grace, encouraged
all manner of Licentiousness and Villainies. To vindicate himself, he compiled,
and sent this Discourse to Pope Leo the Tenth, Anno Dom. 1520. before there was
an open Rupture Sleidan. Histor. lib. 2. page 25. Edit. in Fol. Francof. 1568.
Wherefore tho his Adversaries basely reproached him as a Man of a boisterous
Spirit, who, for want of a due Temper of Mind, was immoderately hurried, by a
fiery Zeal, to speak and write he knew not what; yet we may be sure, that in
this his little Treatise of Christian Liberty, there are no Thoughts but what
are calm, and composed with mature deliberation: For he would not write like an
enraged Man against Popery before War was proclaimed, nor would suffer his
Passion to transport him, or overcloud and distemper his Judgment, when he
pleaded his Cause before the Pope, who to be sure had no very favorable
Opinion of him.

Philippus Melancthon, contemporary with Luther, and greatly assistant to him
in the Reformation of Religion, and whom God made a glorious Instrument to
clear the Light of the Gospel from the Darkness and Corruptions of Antichrist,
does as plainly describe this Gospel to be mere Doctrine of Grace. Having first
inferred, that the Name of the Gospel is not a Word framed at pleasure, because
that the Apostle John propounds a clear distinction between the Law and Gospel,
John 1. 17. For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ. Necesse est enim discerni praecepta and remissionem peccatorum,
discerni praecepta and promissiones. Item promissionem gratuitam a
promissionibus quae non sunt gratuitae. Melancthon. Loc. Commun. de Evangel.
Fol. 193. page 1, and 2. Tom. 1. oper. Wittebergae 1501.
For it is necessary (says he) that the Precepts and Pardon of Sin be
discriminated, and that a Difference be put between Precepts and Promises, and
also between the Promises of mere Grace, and those which are not so. And by
these Lines he draws the Description of the opposite Natures of Law and Gospel;
that the first is a Doctrine of Precepts, the other a Doctrine of Promises.
Says he a little after, Our Adversaries (speaking of the Papists) tho they bawl
out that they teach the Gospel, yet because they do not instruct People
concerning Reconcilation with God freely of pure Grace, they leave Consciences
in doubt, and for the Gospel teach the Law. Now in all this there is not the
least hint of the Gospel's being a new Law; nay, so far is he from the seeming
appearance of such an Assertion, that he will not allow it, in its true and
proper Nature, to contain Precepts, but Promises alone. In what Sense it may be
said, that the Gospel instructs uc concerning Repentance, which Melancthon
allows to it, and that herein it does not exercise its proper and peculiar
Office, but only employs the Ministry of the Law, I shall afterward show.

John Calvin, to mention whose Name suffices, without attempting to give the
Charater which he deserves, whenever he speaks of the Gospel, forms no other
Notion of it, than as merely a Doctrine of Free Grace Calvin. Instit. lib. 2.
cap. ^.. 2. page 81. a Genev. 1617.
According to the Mind of this truly Great Man, if you take the Gospel in the
more extensive Sense of the Word, it sounds nothing but Promises, tho
comprehending those too which were offered to the Saints of the Old Testament:
but take the word in the strictest Sense, and it signifies the clearer and
fuller Discoveries of God's Infinite Mercies and Free Grace, as revealed in
Christ Jesus. And as for investing Christ with a new Legislative Power, and
dignifying the Gospel with the Title of a new Law, he calls it a mere Fiction.
Hae qui non viderunt, finxerunt Christum alcerum Mosem, Legis Evangelicae
latorem, quae defectum Mosaicae illius suppleverit. Calvin. Instit. lib. 2.
cap. 8.. 7. Fol. 69. p. 2. ib.
They who have not apprehended (says he) these things, (viz. that Christ did
not come to give new Laws, but to interpret the Old, and to restore it to its
true spiritual Meaning, of which he largely discourses before) they have
feigned Christ to be another Moses, the maker of an Evangelical Law, which
should have supplied the Defect of that of Moses.

Beza is as well known as Calvin; and tho from the Decisions of the best of
Men, in Matters of Faith, there must always be an Appeal to the Scriptures, yet
by all to whom the Truths of the Gospel are dear and precious, there has ever
been a great Deference paid to the Judgment of these two Learned Men in
Divinity. He briefly tells the comprehensive Sum of the Gospel, without one
Word inserted about Law or Works. Summa enim Evangelii, quod est Dei potentia
ad salutem cuivis credenti, haec est, Christum apprehendere ut factum nobis a
Deo sapientiam, justitiam, sanctificationem, ac redemptionem. Beza de Haeret.
puniend. page 99. Tom. 1. oper. Genevae, 1570.
The Sum of the Gospel (says he) which is the Power of God to Salvation to
every Believer, is this, that it teaches us to lay hold on Christ, as made to
us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. In another of
his Discourses, demonstrating that the Papists know the use neither of Law nor
Gospel: Quum enim Evangelium a Mose sub figuris legalibus propositum -- Idcirco
sit patefactum Mundo, ut in Christo per fidem apprehenso gratis justificemur,
and sanctificemur, sicut copiose suo loco demonstravimus; isti e contrario
existimant Evangelicam Doctrinam nihil aliud esse quam legem quandam
perfectiorem Mosiaca. Beza Antithesis Papatus, and Christianisimi, in Confess.
ejus, cap. 7.. 9. page 61. Ibid. vide etiam ejusdem Confessionis cap. 3.. 23.
page 19, 20.
For whereas (says he) the Gospel propounded by Moses under Legal Figures, etc.
was therefore published to the World, that we may be freely justified and
sanctified in Christ, apprehended by Faith, as we have in its proper place
copiously demonstrated; They (viz. the Papists) on the contrary think the
Evangelical Doctrine to be nothing else but a certain Law, more perfect than
that of Moses. Thus this Pious and Learned Man, when he gives the Summary of
the Gospel, makes not the least Figure to denote Law or Works; so that
according to his reckoning, they belong not to the Sum, since he leaves them
out in his Account. And in the other Instance, he, with some Indignation,
rejects the Notion of the Gospel's being a Law, as an Article of the Popish
Faith. The same Worthy Author, writing against Sebastianus Castalio, (for he
had not only the perplexing Trouble to refute the Reasons of the Papists, but
to answer the Cavils of the Semi-Pelagians) makes the distinguishing Mark of
the Gospel from the Law to be this, that the Gospel is no other than the
Doctrine of the Free Grace of God. For proving that there are two Parts of
God's Will revealed; one which concerns merely our Duty, which is the Law; and
the other, which contains nothing but the joyful discovery of God's gracious
Purposes to save us by Christ the Redeemer; Nulla tamen in Lege mentio hujus
beneficii. Pertinet enim hujus voluntatis declaratio ad alterram Verbi Divini
partem, quae Evangelium vocatur. Beza de Aeter. Dei Praedest. contra Seb.
Castle. page 393. Tom. 1. oper. Ibid.
There is yet no mention (says he) of this Benefit in the Law: For the
Declaration of this Will belongs to the other Part of the Divine Word, which is
called the Gospel.

This Truth is so rooted in the Hearts of true Christians, that it will grow,
tho in various Climates and Soils, where they have different Habitations. Tho
separated by Seas and vast Lakes, and unpassable Mountains, all who love Jesus
Christ agree in asserting the pure Doctrine of his Grace.

Henricus Bullingerus, one of the known and famed Reformers of Religion in
Switzerland, joins his Testimony to that of Beza, in asserting the Gospel to be
a pure Doctrine of Grace unmingled with Law or Works. Evangelium ergo ab
omnibus fere definitur ad hunc modum. Evangelium est verbum bonum and suave,
testimoniumque certissimum Divinae erga nos gratiae in Christo credentibus
exhibita: vel Evangeliu^ est clarissima Aererni Dei coelitus delata sententia,
absolventis omnes credentes ab omnibus peccatis, and id quidem gratis propter
Christum, promittentisque vitam aeternam. Bullinger. Sermon. Decas. 4. Sermo I.
Fol. 177. page 2. Tigur. 1577.
The Gospel (says he) is defined almost by all in this manner. The Gospel is a
good and sweet Word, and a most certain Testimony of the Divine Favor toward
us in Christ exhibited to Relievers. Or, The Gospel is the most clear Sentence
of the Eternal God, brought down to us from Heaven, absolving all Believers
from their Sins, and that freely for Christ's Sake alone, and promising Eternal
Life.

Hieronymus Zanchius was an Italian, who left his Country with Peter Martyr for
the Sake of the Gospel, in whose Writings, as the Truths for which he suffered
the loss of all things, are nobly vindicated, so a Vivacity of Spirit, which is
so natural to that Nation, shines in them. And it is a Wonder in him, as well
as Calvin, that a Man who wrote so much, should write so well. He gives us his
Suffrage also for the same Truth, and in every Page almost of his three large
Volumes, he asserts the Gospel to be a sincere Doctrine of Grace without any
Mixture. And on all Occasions does clear the distinct Nature of Law and Gospel
from that Confusion, in which by some in his Time they were involved. Having
first divided the whole Word of God into two Parts, Law and Gospel, and not to
confound the Natures of Things so distinct, having described the Law in its
Being, Properties and Office, that it is peculiar to it, to instruct us what
Duties to perform, what Sins to avoid; that it points to us what is a Crime,
and shows what it deserves, and accuses Sinners, and reveals the Wrath of God,
and threatens the merited Punishment: Having thus clearly and distinctly stated
the Nature of the Law, of which the Gospel partakes not in the least, and
having assigned its several Offices, with which the Gospel intermeddles not at
all, nor crowds it self into them, he then as distinctly explains the Nature of
this Gospel. Evangelium vero, quae est altera pars essentialis Sacrae
Scripturae, est Doctrina, sive Scriptura, quae annuntiat salutem gratuitam in
Christo per Fidem. -- Hujus munus est annunciare salutem gratis in Christo
haberi per solam. Fidem, atque ita erigere, and consolari afflictorum
conscientias. Zanchius Miscell. par. 2. page 33. in Tom. 7. oper. 1613.
But the Gospel (says he) which is the other essential Part of the Holy
Scripture, is a Doctrine or Scripture which declares free Salvation in Christ
by Faith. And a little after, The Office of this is to proclaim, that Salvation
is to be had freely in Christ through Faith alone. And in another Discourse he
ascends higher, and tells us, Dico igitur ego Evangelium esse Laetam Divini,
illiusque aeterni, and gratuiti erga nos in dilecto Filio Christo amoris (haec
est Divina Electio) praedicationem. Zanchius, ibid. page 362.
That the Gospel is the joyful Preaching of that Eternal and free Love of God
(this is Eternal Election) toward us in his beloved Son Christ.

To these I might add a Cloud of other Witnesses, to evince that it was the
Faith which universally obtained among all the Reformed Churches in several
Nations, and was earnestly maintained by all the Protestant Writers against the
Papissts, that the Gospel, in the peculiar Nature of it, is no other than a
System of Promises, a Disvoery of God's Mercy and Grace in Christ, and a
Proclamation of Free Pardon and Justification. Isagog. Christizan pars. 4. cap.
21. page 504. Edit. in 8o. Genev. 1588.
Lambertus Danaeus, Loci Com. Ed. a Lycero, part. 2. page 562. in 8o. Francof.
1599.
Martinus Chemnitius, Praefatio in Comment. Oecolampadii in Minores Prophetas,
page 1.
Osualdus Myconius, Paraeus de Justificat. contra Bellarm. lib. 4. cap. 1. page
938. and cap. 2. 946, and 948.
David Pareus, Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 3. lib. 15. cap. 4. page 518. Genv. 1626.
Daniel Chamier, Loc. Theolog. Tom. 3. Loc. de Evangel. cap. 4. page 437. and
cap. 12. page 500, 501. Edit. in 4o. Jenae 1618.
Joannes Gerrardus, Enchirid. Relig. Reform. page 95. Tom. 1. oper. Lugd. Bat.
1647.
Antonius Waleus, Explicat. Cateches. part. 2. Quaest. 19. page 99, 100. in
Tom. 3. ejus Script. Theolog. Heidelberg. Amstel. 1646. and exegesis August.
Confess. Art. 5. page 43. A^stel. 1647.
Altingius, Andreas Rivetus, in Genesis 15. Exercitat. 84. page 325. Tom. 1. oper.
Roter. 1651.
Andreas Rivetus, with innumerable others, write harmoniously in the same
strain.

I will yet add the Testimony of our own Whitaker. Cum enim Evangelium nihil
aliud sit, quam enunciatio and declaratio Gratiae, misericordiaeque Dei, quam
sua morte Christus promeritus est, negari non potest illam esse maxim
Evangelicam Doctrinam, quae hoc beneficium laetumque nuntium plenissime
exponit, eamque ob causam in Pauli Epistolis Evangelium copiosissime, and
clarissime doceri, and esse Paulum optimum Evangelistam. Whitakerus contra
Duraeum, lib. 1. page 80. Tom. 1. oper. Genev. 1610.
Since the Gospel ( says he) is nothing else but the Narrative and Declaration
of the Grace and Mercy of God, which Christ merited for us by his Death; it
cannot be denied that principally to be the Evangelical Doctrine, which most
fully expounds this Benefit and joyful Message; and for that Reason the Gospel
to be most copiously and clearly taught in Paul's Epistles, and Paul to be the
best Evangelist. He scruples not to attribute the Title of Gospel more to the
Epistles of that Apostle, than to the Sermon on the Mount, tho preached by the
Savior of Men; and that on this Account, because in these more abundantly are
displayed the Mysteries of our Redemption, when the Import of that was to
explain and urge Precepts which belong properly to the Law.

But it will be needful to produce one Evidence more, who is the more material,
because it is the same Person whom my Reverend Brother brings as a Witness for
the Cause which he maintains of the Gospel's bring a Law. It is Gomarus
himself, who gives this Definition of it; Evangelium autem hoc modo non
incommode definiri potest; Doctrina Divina, qua Areanum Dei Foedus, de gratuita
salute per Christum hominibus in peccatum lapsis annamciatur; and cum electis
inchoatur ac conservatur, ad ipsorum salutem, and Dei servatoris gloriam.
Gomarus, Disput. 14. These. 25. page 52. Tom. 3. oper. Amstel. 1644.
The Gospel is a Divine Doctrine, in which the secret Covenant of God,
concerning Salvation out of pure Free Grace by Christ, is declared to Men
fallen into Sin: and with the Elect it is begun, and preserved to their
Salvation, and the Glory of God the Savior. Here he speaks nothing of the
Gospel, but that it is merely a Declaration of Grace, and the manifestation of
the secret Purposes of it which were before hid in God's Heart; when therefore
a little after he calls the Gospel a Law, in the Place cited by my Reverend
Brother, he must necessarily understand the word Gospel in the large extensive
Sense, as it signifies all the second Part of the Bible, not in the strict and
properest Sense, as it implies only God's Covenant of Grace discovered to Man.

But what need was there that I should mention the Testimonies of Men, when
Witness offers it self from Heaven? At the Birth of our Redeemer, God the
Father sends down his Messengers, not only to tell us that his Son was born
into the World, but to assure us that he brought nothing with him but Grace and
Peace, and the Reconciliation of a God before angry, unto lost and desperate
Rebels. It is thus the Angels, (who certainly with the greatest Exactness
discharged their Commission) without one word of Christ's being a new
Legislator, or coming as a second Moses to deliver a new Law from Mount Zion,
as he did from Sinai, proclaim the Gospel to be a most solemn Declaration of
God's gracious Designs and Purposes to Sinners unworthy of his Favor, Luke 2.
13, 14. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Host
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, good
Will toward Men. Thus in the first delivery of this glad Message, there is no
Voice but of Peace, no stounding Claps of Thunder, as from Sinai at the
Promulgation of the Law, but the Songs of Angels rejoicing in the restored
Happiness of Elect Men, their Fellow Creatures; no affrighting Flashes of
Lightning, but a soft and gentle Brightness shining from the Face of a
reconciled God, and diffusing it self through the Air without any hurtful or
consuming Flame; Luke 2. 9. And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and
the Glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. Tho
they were a little astonished at the first appearance of so strange and unusual
a Sight, yet the Sense which they had, that it was only an innocent lambent
Fire about their Heads; and the encouraging words of the Angel reassur'd them,
ver. 10, 11. It is not a Judge, but a Savior who is come into the World; nor
are there any Threatenings denounced as at the giving of a Law are necessary,
but they hear Promises of Mercy. There is no Sentence of Death given, nor
Warrants issued out for the Execution of guilty Criminals; but God the Father
honors his Son's Birthday with a large and very comprehensive Act of Pardon.
When this his Son, his Solace and Delight in Eternal Ages, before any Creatures
made, steps down from Heaven, he does not merely declare the great Pleasure and
Satisfaction he has in this glorious God-Man, but he evidenceth how dear this
infinitely excellent Person is to him, in the most surprising Effects of
Goodness and Grace. He proclaims, that for his sake only he can regard his
Elect of Men with Eyes of Favor and Kindness, who in their own Persons were
only Objects of Detestation and Abhorrence. And therefore tho he freely loved
them from Eternity, his Benevolence was never openly published till now. As it
is only for the sake of Christ, whom God infinitely loves, that he can take any
delight in his chosen Children of Men, so it is not till this his great and
adorable Son comes upon Earth, that he proclaims Peace and Goodwill to Men.

Thus God from Heaven, and some of the best Men who ever lived upon Earth, do
plainly tell us that the Gospel is no Law, but a pure Act of Grace. And as God
sent these Men into the World to restore his Truth, to recover it out of the
Darkness of Popery, in which the Nations of the Earth had for so many Ages lost
themselves, and been wretchedly deluded by the worst of Errors, dressed up in
the faint Resemblance of Truth; they were answerably faithful to the
performance of that Work which God had sent them to do. They were careful to
distinguish the Gospel from a Law, and would by no means suffer Works, tho
insinuating themselves under never so specious pretenses, to invade the
Prerogative of Grace. They very well knew (as both Multos enim insignes, and
perniciosos errores peperit aequivocatio vocabuli Legis, non recte distincta
Monachi transformarunt Doctrinam Evangelii in Legem. Chemnitius Loc. Com. Tom.
2. page 4. Edit. in 8o. Francof. 1599.
Chemnitius and Hoc enim vere possumus affirmare, ignorationem differentiae
Legis, and Evangelii, plurimis maximisque erroribus occasionem praebuisse,
quibus hodie Christiana Religio perturbatur: i. e. For we can truly affirm
this, that the Ignorance of the Law and Gospel, has afforded Occasion to the
most and greatest Errors with which the Christian Religion is at this Day
disturbed. Beza Confessio, cap. 4.. 23. page 19. Tom. 1. oper. Genev. 1570.
Beza inform us) that playing with the Ambiguity of the word Law, confounded
Law and Gospel, laid the Root of the most pernicious Errors to spring up and
overspread the Church with nothing but Tares, or worser Weeds, in the room of
nourshing Corn. They were aware that the perplexed Thoughts of Law and Gospel
chained together, by the unnatural Mixture gave Birth to that monstrous
Metamorphosis by which the Monks transformed the Gospel into a Law; and as they
were not at all ignorant that the proper Remedy to cure these distempered
Thoughts, was exactly to distinguish between the one and the other, they
sutably made a good and successful use of it: They would give every thing its
proper Name suitable to its Nature. If they spoke of Works, they meant a Law
prescribing them, and commanding Obedience under severe Penalties; but then in
thus thinking, speaking, or writing, the Gospel never came into their Minds,
nor was formed in their Voice, nor dropped from their Pens. But whenever an
Idea or Notion of Grace arose in their Minds, then indeed the next following
Thought was the Gospel of Christ. By thus reducing these two Notions into due
Rank and Order, they baffled all the sophistical Cavils of the Monks, and
afterward of the more cunning Jesuits, and made War against Antichrist with
Success and Victory: for to drive that Man of Sin out of his dark Corners, and
hiding-Places, is indeed to conquer him. In pursuing such a Conquest, these
famed Divines of the first Reformation, once too much adored, and now as much
despised, wrote and preached the pure sincere Grace of the Gospel to the
People. It was by this alone Doctrine, unassisted by any humane Policy or
Force, that they blew up all the Forts of the dark Papal Kingdom; and
conquering all before them, planted the glorious Ensigns of our Blessed Lord
Jesus, in the Room of the Roman Standards. Thus Chemnitius, who was a perfect
Master in the Art of attaquing Antichrist in her strongest Holds; since he so
prosperously stormed and demolished the Council of Trent, shows what were the
Instruments of this Spiritual Warfare used by him that had the greatest Force.
Et quae alia Lux discussit densissimas tenebras Regni Pontificii nisi haec
praecipue, quod demonstratum est verum discrimen Legis, and Evangelii?
Chemnitius, Ibid. page 562.
What other Light (says he) has dispersed the most thick Darkness of the Papal
Kingdom, but this chiefly, the true Difference of the Law and Gospel before
demonstrated? And this Difference he had stated, that the Law consists purely
of Works, and the Gospel of all Grace.

This might be sufficient to inform us, in what Sense we are to apprehend the
Expressions of any of the Reformed Divines, when they give the Name of a Law to
the Gospel: for since this signifies no more among them than the joyful News of
God's Mercy and Love, and his being reconciled to Sinners in the Blood of his
Son, the meaning of the Word Law, when attributed to this Gospel, that it may
be suitable and consistent with such a Notion of it, must design nothing more
than a Doctrine of Grace and Peace. But if I now bring Instances, that they
tell us in so many express words, that when they call the Gospel a Law, they
intend the Word in no other Sense than this alleged, it will clear the puzzled
Cause, and leave no remaining Doubt of their true Sense and Meaning. I will not
multiply Citations, one or two are enough; and indeed Luther and Calvin are an
Army alone.

Luther tells us, Sic omnes Justiciarii existimant Christum esse novum quendam
Legislatorem, and judicant Evangelium nihil aliud esse, quam librum, qui
contineat novas Leges de operibus, ut Turcae de suo Alcorano somniant; sed
satis Legum est in Mose. Ideo Evangelium est praedicatio de Christo, quod
remittat peccata, donet gratiam, justificet, and salvet peccatores. Quod autem
praecepta in Evangelio reperiuntur, ista non sunt Evangelium, sed expositiones
Legis and Appendices Evangelii. Luther. plenior Comment. in Galat. 2. 17. Fol.
42. page 1. in Tom. 4. oper.
That all Justiciaries esteem Christ to be a new Legislator, and judge the
Gospel to be no other than a Book which contains new Laws concerning Works; as
the Turks dream about their Alcoran: But there are Laws enough in Moses. The
Gospel therefore is a preaching concerning Christ, that he forgives Sins, gives
Grace, justifies and saves Sinners. But now that Precepts are found in the
Gospel; those are not the Gospel, but Expositions of the Law, and Appendixes of
the Gospel.

Now any one would think, that this Luther would never call the Gospel a Law;
and yet so he does, expounding a little after the 19th Verse, and is before
cited by me. And in what Sense he means the Gospel to have that Name, he
informs us plainly, in his Comment on Isa. 2. 3. Out of Zion shall go forth the
Law. Quia de Sion exhibit Lex. Haec est causa multiplicandae Ecclesiae, and
Regni Christi ampliandi, praedicatio scilicet Evangelii. Promittit enim, hic
novum verbum, nisi enim novam Doctrinam significaret, quid opus erat denuo
promittere Legem, quae tot annis ante lata erat? Et manifest significat
differentiam quod addit, de Sion. q. d. prius dedi Legem in Sinai, nunc aliam
dabo in Sion Monte, quae non erit doctrina operum, sed Fidei, non Legum, sed
Gratiae, non accusans sed conferens remissionem peccatorum. Luther. Enarrat. in
Esa. 2. Fol. 292. Page 1. Tom. 3. oper.
This is the Cause ( says he) of the Multiplication of the Church, and of the
Amplification of Christ's Kingdom, viz. the Preaching of the Gospel: For he
here promises a new Word. For unless he signified a new Doctrine, what need
was there at length to promise a Law, which had been made so many Years before?
And he manifestly signifies the difference, in that he adds, out of Zion: As if
he should say, I first gave a Law in Sinai, I will now give another in Mount
Zion, which shall not be a Doctrine of Works, but of Faith; not of Laws, but of
Grace; not accusing, but bestowing pardon of Sins, etc.

Calvin also agrees with Luther in this: And indeed those two Holy Men, tho
they differed in some things, yet they very well accorded in the main Substance
of the Gospel. They believed on the same Jesus, and loved the Truth of his
Grace. Calvin likewise says, that when the Gospel is called Law, a Doctrine of
Salvation is only meant by it; For (says he, explaining Isa. 2. 3.) Nam quum a
Lege petenda esset pietatis regula, per Synecdochen ejus nomine totam Doctrinam
Dei comprehendere solebant: quemadmodum etiam sub Altaris nomine cultum Dei.
Calvin. Com. in Esa. 2. 3. Tom. 4. oper.
since the Rule of Holiness is to be fetched from the Law, by a Synecdoche they
were accustomed to comprehend the whole Doctrine of God under that Name, as
also the Worship of God under the Name of an Altar. Now as it would be absurd
to infer, that the Ministers of Christ are Levitical Priests, because the
Apostle says, that they ought to be partakers with the Altar, and live by the
Gospel; or to endeavor to prove, that the old Jewish Worship is yet standing,
and that Sacrifices should be offered under the New Testament, because the
Apostle speaks of an Altar too, to which Believers came, and of which they have
right to eat, Heb. 13. 10. So the way of arguing would be equally impertinent,
to conclude from the Gospel's being named a Law, that it is a Doctrine of Works.

Musculus also tells us how we must apprehend the word Law, when made use of to
signify the Gospel. Nihil enim aliud intelligit per Legem quam Verbum Domini,
nec per Zijon quam Jerusalem; nec potest de alia Doctrina intelligi quam
Evangelica. Muscul. Com. in Esa. 2. page 71. Basil. 1570.
The Prophet ( says he) understands no other by the Law, than the Word of the
Lord; nor by Zion, than Jerusalem. Nor can it be understood of any other
Doctrine, than what is Evangelical.

And Rodolphus Gualther, explaining what the Apostle means when he calls the
Gospel a Law: Utitur autem Legis vocabulo pro Judaeorum more, de Doctrina
loquens, and Legem operum dicit eam Doctrinam, quae nos operibus justificari
tradit. Legem vero Fidei eam, quae justitiam monstrat in Merito Christi, qui
sola Fide apprehenditur. Gualtherus Homil. 19. in Epist. ad Roman. Fol. 44.
page 1. Tiguri 1566.
After the manner of the Jews ( says he) he speaking of a Doctrine, uses the
word Law; and he calls the Law of Works that Doctrine which asserts that we are
justified by Works, but the Law of Faith that Doctrine, which shows
Righteousness in the Merit of Christ, who is apprehended by Faith alone.

When the Holy Ghost himself, who inspired the Minds, and guided the Pens both
of the Prophets and Apostles; and not only suggested things to their Thoughts,
but the fittest Words too by which to express them: If this holy infallible
Spirit, calling the Gospel a Law, means no other than a Doctrine of Grace; any
one would think, that we could not be at a loss how to understand the Word. I
need not therefore multiply Instances, a few more may suffice.

Zacharias Vrsinus, when he calls the Gospel a new Form of Law, takes care to
direct us to his right Sense, and punctually tells us, that he means no more by
it, than a new Doctrine of Grace. Significat ergo novam Dei patefactionem, and
novam formam Legis, and cultus expectandam esse e Zijone, patefacto nimirum
Christo, and abrogatis ceremoniis. Sed cum dicat Legem egressuram e Zijone,
queritur an hoc and similibus locis stabiliatur opinio Papistarum, qui volunt
Christum venisse, ut esset novus Legislator, qui Legem meliorem and
persectiorem proferret, quam olim lata erat per Mosem, ut secundum cum Legem
homines deinceps viventes, hac obedientia placerent Deo, and consequerentur
vitam aeternam? Facilis est responsio ex phrasi usitatissima in Scriptura, qua
nomine Legis tota Doctrina intelligitur. -- Fugienda est igitur opinio
Monastica tanquam pestis, and eversio totius Christianismi, and obscuratio
officii and beneficiorum Christi, non differens ab Ethnicorum, Judaeorum,
Turcarum, and aliarum Sectarum opinionibus de justificatione coram Deo. Vrsinus
Comment. in Esa. 2. page 63. Tom. 2. oper. Neustad. 1589.
The Prophet ( says he, expounding Isa. 2. 3.) signifies that a new
Manifestation of God, and a new Form of Law and Worship, is to be expected out
of Zion; that is to say, Christ being revealed, and the Ceremonies abolished.
But when he says that the Law shall go forth out of Zion, it is queried,
Whether by this, and the like Places, the Opinion of the Papists is
established, who will have it, that Christ came that he might be a new
Lawgiver, who should publish a better and more perfect Law than had been
before delivered by Moses; that Men for the future, living according to that
Law, might by this their Obedience please God, and obtain Eternal Life? The
Answer is easy from this most usual Phrase in Scripture, by which, under the
Name Law, the whole Doctrine is understood, etc. Therefore that Monkish Opinion
is to be avoided, as the Plague and Subversion of all Christianity, and an
obscuring of the Offices and Benefits of Christ; and as not differing from the
Opinions of Heathens, Jews, Turks, and other Sects, concerning our
Justification before God.

Chemnitius also gives direction how to understand the word Law, when employed
to denote the Gospel. Est and illa significatio generalis, quando sub nomine
Legis intelligitur universa Doctrina divinitus patefacta, ut Psalm. 19. v. 8, 9.
and 119. ubi Lex dicitur consolari, and aedificare corda. Ita de Evangelio
loquitur Esaias, Cap. 2. v. 3. De Sion exibit Lex. Romans 8. 2. Lex spiritus
vitae; Romans 3. 27. Lex Fidei; Gal. 2. 19. Ego per Legem Legi mortuus sum. Est
autem Hebraica Phrasis, in qua Lex (...) ab instituendo, and docendo nomen
habet. Chemnitius loci Com. Tom. 2. page 5. Edit. in 8o. Francof. 1599.
That also ( says he) is a general signification of the Word, when under the
name of a Law, the universal Doctrine divinely revealed is understood; as Psalm.
19. 8, 9. and Psalm. 119. where the Law is said to comfort and edify Hearts. So
Esa speaks of the Gospel, Chap. 2. v. 3. The Law shall go forth out of Zion.
Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life. Romans 3. 27. The Law of Faith. Gal. 2.
19. I by the Law am dead to the Law. But it is a Hebrew Phrase, in which Law
(...) Torah, has its name from Instructing and Teaching.

To these Ancient Worthies, I might add the concurrent Testimonies of Modern
Divines, who are Orthodox in the Faith: But whereas I might produce many, I
will content my self to alledg one, which is that of Whittichius, the present
Learned Professor of Divinity (if not lately dead) in the University of Leyden;
and who, tho he espoused the New Philosophy, yet it had no Malignant Influences
to infect him with any new-contrived Schemes to solve the Phenomena's in
Divinity. He in his short, but full and clear Exposition on the Romans,
explaining Chap. 3. ver. 27. tells us what the Apostle intends by that Phrase,
a Law of Faith. Unde jam sequitur istam exclusionem factam esse per Legem
fidei, quae hic denotat (...) Doctrinam Fidei, prout sub novo Testamento
docetur, sine obligatione ad ulla opera tanquam causam justificationis, uti
futura fuissent opera Legis Moralis perfect, and constanter praestita ab
Adamo, vel tanquam necessarium justificationis praerequisitum. Wittichius
Investigat. Epist. ad Roman. page 150. Lugd. Bat. 1685.
The exclusion of Boasting (says he) is made by the Law of Faith, which here
denotes, by way of Eminency, the Doctrine of Faith, as it is taught in the New
Testament, without Obligation to any Works, as the Cause of Justification, (as
the Works of the Moral Law perfectly, and constantly performed by Adam would
have been) or as the necessary Prerequisite of Justification.

Well then, when we meet with the word Law, if we would not be imposed on by
the mere Sound of a Word, we must carefully view the Text on all sides, and
survey and consider all its Circumstances. When what is proper to the Gospel is
attributed to the Law, the word Law is not to be apprehended in the strict
Sense, as signifying a Rule of Duty, and threatening Penalties to the
Disobedient; or as importing a Doctrine of Works, but a Doctrine of Grace. Thus
when the Law is said to turn the Soul, and to rejoice the Heart, Psalm. 19. 8,
9. since these are not the Effects of the Law, as a Doctrine of Works; for that
rather effects a Sense of Wrath, than any hope in the Heart of a guilty
condemned Sinner; and its Efficacy is more suited to wound him with anxious
Fears, or tormenting Despair, rather than to comfort him, Romans 4. 15. we must
by no means conceive a proper Law, consisting of Precepts and Menaces, to be
meant, but the Doctrine of the Mercies of God in Christ, which only can have
those Virtues and Influences. And so when the Apostle too calls the Gospel a
Law of Faith, since he makes the Righteousness of the Law opposite to the
Righteousness which is of Faith, Romans 10. 4, 5, 6. and Romans 3. 20, 21, 22. he
must consequently mean not a Law in the strict Sense, not a Doctrine of Works,
but of pure Grace. And by this Rule we are to proceed; when we find the Gospel
called a Law, we are not to understand it in the strict meaning, as a Rule of
Duty with a Sanction, which is the proper and peculiar Nature of the Moral Law,
but as a revealed Instruction to us, what the Mind of God is concerning our
Recovery and Salvation by Christ. And when we hear of the Precepts and
Threatenings of the Gospel, and read them in that part of the Bible which we
call the New Testament, whether in the Sermons of our Savior, or in the
Writings of the Apostles, we are not to surmise presently, that these are any
Parts of the Gospel, properly so titled, as it is a Word of Grace, and the
Doctrine of our Redemption by Jesus, tho they are contained in that Book to
which we commonly give that Name: For this would be to perplex our Notions of
Things which are entirely distinct in their Natures and Idea's, and to jumble
them so confusedly together, that we should not be able, upon sight, to discern
and know one from the other. For by the same Method of proceeding, I might
frame an Imagination to my self, and strive to impose it on other Men, that the
Moral Law is the Gospel, because there are so many Declarations of God's Love
to Sinners, of his Mercies to pardon them, and so many Promises of Grace
interspersed in the Psalms and Prophets, and other Books of the Old Testament;
all which, tho so much of the Gospel be contained in it, is so frequently
called the Law, both by Christ and his Apostles, the Primitive Fathers, and
Protestant Divines. So that in a Word, as the Promises of the Gospel spread
through the Books of Moses and the Prophets, is no Argument to prove the Law to
be the Gospel: So it is as false a Demonstration that the Gospel is a Law,
because there are so many Precepts and Threatenings repeated in the Evangelists
and Epistles. All that can be concluded is, that as there are Promises in one
Volume of the Bible, so there are Commands and Menaces in the other: But yet as
it is the Gospel which promises Grace in the First, so it is the Law which
commands and threatens in the Second. And to clear the Equation, it is only
needful to bring all the Precepts in both to one side, and the Promises to
another, and then we have distinct Law and Gospel.

CHAP. VII.
The Arguments used by the Apologist, to prove the Gospel to be a new Law,
examined. That from the Precepts, Commands urged, and Threatenings denounced in
the New Testament, nothing can be concluded to this Purpose.

IT is now very easy to answer my Reverend Brother's Arguments, and with one
gentle Stroke to wipe off all his Citations, since they all are established
merely upon the Ambiguities of the word Law. Such reasoning is very fallacious,
to endeavor to prove the Gospel to be a new Rule of Duty, fortified with a
Sanction, because we find it to be named a Law, both in the Scriptures and
Humane Writings: for the Sum of the whole Demonstration amounts to no more than
this, a Law is a Law, the Gospel is a Law, therefore the Gospel is a Law; which
is a pretty way of arguing, and without doubt unanswerable. But the clearing
the Sense of the Terms, answers all without any more to do; which I think I
have done, and the more largely, because I would do all the Justice to a bad
Cause as could reasonably be asked, and allow to it the fullest Scope and Play
possible. I have therefore offered Arguments for it my self, I have considered
what might be alleged, I have produced those Scriptures which with any color
may be urged to prove the Gospel to be a new Law, omitted by my Learned
Brother; and yet as aware that they might be summoned, I have brought them in,
and endeavored to clear their Words from that false Meaning which might be
fastened on them to so ill a Purpose. I shall now particularly consider those
which he brings, and show that they do not prove the Matter in Dispute.

His first set of Scriptures are such as express the Gospel to be either giving
Precepts, and issuing out Commands, and prescribing what is our Duty; or
reproving the Negligent, or threatening the stubborn Offenders, or promising
Blessings on the Condition of such Duties performed as are required. It would
make this Discourse too large, which is, I know not how, grown under my Hands
to a greater Bulk than I first designed, if I should particularly examine every
Text; it will be enough to show, that however there are Precepts and Commands
in the Books of the New Testament, yet these are not properly the Gospel, but
parts of the Law, only employed in its Service; that the Threatenings denounced
do not properly belong to the Covenant of Grace, (for what has Love, and
Mercy, and Favor, to do with Wrath, and Justice, and Expressions of
Vengeance?) but it uses the Ministry only of a violated Law, whose proper
Office it is to threaten the Disobedient, to condemn the Unbelieving and
Impenitent Sinner, and to demand Justice against him. If I also show at last
that those places of Scripture (which look like Promises of Blessings to us, on
condition that we perform the commanded Duties) viewed nearly, prove to be no
more than so many Declarations of the Connection of the Blessings of Grace; and
that as Faith is the first bestowed, it goes not alone, but is attended with a
numerous Offspring: When all this is done, then the right Sense of those Texts
which seem to infer to be a Condition of our Justification by this Evangelical
Law, will be fully cleared; the meaning of the alleged Scriptures will be so
plain, as it will appear that they do not so much as look toward the favoring
that Opinion of the Gospel being a new Law, for which they are produced.

That the Precepts which the Gospel employs, are not any Parts of it self, but
borrowed from the Law, will be undoubted, if we consider what is their Nature
and Use. They are designed as the Rule of our Actions; they instruct us what to
do; they draw the Lines of our Duty, and set the Limits of our Obedience; and
all this is the proper Office of the Moral Law, which it completely discharges,
without calling in any Assistance. It is the eternal and unalterable Rule of
Manners, and a Doctrine directing the whole Conduct of Humane Life: There is no
Defect in it, which it was needful to supply by another new Law; to assert
that, would be to impeach the Wisdom of God as deficient, as not knowing at
first all that was Good and Righteous, and necessary to be commanded to his
Creatures, and to be done by them; or as so short in its Foresight, as not able
to discern at the first all the Duties which Men were bound to perform in the
Circumstances of their State, but was obliged afterward, taught by Experience,
to supply the Failures by a new Law, or by an Addition of new Precepts suited to
Man's present state of Sin, Weakness and Misery. If then the Moral Law did not
comprehend in it all Precepts of Duties, it would not be God's Law, for his is
perfect; he is not like short-sighted Men, who cannot foresee what the
Consequences of a Law made by them may be within the Compass of one Age; nor
whether Circumstances of Affairs altering, it may not prove hurtful or
unnecessary; and therefore all Governments find themselves obliged to repeal
old Laws, or to add some Clauses to suit them to a present Posture of Affairs,
or to make new Ones to repair the Defects, to which all Humane Wisdom in her
best Provisions is obnoxious, for want of a certain Foreknowledg of the Future.
But who can have such a Thought of God, that these Infirmities of a Man should
ever befall him in making his Laws, that he should be forced, tho not to repeal
what he had made so many Ages before, yet to promulgate a new one, with
additional Precepts accommodated to the present Case of his miserable Creature
Man? And as it is repugnant to God's Perfections to make new Laws, so it would
infer that his antiquated Law was imperfect, and so no Rule; and this would
unavoidably follow, if any Duties are to be performed which it neither
regulates, nor gives any direction about them. But Christ tho as Mediator he is
no Lawgiver, yet perfectly knows the Nature of the Law given at Mount Sinai;
that the Law contains all Duties, for he makes the Sum of it to consist in Love
to God, and in a due degree of Love to our selves, and in loving our Neighbor,
Matthew. 22. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Then one of them which was a Lawyer, asked
him a question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is the great
Commandment in the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is the
first and great Commandment. And the Second is like unto it, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets. Now it will be very difficult to give an Instance of any Duty which
we owe to him our Great Creator, or to our selves, or to Men our
Fellow Creatures, which are not included in one of those two Tables, or to name
a Precept which may not be reduced to them. The Scripture alleged is the more
demonstrative for this Reason, that our Lord Christ's Answer is to a Man
enquiring concerning his Duty; and then, if at any time, there was occasion to
mention this new Law, and to have told him the additional Precepts, had there
been any such things. But Christ sends him to the Moral Law, as comprehending
all that Man was to do, and as a perfect Rule of Duty sufficient completely to
instruct him. And indeed what more can be required of Man, than to love God
with all the Powers and Faculties of his Soul, and to love himself as he ought
to do, and his Neighbor in like measure?

When Christ also comes into the World, and was made under the Law, which never
had before, nor will ever have again so glorious a Subject, it is this Law he
not only explains in its spiritual and comprehensive Meaning, but obeys it, and
therein fulfils all Righteousness, Mat. 5. 17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Mat.
3. 15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness. Then he suffered him. And what! is
that Law imperfect, which was the Rule of the most perfect Obedience that ever
was, and which excelled that of Angels? Are any Precepts wanting in it? how
then did Christ complete all Righteousness in the most exact observance of it?
Well then, if the Law be perfect, there is no Duty but what comes within the
Verge of its Authority, and what it enjoins under the severest Penalties; and
no Precepts were given even by Christ himself, but what particularly appertain
to it, and not to the Gospel as a new Law: It is not only our Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ, but it commands to believe on him; for Faith in God (and
Christ is so) is contained in its first Precept: it not only shows us our Sin,
and convinces us of our Misery and lost State; but when we have believed, tho
it be no longer a condemning, vexing, tormenting Law, yet it is a commanding One
still: It is a Rule of Gratitude, it prescribes, that we ought to be thankful
to Christ in all Returns of Love and Duty, it is the Rule of all that Holy Life
of a Christian, which is the Fruit of Faith, and which is called Evangelical
Obedience, not because it is so to the Gospel, but in respect of those
Principles of Faith and Love from which it flows, in respect of the Evangelical
Motives which animate and encourage it. It is not hurried on by legal Terrors,
nor pricked forward by sharp-pointed Threatenings, but is sweetly drawn and
enlivened by the Promises. It is not the Fruits of Fear, but the genuine
Effects of the heartiest Affection to Christ, and of the most earnest Desires
and solicitous Cares to please him.

I know that it will be said, That tho those Precepts in the Gospel, which
command and direct Moral Duties, appertain to the Moral Law, yet Faith in
Christ the Redeemer, and Repentance, do not seem to be in the least so much as
hinted in any of its Commands: For since the Law was given as a Rule of the
Actions of Holy and Innocent Creatures, who needed not a Redeemer, there could
be no occasion to command them to believe on One; and Adam in his State of
Integrity, was no more obliged to such a Faith, than the Blessed Angels are to
believe on the Savior of lost and wretched Men. And since Repentance is a Duty
too, which presupposes the Person engaged to it, to be an Offender, and
guilty, How could it be commanded to a Creature who had never sinned? How could
it be a Duty for him to own his Crime with Shame and Sorrow, who never yet had
transgressed, or prevaricated in his Obedience? Since therefore Faith in
Christ, and Repentance, are Duties which suppose the Man to be a Sinner, it
would seem that such Precepts are not implied in a Law given to him before his
Fall; but are the proper Precepts of a second Remedial Law, which God has
provided for the Relief and Help of this miserable Creature.

This I must confess looks very plausible at first sight, and the Argument
seems to be strongly conclusive. But if we consider the Nature of Faith, it
will be manifest, that it was not only commanded to Adam in Innocence, and that
it was his Duty, but that it is absolutely necessary to every holy and good
Creature: For if we take it as an Act of the Mind, assenting readily to all
that God reveals, as infallibly true, it is that to which every Creature in the
right Constitution of his Being, is indispensably obliged. It is the Duty of
Angels themselves to believe that Jesus is the Son of God, that he is the
Savior of Elect Men; that the Pardon and Justification of a Sinner, is by his
Blood and Righteousness alone; that God's Justice is satisfied by the Sacrifice
of his Son. For all these Truths being published, and made known by God for the
Illustration of his infinite Mercy among all his rational Creatures; and that
the Praises of his Free Grace might resound as well in the Songs of Angels, as
from the Mouths of Men; it is needful, and required as a Duty from them both,
who are to honor God in the Celebration of all his Attributes, that they
heartily believe all these Truths of the Gospel, in which alone God's
Perfections of Mercy and Grace do illustriously shine forth. And as for Man in
Innocence, though it was not in express Terms required from him to believe the
Gospel not yet revealed to him, or to act Faith on Christ undiscovered; yet
such a Command was included, and implied in that general one, that he should
without any Doubt or Hesitancy give Credit to all that God said: and that as he
was to believe the Sincerity of God's Promise, and the Reality of his
Threatenings when the Covenant of Works was made with him, and without doubt he
acted such a Faith; so by the same Precept he was commanded and bound to
believe every word which God afterward should speak to him, and without
scrupulous disputing presently assent to those Truths which were to be
revealed, as soon as it appeared to him that they were so. So that indeed the
Belief of the Gospel, and Faith in Christ Jesus, were comprehended in this
general Precept of Believing in God: and indeed Christ himself tells us so, and
uses it as an Argument why they should act Faith on him, because they were
obliged to it by the same Command which required them to believe on God; John
14. 1. Let not your Heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me.
If we regard too the other Act of Faith, which is a firm Reliance of the Soul
upon God, and heartily trusting of him, and cheerfully committing all our
Concernments, our Life, our Happiness, all we enjoy or hope for, to his
faithful Love and Care; this was certainly our first Father's Duty, and given
in Precept to him in the Law, as well as the other of assenting to all that God
declared as undoubtedly true. And indeed, if it was Adam's Duty in his
Primitive Condition to believe in God, it was commanded by the Law; for that
only could make it become so. And what! can we ever wildly imagine, that our
first Father was not bound to act Faith on God his Creator, and constant
Benefactor, and upon whom he was to have a perpetual Dependence, or he could
not live a moment? What! can we think, that to have rejected God's Word as of
suspected Truth, to have refused, or but to have suspended his Assent to it
when proposed, had been no fault in him? That to have distrusted God, to have
renounced Dependence on him, would not have been a Crime the greatest as could
be committed by him? But all this is the unavoidable Consequence of this
Assertion, That the Precept of Faith is not in the Law; for neither would Faith
have been a Duty, nor Unbelief a Sin to Adam, had not the Law, which was the
only Rule of his Obedience, commanded the one and forbidden the other. Were it
not for this, he might have been a stubborn obstinate Unbeliever without being
a Sinner; when on the contrary, it appears from the short Relation of his
Apostasy, that Unbelief was his very first Sin. For what is Faith, but to trust
in God upon his Word and Promise for all our Life and Happiness? and what is
Unbelief but to distrust him? And was not Adam, while flourishing in his State
Innocence, a real and sincere Believer? and so long as he persisted in acting
Faith, did he not continue to be happy? And was it not the Neglect of the due
Exercise of Faith, which at last plunged him into the Depths of Misery and
Despair? As long as he believed God, and entirely confided in him; as long as
he lived in constant Dependence upon the Love and Care of his Creator; as long
as he thankfully acknowledged, that he received all the Blessings of Life as
the Fruits of his Bounty; as long as he trusted in God upon his Word, that he
would not only continue them unto him, but bestow greater to come, which by the
Promise he had reason to hope for and expect; all this time he lived by Faith,
and his Days were clear and happy, and it was Unbelief made all his Glories set
in a gloomy Evening. It was this begun his Apostasy, not exercising Faith any
longer, he would throw off his Dependence upon God, and seek to be blessed in
some new and fond Way of his own. He indulged a surmizing Thought, that God,
whose solemn Promise he had so freshly heard, either could not, or was not
willing to make him so happy as he aspired to be, and that he refused to
advance him to those degrees of Bliss, of which he fancied himself capable: And
thus he ceased acting that Faith in God, on which depended his Life and
Blessedness; he disbelieved God, and believed the Devil his greatest Enemy, and
sinned, and died. And I know not but that he deserved the Execution of the
Sentence and Curse pronounced against him, more by his Unbelief than by Eating
the Apple: And that even the Law of Works condemned him as much for that Sin,
as for the outward Act of his Disobedience. Ay, but it will be said, All this
does not prove that Faith in Christ was commanded by the Law, and required of
him as his Duty. No, it is enough that Faith in God was so, to prove that the
Precept belongs to the Law. For if it is sufficient to argue from the Law's not
directing this its own commanded Act, to such an Object as Christ the Redeemer,
that therefore it gives no Precept and Command of Believing, but that it is the
peculiar Office of the Gospel to do so; that because this particular Kind of
Faith is not specified, and this Way of Acting it on Christ particularly
expressed, that therefore the Duty of Believing comes not within the Limits of
its Commands: I might at this rate of Arguing, prove that the Act of Eating the
fatal Fruit was no Sin, because not expressly forbidden by the Law; for that
regarded it as a thing indifferent, as indeed it was before the Prohibition:
and yet this destroying Act of his was a Sin, and forbidden by the Law, tho not
in a particular Precept, yet as involved in that great One, which commanded him
to obey God in whatever he should require.

It does not therefore by any consequence follow, that the Gospel is a new Law
because it commands Faith as a Duty, and threatens Unbelief, since the old Law
had done the same before, and the Gospel only imploys its Precepts, and applies
them to its own Design and Use. To say that we are enjoined in the Gospel to
believe on Christ as the Redeemer, to deliver us from Sin and Death, will not
weaken the Force of the Argument urged; for the Act even of this Faith is
commanded by the Law, and is its proper Precept: That which belongs to the
Gospel, is to direct this Act to an Object suited and proportioned to help us in
the Misery of our present sinful State. Adam was by the Law commanded to
believe, and trust in God for the Preservation and Continuance of him in
Happiness. And we are commanded to trust in the same God for the Restoring this
lost Happiness, and our Recovery of it again. The Act and Object of Faith, is
the same (Christ being God), and all the Difference is only made by that which
is the Circumstance (tho a deplorable one) of our own Persons. But this will
not alter the Nature of the Faith itself; for if so, then according to the
Variety of these sad Cases and Exigences wherein we trust on Christ, our Faith
would alter to a different Nature. Since then the Faith of Adam, which the
Moral Law commanded him to act on God, was a Trust in him that he would
preserve his innocent Creature in all the Blessedness of his primitive
Condition; and the Faith of a Sinner coming to Christ for Life, is a Trust in
the same God, (he being the second Person of the Divinity) that he will restore
his wretched Creature to its lost Happiness, the Faith is the same in both
Instances as to the Nature of it, (tho the Circumstances of the Persons are
different:) and therefore if our first Father was by the Moral Law commanded to
believe on God, the same Precept requires, and obliges Sinners to believe on
the eternal Son of God.

I know that with a scornful Smile it will be said, that it is an absurd
Assertion to affirm the Precept of Faith to belong to the Law, when the Command
of believing on Christ is perpetually repeated in the Gospel, which only
discovers this Savior of Sinners. It is granted, that we meet with this
Precept in all the Books of the New Testament; but then the Objectors must also
grant, that we find there too the Precepts of loving Christ, of abandoning all
things, and denying our selves for his Sake, of loving our Enemies, of the
Obedience due from Children to their Parents, of the sincere Service which
Servants owe to their Masters: and now if the Gospel is not a New Law in
requiring these Duties, which were all commanded by the old one, it will no
more be a new Law for commanding us to believe, since this has been
demonstrated to be a Precept of the old Law as well as any of the other. All
therefore which can be inferred is, that the Gospel borrows these Precepts from
the old Moral Law, (and then they are not properly its own Commands) and
employs them in its Service, and for the Interests of our Salvation; or to
speak briefly and clearly, in the Words of the Holy Ghost himself, Gal. 3. 19.
the Moral Law is in the hands of Christ our Mediator, and made by him to
subserve his gracious Designs.

The other pretended peculiar Precept of this new Law, is Repentance; and if I
then prove, that by virtue of the old Law, which was a perfect Rule of Duty,
this also was enjoined, and Sinners obliged to it, this will evince, that
neither this is the proper Command of the Gospel. It cannot be denied, that all
which is justly due from one Person to another, is required in the Moral Law;
for it is a complete Rule of Righteousness. It can as little be disputed that
an hearty Acknowledgment of the Wrong with Shame and Sorrow, from a Man who
has injured another, is due to the offended Party; and common Reason and
Justice does engage Men to this, tho no other Reparations can be made. The
owning then of our Offenses with the most inward Mourning, and deepest
Detestation of them, is much more due to God, our Sovereign and Supreme Lord,
tho we are incapable by all this of making him the least Satisfaction. To
confess a Fault, and to express a real Trouble for having done it, is indeed
among Men a making some amends to the wronged Person; for it is some Security
that he shall not be hurt by a second Injury: But all our Sorrow, and
Confession of Sins with Tears, cannot in any degree satisfy, nor repair the
Dishonor and Indignity offered unto God. It is yet our Duty to throw our
selves at his Feet, to express an Abhorrence of our heinous Rebellion against
him; and it is a Duty to which we are bound as Creatures to our Maker, and
Subjects to our Sovereign, who is Lord over all, God blessed for ever. But
what! it will be said, does the Law require Repentance when it made no
Proposals of Pardon for the Crime? Does it require a sorrowful Acknowledgment
of the Fault; and yet the whole Design of it is, that all this shall do the
Offender no good, since it provides not the least Relief for the penitent
Sinner? To what purpose is such a Command, when tho the Sinner sheds floods of
Tears, and mourns out a Life lasting to Eternity of Ages, there is yet no
Remedy tendered by this Law to prevent his being eternally miserable? Yes, for
all this, such a Command of Repentance in the Moral Law, is not only to great
purpose, but absolutely necessary: for to own to God, with Shame and Sorrow,
the Injury we have done him by our Sins, is a Duty which we owe to him our
offended Sovereign, tho he had never promised to forgive us; nay, tho he had
plainly declared that he would never be reconciled. It is a Duty then to which
Adam, after his Fall, was bound by the same Law which he obeyed in his
Innocence; to which he was bound, when amazed with all the Horrors of a
despairing Mind, looking for nothing but Vengeance and Ruin from the Anger and
armed Power of the Almighty. It is a Duty to which he was tied before any new
Covenant of Grace made, and before God had revealed any Thoughts of Favor to
him, or any Purposes of Grace in that first Promise of the Seed of the Woman
breaking the Serpent's Head. If then it was Adam's Duty to repent, before he
had received any Promises of Mercy, there must be some Precept obliging him to
it: since that, and Duty, mutually infer one another, no Precept could it be of
the Gospel, for that was not yet proclaimed, and therefore it must be the
proper Precept of the Moral Law, which was the thing to be proved.

If any one will peremptorily deny Repentance to have been Adam's Duty before
God had promised Mercy, the same Person must consequently assert, that it was
no Fault in him to run from God; that he did very well in excusing himself, in
throwing the great Part of the Guilt upon God, in standing upon his own
Justification; and that if he had continued an obdurate hardened Wretch, if he
had acted as a bold desperate Rebel, and instead of confessing his Crimes, and
expressing his Sorrow, had further dared and outbrav'd offended Justice, he had
been innocent in all this, and had not in the least broken any Precept of the
Law, nor transgressed the Bounds of his Duty. For if Repentance was not
commanded before the Gospel published, then the worst Impenitence in Adam would
have been no Sin, because forbidden by no Law.

I know very well that Arminius boldly affirms all this; Epistola Arminii ad
Utenbogardum in Epistolis praestant. viror. Epist. 70. page 131, 132. Edit. 2.
Amstel. 1684.
That the Covenant of Works being broken, the Law was abrogated too, and that
God no longer required Obedience from his sinful Creature, till he brought in a
new Law, which is the Gospel, commanding Faith and Repentance; and that God
accepts this Obedience to the Precepts of this his new Law, instead of perfect
Obedience to the old violated Moral Law. But I know too very well, that most
prodigious and amazing Absurdities will be the natural Products of this
monstrous Opinion. It will follow, that the first Sin dethroned God, not only
out of Man's Heart, but out of his Seat of Majesty in Heaven too, until to
regain his Crown and Dominion, and for the recovery of his lost Sovereign
Power, he was forced to condescend to treat with his Rebels upon lower Terms,
and to propose a new and milder Law, accommodated to the weaker Circumstances
of their State. Thus God loses his Sovereignty by the Disobedience of his
Creature, and his Laws signified so little, that they were all repealed and
disannulled, when Man would observe them no longer. And who can once think that
the Great God should lose his Power to command, when his Creatures refused any
more to obey him, and that Man by becoming a Rebel, should cease to be a
Subject; and that therefore a new Law, giving new Precepts, and proposing other
more moderate Conditions, was absolutely needful to adjust the desperate
Affair, and to set all things right again?

Adam also by his Fall having, according to the Assertion of Arminius, broken
all Ties and Bonds of Obedience, if before the Promulgation of the Gospel or
new Law to him, he had blasphemed God, had sworn and forsworn, had dissembled
kindness to his Wife with the deepest Oaths, while he had nothing in his Heart
but Thoughts of Malice, and Designs of Revenge against her for betraying him to
ruin, had most barbarously murdered her, and afterward killed himself, he yet
had not sinned in all this; because before the new Law given, he was obliged to
no Duty. Believe this who will, for my part I cannot.

And now, what is the Ground of this desperate Assertion? Why truly only this,
That because the Law once broken, there were no longer any Promises made to the
Obedience of a Sinner; therefore the Covenant between God and Man was entirely
vacated, and so the Sinner was no longer bound to obey, till a new Law came
with other Precepts of Faith, and making Promises to lower degrees of Duty; and
then upon this new Account the Creature stands bound again. Now all this is
founded upon one grand Mistake; which is, that our Obedience to God is
established upon his Covenant with us; and that the only Tie upon us, are
Promises or Threatenings: Whereas our Duty to God immediately results from the
infinite Greatness of his Being, which is therefore supreme, and has an
undoubted Right to command, and from the unalterable Relation of a Creature to
his Maker. So that Adam, as soon as he had Existence, was presently bound to
obey God in all that he would command him, tho he had made no Promise to him of
any Reward. And if God had placed him in a dismal Desert, instead of settling
him in Paradise; if he had sharpened his Life with Sorrows and Miseries, in the
room of those Blessings and Comforts which he enjoyed, yet he might have
commanded him all that he pleased, and it would have been his Duty to have paid
a ready Obedience. And this clears the Difficulty lying in our way, that tho
the Law made no Promises to Sinners, as the Gospel does, yet that hinders it
not from commanding and engaging them to repent; for by what I have proved, it
appears, that Promises do not lay the Foundation of a Duty, but are only the
Encouragements of it. Well then, tho Adam saw not any thing in the Law to renew
Life to a Penitent Offender, tho he could not read in it one Syllable of a
Pardon, yet the same Law which required Obedience of him, commanded after he
had sinned, to repent, and return to his Duty; tho he had no hopes of
succeeding in it, and had no assurance that a justly provoked and angry God
would forgive, and descried not the least Promise shining in Heaven to favor
him.

And as it was Adam's Duty to repent, so it is the Duty of all Men now living
upon Earth: A Duty, to which Heathens who are not under the Dispensation of the
Gospel, to whom this new-stil'd Law never came, who never heard a word of its
pretended Precepts or real Promises, are indispensably obliged. Whence have
they this binding Precept of Repentance? From the Gospel? How can that be, when
the least Sound of it never arrived to their Ears? It must therefore
necessarily be a Precept and Command of the Moral Law to them, which more or
less is manifested to all, even the most savage and barbarous Nations of the
Earth.

The Design and Office of the Law does also manifest, that the Precept of
Repentance does properly belong to it: For it was not only appointed as a Rule
of Obedience to Adam, but God certainly knowing that Man would fall into a
State of Sin and Death, intended the Law for the Conviction of Sinners, to show
them their Sinfulness and Danger, Romans 3. 19, 20. Now we know that what things
soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law; that every Mouth
may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before God. Therefore by
the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his sight: for by
the Law is the Knowledge of Sin. Romans 7. 7. He designed it to rouse and alarm
the poor negligent Creatures. And now if it convinces them of Sin, its
malignant Nature and direful Effects, it consequently tells them, that it is
their Duty to bewail their Miscarriages, which bring all Miseries upon them,
and to reform their evil Courses, and to turn from Sin to God. This the Law
preaches to Men, and these are the natural Dictates of it in their
Consciences; and it is impossible to persuade them (till God comes with the
Power of his Grace, and works Faith) against putting their Confidence in their
Sorrow and repenting, to obtain Pardon by it, and against trusting to their
Resolutions of living better for the future; and against their fond Presumption
of being justified for their endeavors of Amendment, These legal Principles
are natural in Men, they arise not from the Gospel, for that instructs us to
put our whole and entire Confidence in Christ, and his Righteousness alone;
they must then spring from the Law, and consequently Repentance, which this Law
not only urges Men unto, but moves them to build their Hopes of Life upon it,
must be one of its Precepts. The Law commands it, the Gospel as a Proclamation
of Grace, and an Offer of Pardon only, invites and encourages it.

Thus it is sufficiently proved, that Sinners were by the Moral Law obliged to
own their Sins with the most bewailing Expressions of Grief, tho that Law gave
them no Encouragement and Hope; and that Adam after his Fall was engaged to
this Sorrow and Contrition, before any promise of Pardon and Acceptance
tendered. If we now consider the other and chiefest part of Repentance, it will
be evident that this was not only required of the Father of Mankind fallen, but
that it was his Duty, and what he practiced in all the time of his Innocence
and flourishing Condition: For what is Repentance mainly, but an hearty
abhorrence of Sin, joined with a most careful Avoidance of it, and a most firm
Resolution against it? Now this was as surely in Adam, when continuing the same
upright Creature which God had made him, as it is certain that then he was
holy, Holiness and hatred of Sin being altogether inseparable; and therefore
unless we will suppose our first Father to have been unholy in his original
Being, we must not doubt of his daily acting of this principal and most
considerable part of Repentance. I call it so, because it is that which to
bring forth the other is appointed: for we are not commanded to mourn, and to
bewail our Follies and Miscarriages, merely for the sake of vexing and
tormenting our selves, or as if by the inward Anguish of our Souls, we were to
do Penance to pacify a displeased God; but all this trouble of Mind for Sin, is
intended and required to imbitter it to us, and to render us vile in our own
Eyes, and to throw us humbled before the Throne of Grace. For tho we are
Sinners, and poor and miserable, yet we are naturally proud, and therefore a
Sense of our Sin and Misery is requisite to bring down our haughty Spirits; tho
we also daily feel the dismal Mischiefs of Sin, yet our depraved Natures render
us too prone, and readily inclined unto it; and therefore a piercing Sorrow is
necessary to bring us to that true Repentance of which I am speaking, which
consists in hating Sin, and turning from it. It is but needful that an aching
Wound make us sensible of the malignant Mischief of Sin, to render it the
Object of our highest Aversion. Well then, it is hatred of Sin, and an hearty
resistance of it, which is the last and chiefest Act of Repentance, since our
Sorrow is designed only to produce this Effect, and so after all to hate Sin;
and most carefully to avoid it, is most truly to repent of it. And this
Repentance our first Father, even in his Innocence, acted to a higher degree
than we do, since his detestation of Sin was greater; and till the sad Moments
of his Fall, he opposed it more firmly and successfully.

But it will be objected, Repentance supposes the Person to have sinned, and
therefore a Precept of it to Adam in his Uprightness was altogether needless.
No not at all, for a Precept to oblige Man to what is due and just, is
necessary for him in every Condition; and nothing can be more due than to
acknowledge a Wrong done: And what is Repentance, but an hearty owning and
lamenting the highest Injury offered to God by our Sins? And besides, God in
making a Law, gave such a perfect Rule as was sufficient to bind Man to his
Duty in all Circumstances of his Case; and therefore it was not only modeled
to oblige him to perfect Obedience, but to engage him to repent when he had
failed of his Duty.

Well, but some may argue against what I before said concerning Faith's being a
Precept of the Original Law given to Adam, that tho it is true, that Faith in
God is required in the first Commandment, yet there is no Faith in a Redeemer
expressed. What then? It is yet plainly implied, since this our Redeemer is
God, and therefore a general Command to trust on God at all Times, and
according to the various Necessities of our State, must include a Precept to
believe on Christ the Redeemer, when the sad State of our Case does require it.

Ay, but the Law (will they object) was given to Man in Innocence, and
therefore only tied him to such Acts of Obedience as were proper to that
Condition; and therefore such Duties which result from Man's being a Sinner,
such as Faith and Repentance, were not enclosed within the compass of this Law.
Yes, but they were, and that for the same Reason as such Duties which arise
from the present Relations which Men bear to one another, which are the
Consequents of Adam's Fall, are comprehended in the Precepts of the Moral Law.
By this a Slave is obliged to perform Service to his Master; and yet if Man had
not sinned, there had been no such thing as Slavery. By this also Judges are
bound to do Justice in punishing Malefactors, and yet in Man's Primitive State
of Integrity, there were no Rogues and Villains, nor any need of Judges or
Sheriffs.

This is strange indeed (it will be said) to deny the Gospel to be a Law
commanding Faith and Repentance, when nothing is more frequently inculcated and
earnestly urged in the Sermons of Christ, and the Writings of the Apostles,
than that Sinners should repent, and should believe on him. It Is readily
confessed; but yet from what has been argued, it must be owned, that these are
Precepts of the Law made use of by the Gospel, and encouraged by its Promises.
We are not presently to fasten every thing on the Gospel, strictly taken, as it
is the Word of Salvation which we find in the Books of the New Testament; and
because Christ and his Apostles give us Rules of Holiness, immediately name the
Gospel a New Law. For after this rate of Reasoning, we may infer too that it is
a Book of Lives, because the Life and Death of our Savior, and the Acts of the
Apostles, are recorded in it; that it is the Levitical Law, because the Apostle
Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, insists on so many Particulars of it. That
it is the Ceremonial Law, because the said Apostle circumcised Timothy, Act.
16. 1. That it is a Sacred Chronicle, and the Annals of the Church, because it
contains the History of the Beginnings and first Progress of Christianity. Thus
if we frame Arguments by these Measures, we may make the Gospel any thing that
we please, or would fancy it to be.

I have thus (as I think) cleared the Difficulty which arises from our finding
the Precepts of Faith and Repentance, so frequently enjoined in the New
Testament, and have demonstrated that all such Instances will not serve the
Purpose of evincing the Gospel to be a new Law. The next Rank of Arguments to
be broken is this, that it is alleged that the Gospel denounces Threatenings
against unbelieving and impenitent Sinners, and makes general Promises, that
every one who believes and repents, in obedience to its Command, shall
certainly be saved. If I now then prove that these Threatenings are not of the
Gospel, but that it only leaves the Sinner, who by Faith has no Interest in
Christ, to the condemning Sentence of the Law, without any Defense or Plea, or
the least Excuse for himself: And if I also prove, that the Gospel makes no
such universal Promises of Eternal Life to all Men, on condition they believe,
I shall then clear the Way through my Reverend Brother's first thick Set of
Arguments, formed from twenty Texts of Scripture enumerated by him.

One plain Text of Scripture evinceth, that the Gospel judges and condemns
no Man, but leaves the unbelieving Sinner to a fair Trial at Law, and to make
the best of it that he can. It Is what Christ, who came to save Sinners, and
perfectly knew his own Design and Work, tells us, John 3. 17. For God sent not
his Son into the World to condemn the World; but that the World through him
might be saved. What could he have said more to assure us, that in the
Declaration of the Gospel he did not threaten Death, but promise Salvation to
Sinners, whom the Law menaced, and who were condemned by its Sentence; that he
came not as a new Legislator, to give new Laws, and to pronounce a fatal Doom
against those that disobeyed them, but to rescue poor sentenced Criminals from
the rigorous Judgment of the Law, and to assure them of a Pardon? He came not
to condemn the World, but to save all those whom God had appointed to Life, and
consequently to believe on him. But if Christ had brought in a new Law, with
Precepts and Threatenings, then one Design of his coming had been to condemn the
Disobedient. Our Blessed Redeemer took an effectual Care that we should not
have such a Thought of him; and therefore he repeats the same Assertion, John
12. 47. And if any Man hear my Words, and believe not, I judge him not; for I
came not to judge the World, but to save the World. He does not threaten, much
less judge and condemn an Unbeliever: He knew that Salvation of Sinners was the
Work which he came into the World to perform, and that the Office of a Judge did
not belong to a Mediator. He accordingly disowns it, and leaves to the Law its
proper Duty, which is to pass Sentence of Death on every Sinner, who cannot
plead the Blood and Righteousness of Christ for his Discharge; and this all
Unbelievers dying in that woeful Condition are incapable to do. Thus the Gospel
condemns no Man, but it is the Law; and those who believe not, shall be judged
by it, for violating its just and righteous Commands, and are exposed
defensless and liable to Justice. Those who believe not on Christ, are
presently condemned by the old Law in force against them who have in the least
Instance disobeyed it; and there is no need that any Sentence of a new Law
should be passed against them to this Effect. If any should deny the Argument,
I am yet confident they will have a regard to the express Words of Christ
himself, which are to the same Pupose, John 3. 18. He that believes on him, is
not condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. What is this but to
say, that he introduced no new Law to condemn the wretched and desperately lost
Sinner for not believing on him, since he was before condemned for the Offenses
committed against the Moral Law? But it will be urged, What is more frequently
pronounced by Christ and his Apostles, against all Unbelievers, than an
unavoidable Ruin and Damnation? such Threatenings are almost as thickly
scattered in the New Testament, as the Promises of Grace. What then! will it
thence follow that the Gospel, which is a Doctrine of Grace, is also a dreadful
threatening Law? No certainly, for these two are altogether inconsistent. All
then which can be concluded, is only this, that the Gospel repeats the
Threatenings of the Law, to show Sinners their Danger if they do not believe.
This Gospel only tells them what severe Measure they will have from a violated
Law, if they are not enclosed within the compass of the Mediator's Favor and
Blessings. It plainly and sincerely declares to them, that they can expect
nothing but certain Death from a Law which kills the Sinner, if they refuse the
only healing Remedy which Christ offers. Thus it is told to a Patient, That he
will certainly die, if he takes not the prescribed Physic: And yet who will
say that this Threatening is any part of the Medicine? Thus the Physician
pronounces Death to a Man, who when mortally Sick, wilfully refuses to
observe his Directions. And how absurd is it from this to imagine, that he who
came to cure, designed to murder him, when it is only the Disease, and his own
Obstinacy, which have this fatal Effect?

It Is true indeed, that an Unbeliever's Guilt is aggravated by his Contempt of
the Gospel; and by rejecting Mercy, and despising the Riches of God's Grace, he
lays himself open to a severer Sentence, brings an heavier Ruin on his Head,
and sharpens his own Punishment. For as the Fire of Hell is the Wrath of God,
and the avenging Furies of Conscience, those Flames will burn with more
fierceness in a Soul, which makes terrible Reflections how while it lived in
this World, it slighted that Grace and that Redeemer, by which others were
saved. Thus a Pardon offered to Rebels, does not condemn them for not accepting
it; the Refusal only leaves them exposed to the Severity of the Law, by which
the unpardoned Offender is judged and condemned: Tho indeed the Criminal
recalling to mind the Pardon once offered him, and his own obstinate Contempt
of Mercy, will, with greater Horrors of Soul, at the Place of Execution, curse
his own Folly and Madness, as the Cause of his infamous Death.

There now remains nothing more than to show, that the Promises of Eternal Life
made to the Believer, and the Ruin denounced against every Unbeliever, do not
prove the Gospel to be a new Law; and that such Expressions as these, which we
so often meet, He who believes shall be saved; and except you repent, you shall
all likewise perish, do not speak Faith and Repentance to be properly commanded
by the Gospel, nor promises Pardon and Justification, on condition these
Precepts are obeyed, nor threatens Death if they are neglected. That it is not
the Gospel, but the Law which threatens Death, I have already proved; that the
Promises of the Gospel are not made unto Men, on condition of Obedience
performed to it, is evident from this, that if they were so, they would not
differ in their Nature from the Promises of the Law, and so the Covenant of
Grace would be a Covenant of Works: which if the Apostle Paul says true, (as I
really believe he does) is a flat Contradiction, Romans 11. 6. And if by Grace,
then is it no more of Works: otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of
Works, then is it no more Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. For the
Promises of the Law were made to Men, on condition that its Precepts were
obeyed. If now the Promises of the Gospel are also made to Men, on condition
that its Precepts are obeyed, then the Promises, both of the one and the other,
are of the same Nature and King, being both made to Obedience. It is but a poor
shifting Evasion, to say, that there is a great difference, because that the
Law requires perfect unsinning Obedience, and the Gospel insists only on lower
degrees of Duty: for this will not so much as prove the Obedience to be of
different Kinds, but only of greater or lesser Measures, which, as every one
knows, does not alter the Species. But if it should be granted, that Obedience
to the Law is of a various Nature from that enjoined by the Gospel, yet the
Promises made to them both must be of the same Kind, for both of them are
Works: since to obey a Precept, is to do a Work, or I know not what to make of
it; and all the Difference then is, that the Promises of the Covenant of Works
were made to Obedience to the old Law, and the Promises of the new Covenant of
Grace were made to Obedience unto the new Law. Both are Promises to the
Obedience of Laws, and the two Laws will be distinguished no otherwise, than
that the one proves to be older than the other by many Ages. And thus the
Gospel will be only the superannuated Law of Works revived, with some
Abatements of its required Duties. And if this be not as utterly false as there
is Truth in the Scriptures, (as I am sure there is) let all unprejudiced Men
judge. And yet this absurd Confusion of Law and Gospel, is the unavoidable
Consequence of this Annertion, that the Gospel promises Justification and
Eternal Life to Men, on condition they perform the Obedience which it commands.

If also from this Proposition, He that believes shall be saved, we argue that
the Gospel is a new Law, promising Life upon the observance of this its
Precept, it will follow, that God in the promulgation of this new Law, offers
Life universally to all Men, to Tartars, Negroes, and the Savages in America;
to all the Nations from Peru to Japan, on condition they obey the Command of
the Gospel, and believe and repent: For if God in giving his Moral Law to all
reasonable Creatures, said universally to Angels and Men, Do this, and you
shall live; by the same Rule, if the Gospel is a new Law, God speaks generally
to all Men, Believe, and you shall live. Now from this, two amazing Absurdities
will naturally spring; the one is, that God should by this his new Law promise
Pardon and Life, on condition they believe on his Son, to People who have never
heard that there is such a thing as the Christian Religion in the World, nor
such a Person as Christ, and to whose Ears not so much as the sound of his Name
ever arrived. Does this become the Wisdom of God to act so preposterously? How
can we think that the Depths of that Knowledge, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.
33. has such shallow Designs, as to proclaim a Pardon to all Men, on condition
they believe, and yet to make no Provision that the least Syllable of this
gracious Proclamation should ever come to their Ears? It is also as repugnant
to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to promise a Pardon to all Men, on condition
they believe, when he knows that the Performance is impossible to them all, by
their mere natural Powers depraved as they are; when he knows also, that
without his All-conquering Grace they cannot believe and repent: To promise to
them all Life, on condition they do so, and at the same time to resolve to
withhold this Grace from the greatest part of Mankind, without which it is
impossible for them to do it, what is this but to illude Men? For any one to
offer Food to a Wretch, who has not a Limb whole, starving in a Dungeon, on
condition that he would come up and receive it, and yet refuse to put forth a
Finger to give him the least lift, what would this be but to mock him, and to
make a sport of his Misery? To avoid these Absurdities, the Arminians, who do
not want Wit or Reason to discern the Consequences of their Opinions, as boldly
own and maintain them: And as they assert, that God offers and promises Life
to all, on condition they perform Obedience to this new Law; they speak
consistently with themselves, and affirm too, that all Men have sufficient
Means afforded them to do it, and that God gives them Helps enough to enable
them to believe if they will, and whenever themselves please. If we are then
fond of any Arminian Opinions, we must take the whole System of them together,
and assert roundly, as they do, without mincing the Matter, what has an
inseparable Connection with a false Proposition: for there are Consequences
among Errors, as well as Truths; and as the one are chained, the other are
linked together.

We may then be certain, that these Expressions in Scripture, [ He that
believes, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16.
16. And whoever believes on Christ, shall receive remission of Sins, Acts 10.
43. And except you repent, you shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 5.] which
are urged by my Reverend Brother Mr. Lorimer' s Apology, Chap. 2. Sect. 1. page
22.
, do not signify that God passes his Word to all Men, by a new Law established
among them, that if they obey it, and believe and repent, they shall assuredly
be saved: for God always speaks the Purposes of his Mind, and none of his Words
contradict his Heart; but he never decreed, either absolutely or conditionally,
that all Men should be eternally happy; for if he had, he would have taken
effectual Care that they should be so, since the Intents of his Mind and Will
always obtain infallibly their desired Effect.

If we also understand that Expression, He who believes, shall be saved, that
it is promised to all, that on the performance of this Condition they shall be
thus eternally blessed; then by the same Rule we must say, that eternal Death
and Ruin is threatened to them, on condition they do not believe. But the
Threatenings of this Woe are not denounced against Men for not believing, but as
due to them for not perfectly obeying the Law of Works; and their Unbelief only
leaves them in that perishing Condition wherein they were born, as I have
proved before, tho, as I said, their Unbelief aggravates the Misery, and
inflames the Anguish of it.

But what meaning then must we apprehend these Scriptures to bear? Why truly
they have the same Sense as that Text in Heb. 12. 14. Follow Peace with all
Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. What! is Holiness
the Condition of obtaining the Beatifical Vision? No; tho it does naturally
dispose the Soul, and make it meet for and capable of this blissful Enjoyment.
No more therefore is meant, than that Holiness, and this Vision of God, are
inseparably joined together, and that no unholy Soul can possibly come to his
Presence and Sight. Thus it is also true, that he who believes, shall be saved;
which imports no more than this, that all Believers are saved, and none but
they; and that there is such an unchangeable Connection between the Blessings of
the Gospel, that Faith, Repentance and Holiness, are indissolubly fastened with
Pardon, Justification, and Eternal Life, in the same Person; or in a Word, that
God justifies and saves no Man, but whom at his own due appointed Time he makes
a Believer, brings him to Repentance, (I speak in this of Adult Persons) and
sanctifies his Nature: and whoever asserts this, is no Antinomian, nor so much
as like to such an execrable Monster, however invidious Names are flung about
as thick as Stones in the Streets.

I might insist more largely on this Argument, but I begin to think that the
Consideration of it will more properly belong to another Discourse, wherein I
design, with the Assistance of my Lord Jesus Christ, (who has helped me in
this, beyond the natural Abilities of my own Mind, to him be all the Glory) to
prove, that the Covenant of Grace does not promise nor confer the Blessings on
condition of performing Duties required.

CHAP. VIII.
Those Texts of Scripture (which are urged by the Apologist, as expressly giving
the Name of a New Law to the Gospel) recovered to their right Sense. His
Testimonies out of the Fathers, and Protestant Writers, evinced to be useless
to serve his Design.

I Shall now examine those Texts alleged by my Dear Brother, wherein the
Gospel is called a Law; and the Citations produced by him, wherein the Fathers
and Protestant Authors give to it the same Name. I shall do it but briefly, for
I need not be large, since any Reader who has, with any intention of Mind,
perused my poor Writing, may resolve them all at first sight.

The first Text produced is, that known one in Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting
then? It is excluded. By what Law? of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith.
Without looking on the Context, we may be satisfied by what the Apostle says
in the same Verse, that by the Law of Faith, he means no more than that
Doctrine of Grace which declares a believing Sinner to be justified by the
Righteousness of Christ, which by Faith he receives; for it is such a Law of
Faith that excludes all boasting. Now then, if it commanded Faith, and promised
Justification, on condition that this its Precept was obeyed, Boasting would
not be excluded, but rather a great Occasion would be given to promote it: For
why should not a Man glory in his Faith, if it be an Act of Obedience to this
new Law, which by the Statute of it makes his Justification to depend on this
his Performance? He may then as well plead that he has done what was required;
and so he may as well claim Life and Happiness, on the Account of having done
all that this new Law made necessary to Salvation; as Adam, if continuing in
his Primitive State, might have formed a Plea of his Right to Life, for having
discharged all that Duty which the Law of Works commanded and proposed, as the
Condition of his being eternally Blessed. If he might have boasted for having
faithfully observed the Covenant of Works, the Believer too may assume some
Glory to himself for having acted his Duty punctually to the Law of Faith; if
the Constitution of this Law be such, that it makes the promised Salvation
dependant upon this his Obedience in believing. It will signify nothing to say,
that the Law by which Adam was to have been justified, enjoined Works as the
Terms of his being so; but that this new Law insists only on two Acts of
Obedience, Faith and Repentance, as all that it requires for our Justification:
For these two are Works done by us, and so we might boast that we have done
something, tho not arising to that height of Duty incumbent on our first
Father; by which, according to the Tenor of this new Law, we are justified. By
the Opposition which the Apostle makes of the Law of Faith to a Law of Works,
it is also manifest, that by the first he intends a pure Doctrine of Grace, and
by the other a Law, commanding something to be done: For if the Law of Faith
requires any Works, and constituted them to be Conditions of our obtaining the
Blessings; make these Works as few as you will, and call them by what Names you
please, Faith and Repentance, yet this will result from it, that both are Laws
of Works; only with this difference, that the one rigorously insists on more
Works than the other: which how this may consist with that Opposition the
Apostle forms between them, I cannot very well apprehend.

We must therefore by the Law of Faith understand, not a Law in the strict and
proper Sense, prescribing Works of any sort as Conditions, but only the
Doctrine of Faith, and of the Believer's Justification by Christ's
Righteousness which Faith receives. It is thus all the right Protestant
Divines, who have commented on this Epistle, interpret the Apostle's meaning;
tho the Popish Annotators wrest it to the same Purpose for which it is brought
in by my Reverend Brother, as I shall prove by many Instances.

It would be tedious to multiply Citations of the hundredth part of Protestant
Expositors on this Epistle; Calvin and Beza may alone suffice. Legis quidem
nomen improprie fidei tribuitur. Calvin. in Romans 3. 27. page 49. part. 3. Tom.
5. Edit. Genev. 1617.
The Name of Law indeed (says Calvin) is improperly attributed to Faith. Per
quam Legem? (...); id est, Qua Doctrina Beza in Romans 3. 27.
By what Law, that is, (says Beza) by what Doctrine.

The Popish Commentators indeed universally interpret this Romans 3. 27. to
design the Gospel to be a new Gracious Law. Thus Aquinas Lect. 4. in Romans 3
page 30. Antverp. 1620.
Aquinas, and the Cardinal Cajetan. in Romans 3. 27. in Tom. 5. Comment. in
Script. Lugd. 1639.
Cajetan; Arias Montanus, in Romans 3. 27. in sua Elucidat. Epist. Apost. Edit.
Plant. Antverp. 1588.
Arias Montanus; Ambros. Catharin. in Romans 3. 27. 28. in ejus Comment. in
Epist. Paul. page 38. Paris. 1566.
Ambrosius Catharinus, Bishop of Minori; Cornelius Mussas, Comment. in Romans 3.
page 184, 185, 186. Venet. 1588.
Cornelius Mussus, Bishop of Bitonto; the four Jesuits, Benedict. Justin. in
Romans 3. 27. in Tom. 1. Explant. in Epist. Paul. Lugd. 1612.
Benedictus Justinianus, Cor. a Lapide, in Romans 3. 27, 28.
Cornelius a Lapide, Estius, in Romans 3. 27.
Estius, and Adamus Contzen. Comment. in Romans 3. 17. Quaest. 2. page 175, 176.
Col. Agrip. 1629.
Adamus Contzen. This last orders his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans,
in a way of Disputation, to refute the Heretics, as he calls all those who
believe the pure Truths of the Gospel. One great Doctrine of these No-Hereticks
is, that the Gospel is no Law. This supposed Error the Jesuit applies himself
to confute; and in resolving that Question, What is the Law of Works? and what
the Law of Faith? he first propounds Bellarmine's Decision of it; the Sum
whereof is, that the Gospel is a Law of Works too, but accompanied with Grace.
But there is an Objection of Paraeus in the way, That if the Gospel be a Law,
as containing in it Precepts and Commands, then the Distinction which the
Apostle makes between the Law of Faith, and Law of Works, cannot be preserved;
for both of them will agree in commanding Works, however different those Works
may be which they enjoin, and therefore they both of them must necessarily be
Laws of Works; unless any one will be so accurate a Disputant, as to deny a Law
to be a Law, or Works to be Works. To remove this Objection, Contzen, (who
being a Jesuit, was very well skilled in all the Arts of Shuffling as well as
any Man, and knew the necessary Doubles and Turnings when he was hunted) like a
Politician in Divinity, makes this evasive Answer; That both Laws command, and
yet the Law of Faith is not a Law of Works, though it commands Works; because
it has the Aids of Grace, by which the Works are performed. Therefore the Law
of Faith is a Law of Grace, the Law of Works is without Grace. This is strange
indeed; What! the Gospel commands, and yet is not a Law of Works; that is, the
Gospel commands, without bidding us to do any thing; or to do, is not to work,
but I know not what without a Name. Ay, but it is not a Law of Works, because
it contains in it Grace, as a supply of Succor to enable us to perform them.
But this only proves the Works of their new Gospel to be easier, not that they
are none at all. The best which can be made of it amounts to no more than this,
that their Gospel is a gracious Law of Works, a Law whose Exactions are not so
hard and cruel as those of the Tyrannical Egyptians, to require Brick without
Straw, a Law whose Commands are moderated, and its lesser degrees of Duty
accommodated to the weakness of our present State; and therefore it is not all
Work, bu there is an Alloy of a great mixture of Grace. This seems to be fairly
offered to compound the Business: but what if the Apostle refuses the
Composition? And indeed, in my poor Judgment, (if a Man may know his Meaning by
his Words) it will not be admitted by him; for he opposes the Gospel, or Law
of Faith, to any Law of Works whatever, and however named gracious, or rendered
attractive by any other amiable Titles.

But in the Close of the Dispute, this Jesuit Contzen joyfully cries out,
Victory; And what animated his Courage? Really it was only this, that he
thought any more of his Learned Labors in this Affair were wholly superseded,
by a great many of the Protestants owning the same Assertion (which he
endeavored to prove) of the Gospel's being a new Law. But what are the
Trophies of Conquest which he shows to this purpose? only Bertius the Arminian,
who afterward turned Papist, and was advanced by the French King to be
Professor of History at Paris Rivet. in Cap. 15. Genes. Exercitat. 84. page
321. Tom. 1. oper. Roterod. 1651. Alessandro Zilioli, Histor. Memorab. de
nostri Tempi, part. 2. lib. 2. page 46. Bologn. 1645.
.

I wish that my Reverend Brother had not offered that place in Gal. 6. 2. not
only on the account of its perfect refusal to serve his Design, but because the
Papists and Arminians press it to the same purpose, of proving from it the
Gospel to be a new Law, and Christ a new Lawgiver, and I would not have him to
be seen in such Company; the entire words of the Verse are these, Gal. 6. 2.
Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. There needs no
more than to read them, to be satisfied that they signify nothing to the Intent
for which they are introduced: For the Law of Christ does not import the
Gospel, but (as all Commentators agree) only that particular Precept of the
Moral Law urged by Christ, Joh. 13. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, That
ye love one another: as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. And we
may as well prove from hence, that there are Eleven Commandments, as that the
Gospel is a new Law. The Arminian Vorstius, and the Jesuit Estius, the better
of the two, infer the same Error from this Gal. 6. 2. as my Learned Brother
does; Ex quibus omnibus etiam patet, Christum non solum ut redemptorem
hominibus datum esse; cui fidant, ut volunt Haeretici; sed etiam ut
Legislatorem cui obediant. Estius in Gal. 6. 2.
From all it is manifest, (says Estius) that Christ is not only given to Men as
a Redeemer, to whom they may trust, (as the Heretics will have it) but also as
a Legislator, whom they may obey. Christus non modo servator, rerum etiam
Legislator agnoscendus est, quippe cujus summa Lex est charitas, quam veluti
novam Legem, novo modo nobis imperavit, novoque exemplo confirmavit. Verstius
in Gal. 6. 2. page 273. Comment. in Epist. Apost. Amstelod. 1631.
Christ is to be acknowledged, (says Vorstius) not only as a Savior, but also
as a Lawgiver, inasmuch as his chiefest Law is Love, which as a new Law he
has commanded to us in a new manner, and has confirmed it by a new Example.
This is that Vorstius who denied the Omnipresence of the Infinite God, and who
advanced a wicked Opinion, not only to imprison him in Heaven, but to bind the
immense Divinity in Chains to his Throne there; and who asserted God to be
mutable, and to change his Mind and Will as often as a fickle inconstant Man
Vorstius de Deo Disp. 3. page 19. and Notae in Disp. 3. page 215 ad 217.
Steinfurt. 1610. Ibid. Disp. 6. page 64. and Notae in Disp. 6. page 365, 366.
Et Apologet. Exeg. Cap. 11. page 46, 47, etc. Lugd. Bat. 1611.
.

The other place of Scripture, Isa. 42. 4. cited by my Learned Brother, is no
more effectual to prove his Assertion than any of the former: The whole Verse
is thus, Isa. 42. 4. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set
Judgment in the Earth: and the Isles shall wait for his Law. That by his Law is
meant a Declaration of Free Grace, is apparent from the genuine Sense of the
Hebrew word, which in our English Bibles is translated, [ they shall wait for
his Law] the Hebrew word (...), signifies they shall hope, with earnest Desires
expect it: And thus Piscator, who had an unquestionable Skill in that Language,
renders it. We may then by a necessary Consequence conclude, that by Law here
is meant, a publication of Free Grace by Christ, since the poor Sinners of the
Gentiles could not desire or hope for any other. But without any Criticisms on
the Hebrew Language, the foregoing Verse of the Prophet Isaiah, instructs us to
a right understanding of the following, Isa. 42. 3. A bruised Reed shall he not
break; and the smoking Flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth Judgment
unto Truth. Now if Christ had brought in a new Law, with Precepts superadded to
the old One, this would have been to break the bruised Soul with repeated
Strokes in greater strength and fierceness.

There is another Scripture produced by my Learned Brother to be examined,
which he urges to prove, That the Gospel as a new Law promises Blessings to
the Performers of its Precepts, and threatens to punish all those who neglect
them; Luke 19. 27. But those mine Enemies which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Now as I think, who am very
willing to be better informed, our blessed Lord Jesus asserts only his Right as
Universal Monarch of the World; which we are so far from denying, that we
heartily pray that his Kingdom may come in all the Shine of its Glory, as we
are sure it will at the determined Time.

Well, but to soften the harsh word Law, he adds the more allaying one of
Grace. But this will not do the Business, for a Law prescribing Works is no
Covenant of Grace, if it be true what the Apostle says, Romans 11. 6. And if by
Grace, then is it no more of Works: otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it
be of Works, then is it no more Grace: otherwise Work is no more Work.
Therefore his no angry Brethren, are in no Passion to hear the Voice of the
Law, if the old Moral One, as a continuing Rule to Believers, is meant; and
they are very glad of the joyful Sound of Grace, they only gaze and admire at
the strange Prodigy of those two unnaturally joined together, to compound a
Covenant of Grace.

And tho with the greatest rejoicing we most thankfully accept God's new
Covenant of Grace, yet we cannot own a new Law of his making, till we hear it
more clearly proclaimed by God himself.

I must confess I was a little surpised at what I next read in my Reverend
Brother's Learned Discourse; The Law of Grace we speak of, (says he) is both
New and Old in different respects: It is New in respect of the Covenant of
Works made with Adam in his State of Innocence Mr. Lorimer 's Apology, Chap. 2.
Sect. 1. page 22.
. What! is it a new Law of a fresher Date, that the old One being useless, God
saw it needful to promulgate another, lowered to lesser degrees of Duty, and so
suited to the present Estate of Sinners? I am confident my Learned Brother will
not assert this, tho it unhappily falls out that his Words seem to imply it
Ibid. page 24.
.

There remains nothing more than to examine his Humane Authorities; which I
will do, tho there is the greatest uncertainty in the Citation of Authors to
abet an Opinion, when Men only take care and labor to wrack and torture them
to a forced Confession of their own Sense: For if the Words of the Holy Ghost
himself, who delivered his Meaning most distinctly, and with the greatest
exactness, are yet wrested and perverted to contrary Purposes, all Humane
Writings are much more liable to be disfigured by wrong Interpretations.

I will yet consider in order the several Authorities alleged; and first as to
that of Justin Martyr. Any one who distinctly regards the Design of that
Father's Writing, will see, that however he makes use of the word Law, by which
to name the Gospel, yet by Law he means no more, than a new Doctrine or
Dispensation of Grace. For his Design is to prove, against a Jew who was a
great Admirer of his own Law, and its august Ceremonies and Worship, That all
that solemn Pomp was excelled by the plain Evangelical Doctrine; that this new
Discovery of the Blessings of Grace in the real and solid Substance, was
infinitely preferable to all the old Representations and Shadows of those good
Things: And therefore by this new Law, or this new Instruction of Grace coming,
those old Rudiments go off as useless to teach us any longer. The Gospel as a
new Doctrine of Grace appearing, the old Institutions of Sacrifices and
External Rites, civilly are to withdraw, to give place to a superior and
better Instructor. To prove this is the Design of that Father's Dialogue
against the Jew; and all that can be gathered from his calling the Gospel a New
Law, is only this, that it is a fuller and clearer Revelation of the Grace of
God in Christ, as is evident from what follows a little after those Words cited
by my Learned Brother, where Justin Martyr expresses his Meaning about the
Gospel's being a New Law, (...). Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. page 229. oper.
Edit. Paris. 1636.
that it is so as it is a new and clearer Dispensation of Grace: for having
cited that Place in Isa. 55. 3, 4. expressing the Nature of the Gospel, and
upbraiding the Jew for his Confidence in old Legal Performances, in
Circumcision, in eating unleavened Bread, in washing in the Laver of Water, in
the Blood of Sheep and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer; It is not by these,
says he, that Sinners are purified, but by the Blood of Christ, and his Death;
who died for that very Purpose, as Esa himself has spoketh it. And then he
largely recites the six last Verses of the 52d Chapter, and Chap. 53. entire,
and the six first Verses of the 54th Chapter of that Prophet; which contain the
most clear and full Discovery of the Doctrine of Grace, as is in all the old
Testament. So that all which the Father intends by the Name of a new Law given
to the Gospel, is, that it is a Doctrine of Grace newly revealed: And in this
Sense, I am very willing to call it so too.

But let us see if Cyprian gives his Vote for my Learned Brother. It is true,
that he speaks frequently in his 11th Epistle of the Law of the Gospel; but it
is certain, that as he wrote this Epistle to complain of, and to rectify the
Relaxation of Discipline in the Churches, that those who had fallen into great,
and notorious Sins, were yet readmitted into Communion before they had given
any Testimony of their Repentance; so by the Law of the Gospel he means only
that due Discipline, which ought to be observed in all the Churches of Christ
Goulartii notae in Cyprian. Epist. 11. page 33. oper. Cyprian. Edit. Goulartii,
Genev. 1593.
.

When Cyprian also speaks of a new Law which was to be given, he writing
against the Jews, and proving the Abolition of their Ceremonial Worship, means
no more by the new Law than what Justin Martyr did; that is, a new Doctrine,
and Institution of Grace: And this the very words of Cyprian, cited by my
Learned Brother, wherein he calls this new Law, Another Administration, and
that by it the old intolerable Yoke of Ligal Observances was removed, do
evidence.

The next Father, who is forced to come in to give witness to this new Law, is
Augustine: But what he says will not at all serve the Cause. For in that his
Discourse of Grace and Free Will, his Design is to prove against the Pelagians,
that Man by the best use of his natural Powers, cannot obey the Precepts of the
Moral Law; but that the Grace of the Gospel is absolutely necessary to
strengthen a Christian to that Obedience which be pays; tho imperfectly, to the
old Law as the Rule of his Actions. And that great Light of his Age makes the
Difference between the new and old Law to be this that the old Law consisted
wholly in Precepts and Commands, and so was a killing Letter to the Sinner; but
the Nature of the Gospel is to promise, and give Grace: Cum dicitur diligamus
invicem, Lex est; cum dicitur quia dilectio ex Deo est. Gratia est. Augustine.
de Gratia and Libero arbitrio, cap. 18. fol. 284. page 2. Tom. 7. oper. Paris.
1571.
When it is said, (says he) 1 John 4. 7. Let us love one another; this is Law:
when it is said, Because Love is of God, this is Grace. He asserts that there
are Precepts in the New Testament, and none ever had so little Understanding as
to deny it; but these Precepts do not properly belong to the pure Nature of the
Gospel, but are only repeated and urged in it: but it is that Grace which
promises Pardon to the Sinner, and that Grace which makes the Believer holy and
obedient, that are the native Streams which are derived from this Spring. And
it is apparent from the Words of Augustine, cited by my Reverend Brother, that
this Father makes the old Law to be a Doctrine of Works, and so a killing
Letter without Grace; that is, without the Gospel, which as a pure Doctrine of
Grace, shows how the Law is satisfied by Christ, and how the Sinner and the
Ungodly may be justified; and affords Supplies of Grace suitable to all the
various Needs of the Believer. The other Place cited out of Augustine, proves
no more than that we are freed from the Condemnation of the Law by the Law of
Faith, which how it is to be understood of the Doctrine of Faith, I have before
shown in resouing Romans 3. 27. from its perverted Meaning, Page 59. of this
Discourse.

Salvian's Testimony proves no more than that the Christian Law, or the
Doctrine of Grace, was dishonored by some Men's abusing it to Licentiousness.
Bradwardine I must confess speaks plainly to my Reverend Brother's Purpose; but
it is no wonder: for tho with incomparable Strength, and Closeness of Reason,
he refuted the Pelagian Heresies, yet he was a Papist, and consequently firm to
the Belief of the Roman Creed, the principal Article of which is Merit. He
accordingly, tho utterly disclaiming Works done by Nature, yet asserts Works
done by Grace to be meritorious. To support this Assertion, the Writers of the
Church of Rome have taken care to lay down another as its main Foundation, that
the Gospel is a new Law; and therefore by obeying of the Precepts of it, which
are made the Conditions, we deservedly (as they assert) obtain, by virtue of
God's Covenant stipulated with us on such Terms, the promised Rewards.
Bradwardine accordingly maintains the Gospel to be a new Law, and that whoever
shall keep this Christian Law, shall receive eternal Glory. Mr. Lorimer 's
Apology, page 26.
So that this Man's Authority in the present Case (however great and excellent
he is in other Points) will not reflect any Glory on this Hypothesis; but
rather does disparage it, since it evinceth how near this Opinion of the
Gospel's being a new Law, approaches to Popery, tho I cannot entertain a
thought, that any of my Reverend Brethren do designedly make the least
advancing step to it.

As to the Testimony of the Leyden Professors, they only mean that the Gospel
in a large and improper Sense may be termed a Law, because there are Precepts,
Commands, and Threatenings in the Books of the New Testament. But those worthy
Professors, when they treat of the Gospel in its strict Signification, they
define it to be only a pure Word of Grace. For, says Polyander, who was one of
them; Vox Evangelium speciatim sumpta, atque ad Christi exhibitionem restricta,
primo Historiam denotat de Christo in carne manifestato, ut Marc. 12. secundo
pro laeta usurpatur doctrina ac praedicatione de hominum peccatorum
reconciliatione cum Deo per gratuitam peccatorum remissionem morte Christi
expiatoria ipsis partam, quibuslibet indefinite oblatam, pauperibus spiritu
atque Infantibus revelatam, credentibus vero singulatiter applicatam ad horum
salutem, and misericordiae Divinae cum Justitia conjunctae patefactionem,
laudem sempiternam. 1 Cor. 9. 14. 15. and seq. Synops. pur. Doctr. Disp. 22.
These. 5, 6. page 267, 268. Ludg. Bat. 1625. Ibid. These. 36, 37. page 272.
The Gospel specially taken, and restrained to the Exhibition of Christ, first
denotes the History of Christ manifested in the Flesh, Mark 12. Secondly, it is
used for the joyful Doctrine and Preaching concerning the Reconciliation of Men
who are Sinners, with God, by the free Remission of their Sins obtained for
them by the expiatory Death of Christ, indifinitely offered to any one,
revealed to the Poor in Spirit, and Babes; but singularly applied to the
Believers, for their Salvation, and for the Manifestation, and eternal Glory of
the Divine Mercy in Conjunction with Justice: 1 Cor. 9. 14, 15. This is in the
same Disputation cited by my Brother. And a little after the same Learned
Polyander renounceth the Opinion of the Schoolmen and Monks, asserting the
Gospel to be a new Law; and disclaims the Arminian and Socinian Doctrines,
which attribute to the Gospel as a new Law, new Precepts that are proper and
peculiar to it. Whether then these Reverend Professors ever once thought the
Gospel, strictly and properly taken, to be a Law, let any one judge.

It is easy also to judge, that Gomarus understands the Gospel in its larger
Acceptance, when he calls it a Law in the Place cited by my Reverend Brother;
for when before in the same Disputation he defines the Gospel, (and then to be
sure he took it in its strict and proper Sense) he makes not the least mention
of a Law, nor of Commands of Threatenings Gomar. Disput. 15. These. 25. page 52.
Tom. 8. 3. oper. Amstel. 1644.
: As I have before given the Instance from his own words, Page 34. of this
Discourse.

It is wearisome to follow my Learned Brother through all his Citations, and
particularly to consider them; there is no need to do it largely: and tho what
he transcribes out of Dr. Twiss takes up almost three Pages, yet a short Answer
will take off this Testimony too, and show that it is nothing to the Purpose.
In a word, all that can be concluded from the Words of Dr. Twiss is only this,
that God has appointed a set and stated Order in our Salvation, according to
which he proceeds. As he is not a God of Confusion, he saves us regularly, and
bestows his Blessings in a due Series; so that in a becoming Manner one may
follow the other: And how the Gospel is such a regular Order and Harmony of
Blessings, I have showed before, Page 6. of this Discourse.

And by this Way we may soberly and sincerely deal with a poor dying Sinner (to
whom my Reverend Brother Apology, page 32, 33.
next brings me) without encouraging his Presumption in the general Notions
which even wicked Men have of God's being merciful, and Christ's dying for
Sinners; or throwing him into the Convulsions of Despair. If I should tell him
just dying, of a new Law which must be obeyed by him, before he can entertain
any hopes; that this new Law requires Obedience from him, and till he has done
it, he must look for nothing but Condemnation from its severe Sentence: If I
tell him that one Condition of this Law is that he reform the Course of a Life,
of which he is come within a point of the Period; and that unless he live
better he cannot be saved, when he has but a few Moments longer to live: He
would certainly look very ghastly upon me, and think that I made his Mittimus
to Hell. But if I tell him, that the Blessings of the Covenant are inseparable,
and where God gives one, they are followed with all the other; That where God
confers his Favor, he plants Grace too, and works Faith in the Heart of those
whom he has decreed to save: That this Faith, if true, is accompanied with
Love; and the natural Product of that is a sincere Resolution to please Christ,
and obey him; and if he can lay his Hand on his Heart, and find these Blessings
there, he may be assured of his Interest in the other, and that believing he is
justified by the Obedience of Christ to the Law performed for him. This
Declaration of the Gospel to a startled Sinner, who has not one Minute longer
to promise to his affrighted Spirit, may (God making it the Power of God unto
Salvation) revive, and give new Life unto-him in the Agonies of Death. But to
amaze him with a Discourse of new Laws, and Commands, and Threatenings, would be
to stab him to the Soul, and to murder him more cruelly than his Disease.

CHAP. IX.
That this Opinion of the Gospel's being a New Law, too much agrees with the
Popish and Arminian Doctrines, proved by several Instances out of their Authors.

SINCE Popery and Arminianism, under various Names, and in pursuit of different
Ends, make the same stated Opposition to the Design of the Gospel; every
Opinion which agrees with their Errors, deserves to be suspiciously regarded,
and is unworthy of any favorable reception. If it then does appear that this
Doctrine of the Gospel's being a new Law, has been strongly maintained by the
Romish Church in several Ages, as that which lays the surest Foundation for
that dear Article of their Faith, the Merit of Works; and has all been
zealously espoused by the Arminians and Socinians, as a most effectual Engine
to overthrow Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ: Then all who
love Jesus the Redeemer, or are careful of their own Salvation by him, will be
very wary of giving a welcome Entertainment to this new Law. That the Doctors
of the Romish Church have all along asserted the Gospel to be a new Law, will
be evident from a few Instances.

Petrus Lombardus, the Master of the Sentences, who flourished An. Dom. 1141.
explaining the Difference between the Old Law, and the New Law the Gospel.
Praecepta etiam diversa quantum ad Ceremonialia: Nam quantum ad moralia sunt
eadem, sed before in Evangelio continentur. Petrus Lombard. lib. 3. Sentent.
Did. 4. page 681. Edit. in 8o. Mogunt. 1632.
The Precepts of them ( says he) are different as to Ceremonials: For as to
Morals they are the same, but are more fully contained in the Gospel.

Alexander Alensis who lived Anno Dom. 1230. resolving that Question, Whether
the Observance of the Old or New Law be the most burdensome? says, Tametsi
Evangelii praecepta simpliciter difficiliora sint, majorisque oneris praeceptis
Mosaicae Legis, etc. Alex. Alens. Sum. Theol. par. 3. Quaest. 28. Memb. 4. Art.
1. page 193. Col. Agr. 1622.
That the Precepts of the Gospel, simply and absolutely, are more difficult,
and of a greater Burden than the Precepts of the Mosaical Law.

Gulielmus Altissiodorensis, who flourished Anno Dom. 1240. resolves the same
Question, with this Distinction; Duplex est difficultas five gravitas, una
carnalis, alia spiritualis: Quantum ad carnalem gravitatem gravior erat Lex
vetus quam Evangelium, sed quantum ad difficultatem spiritualem Lex nova
difficilior. Guil. Altissiod. Sum. in Sentent. lib. 4. Fol. 243. page 2 Paris.
1500.
The Difficulty or Weight is twofold, one Carnal, the other Spiritual. As to
the Carnal Burdensomness, the old Law was heavier than the Gospel; but as to
the Spiritual Difficulty, the new Law is more difficult.

Albertus Magnus, who lived Anno Dom. 1260. clearing, how tho the Letter of the
Law kills, yet the Spirit makes alive. Spiritus est gratia spiritus, in qua
datur spiritus sanctus: and haec datur in Legislatione nova, non veteri.
Albert. Magn. Com. in lib. 3. Sentent. Did. 4. Art. 4. page 419. Tom. 15.
oper. Ed a Jammy, Lugd. 1651.
The Spirit (says he) is the Grace of the Spirit, in which the Holy Ghost is
given; and this is given in the making of the new Law, not in that of the Old.

Thomas Aquinas, who lived Anno Dom. 1265. in resolving that Question, Whether
the new Law can justify a Man? positively affirms, That Lex Evangelica, cum sit
ipsa spiritus sancti gratia, necessario hominem justificat. Aquin. Sum. prim.
secund. Qu. 106. Art. 2. page 199. Col. Agr. 1622.
the Evangelical Law, since it is the Grace it self of the Holy Spirit, does
necessarily justify a Man.

Joannes Dunscotus, who flourished Anno Dom. 1300. explaining how the new Law
is easier to be obeyed than the old One, tho it has all the Moral Precepts of
that with the superaddition of new Ones: Ex part autem Legis novae plus
alleviat multitudo, and efficacia auxiliorum, etc. Scotus in lib. 3. Sentent.
Did. 40.
But (says he) on the Part of the new Law, the Multitude and Efficacy of the
Aids does more alleviate the Difficulty of its Moral Precepts.

Raynerius de Pisis, who also flourished Anno Dom. 1300. discourses largely
about this new Law, and its Excellence and eminent Prerogative above the old
One: Quae quidem Lex nova quatuor notabiles and excellentes conditiones habet.
Est enim Lex Charitatis, Libertatis, Facilitatis, Necessitatis. Rayner. de
Pisis Pantheol. Tom. 2. Cap. 109. de Lege page 116. Edit. in 4o. Brixiae, 1580.
Which new Law (says he) has four notable and excellent Conditions; for it is
a Law of Charity, of Liberty, Facility, and Necessity; and with a tedious
prolixness he insists on all those Particulars.

The Cardinal, Petrus Aureolus, who flourished Anno Dom. 1317. gives eight
Differences between the new Law and the Old; and among the rest assigns this,
That Antiqua (viz. Lex) imperabat, sed auxilium non praebebat, attendebat
literam, quae occidit: Nova spiritum, and gratiam, quae vivificat. Aureolus in
lib. 3. Sentent. Did. 40. Quaest. ult. page 451. Tom. 2. Romae, 1605.
the old Law commanded, but afforded no Aid, it was intent on the Letter which
kills; but the New gives Spirit and Grace, which quickens.

Quod Lex nova liberat ab oneribus veteris Legis verum est, tum quia imponit
onera pauciora, tum etiam leviora, and quae pertinent ad curationem morbi
peccati, and ad conservationem sanitatis spiritualis. Durand. in Sent. lib. 4.
Did. 1. Qu. 2. page 646. Lugd. 1587.
That the new Law frees us from the Burdens of the old Law, is true, (says
Durandus a S. Porciano, who lived Anno Dom. 1320.) both because it imposes on
us fewer Burdens, and also lighter, and which belong to the Cure of the Disease
of Sin, and to the preservation of Spiritual Health.

Duae namque sunt parts Legis Divinae tam vetustae, quam novae, videlicet
testimonia, and praecepta. Testimonia pertinent ad credenda, Praecepta ad
operanda. Dionys. Carthus. in lib. 3. Sentent. Did. 40. Qu. 2. page 330.
Venet. 1584.
There are two Parts of the Divine Law, both the Old and the New, (says
Dionysius Carthusianus, who lived Anno Dom. 1450.) viz. Testimonies and
Precepts; Testimonies concern things to be believed, Precepts those which are
to be done.

Dominicus Soto, who was Father Confessor to the French King Francis I. Anno
Dom. 1535. disputes largely about the New Law, or the Evangelical Law; and
among other things he tells us, That Lex Evangelica Christianorum est propria,
Lex vero invita universis communiter intionibus pater. -- Lex haec ipsissimum
est Evangelium. Domin. Soto de Justic. and Jure, lib. 2. Quaest. 7. Art. 1.
Fol. 61. page 1. Lugd. 1582.
it is a Law proper to Christians, when the Moral Law, written on the Hearts of
Men, belongs to all Nations. That this Law is the Gospel it self.

And then determining that Question, Whether this new Evangelical Law has the
Virtue of justifying a Man? he decides it in these two Propositions; Prime
conclusio est: Lex Evangelica, si pura documenta and mandata, atque opetum
substantiam consideres, non magis per se justificat, quam vetus, vel Lex ipsa
naturae. -- Secunda conclusio: Lex Evangelica, si internam ejus virtutem
mediteris, hominem justificat. Id. Ibid. Quaest. 7. Art. 2. Fol. 61. page 2.
1. The Evangelical Law, if its pure Instructions and Commands, and Substance
of its Works be considered, does no more in it self justify than the old Law,
or the Law of Nature it self. 2. The Evangelical Law, if its internal Virtue is
considered, justifies a Man.

Albertus Pighius, who lived at the same Time, speaking of the Cup in the
Sacrament: Non veteris illius, and tunc continuo evacuandi, sed novi and
aeterai Testamenti, novae Legis, novo more promulgatae. Alb. Pighius, de
Hierarch Ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 2. Fol. 7. page 1. Col. Agr. 1558.
This is the Cup, (says he) not of that old Testament, which was then presently
to be disannulled, but of the New and Eternal Covenant, of the new Law
promulgated in a new manner.

If we go to the more Modern Doctors of the Church of Rome, who lived in this
present Age, we shall find that they all write in the same Strain. Lex autem
gratia comitata, cujusmodi intelligitur Lex nova, non tantum quid sit agendum,
ostendit, verum etiam spiritum and virtutem subministrat, qua quod praecipitur,
impleatur. Estius, in lib. 3. Sentent. Did. 40.. 4. page 159. Tom. 1. Duac.
1616.
But the Law, says Estius, (showing the Difference between the two Laws)
accompanied with Grace, such as the new Law is understood to be, does not only
show what is to be done, but does administer Spirit and Virtue, by which what
is given in Precept may be fulfilled.

Suarez, who for strength of Mind, and clearness of Thought, is the best of all
the Schoolmen, spends the whole tenth Book of his large Volume about Laws, to
explain the Nature of this new Evangelical Law. He at the very first lays down
these two Assertions. Dicendum vero primo est Christum dominum non solum suisse
redemptorem, sed etiam fuisse verum, and proprium Legis latorem. -- Dico
secundo Lex Christi seu Lex nova, est vera ac propriissima Lex praeceptiva.
Suarez. de Legibus, lib. 10. cap. 2. page 696, 697. Mogunt. 1619.
1. That Christ was not only a Redeemer but a true and proper Legislator. 2.
That the Law of Christ, or the new Law, is a true and most proper preceptive
Law.

And then afterward assoiling that Difficulty, How this his new Law can
justify, since it consists in Precepts as well as the Old, and so could have no
more justifying Virtue in it than that: Ad diffitultatem est Responsio
communis; gratiam convenire Legi novae quasi per se, and ex propris;
antiquioribus vero Legibus non ex vi illarum, seu per se fuisse conjunctam, sed
per respectum ad Legem gratiae. Et ideo Legi gratiae simpliciter tribui
justificationem non vero superioribus Legibus. -- Ob hanc ergo rationem
spiritus gratiae dicitur esse proprius Legis novae quia data est eo tempore, in
quo jam Author gratiae advenit, and redemptionem hominum consummavit,
gratiamque omnibus meruit. Imo idem ipse est Author hujus regis, and gratiae.
Idem. Ibid. cap. 5. page 712.
But to this Difficulty (says he) there is also a common Answer, That Grace
does agree to the new Law in it self, and as proper to it: but it was not
joined to the old preceding Laws from their own force and Virtue, and as proper
to them, but with respect to the Law of Grace: And therefore Justification is
simply attributed to the Law of Grace, but not to the former Laws. -- For this
Reason therefore the Spirit of Grace is said to be proper to the new Law,
because this new Law was given in which the Author of Grace was now come, and
consummated the Redemption of Men, and merited Grace for all. Yes, he himself
is the Author, both of this Law and of Grace.

I will name one more, the Cardinal Bellarmine, who as he fiercely opposed the
Doctrine of Grace, revived by the first Reformers, he earnestly sat himself to
assert the Gospel to be a new Law. And as he knew very well, that he could not
maintain the Merit of Works and Justification by them, without this Assertion
of the Gospel's being a new Law, he begins his fourth Book of Justification
which is concerning the Righteousness of Works, with eager Endeavors to
vindicate this Assertion against the Protestants. Among other things, too long
here to relate, he tells us; That Et quidem si loquamur de Gratia Novi
Testamenti, non distinguitur Lex ab Evangelio: Quod Lex requirat opera,
Evangelium non requirat opera; sed quod Lex doceat quid sit faciendum,
Evangelium praebeat vires ad faciendum. Bellarm. de Justif. lib. 4. cap. 2.
page 1011. In Tom. 4. Controv. Colon. Agrip. 1619.
indeed if we speak of the Grace of the New Testament, the Law is not
distinguished from the Gospel in this, that the Law requires Works, but the
Gospel does not require Works: But in that the Law teaches what is to be done,
the Gospel affords Strength to do it. So that according to him, the new Law tho
requiring Works, is yet a Law of Grace, because accompanied with Grace.

Thus it is evident, that for many past Ages down to our own, this Opinion of
the Gospel's being a new Law was the constant Doctrine of the Antichristian
Church, and eagerly maintained to support the Merit of Works. The Socinians and
Arminians, as they joined with the Church of Rome in denying the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, so they readily embraced this Figment of the new Law;
under the covert of which, they introduced an Evangelical Righteousness of our
own in conformity to it, by which we are to be justified. I shall not be large
in prosecuting this Business, because my Revernd and Learned Brother, Mr.
Stephen Lobb, will do it sufficiently. I will only offer two fair Evidences;
the one of Socinus himself, the other of Episcopius. Quamvis Christus suam
Legem habeat, eumque Dei nomine mundo tulerit, non tamen simpliciter Legislator
dicitur, cum ejus Lex nihil aliud fuerit quam complementum ac perfectio
Mosaicae Legis; nec sane ob id praecipue in Mundum venit, ut Legem ferret,
nosterve Legislator esset, sed ut nos servaret, in quem etiam finem nobis suam
Legem dedit. Socin. ad Artic. Cuteni, These. 10. page 454. tom. 2. oper. 1656.
Tho Christ (says Socinus) has his Law, and promulgated it in the Name of God
to the World; yet is he not called simply a Lawgiver, since his Law was
nothing else but a Complement, and Perfection of the Mosaical Law: nor indeed
did he chiefly come into the World for that End, that he might make Laws, and
be our Legislator; but that he might save us, for which End also he gave to us
his Law. Fatentur Remonstrantes delectari se ista Loquendi ratione, [ viz. quod
Christus sit novus quidam Legislator] non quia hunc aut illum autorem sapit,
nedum quia eam a Socino mutuati, sed quia Dei and Scripturae Phrasis, and quia
Religionis totius corculum, ac Medulla est. Nihil aeque necessarium esse
credunt, quam ut credatur novae Legis latorem esse. Episcopius, Apolog.
Remonstrant. cap. 24. page 237. part. 2. tom. 1. oper. Rot. 1665.
The Remonstrants confess (says Episcopius) that they are delighted with that
Manner of Speaking, [ viz. that Christ is a certain new Law-giver] not because
it savours of this or that Author, much less because they borrowed it from
Socinus; but because it is the Phrase of God, and of Scripture, and because it
is the Heart and Marrow of all Religion; and they believe nothing to be more
necessary, than that it should be believed that Christ is the Maker of a new
Law.

It is plain then that this Assertion of the Gospel's being a new Law, is a
Popish, and Socinian, and Arminian Doctrine. What then shall I brand my
Reverend Brother with any of these hated Names? No, I am so far from doing it,
that I do not so much as think him to be on the Side of any of the three
Parties, tho he is so liberal in bestowing Titles of Dishonor upon those who
differ from him, as to call them Antinomians; and so by virtue of an hard Word,
to name them the greatest Villains which can live upon Earth.

I know very well that the Papists, together with asserting the Gospel to be a
Law, assert the Merit of Works; which is disclaimed by my Brother, and yet is
really included in his Hypothesis: For what is Merit, but when the Reward is
due to some Work done? And now if the Gospel be in that respect a Law, that it
requires Duties as Conditions of having a Claim to its Blessings, and promises
them to the Performance of those Conditions, then to them performed, tho of
never so little Consideration, the Blessings must be given not as the Fruits of
mere Grace, but as the Results of a just Debt. However, tho the Opinion is not
professedly so rank as Popery, and Arminianism; yet in the least Nearness to
those destructive Errors there is Danger, and within the very Confines dwell
Plagues and Death. The People cannot then with too much Zeal, be warned of the
hazardous Approaches which lead them on to be betrayed into the Enemies Camp.
They understand not the Niceties of Controversy, and of Errors so refined that
they escape their discerning they are not afraid, and yet all the while the
Venom works more desperately for being subtiliz'd, and the invisible Spirits of
it mortally seize their Brains, when they startled at the sight of the Poison
offered in its grosser Bulk. I hope then my Reverend Brother, and all others,
will pardon me if my Love to the Truth has stirred me with some just
Indignation against the Opinions, which favor those dangerous Errors
concerning Justification by Works, and if I have been moved to represent them
in their own exact Shape and natural Colors. For tho I will not avow these
newly advanced Doctrines to be rank Popery, and Arminianism; yet I must say,
that they want but little of taking that Degree, and that even in this respect
they are the more hurtful. For when a gross Error is wire-drawn to a slender
Thread, it is the more mischievous in being not easily discernable, since so it
slides insensibly into the Minds of the Unwary. What tho the Merit of good
Works is disclaimed; what tho the Socinian and Arminian Inferences from the
Gospel's being a new Law, are disowned; yet would it not be better for the
Preservation of the Truth in its Purity, and for the Safety of the Souls of the
People, to forbear such Phrases and Modes of Speech, which by the Enemies of
the Gospel are made use of to very ill Purposes? Let all of us be swayed by the
Words of a Man, whose Memory we all love and revere: It is the admirable Beza;
who writing against Claudius de Xaintes, contests with him that the Gospel was
not a new Law, nor ought so to be named; Paulum fateor uno loco Legis fidei
meminisse, quam opponat Legi operum; sed praeterquam quod additum fidei nomen
omnem amphiboliam tollit, dico ne sic quidem illum Locum tibi patrocinari. Lego
apud eundem Legem Christi, sed pro mutuae dilectionis mandato a Christo
renovato; cui opponitur externa Legis observatio, ac praesertim Pharisaica.
Legem perfectam Libertatis (cujus meminit Jacobus) nego ad istam novae Legis
appellationem pertinere. Calvinum autem uti memini uno Loco vestra illa
formula, sed addita interpretatione, and idcirco tantum, ut quid in vobis
redargueret, omnes intelligerent: Ne me vero existimes de nihilo contendere,
quum veteres nonnulli, veluti Augustinus (quod tamen rarissime fecit) Legis,
and quidem novae, seu secundae, nomen aliquando novo Foederi, sive Evangelio
tribuerit, facit exitialis ille and plane detestabilis Error vester, quo Legis
and Evangelii praecipuum discrimen tollitis, ut hanc formulam scripturis
inusitatam prorsus ex Ecclesia exturbandam existimem. Bezae Apolog. 2. ad Cl.
de. Xaintes respons. page 364. tom. 2. oper. Genevae 1573.
I confess (says he) that Paul makes mention in one place of the Law of Faith,
which he opposes to the Law of Works; but besides that the Name of Faith added
takes away all Ambiguity, I say that neither so indeed does that Place favor
thee. I read in the same Apostle, the Law of Christ expressed, but meant for
the Command of mutual Love renewed by Christ, to which is opposed the external,
and especially the Pharisaical Observation of the Law. I deny that the perfect
Law of Liberty, which James mentions, belongs to this naming of a new Law. But
I remember that Calvin in one place uses your Phrase, but with an
Interpretation added; and that too only, that all might understand what he
would disprove in you. But do not think that I contend with you about a
Triffle, tho some of the Ancient Fathers, as Augustine (which yet he did very
rarely) attributed sometimes the Name of a Law, and indeed of a new, or second
Law, to the New Testament or Gospel. That pernicious, and plainly detestable
Error of yours, by which you take away the chief Difference of the Law and
Gospel, makes me to judge that this Phrase, viz. [a new Law] unusual in the
Scriptures, ought wholly to be thrust out of the Church.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 69. Line 14. for all read also.


