The GORGON'S HEAD or The Monster of Munster
Choked with a Lamb's Skinn
OH Monster: Oh Monstrous Monster: The Monster of Monsters: The Monster of
Munster?

Woe to you Anabaptists, when the Monster of Munster appears. He is a Wolf in
Sheep's Clothing; He left NOT ONE Anabaptist alive to tell their own story:
much less to contradict the Others so largely written in their Innocent Blood.
In the Massacres of FRANCE and IRELAND they were not half so cunning: therefore
they that escaped Lived to Record their Cruelty in Red Letters. But our Monster
of Munster, NOT Leaving ONE, made their own Relation Authentic. And let all
men Judge, whether Anabaptists did not deserve to be so served; for all those
Despised things through-out, POLAND, HUNGARY, BOHEMIA, GERMANY, and the
Low Countries (as all men and women who have been in those Parts can wittness)
instead of Destroying their Enemies or Defending themselves, hold it a sin to
Resist Evil, because their Savior forbids them: And think it fit that if a
man smite them on the one cheek, to turn the other, And our own Relators tell us,
that these Anabaptists of Munster stood still, and let out Monster kill them:
and some of them climbed up upon Trees waiting for Miraculous help from Heaven:
but our Party prevented that Miracle. Oh that they would do so here in ENGLAND
(cries the Rabble) then should not our Pulpits and Pamphlets need to tell so
many Lies to Incense the Multitude; Nor should we need to Disarm and
Disfranchize them from all English Liberties before we kill them. And when all
is done, we are so dismayed, that we know not how to go about it, for fear left
when they are gone, we should be no ways able to Cope with our Numerous
Enemies of the other hand. For our Ministers are so zealous and inompatible
since they were Infected with New ENGLAND spirits, and tryumphed over the
Bishops that we have not one friend left but our selves: and we are friends to
none but our selves, But the Anabaptists heretofore have been our best and
surest friends, and stoutest Warryers in time of Danger. And the GOD of the
Anabaptists has showed himself so Partially for them, that we know not well
how to be against them.

Yet we have the Monster on our side: and he is very bold and subtle: as subtle
as the old Serpent. He has lately crept up into our Pulpits, who in the
beginning of these Wars was hardly known amongst us. And now tells us stories
of half an hour long, which are held as true, and Orthodox as the Gospel they
preach. For we have heard with our own ears, and they have declared it openly
in their Sermons, that the Monster was come into England: and that the
Anabaptists of England would have cut All our English Throats (and we had no
other to eat sweet meets and drink burnt Wine with a Christnings.) And if they
had Cut All our Throats, and our Ministers too, none of us all could have
terrified the vulgar with these lamentable stories. For we never heard of any
that spoke after their Throat was Cut. And many of us have been put into
grievous frights by it: so that we felt on our Throats to find whether it were
not done already: but we found them yet very sound and whole, which is a
certain and infallible demonstration that our Monster is a Prophet, and
foretells things before they come to pass, or likely to come to pass. For we
are yet all living, and mean to Cut theirs: Ah Rogues Cut our Throats? we will be
revenged on them. A silly Waterman the other die boasted how many Anabaptists
Throats he would Cut for his share: and should we be behind a silly Waterman ^n
our Zeal for the Good Old Cause. For we say this is the Good Old Cause what
ever they affirm to the contrary. It was the Good Old Cause in Neroes time, and
all the Roman Emperors time: It was the Good Old Cause in all the ten
Persecutions: It was the Good Old Cause in the Massacre of France. I was the
Good Old Cause in Munster in Germany: It was the Good Old Cause in Qeene Mary's
days: And it was lately the Good Gld Cause in Ireland, and Piedmont, and
should have been the Good Old Cause throughout all Germanay. What should we
loose time? It is and has been the Good Old Cause in all times and places,
from the beginning of the World to this day, to Cut the Throats of Heretics
though they were not all Anabaptists, and so will continue to the end of the
World, if the zealous Orthodox men of the times might have but their own will,
Abel was an Heretic, who being neither Priest nor Levite, but a younger
brother, would offer and prefer the strong savovr of a Lamb, before the sweet
smell of the Fruits and Herbs of his Elder Brother, but it cost him his life;
And Paul confesses himself to be accounted an Hereteck amongst the Orthodox
Scribes and Pharisees of his time, when he was accused by those learned men
(the Children of the Covenant) to be a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens,
and by that means a Pestilent fellow and mover of sedition ( Act. 24.5.14.) A
Sect that was every where spoken against, ( Act. 28.2.) And these men, who were
Jews, the very Children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom pertaind the
Adoption and the Glory, and the COVENANTS, and the giving of the Law, and the
SERVICE of GOD, and the PROMISES, Romans 9.4, 5. These men cried out away with
him from the Earth, it is not fit such a fellow should live ( Act. 21, 22. and
25, 24.) Yet he was but one, and should we suffer such a numberless number of
Anabaptists to live, who are so many? who we? who are the Children of the
Covenant, and whose Children are in the Covenant? what we? who are indeed such
very Children of the Covenant, that we know not the right from the left, nor
the old from the new in matter of Covenant? And that is the reason (by the way)
that we do break our Covenant so often, and act things so directly contrary to
our Holy League and Covenant: But that is a trifile, that is but by the by, as we
said, and now quite out of date, let us now return to our Monster again, and
hear his Prophesies. For we may well call him a Prophet that tells things (like
the welsh Prophet Arize Evans of Blackfriars) before they are, or will be, or
like to be: yea, perhaps such notable things as are impossible ever to be:
therefore how transcendent a Prophet is he? should not such be believed? what
not such as our very Godly Ministers themselves believe, without so much as
examinings the probability of the thing? And they themselves preach it as
matter of Faith to be believed: For if they would not have us believe it, why
should they preach it? and that at the very same time when they preach unto us
their Gospel; yea at our most solemn meetings of all? In times of Feasting, and
times of Fasting, and greatest humiliation and sincerity before Almighty God.
It often does serve their turn instead of the Gospel it self, so as to furnish
them with the greatest part of their Sermon. And sometimes is of far greater
use to them then the best Text of Scriptures, in confuting the Anabaptists. For
when we or our Ministers have nothing at all to say for our selves against the
Anabaptists, we do but raise up this Monster, and so stops the mouths of the
common people, who else would be all running after them; But when they see this
Monster in the way, they come running back to us again for shelter: as we see
little Children scared with a Bulbegger. And it is a plain CASE that our
CALAMITY were very great if we had not this Monster for our refuge at a dead
lift. And surely the story cannot but be true and concerns us very much to be
so. We must, we will, we cannot but believe it. For whom should we believe if
we believe not our Godly Ministers? It Is true, we are yet alive: else how could
it well be a Prophecy? And both we and they must tell these things whilst we
are alive, for when we are dead we shall not speak one word: and so our
business may be represented, as fowl as the Anabaptists themselves, who never
spoke one word since they were killed: But now we may say what we will for all
them. The men of Munster also that killed the Anabaptists told their story
whilst they themselves were alive: but they were no Prophets as we read of: but
plain Historians writing of things past; yet far more subtle then common
Historians, who can relate no further then every man may have seen or heard:
but these declare the very secret purpose and intentions of the Anabaptists,
which lay so secret within them, that perhaps the silly Anabaptists themselves
never knew it, nor no man else till the men of Munster, who killed them, and
opened them, and saw their very hearts, revealed it to the world, as the true
and just reason of their so dealing with them: lest any man should judge them
cruel to do so horrid an Act without cause, and so abhor both them and their
Religion for so doing, as some have done the most devout and learned Calvin,
for causing Michael Servetus, who fled our of Italy to Geneva for Conscience
sake, and was there burned for not melting presently into all Mr. Calvin's
Orthodox Opinions, and so was condemned to the fire, supposing him to be like
wax, and being heated, the fitter for their purpose: but he proved combustible
to ashes. We have seen therefore wherein their zeal failed, and hope to make
better use of ours. We are all forewarned from the first time that Sir George
Booth had the watchword, and though he miscarried, yet we (by Presbyteriean
Providence) are once more forearmed: And what should we do with our Arms, if
not to cut the Anabaptists and all Sectarian Throats? For when we have cut all
their Throats, we shall be then sure they cannot cut ours. We have the Sword,
and should we wear it in vain, as the Anabaptists did? For they did not so
much as touch the hair of our heads all the while they had the power in their
hands, and would you have us to do so to? They knew not what to do with the
Sword, but we do, and they shall know it to their Cost. We have already turned
out 400 of their Officers, and disarmed the rest to expose them to the incensed
mercy of the Irish, who have already begun to burn and spoil some of their
Goods and Houses, to the value of 500 l. for one man, and threaten the like to
the rest; That the Presbyterean Plot might in nothing be undervalued, or give
place to the Traitor Strafford's: whose design was the forerunner of that
Glorious Irish Massacre so highly Canonized in Rome and Spain, and amongst all
zealous Catholics. And some are clapped up, for fear lest being provoked they
should serve us the same sauce, for they are much for DO as you would be DONE
by, an old obsolete Law of the Jews and the old Christians above 1600 years
ago, as if it were a better Law then all the Laws of our Native Country. A
Company of Lavvless Creatures they are; They would have all things done by
Love (for-sooth) if they might rule the roast; And so all our Ancient
Fundamental Laws would down at once. But we hope our Lawyers will see to
that: For if they go down, it is their fault more then ours: for they are
chosen Speakers, and they are chofen Chair men, and they are chosen
Secretaries, and they are chosen Judges, and they are chosen Ambassadors, and
they are chosen Advocates, Sergeants and Counselors. Yet we should not much
stand upon it, if they were all down, so our Godly Ministers were up, and not
one whit abridged of their Tithes and Argmentations, and all impropriations and
Gleab Lands and daily freewill offerings, first fruits and tenth of Tithes and
the like. Poor Ministers! They have had a hard pull on it; They were fain to be
entertained at the chiefest Tables in all the Land, and had like to have lost
Livings of 400 ot 500 l. a year, and some diverse Livings and places together to
the value of one thousand or fifteen hundred pounds a year. Therefore many of
them could not Preach all the while; yea they were fain to turn their preaching
into soliciting and pleading: But we have now gotten the Parliament trump on
our side, and we care not a pin for the Anabaptists, if they stick fast to us.
And now if Charles Stewart would but come in upon our Terms and Confirm, all
that we do, we should carry the Game before us; And if he should not, we would
deal with him in the stool of Repentance, and if that would not serve turn, we
could make him as Glorious a King as we did his Father, and have another Free
Parliament into the bargain; And our Godly Ministers would take care enough in
all places that no Sectaries should be chosen; for we could sooner comply with
Papists then with them. Yet if Charles Stewart should bring with him the 200000
Scottesh and Irish, who have been banished, and suffered with him all this
while: besides all the Rabble of France and Spain, and all the English also
beyond Sea, to join with the Malignants and Papists in England, (whose Lands we
have gotten into our possessions) and make us live again like Pesants and
Apprentices, and poor Sneaks, who now live like Lords, yea and some of us d^bd
Lords, both by the mighty Protector, and the Almighty and Eversting Rump (as we
call them when we are by our selves, or amongst the Malignants): For the Truth
is we dare not well trust them, for all their colloging with our Ministers and
Inns of Court, in establishing our incomparable Laws, and the Ancient Divine
Right of Tythhs, and Augmentations in an other Title; we had rather have those
of 48, or a free Parliament; for we dare not trust these further then we can
throw a Millstone; nor had done so much as we do, but that they put the Sword
into our friends hands; In whom we put far greater confidence then in them; And
yet it sticks in our Stomach to think of C. S. whether he have any more
Irelands and Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters Lands to give us. And if he should
be too cunning for us, we should wish the Anabaptists alive again to help us.
And yet now it is aquestion, whether they would not sooner join with him, being
promised better Conditions, and surer Tolleration then ever we are like to
afford them. Really (and that was the Old Protectors sober Oath, when he did
not swear in private) Really it is a hard CASE and CALAMITY we are put too,
whether we should let them live or no? We must advise with our Ministers, they
are Wiser then we. What should we doubt? They tell us all things that shall
come to pass in another World, and cannot they tell what will come to pass
here? we trust them in greater matters, we may well trust them for the less;
For if it were not for them, we should be as ignorant as Papists. And yet we
see what an excellent order they keep by beleiving as the Church beleives, and
if we should not do so to, we should soon come to Confusion. It is a dangerous
thing to know too much, for Solomon tells us, that thereby sorrows are
increased. Therefore we see the Papists putting all that trouble upon their
Prsests, and they upon the Pope, they go on as boldly and resolutely, and
couragio^sly as blind Bayard: and surely in many things the Papists will shame
us; for they believe what their Priests say, before they believe their own
eyes, or their own taste, or their own hands. And we know that our Godly
Ministers are a great deal more learned then they: For they say so themselves.
And in their Sermons, if they meet with a Popish Ceremony in the way, they will
so canvas it, confute it, and be so learned upon it, that none in all the
Congregation have one word to say against them, or if they had the very
Reverence of the man and his Office (together with the severe Laws, and that
Statutes of the Land) do so over-aw them, that they all depart in peace.

And by this means he that is most in the Ministers favor, is most in the
favor of the whole Parish, and has most respect. And it is the only way of
Preferment in the Commonwealth; therefore we are resolved to stick by our
Ministers, whether right or wrong. It is a plain CASE that CALAMITY attends all
those that side not with them, and they are nigh to dedestruction, What wise
man therefore will side with the Anabaptists; we look upon them as our deadly
and mortal Enemies, and so intend to prove them. If they can but hansomely
proceed (as they have begun) in Ireland; we will prove them both Mortal and
deadly, if Fire and Faggot, Halter and Gibbot can prevail; It being a far
easier and safer way to proceed with them, and make them mortal one by one:
then to deal with the least Company of them together, lest 10 of them should
chase 100. and 100 a 1000, as they say is written in the Scriptures, Oh they
are a dangerous Generation. For we neither dare fight with them, nor speak with
them; For our Ministers themselves, if they come to parley with them, cannot
answer one of a thousand. They will so thunder out Arguments, and Scripture
after Scripture, that a man has not a breathing time between. And if they were
not more Conscientiously obedient to Magistrates then we are our selves, and
that our Ministers are so diligent night and day, early and late, by their
Wives and Servants to solicit all the chief Magistrates against them, whilst we
nettle their Conscience by crying out in all places that they will endure no
Magistracy, because they themselves are not ambitious to be Magistrates: the
whole Nation would be soon overrun with the Doctrine of Baptismes; Not the
Invifible Baptism of Mr. Dell and the quakers, but the outvvard Washing of
water with the inward Answer of a good Conscience in the Spirit.

And in all these things we have found the Anabaptists so cunning and subtle,
that when our Godly Ministers have brought Scriptures which we before looked
upon as impregnable and invincible, they have taken those very Scripturs and
turned them upon our Ministers, that they had not one word to say: But to fly
off to other Arguments or end in a Huddle, or get behind the Covenant, and
there they skip from one Covenant to another, sometimes in the Old, sometimes in
the New, sometimes in both, sometimes in neither; and so get into a Thicket, they
escape and run away; sometimes they ply it so Home that they make many of us
believe that Jesus Christ and all his Apostles, and all the Primitive Churches
for 300 years were all Anabaptists: And tell us that if Jesus Christ and his
Apostles were in our days, we should even use them as the Jews did: being the
case is the same. For they all Dipped in Jordan and Aenon, and the River of
Philippi etc: And Jesus Christ was but the Son of a Carpenters Wife, And his
Apostles but Fishermen, and were never Ordained by the Priests and Levites,
nor of the Doctors; nor yet brought up in any Universities, Nor yet among the
Learned, Except it were Paul and Matthew, yet they drew multitudes after them,
and went into Synagoges and Preached, Disputed, Baptized, what not?

Away with such Dangerous Fellows, a man cannot hear them but his Concience is
troubled for ever after, if he do not follow their ways; And there is no way
to resist them but to fear the Conscience with the Red Hot Iron of Obstinacy
and Resolution; They are more Dangerous and powerful then Inchanters,
Conjurors, or Jesuits; for the Jesuits do use Enchantments and Conjurations,
and have the Assistance of Magistrates and the Inquisition, forbidding the
Scriptures, and have to help them abundance of Wealth, Honor and Riches, yet
if these Anabaptists were once countenanced, they would gain 10 Proselits for
one of the Jesuits, or of our Godly Presbiterian Ministers either; And the very
quakers have noway to escape them but to get into a dark Lanthorn, and sly
from the Scriptures to the Light within them. Down with them all, Downwith
them; Let not one Live, for a little Leaven Leavens a whole Lump: Ifone of them
Live they will presently Swarm into a Multitude. No way to ^e^^ with them but
as with the Bishops, Root and Branch. Yet the Reviving of our Laws and our
Knack of old Tithes, with the Presbyterian etc: (as well as the Bishops) will
insensible undermine them, and Consume them, and drive them into Lurking holes,
and to fly to their Old Denn of Amsterdam, and Germany; Well fare New England;
It is as Rare to see an Anabaptist amongst them as a Wof in Old England; except
it be in Sheeps Clothing, and of them are many thousands.

Well we are resolved either they shall fall, or we will fall, Power indures no
parity: should we beat the Bush, and another catch the Bird; Was it not we that
stirred up all these Commotions; did not we stir up the Sailors and the
Soldiers at first? did not we curse Meroz? did not we bring in our Brethren of
Scotland? did not we pull down the KING and House of Lords and cut off their
Heads? Did not we firk out the Bishops, root and Branch, and got into their
fatt Livings? did not we choose Parliament men, and filled up all Offices, and
suffered only a few Independents and Anabaptists to help, and they think now to
rule the Roast, because old Oliver proved too subtle for us? No such matter?
Oliver is now dead; Therefore they may see how they are deceived. Have not we
yet a Sir George in England, a Sir Charles in Ireland, and all our friends in
Scotland: besides our wise and subtle Pentionaries in Councills and elsewhere?
Have not we all the Apprentices on our side still? And at a dead lift we have
a C. S. upon any terms. But what have we fought for, if it be not for Liberty
of Conscience; And how can we possibly have Liberty of Conscience, and the
Sectaries have it also? As if Liberty of Conscience were a two handed Lawyer,
and could play Jack on both sides. No; Liberty of Conscience is on our side; We
fought for it, and we will keep it safe enough from their coming to it. For we
hope to be keepers of the very Liberties of England, and it must be a large
Conscience that can hold all the Liberties of England; It is our Liberty of
Conscience to be uppermost, since Bishops are down, who kept us from it. And
since we came to the ticklish point of Government, we have had a very tender
Confcience, and diligent care that none should have the like Liberty with us,
lest we should not have liberty enough for our selves, and lest they should
return to the Flesh Pots of Egypt: or else run into any Opinions which we hold
Erroneous, so that we have concluded all others to be Heretics, and in State
of Damnation. For how can we love others better then our selves? And whether we
are right or wrong, All men ought to Believe as we Belcive, and Do as we Do:
For our Salvation lies at stake for it. And what benefit will it be to us that
others should be saved, if we be not? And if we should not be saved, (who do
all as our Ministers bids us,) what will become of those that never come to
our Sermons, nor care for what our Godly Ministers Preach, save in matter of
Faith and Repentance? And of such the vvorst we meet with are the
Anabaptists, for we can outreason the Papist, Lutheran and quaker, and make
them ridiculous: but the Anabaptists will outreason us, as if we were almost
as much to be condemned as they. And against them we have no refuge but to
fly to our Victorious and Tryumphant Monster. Go on therefore thou Monster
Persecution; Not now the Monster of Munster but the Monster of England. Si.
George on Horseback; who bestridest and boastest thy self over England,
Scotland, and Ireland. And if thou meanest as thou say, and the purpose of
God be that the Anabaptists should be those fellovv Servants and Brethren that
should be killed as the Souls under the Alter were, Rve. 6.11. (For the word
of God and the Testimony of Jesus:) Then Satiat thy Cruel Mavv with Blood, or
be blood-thirsty still and never satisfied: And what thou do, do quickly;
For the time is coming, and now is, that though Judgment may begin at the
House of God: yet the dreggs shall be given to thee O Monster. For it is
written, Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou were not spoiled: And dealest
Treacherously, and they dealt not Treacherously with thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end todeal
Treacherously, they shall deal Treacherously with thee, Isa. 31.1. For God has
determined to render unto thee double, Rev. 18.6. Here is the Patience of the
Saints, and here are they that keep the Commandments of God and the Faith of
Jesus. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, Rev. 14, 12, 13. To God only wise
be Glory, Amen.

The serious Poscript.
1. THat it is trve that the Anabaptists of Munster (so called) were all of
them Slain, Killed, Murdered, or Massacrd, is Confessed by all of that Party
that were guilty or Abbettors in that Act, and relate the Story. 2. That none
of the Anabaptists that were so killed (for the Relators themselves say none
escaped) did ever answer for themselves is out of question. 3. That to Condemn
one Party before the other be heard, the very Heathen accounted it Injustice
and a Crime. 4. That Parties will speak Untruths to justify themselves, is a
practice in all Countries: and we have too sad experience of it in England. 5.
That none of the Anabaptists in all Poland, Hungary, Germany, Bohemia or the
Low Countries will so much as fight or defend themselves, or exercise any
Magistracy, is a Truth known to all Merchants and Travelers that ever were in
those parts amongst them. 6. That none of those called Anabaptists in England,
Scotland or Ireland, etc: have any such unjust, foolish, or rediculous
Principles as are mentioned in that story of Munster is and has been publicly
protested against. 7. That the Story of Munster (as they relate it) seems to
all sober men a Romance, like Don quitote and Sanca Panca. 8. That if
Knipperdoling Becol, and John of Leyden were such fellows, it can be no more
wondered at then the Actings of Theaurau John Tauny, or Sir Thomas Parfons,
(our late Knight of the Son) and yet the Court and City were not accused for
their Extravagancies; And who can tell what Oppression might force the rude
multitude to in Munster, as that of Massagnello in Naples, which might
afterward be laid upon the Anabaptists. As all things whatsoever which savours
of Folly or Cruelty, is at this day laid to the Anabaptists in England, or else
to the quakers. 9. That if John of Leyden Knipperdoling or Becol had been
Anabaptists, and had played such pranks. It is as unjust to charge all
Auabaptists with it, as to charge all mankind with folly and madness, because
the men of Bedlam, and the dull Housen in Holland,: are so; Or because Judas
was an Apostle to charge all the Apostles with Treason, or as if one
Presbiterian were Executed for Rapes and Murder, all Presbyterians should be
charged guilty of the like sins. 10. But that all Sober People may know what
to think of Anabaptists. They may be pleased to know. 1. That their only
General Rule to walk by is the Scripture of the Old and New Testament as they
agree together. According to which Rule in particular, first, They ought to
Suffer Wrong rather then do any. Secondly, As to Magistrates. They believe
themselves bound by the Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
Mat. 17.27. Mat. 22.21. Romans 13, 14. to 8. and 1. Pet. 2.13, 14. etc. Thirdly,
If any do otherwise they dare not allow it in themselves, much less in others.
Fourthly, If any have been mistaken in these changeable and mistaken
Authorities: when every one that got hold on the Hilt, was proclaimed Master of
the Sword: And all Authorities bowed thereunto: Mistaken Obedience could not
properly be a Sin of Wilfullness or Presumption.

Judge not, that ye be not Judged, Mat. 7.1.
FINIS.

