THE Present state OF THE PRINCES AND REPUBLICS OF ITALY, With Observations
on them.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged, with the mamnner of the Election of
Popes, and a Character of SPAIN.

Written Originally in English by J. GAILHARD, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter near Temple Bar in
Fleet Street, 1671.

To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of Sunderland, Baron Spencer of
WORMLEIGHTON.
My Lord.
It Is usual with some when they publish any of their works, to pretend they
were forced to it by the importunity of Friends, which is often true, and
sometimes it is allowable; but it is no great modesty to boast of it upon every
occasion. Others do prefix to their Books, to give them credit, the name of
some considerable person; this is well done, if the worth of the Piece be any
ways suitable to the qualifications of that Person; else (to speak in Solomon's
words) it will be as a Jewel of Gold in a Swines snout.

I hope, My Lord, I have at present in some measure hit upon that necessary
proportion; Your Lordship is in every account one of the most Eminent Noblemen
of the Kingdom, and my Subject (though I handle it with several defects and
imperfections) is of potent Princes and Republics, a hard task indeed it is;
for when a private man is to speak of the persons and actions of Kings and
Princes, specially of so many as I have occasion to mention, he walks upon the
edge of Rocks and Precipices; for of one side Princes are jealous of their
Authority, and the people of their Liberty; on the other, if he gives
Monarchies such Commendations as that manner of Government deserves, he must be
careful to say nothing to the disparagement of Republics: Every one of these
Governments is good in it is kind, yet not in every Country, only as it suits
the temper and constitution of the people; but I cannot forbear to say, that
Monarchy has of all Governments most conformity to the pattern of all, or to
the Empire which God has over the World.

It Is not an easy matter to speak of a subject which has been treated of by
several others, however there are different ways to do it, and new
observations may produce new Notions. Sometimes one has occasion to tell his
opinion of things, and herein he is himself liable to the censure of thousands
of different judgment and affections; but as these things are unavoidable to
those who appear in public; so they ought to be resolved to undergo any thing
of that kind: the approbation of such persons as your Lordship, is that which
writers should mind most of all, and use their utmost care to obtain. It Is a
known truth, and I declare it, My Lord, that your Natural parts, joined to the
experience you have gained by your travels, have fitted your Lordship to pass a
judicious Sentence upon any thing that deserves it.

I say nothing in this Relation, but what your Lordship has more accurately by
far, and more exactly observed: You have been, My Lord, upon the places highly
esteemed by some Princes who knew your worth and quality, and where to my own
knowledge (if I may so say) you omitted nothing that might conduce to the
improvement of your self, as a person who by virtue of your Birth, Parts and
Merits, will find no employment in your Country too high for you, when some
occasion shall be offered for your Prince to do you that favor and justice; to
the end, the Nation may have some benefit of that treasure of wisdom and
Experience which is in you; and I in particular the satisfaction to see your
Lordship as great as you deserve; which is the earnest desire of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Devoted Servant, Gailhard.

TO THE READER.
Wonderful and much to be admired is the goodness and wisdom of God, in that
various distribution he has made of his favors to Nations and Countries, for
the benefit of humane Society, that men seeing every where some tokens of his
goodness, after a serious reflection on the same, they should reduce all to
that ultimate end, which is to give him Glory and Praises for it. Non omnis
fert omnia tellus, So that one Country lies under a kind of necessity of
keeping correspondency with another, either for necessary or for delightful
things, if not for the being, yet for the well-being; for this end has the Art
of Navigation been discovered, Trade (which makes Countries so flourishing)
settled, and all manner of correspondency kept between those who live at a
distance. I do not deny but that it is convenient to have things brought home
to us out of Foreign parts, without taking any pains, or running any hazard,
yet to have things right, we must go to fetch them upon the places where they
are produced; it is best to have things at the first hand, and to have pure
water, we must go to the spring, if it can conveniently be done, for it looses
something of it is worth, either through the defect of the Vessel, or some
other accident, if it be brought to us: We observe in Vegetables, if they be
transplanted, after a while they degenerate, and loose part of their Virtue,
the climate and the soil are not so suitable to their nature as that wherein
they grew; no Balm was so good as that which was in Gilead; that Vine-tree
which in one place does produce good Grapes, in another will yield nothing but
wild Grapes. Experience also does demonstrate this in sensitive Creatures,
horses and dogs, when carried from their own climate, loose their good
qualities, at the furthest at the second or third breed. This holds in rational
creatures; we know there are Nations which for the generality have quicker
apprehension, and sharper wit than others, yet let a man remove from his Native
Country, when he has been any considerable while in another, his temper will
be like that of those amongst whom he lives, imperceptibly such an alteration
is wrought, so that he will grow dull and phlegmatic if the climate bears it;
this may be caused by a constant conversation with people of that constitution;
by the very diet, for those aliments which are course, make gross and thick
blood, which does not breed quick and lively spirits; and a man by the change
of Air, will find a great alteration in himself; the breathing of a pure Air
refreshes the Lungs, chears up the Heart, and upon a sudden inspires an inward
joy, which can hardly be expressed: in this I speak after my own experience, I
specially took notice of it when I came to Puzzuolo and Baya in Italy, neither
was I alone to make that observation, which obliged me to think that there had
been a particular reason of this nature, why some Roman Emperors, and others
of the greatest persons amongst them, took such a delight to be there. 'Twas in
such places as this, and Tivoly, with the like, that Cicero, Virgil, and other
eminent men for learning, composed the greatest part of those works which to
this day we have amongst us.

That which I have said of low and Mechanical things, will hold in those of a
more noble and higher nature. What Merchants do for their profit, Gentlemen
ought to do for their honor; the one brings riches into his Country, the
other ought to bring good observations and maxims that may contribute to the
good order and right Government of his Nation, if by his quality or abilities
he comes to be called to have a share in it. The great Law givers in Greece,
sent into several parts of the world those who gathered for them the
quintessence of those Laws which other nations enjoyed. The Romans in the times
of the Decemvirs did the same, and others have followed their example; it is
true, one must be very judicious and skilful in the application of the same;
for every Law does not suite every Nation; but I say, that mutatis mutandis,
there is never a Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy, but they may make an
exchange of some of their Laws and Customs: Monarchy may afford Democracy some
beneficial Statutes, so may well regulated Democracy to Monarchy; for all
governments, by what name soever distinguished, have or ought to have, but one
and the same end, which is self preservation first, and then the promoting of
public good, every one in his station and calling, although these different
governments use different means and ways to come to that end.

Out of this I suppose 'twill appear to any rational man how necessary and
beneficial traveling is to the completing of a Gentleman, if it be well
directed and improved; and as Nations are obliged to those Merchants, who
through many and great hazzards do bring home the best of other Countries to
enrich their own, certainly they must needs be much beholden to those Patriots,
who have been at charges and pains to collect and bring them those wholesome
counsels, by the right use of which they may secure themselves in the enjoyment
of their plenty, riches and happiness, to the preventing of disturbances which
might happen to arise against it: It ought therefore to be the endeavors, as
it is the duty, of every one to fit himself as much as he can for the service
of his King and Country.

I said just now, how beneficial traveling is, if one has good directions;
this lays an engagement upon me to say something to that effect for the
satisfaction of those who stay at home, and for the instruction of them who go
abroad; not that I think my self wise enough to advise others; only I say my
natural propensity joined to that manner of life I have led hitherto, has
much inclined me to travel into most parts of Europe, wherein I have spent most
of my time; but whether this has fitted me to give my opinion upon this
subject, I am not to be the judge: however I dare say it is difficult for a
Gentleman, let him have never so good parts, to get any considerable benefit by
his Travels upon his first going abroad, except he has along with him the
advice of one who knows Countries and fashions; for the time allowed him to
stay abroad is almost expired, before he can recover himself of the surprizal
and astonishment which daily difficulties and inconveniences have cast him
into: but when he is to act according to advice, and this advice is grounded
upon knowledge and experience, he will find his task more easy, more pleasant
and more profitable. And here I must say something in general of those who
undertake to be such directors, which may well be applied to all sorts of
persons.

God, whom men pray (or ought to pray) every day to give them their daily
bread, has commanded them to work for it, and he who does not work, ought not
to eat, as the Apostle says. As the difference of faces, and the diversity of
tempers in men do express the wisdom of God, so does that variety of
employments which he calls them to, according to their genius, inclination and
abilities in some measure to perform their undertakings: Let every one abide in
that whereunto he is called, says St. Paul.; so that men ought to follow it
after they have embraced it, either out of choice or by necessity, especially
if besides the benefit they reap by it, they are any ways useful to others
knowing we are born not so much for our selves, as for others; and though a
constant kind of employment be necessary for one, yet this does not exclude the
use of that capacity he may have to several sorts of calling, it being well for
those who have many strings to their bow, that if one breaks the other may be
useful. Men must ever be doing something, if it were for nothing else but to
keep themselves from Idleness, which is the Mother of Vice.

But to come to that kind of Employment which gives occasion to this discourse,
it is usually attended with great and many difficulties, besides the hazzards
which one runs in foreign Countries; for if dangers come often to men when
they are at home, what will it be when they go as it were to meet with them,
when almost every day they see men of all Nations, and of all sorts of tempers:
certainly one must very much exercise his prudence in avoiding the perils he
meets withal, and must have much courage to come off when they be unavoidable,
but above all, an extraordinary protecting providence of God is absolutely
necessary: yet there are more uncomfortable difficulties to struggle withal,
than are the foreexpressed. The extravagancy of a young man, who will not be
advised by a Governor, nor ruled by a Father; this Governor is to please a
Father who loves to spare, and a Son who delights to spend, a Father who would
have him to learn and improve himself, and a Son who in his travels has no
other end but to take his pleasure; and after he has fenced a long while
against the wild nature, the vicious inclination and unreasonableness of a Son,
he is also exposed to the hardness and unthankfulness of Parents.

I have wondered at many who take this charge upon themselves, and consider not
whether they be qualified for it, when no honest man will undertake any thing,
except he knows himself in some measure able to perform it: It Is enough for
them to know they shall thereby get a competent allowance, to run headlong upon
any employment that lies in their way; how can they expect in conscience or
reason, that a young Gentleman can improve under their conduct, that his
relations can have any satisfaction, or themselves get thereby any credit or
reputation, if they have no capacity somewhat suitable to their undertakings?
for how can such a one be able to direct another how to benefit himself, and to
travel in foreign parts, except he has some knowledge of the language of the
country, and fashions? Every Nation has some particular Vices and Virtues,
the one to be avoided, and the other learned; what these things are I must be
told, and how can be that knows it not tell me of it? this ignorance will make
him contemptible to me, and he must learn it himself before he can teach it
me; so that for the whole time allowed to travel, he is only a learner who
should have been a Teacher. I am a bashful English man, I will learn
confidence, and a handsome carriage in France, so riding the Great Horse,
Fencing, Dancing, and other bodily Exercises which contribute to complete a
Gentleman, thence if I pass into Italy, that Air will fix the French
Quicksilver, there I will learn Sobriety, Frugality, and to be circumspect in
words and actions, so Music Picture drawing, Architecture, etc. Yet I must
have some knowledge of persons and places, of whom and where these things may
be learned best of all; I must know also how to benefit my self in going by, or
staying at a place. It Is not enough for a Gentleman to say, in such a City
there is a stately Church, a fine Palace, and the ruins of a most ancient
Amphitheater; this I confess ought to be taken notice of: but further, I must
observe the quality of the Climate, and of the soil, the Situation of the
Country, and (if I understand Fortifications.) the strength and the weakness
of the Cities and Countries I go through, and take notice of the advantage or
disadvantage of Rivers, Ways, and Grounds; so I must be acquainted with their
Manners, Forces, Riches, and wherein they consist, to see whether any thing out
of it may be useful to my Country; but above all I must observe their
Government, and if it be possible their mysteries of State, so I must endeavor
to know the persons and qualifications of Princes and Ministers of State, and
any thing else that may be both for my own benefit, and the service of my
Country; so at length my travels having ripened my judgment, quickened my
apprehension, and sharpened my wit, I shall not be unprofitable, nor of the
number of those the Poet speaks of,

Nos numerus sumus fruges consumere nati. This I do insist upon, not to boast
of any abilities of my own, for I ingeniously confess my weakness in this, yet
I profess a desire to learn it, though it was for no other end than to impart
it to others, that with me they may reap some benefit of it; this I say still,
that another cannot teach me that which he knows not, but his knowledge,
experience and practice of any thing enables him to infuse it into me; and
indeed it is a fault I have accidently observed in some when they be in a
strange Country, they keep company with none but the masters of their
exercises, they ought indeed constantly to follow these exercises, but if they
see no body else, at last they will learn to dance, to fence, etc. and nothing
else; they ought to make acquaintance with men of quality, and frequent their
company; of them a handsome carriage and good fashions are to be learned, they
must also take care to find themselves company for their honest pleasures, and
lawful recreations; but a hateful thing it is to see one brought up in a
timorous and pendantical way, which makes a Gentleman unfit for any thing of
concernment; a Gentleman must be taught as to do no wrong, so to suffer no
wrong as long as his honor is concerned in it, for he is not worthy to live
who prefers his life to his honor; not that imaginary honor as it is conceived
in these days, but that honor which is really so, not contrary to our duty to
God, or obedience to Superiors; therefore a great wisdom is required in the
use of a bridle or of a spur to work upon youth, to infuse courage into them,
so as not to make them rash, and so to curb them, as not to dishearten them.

But I am carried further than I intended upon this subject, it is time to speak
directly to my present design; I give thee Reader, the present state of the
Princes, and Republics of Italy: It Is a worthy subject, if we consider their
number, jealousies, and policy; it is certainly one of the most politic Nations
of the world, and I doubt very much whether any other can compare to it. What I
express is gotten not so much by reading, as by traveling upon the places,
seeing and conversing for a competent time with those who were able to instruct
me: some things also are of my own particular observation. In the following
discourse, I do not speak of the Situation, or of the boot-like shape of
Italy, which any ordinary Map can show; to mention the quality of the
Climate, or of the soil of every part of that Garden of Europe, 'twould prove
tedious, and contrary to the narrow bounds I do here prescribe my self. The
manners of the Inhabitants, their outward form of Government, their Riches,
Force and Religion, are matters for Historians; hence it is that I do not
insist upon Descriptions, however that which I thought fit to be known upon the
matter in hand I express; I think (I know not whether I am mistaken) that the
variety I use in it will please thee, for in some parts I insist upon the
person of the Prince, in others upon the manners of the Inhabitants, and in
some others I briefly mention what is particular in their Government; so that I
have not a constant or affected method; contrariwise I endeavor some time to
conceal it: Upon every particular, I speak, either that only which I thought
necessary to be known, and so I passed by some things I could have told, or I
speak according to the degree of knowledge I had of the thing; and if amongst a
thousand things unprofitable, there be but one useful, I will not grudge my
time nor my pains.

J. G.

LICENSED

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

THE Present STATE OF ITALY.
THAT must needs be a Rare Country which is pleasant and plentiful, watered
with many Rivers; at the season adorned with Corn in the fields, and Grass in
the Meddows, with delightful Land-skips, that in most parts has a wholesome
Air, that abounds in strong and stately Cities, where the eye is delighted with
most sumptuous buildings, recreated with variety of Pictures and Statues, the
ear pleased with as great a variety of harmonious music as can be upon earth;
where the Palate is satisfied with the best fruits, and other delicacies, and
the rarest Wines of Europe; where in a certain season, the nose enjoyes the
sweet smell of Orange and Jasmin flowers, which lay over head or under feet;
and at the same time, and in the same place to behold fine perspectives, and
hear the murmur of several fountain waters: in a word, that Country which
produces plenty, and variety to please all the Senses, and which has the Alps
of one side for Walls, and the Sea on the other for bounds, must needs be an
excellent Country; such is Italy.

The length of it, is a Thousand miles, or thereabouts; beginning from Susa, a
Town cited at the foot of the Alps, at the coming into Piemont, and ending at
Reggio, in the furthest parts of Calabri, in the Kingdom of Naples. As to the
breadth, it is more or less, according to the places, it being not full four
hundred any where, nor less than sixteen. Parts of France and Savoy lay on the
West of it, parts of Germany, namely, Tyrot and Swisserland on the North, and
the Mediteranian Sea on the East and South, though for distinction, some call
the one Jonian, and Adriatic; and the other Tirrenean: most passages into
Italy, are hard and difficult.

The whole Country which we call Italy, is, by the Italians themselves, divided
into Italy, the Kingdom, and Lombardy; Italy comprehends the dominions of the
Pope, of the grand Duke, and of Luca. Naples is that which they call the
Kingdom, and Lombardy contains great part of the State of Venice, the Dukedoms
of Milan, Mantua, Parma, Monferrat, Piemont, and the State of Genoa.

But to make use of the ancient Division, and to descend to particulars; I say,
that in Italy some are great Princes, considering the Extend of their
Dominions; and others of an inferior Orb, may be called petty Princes: The
former sort come to the number of seven, and with the four Republics, to
eleven. The Pope, King of Spain, Dukes of Savoy, Tuscany, Mantoa, Parma,
Modena; for though some do reckon the Bishop of Trent, which stands between the
Venetians and Tyrol, yet being a Prince of the Empire, having a perpetual
alliance with the House of Austria, and often of the same Family, He may be
taken for a German more than for an Italian Prince; and seeing little can be
said concerning him, we shall pass it by to come to the Republics; which are
Venice, Genoa, Luca, and San Marino: For the order of precedence, Venice has
place after Spain, Genoa after Tuscany, though they pretend to be used as
Crowned heads, being Masters of Corcica, formerly a Kingdom; the other two
Republics take place after all the forenamed Princes, who also do not agree
amongst themselves about Precedence; Tuscany pretends it from Savoy, though he
be much inferior in antiquity, and extent of Dominions; and Mantoa from
Tuscany, neither will Modena yield it to some named before him. I should also
say, that France having acquired Pignorolo, a door into Italy, and a strong
place, from the Duke of Savoy, that King having an Interest in Italy, is to be
reckoned amongst the Princes of it.

The State of Rome.
THE Pope has great Dominions conveniently seated to disturb others,
specially, Naples; for all from Ostia, upon the Coasts of the Mediterranean
Sea, to Loretto, Ancona, etc. is his: All the Lands together are called, Lo
Stato Della Chiesa, in particular, old Latium, now Campagna Romana, il
Patrimonio, di San Pietro, of which the chief City is Viterbo, part of ancient
Tuscany, Terra Sabina, Umbria, ducato di spoletto, la Marca di Ancona, la
Romagna, il ducato di Urbino, ducato di ferrara, Perugia, Orvieto, and
Bolognese; he is Sovereign of Naples, and Sicily, which he gives the
investiture of, and receives homage for, as he does for the Dukedoms of Parma
and Piacenza, pretending the same over the Islands of Sardegna and Corcica: He
is in possession of the Dukedom and City of Benevento in the Kingdom of Naples,
and he pretends that in time of minority of the Kings of Spain, he has right
to Govern that Kingdom by a Legate: He also enjoyes the County of Avignon in
France, and Ceneda within the state of Venice.

These Countries, (I mean those who are united together) especially from Ancona
to Ravenna and Ferrara all along the Coasts of the Gulf of Venice, do afford
good Soldiers, which upon case of an urging necessity may be gathered to about
the number of 60000, though 20000 foot and 3000 horse, as had Clement the 8th.
in the War of Ferrara, were much to be kept on foot any long while: Urban the
8th. in the War of Parma had 30000, but if the whole Country was in Arms,
then 'twould be upon 400000. The Pope indeed may be accounted, as he is really,
a strong Prince, which strength consists in the extent of his Territories, in
their Situation, being all united, and there being no safe nor convenient
places toward the Mediterranean, to make any landing; and toward the Gulf
they trust to the Venetians, who are to keep it clear; upon which condition
they are acknowledged to be the Lords of these Seas; further all along the
Coasts of the Mediterranean, and the whole Campagna Romana, there is a bad air,
which would soon work upon any Army, either in Spring, Summer, or Autumn: This
strength further consists in the temper of his Subjects and Soldiers, who are
esteemed to be the best Foot in Italy: The Italian Proverb calls them, The best
of Soldiers, but the worst of Subjects: so this strength consists in his strong
holds, as Ferrara, Bologna, Fortezza Urbana, etc. in his Arsenals, or Magazeens
of Arms; the Vatican or St. Peter has for 5000 men, in the Castle St. Angelo
for 15000, in Ancona for 10000, in Ravenna for 5000, in Ferrara 25000, and
Bologna for 10000, and a new one a making at Tivoly, by the late Don Morto's
Order, for 16000 men, with 80. pieces of Ordnance, where he employed
continually above 300 men, so that they are spread up and down the Country to
arm the People upon occasion to the number of 100000 men. Upon the
Mediterranean he keeps five Galleys, which harbor in Civita Vecchia, they are
not handsome, nor very good, but are well maned.

But that which another way strengthens much the Pope, is, that Respect and
Devotion which Popish Princes and States bear him, acknowledging him (though
falsely) to be the Vicary of Christ, God on Earth, and the head of their
Religion; so that if a Prince had seized upon any of his Dominions, the Pope
who had provoked him to make War being dead, it would be restored to the new
Elected, all of them being persuaded, that it were a Sacrilege, to detain from
that Church, that which did belong to it; besides that every Prince of that
Religion intending any such thing, would find it to be a hard work; for the
Pope has ever an Army quartered upon their Land, which are that vast number of
Secular Priests, and Regular Friars, who depend on the Pope upon several
accounts, who having all sworn an Obedience to their Generals, who usually kept
at Rome, they would act according to the Orders sent them from thence. So that
having their Pulpits, Confessions, and Introduction into houses of all ranks,
they could make strange work; Hence to me does appear the happiness of those
Princes, who having shaken off that Roman yoke, and turned out those
Emissaries, are freed of those dangers, which those of that Religion are
exposed to, though often they are liable to their private attempts. Another
politic strength of Popes, consists in the College of Cardinals, who are most
of them chosen, either to gratify Princes, or who depend upon Princes,
(without whose knowledge Princes hardly resolve any thing of importance about
Popes) or else are Relations to Princes; and it is certain, when these Princes
interests come to be in competition with the Pope's and Churches, this last
swayes with them above all, because every one of these Cardinals is not without
hope of being chosen Pope one time or other. Now I say, that Popes, as they are
Temporal Princes, though they be Elective, ought to have that respect which
deserves the character which God has set upon the forehead of Sovereigns; but
as he is a Tyrant over the Church, and an Usurper over the Heritage of the
Lord; all good Christians and reasonable men ought to abhor him, not his
person, but that Tyranny, Usurpation, and unlawful Actions of his.

I said, that 25000 or 30000 men, is a great number to be kept on foot by Popes
any long while; not for want of moneys, for as Sixtus Quartus used to say, The
Church can never want money in her purse, as long as the Pope does hold a pen
in his hand. Indeed, besides the ordinary income to the Camera, for the
occasions of the Church (so they call that State) the Office of the Diataria,
brings to Popes for their own use, exceeding great Treasures out of all parts,
which own his Religion; besides the private ways they have to get moneys, of
which I shall speak; some reckon that Popes have 6000 l. sterling a day,
besides the casual incomes, which are very great: every time a Legate a Latere
is sent abroad, he is allowed 250 l. sterling a day: for proof of this vast
Revenues, Sixtus the 5th, who Reigned but five years of a poor Country Family
Peretti, yet he builded the Palace of St. John of Lateran, began that of
Monte-Cavallo, fortified Civita Vecchia, built many Colleges, made chargeable
Aqueducts; did many other costly works and reparations, wherein it is thought he
spent a matter of 15 Millions of Crowns, or upon 4 Millions of English pounds,
and left f^ve Millions of Crowns in the Castle of St. Angelo, and did not
charge his people with heavy Taxes; and then the Popes had not the Dukedom of
Urbino, nor that of Ferrara, and in a time that Reformation was carried on in a
great measure in these three Kingdoms, France, Holland, Switzerland, Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, and other parts of the North. And Paul the 5th. who indeed
Reigned longer, left to the Prince of Salmona, one of his Nephews, 1000 Crowns
a day, besides what he gave to several others of his Relations. And Gregory the
15th. of the family of Ludovisio, reigned only one year and a 11 months, and
left to his Family 250000 crowns a year, or 62000 and 500 l. besides. Thus as
Popes are temporal Princes, so they lay Taxes upon their Subjects, and heavy
ones too. The late Popes, since his falling out with France, within the space
of two years, laid Gables or Taxes upon 16 sorts of Commodities, which were
free before: So 'twas done upon the Soldiers, kept within the State, for every
common Soldier was Taxed one Crown of his yearly pay, which came to between 5
and 6000 crowns, according to their number; and the whole people in the City
and Country were exceedingly oppressed: The selling of Offices is now a settled
custom in the Court of Rome, which is very beneficial to Popes: I shall give
but an instance of the Camera Apostolica, or the Apostolic Chamber; the places
of the Treasurer General, and of the Auditor, are sold for 80000 crowns a
piece. There are Twelve places of Chierici, Clarks worth 42000 a piece; the
Presidents is 30000, and so of others: the two forenamed Offices are the next
step to the Cardinal; so that if the Pope will have 160000 Crowns he makes
Cardinals those who have them, and from others he finds ready money for the
places. And what shall we say to that vast Treasure of Loretto, which is
inesteemable: every week, nay, almost every day, one gift or other is brought
to it from Kings, Queens, Princes, and other great Persons, Cities, and
particular men; they have whole Chambers full of Gold and Silver plate; but
this is nothing to that vast number of Diamonds, and other precious stones,
which they keep in a place made a purpose: in the Castle of St. Angelo, are
ever 5 millions of Gold, and one and a half in Jewels.

Were it not for want of exercise of the Protestant Religion, Rome is as fit a
place to lead a quiet and a contented life, as any is in the world, a man may
live there as he pleases; and no body meddle with him; offend no body, and no
body will offend you; and though the inquisition be there, strangers are not
troubled with it, except they speak against their Religion, which it were a
great imprudence to do; 'twere a madness for a man to go tell the Pope he is
Antichrist, this were to tempt God, and contrary to the wisdom of the Serpent,
which is commanded us. It Is an old and common saying;

Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more, etc. A stranger and a Traveller must be
all eyes, and all ears, but hardly any tongue at all, he must hear, he must
see, and hold his peace. I say, at Rome there is a very great liberty; if a
Protestant pleases, all Lent he may eat flesh, by the means of a License, which
he may get for two shillings; You are not obliged to go to Mass, to Confession,
nor to any of their Superstitious ways. One thing there is, which a stranger
may do to satisfy his curiosity, which is, to go to their Stationi, as they
call it, that is, their Devotions to certain Churches, which happens in one or
other every week, where is a great concourse of people of all sorts, and
constantly excellent good music; so every Saturday at the Cardinal Padrone's,
the Popes Nephew, lodging at Monte-Cavallo, all men of good fashion use to
meet, to tell and hear news; so one day or other in the week, people use to
meet at the Palace of the Preferto of the Church, which is either the Popes
Brother or Nephew. So at Monte-Cavallo, the Popes Palace; when the Consistory
of Cardinals is kept. So one may have the company one time or other of their
Academists or Virtuosi, which in Rome are of three sorts, Humoristi, Lincei,
Eantastici.

One thing more is, to follow the Corteggio of some Cardinal and Ambassador
first for Protection; for if any mischance should befall a man, when it is known
such a Gentleman is of the Corteggio of such a Cardinal, he is respected, and
no harm done to him without the leave of such a Protecture, into whose house
one may fly for sanctuary. Secondly, going with them (after the warning you
have of it at your lodging) when they receive or make visits, or go to their
audience, one may see their formalities and Ceremonies which are very great;
they never visit one another but they send before, one to know whether such a
one be disposed to receive the visit of another at such an hour, and as
Italians, give high names to things; they call this Embassage. Further, they
receive not at the same time visits from two persons; it must be known also,
whether such a person intends to come Incognito, or whether he will be known,
which only consists in the putting on or off of a superfluous garment, and the
Loops which are about the Horses heads, which are of gold, if the Cardinal be a
Prince, a Roman Baron, or of the Family of a Duke and Peer of France, or other
Kingdoms; so that according as they come, they are received nearer the Stairs,
and with more Ceremonies, for every step they are to make is regulated, and
they would not go an inch further; so that all that passes between them, is
more belle parole then realities; I say, belle parole, not only because they
be Complements, but also they are accurate expressions, well pronounced,
according to their proverb, Lingua Toscana in bocca Romana.

One thing I must needs observe of their civility to strangers who are of their
own Corteggio, that although they know them to be Protestants, yet they never
trouble them with any discourse of Religion. It Is certain, that this Court is
as politic as any in the world, and where by a reflection you may know all
what passes in Europe: for no Prince in the world has better intelligencies
then the 'Pope, who has Legates or Nuncio's in most Courts, and spies every
where. Cardinals do receive their Letters from the Courts of the Princes whose
interests they own; and the general of every Regular Order being usually at
Rome, and receiving a constant weekly intelligence out of all those parts where
are any of his Order; and sometimes from the Confessors to Kings, Queens, and
other high persons, do signify what things they hear, to the Pope. One may
judge of this by what they do at home; that which is to be admired at Rome, is
that exceeding great number of spies under pay, which are there up and down in
all houses, public places, and at every corner, the Pope has his; every
Cardinal, and Princes (I put them before, for they take place of them) have
theirs; one Cardinal and Prince will have his spy in the house of another,
though some of them go like gentlemen of good fashion; and others who are of a
higher form keep their Coaches; some of them have keys to come in at any hour
by the back door to the persons whose spies they are. Some as Staffieri, or
Footmen, serve strangers; others are Masters of Excercises, nay, several
Cortegiane or Prostitute women are under pay; so that by these means, no
particular business comes to pass, but it is presently known. One day I had
occasion to enquire for a mean person about an ordinary business, very far from
my lodging, and from that of a third person concerned in it, in a corner of a
street, one that was with me inquiring for such a one, in came to us an unknown
man, who stood by, I admired to hear him say, what, you look for him about such
a thing, he is gone to such a place: Every one of their great men who know this
custom, do suspect every new servant they take. I have been told by a person
who stood by, that the late Duke Cezarini, sent one day for a Notaro (or one of
those Scriveners, who kept the List of some spies) whom he trusted, and having
showed him the names of all his Domestics, how does it go said he? the other
answered, well; then said he, it is a wonder, I am here the only man; this
Language is obscure, but he who stood by, knew the meaning of it. As to
strangers, none come to Rome, but it is presently known who it is, whence he
comes, what company he frequents, and the like. Not long since I happened to be
at Rome, at the same time that there was a considerable number of Englishmen;
the late Pope told an English Priest, and an English Gentleman, who being a
Papist, went thither for Devotion sake, That he wondered, that some of the
English men that were then in town, did not come to his Palace upon the days
he gave Audience, though it was but for curiosity; but said he, I know they are
so taken up to drink, that they have no time to spare: He was well informed,
yet this did not proceed from any contempt he had for the Nation; contrariwise
he used to speak with respect of England, calling it the Land of Wonders:
though this may be ambiguous, yet I believe he took it in a good sense, and he
has expressed the desire he had to have come to see it when he was Nuncio in
Germany, if he could have done it with safety.

In Rome are to be seen several ancient and modern Curiosities; there are
particular guides for antiquities, the modern do consist in Churches, Palaces,
Houses of Pleasure, called Villa, where you may see the utmost of Art in
Architecture, Pictures, Statues, Gardens, Waterworks; so there are Libraries,
as that of the Vatican, enriched with a number of Excellent Books, and rare
Manuscripts in several tongues, and increased with the ruins of that of
Heildelberg, and with that of Urbino: this Library can be compared to none but
that of Oxford, yet with some difference: there are also private Libraries and
Cabinets, of all, which as of the curiosities of Tivoly and Frescati, places
12. and 18. miles from the City, there are exact relations in their Language,
so that it were needless for me to name or to describe any.

Therefore I come to speak how Popes stand affected to their Neighbors; some
grounds of this might have been laid formerly, when the Apostolic Chamber had
the direction of affairs: but since Popes are come to be so absolute, that the
Chamber must do almost all what they please, now their interest, natural
in^^ination, fancy or Capricio, as they call it; and sometimes the suggestions
of a Kinsman and favorite, such as was Don Mario, though 'twas a woman, as Don
Olympia, are the rule of it. Some Popes have had fallings out with the
Venetians, as had Paul the 5th. concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
other things; Clement the 8th. with the Dukes of Modena about Ferrara; Urban
the 8th. with the Duke of Parma about Castro; and so of late Cardinal
Franciotti, Bishop of Luca, was like to be the occasion of a great falling out
between the Pope and that Republic. Urban the 8th. was a great friend to
France, but not to Spain, nor to the Grand Duke. Innocent the 10th. the half of
his Reign was for Spain, and then he turned to the French; and the late
Alexander 7th. was all along an enemy to France, chiefly upon the account of
Mazarini, whom he hated with all his heart; but the present Pope carries
himself even between all, although before his Election he were suspected to be
partial for Spain, but upon no sollid grounds; for those who pretend to the
Popedom stand neutrals, and declare themselves of no party

The maxims of Pope's are different, according to their interest and temper;
so that this being an Elective Dignity, no general rule but this can be given,
that all endeavor to raise their Families to Honor and Riches; however their
Raggioni di Stato are, to hinder Naples from falling into the Emperors hands:
for Clement the 7th. made penance for the fault which Leon the 10th. had
committed to favor Charles the 5th. A second maxim is, still to give hopes of
being promoted, to the dignity of a Cardinal to those potent Prelates that are
at Rome, and elsewhere, to keep them in dependency, and from discontents and
disturbances. Another is to confine the number of Cardinals to 70. which was an
invention of Sixtus Quintus, to avoid the importunities of several Princes, who
solicited him to confer that dignity upon some whom he would not bring into the
College. Of the same nature as this is, another Arcano di Stato, concerning
the Examen of Bishops, which was ordered by Clement the 8th. to stop the
designs of Princes, who intended to promote to Prelacy many of their
Creatures: for then they had been ashamed to present those who had no learning,
nor other qualifications fit for the place. A further secret of state is, that
of the Bull of Residency, whereby Bishops are obliged to reside in their
Bishoprics; by the means of this, Popes do remove from their Court those
Cardinals and others whom they dislike: By these means Urban the 8th. kept out
of Rome Cardinal Borgia, and others of the Spanish Faction, who spoke too
boldly to him: So did Alexander the 7th. keep away Cardinal Rossetti, who
stiffly opposed his Election. A further maxim of theirs is, to refer to
Congregations, the demands of Princes about Ecclesiastical Laws, Jurisdiction,
and other things which Popes are not willing to grant, for so they lay the
denial upon others. Another Raggioni di Stato, is, that Cardinals may not go
out of the state of the Church without leave from the Pope, for so they prevent
those Counsels and Assemblies before the which formerly they have at several
times been summoned to appear. Further, as former Popes have humbled and
brought down those noble and potent Families that were in Rome, which had given
a great deal of trouble to their Predecessors; so at present Popes keep them
low; by which means, they have so degenerated, that instead of those great and
brave Captains, now out of these Families come out idle, vicious, and
effeminate persons. Lastly, it is a very politic maxim of Popes, to send their
Legate to Princes, to pacify the quarrels arising between them, although they
know 'twill effect nothing at all; and that sometimes it is their interest that
such quarrels should last, for hereby they show themselves to be zealous of the
public good and peace; and thus they maintain themselves the Arbiters of
Princes. The Cardinals Nephews have also their particular maxims, namely to
keep from preferment, and to remove from the Pope's person those whom they do
not affect: on the contrary, to raise to dignities, and to procure places of
trust to their friends and creatures. Public Ministers at that Court know so
well the jealousy of Nephews, who will have nothing communicated to Popes, but
by their means, that usually they impart first to them, that which they are to
speak of to the Pope, and commonly they give them an account of what answer
they had, taking Cardinal Padrons lodging from the Popes in their way
homewards. A policy of the Cardinals, who are contrary to the Court, is to get
some Eminent one disaffected as they are, to be their Head; and now it is a
custom passed as it were into a Law, to choose none but Italians to be Popes.

Before the late Election, the College of Cardinals was divided into the
Ghigian party, which were all the creatures or friends of Alexander the 7th.
six of them are of Siena, the City he was born in, the Squadra volante, the
flying Squadron composed of the creatures of Innocent the 10th who having left
no Cardinal of his Name or Family, Cardinal Imperiale was looked upon as the
Head of them, and most part of these were brought in to this present Pope by
Azzolino, one of their chief members; but the 3d. party was that of Barbirini
Francesco the Dean of the College being the head, and several of Urbans
Creatures the members with some others, who being poor, received pensions from
Francesco; now a fourth part is rising, which is that of the present Pope.

Before I leave this subject, I must say something of him; He is called Clemene
the 9th. which name he took, as he assured the Princess of Rossano, out of
respect he does bear to the memory of Clement the 8th. Aldobrandin; his name is
Giulio Rospigliosi of Pistoia, an indifferent good City, about 20 miles from
Florence, and in the Grand Dukes Dominions. This man was chosen the last year,
in the 71. of his Age; he was employed as Nuncio in Spain, and then by the late
Pope was chosen Secretary of State; he had a very sore fit of sickness a little
while before the Pope died; he was once given over by Physicians, and when he
came to recover, and before the Popes death, he had thoughts to leave his
place. He is a man of a middle stature, and very gray; being a Cardinal, he was
accounted a wise Statesman, and of great parts; I say he was, for I cannot tell
whether he does or will continue so, for often have we seen in that place that
Honors have changed manners; as it was well observed of the late Pope
Alexander, of whom it was said, as of Galba, He had been worthy of Reigning, if
he had not Reigned; Dignus Imperio, sinon imperasset; and of all other sayings,
this most of all was fastened upon him; he was maximus in minimis, and minimus
in maximis.

This Pope, since his Election to that Dignity, has made a judicious Creation
of Cardinals; he has chosen his own Nephew to express his affection to him;
the late Pope's Nephew, Don Sigismond, to express his thankfulness for the
Obligations he had to that Family; and herein he has given an example contrary
to that so much blamed of Innocent the 10th. who did so bitterly persecute the
Relations of his Predecessor. The third Cardinal Created, is Leopold, of the
family Medici: Thus he has repaired the fault of Alexander, acknowledged the
kindness he received from the Grand Duke in the late conclave, and shows that
he remembers he has been his Subject: Further, this Pope has done two things
contrary to the practices of his Predecessor, who, at the beginning, would own
none of his Relations, nor have them about his person, or raise them to
preferments, till he seemed to be forced to it by the earnest solicitations,
and constant importunities of Cardinals, and public Ministers; yet it is well
known how indulgent to them he has been all along; therefore, said the Romans,
Alexander was as good as his word, that he would not receive his Relations at
Rome, for he went to do it at Castle Gandolfo, a house of pleasure 12. miles
from it: but the present Pope sent for his immediately after his Election, and
would make no new Creation (as they call it) of Cardinals, nor distribute
several favors till his Nephew was come back to Rome, that others might have
to him the Obligation of it: The other thing he has done is, that he has
suppressed in part those heavy Taxes which his Predecessor, or Don Mario, has
laid on the people; this has much gotten him the love of his Subjects. Should
I now go about to give a character of Don Camillo his Brother, his Nephews, and
other Relations, it would be too much like a relation, therefore I forbear it;
and indeed I have been so long upon this particular, that I must be shorter in
what follows.

In Rome are still some Noble and Ancient Families, as Colonna, which do
possess three Principalities, Ursini has two more. Savelli, whereof the chief
is perpetual Marshal of the Church, and Prince of La Rizza, bought by the late
Pope, and of Albano. Muti, Duke of that name, and Prince of Rignano, Cezarini,
Prince of Jansano and Ardea. Conti, of which is the present Duke Pauli.
Caetanis of which is the Prince of Caserta, Son to the Duke of Sermonetta.
Frangipani, which is extinct, for the late Marquess left out one Daughter, who
has been married to one of the name, who lives in Hungary. The others are
Bentivogli, Baglioni, Peppuli, Vitelli, etc.

The new Families, to begin with that which now Rules, are, Rospigliosi, Ghigi,
Pansilio, Barberini, Ludovisio, Borghese, Altemps, Cezi, Farneze, Aldobrandini,
Buoncompagnio, etc. raised by Popes of their family, as now Rospigliosi of
Clement the 9th. Ghigi of Alexander the 7th etc. Matthei also, and Lanti both
Dukes in Rome, are both of good Famiies.

But now Clement the 9th. is dead, after somewhat above two years Reign; he was
old and weak, but the loss of Candia, has probably hastened his death: his
Relations had no time to rise very high, and they must leave the place to his
kinsman, who is now to be chosen Pope: about whose Election the Conclave is now
much divided; the Factions being great and stiff, every one driving on her
Interest and advantage. The Cardinals amongst themselves being divided into
four parties, because they are all the creatures of so many Popes, Urban the
8th. Innocent the 10th. Alexander the 7th. and Clement the 9th. besides the
Grand Dukes Interest is great in the Conclave: the Spanish is considerable in
number, by reason of many of his Subjects in it; but as Cardinals mind
themselves more than the Crowns; and as Spain is not mony'd, very probably many
will fall off: on the other side, the French having some of the best
head-pieces in the Conclave, and ready monys, will go very far; and because the
last time they were disappointed, and could not raise Farnese to the Popedom,
they will strive very hard for it.

The Emperor, and King of Poland have also their Parties among the Cardinals,
but not considerable in themselves, only they may join with others. These
Princes, as the French and Spanish Crowns Interests, are managed by those
Cardinals who are their Protectors, and the Ambassadors who are at Rome: of
late the Crown of Portugal is also come in.

There are also those Cardinals called Neutrals, of those, who pretending to
the Popedom, declare themselves (at least, not openly) for no party.

Cardinals first of all were called Roman Priests, sent by Popes, to Preach and
do other offices in the Churches, who owned their Authorities: There were but
six upon their first Institution. Calpurnius Poncinus, in the year 231. raised
their number to 10, so by degrees they were 70. but as Popes may alter the
orders of their Predecessors, so they have lessened, or increased this number.

They were very inferior in dignity to Bishops, to whom, and to the people the
Election belonged formerly; but Innocent the 2d. gave it wholly, and only to
Cardinals, in the year 1135. yet left it at their liberty to choose one of
their number, or another Prelate.

But in the year 1464. Paul the 2d. ordered that none but a Cardinal should be
chosen Pope. Innocent the 4th. was the man, who in the year, 1242. altered the
precedence between Bishops and Cardinals, to the advantage of the last: the
same gave them the red Hat: Bonifacius the 9th. the Habit: and Paul the 2d.
the Cap of Scarlet: to show, (as they say) how ready they are to shed their
blood for the Service of the Church; though I think, that this color and
Purple which they use too, are to set forth their Pomp and Magnificence.

These Cardinals are chosen by the Pope, according to his intimation, and some
few upon the commendation of the Emperor, and the King of France, Spain, and
Poland, out of the German, French, etc. Nations; according to the choice of
those Princes, who have liberty to commend, one two, or three, of what Nation
they please: All these Cardinals are divided into three Orders, six Bishops, 50
Priests, fourteen Deacons: every one of them takes place of all Ambassadors
whatsoever, and pretend the hand from all Princes, except Crowned Heads.

Thus much I thought fit to speak of Cardinals, especially now upon the
occasion of the Sede vacant, for they are met to make a new Election, of which
it is necessary to say something.

The Pope being dead, Nine days are employed toward his Funeral, and other
formalities depending thereupon: On the ninth day after, Mass is said, a speech
is made in commendation of the deceased, the Cardinal Padrone, that is Master,
(a Title introduced by Paul the 5th. but fully confirmed by Urban the 8th.) who
is a nigh relation of the late Pope, acqaints all Cardinals abroad with his
^eath, who thereupon make all possible haste to come to Rome.

On the 10th day after the Popes death all the Cardinals who are able, meet at
St. Peter's Church, where the Mass of the Holy Ghost, as they call it, is sung
by the Dean of Cardinals, he who is of a longest standing, or the next to him,
if he be not well; there is also made a speech upon the subject of the Election
of a new Pope, with a great concourse of people to hear it; after this, all the
Cardinals go in a Procession toward the Conclave, following a Priest who
carries the Cross, the Musicians singing their Veni Creator Spiritus.

This Conclave is a place in the Vatican near St. Peter's Church, all made a new
by order of the Cardinal Chamberlain, or Chamerlengho, all of wood, which after
the Election, is disposed of by the said Chamberlain, where a small Lodging is
made for every Cardinal, and every one has his by lot.

The Cardinals, some Prelates, and Volaries go in then, whereof one reads with
a loud voice the Bulls concerning the Election of Popes, which being done, all
Cardinals take an oath to observe what is therein contained, in the hands of
the Dean, and of Prince Savelli, who upon this action has leave to enter into
the Conclave, of which he is keeper, and perpetual Marshal of the Church, for
himself, and successors: After this Ceremony every one goes to his dinner, and
hitherto the doors are shut up, but after dinner all Ambassadors and Roman
Princes have liberty to go in, and for the space of four or five hours they
treat and negotiate with Cardinals, within their private Lodgings, which time
being past, they ring a little bell, whereupon every one is to go away,
excepting the Cardinals, and the Deputies or Deputati of the Conclave, to wit,
two servants are allowed to every Cardinal, who chooses whom he likes, the old
and weak ones are allowed three; for public use, are one Sagrista, and
Oschaltarra; and Solo Sagrista, who take care of things relating to their
Devotions, and belonging to the Altar; five Masters of Ceremonies, the
Secre^ary of the Conclave, a Confessor, two Physicians, an Apothecary, and two
to help him; a Surgeon, two Barbers, two Masons, two Carpenters, and sixteen
Porters.

As Soon as all others are gone, and these are within, the Conclave is walled in
and out, after which, the Cardinals, Dean, and Chamberlain, go about it to see
whether it be well: it has formerly been ordered by some Popes, that after
this, no Cardinal should be admitted, but it is not strictly observed, if they
come soon after, and if the Election is like not to be ended so soon: Before
they are shut up, orders are issued by them, for the peace and quiet Government
of the City, it being very necessary so to do, upon such a conjuncture, to
prevent great and many mischiefs; now all that time the City Officers have a
great power, so that if a Malefactor be taken, he is soon made away. It Is not
usual with the Cardinals to discharge the Officers entrusted by the late Pope,
but it is necessary they should be confirmed by them.

Within the Conclave, is kept an exact Guard, under the Command of the High
Marshal; first at the Ruota, seven in number, which are some holes left
unwalled, to take in the Victuals which are brought in to every Cardinal; These
Ruota's are used at Rome, in every Monastery and Nunnery; the use whereof is to
receive what things are brought from without, and given from within: For at the
inside of the Wall are some few boards joined together, of five or six foot
high, and three or thereabouts in breadth, some more, some less; but being all
of an equal bigness; and this is so suspended, that it turns about like a
wheel, which in Italian is called Ruota; it is hollow within, so that it is
capacious of receiving great dishes, baskets, and some can hold a child of
twelve years old; Then upon the Stairs in the Courts, and at all passages,
Guards also are set with four great corpse de guard in the great place before
St. Peter's Church; every time dinner is sent in to a Cardinal, it is attended by
some of his servants, and a Mace-bearer, with a Silver Mace, with the Cloth and
other things used at Table; this is done twice a day, and besides the Soldiers,
four Prelates stand at every Ruota, to search strictly every thing which is
sent in, the very bread is all cut in small pieces for fear their should be any
bills in it, and those four Prelates are changed every day by the Marshal, to
whom these bills shall be given, in case any be intercepted, which he will keep
till the Election be over; but this is searched, not only without, but also
within, by the Masters of Ceremonies; who have taken an oath of fidelity, and
after the meat is in, these ruota's are sealed with paper, both at the in and
outsides: at every one of these holes, twelve Soldiers are of Guard in the
day, and twenty five in the night time.

Every Cadinal eats and drinks alone with his domestics, and all their
victuals are dressed by order of the Martial, but the Church pays for it, and
one buyeth as much as the other; there is also an allowance for others, who are
shut up, some more or less according to their quality, but usually the
Cardinals servants have the rest of their Masters, and the Guards every where
are mounted every day according to the Marshals order, who also according to
the Bulls does lessen the victuals of Cardinals, when ten days are over, since
they, being shut up, in case the Election be not made, and this is to force
them to hasten it, and to come to an agreement about it; which to effect, once
a day they meet at the Chapel of the Conclave, and he who at last is chosen,
ought to have two parts of three of the Votes, so that if of sixty he had but
thirty nine, it would not be a right Election. The Cardinal Dean, has the
command of Cardinals, as the Camerlengo of others who are shut up, and and at
last they must agree about him who is to be chosen, and all this while, all
within the Conclave are ignorant of what passes in the City.

As Soon as it is known within the Conclave who is the Pope, the Cardinal Decano
desires him to approve of the choice which the College has made of him,
which he consents to, and takes what name he likes, as Innocent, Clement,
Alexander, or the like: then standing between the two chief Cardinals, he is
led behind the Altar, where they take off his Cardinals clothes, and give him
the habit of a Pope; immediately after is sung the Te Deum: then all the
Cardinals one after another, falling upon their knees, do (to use their words)
adore him, kissing his foot, then the right hand, and then he gives them
osculum pacis, upon both cheeks, so they give him signs of submission, which is
meant by kissing of the feet, they expect from him Protection, in kissing his
hand, and they receive from him a sign of affection, being kissed on the lips
or cheeks.

These things being performed, one of the Masters of Ceremonies, takes the
Cross, and carries it before him, whilst the Ecce Sacerdos Magnus is sung, and
they go toward the Balcone which looks upon the great place before St. Peter's
Church, called La loggia della benedictione; and the Masons beat down the Wall
of partition, and there the Pope being between two Cardinals, they show him to
the People, who stand below in the great Place, one of the Cardinals with a
loud voice pronouncing these Latin words, Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum,
habemus Papam Eminentissimum and reverendissimum N. N. qui sibi nomen imposuit,
N. N. Hereupon, the People cries out, God save the new Pope, God bless the
Family, N. N. and at the same time, one can hear the Artillery of the Castle
San. Angela go off, there being constantly some to observe the pulling down of
the Wall; then all the Soldiers give their Vollies; the Drums beat, the
Trumpets sound, and all the Bells in town ring. As Soon as the people hear who
is chosen, they run to his Palace and Plunder it, it being the custom so to do;
but those Cardinals who are likely to be chosen before they go to the Conclave,
have removed the best things they have.

The Ceremony at the window of the Balcone being ended, all the Cardinals wait
upon the new Pope to his Palace in the Vatican, whence every one goes home: in
the mean time, the Pope receives no public visits, only private ones from his
relations, if they be at Rome, and those who have been his friends in the
Conclave, who come to receive the effects of the promises he made to them to
get their assistance, for usually they engage upon such conditions of interest
and preferment: about a fortnight's time is allowed to prepare things, in order
of his being carried in a Chair on men's shoulders to St. Peter's Church, to take
possession of the Popedom, which is done with much pomp and magnificence; and
about a fortnight after he goes in a Cavalcata to do the same at the Church of
St. John of Lateran: but from the first day of his Election, he begins to give
his Orders about the Government of all his Dominions.

It Is usual with every Pope to take an Oath before the Cardinals, about several
things, the chief whereof are, 1. To labor to keep peace between all Christian
Princes. 2ly. They will promote to the dignity of Cardinals, none but those who
are worthy of it. 3ly. To call to an account all the Officers of the State, of
the Church, when their time is expired. 4ly. They will not make two Brothers
Cardinals, which was the Decree of Julius the Second. 5ly. Not to alienate any
thing belonging to the Church, which things all the World knows how well they
are observed, but if Popes may (as they think) dispense others from their
oaths, why not themselves too? so that after this Principle of the Popes
Infallibility, men who believe it, must not complain against him, for if he be
infallible, he can do nothing amiss; these were the words of the late Duke
Cezarini to two Jesuits, who complained to him, that the Pope Alexander the
7th. had persuaded Father Oliva their General, to fell to him land for 100000
Crowns.

I thought it would not be amiss to mention so much about the Election of a
Pope, it being seasonable now, in the time of a Conclave, for those who have a
mind to be informed of their ways about it, for as to many other practices of
that Court, I wholly wave it off, as are their Formalities in visits, their
change of cloths, creation of Cardinals, and things depending therefrom; of
their Jubilees, Indulgences, Blessing ofSwords, Agnus Dei's, and Roses,
Cavalcataes, and Processions, Washing of the Feet, Beatification, Canonization,
and so many other things which we account to be vain or Superstitious.

I judge it unnecessary to mention the order settled in the Popes Court and
Family, but withal think it not amiss to say few words about their great Courts
and Offices, which I will only mention, they being not material for any
Protestant State who have nothing to do there, by way of Public Ministers.

All businesses there are managed by certain Councels or Commitees, which they
call Congregationi, to the number of sixteen. The First, is that Del Sant
Officio, or Inquisition, which as all the rest has a Secretary, by whom are
given all dispatches, which he seals also with the seal of the Cardinal, who is
the President of it; in it are treated Matters of Religion, conducing to what
they call Heresy, Profanation, Blasphemy, etc. This ever is Governed by the
Dominicans, and meets three times a week, on Monday at the Palace del sant
Officio, on Wednesday, at the Dominicans Church, called, La Minerva; and the
Thursday, before the Pope.

The 2d. is that which takes cognizance of affairs concerning Bishops and
Regular Priests, or other of their Diocess's, of this, as of all the rest a
Cardinal is the Head; into it enter 24 Cardinals, which is the greatest number
of any, yet never under six in any other; whenever Friars have any falling
out with Bishops, they presently threaten to bring them before this
Congregation, which meets every Friday in the House of the Cardinal, President
of it.

The 3d. is del concilio, the jurisdiction of which, is to give interpretation
to the Text of the Council of Trent, it meets every Sunday in the House of the
Cardinal President of it, or a Thursday if he has a mind to it.

The 4th. is della immunita Ecclesiastica, instituted by Urban the 8th. to
judge of Ecclesiastical Privileges, which is kept every Thursday, at one of
the Popes Palaces, a Cardinal being the Head of it, for which the Camera
allows him 1000 Crowns a year.

The 5th. is di stato, which handles matters of State; all the Cardinals, who
have been Nuncios and Ambassadors, come in to it, and the Secretary of State:
there is no prefixed day, but it depends upon the pleasure of the Pope, or his
Nephew Cardinal, in whose presence it meets.

The 6th. is de propaganda fide instituted by Gregory the 15th. it consults
about all manner of ways, how to promote the Roman Faith throughout all parts
of the World; all their Emissaries depend upon this, so that what Jesuits and
Priests soever we have here, have their mission from this Congregation, whereof
Cardinal Francesco Barberini is President* it meets usually once a month upon
a Monday, either in the presence of the Pope, or in the College called de
propaganda fide, which is, in Piazza d' Ispagna.

The 7th. is de' Riti which judges of all differences about Ceremonies,
Formalities, Places, Canonizations, etc. it sits once a month, and more if
needs be, in the House of the Cardinal President of it; who is ever the Senior
of the Deputies, who is to summon it, as do all other Cardinals, Presidents of
other Congregations.

The 8th. is del acqua wherein are treated Matters concerning Rivers, Channels,
Bridges, and the like; there is no certain day to meet, but when occasion
requires it, the Cardinal who is the Head of it, sends out his summons about it.

The 9th. is; delle Strade, whereof the Camerlengo is the chief, all things
relating to the necessaries and ornament of Streets, is treated of in it, under
its jurisdiction are matters of Aqueducts and Fountains; the distribution,
whereof is made by this Congregation as they think fit and convenient: and meet
only upon occasion.

The 10th. is della consulta per governo, dello stato di S. chiesa, is of a
great concernment, it takes cognizance of any thing relating to the Government
of the whole State of the Church; all Legates, Governors of Cities and
Provinces give an account of what things of concernment happens in their
Government to this Congregation, who orders them to act as they think fit: yet
by especial privilege, the Legates of Avignon, Ceneda, Benevento, and the
Governor of Fermo, and Spoleti are free from her jurisdiction. The Cardinal
Padron, for the time, who is ever a nigh relation of the Pope, and who rules
all under him is the head of it, at whose pleasure it usually meets in his
Lodgings.

The 11th. is dell, indice, into it are brought Matters of Books, Printed, or
to be Printed, to be examined, Corrected, and Licensed; it usually meets once a
month or seldomer, as the Cardinal President of it is pleased to order.

The 12th. is degli Syravii, or grievances, otherwise, De buono Regimine, it is
a Court of redress and equity, this, particular subjects, and whole
Corporations apply themselves to, when they are wronged, or oppressed by their
Governors; this Cardinal Padron, is the Head of, who orders it to meet at his
house when he has a mind to it.

The 13th, is Soprale Zecche, about the mint; sees all moneys to be coined, and
sets the price of foreign Coyns, and all currrent moneys. This Congregation
upon occasion, meets at the house of the Cardinal, head of it.

The 14th. is Dell, Essame. All they who are to be promoted to any Bishoprics
in Italy, and not one of it, are to be examined by these; it is usually done in
the Popes presence, and at his pleasure, for the time, he who is examined
kneeling all the while upon a stool opposite to the Pope; the Cardinals only
are free from this examen.

The 15th. is de negotii consistoriali, about consistorial affairs; of which
the Cardinal Docano, Senior, or Eldest as to Election, is the head: at whose
house it is kept but very seldom, because it treats only about matters referred
to it by the Pope, as are resigning of Bishoprics, Abbeys, Ecclesiastical
Taxes and Impositions.

Having already mentioned Consistorial Affairs; one is to know that the
Consistory is the Assembly of all Cardinals then at Rome, whereat the Pope is
ever present: it being kept at Monte Cavallo on Mundays, Wednesdays or Frydays;
where more general and serious Affairs are treated of: and what things the Pope
is pleased to lay to their consideration, upon a consistory day, no
Congregation is kept except it had been summoned before the Pope had intimated
the Consistory; and in such a case the Congregation is put off till the
afternoon; for Consistories are ever held betimes in the morning.

Of Consistories, some are public; when by example, hats are bestowed upon
Cardinals after a public Cavalcata, or when Audience is given to Ambassadors,
and foreign Ministers; or else private, according to the Affairs they are to
treat of; and this last sort are kept more often than the former.

That which they call Collegio, is the whole body of Cardinals; among whom ever
is one Camerlengo of the Sacro Collegio, to distinguish it from the Popes
Chamberlain, and is but for a year: there is also a Secretary, a Clerk, and
Controller^ the Secretary is ever an Italian; but the Clerk is one year a
German, another a French man, and then a Spaniard.

But there is the 16th. and last Congregation, Della visita Apostolica, whose
care it is to see all Churches, Chapels, and places of devotion in and about
Rome, that nothing be wanting in it, tending to the necessaries, ornaments and
decorum thereof; and to cause every thing to be duly and orderly performed
in it.

Besides all these Courts, there is a considerable one called la Ruota,
composed of twelve Prelates; whereof there is one German, one Frenchman, two
Spaniards; one of Bologna, one of Ferrara, one Venetian, one Toscan, one
Milanese, and three Romans. They judge of all causes about Benefices, whether
they be in those Countries which own the Popes authority, or elsewhere. About
which they use to meet in the Apostolical Palace twice a week, on Mondayes and
Fridayes; and although the place of Auditori di Ruota be not very beneficial in
it self, it being not worth much above one Thousand Crowns by the year, yet the
Pope, bestowing upon them other Ecclesiastical preserments, it makes it very
considerable, the more as to honor, that sometimes some of the Auditory are
made Cardinals.

There is also the Camera Apostolica, or Apostolick-Chamber, consisting of the
Cardinal-Chamberlain, the Governor of Rome in quality of Vice-Chamberlain, the
Treasurer-general, the Auditor and the President of the Chamber, the Advocate
of the poor, the Solicitor-general, and Attorney General, the Commissary and o
twelve Chierici or Clerks; whereof four ever are Overseers or Prefetti, the
one dell Annona of all manner of Corn, and price the other della grajua over
the price of all sorts of Flesh and Fish; the third over all the Prisons which
he visits, with others, every Thursday; and the fourth is to oversee the
Streets. The Jurisdiction of this Court is extended upon every thing relating
to the Church, in the way of Bonds, Leases, In-comes, Expenses, matters of
Rights, Customs, Impositions, and all Rights, Possessions and Privileges; in
a word, when Popes were not so absolute, as they are now, these Camera, was as
the Guardian of the State of the Church, to see that it should not be
imbeciled, wronged or a lienated; so that it is indeed the true Treasury of the
Church, all Tributes due to it being paid here.

There is also another Office called Diataria, which is administered usually by
a Cardinal, who has one under him called Sotto Datario, throughout whose hands
pass the vacancies of all benefices, which bring yearly very great In-comes to
the Pope, who allows 2000 Crowns to the Datario, and 1000 to the Sotto Datario.
This Office is not the same as that of the Secretary of the Pope, as some do
imagine; for he who is properly the Secretary of State is the Popes Nephew, or
Nephews sometimes, who has several under him: to him all Ambassadors, and
public Ministers make their addresses. This writes and subscribes by the Popes
orders, all Letters to Kings, Princes, Nuncioes, and others, and signs the
Patents of several Governors, and other Officers of the State of the Church;
yet the Patents and Commissions of Legates, Vice-Legats, Governors of great
Cities etc. are signed by the Pope himself, and sealed sub annalo piscatoris.

But there are other great Offices granted for life. First, The Popes Vicar,
now Cardinal Gimetti above 84 years of age, a coveteous man, who has many
Kinsmen, which two things have made him lose the hopes of ever being chosen
Pope. His Jurisdiction is extended upon regular Priests and Nunneries: the
Jews, and deboist women which in Rome are publicly allowed, for which
toleration, it is the common opinion, they pay a Tribute, and certainly there is
more than opinion in it, because every one who is a Housekeeper, and a known
Whore must have her name registered at the Office of the Vicegerent, who is one
of the chief Officers of the Vicario, who is also the Judge of them as such: so
that all the year long they enjoy the liberty of their licentious life, except
at certain times which they call Uacanze, as about Christmas and Easter, for
then the Sbirri or Bailiffs go to search their houses, and if they find any
there, they may if they will carry them and her to prison; Therefore to prevent
this inconveniency, these women send to the Office, and by the means of some
moneys, obtain a defense to those Officers to come to their houses, and to
molest them. And in the days of Alexander the 7th. there was a talk of
suppressing these infamous houses; a sign of the Popes protection, which gave
occasion to this impious pasquinata, laudata Dominum pueri.

Another great Office is that of the Sommo penitentiere, at present Cardinal
Ludovicio, a person of mean parts; his Jurisdiction is about Penances,
Absolutions, and Confessions; for he having many under him in great and weighty
cases, they acquaint him with the faults, though not with the name of the
party, to know of the penance to be said upon.

The Vice-Cancelliere, or Vice Chancellor so called, because the Pope reserves
to himself the Title of Chancell or of the Universal Church, has the whole
ordering of the Chancery. The Camerlengo, now Cardinal Antonio Barberini, has
a very Honorable and beneficial place, for the Chamberlain takes cognizance of
every thing belonging to the Camera, and in the time of Sede Vacant, or when
there is no Pope, he takes the Popes Lodgings, is attended with his Guard, and
causes money to be coined in his Name: This place is worth 15000 Crowns by the
year; besides of three Keys of the Treasure of the Castle Saint Angelo, he has
one, the Pope having the other, and the Cardinal Decano the third.

The Prefetto della signatura di giustitia, must see all Petitions about
matters of Justice, and answers them, ordering what he thinks fit to be done
about it. The like is done in matters of grace, pardon, etc. by the Prefetto
della signatura di gratia. The Prefetto de brevi peruses and signs all the
Apostolical Writs and Orders. The Bibliothecario is Over-seer of the Presses
and of the Library in the Vatican, and commands those who have any thing to do
in it. These four last Offices I mentioned only because they are in the hands
of Cardinals as well as the four former, though less honorable and beneficial.

So are the three following bestowed upon Cardinals, and all is for life, to
wit, The three Arch-Priests; of St John of Lateran, now Cardinal Ghigi; of St.
Peter in Vatican, at present Cardinal Francesco Barberini; and of Santa Maria
Maggiore, now Cardinal Rospigliosi, by the late resigning of it up by Cardinal
Antonio Barberini, who received some satisfaction for it. Now these three
Arch-Priests have an absolute power over all the Canons, Priests, Curats, and
Beneficiaries of their Churches; which Benefices they may bestow upon whom they
please when they are vacant; besides this, he of Lateran has the
administration of Justice in civils and criminals over all persons within the
Jurisdiction of his Church,

Having already insisted so long upon this Subject, I must forbear speakingof
othergreat charges, whether they belong to the Court, as the Master of
Ceremonies, Master of the S. Palace, Secretaries, Steward, etc. Or be Military,
as General of the Galleys of the Popes Guards of the Church, who has four
under him, to wit, of Avignon and Ferrara, and the Generals of the Horse, and
of the Artillery. This great place is ever given to a nigh relation of the
Pope; and he, with him of the Galleys, and the Governor of the Castle Saint
Angelo, are answerable of their actions to the Pope alone; or whether they be
Ecclesiastical, as Almoners, Chaplains, etc. or at last, whether they be Civil,
as Governor of Rome, divided into 14 Rioni or Quarters; namely, Monte,
Colonna, St. Eustacio, Ponte, Regota, Ripa, Trastevere, Trivio, Campidelli
Parione, Pigna, Campo Marzo, St. Angelo, Borgo; but this last is actually
depending upon the Governor of St Angelo, and also Senator, and Conservatours
of Rome, etc.

The King of Spain comes next to the Pope in Italy; he has Naples, and the
Islands of Sicily and Sardegna upon the Coasts, with Milan in Lombardy, and
Finale the head of a Marquisate upon the Coasts of Genoa, and nearer to
Tuscany, he has Portolongone, and Orbitello.

The State of Naples.
NAples contains twelve Provinces which are a division of the three ancient,
their names are Terra di Lavora Principato citra, Principato Ultra, Basilicata,
Calabria citra, Calabria ultra, terra d'Otranta, terra di Bari, Capitanata,
Contato di Molisse, Abruzzo citra, and Abruzzo ultra.; Most of these parts are
inhabited by very dangerous people, the more by reason of the abundance of
Woods which do shelter those Rogues, whom the Crimes they have committed have
driven from the Cities, whither they are not safe to return; whence they have
the name of Banditi, and whom the protection of Great Men to make use of them
one against another, by reason of their animosities, keeps there: those of
Calabria, specially along the Coasts, have the name of being the worst of all,
so ha t it is turned into a Proverb, He is as wicked as a Calabrese. The best
part of the Kingdom is, Terra di Lavoro, which is all the Country about Capua
and Naples: There are but three good Havens able to receive at Fleet, Brundisi,
Taranto, and Trani; for Gaeta, Napoli, Puzzuolo, Bari and Otranto, are neither
safe nor great enough. It Is said, that the Cities, Lands, or Castles in the
King dome come to 2573, the least of which will make 500 Souls, or there
abouts: They have good Soldiers, but proud, treacherous and inconstant for the
generality; yet there are brave men amongst the Nobility, I mean for Civility,
Courage and Valor. The chief strong Holds of the Kingdom have Garrisons of
Natural Spaniards, by whom they are strangely oppressed, as by them they were
conquered.

They are Governed by a Spanish Vice-King, to whom this people is given as a
prey, that he may make himself amends for the Expenses he has been at in some
chargeable Embassage, or a reward for some service he has done to the Crown;
so that in three years, which is the usual prefixed time for the exercise of
that Authority (because the Court of Spain would not have Subjects to grow too
potent in those parts) they squeeze and oppress that people with an infinite
number of Taxes, and other heavy burdens; the Nation being looked upon by them
as Factious, Seditious, reckoned and desirous of Novelties; there being 30
notable Rebellions within the space of 500 years: So that the Vice-Kings rule
with a Despotick Authority; and let him do what he pleases in this kind, people
must never look for redress, he not being accountable for things of this
nature; Besides that, the City, or any part of the Kingdom may not send upon
any occasion an Agent or Deputy into Spain without a special License from the
Vice-King, which he grants very seldom: Neither are the Nobility free from
oppressions, being dragged into Prisons, or driven into Exile upon the least
suspicion that they grow too potent, or are any ways disaffected. The
insolences of the Spanish Soldiers, and others of that Nation are not at all
punished; the very High-waymen, and other Rogues, who are as thorns in the
sides of the people, and who vex, disturb, and plague them, are winked at,
except it be upon a jealousy of State: So that, that formerly flourishing
Kingdom, and full of all manner of necessary and delightful things, is at this
day brought to an utmost misery; that Nation not being allowed so much as
liberty of trading with strangers, on selling their Inland Commodities, but
upon certain Conditions, and a License well paid for* and all the Gold which
can be gathered there, is sent into Spain, which does amount to vast sums. The
Duke Medina delas torres los volez, told one day the Cavaliero Damenico Zane,
then Ambassador at the Spanish Court from Venice, that in six years of his
Government of that Kingdom, he raised 44 Millions of Crowns to supply the
occasions of the Dukedom of Milan, and of Flanders, Moneys are drawn from
thence, with a number of Soldiers to serve in the wars that are made in the
forenamed Countteys: These and many other intolerable oppressions caused the
great and many insurrections that have been there, which cost so much blood,
not only in the times of troubles, but long after, it being the custom of
Spaniards to punish to the Tenth Generation those faults which have been
committed against the State. For all this, the Nobility of that Kingdom
triumphing over their miseries, and boasting of their slavery, are high and
proud, and yet gentle and courteous in their carriage, though they insult over
the common people, they spend beyond their estates, are splendid in an outward
show, but frugal at home, loyal to the King, Enemies to the people, slaves of
Royal Ministers, and very hard to their Vassals, whom they pinch to the very
bones: with all this they hate the Spanish Nation.

Out of this, one may judge of that enmity which is between the Napolitans,
specially the people and the Spaniards; there is never a year but hundreds of
these last are killed by others, either at night in the streets of Naples, or
in the fields, when Fruits and Grapes grow ripe; this people, and so those of
Milan, are grieved to see how those same Spaniards who come to them in a low
and poor condition, and with Capatos de Cuerda, within a year or two do live
very high, out of the blood and substance of the Country. So that the
Spaniards being so hard Masters, they keep what they have in this Kingdom only,
by the means of the division which is in it; so they keep all what they have in
Italy, only because the Italians suffer them to enjoy it for fear of falling
into the hands of worse Masters, not that they can have worse, but because they
are not so sensible at injuries received from Spaniards, as those which they
have suffered from some other Nations, not as to the things, but as to the
manner of doing them; the Spaniard lays heavy burdens and impoverishes them,
and upon suspicions and jealousies of State takes away men's lives; nay, he
attempts upon the Honor of families, but he carries it with more secrecy and
circumspection than other lighter Nations, whose manner of proceeding seems
more insolent; besides that, the Spanish haughtiness and gravity is more
suitable to the Italian temper. Further, Spain and other Dominions belonging to
it, being remote from Italy; the Italians do not account them altogether so
dangerous, as other Martial Nations who are at hand. However, if the late Duke
of Guise had played his game well in Massanillo's time, and well used that
conjuncture, he could have given them a great check in that Kingdom, but
unadvisedly he left the City, which was at his Devotion, and he kept a number
of insolent persons about him, which ever undid the French affairs in Italy.

There goes a story of this Duke, that several persons of Quality and Interest,
to the number of 2000, appointed a Marquess to go in their name, and tell him,
they were unanimously resolved to stand by him, and settle the Crown upon his
head, if he would come to them; but he was fast asleep when that Person came to
his Palace; Who said, he had matters of great concernment to impart to him; but
his people being loath to awaken him, he was forced to stay a long while; at
last being awakened, the other was called in, but before he was come to the
Chamber, the Duke had began to Dance a Courante* and would not speak with him
till he had Danced; which the other being arnazed at and offended, said to him
afterward in few words, I was come to you upon such an Errand; But said he, by
my so long waiting here, the time and opportunity are lost, therefore know
that, Co'l balare non se quadagnano li Regni, Kingdoms are not gotten by
Dancing: So he went to those who sent him, and told them what he had seen; so
that every one went home, and this person soon after forsook the Kingdom to
avoid the punishment which the Spaniard would have inflicted upon him: If this
be true, how did he strangely miscarry in it, for so he lost all the Nobility,
who afterward closed with the Spaniard.

The City of Naples is great and populous, they reckon, that with the late
Plague 200000 died in it. Churches there are a Sanctuary to Malefactors, which
has been often an occasion of falling out between the Vice-Kings and Card.
Filomarini late Archbishop, for some of those having upon occasion caused
these Malefactors to be taken by force out of; these Churches; he threatened,
and did actually excommunicate some for breaking, as he pretended, the
privileges of those Churches, as if the House of God (if such a name may be
given to such places) was to be a Sanctuary to, and a den of Thieves. There are
three Castles in this City, one is St. Elm upon a Mountain, built by King
Robert the first; the other is Castle Novo, in the Port which keeps
communication with the Palace of the Vice-Kings nigh to it, this was built by
Charles, brother to Lewis the 9th. of France; the third is, Dell-Ovo, which is
upon a Rock in the Sea, William the third of Normandy built it. There are also
several fair Churches embelished with rare Pictures, and other ornaments, so
there are two Cabinets worth seeing. At the end of one of the Suburbs, in the
way to Puzzuola, is, la Grotta di Lucullo; a way made through the Rock of
almost a mile in lenth, and broad enough for three Coaches when they are gotten
in it: I shall not mention all the relics of Antiquity which are seen in the
way to Puzzuola, when one is at it, and at Baya, as the Elysian fields, and
those other things so often mentioned in the Poets; nor the mount Vesuvius, now
la Montagne di Somma, these things are out of my purpose. I return to Naples,
and say, that the Virtuosi there are called some Ardenni, others Intronati; and
it is to be observed, that when these Societies take a name, it is either a Title
of imperfection, which betokens a privation, or of a moral Virtue, or of some
habit of the Intellect, and all this to show that they esteem and study the
perfection, contrary to the defect signified by the name.

Their great Offices of the Kingdom are either given or sold according to the
Kings pleasure, but the last rather than the first; and this for life: They are
the High-Constable now a Rom an Prince, of the Family Colonna, the high Judge,
high Admiral, high-Chamberlain, Gran Pronotario, a kind of a Principal
Secretary, Gran Sinisculco, or high-Steward, and high-Chancellour, all which
are given some to Italians, some to Spaniards.

All the High-Courts do sit in the City of Naples, for there are the Seggi,
which are the Assemblies of the Nobility of the whole Kingdom, divided into
five Classes: The first is Seggio Capoano. The second, Di Nido; the third, Di
Montagna; The fourth, Di Porta: and the fifth, Di Porta nuova, so that except
one be admitted into one of those Seats, he cannot pass for a Nobleman or
Gentleman; the Nobility and Gentry there differing only in Degree, and not in
Order; now some enter into several Seggi, so that to be admited in, he must be
past 20 years of age, and have the greater part of the Votes of all the Nobles
of the Seggio.

Out of these 3 Seggi are chosen 3 Gentlemen, who with one chosen by the
people, make up the Body, called the Magistrate of the City, through whose
hands do pass all manner of Taxes and Impositions which the Viceroy has a
mind to lay upon City and whole Kingdom: they also find out means how to bring
it about.

There is also in Naples that Tribunal so much talked of, called, La Vicaria,
which matters of the greatest importance are brought unto, and receive; appeals
from all parts of the Kingdom. The greatest of all is also kept there, called
it Collaterale, whereof the Consigliere, or Counselors have the Title of
Regenti, and for distinction-sake, they wear a long gown, this under the King
is the Supreme Court of Justice, treating of several important matters; these
Regenti are chosen by the King, part Napolitans, and part Spaniards, and it is
for life.

It also has a Council of State, which judges of things concerning War
composed, of six persons, whereof three are Spaniards, and three Italians, half
Soldiers, and half gown-men, chosen by the King; over this as all the rest is
the Vice-King, whose authority is very great, and the profit arbitrary.

I am loath to omit speaking of a custom of the Napolitans, for all their
reserved temper once a year, at Vintagetime, they allow themselves a very great
liberty of jesting one with another; the meanest person is then allowed to jear
the Noblest man of the Land, who use to begin with them: they give one another
all the bad names which their Language does afford, whereof the least at
another time would cause murders and stabbings. This calls to my mind a
singular custom they have at Rome, when there is fallen some snow, at which
time the most reserved and virtuous men and women throw Balls one at another;
the Princes and their Wives practice it one with another within their Palaces:
Neighbors throw it through the windows into the Chambers one of another; if
one has any kindness for another, it is the fashion to go under the window, and
throw in some, as they receive some, if they go by the door of any of their
acquaintances; and this is amongst them a token of civility and favor, and so
much observed, that if any Gentleman or friend of mine comes to me, the most
virtuous woman that happens to be my Neighbor, can show me no greater respect
nor kindness, than to throw at him snow balls.

Before I speak of the secrets of State, which the Spaniards have in relation
to this Kingdom, 'twill not be amiss to speak few words of some Maxims they
have in general; relating to the rest of their State-Dominions in Italy. At
Madrid for the affairs of Italy, there is a particular Council consisting of
six Counselors, whereof two are Napolitans, two Sicilians, and two of Milan,
besides the President, who ever is a Spaniard, and now the Marquess of Vellada
by name; This Council was instituted by Philip the Second, no other affairs but
those of Italy are treated of in it, which formerly belonged to the congnizance
of the Council of Aragon. When first of all the Spaniards came to Italy, and
had gotten footing in it, they went about by fair means to insinuate themselves
into the affection of the Nation, to turn it upon occasion to their own
advantage; but the Italians, who, as they say of themselves, Dormono Co'll
Occhio aperto, who are constantly awake, stood upon their guards, and observed
the Spanish motion, which being taken notice of by the House of Austria, Charles
the 5th, and then the Council I spoke of just now under his Son Philip the
second, took another course, and went about to terrify them with their Arms,
to draw some to them with fair promises, to threaten others, to sow divisions
amongst them, but above all they looked upon the Republic of Venice as a great
let to their designs, having ever appeared to be the Champion of the Liberties
of Italy; the troubles which this raised in those parts sometimes against
Mantoa, other times, against Savoy, etc. are well known; but now a constant
maxim they hold, is, to get at Rome as many Cardinals as they can to be their
friends, that if possible they may every time have a friend of theirs chosen
Pope, the truth is, they are potent in the Conclave, because of several
Napolitans, and Milaneses who are in it, the several means they have to
gratify Churchmen, by conferring Benefices on them within their Dominions in
Italy, and by selling Lands and States to others within the same, besides the
many pensions which they allow to several of them: so that whilst the French
has but eight or ten of his side, namely, D' Este, Ursini, Antonio, Grimaldi,
Mancini, Maldachini, de Rets, Bouillon, the greater number of them are for the
Spaniard; it is true, it is very chargeable for them to keep this party, and a
Spanish Statesman had reason to say, It were better for his King to buy Popes
ready made, than to make them.

But now in few words, Spaniards do govern Naples with these few rules; the
first is, to hold good correspondencie with the Pope, not only because they do
him homage for it, but because he is a next neighbor, much able to trouble it,
and to foment and assist Insurrections in it. The second is, to foment
Divisions between the Nobility and the people, and between the Nobility
themselves who being all together united, could for certain drive them out; and
though the Napolitans Horse's back be much galled, if he could gather his
strength together, he would be able to shake off the Rider. The third Maxim
is, as much as they can do to make great States fall into the hands of women,
whom they marry afterward to Spanish Noblemen.

The Chief Families of that Kingdom are at present Caraccioli, where of the
Duke of Auelina is the Head; Caraffa, of which Family is the Duke Matalone;
Pignatelle, who had the title of Duke of Monteleone, Monaldesqui, Aquaviva,
Brancaccio, and several others who have the name of Princes, as, Marana, etc.
The ancient family of the Princes of Salerno is extinct as to the name, and
their Palace at Naples; which was very stately, has these several years been
possessed by the Jesuits.

I shall not say much of Sicily, it is governed by a Vice-King at present; the
Duke of Albuquerque, as Don Pedro d' Arragon is he of Naples: This Island is
known to be plentiful; and as formerly it was the Granary of Italy, so it is
still of part of it, but specially of Maltha, for the Galleys of the Order come
almost every week to transport Corn cut of it. Messina drives a great Trade of
Silks; the Inhabitants have still their est and non est, that is, when any
thing is proposed by the Vice-King or his Order, after a debate had thereupon
to satisfy the people, they cry out non est, if it be not contrary to their
Privileges; if it be, they say, est, then every one gets to his Arms. This
City has several privileges, but cannot get them confirmed at Madrid; neither
do the Vice-Kings dare to trust themselves amongst them; therefore they reside
at Palermo, which was the landing place of Don Pedro d' Arragon, when the
moneys he had received from Lewis the 9th of France, to make war against the
Infidels in Africa, he went to drive Charles d' Anjou, Lewis's Brother, out of
the Kingdom whereof he was lawful Sovereign. The peoople of this Island speak
a very corrupt Italian Language, mixed with some words of corrupt Greek; and as
their Luanguage is, so are their manners, and nature, which how treacherous it
is let the Sicilian Vesspers bear witness; by which action they are become not
only odious, but also a proverb to Italy, having thereby been the author of all
the disturbances wherewith the Spanish Nation have since afflicted those parts
of the world; it had been something in withdrawing from the subjection of one
(who though he was their lawful Prince, yet he was of a Foreign Nation) they had
gotten their liberty; yet Princes may see of how dangerous a consequence is
this president: but to leave the bad for the worse, it is to find a pain,
wherein they looked for a pleasure, that is, to be no more reasonable than were
the Frogs, who rejected the Reed, to have the Stork to rule over them; they
should have learned of the Fish, how it is better to keep in the Pan, though
amidst boiling water, than to leap out and fall into the burning flames and
fire.

Mount Aetna, now Gibello, with some of his flames, is still to be seen; its
horrid late casting up stones, flames, cinders, as far as Catania, and the
running of Rivers as it were of fire and brimstone, are known to all Europe;
Such as we cannot read ever there was the like. Syracusa is not very far from
it, which is much decayed, they show some old standing ruins of a Castle, as
they say of Dyonisius; they affirm 'twas in the shape of a shell; in the Center
of which was the Tyrants Closet, whence by the means of some pipes, which
conveyed the voice, he heard (if we believe the Tradition) every word spoken by
the prisoners; it is probable that such a thing may be, there being things of
that nature in several parts; though these prisoners were at a great distance
from the Closet.

The Spaniards govern this Land almost by the same Maxims which they use in
Naples, only they let them have some few Privileges, in consideration of their
withdrawing from the French, and giving themselves up to them; nevertheless,
the Spaniards are much odious to them by reason of the great and many
oppressions they suffer from them, for the which no body pities them, since
they brought it upon themselves; however, it is the division of the two Chief
Cities Messina and Palermo about precedencie and other things, which upholds
the Spaniards authority in the Island; for when one of these Cities stands up,
the other stoops, and they do every thing in opposition one to another; the
Spaniard therefore knows how much it imports to his interest to see these
differences continue, he foments it with the best of his skill, and to the
utmost of his power.

It were in vain to speak of Sardegna, seeing the people in it are become
Spaniards in every thing. There happened in it not long since a great division
caused by falling out between two of the Chief persons of the Island, but
having been both transported into Spain, the Factions were dispersed, and gave
way to a general tranquillity. This is a Kingdom, and therefore is Governed by
a Vice-King, who was lately Prince Ludovisio. Of late they have stirred very
much, having killed a Viceroy; for which act some have been executed, which
their Friends and Relations highly rescenting, are causing new Disturbances; so
that the present Vice-King not thinking himself strong enough, has desired
more Forces out of Spain, specially his Enemies being potent in Cagliari,
hereby are laid the foundations of an eternal hatred, for their Children
inherit of the quarrels, and desire of vengeance, as of the states of their
parents, this had been a fair occasion for any foreign Enemy of the Spaniard.
This Island, as that of Sicily and Naples, maintain a number of Galleys, which
of late is much diminished, for put them altogether with the squadron of the
Duke of Tursi, they do not come to above twenty.

The state of Milan.
VVEsterly it borders with Piemont and Monferrat, Sur Southerly with the
Republic of Genoa, Westerly with the Duke of Parma, with the Republic of
Venice and the Duke of Mantoa, and Northerly with the Valtoline. The Dukedom
of Milan is as good and as plentiful a Country as any in Italy, full 300 miles
about, plain and even ground; in it are many Lakes full of Fish, and is watered
by considerable Rivers, which make it pleasant, plentiful and strong; Po runs
by Cremona, the Tanaro by Alessandria, and the Bormia, which is a little one
not far off. Adda, nigh to Lodi and Ticcino by the walls of Pavia, by Milan run
two Channels, one of which is of great use (and this goes through it) and both
for watering of grounds, whence it is that they have so good pastures; hence it
is that this Dukedom does furnish with Cheese all Italy, and other places; the
best sort of that which goes under the name of Parmesan is made at Lodi, one of
the Cities of the Dukedom, and its Territory. This Country does also produce
abundance of all manner of Corn, good Fruits, and good Wines; this goodness of
the Soil, joined to the industry of the people, makes it very rich; it
contains many Cities, as Milano, Pavia, Tortona, Alessandria, Della Paglia,
Novarra, Mortara, Vigevana Cremona, Lodi, Como and Lomellina, every one strong,
and except Mortara, the head of a Territory, which borrows its name from the
Town. This Dukedom is Governed by one sent from Spain, and has the name of
Governor, who was Don Lewis de Gusman ponce de Leon: And now the Marquess de
Los Balbases: These Governors improve well their time, which, as I said in the
case of Naples, is for three years, or thereabouts, except they be confirmed;
and this makes part of the misery of that people, that every three years they
have new and greedy Ministers, who make haste to be rich, and when they begin
to be full, they are gone to give place to one who is as hungry as they were.
The King of Spain raises here one Millions ofCrowns a year, but it goes all for
the necessities of the State. In time of peace there are kept 5000 men; there
was a strong hold, called the Fort Sandoval, which commanded the way into one
of the Gates of Vercelli, which is but a Cannon-shot off, and 'twas raised to
bridle that place; but the Spaniards after the taking of Vercelli demolished it
not long since as a thing chargeable, and nor necessary; but by the late Treaty
of Peace with France, they restored Vercelli to the Duke of Savoy.

The City of Milan is called the great, for it is of a large circumference, full
of people, to the number of about 300000, and of handy-craft-men, almost of all
fort, in so good repute amongst the Italians, that when any sumptuous clothes
or furnitures are to be bought, or any considerable equipage is to be made, to
the very Liveries, they send thither to have it done: They work much in Silks,
Gold and Silver thread, and make admirable good Gun-barils; all this maintains
abundance of weak and poor people. In this place is a Castle, esteemed one of
the strongest in Europe, well provided with Ammunition and Artillery; there is
a particular Governor of it, who does not depend upon the Governor of the
Dukedom, but has his Orders immediately from Spain. In this City is a very
great number of stately Churches, specially the Domo, all built with white
Marble; they say, about it are 600 Statues, which cost 1000 Crowns a piece: if
this Church be once finished according to the design; none but St. Peter in
Rome will be able to compare to it; till then, this last will be the fairest in
Europe, and I believe, of the world, for all the great commendations given to
that of Santa Sophia in Constantinople. I returnto Milan, and say, not only
there are in it fair Churches, but also sumptuous Cloisters, Hospitals, Palaces,
and other Noble Buildings: A Churchman there has a fine Cabinet full of
Rarities, most of his own invention and making. Virtuosi in Milan have the name
of Nascosti; but I must not omit to say that the house which the Cartusians
have fifteen miles from Milan, and five from Pavia, is the best of their Order.

Notwithstanding the Proverb tha^ the King of Spain governs Sicily in meekness,
or Dolcezza Naples by fraud, or con Inganno, and Milan by Authority, con
Authorita (which may be understood in relation to the strong holds he has in
it:) It Is his maxim of State, to Rule this Dukedom with more gentleness, than
the rest of his Dominions in Italy; This practice is enforced by the temper of
the people, who are nor so willing nor so apt as others to suffer abuses,
burdens exceedingly heavy, nor other great opresfions, their spirits can
hardly bear it; they are of an humor free, open, plain, and as they call it,
Rozzo, being usually called the Lombarad's temper: That which makes further the
Spaniards more circumspect in this, is that many Neighbor Princes would
willingly receive and assist them, if they came to have a pull for their
liberty, for they join with the Duke, of Mantoa, the Venetians, with Parma,
Genoa, Piemont, and with the Grisons, by the Ualteline; therefore the
Spaniards, who knew the importance of that passage to them, struggled so hard
for it, and set all Europe in an uproar about it: yet for all this gentleness
of theirs used to the Milenesi, that people is not free from grievances and
oppressions. That Country which for a long while together has been the seat
of War, has been obliged to maintain in a good measure the Spanish, Germans,
French, Savoy, Modena, and Mantoan Forces, the perpetual lodging, quartering,
and contributing, for the Soldiers has wasted them; and all this has been a
pretense for the Spanish Ministers to oppress them: The Italian Proverb says,
that the Spanish Ministers in Sicily Rodono they Gnaw, in Naples Mangiano they
eat, but in Milan Divorano they devour: but they bear it, seeing that excepting
the Republics, the Subjects of other Princes are used no better than they.

At first the Sforzi got this Country from the Visconti, and the House of
Austria has gotten it from these, yet the Venetians have of it Brescia,
Bergamo, and Crema: I will not show whose right it is to have it, if the Heirs
of Valentina have it not. The Chief Families of it are now Borromeo, Trivultio,
Stampa, Trotti, Sforza, Homodei, Litta, etc.

Finale is a Town well fortisied, of great concernment to the Spaniard, for
it is the only door they have to get into Milan from Spain, Naples, Sicily, etc.
It is also a bridle to the Genoesi. Portolongone and Orbitelle are also upon
the Coasts, the one on the Continent, the other close by upon a Rock in the
Sea, of great importance to bridle the Grand Duke, Viareggio belonging to Luea
and the Genaesi.

The state of the Duke of Savoy.
THe Duke of Savoy is the most considerable Prince of Italy, after the Crowned
Heads; He comes from Humbert, a younger Brother of Saxony, and a man of
fortune: Amede the great, or, le Comte Verd, or Green Earl, so called, because
usually his Clothes were of that color, as were those of his Followers; by his
merits and good fortune raised himself to a great credit; he did great Services
against Infidels, specially at the taking of Rhodes from the Infidels, and then
he took the Motto about the Coat of Arms which to this day that Family retains;
F. E. R. T. signifying, Fortitudo, Ejus, Rhodum Tenuit. His History is in
Fresco at the pleasure-house of the Dukes at Rivoli. This Family was first
Earls of Moriene, then by Marriage and favor of some Emperor, Princes of
Piemont, and Dukes of Savoy; and of late from the Duke of Mantoa, they have
gotten Trin and Alba in Monferr at by the Treaty of Chierasco, so that besides
Piemont with its Valleys, and Savoy, the Duke has upon the Seacoasts, Villa
Franca, Oneglia, and Nizza di provinza, with as strong a Castle as any in
Europe, his Dominions indeed are large, though to speak the truth, Savoy is a
barren and a mountainous Country, which defect is somewhat made up by the
indefatigable laboriousness of the people, and by the populousness and plenty
of Piemont.

His Court is for certain the Ornament of Italy, not composed of a vast number
of persons, nor solitary neither; there is in it a variety without confusion,
well compacted, consisting of choice persons, well qualified for a Court in a
handsome and orderly way; In it the French and Italian languages are commonly
spoken, and the free French manner of life is practiced in it. These Princes
have been, and are still very Honorable in Europe; for this long while
Emperors and Kings have given them the Title of Serenissime, when some other
Princes of Italy did not so much as pretend to it: but it happened in the days
of Pope Urban the 8th, that he (it may be to please his Nephews) gave a higher
title to Cardinals than they had before, the title of Illustrissime was changed
into that of Eminentissime; this obliged some Princes to take the title
Serenissime and of Highness; upon which account still to keep a distinction
between them and other Princes, the Dukes of Savoy added Reale to Altezza to
make up Royal Highness, which they pretend to, as being Titular Kings of
Cyprus, and so by virtue of a match with France, the French did not oppose it;
and this Duke is now in hopes that the King or Prince Regent of Portugal (being
now himself owned to be a Crowned Head) by reason of the late Marriage, or that
which is to be made with that Prince Regent, and the Dutchesse's Sister, will
approve of it, but upon what grounds I dispute not.

This Duke is Vicar of the Empire in Italy, he could not yet obtain from the
Emperor the Investiture of what he has in Montferrat; however of late the
Electoral College at the Solicitation of the House of Bavaria, whose present
Elector married his Sister, did something on his behalf, to wit, made a Decree,
that his not being invested by the Emperor shall be no prejudice to his Right,
seeing he had used his diligence to obtain it. It Is a thing which raises much
the Glory of this Prince, that he has several of his Subjects descended from
Emperors of East and West Kings, other Sovereign Princes, and of the Chief
Families of Italy; in Piemont alone are above fifty Earls, fifteen Marquesses
at least; this makes him the more Considerable, and adds something to his
strength, which on the other side does consist in the largeness of his
Dominions, the Number, Affection, and Fidelity of his Subjects; and in his
strong places, of which the Castle of Montmelian, though taken by the French,
is one of the chief in Savoy; they use to say, that their Prince has a City
which is 300 miles about, to show how thick Towns are in it, and how populous
it is; in Piemont alone are 8 Episcopal Cities, and 130 very populous places.
Another thing is, that the Duke is as absolute as any Prince in Europe. It Is
said of Charles Emanuel, this Dukes Grandfather, that one day discoursing with
Henry the fourth of France, and the King having asked which of the two Pistols
(pieces of Gold) the French or Spanish he accounted the heaviest; his answer
was, That which I shall give my grain to, meaning that of the two Kings, he
whom he would assist should be the strongest.

His Riches I will not mention, his yearly income is said to amount to one
Million, and Eight Hundred Thousand Crowns, out of which Savoy and the Valleys
yield him but Four Hundred Thousand, all which is Nobly spent. I must say
however, that Gold and Silver are scarce in his Dominions, which on the other
side afford him a great plenty of all things, whereby all manner of provisions
are at a low rate. Upon consideration of this, two several proposals were made
to the present Duke by a judicious person; the first and less important, was to
settle a fixed and a constant Office for the conveniencie of Travelers, so
that giving so much, they should be defrayed for their Diet, and should be
provided with Horses; to this effect a Correspondencie was to be settled at
Lion, as this had been convenient for strangers and safe, so it had made the
moneys of all those who enter Italy that ways to pass through the hands of the
Dukes Officers; and these sums had been very considerable, seeing all those,
who go by land into Italy out of Spain, in time of peace out of France, and
pats of Germany, come by the way of Lion, this would have encouraged many to go
that way who do not, helped the sale of provisions, and brought Moneys into the
Country: but this Proposal, though approved, yet wanting a further
encouragement came to nothing. The second is to make Nizza, or Villa Franca a
Free port, any of these lies convenient for ships, this would bring in Trade,
and consequently Moneys, and would help the sale of the Lands Commodities: but
I omit the reasons which are given to enforce this proposal, for I must come to
other things.

Turin is the Metropolis of Piemont, and the ordinary place of the Dukes
Residence, when he is not at his houses of pleasure, of which he has as great
a number of fine and convenient ones, as any other Prince: This City is well
seated in a plain, the Rivers Po and Doire running not far from it; in the
Court is an Office of the Admiralty, as they call it of the Po, which is more
for formality-sake, than for any benefit. In Turin are to be seen the Old and
New Palaces, with the Garden, from the place to the New Palace to that of St.
Garloe, is on both sides a row of fine Houses all uniform. I shall say nothing
of Churches there, nor of the Countrey-houses, as Rivoli, Moncallier, le
Valentin, Millefleur, and la Venerea, which is the present Dukes delight: but I
must take notice that there is as good a Citadel as any in Europe, in which
there is a Well, into which one may go down to water a Horse, and at the same
time, one can come up thence and not see one another. There are also Arms for
40000 men.

Many things I omit here to tell, that Carlo Emanuele, the present Duke, is a
Prince well made of his person, of a middle stature, full face, with that
natural red, which only does embelish it; his sight is none of the best, as may
be observed when he eats or reads; he loves hunting with some kind of excess,
the scorching heat, nor the foulness of weather, being not able to divert him
from it: and by this constant course he has brought himself into a capacity to
endure any hardship; yet this passion does not take him off his important
businesses, which he is vigorous in, and follows it very close: He has set
days to give Public Audience, at which time the least of his Subjects may
speak to him without any disturbance at all, and he hears them very patiently,
as he is an active man, so he takes cognizance of every thing, and imparts all
to his Lady, who being a judicious Princess, and exceedingly complying with his
Highness, she ever has a place in his Closet, as in his Bed.

He is a Prince very civil to Strangers, and now frugal at home, for he finds
his Ancestors have been too free so he has been himself, but now says for a
reason of his alteration, that as to Frugality he cannot imitate a greater
Monarch than the, King of France, with whom he has a conformity of temper,
joined to a natural affection. His inclination to Women has been discovered by
his actings with the Marchioness of Cahours, and is daily observed by those who
follow his Court. His first Minister of State is the Marquess of Pianezza, of
the Family d' Allie, and Brother to Count Philip; a great Politician he is, and
a greater Enemy to the Protestants of the Valleys of Piemont: His Son the
Marquess of Livorno, kept the place when he was lately retired for some
distasts, though under pretense of Devotion. The Marquess San Germano Governor
of Turin, is of the same Family; The Marquess Palavesin (Successor to the
Marquess de Fleury, who was turned out for his privacies with the Marchioness
de Cabours) Captain of the Guards, is also much in favor; so is the Old
Marquess of Voghera, whose Lady has the oversight of the Maids of Honor, but
none can boast of being his special Favorite. The Princes of the Blood are
few, the Young Prince of Piemont, Son to the Duke by this Wife, and Prince
Philibert, with the Earl of Soissons, Sons to the late Prince Thomas. There is
at Court a Princess, the Dukes Sister unmarried: there is a Natural Uncle of
the Dukes, Don Antonio, Governor of Villa Franca, and a Natural Son of the
late Victor Amedeo, who lives privately in France.

This Princes Country is much exposed to the French power, whereby they have
been stripped twice, and therefore his interest is to agree with France, for fear
of bringing himself into the sad condition which the Duke of Lorrain is in, for
the 18 or 20000 men, which without any great inconveniencie he can keep on
foot, could hardly save him; he is withal as handsomely as he can to prevent
the French from settling in Milan, for then he would be shut up by them every
way.

The State of the Grand Duke.
THe Family of Medici, of which are the Grand Dukes of Toscany, has not been
very long possessed of that Dignity, neither is it so ancient as are many
others in Italy; when Florence was a Republic, 'twas one of the Chief, but no
more than the Strozzi, Pity, and some others were. Alexander began the work,
but was quickly dispatched by his Cousin Lorenzo: then came Cosmo, who was the
first named and Crowned Grand Duke by Pope Pio Quinto of his Family, Ferdinand
who left off the Cardinals Cap after the death of his Elder Brother, Cosmo 2d.
and Ferdinand 2d. who is the present Grand Duke, who married Donna Vittoria
della Rovere, last heir of the late Duke of Urbino. Some say a Physician was
the first who raised that Family, and that in token of it, they took the Pile
(but it is the Balls or Globes) for their Arms; they were raised by Charles the
5th. the Emperor, who gave Margarita his Natural Daughter to Alessandro, and so
forced the Florentines to submit to him.

The Grand Dukes are Creatures of Clement the 7th. and of Charles the 5th.
Emperor, with whose arms and countenancing, they became Masters of Florence;
at present they are in possession of three formerly potent Republics, to wit,
Florence, Pisa, and Siena; they have all ancient Toscany, except Luca and
Sarzana; hence is the Proverb, which says, If the Grand Duke had Luca, and
Sarzana, Sarebbe, Re di Toscana, for he has also the Cities of Pistoias
Volterra, Cortona, Arezzo, Montepulciano, and several other lands and Castles
of a lesser importance, besides part of the Island Alba, where is Cosmopoli,
and Porto Ferrario. When the Dukes came to the Government, the Florentines had
subdued Pisa, wherefore the condition of that City is the worst of the three,
for being a conquered Country they are under the Jurisdiction of Florence; but
Siena is Governed in the same way, as when it was a Republic, owning none but
the Grand Duke, or the Governor sent by him; thus they have nothing to do at
Florence, even they are used better than the Florentines, who being looked upon
at sactiout men, and desirous of liberty, are not only disarmed, as all other
Subjects are, but are more bridled too: A further reason is, that the Duke does
homage for it to the Crown of Spain (as he does for Radicofany to the Pope)
therefore he dares not take altogether the same liberty there, which he uses in
other places. Pisa is void of inhabitants, but well seated, and has in it
several things worthy to be seen; the Grand Duke delights to be in it, therefore
he comes to it, having the conveniencie of a Forest, which lies not far from
it. Siena is a fineCity, in a good Air, with good store of people in it, the
Italian tongue is well spoken, the Virtuosi that are there, are called
Intronati.

Florence, the place of the Courts ordinary residence, is a stately City, and
very populous, there being accounted to be 100000 souls in it; the Gentry in it
does not think it below themselves to follow trade, which is specially of
Silks, so that it may pass for a rich town; there are in it 10 or 12 Families,
accounted to be worth one Million of Crowns. There are three Castles, fine
Churches, specially the Domo, which on the outside is all of white and black
Marble, and that incomparable Chapel of San Lorenzo, for the which Marble is
not rich enough to enter, as one of the Materials, but Jasper, Agatha,
Porphiry, etc. There are further rare Palaces, and the Dukes Galleries
exceedingly rich, the River Arno runs through it, there is that learned
Society, called la Crusca.

The Grand Duke trading much underhand, as its thought, and being very frugal,
must be very rich; not to mention those rich Galleries of his esteemed worth
above three Millions, but he draws to himself the best of his Dominion, there
being hardly in the World a Country more oppressed with Customs and Taxes
than this is; hence it is, that except Florence, where trade does flourish, and
Siena, where is still some rest of liberty the whole Country is the Grand
Dukes, very little inhabited, and full of poverty, and this for fear those
Toscan active wits should cause some disturbance; therefore he has several
strong holds, with a 1000 horse commanded by strangers, and about 4000 foot,
besides the Militia's, which upon occasion ought to be ready. It Is a privilege
of the Horsemen, that they may not be arrested for any debt whatsoever; so
that any one that is afraid and in danger of it, uses all possible means to get
in amongst them.

This Prince for his person is a judicious man, and upon all occasions carries
himself very politickly, besides the general genius of the Nation, the
particular one of the Florentines, which goes beyond others, and his own
natural parts; Having ruled these many years, he has gotten a great deal of
experience; therefore he knows admirably well how to far fatti Suoi, to mind
and do his businesses, whereat he is as a Cervellone, Italiians call it. He
carries his whole Council along with him, for he has no constant nor fixed
Councillors, but upon occasson he sends for whom he pleases to have their
advice, but all resolutions do absolutely depend upon him; so that the whole
manner of his Government is to be attributed to him alone. He is extraordinary
civil to strangers, specially if they be persons of Quality, and after they
have had the Honor of waiting on him, he sends them a Regale, or a present of
Fruits, Wines, etc. But of all Nations, Germans are those who have the greatest
privileges about his person, and in his Dominions, strangers of other Nations
having any thing to do with his Searchers, and the like Officers, do free
themselves of toil and trouble, by saying they are Germans; and at present,
amongst those many of that Nation who are at his service, there is one who is
much in favor with him.

He is very careful to know the affairs of other States, to be able the better
to rule his own, to that end he spares no charges that he may be well informed
of it, knowing it is the deepest policy of Princes to dive into the affairs of
others: so every year he spends great sums of moneys to maintain the Spies he
keeps abroad, there being no Court, and hardly any considerable City, but he
has some to give him intelligences of what passes in it.

He will have an exact knowledge of the state of every thing within his
dominions, therefore in 1645, having a mind to know the yearly Income of his
Clergy, he caused an account to be made of it; 'twas found to amount to 765000
Crowns, whence one may guess he does not neglect to know his own, which is
thought to be of half a Million of English pounds, besides Casualities, of
which he hardly spends the half; so that he must needs have many a Million in
his Coffer; Indeed Legorn alone is worth a treasure to him, it being the most
noted Storehouse of all the Mediterranean, there being at it an extraordinary
concourse of Ships from all parts, and it is a place well fortified; there is in
it the Statue of Ferdinand the first, with four slaves in Brass, then the which
nothing better can be seen in that kind. But to return to the Grand Dukes
riches, he daily improves them with his frugality, for to save charges he has
lessened the number of his Galleys, having now but four, two of which are unfit
for service; and to get moneys he hires the others to Merchants to transport
their Wares; formerly his Galleys lay along the Coasts to secure them from
Pirates; now they have Towers along the Sea shore, where they use tolight fires
when any Enemies or Pirates appear, which gives a warning where the danger is.
This Prince gathers moneys on all hands, for at Florenee, Legorn, and other
places, he receives Contribution from the Cortegiane, or prostitute women, for
the tolleration and protection he gives them; so that an injury done to any of
those Infamous persons shall be punished, as if it had been done to the most
virtuous in the world. But the Grand Duke is not satisfied to be frugal
himself, he has often exhorted the Grand Prince his Son to the practice of it;
Son, says he, Non spender' quell' che tu hai perch, chi non ha none; Do not
spend what thou have, for he who has nothing, is nothing.

Another way of this Grand Duke to get moneys, and wherein lies his great
maxim of policy at home, is to keep his Subjects low; no people in the world
lie under heavier Taxes and burdens than this does; every house that is Let
out, pays him the tenth part of the rent; every Contract of Marriage, Eight by
the hundred of the portion; and every one who will go to Law, before he begins
must pay two for the hundred, out of this one may judge of the rest; this usage
makes that Prince to mistrust his Subjects, who are active, stirring, and men
of pregnant parts, exceedingly desirous of, and breathing after liberty, for
it is very hard for a people who lived a long while in a way of Republic, to
bring themselves to live under a Monarch, so absolute and so hard as this is;
so that upon this account the Grand Dukes strong places are all well furnished
with Arms, Ammunition, and Provision, not only to resist a foreign Enemy upon
occasion, but to bridle his own Subjects; which is indeed a sad case, when a
Prince has as many Enemies as he has Subjects; how can he think himself sure
with those who hate and fear fear him, seeing any one who out of despair
caresnot for his life, is ever the Master of another, specially in those parts
where it is so much used, and where men are so skilled at it; and the Devil who
is a murderer from the beginning, omits no occasion to infuse bloody motions
into his Hirelings. Happy is that Prince whose strongest fortress consists in
the love of his Subjects, who has not only their hands but their hearts along
with him; it is certain that of all Enemies the Domestic is the most dangerous,
and the most to be feared. Oderint dum metuant, was a fit expression for such a
man as Tyberius. Yet though the Grand Duke keeps his people so low, he has
left them a shadow of liberty, whereat they be somewhat satisfied, it consists
in the use of those common Laws of Justice which they had in the time of the
republic.

Now to the maxims of State of this Prince in Relation to his Neighbors, the
first is apparently to be united with Spain, yet in private to keep friendship
and correspondency with France, which the Spaniards often times have been much
displeased at, and had some thoughts to resent it, but fearing least the remedy
might prove worse than the disease, they have chosen to sit still. What he does
in France, the same he practices with the Republic of Venice: but that which
he minds most of all, is to have a good number of Cardinals, and other useful
persons of Quality his pentioners at Rome, to have none but those who be his
friends chosen Popes, for the great'st storms he is afraid of are from thence,
for knowing how matter is combustible at home, he fears least Popes would
encourage and assist his people to recover that liberty which they are so much
longing after; and there has been some Popes who were born his Subjects, as
one of the Clements, and lately Urban the 8th. who have given him or his
Ancestors trouble enough.

Of his Family, Prince Matthias his Brother died lately, Governor of Siena,
and now Prince Leopold is created Cardinal, his Son the Grand Prince his Heir
Apparent is called Cosmo, who has married the Princess of Voalis, of the
French Royal blood: for a long while there has been an unhappy falling out
between them, but now all differences are composed; by some the fault was laid
upon one, and by others upon the other; it is not fit for men to search into the
causes of falling out between Husband and Wife, specially when they are
Princes; some particular ones I heard, which I do not mind, only one may say
that the retired manner of life practiced in Florence differs very much from
that which is lead at Paris, so that an Italian may happen to require a thing
which a French Woman will have no mind to grant: I know in Toscany there are
still some Noble and Ancient Families, but as the Grand Dukes have been very
jealous of their Aurhority, they have either rooted out, or brought very low
the Chief, and those of whom they were the most jealous.

The state of Mantoa.
THe Family Gonzaga has possessed the State of Mantoa since the year 1328. at
which time Roberto Gonzaga having expelled some petty Usurpers, he made himself
Master of it; they enjoyed it without any Title till the year 1432. when the
Emperor Sigismond Created Giovanni Francesco Marquess, and Charles the 5th.
in the year 1530. made Federico Duke of it; this Married Margarita Paleologa
Heir to the Marquesate of Monferrat. The Titles of this Prince are these, Duke
of Mantoa, Marquess of Monferrat, Prince, and perpetual Vicar of the Empire in
Italy, Marquess of Gonzaga, Viadane, Gozzolo, Dozzolo, Earl of Rodiga, and
Lord of Luzara.

These Dukes could formerly live in as great a splendor as any Prince in
Italy, their equal, specially since Monferrat was united to their State, but
since the late War made against the Duke Charles the first, in the year 1630.
by the House of Austria, under pretense that he had not done homage to the
Emperor, nor acknowledged him for his Sovereign, though the true reason was,
because being born in France, he was by them suspected to be wholly inclined
that way, and by the Duke of Savoy, who would have stripped him of Monferrat,
which is joining to Piemont: their Strength is so weakened, and their Revenue,
and yearly Income so lessened, that without the help of other Princes they
cannot maintain their Garrisons, as it is in the case of Cazal that strong
place, so that from above 300000 Crowns they had a year, they are brought to
80000. which yet are not clear. Mantoa, formerly a most flourishing and very
populous City, has at present but few Inhabitants, and is full of misery, not
caused by their Princes who have been the meekest of all Italy, but they could
not rise up again since they were taken and plundered by the Imperial Army. The
best Ornament of that City was, and is, still the Dukes Palace, where they
reckon at least 550. Chambers very richly furnished with hangings and bedding,
there are 1000. Beds, and many rich Statues; but before the taking of the City,
'twas as they say, more stately and rich, then the Mills only of the City were
worth 10000. Sterling a year. Upon occasion this Duke can raise 10000. Foot,
but not to keep them very long, and 800. Horse: now the Mantoan Horse is
esteemed the best of Italy.

There are more Sovereign Princes of this Family, than of any other in Italy,
because Duke Alfonso having many Sons, would make every one of them a
Sovereign; therefore by the Emperors consent, some Lands he separated from the
Jurisdiction of Mantoa, and others he bought; so that the Eldest Son was Duke
of Mantoa, another Prince of Bozzolo, a third Prince of Sabionetta, another
Duke di Guastalda, a fifth Duke of Novellara, and a sixth Marquess of
Castiglione della Stivere: but now Sabionetta as a Doury has been alienated by
a Marriage to the House Caraffa in Naples, and since, the Princess of Stigliano
of this last Family being married to the Duke Medina de las torres los Velez,
brought this State into his Family.

The late Duke Charles the 2d. to unite himself the more to the House of
Austria, (for the late Emperor had already married a Princess of his Family)
took one of the Princesses of Insprack to his Wife, but for all this he neither
was much trusted to, or rewarded; the truth is, he was affected to France,
whose interests he would not have separated from, if he had not thought
himself slighted at Paris, and less respected then was the Duke Francis of
Modena. This Duke of Mantoa died not long since in the flower of his Age,
leaving only a Son of 12, or 13. years old, who has succeeded him. He was
generally inclined to Women, but in particular to the Countess Margarita di
Cazale: He was a great Gamester, and lost much money at Venice: Upon all
occasions he was supplied by a Jew of Mantua, who almost ruled the Dukes
Affairs to his own advantage, and to the Princ's loss. Jews are tolerated in
Mantoa to the number of above 5000. for which they pay 20000. crowns, or 5000.
Sterling a year, the more willingly because they are obliged to no marks of
distinction, as they are in all other places. The City of Mantoa, as all others
that are consideralile in Italy has some Virtuosi called Invaghiti,

It has been a maxim of State of these Princes to be united to France, where
they had the Dukedoms of Nevers, Rethel, and Mayene which Cardinal Mazarine
bought, the last for himself, the other two for one of his Nepews, and also to
be united to the Venetians; to the first, because that King could fall heavy
upon the Duke of Savoy, the perpetual and unreconcileable Enemy of his Family;
to the last, because being his next Neighbors, they could assist him upon any
occasion. The Friendship which seems to be between this Duke and those of Parma
and Modena is not real, by reason some State-differences which happened
formerly between them: With the Grand Duke he has had fallings out about the
Precedence of their Ministers: though the Grand Duke has larger dominions, the
others Family has been more Noble, and is more Ancient; besides the other
reason of the enmity is, that the Grand Duke has several Goods of his for the
portion of the Princess Catharina di Medici, married to Duke Ferdinando.

But the greatest Enmity of this House, is, against that of Savoy about
Monferrat, and other things; their differences are so great, that no means can
be found out to compose them: and here I must not omit to speak of the Treaty
of Chierasco in reference to these differences: thereby the Duke of Savoy is
put in possession of two good Cities of Monferrat, but some satisfaction is to
be given for them to the Duke of Mantoa, therefore the French does oblige
himself to pay the Duke of Mantoa 494000. Crowns of Gold pretended by that
House from Savoy for portions; but for the forenamed Sum, the French is put
in possession of Pinarolo, and yet the Duke of Mantoa never asked those Moneys,
protesting against that Treaty; so that upon occasion this may happen to be a
ground of troubles in Italy.

The State of the Duke of Parma.
THe Dukedoms of Parma and Piacenze, two of the best Cities of Italy, have been
possessed by the Family Farneze above these 122. years, after several
revolutions they fell to the Church, and were at last by Pope Paolo tertio,
given to Pietro Luigi Farneze his Son born before he was a Churchman. Charles
the 5th Emperor opposed it at first, but after the marriage of Ottavio 2d Duke
with his Natural Daughter he approved of it; besides the Dukedoms of Parma and
Piacenza in Lombardy, he has the Dukedom of Castro, and County of Roncigliont
within the Sat of the Church, which the first was pawned to, and for want of
paying the moneys in the prefixed time, it was united and entailed to the
Church, which is the worst that a Turk or a Jew can do a Christian: yet
notwithstanding the sufficient reasons to the contrary given by the Duke, that
pretended Father of Christians played this unmerciful trick; and though of late
by the means of the French King, this Entail was cut off, as yet they could not
bring the Pope to part with it, as he is obliged by the Treaty of Pisa; so well
these Popes agree, the one to get, and the other to keep. Besides this the Duke
of Parma has some Lands in the Kingdom of Naples for the Doury of Margarita
of Austria married to Prince Ottavio.

This Prince is perpetual Standard bearer of the Church, to which his State is
to fall incase he should die without Male Issue. Although he does homage to the
Church for the whole, he is nevertheless absolute for that; after the homage
received, Popes having nothing to do in his dominions. Urban the 8th was a
great enemy to this Family; he took Castro, and had it demolished; he would
have ruinated Odoardo then Duke, and Father to this present, who was a wise and
a valiant Prince; but Italian Princes expressing to be dissatisfied at it, he
was obliged to be quiet, having raised upon the Frontires of Parma, that strong
place called la Fortezza Urbana. This Family has given the world some men of
great repute, specially him who was Governor of the Low Countries; the loss of
Castro has been a great prejudice to the Duke, yet he has still a matter of
400000. Crowns a year: the Apennini are as a Wall to his State, which joined to
many Rivers, and some strong Holds, makes his Country considerable; he keeps
nigh upon 5000. men, but in case of necessity he could bring into the field
20000. Foot, and 1000. Horse, the half he can bring forth without
inconveniency; he has much Nobility in his dominions, and he is very jealous
of them, specially of those of Piacenza, because the first Duke was killed
there.

What manner of Cities are Parma and Piacenza I will not describe, nor the
curiosities to be seen in them; I name nothing, only let this general rule be
taken; in every good City of Italy, one is to see the Churches wherein consists
their Glory, their Palaces, Gardens. Houses of pleasure, Cabinets, etc. all
which are embelished with Statues, Pictures in Oleo, in Fresco, and Mosaic
works, wherein Porphiry, Marble, and such rich materials are often used; this I
say to free my self from making descriptions which might make up a great
Volume, I only take notice that in Parma are some Academists, called Innominati.

The present Duke Ranuccio, a man of a fat complexion, as yet has no children,
his first Wife being-dead, he is again married to the Sister of the late Duke
of Modena, he has Prince Alessandro Farnese his Brother, who has been in the
service of the Venetians, and came off with some discontent; at present he
serves in Spain. There is now at Rome Cardinal Farneze, but he is not very nigh
Kinsman, I am sure he did not act the part of a good Kinsman, when he found out
some ways to sell his Principality of Farneze to the Pope for Don Mario for
80000 Crowns, and a Cardinals Cap, excluding thereby the Duke of Parma from
that Succession, in case the Branch should fail; but an Entail having
afterward been found out, the Pope called for his moneys, and restored the
Principality, however he is Cardinal by the bargain; the best Palace in Rome is
Farneze, built after the direction of Michel Angelo Buonarotta; and one of the
best Countrey-pleasure-houses of Italy, is Caprarola in the County of
Ronciglione, belonging to the Duke of Parma.

Till of late, since the days of Charles the 5th, 'twas a constant maxim of
State of these Princes to keep close to the House of Austria; but Odoardo the
late Duke being unsatisfied with the Earl and Duke of Olivares, he left that
Union, and they have since sided with France, as the fittest power to uphold
them in their Quarrels against the Pope, which will be a continual ground of
troubles in Italy, and an occasion of bringing the French into it. One thing
more is, that these Dukes do more willingly make use of Strangers to be their
Ministers when they find them qualified for it, than of their own Subjects.

The state of the Duke of Modena.
THe Family D'Este, though we put it here last, is much more Ancient and Richer
than the two former, yet according to that period which is set to Families of
Princes, and their Dominions, this has lost something of its Ancient
Greatness. They derive their Pedigree from Atto Marquess of Este, who took the
Surname, which now his Family keeps, from the City Este, which does still
belong to it: This Married Alda, Daughter to the Emperor Othon the First, in
the year, 1000. and had with her, Modena and Reggio. Theobaldo d' Este Othon's
Grandchild, had in the year 1055. Ferrara from Pope John the 12th, which was
in the Year, 1598. taken from them by Clement the 8th, after the death of
Alfonso the 2d, for want of Lawful Heirs Males: yet there was Cesare d' Este
whom Alfonso had from Laura Ferrarese who would have proved that his Father had
Married his Mother, and so that he was a Lawful Heir, but the proofs of the
Pope who had already taken possession of the place, were the strongest: Yet
that Family still pretends to it, affirming they come from a Lawful Heir,
though Popes will have him to have been a Natural Son; and this as to
precedence wrongs that Family, for other Princes will not grant them as Dukes
of Modena only, what they had as Dukes of Ferrara, although their standing
Dukes of Modena be from Barso d' Este, who had the title given him by Frederick
the 3d Emperor in the year 1460. The City has been a great looser by this
change, for instead of the Seat of a Court, it is now made a City of War, and of
80000. souls that were in it under the Dukes, there is now hardly 20000.

However this Duke is still in possession of the Dukedomes of Modena and
Reggio, the Principalities of Carpi and Correggio, the Earldome of Roli, and
the Lordships of Sassevil, Garfagna and Frignano, by the late Treaty of Pisa;
his dispute with the Pope about the Valleys of Gommachio was decided, being to
receive as he did 400000. Crowns for them, 40000. more of damages, and some
other advantageous, conditions: all these lands with others which he has still
in the Dukedom of Ferrara, yield him every year full 500000. Crowns; all his
Dominions joining one to another, makes him the more considerable; his strength
therefore consists in the number of his people; the only Province Carfagnana is
said to contain 80. places walled about; he has also several strong Holds;
upon extraordinary Occasions he is able to bring into the field 20000. Foot,
and 1000. Horse, and he can without inconveniency keep the half of the number,
however his Country lies somewhat open to several neighboring Princes, not for
want of good places, of which he has many, seated at a proportionable and
convenient distance one from another, but because that Country lies upon an
even ground; in his Citadel of Modena, are as they say, Arms for 40000. men;
this City is not in repute with other Italians, who call it Modena la pazza.

These Princes observe the general maxims of their Neighbors, to have a good
correspondency with Venice, which was ever looked upon as the Protector of the
liberties of Italy: Since the loss of Ferrara they kept close to the Spaniards,
but of late their Interest made them change their affections, for Duke Francis
was in the late Italian War, made General of the French, and Mazarine's Niece
married to Prince Almerigo his Son, who has left a young Prince to succeed
him. At present all things are done after the advice of Cardinal D'Este,
Protector of the French Interest at Rome, and the promoter of the late Union of
his Family to France; He is a Prince very active and stirring, who lives at
Rome, when he comes there, with greater pomp, and more splendor then any other
Cardinal whatsoever; he is zealous for the French, by whose Friendship his
family is much better with moneys, being enriched with the late Generalship: So
is the Country, for in winter the Head Quarters were in Modena, whereto
resorted all the great Officers, and a great number of inferior ones; this
somewhat helped the poor people to pay those Taxes that are laid so heavy upon
them; at present there is one of their name, and kinsman afar of, Don Carlo
D'Este, if I mistake not, a Subject born to the Duke of Savoy, who is a Knight
of the Order of the Fleece, whom I have seen attending on the Empress at
Alexandria, Pavio, etc.

The Duke of Modena has this advantage above most Princes in Italy, that he
has some of his Subjects who have Feudi Fiefs of the Empire; we find many
great Families in his Dominions, as the rich Earls, di San Paolo, the
Bentivogli-Ragoni, Buoncompagni, the Marquesses Spilimbergo, Peppoli; Gualengo,
di Vignola and Gualteri. The Earls Caprari, San Martino, di Molsa, di Maluisia,
Montecuculi, Tassoni Ferrarese di Conoscia, and few others; the present Duke
being very young, we have nothing to say as to his person; and though he were
older, we could say of him that which must be spoken of some others, they are
reserved, and live retiredly; so that strangers, for any long while have not
free excess to their Courts and Persons.

The state of Venice.
NOw to go on, I must say something of the Republics. I do confess I am much
at a stand when I see my self obliged to speak of Venice; the abundance of
matter is often to a man a greater hindrance then help, when he must pick out
that which is only fit for his purpose; to speak well of a Republic esteemed
a miracle of Nature, and a Prodigy of Art, the tongue of an Angel is necessary:
'Twere too trivial to say, that this Republic was founded above 1246 years
ago, by those who from Aqueleia, Padoa, etc. fled from the cruelty of Attila:
they were governed by Tribunes till the year, 697. at which time they made a
Head called Doge, and they chose San Marco to be their Protector; wherefore a
Lion holding a Book, is their Arms, with this Motto, Pax tibi Marce Evangelista.

The Government was part Aristocracy, and part Democracy, but at the time when
Pietro Gradenigo was Doge in the year, 1280. It was resolved in the Senate,
that the Government should hereafter belong to the Nobility alone; and to avoid
oppositions, all the Families that were in some esteem amongst the people, were
declared Nobles, as it has been practiced afterward upon urging occasions, as
in the Wars against Genoa, and lately in the Wars against the Turk, 100000.
Crowns being paid by every one who is made such, besides that he must be
otherwise qualified for it. In the Majesty and perpetuity of the Duke, there is
a shadow of Monarchy, but the strength and the Authority resides in the Senate;
their Dominion is of a great extent. In terra ferma they have Dogado, La Marca
Trevigiana, Padoano, Vicentino, Veronese, Feltrino, Bellunese, Bresciano,
Beragamasco, Cremasco, etc. there is further il Fruili, with many considerable
Cities in it, as Udine, Palma, and that strong hold Palma Nova. Istria with
four good Cities, and many Lands and places. Out of Italy they have Dalmatia,
with the Islands thereto belonging, and the chief Cities of Zara, Clissa:
Cataro, and few other places in Albania; in the Levante, Corfu, Cefalonia,
Cerigo, Zante, and some other Islands in the Arcipelago; and the Sovereignty of
all the Golfo from Venice to Otranto, and to la Vallona, which is seven hundred
miles in length; of the Kingdom of Candia, they have nothing but the City.

It would require whole Volumes, if one would insist upon the manner of their
Government in general, seeing they have been curious to gather the quintessence
of all the good Laws and Statutes which ancient and modern Republics had,
which they make use of upon occasion: they have above 60. Courts of Judicature,
such a diversity being necessary for them to employ so many Noblemen they have.
I will hardly mention the Gran' Consiglio, wherein are usually 1500. Votes,
besides other 500. Nobles who are in Offices elsewhere, either by Land or Sea;
nor the Pregadi composed of '200. or thereabouts, or the Collegio, or the
Consiglio di Dieci, nor what manner of bus^inesses they treat of: Why should I
tell who are the Procuratori di San Marco, Sesteri, tree capi di Quaranta Savi
di Mare, Savi di terra, Savi grandi, and so many Officers; this with an exact
description of that Republic, and of all her dependencies I could undertake,
if I saw occasion, but it is a thing that deserves to be by it self, as well as
the account of the Forces, and Riches of the Republic, and wherein they
consist; I shall not speak of the City which is full of wonders with ancient
and modern curiosities, only I shall name the Arsenal, which is certainly the
best in Europe, and the Treasure has many rich and precious stones, however I
will not omit to say, that in the City are two sorts of Virtuosi, one is called
Discordanti, and the other Gussoni.

I must come to something of the political part of that Government, but before,
I must name some of the Chief Families of that Republic. I believe the number
of the Nobles exceeds that of 3500. though 40. or 50. Families with their
friends and relations, whose leaders they are do govern the whole, the most
considerable of these are Contarini, now Doge, Sagredo, Corraro, Capello,
Moccenigo Morosini, Cornaro, Gradenigo, Grimani, Querini, Loredano, Marcello,
Pesaro, Giustiniano, Foscari, Bembo, Delfini, etc. Now I proceed, the Venetians
take a great care to have their young men instructed in those things which
concern their Republic; in part to this effect they have found out such a
variety of employments, to the end that applying themselves to these, they may
in time be fitter to administer those of a higher nature, so that there is
hardly any one without some employment suitable to his Genius and Capacity;
they also have an usual way to speak familiarly of policy, so that after a long
use, and earnest application, and an often hearing of those who understand
things well, they must needs make improvement in it. The Venetians also most of
any Italians do travel abroad, and hardly an Ambassador ever goes to any
place, but he is attended by some of the young Nobles, who go to learn the
politic part of the Government of the Country which the Ambassador is sent
to; and that which is the chief, to the end that the Senate may be instructed
of the present state of affairs of any Court, we may observe that almost
everywhere they have Ambassadors (not mattering what charges they come to) who
all the time of their residence, by a constant Intelligence do acquaint the
council with every particular thing that falls out in the Court they live at;
who not only leave instructions to those who succeed them in the place, but who
also when they come home, are obliged to make in Pregadi, a full relation of
the state wherein stands the Court whence they come.

One thing above all, which I find extraordinary, is that secrecy so
inviolably observed amongst them, that amongst so many heads there should be no
tongue, nay there have been those who were present at the Council, when violent
resolutions were taken against some friend or relation of theirs; they have
conversed with them after that, and yet never discovered any thing. Public
Ministers of Princes who reside there, do confess it is more difficult to
penetrate into those results made sometimes by above 1500. men, than into those
which are made by three or four: It Is true, this is looked upon as a part of
their wisdom, that public affairs are communicated to all, for then when the
resolutions they have taken, require secrecy, they think themselves obliged to
observe it, though it were only upon this account that they are true and
faithful to themselves. Thus their general aim is, or at least their Laws tend
to maintain peace, union, and liberty. We must not wonder therefore if this
Republic is come to such a height, and maintains herself in it, with the
excellency of her Counsil, the observation of the Laws, the gravity of manners
and customs, and the common desire of maintaining liberty with a severe
punishment of all innovations which could disturb the public peace.

Laws ought not to be Despotick or Arbitrary, nor after the suggestions of
sycophants, and the biased parasites, but inconformity to those of the great
Law giver (who though he have an absolute and unlimitable right and power over
all, yet he is often times graciously pleased to give reasons of what he does)
they ought to be grounded upon Justice, Reason, and Equity, and to tend to the
public good, which should be the end of all civil and municipal laws, and not
to be turned into private Channels, to run to particular ends, which happening,
let him look to it who bears not the Sword without cause, for all private ends
ought to be subservient to the public interest: to this effect, when first all
men contracted Societies, and united themselves in Corporations, they knew well
they could not subsist without order, which can never be observed without Laws,
tending to protect the good in the enjoyment of that peace and quietness they
desire, and to terrify the evil with those punishments threatened them, in case
the, go about to disturb it. And the truth is, that such Laws being enacted,
they look to future ages more than to that time wherein they are made, because
those who made them being free agents, and entering willingly; and with their
own accord into such Societies as every one of them had a hand in the passing
of the Laws, if not in the framing, at least in the approving and confirming of
the same; for that which is to be above all, as Laws are, is to be made by the
consent of all; So it is to be supposed they would not break the Laws which
they made themselves, upon grounds of Reason and Justice; Hence it is, that as
they have made use of the Legislative Power they had, and that they have bound
themselves to the execution of them, which being once done, the bond cannot be
loose or untied but by the general consent, and in such a case it may be done
according to the maxim, that he who makes the Law, can disanul it; (but it
must be the whole Legislative Power) for as grounds and reasons sometimes do
alter, so may the Laws accordingly, because as a Law does not suit in all
places, so neither at all times, neither may they be allowed, but as much as
they conduce to the public good, which as I said, before is the end for the
which they were road; but if they turn to be destructive to these ends for the
which they were made, they ought certainly to be abrogated and made void; and
this shows that every Law is not of the nature of those of the Persisians and
Medians, which might not be altered; but because the life of the Law does not
so much consist in the Legislative Act, but specially in the executive part,
not only in wisdom, but also in powers therefore they who made the Law do
appoint those who are to see them executed; and because at first Lawgivers
could not foresee all cases and accidents which might fall out, there is a
certain power reserved to interpret, to explain and to amplify those Laws, yet
upon this condition that sense shall be given to the words of the Law which is
most conducing to the end of the Law, that is, to the public good: For those
rules that are imposed by Conquerours as such, and do deserve the name of Laws,
but are only despotick orders and commands; the Conqueror after his Victory
imposes what he pleases upon the Conquered; sometimes nothing but Martial and
Arbitrary Laws, as it is this day practiced in the Turkish Empire, for as he
has gotten it, so he must keep it either by force or fraud; this is by virtue
of a right used between wild beasts, who will tear or spare those that are
weaker than themselves.

The Laws of Venice, which are the occasion of this discourse, abhor these
last, and are of the nature of the former, the happiness which they have
enjoined under them, do highly declare the wisdom of their Lawgivers. I
believe it were of no little use, if every Country were acquainted with the
same; I altogether for bear speaking of them that are common and ordinary, one
kind excepted, which is very beneficial, and might prove so to other Countries,
being introduced therein, I mean the sumptuary Laws against excess in Clothes,
Jewels, Equipage, etc. which though vain and superficial things do consume and
wast the state and substance of many; the servant is not to be known by his
clothes from his Master; and of these how many have we who are more sollicitous
of getting Perriwigs, gaudy Clothes, and the like, than careful to acquire
knowledge, virtue and experience, not knowing that those things are borrowed,
and not their own, which make no difference between an honest man and the
vilest wretch in the world, however they are satisfied with the show, and are
like those Apples that grow about the Lake of Sodom, which have a fair show,
but have nothing within, blow upon them and they fly into dust and ashes. As
there is a difference of quality in persons, so there should be some
distinction in clothes, or the like; the very Stars show greater brightness
some than others. Men should strive to go one beyond another, not in clothes
but in virtue, and good quality. But I Will leave this discourse, not for want of
matter, one who has but common sense and reason could have much to say upon it,
but because I avoid to be accounted too censorious and critical, and that some
times every truth must not be spoken, or when it is odium parit: but to come to
my subject, I say, it is not so in Venice, they mind more solid and substantial
things than these, and they practice certain refined maxims, which I have
observed.

First, their Doges may not ally themselves to any foreign Princes, to preveni
receiving from abroad Councils tending to the destruction of liberty at home.
Neither is it lawful for any of the Nobles to converse with any foreign
Ministers, or any one that has any relation to them, or to keep communication
with them by way of letters, or any other direct or indirect way, to remove all
occasions of being bribed, and so of betraying the State or their Councils; for
this cause 12. or 13. years ago was put to death one of the Family of Carnaro,
it being found out that he had been several times at the lodging of the Spanish
Ambassador. Further, as they know that the greatness of the Republic comes
from their power upon the Seas; so all the Nobles apply themselves specially to
Sea Affairs: as for Land service they usually take strangers of known valor
and experience out of Germany, Italy, and other places. To preserve union
between the Nobles and the people, and that these may have where to apply
themselves; the Noble; do not roeddle with public Schools, or ruling of
Parochial Churches, or the like; and more than this, the direction of the
Chancery of the Republic, which is a high dignity that has the ordering of
all public expeditions, and the Secretaries places are ever given to some of
the people, to whom also they allow liberty of fishing, coursing, shooting, and
the like, there being no propriety in things of this nature, and that they may
yet the more get the love and affection of the people, they converse together
in Walks, Play Houses, Gamingplaces, and upon all occasions and meetings; so
also they take Citizens Daughters to be their Wives: yet for all this the
Nobles are so far from hindering, that rather they encourage the divisions which
are in the City of Venice of one part against another, that is, between the
Castellani and Nicolotti, who use to meet specially in the Month of September,
upon the Bridge of St. Barnabas, which they flock to in great numbers, and the
Nobles who happen to be there do encourage every one of those of his side;
there they Kick and Cuff one another, but have no Arms: this to some is an
effect of animosity, to others' a sport, to others a show, and to all a
diversion from other things. Upon this account, they suffer the insolences of
Scholars at Padoa with their Chi va li at night to keep a division between them
and the Citizens, who also are looked upon as a factious people.

Another maxim which they have, is to keep the scales even between warring
Princes, specially in Italy, as they have done in the wars of Milan, to
preserve the Public Liberty, that one Prince do not grow too potent by the
loss of another; but a thing which they study most of all, is, to know the
Genius, Customs, Strength, and to find out the Designs of all Princes and
Republics, by which diligence many a time they have found out and avoided
great dangers impending over themselves and others. But a very useful maxim
they have, and which is very wise, it is ever to hearken after peace, and fit
themselves constantly for war: Before they were involved in this last with the
Turk, their policicy was by all means to avoid a falling out with so dreadful
an Enemy; but it seems at this time providence has made use of the
perfidiousness of those of Candia, and of the Turks ambition, to make this
maxim to be null and void. But to withdraw from this Ocean, I will say, that
out of policy they suffer the delays of doing Justice, and the tedious
proceedings at Law, to keep people in exercise, and the Courts of Justice in
credit: By the same reason they are so severe in punishing faults against the
State upon all sorts of persons; and to avoid Innovations and Disorders;
contrariwise, they be very remiss to those which proceed from humane frailty:
So it is to punish more rigourously the faults of the Nobles, than those of the
people, to the end that the former do not grow insolent, nor these last
discontented. Further they are careful to maintain their privileges to
Provinces and Cities, that they may continue in their Loyalty and affection.
Lastly, it is a part of their Justice, as of their policy, not to punish the
crime of the Fathers upon the Children, nor e Converso, the person only which
is guilty suffering.

I have one thing more to say before I leave it: Of all States in Italy this of
Venice hangs loose from the Pope most of all, therefore they meddle not in the
Court of Rome, neither do they care to bestow Pensions upon Cardinals to have a
favorable Election, and indeed it is not much material to them, seeing they
extend their Jurisdiction upon all Regular and Ecclesiastical persons within
their Dominions, notwithstanding the endeavors of several Popes to the
contrary: and they have good Laws to bridle the power of Popes within their
State, as I will instance only in two Cases; the first is, though the
Inquisition be amongst them, yet they have taken away its sting, there being
constantly three of the wisest and more moderate Senators named to be present
at their Consultations; and it is further ordered, that nothing shall be
resolved in it, except there be present one of these Senators, who qualifies
things, reduces them to moderation, and in case of extremity telling, the
Senate must be acquainted with such and such things. The Second Case is, the
nomination which Popes make, of whom they think fit to some, Church Livings and
benefices within their State, the Pope pretends he has right so to do, which
they deny; however because they will not openly cross him, they have found out
an indirect way, which is this, there is an Order, that no man whosoever shall
be put in possession of any Benefice by virtue of any Grant or Nomination from
the Pope, except the same be first approved of by the Council, so that the
Patent being brought to the Council, there it lies till either the person who
had it, or the Pope who granted it, be dead, which maxim now being known, none
of their Subjects will be at the charges and trouble to Sue at Rone for any
such thing.

The wisest amongst them laugh at the pretended Authority and Jurisdiction
which Popes arrogate to themselves within the limits of their Republic: he may
(say they) play Rex at Rome, and have his Patriarchal Churches, namely St.
Peter representing the Patriarch of Constantinople; St. Paul of Alexandria, St.
Mary the greater of Antiochia, St. Laurance without the walls of Jerusalem, and
set over these four, St. John of Lateran, representing the Pope, who is over
all; but say they, such liberty is not allowed him in the States of other
Princes. From time to time there has been Quarrels between Popes and this
Republic; Paul the fifth's Excommunication is not yet forgotten there, nor the
Principles of padre Paolo, and padre Fulgentio rooted out; though the Gospel be
not taught there in public, one may hear it sometimes in private. It Is true,
of late the Jesuits were readmitted there, but mere necessity of State
obliged them to it, though their readmission was carried on but by few Balls
or Votes, the late Popes Letter earnestly entreating them to do it, and saying,
that if he could have gone in person to ask it, he would have done it, was not
so efficacious as the promise of keeping 3000 men at his own charges in
Dalmatia, for theservice of the Republic; and upon occasion the use of his
Galleys, with some other advantages: however, they are still odious in that
City to all sorts of people, and a small matter will send them out again: In a
private Conversation between the late Popes and a Venetian Ambassador then at
Rome, upon the question moved by the Pope, Where was their Title to the
Sovereignty of the Gulf? the other answered him smartly, It Is upon the back of
Constamines donation; this shows something in the bottom of the Venetian hearts
not favorable to Rome, whence they have received so many grounds of
displeasure; We have seen of late how much trouble a Nuncio of the Popes at
Venice was like to have raised between the Duke and Senate about the Barigello,
who had seized certain of the Nuncio's Servants when they had done some
insolences, though he said he knew not they were his Servants, and though
things had been composed so, that the Barigello should not appear in the Church
of St. Mary, where the Nuncio was to be till the last holy day of Christmas,
yet upon that very day against the agreement, within the Church the Nuncio
prevailed with the Duke to order him to go out, whereat the whole Senate were
highly incensed that the Duke would do such a thing without their advice: and
now the late grudge about the turning of the Channel of the Po another way,
might produce something, were it not for the War of Candia, however there
remains a cause of falling out hereafter.

The state of Genoa.
BUt it is time to speak of Genoa, formerly the dangerous Rival of Veuice;
History shows us the several and great Revolutions of Government in this City;
it was by Charles the Great made an Earldom, and under one of their Earls won
the Island Corfica from the Saracens', afterward they became a Republic, they
asked the Protection of Charles the sixth King of France, and having rejected
this, they submitted to the Duke of Millan, and then would have withdrawn from
his Obedience, but he being too hard for them, they were kept under till the
days of Andrea Doria, who having pacified the intestine divisions, instead of
making himself Prince of it, as some think he might have done, he got them the
liberty wherein they stand at present: This Republic is no more now what it
has been, that Genoa which has formerly been so potent at Sea, as to beat the
Venetians, take one of their Dukes prisoners, as they did in 1258. run
victorious up and down, taking several Cities belonging to them, and block up
Venice it self. Furthermore, in the year 1337. they Conquered the Kingdom of
Cyprus, took the King and Queen prisoners, but restored them upon certain
conditions; the reason is, because though the Country be the same, yet that
people has exceedingly degenerated; in those days every one minded the public
good, and the honor of the Nation, but now every one seeks his private ends
and interests, let what will become of the public, which is a mere folly, for
when the public goes to wrack, particular men cannot thrive very long; but if
all particular men strive together to promote the public, as they are members
of that body, so they will find the benefit of it; when we have seen in the
Roman Commonwealth men sacirfice States, Friends, Relations and Lives for the
Republic, when nothing was so dear to them, but they could part with it for
the good and safety of the Republic, then were all things in a flourishing
condition, but when they began to seek their own, and every one to set up for
himself, all things began to totter: How can the parts be saved, if the whole
perish? The Bees and the Ants natural instinct goes beyond some Men's reason,
they may be Hyerogliphicks to us, and their example teach us to be public
spirited Men, but it seems the Genoesi are not so.

This Republic is in possession of what was formerly called Liguria, now it is
Riviera di Genoa, from the City of Genoa to Porto di Luna, is called, la
Riviera di Levante, or of the East, and from Genoa to Monaco it is
Rivieradiponente of the West, which makes 150. miles in length, though the
breadth is hardly above 25. in any place: it is true, that upon the ponente is
Finale belonging to the Spaniarols, and three places to Savoy, but withal
beyond Monaco it has St. Remy and Ventimiglia; toward Milan they have Gavi
with a strong Castle, and Novi not so good as the other; they have also the
Island Corsiea: Formerly Trade did much flourish in Genoa, but now Legorn has
spoiled it, as Genoa had spoiled that of Savona, they suffered extremely by the
late great plague that was there; so that to make themselves amends, and to
keep up Trade, they have thought fit to bring in the Jews, by whose means they
hope in time to bring Trading back again from Legorn; but others are in
expectation to hear how they will agree, for between a Jew and a Genoese
(setting aside baptism) there is no difference; and if they do 'twill pass for a
wonder.

But not to be tedious upon this, I say, that although the City be very fair,
and the Palaces stately, it is inhabited by men, then whom (few excepted) there
cannot be worse, this is the opinion which all other Italians have of them:
There goes a story, (which how true it is I will not dispute) that when the
Grand Duke first of all made Livorno a free Port, he gave leave of Trading in it
to all Nations, as English, French, and to all Merchants, even out of Turkey,
Anch' ai Genoesi, having named several Nations, amongst whom there were
Infidels; those of Genoa are put the last, as being the worst of all. Indeed
they are proud, revengeful in an extraordinary way, and enemies to strangers,
though out of that City they go almost into all parts. I do not think there is
a City in Italy where more mischief is done than in this, one hears of it
almost every day: In the way of Trade they are very skilful, yet so interessed,
that there are those in it who could prefer one 5 s. to twenty lives; their
temper is such, that they cannot agree with any sort of people, nay, not so
much as amongst themselves; their unsettledness appears in this: from Earls
they came to Consuli, from these to Potesta, then to Capitani, to Governatori,
Luoghitenenti Rettori di populo, Abbati di populo, reformatori, protectori,
duchi Nobili, and duchi Popolari. Civil Divisions ever regarded amongst them,
for they are no sooner come under one sort of Government, but they wished for
another. When Francis the first heard they would desire his Protection; Let
them go to Hell, said he, for I am not willing to needdle with such people. The
Italian Proverb of them is, Mare senzapesci, they have Seas without Fish,
Montagne senzalegno, Mountains and no Woods, Huomini senza feed, Men without
faith, and Done senza vergogna, women without shame; yet some brave men are
come out of it.

The Government is Aristocratical, with a Doge, only for two years, who with
the 8 Governatori, is called the Signoria, then the little Council of 100 men,
and the great of 400. they have also the Sindici Overseers of the actions of
Governors, as Censors were at Rome: the Doge has a Guard, which he of Venice
has not; their Forces are much decayed from what they were, when they reduced
Venice to an extremity; still they continue to be good Sea-Souldiers, and keep
eight Galleys, which do dispute the hand with those of Maltha, but they are not
esteemed by Land. It Is a thing which will seem an extravagancy, yet it is a
truth, that there has been persons, and there are now Families in Genoa, more
esteemed abroad than is the Republic it self, and some are as rich, if not
richer, who keep Galleys of their own. The Republic has not above 200000
Crowns a year, because part of the Dominion, and of the Revenue, does belong to
the company of St. George, which is, as it were another Republic within that;
yet some make the yearly Income greater; but confess that it does not exceed
the Charges. Silks are the Staple Commodity, which they work very well in
Velvet, Plush, Satin, Taby, Taffitie, and the like Silk-works, which they send
into all the Northern parts of Europe. St. George is their Champion, and the
Red Cross is their Coat of Arms. The City as it is usual with Republics, draws
the best of the Land to it self, and has destroyed the trading of other
places, as Savona to advance its own; In it are a sort of Virtuosi, who call
themselves Addormentatis the City is not strong.

The great secret of State of this Republic has been to keep Herself United
to, and depend upon Spain since Charles the fifth; and Philip the 2d of Spain
to keep them to her self, has borrowed vast sums of moneys, and assigned Lands
in Naples and Milan for the payment; so that they must keep fair with the
Spaniard, for fear of loosing the Principal; on the other side, as the King of
Spain has occasion of them, in relation to Finale and Milan not to loose them,
he allows very great use for this money, so that they are even, and think to
have overreached one another; most of the moneys which are current being
Spanish Coin, it shows there has been very great dealings between them.
However now the Spaniard has much lost the Great Authority he had first
amongst them, for formerly they so far depended upon him, that they might not
receive within their City the Ambassador of any Prince but his own, who might
come as he did often into the Consultations of the Senate; but now there is no
such matter; they being exposed to so many alterations, there are no fixed nor
constant maxims of policy among them. I think it is a Republic great by Name,
but small in Srtength, despised by her Superiors, hated of her Equals, and
envied by her Inferiors, which does subsist only because one Neighbor would
not have another to get it, the Interest of every one being to have it remain
in a third hand; Genoa is very jealous of two of her Neighbors, Savoy and
Toscany, of the former, who has aimed and attempted to bring her under his
Yoke; of the latter, by reason of his pretentions to Sarzana, which formerly
belonged to Florence, and of both, because she is odious to both, and that upon
the account of State, and of private interest, they wish to see her brooght
low. In it are many Noble and Rich Families, as Doria, of which are the
Marquess of Toreglia, Prince of Melfy, of the branch of Andre Doria, and the
Duke of Tursi; Spinola the Marquess, and de Duke of Sestri, Marquess de los
Balbases, a Spanish Title, because a Grandee of Spain; other Families are
Fieschi, Grimaldi, Giustiniani, Pallavicini, Cibo, Carrieri, Imperiale, and
some others. Now the Marquess Hyppolito Centurione with his Ships and Galleys,
is entered into the French service.

Of the state of Luca.
I See I do fall from an Ocean into Rivers, yet there is water enough for me to
swim in, in some places, if not every where. You will not be troubled with
hearing a long enumeration of places and Dominions; yet it is to be admired of
the places I am now to speak of, not how they can preserve themselves; this the
jealousy between, and the interest of their Neighbors, joined with
watchfulness on their side, does for them; but how formerly in times of
conquest they could free their necks from the yoke of their potent Neighbors.
Luca is one of these places which has sometimes been possessed by the Goths,
the Emperors of Constantinople, the Faseoli, Castrucci, Spinoli, by the Family
Della Scala, by the Fiorentini, Pisani, and by one Carlo of Bohemia, who having
made a Bishop Governor of it, this Bishop received 25000 Crowns, and left them
the liberty they are now in, their Dominion is extended upon few Mountains, not
much inhabited, upon the top of which they have some strong holds, as Monte
Ignoso, Castiglione, Minuoiano, with Camagiore and Via Reggio upon the Sea; but
the best they have is the City well seated, people'd, and fortified with the
territory belonging to it, which produces abundance of Olives, the best of
Italy; and the industry of the Inha bitants about Silk-works makes the City
flourish and grow rich, every one in it has something to live upon; there are
in it a matter of 10 Families esteemed at least worth 20000 Crowns a year;
others to the number of 30 have some 15000, some 10000 a year, and above 60
have been between 4 and 5000; the yearly Income of the Commonwealth comes to
not much above 100000 Crowns, with a treasure they have esteemed a Million,
with certain Plate and Jewels, which upon occasion might bring in some moneys.

They are governed by a Council of 150 of the chief Citizens, the City is
divided into three parts, which they call Tertieri, out of every one of which
the General Council does Elect three men, in all, Nine, called Senators, who
joined with the Gonfaloniero their head are called la Signoria: The Senators do
command by turns every three days, the Gonfaloniero has a bare Title, and
nothing but the precedence above the rest, he is himself commanded by the
Senators; he keeps his place but two months, then another is chosen, but within
that time he may not go out of the Palace under pain of death: As for Warlike
affairs they are in a good condition upon the defensive, their listed Militia's
are of 18000 men, besides the City contains 30000 Inhabitants, and is
constantly Guarded by 300 good Soldiers, whereof 200 are born in the City, and
have the keeping of the Gates, Walls, and other places, the other 100 are all
strangers, born 50 miles at least from the City; amongst them they admit no
Florentine; their Captain is a Stranger too, the Palace is committed to their
Guard, and under pain of death they may not come nigh the Walls. The City keeps
a constant provision of mouth, and ammunition of War for whole 7. years; their
few strong Holds are well provided, and their Soldiers well paid, which is the
only way to keep them upon duty and obedience; so that their care, and the
plenty of their Territory about the City do supply the narrowness and
littleness of it: In a word, if they come short of other Princes and
Republics, as to the extent of dominions they have great advantages above them
another way.

First, they are not revengeful, as all the rest of Italians are, they casily
forgive offenses received, which does argue the goodness of their nature, upon
this account they are a proverb to other Italians, Riceve gli affronti come un'
lucbese. 2dly, their women are very modest, and inclined to chastity, and their
young men sober and temperate, some out of a Natural inclination, and others by
virtue of the good order kept amongst them: for 24 men, known to be of a good
Life and Conversation are chosen out of the Council to be inspectors over the
manners of Youth, (this they call consigliodi discoli) specially of deboist
persons, and every time they meet, which happens once a year, every one puts in
his Bill with the names of those whom he has found and observed to be unruly;
and if the name of one be put in the little Box by the two thirds, that is by
sixteen; herein is his sentence contained of 3 years banishment, he must go out
of the City the next day after he has had warning, and within 3 days after
out of the State: So that by the observation of these good Orders, God fits
them the better for conversion and reformation, after the reading of
Scriptures, which they are much inclined to: hence it is, that we have seen so
many families leave Luca and go to Geneva to enjoy the liberty of the Gospel,
and to make an open profession of the truth: after these commendations 'twere
superfluous to say, they have also amongst them two sorts of Virtuosi, the one
called Oscari and the other Freddi.

They might boast of the antiquity of their City, which was built by Lucamon
King of Toscany, but they have a greater advantage which they glory in, that
this is the first City of Toscany, which received the Christian Faith; though
they be united amongst themselves, they are not sometimes without troubles at
home, caused by the pride of their Clergy which is so far protected by Popes,
that Urban the 8th for their sake excommunicated the Republic. This people is
Civil to Strangers, and very courteous to those who come into the City, yet so
watchful over them, that they have the council Della Vigilanza to know what
they come for, whence they come, and whether they go, not allowing them to wear
swords in the streets without a special leave, yet they give them liberty to
walk upon the Moat, by the Walls, and to view the same; in this City, the
tongue is spoken in the purity of it.

All their maxims of State are onley about the defensive part, and how to
preserve themselves from their great Neighbor the Gran' Duke, who would be
glad to bring Toscany to her old limits that way, wherefore the Republic has
a strict correspondency with Genoa, which fears the same; however as I have
observed, one Neighbor would cross another, if any thing was designed against
Luca: their care has provided against open attempts, they being in a readiness
to oppose them, all what they must do, is to take heed of surprisals.

The state of San Marino.
SAn Marino is, I believe, the least Republic of Europe, when the Empire was
transferred out of Italy into Germany; this City, with some others made her
self a Republic; it lies on the West of the Dukedom of Urbino, under whose
Dukes protection it remained, till this State fell to the Church, so that now
it is shut up within the Popes Lands, and under their protection, yet some of
them, specially the late Alexander the 7th, have done what they could by
promises and fair means to make their Nephews Princes of it, but she would not
part with her liberty; and though the Pope could easily force them to it, yet
he dares not, it being certain that the Venetians, and the Grand Duke would
oppose him in it, specially now when Italian Princes do dislike Novelities and
Innovations: when this Republic has written to Venice, she has called her
Carissima Sorella, very dear Sister, a weak one indeed, for having but the
City, and two or three Villages besides, her strength and riches are but small,
which must be supplied with their care of themselves, and watchfulness over
their Neighbors.

Of the Petty Principalities
THis is all as I think, that needs be said upon the subject of great Princes,
and Republics of Italy. I must therefore now speak to the Petty Princes, or
rather continue it, for the last Republic I have mentioned may have her place
amongst these, rather than amongst the great ones: But I desire not to be
mistaken, when I call some petty Princes, it is not to be understood, as if they
depended from others, and were not Sovereignes, for every way they act as such:
In their Lands there is no appeal from their sentence, they dispose of Life and
Death, as well as the greatest Princes, they Coin, or may Coin moneys, Elect
Officers, make Laws, and when there is occasion for it, they treat of Peace and
War. I call them Petty Princes, because their States are but small in
comparison of those whom I call great ones. It Is true, that there are very many
who have the name of Princes, who are not Sovereigns, but are Subjects to
others; the number of these all Italy over is between 75 and 80; between 90 and
100 have the titles of Dukes, and of Marquesses and Earls, there are above 500;
but I speak only of Sovereigns.

The Duke of Della Mirandola is one of this sort; the City La Mirandola is
seated upon the confines of Modena toward the River Po; the family Pico, one
of the most ancient and famous of Italy, have been Lords of it, and of
Concordia since the year, 1110 till now; that line failed in the year, 1637,
and therefore another was invested of it by the Emperor.

Of this sort are also the Princes of Bozzolo, and of Sabionetta, the Dukes of
Guastalda, and of Novellara, and the Marquess of Castiglione; all within the
State of Mantoa, as we said before, they have been such for these 100 years
past, and are all of the family Gonzaga, he of Sahionetta excepted, which in
the year 1540 was given with a Daughter, and Heir to General Caraffa, and now
in the hands of a Spaniard.

The principality of Monaco is another, this is a strong City by Nature, seated
upon the Mediterranean, between Nizzadi, Provenza and Genoa, this makes the
Prince more considerable than any other of his sort; there is an indifferent
harbor; the way up to it is very steep and difficult, and several Guards to
speak with, before one can get to it. At the coming in there is a broad place
with a prospect as pleasant as can be; within few miles from it, is another
place, good enough, called Menton, depending from the said principality: there
was in Monaco a Spanish Garrison, but the late Prince having partly by a
stratagem, and partly with help from the French driven it out, he desired the
French protection, and now there is in it a French Garrison, he is Duke de
Valentionis, and Peer of France, whose coin is current in that Kingdom. This
Princes family is Grimaldi, who derive their pedigree from Grimald, Son of
Pipin King of Austrasia, and Brother to Charles Martel: this Pipin as they say,
gave the Lordship to Grimald, in the year 713. but they were declared Princes
in the year, 1411. Cardinal Grimaldi yet living, and brother to the late Duke,
was in great part the occasion of the admitting in of the French, induced to it
by the persecution which the Barberini suffered from the Pope at the secret
instigations of Spain, and by the protection which the French gave to that
family, whose passionate creature this Grimaldi is, and also by the interest he
has gotten in France, to be Archbishop of Aix, and other good benefices he
enjoys: He is of an active spirit, therefore he has been much spoken of at
Rome; their family, or a branch of it is named amongst the greatest in Genoa,
where some of the name are admitted to the highest charges: the present Prince
of Monaco is not much passed twenty five, he has married Marshall Grammonts
Daughter, who prefers the pleasure of Paris, to the Sovereignty of Monaco.

Massa is in Toscany, seated part' of it at the bottom of a great Mountain,
part upon the Mountain, and highest of all is the Princes Castle, yet he is a
building a Palace in the lower Town, and it is almost finished; this is but a
Post from Sarzana: The family Malaspina possessed it along while, till by the
marriage of Ricarda Malaspina, with Lorenzo Cibo, it came to this family,
because she was the Heir of it: They were Marquesses till the year, 1499. at
which time Innocent the 8th of the same family being Pope, Alberico Cibo, was
by the Emperor Maximilian made Prince of the Empire. Bonifacius the 9th was of
the same family, which coming from Grecia, where they had possessed some
Islands, Principalities, and other Territories, they seated in Genoa, there is
a Cardinal of the name and family.

Massarana is in Monferrat, not far from Veroelli, this Principality has been
in the hands of the family Scala, but in the 1568. 'twas bought from them by
the Ferreri, who are at present in possession of it.

Upon 15 miles from Genoa is another Sovereignty, the Marquesate of Torreglia,
it was given by Charles the 5th to Andrea Doria, who had left the service of
Frances the first King of France, and done many eminent services to the
Emperor; the same family does also enjoy the principality of Melfey in the
Kingdom of Naples, but not in Sovereignty: This family Doria has for 500 years
been esteerned in Genoa, one of the most noble, if not the first of that
Republic: The head of the family is young at present there are two branches of
it flourishing in Genoa, who has each of them a stately Palace, though one is
more ancient and more sumptuous than the other.

Another principality is, Piombine, in the Island Alba, whereof part belongs to
the Grand Duke, as Cosmopoli, etc. Prince Ludoviso has it now, it was bought
for his Father by his Uncle Gregory the 15th of the same family; not long since
the Princes Father died in Sardegna, where he was Vice-King for Spain, having
laid before noble and stately foundations of a Palace in Piazza Colonna at
Rome. This Prince underwent his Fathers displeasure unto the time of his death
by reason of a strong passion he had for a mean person in the Island: At
present there is Cardinal Ludoviso great Penitentiere of the Roman Church,
which is one of the most eminent dignities of it: he is of Bologna of this
Family by the side of late Prince Ludovisio's Mother; he is a man of no
considerable parts.

Speaking of this sort of Princes, I say nothing of Strength, Riches and
Policy, things so inconsiderable with them, that they are to be not so much as
mentioned; all are under the protection of those within whose dominions their
principalities stand, or of some other; the inconsiderableness of others, and
the affection of their few Subjects are a security to them, and happy are they
if satisfied with their condition; they are free of fears and of ambition; as
they have little, so they have little to care and to answer for; they have the
satisfaction to command, and not be commanded, and enjoy what sweetness there
is, giving Law, without being exposed to the inconveniences of it.

But now we must come to those principalities which are seated within the state
of the Church, and first to those which belong to the family Colonna, now
divided into two branches, one of which has the Principality of Carbognana,
whose eldest Son has married his Sister, who is at present the head of the
other branch, whereof however the late Cardinal Colonna, who died at Finale,
attending on the Empress, and who was Protector of the Empire, was the chief,
and with his frugality acquitted the debts, and cleared the state of his
family: his Nephew Don Lorenzo Colonna (who has married the Mancini, one of
Mazarins Neeces) commonly called Contestabila Colonna, because he is High
Constable of the Kingdom of Naples, is now the head of that branch, a man
whose Inclination agrees better with the French than with the Spanish temper;
yet he must keep fair with these by reason of his place, and of the Land he
has in Naples: his free and frequent conversation with the Duke of Crequi
Ambassador to Rome, gave the Spaniards much jealousy, some think he left Rome
in part upon this account but the aversion he had for the late Popes family by
reason of some discontents he had received from them, was a sufficient ground
to oblige him to leave Rome for two years time, as he did lately; he is a man
who lives in his pleasure, yet he has so High and so Noble a spirit, that he
could not stoop to the Popes Kinsmen, as few others did; he has a brother
called Don Domenico Colonna, and is Sovereign of Pagliano and Prince of Marini,
the antiquity of his family is well known: their Arms are a Colonna, or a
Pillar, crowned because Stefano Colonna the Roman Senator did crown Lewis of
Bavaria Emperor, in the year 1260. they say they come from Columnius an
ancient Roman.

The Rival, and ancient Enemy of this family has been Casa Ursini, most Noble
and very ancient, of which was that proud Nicholas the 3d; this family has
been much decayed in her state, though of late 'twas somewhat restored by the
means of some rich Matches made with other families, which yet for want of
Children may at last prove disadvantagious: Their Palace at Rome in Monte
Jordano is very ancient: the eldest of the family is now Cardinal Ursini
Protector of Poland, Portugal, and Com-protector of the French Interest at the
Court of Rome; a man of no extraordinary parts, who not long since was obliged
to take a journey to Paris to pacify that Court, angry with him for not acting
according to directions in the business of Crequi at Rome; and therefore had
taken from him his pension of 5000 Crowns a year, and bestowed it upon Cardinal
Aldobrandini, who being dead, Ursini posts away to Paris, and obtains his
desire, the head of this family is now the Duke of Bracciano, who is also Conte
di Petiglione, two Soveraignties belonging to the family by an ancient gift of
some Popes for services done to the Church; this Duke is the head of the
ancient Nobility of Rome, as all other Roman Princes do, he stands much upon
the points or punctillio's of ceremonies; hence it is, that lately he had a
kind of a Broglio, or falling out with Cadinal Sforza, though some think it was
not so much his fault as the Cardinals; he has a younger Brother, called Don
lelio Ursini Prince of Vic^varo.

Another ancient family is that of Cezarini Duke of the name, and Prince of
Fansano, and of Ardea he derives his pedigree from the Cezars, the family, as
to a Male Issue, is like to be extinct: the late Duke, a man of 50000 crowns a
year could afford his Cook 4Giulius, two shillings for his dinner, and no more.
He appeared so high for the French in the business of Crequi, out of an enmity
he had for the Popes Relations, that he was obliged to retire into the Kingdom
of Naples till the peace was made; he was one of those whom Italians call Matti
porta a casa, he died lately, and left three or four Daughters in Monasteries,
who had made no profession; his brother the Abbot Cezarini has succeeded him,
a man of a most loose and dissolute life; when I came from Rome he was upon
marrying a Lady of Milan, without hopes on his side, by reason of his former
deboistness of having any Children; yet with what he had before he is worth
60000 Crowns a year. Rignano is a Principality belonging to the Duke Muti, of a
very ancient family, for they derive themselves from Mutius Scevola, and a
proof of it is the possession of Campi Mutii, wherein Porsenna was encamped,
given by the Senate to Mutius and his posterity: The present Duke is not
married, though he begins to be ancient, he has much squandered his state with
Gaming and Women, he has a brother a Prelate, and another called Marquess
Muti, a very ingenious person to my knowledge, and of good parts, their Palace
as that of the forenamed family is in Rome.

I will make no further mention of the Sovereignty of Farneze, I said what was
fit to be known of it speaking of the Duke of Parma, the Cardinal of that name
is Prince of it. I will only name the Marquess di Monte another Sovereign, and
the Noble Family of Caetani who have a stately Palace at Rome. Of this Family
is the Prince of Caserta, who for an unhappy business was obliged to fly from
Rome, where he was looked upon as the best qualified of all other Princes, as to
his personal worth.

Pope Clement the 8th a Florentine, in the year, 1595, bought the Marquesate of
Meldola, and gave it to his Nephew Ottavio Aldobrandini, which is a
Sovereignty; this family has lived at Rome with great pomp, and much
splendor, where they have three or four fair Palaces: now there being no
Males, the great Heir of that family is the Princess of Rossano married first
to the late Prince Borghese his Father that now is, and after to Prince
Panfilio, Nephew to Innocent the 10th, of which she is now a widow; this match
with those two families is like in time to cause great clashings between them,
about a clause in the contract of marriage with the former; both are very
potent, for Borghese has 300000 Crowns a year, and Pansilio little less: So we
are now come to late families raised at Rome by Popes.

Urbanus the 8th, subject born to the Grand Duke, by the means of his long
Reign: had time enough to settle his family Barberini; he had three Nephews,
Francesco, whom he made Cardinal Padrone, that is Master, Antonio who for a
while was the head of the Family, but desired at last to be made a Cardinal,
and Don Thaddeo: Francesco was made Arciprete of St. Peter's Church. Antonio of
St. Mary the greater, and High Chamberlain, and Don Thaddeo Prefetto, or
General of the Church; this last being made the head of the family, they bought
him the principality of Palestrina, formerly Praeneste, which is now in the
hands of his younger Son, the eldest having voluntarily resigned his Birth
right to his brother to be made a Cardinal, who at present is called Cardinal
Carlo Barberini, he is the third of the family who has that Dignity, which is
very rare at the same time; and that which is the more to be admired is, that
he was Elected by Innocent the 10th, who made it his task to persecute and
destroy this family; but this was the work of Donna Olympia, who recollecting
her self, and being afraid least the next Pope might prove a friend of the
Barbarines, whose faction was then potent, and so retaliate the Panfilio's what
they had done to the Barbarines, she thought it fit to reconcile both families,
and this Cardinals Cap was the Seal of that Reconciliation; though this family
was persecuted by Innocent, it is still flourishing; the Prince of Palestrina
being already in possession of a vast Estate, and in expectation of a great
addition to it, after the death of his Uncle Francesco, who is very rich, and
at present the Dean of the College of Cardinals, and titular Protector of the
English Interest at Rome; but how much more would he get if he were made a
Pope, as he pretends to it in case of a Sede Vacant: this Princes Palace is in
as good air, and as pleasant a seat as any in Rome nigh to Monte Cavallo, which
Innocent was upon taking from them, had not Cardinal Grimaldi prevented it by
setting the Arms of France over the Gate.

But we must come to the late reignning family of the Ghigi's, that Pope at
first was seemingly unwilling to do any thing for his relations, but at last he
was as busy as any of his Predecessors had been, to raise them up; to this
purpose he bought, as we said before, the Principality Farneze, but afterward
he parted with it for the reasons before expressed. He persuaded Father Oliva,
the General of the Jesuits, to enduce those of their College who had
Authority to sell him the best land belonging to it, to the sum of 100000
Crowns, under pretense of getting moneys to pay their debts; and this was
bought for Don Augustino, whereat the Jesuits were much grieved, when they saw
their fault at a distance; then did he secretly tamper to get those of San
Marino to receive a Prince over them; then did he proffer to Duke Muti for his
principality of Rignano a Cardinals Cap, and a great sum of money; and after
the death of Duke Cezarini, he offered the Cardinals Cap to his brother and
heir with 200000 Crown, if he would give one of his Neeces that are in the
Cloister to Don Sigismond the youngest of his Nephews, and resign the
principality, but he not willing to marry, nothing of this could take effect;
however the head of his family is provided for, because the Noble Family of
Prince Savelli being exceedingly decayed, want of moneys obliged him, who now
is to hearken after the proposals, made by the Popes Agents, to sell his
principality of la Rizza and Albano, which he did not absolutely, reserving for
many years to come for himself and his heirs (having already a fine young Son)
to enter again into his right and possession, paying the sum received, which
there is no great probability as yet to effect, except in case of some very
great match, or of a Popedom in their family, which yet is not very probable,
though at present there be a Cardinal of the family, who had some things left
him by Cardinal Mont' alto: however the Pope is dead, and Don Maria, who at
Rome ruled the roast, has soon followed him, and a spend-thrist of no parts is
left after them; the prsent Pope as yet has gotten no principality for his
Nephews, and he has hardly had time to do it; what he will do hereafter time
will reveal.

All Princes and Republics in Italy do homage, or pay tribute either to the
Pope or to the Emperor, except the Venetians, who yet for some Islands pay a
tribute to the Turk. Namely, first, the King of Spain is Feudatario of the Pope
for the Kingdom of Naples, and of the Emperor for the Dukedom of Milan. The
Duke of Savoy depends from the Emperor of Piemont and Monferrat, by virtue of
which last he is Vicar of the Empire. The Grand Duke acknowledges the Pope for
Radicosans, the King of Spain; for Siena, and the Emperor for Florence, and
the rest. The Republic of Genoa does homage to the Emperor for her whole
state; the Duke of Mantoa, who is also Vicar of the Empire, by reason of
Monferrat to the Emperor, for what he has of Moferrat, and for the Mantoan.
The Duke of Parma to the Pope for Parmas Piacenza, Castro and Riociglione. The
Duke of Modena to the Emperor for his whole state; so does the Republic of
Luca.

The Prince of Monaco does homage to the French King for what he has in Fance.
The Duke Della Mirandola, the Princes di Piorulino, and all those of the family
Gonzaga, with the Marquesses di Massa and Torreglia, depend from the Empire, as
due from the Pope, the Republic of San Marino, the Prince di Massarano, the
Duke di Itracciano, and Earl di Petigliano, the Marquesses di Moldota and di
Monte, and the Princes di Palestrina, di Pagliano, and di Farneze.

Now the difference of those Papal and Imperial Fiefs or Feudi, consists in
this chiefly, that most of the last pass by succession from the line male, to
the female, but it is not so off the others, for the lawful masculine line
happening to fail, it is presently devolved to the Church, as in cases of Ferrara
and Urbino.

Thus far have we spoken in particular of the several Princes and Republics of
Italy; now I have some few things to observe in general, relating to the whole
Nation: First, their Language, which is a corruption of the Latin, caused by
the irruption of the Goths, Huns, Vandals and Lombards, who settling in it for a
while, and using their own Languages, the Country Tongue, which was in Latin,
came to grow corrupt by degres, and to be somewhat forgotten, and which is a
mixture of the French, and some of the Spanish, because these Nations have been
there with their Armies, and have ruled over parts of it for a long while;
hence it is, that about Piemont, Milan, and Genoa, they speak a corrupt
Italian, which has most of the Provenzal in it, and except in part the State
of the Pope, in Toscany and at Leuca, the right Italian is spoken no where
else; I do not speak as to the pronunciation, which is very different, at Genoa
it is pronounced much with the lips, in Naples with the teeth, in Venice with
the palate; and the Florentine pronunciation is well enough known, how ever the
right Italian language, or Toscan, as they usually call it, is very
Sententious, and full of Judicious and Significative proverbs; it is very sweet,
and does abound in fine and civil expressions, as for instance, if I desire to
speak with one, the first words he will say to me will be these, Che commanda
US, what are you pleased to command me; if they answer to a question, it is in
these words, Daservitore non lo so, as I am your Servant I cannot tell; If I
desire one to do any thing for me, he will say, Sara Servito, I will do it; or
if I buy any thing, and we cannot ag^ee about the price, the parting words will
be to me, Mispiace di non poter servirla, I am sorry I cannot afford it, and
the like; all which expressions in their Original, have more of civility then
in any other Language. I need not to penetrate into the sincerity of their
discourses, which is not material to the purpose. I know the saying, The French
do not speak as they write, nor the Italians as they think: I speak only as to
the sweetness of the Language, whereupon one said, If I was to speak to
Senators or Ambassadors, I would do it in Spanish, if to Soldiers in High
Dutch, to Courtiers in French, but to Ladies in Italian. There is indeed a kind
of excess in their civil expressions, for they use to say, Schiavo di V.
Sigria, I am your slave instead of your servant; and the word Vosignoria, your
Lordship is ordinary with them; so is the title of Molto magnifico given to
inferior persons, as that of Illustrissimo to those of a higher quality, yet
it is given to many who are no great matter: a stranger with them is presently
Sigre Conte, or Barone, or at least Sigre Cavaliere; they call men by the
Christian name, Sigre Francesco, Giouanni, Francis, John, when they speak to
them, only adding the word Don, to those of the highest quality, as Don
Domenico, Don Lelio, yet they speak in the third person, when it is with one
whom they will show respect to, thus, Dove vanno loro sigri, but in Naples it is
usual with men of the highest quality to do it in the second person of the
singular, thou, as Che fai, sei tu stato, which with other Nations is a sign
either of great familiarity, or of much contempt. Neither must I omit here how
fit and proper Epithets they give to things and places, as in the case of every
one of their Chief Cities, so they call Roma la santa, the holy, according to
their opinion, Venice, la Ricca the rich, Padoa, la Dotta the learned, Ravenna,
l' Anticha the ancient, Fiorenzala bella, the fair, Milan la grande the great,
Genoa la superba the proud or stately, Bologna la grassa the fat, Naples, la
Gentile the Gentile, Capua la deliciosa, the delicious, etc.

I will not insist upon their customs, which is a subject of which many have
treated, however by the by let me say in few words, that in their division of
the artificial day, they differ from the general practice of Europe, excepting
only (as far as I could observe) Prague in Bohemia, instead of our reckoning
from 12 to 12 hours, they reckon from 24 till 24, and their first hour begins
at night an hour after Sun setting, wherein they imitate the Jews, who after
the method of the creation reckoned the night before the day, for says
scripture, The Evening and the Morning was the first day, the second day, etc.
Another custom of Italians wherein they differ from us, is in the sign we use
to make with the hand to those whom we call, for here we do it with our fingers
upwards, but there it would be taken for an affront, my hand must be downwards,
and move gently when I make a sign with it; here we take that to be the
upperhand which is next to the wall, but there they judge of it by the hand it
self, the right hand though next to the Chanel is with them the upper hand; and
in the case of riding in a Coach, a place in the Boot in their way, is before
one in riding backwards, but in Venice the left hand in the Gondola is the
upper hand; but when three walk together, the middle is the most honorable,
hence it is, that when they walk upon a place to and fro, they are careful to
let every one take his turn in the middle: A strange way they have to retort
affronts upon others, which is, to break a bottle of Ink upon one, specially
women, or else over the door of the house, so that it remains spotted with it,
it is the greatest note of infamy that can be laid upon any one. Italians, both
men and women, have a general and a natural inclination to play upon the
Gittar; and I admired sometimes to hear those play who never learned at all;
the very inferior sort of people without any direction, only with a constant
application do get it, and they are so taken with it, that as they travel upon
the high way from town to town, they play upon it; and at the same time to
play, to sing and to dance, is usual with them.

I cannot well omit to speak some few words about their temper and manners, but
before I do it, some passage I observed somwhere there (for in things of this
nature I name no places nor persons) which gave occasion to my following
reflection, how fit it is for Princes to be careful what manner of men they
bring about their persons in private. When a Prince comes into a place of
retirement, he puts off that Majesty and Gravity which he has when he appears
abroad; they are but men, and so they must allow 'themselves some liberty in
there Chambers when they are withdrawn from the crowd of men and business. Now
if when they are thus retired to be private, every action of theirs, and every
word they speak be vented abroad by those who are present, in this the
condition of Princes of all men in the world were the most miserable, Quisque
suos patitur naevos, every one has his failings, and the feailties of humane
nature, so that Wisdom consists in the concealing of it, and not in the not
having of it, besides that Nemo sapit omnibus horis: So that if standers by who
see things, spread them abroad, then additions and glosses are made upon it, and
as the actions and words of Princes are exactly taken notice of, so every one
passes his judgment upon them. How necessary is it then for Princes to have no
rash or giddy, but wise, sober and discreet men to wait on them in their
retirements, who without being told, may know what is fit to be spoken, and what
to be concealed, those things which may give a good opinion of a Prince must be
published, but not the contrary, or else I say, that those who have the honor
to be admitted into the presence of Princes, so as to be private to their
retirement from the crowd of affairs, to ease, cheer up, and refresh their
spirits, if they allow their tongue as much liberty as they do to their ears
and eyes, they are very unfaithful or very imprudent, and so not fit to be in
such places. Certainly Domitian himself never told, that when he was in his
Closet, he was busy about killing of flies; the first report of it came
undoubtedly from some other hands, which brought a great deal of disparagement
upon him; I know in this he took his pleasure, as Nero, and other Emperors
took it, in the company of Buffoons, and things of that nature; but they forgot
that their honor was to have been to them dearer then their pleasure. I do not
deny however, but that one friend may sometimes whisper in the ear of another
private things of this nature, and impart in secret some such things to them as
they have seen, for this manner of reposing confidence in the discreetness of
another is a strict bond of friendship: I disapprove here those who speak at
random, before those whom they scarce ever saw, whom they do not know well, or
when they speak it unseasonably, for there is a time for all things, and to
know it is not the least part of wisdom.

But upon the subject of the nature of Italians, I must observe that the people
of those parts which are on this side the Appennini Mountains, as Piemont,
Monferrat; all Lombardy, part of the state of Venice, and la Romagna, have some
things of the French humor, but on the other side, as the Gonoeses, Toscans,
Romans and Napolitans, they have much of the Spanish temper, however they are
all in General, dextrous, subtle and prudent, those who are good, know all the
tricks that are put upon men; there is no leading of them by the nose, neither
will they be easily cheated, but they who are bad apply their whole wit to hide
it; so that one is easily mistaken in them, and it is very difficult to know
them well, but after a long dealing and conversing with them.

Italy the Mother of Arts and Sciences, I look upon as a nurse, who has virtue
in one breast, and vice in another, and as ever one extreme joins with another,
so best and worst are to be learned there; this is according to the
constitution of the people, who when they be good they are very good, when bad
extraordinarily bad, Corruption optimi est pessima; however a judicious man will
benefit himself by the good which there he will meet withal, but also like an
experienced Artist he will extract wholesome cordials out of the worst of
poisons; though the corruption of humane nature is so strong, that it inclines
and draws us to evil, rather then to good, but the beams of grace, the light of
nature, and the testimony of ones conscience, may teach us the right way.

However, to speak first of the best, I say the conversation of Italians is not
easy to be had, but when it is, 'twill be found sweet, civil and obliging,
very circumspect not to give offenses to any one in the Company, or any one
else that has a relation to it, ever respectful one to another; the greatest
familiarity does not make them recede from a courteous carriage, so that such
persons have one of the best qualifications to make friends, for friendship
without respect is not to be cared for: Furthermore a thing very commendable in
point of conversation is, that though they be many in company, they never speak
together, which is the Vice of some other Nations, and fit only for Children;
let a man make a discourse never so long; they will hear him quietly, and not
interrupt him, as they will not be interrupted when it is their turn to speak;
it is true, that most of them speak rationally and juditiously; and as they are
a people who love exceedingly their liberty, for which cause their Princes, to
keep them under, have built so many strong Holds and Castles, so the ordinary
subject of their discourses are affairs of state, which by a constant custom
of speaking and hearing of, they have brought themselves to an ordinary
knowledge in, as the example of that poor Fisherman at Naples, Mas' Anello so
cunningly blowing up the fire of that Insurrection, which made so much noise in
the world, does demonstrate; upon this account, Books treating of any state
revolutions are so strictly forbidden them, knowing that this is to add fuel
to the fire; and in some places, where most of all Princes are jealous of their
Authority, as in Naples, discourses of this nature, if known, are severely
punished.

But there are two extremities upon this subject, some Princes of the East and
North east parts of the world, namely the Tartars and Muscovites, keep their
people in a beastly ignorance, and have exiled all manner of Arts and Sciences
out of their Dominions, and this under pretense, that hereby having not so much
the use of reason, they are not apt to cavil at, or to disobey the orders of
their Superiors, as do other Nations, who have more knowledge and
understanding; but this has no more consequence, then if one should say, meat
and drink are not to be used, because there are gluttons and drunkards; because
there are sometimes knowing and judicious subjects, who are disobedient, it is
not to be concluded, that knowledge and judiciousness are the cause of
disobedience, so far from it, that these letting a man know of his duty, do
fence against any thing that goes about to withdraw him from it: Pride,
Ambition, Discontents, Covet ousness, Cruelty and the like, are the caufes of
Risings against Lawful Authority, and not Wisdom and Understanding, so far from
it, that where they are not, the use of reason is suspended, and men act only
out of a natural impetuosity, and out of a sensitive principle, wherein they
differ nothing from beasts; so that the same ignorance and violent motion which
leads them to obedience upon the less shadow and fancy, will spur them to
disobedience; and one alone, if not quickly taken off, is enough to turn away
whole thousands, for who can more easily be mislead, then he who receives
falsehoods for truths, and who has not a spirit to discern good from evil;
these are Mules, which will as soon kick their Master as a stranger; or like
those Elephants, who having once felt the smart of a wound, in spite of their
Rider turned from upon the Enemies, and fell foul upon their own Army: I am
further of the mind, that ignorance is the great prop of Rebellion; for as
there is nothing so natural to men as the desire of liberty, and that there is
nothing in men to oppose the motions and desires of it; and seeing they obey
only out of fear of punishment, upon all occasions, they will embrace any
means let them be never so wrong, to attain it: Like Lions and Tigers used to
be chained up, when they break loose they tear and devour any thing that lies
in their way, and like violent torrents they overflow all; from the fury of
such people, Libera nos Domine. As to those barbarous Countries where they have
such Erroneous principles, contrary not only to reason, but also to common
sense, they bear the punishment of this fault, for all their subjects are
generally incapable to do them service, having neither parts nor abilities to
effect it; and in the managing of their Wars, which is the chief thing they
mind, they are obliged, specially in Muscovite, to get Officers of other
Nations to carry it on, their own Subjects, few excepted, wanting knowledge and
experience in it. Arts and Sciences, not only make a Kingdom flourishing, but
also do fit Subjects to obey and to command; overrules with the use of reason,
that brutish impetuosity which is in some men, not only teaching them their
duty, but also strengthening it in them with reasons and examples.

But it is not enough to disapprove this singular error, for there is another
extreme to be condemned; it is the too great curiosity of private men. I know
particular persons are concerned in public transactions, as being members of
that politic body, which can never fare well or suffer, but they must be
sensible of it: yet some more and some less, according as they are eminent in
their places, and called to it by the favor of their Prince, for every one
must know his station, and act within that sphere, Ne ultra crepidem; for if
every one were his own carver, and had that share which he wishes in the
Government, then all would command, and there would be none to obey, so that
all would degenerate into a confusion and Anarchy. Men ought to refer
themselves to their Rulers, for the direction and steering of public Affairs,
knowing that God who has called them to it, has not been wanting to endue
them with necessary abilities: Therefore those subjects are to be blamed, who
would penetrate into the secrets of Princes, and dive into their Coucils, and
consequently cavil at their actions, and censure their proceedings: they see
indeed the effects, but know not the causes, which if they knew, they would be
satisfied and approve of them, if they were capable to understand them, but
oftentimes they will judge of an undertaking by the event, which is a great
mistake; as we could give examples of designs, which were as rationally
grounded as could be, carried on with all imaginable dexterity and secrecy,
yet miscarried upon the point of execution; on the other side, rash attempts
managed with the greatest imprudence in the world have proved successful: What
then? were the former to be blamed, or the latter commended? No, we must look
upon men to be no more than instruments, if according to the reason they have,
they make use of the means afforded them, it is all that may justly be required
from them, for success of things depends upon the overruling hand of
providence, which disposes of all things as it seems good unto her: It is true,
it is said a successful man was never a fool, nor an unfortunate a wise man; but
this is a vulgar error as well as this other, the strongest is never the
traitor. Out of this I deduce, that for the most part it is beyond the sphere
and capacity of subjects, specially those of an inferior Orb, to judge aright
of the actions of Princes; they have certain motions whereby they act, which
are invisible to particular men, they are acted by an intelligence which is
hidden from the eyes of the commonalty; and as they stand nearer to God, so
they receive more of his influences: But some sort of people do proceed to an
excess of unreasonableness, in that as much as in them lies, they will not give
Princes that liberty which they allow themselves, as if they were Servants more
then Masters of the Sat; it is true, certain faults of Princes are more
unexcusable than those of private men, because by these last, none but
themselves or few else do suffer, but by the former, whole Nations are
sometimes the worse, and share not only in the disgrace before men, but also in
the punishment from God; however a distinction is to be made; some failings are
natural to them as men, and others as they are Princes, and neither are to be
examined by subjects, for to their great Master they must fall or stand.

Now I must return to my principal subject, to some other virtues practiced by
Italians, which are sobriety, and frugality; I will join them together, for
they have a great dependancy one upon another, only the latter is of a larger
extent: Sobriety is a thing so much in request amongst them, that with them
it is accounted to be, as indeed it is, a great shame to practice any thing
contary to it, specially in point of drinking; so that to call one there
Imbrioco, a drunkard, it is to give him one of the greatest affronts he can
receive; and it is a certain truth, that they are very temperate in their meat
and drink, and whole diet, as I will give some particulars by and by upon the
point of their frugality; in the mean while some make a doubt, whether their
Sobriety bean effect of their temper, or of the Climate: I confess in hot
Countries, such as this is, men have no such stomach to their meat, as they
have in those which are colder, and though they had, the stomach could not have
the facility to digest much of their aliments, which are very nourishing, and
some of a hard concoction; however this argues nothing at all against Italians
sobriety in matter of drink, for the hotter the Climate is, the more apt men
are to drink, and no Nation has more enticements to it than they, if by nature
they were inclined to it, they having as rare and excellent Wines as Europe can
afford; but since they forbear, I will not deprive them of that praise which
they deserve for this virtue; as for eating, they have as delicious meats as
can be wished for, which are both pleasant to the palate, and light to the
stomach, in the use of which they forbear all excesses.

This will better appear by their frugality, which yet some who are used to
misname every thing, and give the worst construction to all, do call
covetousness, when it is known, that in certain things no Nation is more Noble
and more splendid than they are; this frugality is extended to their clothes
and diet, they go very plain, men of vast Estates, yea, their very Princes,
except upon extraordinary occasions, very seldom exceed 10. ponunds in a Suit
of Clothes. I know Princes and Cardinals, who when they have received a present
of sweet Meats, Fowls and the like, send it to their Confectioners, Poulterers,
etc. who by it of them; this here would be looked upon as the effect of a
miserable and covetous nature, but there it is their way; from the highest to
the lowest they are very private in their diet, there is no coming to them at
such hours, and the meanest of the people would not be interrupted by the best
man in the Land: the most part of Noblemens Servants do not diet in their
houses, but are allowed board wages instead of it.

But Italians delight in rich and fine Coaches drawn by stately horses, and to
be attended by a number of Staffieri, or men in Liveries; Coaches of 800 or
1000 pounds are not rare there, and there is never a King in Europe that has
Coaches so rich as has the Grand Duke, and the Duke of Parma, the formers Coat
of Arms, which are the six Balls, are set over head in his Coach, for every
Ball a precious Stone, valued at 10000 l. Sterling. and if we will believe them,
the whole Coach comes to 40000 l. Further they delight in buildings, and
stately Palaces built up after the Symmetry, and exact Architecture; So in
Gardens and Water houses, Ornaments and Furnitures of Houses, as Statues and
Pictures; hence it is that they are so passionately in love with Pictures, that
they will give any thing for one when they like it, 4 or 500 l for one Picture
is no extraordinary rate amongst them; there has been some Princes who have
offered in Siver the weight of some Statues, and could not have them; in a
word, Italians delight in those things which make a show. It Is not to be
admired that in Italy they are such lovers of Pictures, for that Art is there
brought to the height of its perfection, and that Country is absolutely the
best, if not the only Shcool of it, where within this age or thereabouts, have
flourished those Eminent Picture-drawers who have filled Europe with their
Names, but most of their Works are safely and dearly kept there, whether they
be in Fresco or in Oleo: what excellent Artists have been Bassano, Ticiano,
Michel Angelo, Rafaele di Urbino, Tintoretto, all the Caracci, Coregio, Paola
Veronese, Dominichino, Lan Franco Guarcini, Guido Reny, and a great number of
others, who excelled, almost every one in something; some in invention, others
in the mixture of Colors, in the proportions, exactness of Features, and after
the natural; and in designing, drawing and touching or perfecting: in great or
short, in Mignatura with the Pen or Pencil, or otherwise, Fights, Land-skips,
Flowers, Perspectives, Sea-prospects, great and small Figures, and in other
ways and things depending upon that curious profession; in this, for certain
Italy goes beyond all the World.

Now we will come to what is worst in them, but we must premise this, that
their youth is very fiery, which is the cause of Murders and other mischiefs
committed in those parts; however this heat does not last usually after they
are passed 25 years of age, or a little more: as for the meanest sort of
people, they are generally civil in their carriage, if one be so to them, but
if a stranger speaks a hard word to them, they take fire and grow very
insolent, yet so, that if they see themselves the weaker, and not in a place
convenient for them, they hold their peace and for bear till they have
opportunity of time and place; but let us come to their Vices.

As the natural propension of men is to evil more than good, so many who travel
into Italy do quickly take notice of their Vices, but do not mind their
Virtues; so when they come from thence, all that they can say for it is, they
are given to such and such evil courses, and are so and so qualified, but
Virtue and Vice with Nations are as Corn and Tares in the Field, and like Wheat
and Chaff in the Barn, one must have skill to pick out the right and leave the
wrong: Some Vices as the Apostle speaks, are not so much as to be named, and as
he says in another place, It is even a shame to speak of those things which
are done of them in secret; a certain modesty in speaking is required, which if
a man does not observe, I judge him to be disposed to evil doing; some Vices
there are so odious in themselves, that they defile the tongue of the speaker,
the ear of the hearer, the pen of the writer, and the eye of the reader, yea,
the very thoughts; this consideration obliges me to pass by some things to come
to others.

Some will tell me, 'twere well also to omit speaking of jealousy, which both
Sexes there are subject unto, though that of the men, as being the strongest,
does produce the saddest effects; I confess it is a very unpleasant subject,
which I leave after few words speaking; this extravagant passion which is
caused by love, but destroys it, and which as Solomon says, The rage of a Man,
does so blind, possess and alter men in Italy, that from Husbands it turns them
into Goalers and Tyrants, and Murderers of their Wives, who become thereby
their prisoners and slaves upon this consideration, Ariosto one of their most
eminent Poets, has the expressions here inserted:

Che dolce piu, che piu giocondo stato
Saria di quel' d'un amoroso cuore?
Che viver' piu felice, e piu beato
Che ritrovarsi in servitu d' amore.
Se non fosse l' huomo sempre stimolato
Da quel' sospetto rio, da quel' timore,
Da qvel' furor', da quella frenesia,
Da quella rabia detta gelosia.
Another Vice of Italians which I am more free to speak of, is that desire of
revenge, which is so strongly seated in them; they are certainly of a most
revengeful nature, and therefore it is very dangerous to offend them, they
profanely say, that Vengeance is so sweet a thing, and so great a good, that
upon that account God does reserve it to himself, as a thing wherein he will
not have men to share with him; and as Italians to attain it, use all possible
means, let them be lawful or unlawful, and as it carries them to the utmost
extremities; so I am of opinion, that there is a cruelty in that nature which
is so bent to the execution of it; out of this principle, I mean of cruelty,
Pope Sixtus Quintus used to say, upon the occasion of a great Princess, who in
his days was brought upon the Scaffold, Che Gusto, said he, di tagliar test
coronate what a pleasure is it to cut off Crowned Heads! Northerly people do
blame the ways which they use to be avenged, as poisoning, stabbing and the
like; but they and the Spaniards too laugh at us, and call Germans, French and
other Nations, fools, who use to challenge and fight duels one with another,
for so doing; for say they, if one has been offended, is he not a fool to take
the way, perhaps of receiving a greater offense, instead of a satisfaction, and
to venture his life upon such an account, but men ought to take their
advantage: the truth is, the Italian is a dangerous person upon this account,
for he appears cold in his anger, constantly thinking upon the means how to be
avenged, he keeps the injury in the bottom of his heart, and the worst is, that
he dissembles and conceals his desire of revenge, which aims at no less than
the death of the offender, by the means of poison, dagger, or any other way,
leaving nothing unattempted to bring his design to pass.

Neither will they hearken sincerely after a reconciliation; for their proverb,
says, Amicitie reconciliate, eminestre riscaldate non furono may grate, there
was never any pleasure in reconciled friendships, nor in warmed pottage; and
this is so deeply fixed in their hearts, that many die obstinate in that
resolution. Upon this subject there is a very notable passage of an Italian
Gentleman, who being strongly exhorted by a Franciscan Friar, to be reconciled
to his Enemy, answered him in these words, You exhort me to forgive as a
Christian, and I cannot do it being a Gentleman; I was born a Gentleman before I
was a Christian, for I am the one by nature, and the other by virtue of my
baptism; therefore I will first be avenged as a Gentleman, before I forgive as
a Christian.

From what has been said, we make some few general observations, namely that
the Italian Nation is not only fallen from that great power it had formerly,
but also it has much degenerated from that heroic virtue and martial spirit
it had before; for a thousand eminent men it produced formerly, there is hardly
one now; and that generosity of the Lion which they had heretofore, is turned
into the cunning of the Fox; so their businesses are managed with dexterity,
(not to speak worst,) more than with strength: hence it may be concluded, that
virtues, though but moral ones, make glorious States, Kingdoms and Republics,
and Vices are the cause of their decay, as it has happened to the Roman
Empire; Virtue gets honor, strength and riches; and as the best things are apt
to be corrupted in their use, so these produce pride, ambition, idleness,
covetousness, and other vices, which causes destruction one time or other.

It appears also from hence, how unfortunate the condition of those petty
Princes are, who depend upon others, for their preservation, their protectors
do often turn to be their oppressors, and yet they dare not camplain of it; how
watchful must those be who have ambitious, and much more potent Neighbors than
themselves, it is a sad case to think what straights they are sometimes brought
to, to provide for their safety, and how many real evils they are exposed unto,
to maintain that vain shadow of liberty which they are so taken with, and that
dream of a Sovereign Authority, of which they be so fond of; they waste and
consume themselves in charges for their preservation, and are besides obliged
to observe the humors of friends and foes; and what is this to the odium and
disaffectedness of their Subjects which they often bring upon themselves, who
must bear the burdens, and be at the charges of upholding this Authority,
which makes also the condition unhappy of the people who lives under such
Princes as have no power to protect them; and as the right use of these two
Princely virtues, Valor and Prudence, do consist in these two things, to free
his States from foreign, and to avoid civil wars; certainly if they can
prevent neither, but with much difficulty, by reason of weakness and
discontents, they must needs be constantly offended with dangers and fears,
which makes to them their life uncomfortable; and let things fall out how they
will, if ever they be engaged in any troubles at home or abroad, what success
and advantage can they get either from those who are much more potent then
they, or from those in whom their strength ought to lie; by this last they act
against their own interest, and do as it were tear themselves in pieces, for
it is not enough for a war to be just, it is necessary it should also be
beneficial and advantageous.

I must make one observation more, that the number of petty Princes (such are
all Italian ones, in comparison of potent Kings and Kingdoms, as England,
France and Spain) does much contribute to their common safety and preservation,
for every Prince watches constantly the design of another, not only upon his
own States, but upon that also of his Neighbor, for he is much concerned that
the dominions of one of his neighbors should not fall into the hands of
another, who would thereby grow too potent for him, and one time or other bring
him upon the Stage; and it is a necessary maxim, not only to remove the will
and inclination he has to do him hurt, but also to hinder and prevent his
being able to do it; So then, that mutual jealousy which they have one of
another, keeps the scales even between them; and if a single one would attempt
something upon him who is weaker, then the others whuld not fail directly or
indirectly to assist the weakest; and if the Prince should happen to be
stronger than all the other together, rather than be made a prey to such a one,
they would call in a foreign power to balance him, as it has been of late
done in Germany, for Princes there being grown very jealous, and not without
cause, much afraid of the Emperors power, they brought in the French and the
Swedes, who having gotten an interest in the Empire, the one in Alsatia, the
others in Pomerania and Bremen, and are now concerned to curb the Imperial
Authority if it would overflow the banks of its just and limited power: this
is also the case of Italy, where the French and the Spaniard have each some
interest, though the former not comparable to the latter, as to possession of
Lands, but when he pleases he can pour thousands of his Subjects into it,
having in his hand a door into it, then the differences between the houses of
Savoy and Mantoa, and of Parma and Modena with the Pope, will be now and then
an occasion for the French to meddle in Italy. And although the Princes of
Italy care neither for French nor Spaniard, yet they care for their interest,
which is ever to make use of one to oppose the designs of the other.

So that public persons, as well as private men, may learn from Italians, the
rules and practice of Economy and Policy; the greatest of Princes, as the
meanest of Subjects, need to be frugal and saving, for let their Incomes be
never so great, the charges of the State, and their own, are sometimes greater:
often there happens extraordinary, and undispensible occasions and necessities
to be supplied, or else the State will run into a palpable danger. Men from the
highest to the lowest, have nothing but what they save and spare, and let them
receive never so much, they will not want unnecessary occasions of laying out
more then that comes to. Moneys are the sinews, not only of war, but really
there cannot be any politic motion without it, wherefore we use to see that of
Princes, he is the strongest who is the richest, if he knows how to make use of
that advantage: by these means he will draw the greatest and the best Armies
into the field, and will keep them upon duty and in obedience, and so in a fit
posture for service; the best experienced Officers, and the stoutest and most
undaunted Soldiers, will ever follow an exact and a good pay; he will not only
secure his own places, but also work within the Garrisons of his Neighbors, and
even have influences upon their very Councils; The rich Prince will tire out
and consume him who is poor; how much then are they concerned, when present
occasions of State allow it, to lay up in their Coffers that which may serve
for the future necessities of it; that Prince who is in this condition, is
feared, respected, and admired at home and abroad, if he has learned well how
to improve this advantage.

As to that part of a Princes policy, which consists in this, Not to discover
the bottom of his heart, nor the utmost of his Power; we have it from Italians,
not the former, for when the inclinations of a Prince come to be found out, and
his heart can be known, then all his neighbor Princes will work upon him that
way; they will give him moneys if he be covetous, praises and flatteries if he
be proud and vain; they will go about to strike fear into him if he be umorous,
or in a contrary way to please him in that passion, which they know to be
predominant in him; and hereby many a time he will be drawn to act or comply in
those things which are contrary to his honor and interest: At home he is also
exposed to the attempts of Parasites and Flatterers who for their own ends;
ever study to please him in that which they know him to be most of all prone
and given to, by which, compliance with him, he becomes a prey unto them: the
latter part of this policy, for a Prince not to discover the utmost of his
power, is to be learned from Italians, as well as the former. Some Princes and
States do subsist and are upheld by credit and reputation more then by a real
strength; it is more by the opinion which others have of them, then by any true
cause in themselves; and it is well for one never to do so much, but to give
others to think that he can do more, for when it is once found out how far one
may go, others will be more apt to cross him, and will take courses suitable to
their designs against him; so that in this a Prince lies open to the attempts
of others.

Another thing neecssary for public and private persons to be learned from
Italians, as much as from any other Nation, is, Not to discover the utmost
reach of ones capacity, and of that faculty of the soul, called understanding
or intellect: this learned men do so observe, that in the solution of
questions, though sometimes they have said as much as they are able, yet they
will tell one, that much more might be said to that purpose, and the like; for
above all things they would avoid to be suspected of ignorance by others,
seeing they make an open profession of learning. So it is a matter of high
concernment to Princes to be accounted to be men of parts, judicious and
understanding, which are qualifications necessary to those who rule Kingdoms
and Nations, therefore they are so careful not to give the least grounds to
make people suspect they want, abilities to govern, seeing nothing can be so
injurious and prejudicial to them, as to be accounted soft and shallow heads.
Solomon the wisest of Kings, pronounces a woe to that land whose Princes are
children, not so much in years as in wisdom and understanding, as was his son
Rehoboam, who was said to be young at 40 years of age, for want of knowledge
and experience: a wise Prince therefore will choose not to speak at all, rather
then not to speak to the purpose upon a subject: hence it is also that he sits
in Council, not only to hear the several advices given him there, but also to
judge of them himself, and having digested it in his mind, to give them a form,
choose the best, and be himself the Author of his resolutions in consequence of
Councils given him, which thus he makes to be his own. It is then a great part
of wisdom to conceal his ignorance, and in capacity of any things, specially of
those which ought to be known, and to give as good opinion as one can of his
abilities, and rather forbear speaking of a thing then not to do it well, or
instead of praises which every one is desirous of, one brings himself into
slight and contempt, for I think that one of the greatest discommendations of a
man is this, he was so put to it, that he knew not what to say.

Silence also, and Secreste, which are qualities so essentially necessary to
all sorts of persons, are to be learned from the same Nation; as nothing makes
a man so vile and so contemptible, as not to be able to hold his peace (an
imperfection and defect to be excused only in children, fools and drunken
persons) so nothing argues so much the infidelity and rashness of a public
person, as the revealing of secrets; as I am the Master of my own secret, I may
declare it to a friend; but my friends secret I may not tell it to another,
because it is not my own; much less may a public Minister betray his masters
secret, wherein not only one or few persons, but whole Nations for the most
part are concerned. Many great designs have been obstructed, and many great
evils caused or prevented, either by an yntimely discovery of resolutions, or
by some few words spoken unadvisedly; one word dropped from a man's mouth is
sufficient at least to breed a suspicion, which usually puts men upon further
inquiries and discoveries; therefore want of secrecy is a great breach of
prudence, which is the Salt, the Spirit and the Life of Moral and Politic
Virtues.

One thing more to be learned is, Constancy and Settleness of Mind, so
necessary to private men, in both fortunes, and to public persons in times of
troubles and difficulties. A skilful Pilot is not moved so, as to despair
amidst the roaring of the winds, the tossing and tumbling of the waves, and the
raging of the storm; contrariwise he sticks the closer to his work, grows more
careful, and minds the more the safety of the Ship, wherein his own and all
others in it are included: So an experienced Minister of State, amidst all
troubles, crosses and conspiracies against the State, does retain that
soundness of mind, and tranquillity of soul, which at last may bring him out of
all dangers, instead of falling into confusion and disorder, or yielding to
fear, he uses those means which are lawful, possible, and likely to quiet and
pacify things; he is not moved at different reports, he is neither incredulous
nor over credulous, but hears every thing, examines and weighs all, receives
that which to him appears to be the truest, and resolves upon that which he
thinks to be the best.

That Italians have known and practiced these things, the history of ancient
Rome, and the experience of these last times do justify it, and some able
Statesmen, and great Politicians, whom that Nation has afforded Germany,
France, Spain, and other Countries, do clearly convince of this truth, and are
presidents of it, and one single Proverb of theirs (to show how solid and
substantial they are) does teach us all the Virtues aforesaid in these words,
Non spendor' cio che tu hoi, non far' cio che tu puoi, non creder' cio che tu
udi; that is, One must not spend all that he has, nor do all that he can, nor
tell all that he knows, nor believe all that he hears.

THE CHARACTER OF SPAIN.
IN the South-west parts of Europe, between the 37. and 42. degrees of
latitude, lies a potent Kingdom, named Spain, or Spains in the plural number,
for so Philip II. called himself, Rex Hispaniarum, after the acquisition he
made of Portugal, in the year 1550. it fell into the hands of the House of
Austria by the match of Philip the xi. first son to Maximilian of Austria, with
the daughter of Ferdinand of Aragon, and Isabella of Castilla, heir of those
Countries, united by the marriage of the said Ferdinand and Isabella. These
dominions have in time been so enlarged by marriages and conquests, as to reach
some things in Africa, a great part of Europe, and almost all America, which
has given occasion to say, That the sun never shines out of the Spanish
dominions.

The struglings of this Nation after an Universal Monarchy, have proved so
lusty and so hard, that at one time or other, whole Europe has been shaken
with it: whereby the Spanish name is become so famous, that it is not to be
admired at, if curiosity of seeing a Country where so great designs were
continued, has put several men upon traveling into it.

I confess, with many others, I have been taken with that itching desire, in
hope of seeing an extraordinary land, peopled with none but Heroes, but with
what success, the following discourse shall witness, being sure that no
curiosity was ever more severely punished then mine, nor pleasure more
constantly attended with pain: if this be a sin, I vow never again to fall into
it, and herein I ought not to be accounted singular, for I protest I found all
those whom I conversed with, and who have been there, to be of my opinion; but
patience. In this World one must see not only good but evil also, things better
judged of by their contraries, yet to go thorough, one must be stored with
moneys and patience.

Let a man begin this Journey which way he pleases, he will find it very
tedious, and must resolve to suffer many inconveniences: whither he goes from
Bayone to Yrun, San Sebastian, and thence the straight way to Victoria, Puerto
de sant Adrian, or on the left, to Pamplona in Navarra by Estella de Navarra
(where is an University) la Puente de la Reyna and Viana passing by Logrono,
whence some go to Santo Domingo de la Calcada, in the Church whereof are seen a
Cock and a Hen of the breed (as it is reported) of those which (if you will
believe it) came to life again after they had been roasted; and to be short,
thence to Burgos Valladolid, Medina del Campo, Salamanco Scyonia, el puerto de
guadarrama, Iscuriale el Pardo and Madrid, Alcula de trenares, Aranjues,
Toledo, etc.

Or whether a man goes into Spain by Catalonia, Valenza Murcia, Grenada: one
shall be ill horsed, hardly used, and have bad accommodation; of which three
things, one alone is enough to vex a Traveller.

Although Spanish Horses be very good, there are so few, that they are not
employed in ordinary uses, Mules must do the work, which are very slow
creatures, very ill harnessed, and very dangerous for biting kicking; to these
inconveniences, let a Spaniard be joined as a guide, who as well as the Mule,
keeps to his slow pace, caused not only by his natural gravity, but also (when
they walk as many do) by shoes made of little cords, which the generality of
them does wear, so that the sand and dry ground they walk upon being already
much heated by the Sun, must needs gall and burn their Feet, let them be never
so used to it, this must needs be very tedious to those who are used to ride
good Horses.

But there are other difficulties caused by the rudeness and barbarity of men,
all rational people will show themselves civil to Strangers who pass thorough
their, Country, to give them cause to commend the Inhabitants when they are
out of it; but here no such thing is thought upon, they are called by the
nickname Gavachos, and as soon as a man comes into Spain he must show all the
moneys he has about him, and every thing else, and must pay for it according as
he is taxed by those unreasonable men, whether it be a silver Sword, a Watch, a
Ring, silver Buttons and the like, so that nothing goes free; and then if any
thing lies in the way of these Searchers, they will make conscience to take it
as dexterously as they can, and though one should take notice of it, yet he
dares hardly say any thing for fear of the worst, because sometimes they send
one or other upon the passage to rob or kill as they have a mind to.

After this they give a note, which some call Albaran, and others Aluala, to
certify to other searchers that the things have been paid for; yet for all
this, others if they please (and they do it very often except moneys be given
them) they cause one to open all again, they search all, and make pay for all;
and the worst is, that this sort of men ever lies at the coming in and going
out of every Province, which in those parts (for greatness sake) they call
Kingdoms, so that after this rate one is to pass thorough several Kingdoms
before he can come to Madrid. At the coming out of Spain one meets with the
like (or worse usage if it be possible) as he found at the going into it.

But after all, the worst is, that one has no accommodation by the way, for
sometimes you shall ride 30. miles and not see a house, nor meet with a man, so
that in some places one must carry for himself something to eat, and Oats for
the Mule, and so lie sometimes under a Tree: how uncomfortable this is in
Winter, and the heat of Summer, I leave every one to judge.

And the misery is, that when one comes to an Inn, he is hardly the better
for it, for excepting some Alcoues which are used only by persons of quality,
all the bed you can get, is some forms or few boards laid close, with straw
or wool at the most, within a matteress upon it, without Bed-steads or
Curtains, for they know not what such things mean, and if one will have clean
sheets, the surest way is to carry some along with him.

Yet this is but beginning of trouble, for these Inns (if I may so call it)
afford nothing to eat, and if you will have bread, you must send for it out of
the house into one place, for Wine into another, for Meat into another, for one
can hardly find two such different things in one place; after all, if you will
have it well dressed, I advise you to have a Cook of your own.

Now see whether or not I have reason to wish my self out of this Country, but
I must go throughout, seeing I am so far engaged in it, and give some
observations I made of their nature, and of some manners and customs of theirs.

Though the Spaniard be not very sociable, yet'tis easy for a man to know his
natural Genius and Inclination as to the generality: I confess amongst the true
Castillans, some Generous and Gallant men are to be found, but these are so
scarce, that we may say of it, as of Bread, the Country affords it very good,
but so little of it, that though the Country (Catalonia excepted) be very void
of Inhabitants, there is hardly enough of it to serve 3. months in the year, so
of 10000. men, hardly one will be found to have a right principle of honesty.

If at any time a man has offended them, though it be an offense taken rather
than given, they will seem not to take notice of it, but they will watch one so
long, and so well, that at last he must fall into their Clutches; then they
give no quarter, but one night or other as a man is going to his Lodging, they
will shoot him dead in a treacherous way, and when he is not aware of them.

Their Pride is known by the contempt they have for all other Nations,
therefore they say their King alone is El Roy de los hombres; the same they
affirm of their Language, but most of all it is known by their carriage; they
have an affected gravity which goes beyond the natural, and make themselves
valiant with oftentation.

They walk up and down the Streets like Peacocks and Turkies with a great deal
of pride, staring upon others, and looking on themselves from top to toe with a
losty, scornful and braving courtenance; and yet when there is occasion to go
to it, except there be three or four against one, Toman las oulcas de villa
diego, as they say, that is in plain English, they run away, till they have an
opportunity of being avenged; and this is most of all practiced in Valenza,
Arragona, Catalonia, etc. in Castilla, and some other places, there being more
generosity than in others.

In Summer, they wear long Cloakes of black London Serge, specially those who
are of any fashion, but I have seen some of Cloth and very heavy, for they say,
that which keeps from cold, preserves also from the heat; their shoes for the
most part have no heel, or a very little one; the clock of their stockings
comes up to the fat of their leg.

It were needless for me to make an exact description of their clothes, seeing
they often have been seen in England, specially in Eighty Eight. I shall not
dispute whether they are becoming or not, much of it depending upon custom and
fancy, yet they are so taken with it, that still they keep to their fashion in
most Countries where they live, and very hardly can resolve upon changing in
some Courts where they have Ambassadors, for else they have so good opinion of
their Countries that they scorn almost all others, and account them not worthy
to be seen, except the low Countries, Naples, Sicily, Milan, the West Indies,
etc. where they go to feather their Nest and to grow rich, and often they take
such courses, as makes them speed well in it in a very short time.

They use to wear Sword and Dagger, and though their Cloak be new, very often
they make a hole in it, that the Dagger may be seen; the lowest sort of
tradesmen, as Carpenters, Shooe-makers, etc. never sit at their work without a
Dagger by their sides. Thus the Commonally is possessed with pride, witness the
story of the Woman, who being a Beggar, yet would not have her son to serve an
Ambassador; I will not said she (being spoken to about it) undervalue my son
so much, who knows whether one day he shall not be King of Spain. Hence it is
that we do not see Spaniards to be servants of men of other Nations, nor to
travel but upon the account of necessity. Now this vanity follows them to their
grave, as we hear of the Cobbler, who being upon his deathbed, having called his
Children to him, said to them, Take heed you do nothing to disparage your
selves, or to dishonor your Family.

To see the meanest of them in their clothes, and to act their gravity, is a
thing to make any Sranger mistake their quality, insomuch, that one day in
their late Kings time, a foreign Minister being private in his Lodging, took
one of them for a Grandee, who (as he thought) came to give him a visit
incognito, as it is usual in those parts, and received him with a great
civility, but at last this proved to be a Glasier, who went to mend a window:
and they so much affect gravity in their march, that one of them being once
whipped at Paris, (you may conceive not for any good he had done) and being
told by some spectators who pittyed him, to mend his pace, that he might sooner
come out of his pains, he turned about, and with much gravity, told them, that
he would not go an inch the faster, though all the Hangmen of France were at
his heels.

But to go on in telling of their good qualities, I must not omit to say that
idleness, and lasiness are some of those which most of all they are subject to:
I cannot tell whether it be merely an effect of their natural disposition, or a
trust they put to the Harvest they receive from the Indies; or, as I believe,
of both; but the matter is such, that their Land which in many places is good,
and could be made fruitful, nor only in Fruits and good Wines, but also in
other Necessaries, for want of being manured, is barren and useless. Now the
Ground does not produce without the care of man; at present God does not show
us such Miracles, as he has done sometimes in the days of old.

If Tradsemen amongst them, do work 2 or 3 hours in the day, they will think
themselves the greatest workmen in the world; and they who set them at work,
must pay as dear, as if they had been a whole day at it: when this is done,
they go to play or iport themselves one way or other, but those that live in
Sea-Towns never fail to walk by the Seaside, to see Ships coming in, to
enquire what parts of the world they come from, and what news they bring: and
here Passenger: do find some office of the Inquisition summoning them to go and
give an account of their Faith to the Office, but their chief end is to get a
piece of money, and then they let people alone.

Others there are in these Sea-Towns, who drive another sort of Trade, they
come aboard and offer to Passengers wine and other provisions at a very low
rate, only to oblige them to go to their houses, where they show them Spanish
flesh rather than Victuals.

No Nation has more ceremony, and less reality than the Spanish, when they
think to cut one's throat, then they make the greatest protestations of love
and friendship: they stand so much upon titles and places, that as Boccalini
says, it is a particular custom of Spaniards, to visit others more to
affront, than to honor them. Complements also are so mixed with their ordinary
discourses, that they wholly take away the pleasure of Society, and banish
Liberty, wherein does consist the sweetness of Conversation: An English
Nobleman having often been troubled at Madrid with such a way of dealing, by
one of their Great men, resolved one day to be avenged on him, therefore once
when the other was come to him, he caused a great fire to be made, and both
being drawn near to it, with their backs toward the Chimney, the Nobleman
engaged the Spaniard in discourses of Civility, who many times bowed toward
the fire, which he did so often, that at last feeling the heat, he clapped his
hand upon the back side, and found the fire had burned part of it, he was as
amazed, as the other who sitting by a fire, and feeling the heat thorough his
Boots, said, I am a fraid of burning my Boots, when another who stood by
answered, Sir, do not mind your Boots, for already they are gone, only look to
the Spurs.

They profess a new Divinity, to allow of a certain evil, that an uncertain may
be avoided thereby, that is to practice a Peccadillo as they call it, a little
sin, to avoid falling into a greater, and for fear of Sodomy, to indulge
themselves in their Leachery; a thing so generally used amongst them, that he
who has not his love in that kind, is accounted a man without wit and merit;
and the generality of them goes as openly and freely into such places, as here
one will go to a Tavern, or an Alehouse: they consuetudo peccandi, tollit
sensum peccati, the custom of Tinning, takes away the sense of sin; their
Proverb is, El fatigado con cosas deveres, recreese con donagres, he who is a
weary of serious things, must betake himself to his pleasures; of which, as of
Wines they allow themselves a Calabrada, a mixture and variety, wherein they so
much indulge themselves, that rather than be deprived of the least, they will
loose any thing; whereupon they use to say, Siempre en las tardangas a'y
peligro, y. vale mas paxaro en mano que buy tree volando, A bird in hand is
better than two in the bush; which they mean of their pleasures.

Sometimes I have seen some of their Priests come to Strangers Lodgings
(provided they be acquainted with the Landlord) to play with them, in a
disguise, not out of any shame, but only to have more liberty with those who
know them not, except a Landlord, or some body else tells them what they are.

There be also some Priests and Friars carrying up and down the Streets, the
Image of one or other Nuestia Sennora, as they call it, for whom they beg, and
yet the poor Lady is never the better for it; for most part of the time, what
they have gotten, they bestow upon their own pleasures, and other uses; and
once I saw at Alicant, one of them, who played at Cards what moneys he had
then about him, and lost it to an English Master of a Ship: whereby we see now
ready they are to sacrifice their show and pretense of Devotion, to their
pleasure or covetousness; and sometimes they dispose of it another way, which
is, to make a mock at what they call piety themselves, and which we, with a
more proper word, do name superstition.

Many of these Secular, and Regular Priests, are very offensive to the Laity,
by reason of the great power theClergy has in those parts, who assert their
privileges with a great severity, by the means of the Inquisition, which is
formidable to the greatest men in the Land, as to the lowest; so that under
this shelter, they commit many unjust and unlawful things.

But in general, to return to the Nation, they are very singular in their Diet,
still making good the Proverb which says, A Spaniard is not sober when he
lives at the costs of others: but else they are very sparing and I am very much
of the opinion of one, who thinks that in London, there is more Meat eaten in
one Month, than in whole Spain in one Year. They do not roast whole Capons, and
Pullets, but Legs, and Wings by themselves, and then spread the feathers
before their doors, to make others think thatgood cheer is made in that house;
a Crust ofBread rubbed with Garlic, or an Onion, is an ordinary and a good
diet for them, which, if a Stranger sees them to eat, they presently fall upon
commending of Sobriety, and how wholesome a thing it is: many a time I have seen
numbers of them dine so, close by a wall, to enjoy the heat of the Sun, which
is their ordinary fire in those parts, so saving they endeavor to be in every
thing; yet if any one will have the pleasure, how well they can eat, or rather
devour, let him treat them at his own charges.

For certain flesh isvery nourishing there, but this is not the only reason of
their sobriety, it is also dear, in part, because it is scarce, and also by
reason of a great Tax laid upon Butchers: Fruits, herbs and roots, are things
which they feed upon most of all, and in every thing almost, they use much
Pimiento, a kind of red Pepper which grows in the country; but they are not
used to see any quantity of meat upon a table; this is the reason why Gondomour
being gone back into Spain from his Ambassy in England, and being asked by his
Master about several fashions used here in the Court, amongst the rest, being
very inquisitive to know what ceremonies were used here when the King was at
table; he answered, for his part, he could not well tell, though he had been in
the Dining Room when his Majesty was at Dinner, because, said he, he was hidden
from him by a great piece of Beef which was laid upon the Table.

They allow not their wives to sit at table with them, those persons of quality
are private in a chamber and by themselves, but others of the common sort of
people, do usually keep in the same chamber where their husbands dine, at a
table with their children, or else there is a place raised half a foot or
thereabouts above the flower, with a Carpet laid over it, thereupon the wife,
and children either kneel or sit without Chairs, and eat what the husband is
pleased to send them from his Table, so that to speak the truth, they are
deprived of their liberty and kept in great subjection, little different from
slavery.

Which hard usage they are sensible of, upon occasion doing them all the turns
of unfaithfulness which they are able, being naturally by the influences of the
climate, the hot things they eat and drink, and out of a desire of the liberty
they see themselves abridged off, much inclined to luxury; they take care to
curle their hair, keep their breast naked, yet not so low as the shoulders,
they paint much with red their lips and cheeks, a custom so general amongst
them, that they hide it not one from another; they wear above their wast a
fardingale, or Guarda infanta, as they call it, which is like a circle of a
good breadth, and very fit to hide a big belly; when they go thorough a narrow
door they must strike it down of one side; those of an inferior quality, when
they are abroad, do usually wear a black Hood which falls lower then their
breast and shoulders, and hides the whole face, except one eye, which is all
one is able to see of it, whereby they are so hard to be known, that toward
evening a husband going by his wife shall have much ado to know her; though
they be more civil to those strangers or others whom they intend to favor, by
uncovering the whole face when they come nigh to them: they improve the few
moments they have of liberty, and they endeavor to hazer su Agosto, to speak
in their own words, or as we say, Make Hay whilst the Sun shines, and they do
it de la buena gana, with a good will.

Men there, are extraordinarily careful of their Beards, which are black and
thick with Mustacchio's (...) Tusks; to save them at night, they have las
bigotes, that is a kind of a waxed Case which they lay upon it, and which to
one who knows not what it is, seems very strange in a morning when they appear
with it at a Window: they also make a Beard so essential to a man, that if he
be altogether shaven, as now we are in England, they will doubt whether or not
he be an Eunuch: and in the streets of Madrid, I have seen an outlandish man of
about 30 years of age, taken by the arm by a woman who never saw him before.
and asked him very boldly, tien los Cojones voste, Sir, are you a whole man,
because he was wholly shaven.

A thing which most of all seemed strange to me in Spain, is the custom of
some to walk in the streets with Spectacles on their Noses, which with a little
thread they tie to both ears, and there is a twofold reason for it; the one is
the scorching heat of the Sun which heats so much the ground, that the
reverberation of it is hurtful to the eye, but as in Winter the sun is not so
hot as in Summer, so methinks the use of these Spectacles should cease;
therefore besides the former there is an inward reason, arising from the
immoderate luxury which they are given to, for by reason of the strict
communication there is between those parts and the head, specially the Optics,
the Organ is much offended, and consequently weakened, so that this people
becomes short sighted; and I think that the fresh waters with Ice, which they
so much drink of in summer, are used to cool their lust more then to quench
their thirst.

The extraordinry long swords they have must needs be very inconvenient,
specially by reason of the long cloaks they wear them under, insomuch that most
part of time they must turn up their cloaks of one side when they walk, and the
other hand they must lay upon the hilt of the sword, that thereby the point of
it be lifted up, otherwise it would constantly trail upon the ground, and often
the cross above the hilt being of one side turned upwards, and downwards on
the other, seems at the same time threatening heaven and earth.

Formerly they used to wear Ruffs about their necks, which were forbidden,
because in Arragon a great man was strangled with it, so that since that time
they have been looked upon as a halter about ones neck, and instead of it, they
use a little band stretched and stiffned with a little wire.

In their discourses they would be taken for Senators, for upon every occasion
they play the Statesmen, they dispose of Crowns Scepters and Kingdoms, just as
if they were of Gods council, they decide the fortune of Princes, censure the
actions and carriage of Ministers of state, and when they are three or four
together, one would think that like so many Gods they sit in council to resolve
upon the fare, and dispose of all States and Empires of the world, and this not
by conjectures, but out of a certain and infallible knowledge, and whilst they
fancy Mountains of Gold, and think how to dispossess other Nations of their
Country, they take no notice how void of people their own is, by reason of
their driving the Moors out of Granada, of their Plantations in the Indies,
their wars in Flanders and Italy, and of the many Garrisons they must keep in
sundry places; thus they make good their Proverb, cada loco con su tema, every
fool has his fancies.

Benefit and pleasure are the two great ends of Travelers, but in Spain
neither is to be had, the people of it not being sociable, and there is hardly
any thing worthy of a man's curiosity, or at least the pains to go to see it;
all Spain does not afford one noble and stately City. Pamplona in Navarra is
noted for the Citadel in it, Burgos the Metropolis of Castilla the old for the
great Church, and an inconsiderable Castle; Valladolid where formerly the Court
has resided for a considerable time, is a proverb, Villa per villa, Valladolid
en Castilla, but there are not so much as walls about it. Salamanca has the
famous University of Spain, their is the Bridge built by the Romans, and the
Bull at one end of it; Segovia has without the Monastery, called Parral, the
Mint, a Palace and the Aqueducts, and the fine Cloth made there: Toledo the
chief Archbishopric of Spain has a great Church and a thing called the
Treasure within it, and Waterworks; so at Granada is the Palace of the Palace
of the Kings of the Moors, the Altrambra: Cordova has the Mosquea or Church of
the Moors, Sarragossa is a good place, and to be short, their Sevile the chief
of Andaluzia, of which their Proverb says, El que non ha vista Sevilla, non ha
vista Maravilla: indeed about it grow good fruits, the River Guadulquivin, runs
by, and after falls into the Sea by San Iuan de Burrameda, but certainly in
other places are much better Churches, Palaces. Bridges, Universities, etc. and
I say that all these things together are not worth the pains and the charges of
going so far to see them, except a man has absolutely a mind to be able to
say, I have seen; neither is a good breeding to be gotten there.

Indeed there are in Spain two things worth seeing, and no more, one is a work
of nature, the River Guadiana in Estramudara, sinking under ground beyond
Placio del Rey, and then raising about Miajada nigh upon 14 short leagues off;
upon this account it is said they have the best bridge of Europe: the other is
the Escurial, the Masterpiece of the great and wise King Philip 11. though 't
was no part of wisdom in him to have at once 3 such great designs, to conquer
England, uphold the league in France, and to recover the Low Countries, all
which came to nothing, because as the Italian says, Chi troppo abraccia nulla
stringe; however he built the Iscuriale where the Courts, the Kings and Queens
Lodgings, the Friars Cloisters, the water, the Gardens, the Library, the
Chapel, in a word, the whole is a rare thing, but not so miraculous to those
who have seen other parts of the world; the Pardo, buen retiro and Aranjuez, I
will hardly mention, those forenamed are the best things in Spain, but he who
has a mind to suffer so many inconveniences before he comes thither must do it
by way of Penance; as for Cities, Barcelona is certainly the most populous of
any in Spain.

The rest of these towns are full of pride, idleness, misery, cheats, treachery
murders and other oppressions, caused by their ambition, animosities,
covetousness, desire of revenge, luxury and jealousies about Wives, Concubines,
Daughters, Sisters, Neeces, and what other relations they have of that Sex,
they account themselves obliged to be watchful over: yet for all their poverty
they are taken with the vanity which is too common in other places, nor to
observe a distinction of clothes according to the quality of persons, for I
have seen Carpenters and Shooemakers in Silver cloth doublets, and in
extraordinary fine cloth; but I know it to be their humor, that the poorer
they are, the more they endeavor to hide it, the best countenance they put on,
and the greatest show they make: their very Alguazils or Bailies, who are the
vilest sort of People, think themselves as good as the best in the land, and to
see them walk with a switch lifted up in their hand, one would perceive in them
as much lostiness, as if they were high stewards, or high chamberlains of the
Kingdom.

But to speak of something which is or ought to be the best in Spain, we must
come to Madrid, the ordinary place of the Courts residence, which is far from
being numerous, and their way is particular and different from others; the
generality of Women about it, are ancient and tanned, but they use painting
very much as a remedy to it: Yet I confess I have seen in Spain some with a
very white skin, (but these are scarce) a brown hair, and a lively black eye,
but there is not that honest Society of both Sexes which is found in other
places: and great men do so affect gravity, and stand so much upon their
formalities and points of honor, that amongst them there can be no sincerity
nor satisfaction.

Coaches in Madrid are drawn by mules, in them Ladies sit in the same Gravity
which men do affect, they are almost like Statues without motion, and when they
think fit to move the head, it is done in so slowand so lingering a way, that one
who is not used to it, would admire to see it; for all this I believe if they
had the liberty which others enjoy in other places, some of them would prove
the wittiest and most gallant Women in the World, even as were the Moors in
Granada, but as things stand they must live a very retired manner of life.

On the other side, no greater prostitution in the world then there is in that
Town, for the generality of Women: mothers make no difficulties to sell their
daughters maidenheads four or five times, and as often as they can to cheat
men; young girls begin to keep men's company when they are but ten, eleven, or
at the most twelve years old, this is the cause of so much infection there in
that kind, that it is a lamentable thing for any one who has the curiosity to
see their Hospitals of incurables, besides that horrid sin which to punish
sufficiently no pain was found upon earth, but God was pleased to pour down, as
it were, hell from heaven, causing fire and brimstone to rain and shower down
upon earth; about this horrid sin they have this proverb in their language, En
Spania los Cavalleros, en Francia los pedantos, en Italia todos.

A thing observable in the Court is the way of their Grandees, who sit down and
put on their hats in the Kings presence; of these men there are three sorts,
some have it by a personal privilege and special favor of the King, others
have it as an hereditary right and propriety derived from their parents, and
others in the third place, have it by a right of their charge and place, as
namely the President of the Council of Castilla, who though he be not a
Grandee, yet enjoys the same privilege as they do. Charles the fifth was the
Author of these Grandees, to gratify the Spanish Nation, and in some kind make
some of them equal with some German Princes who followed him in that voyage,
and who by their quality and extraction, had the right of sitting and being
covered in his presence, a thing which other European Kings do not allow of,
Portugal excepted.

Again, at Madrid is to be seen that cruel Bull-fighting, a remainder of those
bloody spectacles used by the Romans for to give a pleasure to the spectators,
men as mad as the Bulls they fight against, must encounter those wild
creatures, and hazard in a combat which has proved fatal to the lives of so
many.

What shall I say of Madrid it self, where are neither good streets nor stately
buildings, ancient or Modern, not considerable for the materials or for the
rules of Architecture; in winter there is nothing but dirt, and dust in summer,
so that if for the space of three or four hours men have been to walk, their
clothes shall be as white for dust, as if they had been at the Mill, so that
it is no wonder if their clothes and Taffity hats (that is overlaid with
Taffita) grow greasy so soon. Above all, let not one who is there walk abroad
late at night, nor very early in the morning, for as they have no houses of
office they fling it up and down the streets, and how unpleasant these objects
are to the Nose, and the Eye, let any one judge, yet about 9 or 10 of the Clock
there is nothing to be seen, but all is dissolved into dust, and as men say,
that one stench and poison drives away another, so their use of Onions and
Garlic is by them thought to be a sovereign remedy against these Spanish
Perfumes we are now speaking of; the Air indeed is the only good thing at
Madrid, for it is very pure and free from the Plague. But if for all this men
have a mind to go to see that stinking place, I will say to them in Spanish,
Sea con pie derecho, that is in an English sense, Much good may't do to them.

FINIS.

