Mr. GOODWIN's SERMON On the DEATH of the QUEEN.

Of the Happiness of PRINCES led by DIVINE Counsel. A SERMON Occasioned by the
Death Of that most Excellent PRINCESS, Our late Sovereign, Queen MARY. By
THOMAS GOODWIN.

Prove. 31. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but Thou excellest them
all. London, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1695.

PSALM. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me
to Glory.
IF the Great and Wise God regards the meanest of his Creatures, to provide for
them in every Exigency of their Case, to relieve their Wants, and help them in
all Difficulties and Distresses, we may be assured that his kind and watchful
Providence is more peculiarly employed about the Persons of good and pious
Princes. While they live in this World, he guides them by his Counsel, he
steers the Course of those Kingdoms over which they reign: He by admirable and
unaccountable Methods, points to a Discovery of those dark Conspiracies which
were aimed at their Ruin: He protects them, and is a safer Defense than the
greatest Numbers of their armed Guards. He influenceth their Minds and Thoughts
to observe the wisest and best Rules of Government; and he so disposes the
Temper of their Hearts, that Kings become nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing
Mothers to his People and Church; when the most who have ruled the Nations of
the Earth, destitute of this Divine Care and Direction, have been Tyrants and
Oppressors: And when the Date of the Life and Reign of good Princes is ended,
at the appointed Period, God removes them from a low Throne on Earth, to an
higher in Heaven; and he takes off a Crown sharpened with Troubles and Cares, as
so many Thorns, to set one of undisturbed Happiness and Glory on their Heads.
This is the blessed State of just and good Princes, so rarely found among Men,
that God will not only here guide them by his Counsel, but lead and securely
bring them to his Eternal Glory.

The Psalm, tho wrote by Asaph, yet has an apparent regard to David; and of
him as a King, whom God had established on the Throne, and prosper'd his Reign,
guiding the whole Course of it by the best and wisest Counsels, the Words of my
Text are meant; which also express the firm Confidence which this Great King
and Prophet had in God, that to the latest Moments of his Life and Reign, he
would assist him with his successful Directions, and that when his last Day was
ended, he would bring him to the Possession of a Glory infinitely exceeding all
the Splendour and Magnificence of that Royal Majesty of which he must be
disrobed. It is by these Considerations he supports and solaces his Soul;
which, upon first Thoughts, was vexed at the Prosperity of wicked Princes, who
grew old in Tyranny and Oppression, who daily increased in Greatness and Power,
tho founded on the Blood and Ruin of many Nations; who triumphed in
uninterrupted Successes, when as his own just and good Reign was perpetually
disturbed by the Wickedness of his own ungrateful Subjects, or the Invasions of
unjust Enemies. But when he considered that the wicked Counsels by which they
acted, would not always be prosperous, for God would blast and confound them;
that all their Arts of Policy would fail for want of God's Direction and
Blessing; that all their Supports of Power would be suddenly broken, and that
the Ground on which they stood was uncertain and slippery, and so they would
tumble into unexpected Destruction: When this good King entertained himself
with these wise and sober Thoughts, the Hurries of his Mind were presently
composed, and he no longer envied at the Prosperity of the Wicked, nor
complained that God was pleased to fill his own Life with Difficulties and
Troubles. Whatever Tumults and Combustions disquieted the Peace of his Reign,
yet he enjoyed an undisturbed Repose within his own Breast; and under God's
Protection and Care, he was sure of being inviolably safe. As long as he was
led by God's Counsels, which never fail of Success, he knew certainly that
neither his Kingdom, nor his own Person, could be in danger. He knew that he
should live gloriously, and die happy; that God would receive him to a greater
Glory, than what he left here; and that he would only take off an Earthly
Crown, to set an Heavenly One infinitely more bright and shining, on his Head.
Thus Good Princes are entirely blessed; while they live, God is not only their
Guard to defend them, but their chiefest Minister of State, to give them the
wisest and most faithful Counsel; and when they die, they go off honored and
lamented by all their People: nor do they leave only a Glorious Name behind
them, but they go to possess a solid, and eternal Glory, which fades not away.
They but step out of one Throne, to ascend another in Heaven, which cannot be
shaken, nor endangered.

Observe. That they are most certainly blessed whom God loves, and takes care
of; whom he leads by his Counsel through all the troublesome Passages of their
Lives; and after all Storms and Dangers, lands them safely on the Shores of his
Glorious Kingdom above. As he always gives the best Advice, so they can never
miscarry who follow it; but if we trust to our own Wisdom, and pursue Counsels
different from what he gives us, we renounce his Care, we refuse his
Instruction, we blindly rush on without him, and so bewilder our selves, that
we are fatally lost. He knows what is for our Good, and kindly directs us to
it. He sees a-far off the threatening Danger, and warns us to avoid it. He
discerns what may effectually promote our Happiness and Safety, which is not
descried by us short-sighted Creatures; and all his Counsels have a tendency to
bring us unto Blessedness: and if we are led by them, we shall not miss of
arriving at Glory. But he who forsakes this sure Guide, most certainly loses
his Way; and is dismally benighted, and falls down a Precipice into the Place
of everlasting Night and Darkness. I shall consider, 1. What Counsel is in
general. 2. Who the Person is, who so graciously offers us his Help to conduct
us safely by his Counsels, through all the Temptations, Distresses, and Dangers
of this Life. 3. I shall show how the Circumstances of our Case make it
necessary for us to be counseled and directed by God; and that if we do not
mind what he says to us, if we are obstinate and will not observe his
Directions for our Happiness, we must unavoidably be miserable. 4. I shall
display the blessed Fruits, and Effects of being led by God's Counsels; what
Peace and Satisfaction of Mind there is in following his Guidance, what
Security in such a Course; what inward Joys fill the Heart from these Thoughts,
that we shall be safe through all the Time of our Lives, and shall be blessed
and glorious whenever we die.


1. What is Counsel. It is a wise Advice to direct us what is fittest to be
done according to the Circumstances of Case; and what may be the properest, and
most successful Means to accomplish the intended and desired Effect. Such
Counsel all Kings want, but few are so happy as to obtain it. Thrice happy was
our Queen, who was not only directed by her Counsel of State, but by that of
Heaven too. It is God the absolute Disposer of all Affairs both in Heaven and
Earth, as universal Monarch of both Worlds, who gives out Commissions to the
Kings of the Earth; and when they govern according to his Orders, and are led
by his Counsels, they are Fathers of their Country, and public Blessings. It
is this great and wise God, who alone can make any Nation flourishing and
prosperous, by instructing the Prince, and the Senators in Wisdom.

2. If we consider the excellent Perfections of this mighty Counselor, Isa. 9.
6.
they all are so many convincing Arguments to prevail on us to observe his
Instructions while we live; and to have the strongest Confidence and Hope, that
being pursued by us, they will make us happy when we die.

1st. The Greatness of God gives Authority to his Counsel. We redily hearken to
those who are above us, and every Word which they speak carries a weight in it,
and is forcibly impressed on our Minds. If a Friend advises us to what we
apprehend may be an Advantage, we cheerfully receive, and follow his Counsel:
But the Direction of a Superior is a Command, and adds the Obligation of Duty
to the Consideration of our own Benefit. God then who is the greatest above
all, may very well guide all by his Counsel; and it is not more a Duty than a
Privilege, to observe the Measures of his Conduct. Within this Circle our Queen
was secure, when in the Management of all Affairs, she was under the Guidance
of a Power infinitely greater than her own.

2dly. The Wisdom of God assures us that his Counsels are not obnoxious to the
least Mistakes: and that by adhering to them, we can never be misguided. The
greatest Politicians may see their truest Rules fail them, and their exactest
Measures broken; for there are so many nice Circumstances of Affairs which
indiscernably pass by, and cannot be foreseen, that it is impossible for the
Wisest to provide against all Events. The best-laid Design may be frustrated by
very slight unthought of Accidents, which could not fall within the prospect of
the most careful, and considering Designer. But the all-knowing God, who sees
the Issues of things, before we can discern their Beginnings, makes such
effectual Provisions, that nothing can interrupt, or disappoint his Counsels.

3dly. The Goodness of God gives us sufficient Security, that he will not
advise us to any thing for our Hurt; but that all his Counsels come full
charged with Blessings to us. It is condescending Goodness, that he will
instruct his Creatures, whom he might have left to wander and perish in their
Folly. Since then, to prevent their Ruin, he is so gracious as to advise them,
we may be certain that he does not direct them to any thing but what is
mightily conducive to their Welfare and Happiness.

3. Let us reflect how our weak and helpless Condition makes it necessary for
us to be counseled and directed. What is the greatest among Men, without the
Care and Aids of the Almighty, but a poor wretched Creature abandoned to
Misery, and Despair? When encompassed with amazing Difficulties, all his
Presence of Mind is lost, if God does not reassure him; and his Thoughts are so
disordered and perplexed, that he knows not which way to turn himself, nor what
Knot he should first untie to loosen his Intanglements: It is only the Thought
of his being under the Care and Conduct of the Wise and Good God, which can
restore his Spirit to him, and fortify his Resolution.

4. What are the signal Advantages of being protected by God's Love and Care,
and guided by his Counsels.

1. The Assurance that we have of God's kind and careful Regard to us, and that
he will, sutably to the Exigencies of our Case, not only protect, but counsel
us too, gives us the truest Sense of Pleasure in every State of Life. There is
no Condition so prosperous, but the Consideration of the Vanity of its
Enjoyments, or the Fears of a Succession of Misery, may imbitter it to us. We
gain therefore, in the most flourishing Circumstances of our Days, a double
Advantage by our Interest in God's Care and wise Conduct: For the Experience of
it represents to us those Blessings we enjoy, not only as Pleadges of his Love,
and Testimonies of his Favor, but as Gifts which Infinite Wisdom thinks meet
to bestow on us, and will teach us to make a right and good Use of them; and
this increases their Value, and enhanceth the Pleasures of Enjoyment. The
Confidence also which we have in a Divine Providence, kind and indulgent to us,
and carefully managing all our Concerns for the best Purposes of our Happiness,
does fence us against too anxious Fears of a Change of our present easy
Condition: For tho we know that all things here are variable, yet we are
undoubtedly certain that God never alters in the greatest Revolutions, which
toss this lower World, and wholly change the Posture of it. That he continues
the same Care over those whom he loves, tho their Condition is varied. That no
Extremities of Misery, nor Perplexities of Affairs, can put his Wisdom to a
loss, but it is always able to show us a Way to escape; and that therefore tho
all the Calamities should come upon us which Men have either suffered, or do
fear, yet we shall be secured by the Benefit of Divine Counsel. The Thoughts
and Hopes of this therefore can only afford us a solid Comfort in the deepest
plunges of Misery: For what can support us in any sad Moments of our Lives,
wherein all things may seem to conspire our Destruction, when a Storm threatens
from all Sides, and a wide Ruin opens to swallow us? Where can we find Ground
for hope to settle upon, or from whence can we expect a Rescue? If in so sad
and desperate a Condition we look on all things about us, we have nothing in
prospect but Despair. It is the Sense of that part which we have in the
Protection and Conduct of God, to whose Power all things are subject, and whose
Wisdom was never perplexed by the greatest Difficulties, which can here alone
bear us up from sinking under our despairing Thoughts. This Faith supported
David, Psalm. 62. 1, 2. Truly my Soul waits upon God: from him comes my
Salvation. He only is my Rock and my Salvation: he is my Defense; I shall not
be greatly moved. And the same Faith so strongly established the Heart of our
Queen, that no Report of Evil Tidings, nor Appearances of Danger, could once
move it from its due Station, but she firmly bore all Events with an equal Mind.

2. The Apprehension of being guarded by God's careful Love, and guided by his
Counsel, will give us that entire Satisfaction of Mind, as we shall possess
Ease and Joy within; which is a Rational, and therefore the best and purest
Pleasure. What greater Torment is there, than a Man's own unruly Passions when
let loose, which rage with the utmost Violence? What Delight does a Man feel,
when those Furies being quelled, he enjoys an unclouded Serenity of Mind? It is
the pleasing Reflections which we make on our being under the Conduct of a Good
and Wise God, which breaths this Calm in our troubled Breasts, and lays the
Storms which were raised there, either by our own blustering Passions, or the
Impressions of outward Accidents: For Man is not only exposed to all manner of
present Evils, but tormented with the Fears of greater to come, which
aggravates and sharpens the Sadness of his Condition: For as an Addition to his
present Distresses, he anticipates those Miseries which he apprehends will come
upon him; and all those Evils which he yet sees but at a greater distance, are
represented by his Fears as present in the most horrible Appearance. If he be
therefore left wholly to the Mercy of his present Troubles, without any
Defense, and has no hopes of his future being prevented, he cannot entertain
one comfortable Thought: The Horror of so sad and dismal a Condition, will
eternally confound him, and he will always be distracted with his own Fears;
Prove. 28. 1. The Wicked fly when no Man pursues: They startle at the least
Appearance of Danger, and fly from those terrible Shadows which their own
Phancies have frightfully drawn: They have no Interest in the Care and Counsel
of God, which only can help a forlorn abandoned Creature, and relieve him in
the most deplorable Extremities: They have no Strength to oppose against the
dreaded Danger, no Refuge to fly unto for Security. Whither shall that Man go
for Advice, whom God refuses to lead by his Counsel? Where can he be safe,
whom God will not take care of? To what Power shall he have Recourse to defend
him, who wants the Divine Assistance? or by what Hand can be expect to have
what he fears turned off from him, who has not the least apprehension that God
has a kind Regard to him, and will safely conduct him through all the wild and
hazardous Passages of this World, to Eternal Bliss and Glory? Such a wretched
Man must necessarily be left to the Fury of his own fretting Thoughts, and to
the Violence of the deepest Despair, who not only groans under present Evils,
but is wracked by Fears of the Future, without any hopes of Relief. But the
happy Person, who knows that the whole Course of his Life is steered by a wise
and skilful Hand, which is so kind as to be careful of his Welfare and
Felicity, may banish all Fears and troublesome Passions from his Breast,
reposing himself secure upon the Love and Care of his God.

Thus our Queen was led by God's Counsels; and though in the Administration of
Affairs she employed that admirable Wisdom with which God had endowed her, and
fitted her to sway the Scepter of Three Kingdoms, yet with an entire Confidence
she committed all the Events of Government unto him. This made her always easy
in her own Mind, whatever Occasions there were, which would have disquieted any
Soul less firm than Hers; and her Thoughts were ever composed and serene.

And as God answered that Trust which she reposed in him, in leading her by his
Counsels in the Conduct of a Reign, which though alas but too short, yet was
very difficult, and in preserving her Person and Government; so when the sad
Hour arrived, sad indeed to Three Nations, but glorious to Her, in which a
Period was put to a Life so dear to all good Men, and which the Worst could not
but admire, God made good his own Promise, and satisfied her Hopes and earnest
Wishes, in bringing her to his Glory. In the joyful Assurance of this, the
Great Soul took its flight to its Redeemer, and is for ever with the Lord.

She is gone, and has left us to our Sighs and Tears, to bewail a Loss, of
which every Day will make us more and more sensible. She is retired out of
sight, and our Eyes will no longer be charmed with the View of so many
Excellencies, as are the Wonder of this Age, and will difficultly be believed
by the Succeeding, to have been found in any one single Person. She was weary
of the Troubles which infest this lower Region, where nothing but Sin and
Sorrows dwell, and silently withdrew to a safe and pleasant Retreat. Her calm
and gentle Soul was contrary to Storms, though it was never disturbed by them;
and by the Direction of God's Counsel it has arrived in a quiet and smooth
Haven, while looking on this little World, it sees every Shore covered with the
sad scattered Remains of innumerable Shipwracks of Princes and Nations, whom
God led not by his Counsels, but left them to steer their own fatal Course.

She enjoys not only a perpetual Peace, and uninterrupted Pleasures for ever
more, Psalm. 16. 11. after all her Cares and Labors employed for the Happiness
of her Subjects, but God has brought her to his Glory; a Glory which, being
above our highest Thoughts, must necessarily exceed the Compass of any Words to
express it; an Eternal Glory which can never decay, and in comparison of which
all the Magnificence of the greatest Earthly Monarchs, is but the Pageantry of
an Hour, and a transitory Show. But though she has left this World, her Great
and Honorable Name and Memory will never leave it; that, Immortal as her Mind,
will be had in everlasting Remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6.
and Princes in many Ages to come, will strive to resemble her Character, as
the most exact Pattern of an Excellent Queen.

She was greater by her Virtues, than by her Birth and Dignity; and the Blood
of Kings which flowed in her Veins, was one of the least Things which enobled
Her. Those extraordinary Qualities by which she was so illustriously
distinguished from all others among Men, would have rendered her worthy of the
greatest Crown on Earth, tho she had not been born to one: And if she had lived
among Nations, where not distinction of Birth, but the Suffrages of the People,
place the Crown upon the worthiest Head, and the Power of Empire is conferred
on the Person, whose Majestic Presence, and Great and Noble Mind, recommend
him as the most deserving and fittest to command others, whom he so eminently
excells; Her alone appearance among the assembled Tribes, at the very first
sight, would have determined the Choice of the rejoicing People. Never was in
any finite Person, such a due mixture of Sweetness and Majesty; and Royal
Greatness was never so equally loved and revered before. We saw, with a
surprising Amazement, all those manly Virtues in the softer Sex, which we
admire in a Hero; Wisdom in Counsels, a steady firmness of Mind amidst all the
perplexing Difficulties of Government, and a Resolution never startled by the
sudden appearance of any sad Accidents or unexpected Dangers.

But Accomplishments of Nature have been seen, and with wicked Flattery have
been adored in Heathen Princes; though the greatest Examples of them cannot, by
many Degrees, reach the Height of our Queen: She excelled them in all the
Heroic Virtues with which God has been pleased (that the Designs of his
Providence might be effected) to dignify sinful Humane Nature in several
Persons, who neither knew nor acknowledged him. A Crown never shined so
brightly before, though worn by many Kings of the Christian Name, because the
Grace of God, which so very rarely sparkles there, has never, since the Time
of David, spread such a Luster on any Crowned Head.

Our Queen (whose Loss not only we, but many Ages to come will deplore) was not
only Great, but truly Religious; She had not merely the Virtues of an Excellent
Princess worthy to command Men, but the Graces of a Christian. She had not the
empty Title of Defender of the Faith, but knew, and heartily believed the
Truths of the Gospel, and felt their lively Influence on her Heart, and the
Fruits were visibly apparent in the Actions of her Life.

She wore a Crown, not to glory in the Pride of Majesty, but to feel the Weight
of it; and the Regal Power did not administer to her the Luxuries and Pleasures
of a Court, but the anxious Cares of Government; and when other Kings have been
only solicitous to make the Throne easy and delightful, and to indulge
themselves in all things which the Licentiousness of a Scepter would afford,
She alone burdened her Self with the Affairs of Three kingdoms; and her
constant Thoughts were to provide for the Welfare and Safety of her numerous
Subjects in them all. This was her troublesome Employment; Religion was her
great and pleasing Business, as those many Hours which she spent in Sacred
Retirement, and a Spiritual Converse between God and her own Soul, did
evidence. These happy Moments solaced her amidst all the Disquiets of her
Reign, and eased the Burden of that Crown which would otherwise have oppressed
her. As she loved her Lord Jesus, she made him her Support, trusted in him,
cast her Care upon him, according to the Direction of the Apostle Peter; and
her Faith and Hope in him, who is King of Kings, made her Soul calm and serene,
when threatening Storms arose, and the Hearts of all the People trembled: Her
Faith did not only establish her Mind, but was fruitful in good Works toward
others; and that remarkable and distinguishing Character of a true Christian,
which could never be found in the most celebrated Instances of Ethnic Virtue,
was eminently discerned in Her.

She loved and did good to them who hated her; and they that could not be her
Enemies, without being so of their Country too, felt the Blessings of a
Government which they so eagerly endeavored to subvert. She relieved their
Wants, who would have rejoiced to see her reduced to the Condition of the
meanest of her Subjects; and who not only murmured, but would have cut off the
Hand which fed them. They then who regarding only their private Gain and
Interest, and insensible of the Calamity of the Country, triumphed at her
Death, might yet with better Reason have bewailed their private Loss in the
Public One of the Nation; for they soon were sensible of the Decay of those
Streams of Bounty which refreshed them, when the Spring was dried up.

As such Instances of all Princely Qualities, joined with the Graces of a
Saint, are very extraordinary, we ought to acknowledge them as Public
Blessings, and most joyfully to praise God, that he has favored this Nation
with such Examples, as very rarely appear upon Earth: We ought to value, love
and reverence their Persons, to do all that we can to ease the Cares and Weight
of a Crown, by our cheerful Obedience to all just Commands; and by our
readiness to employ our Lives, and all that we have, for the Support of their
Government.

When God deprives a People of a Wise, Good, and Pious King or Queen, we should
tremble at such a dreadful and portentous Sign of his Displeasure, as
foreboding Ruin to us, if we will yet be obstinately resolved to continue in
Sin, and refuse to be reformed. We ought not only to bewail the Loss of so much
Excellence in the Death of the Queen, but to lament it as a National Calamity,
and to feel the Wound that is struck so deep into the very Bowels of our
Country. When good Princes die, the strong and healthy Constitution of a good
Government is impaired; and the Life and Vigor being gone, with the departure
of the Universal Soul by which it was animated, a Kingdom lies expiring, when
They resign their latest Breath. This draws Tears from all Eyes at their
Funerals, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24.
and not only the Court, but a Whole Nation goes into Mourning.

Our Sorrow should sharpen a just Hatred and Indignation against our Sins, as
the Causes of that dismal Calamity, which occasions it. The Sins of a Country
shorten the Lives of those, who are the Fathers of it. They infect the Air of a
Nation; and Good Princes first fall, and then the unguarded People perish in
whole Multitudes. They destroy with a swifter Violence than the malignant
Designs of Secret, or the Swords of Open Enemies.

Let us not put our entire Trust in Princes, though the best upon Earth; for
none but God who cannot die, nor any of his Perfections ever decay, but are
unchangeable, is strong enough to bear up all the Confidence we can put in him.

We have sadly experienced how soon we may be disappointed in the best of
Creatures. What great, and just Expectations had we from the Reign of a
Princess, in whom Regal Power was joined with Goodness, and Grace? How did we
promise to our selves from the vigorous Constitution of her Youth, not only
happy Influences, and Prosperity of her Government, but also a long
Continuance? But how soon were our Desires and Expectations blasted on a
sudden? and when we did not suspect it, a cruel and treacherous Disease in a
few Hours murdered all our Hopes. It is then in our Lord Jesus Christ alone,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and who presides not only over
Nations, but the Persons of Kings themselves, that we ought perfectly to
confide; and if we believe, and trust in him, be will here lead us by his
Counsel, and assuredly bring us to his eternal Glory.

FINIS.

