AN ANTIDOTE Against the Common Plague Of the WORLD.

OR, An Answer to a small Treatise, (as in water, face answers to face)
entitled Saltmarsh returned from the dead: And by transplacing the letters of
his name, this is Smartlash. Ascend into the throne of equity, for the
Araignment of false Interpretours of the word of God.

Summoned out of all ages to appear, under the penalty of death, challenging
the consent, or forbidding to gainsay the common approved p^iesthood of this
age.

What have thou done, the voice of thy brothers blood, cries unto me from the
ground.

Gen 4 10. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for A Crook, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To His Highness OLIVER Lord PROTECTOR, Of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, with
the Dominions thereto belonging.
I Am in a strait in this mine attempt, in daring to dedicate this small piece
unto your Highness, the spirit of man standing always in such readiness
(naturally) as a croking frog, in those Magicians of Egypt, to procure the
favor of, and gain interest in, the most public and eminent men, only for
private ends and self-respects.

But the simplicity and singleness of my proper intent is such in this design,
together with the freedom of my spirit to prostrate my humble disires, (in
public view) after the prosperity of your Highness in eternal things, that I
am born up, and encouraged hereunto.

For God has showed me what all terrene and temporary affairs amount unto;
yea, even of the greatest men, not being used to promote the honor of that one
only, and eternally anointed.

For though a man may be but of a low stature, even as a shrub in his age, in
the view and account of men, yet if he run well with Zacheus, and be take
himself to the top of the Sycomore tree, he may come to take a just and joyful
view, of him who is Lord over all; though otherwise the press of such as are
taller then he, may seem to hinder him from coming nearer; but if he know the
way wherein the Lord passes along, he may take a direct and fruitful view of
him, notwithstanding the crowd.

I know not but that God has made your Highness the mirror of this age, as a
so exemplary for that to come, wherein the greatest glories of this world in
the men thereof, may take a true view of their deformed faces, and that in the
several feitures and figures thereof.

For I could never learn that you have pursued the honor thereof, but only
have been constrained through the urgency of a mighty hand of God pursuing your
self, to yield your self over thereunto, when necessity has clothed you upon,
and adorned you therewith.

Which is a thing rare to be found in this generation, or in any age, and
therefore a myrrour, to be looked into, and admired with respect unto the best
of men also.

No man can deny, but that God has made you an instrument whereby to work
wonderful changes, and that in high, though transitory affairs, making you a
terror to your enemies, and in a covert from the storm, un o such as profess
friendship unto the cause of Christ.

I must confess, that the reports which I have heard, the things which I have
seen, that have proceeded from your own lips, as also what I have sensibly
felt, and tasted of (though in a remote corner of the earth) have so dissolved
my heart to take the impressions thereof, that I cannot but persuade my self
that your spirit profoundly looks into, and is in honorable and skilful
motion, activity, and achievements, in, and about that only weighty and great
change, which concerns the life and death, humiliation, and reign of the Son of
God; a change of state, carrying in it kingdom, power, and glory, infinitely
transcending the rule and protection of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with
the dominions thereto belonging.

For this has in it reallity, of all kingdones, in their several and variou^
distinctions of glory, and power; not exempting one of all them which the
common adversary the devil proposed unto Christ, but the wisdom whereby he
presents them, would have falsified them unto Christ, in point of that when ein
the reallity of power and glory is properly terminated, and for ever stands,
which being truly erected and rightly ordered, never departs from you; no more
then the glory of the conquest and victory, together with his strength,
wisdom, and skill to reign, departs from the son of God, but abide upon him
for ever.

I durst not presume this small piece to your Highness, which was bu briefly
uttered according to our poor accustomed endeavors in our daily exercise,
without either Library, or time to make use of any such things, in this rude,
incumbring, and way-less wilderness.

But that I think it has in it those two mites, which that poor widow cast
into the treasury, which proved of more worth in Christ's acceptance, then the
offerings of Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders, and all the wealthy of the world;
for she gave out all her living, which consisted in two mites: the word mite is
such a diminative, as that it procures, and gains, all increase; for she gives
away the wealth and glory of her husband unto diminution, which is the riches
and glory of the creature, in which tender, gift, or diminution, does consist
the Cross of Christ, in his death to all carnal and transient things, proper to
the life and law of the flesh.

And she throws in all the miseries of mankind, which might arise, and grow,
out of her widow-hood, and loss of all her former suppl es and excellencies, in
the loss and diminution whereof, the Son of God makes manifest his own riches
and power; and these are mites, or diminutives, yea, they are individuals, we
cannot give part of either of them into the treasury, according to the nature
of an acceptable offering, but we must give them all; for he has all our glory
humane, so, as to consume and diminish it upon the altar, and he has all the
miseries of man (thus offered) to diminish it also, in the bearing of it away,
as upon the head of that scapegoat into the wilderness, or land of Shiner, to
set it there upon its proper base.

Which twain, namely, temporary ransient glory, and misery, are all that man
lives upon, viz. upon his own bodily or humane exercise, and doings, thinking
thereby to obtain the favor of God; or else upon his own transient and humane
sufferings, whereby he hopes to escape the displeasure of God: which twain make
but one farthing, or quadril, that is, one state or condition of man,
considered naturally and originally, as springing from the earth, or that first
Adam consisting thereof.

But being thus cast into the treasury, or storehouse of the Son of God, it is
that one state and condition of Jesus Christ, in whose approbation we are
received (as that widow of threescore years of age or above) into that house
and temple of God, out of which treary we find sufficiency and plenty to live
upon forever; whereas the rich give only out of their superfluity, for it is
ever superfluous to add or lay out any of the glory and wealth of the creature,
unto the riches and glory of the Son of God, which is the proper way of living
to the men of the world, either to add something to the crown or cross of
Christ, that is humaue and temporary, and whatsoever they give out in that
manner, they still keep in the main stock of their own livelihood in
themselves, which living after the slesh is death, and such riches are a mere
deprivation of all the holy things of God.

But a true widow neither owns the worlds miseries, nor yet its mercies, for
she knows both the one and the other are cruelty, but only lives upon that
stock in the treasury in the diminishing and demolishing of them both.

If these two mites were not here tendered, in the true manner of the offering
of them, as also the nature of the superfluous offerings of the rich (and that
in such sort) as they are not found in the common records, pulpit, schools,
elderships, and great students of this age, I would hide my self in some corner
of the temple, rather then make tender of them to public view, much less to
one of your atchievments, and give me leave humbly to profess, that I know the
principles upon which the common priesthood of this age stands, to be
inconsistant to the true intent and scope of these following lines; and in
point of a matter of no less weight then of life and death eternal, and if any
man, receiving his ministry from the degrees in schools, laying on of hands by
the presbitery or eldership, as commonly and practiced in these days, or such
as are appointed to examine, correct, and reform, insufficient ministries; if
any such will undertake to answer for themselves, by giving a punctual and
plain account of their doctrine, according to the true intent and scope of this
small Epistle, in any, or in all the particulars contained therein, not
striving about words, but look to the truth of the matter; they shall (if God
spare life) be as faithfully answered, with profession made, what is thought of
their arguments, and upon what grounds, as this is faithfully, and loyally, out
of an affectionated heart presented to your Highness.

And that to the intent that in case a carnal Counsel, Synod, or Eldership,
should pass some unjust censure upon it, branding it with error, when men now
awake, may be fallen asleep, there might be a remonstrance found to declare the
nature of their act; for it is an easy thing for such to condemn, as errors,
such things as come not within the compass of carnal capacity, or else stands
in there light to hinder their attaining to the glory of this world.

And as for Logical argument, height of style, Elegant, and Rhetorical
expressions; as we have little of them, so we matter them not much, but only
keep to that real truth and substance, which will abide in us for ever; yet do
we not deny unto any thing, its proper excellency* or eminency, in whatsoever
it excels: Therefore we can freely give all relations amongst men, their
proper terms and titles, afford them their proper places and offices, if
conducing unto, and tolerable in humane societies, as well as we can afford
the Sun, Moon, and Stars in the firmament, their names, places, offices, or
that conjugall tie betwixt man and wife, for the propagation of mankind on the
earth.

Else we should go about to race out that, which the almighty has stamped upon
the creature, as a document, to figure out, and point unto eternal things in
Christ, and so lay man's spirit wast of any capacity, to gather up the mind and
intents of one another, whereby we should become barbarous each to other,
debarred and shut out, from the use of communion, in that way of rationallity,
wherein properly man excels all other creatures.

For how should we know, or to what should we have recourse, in the diverse and
variety of distinctions appertaining to the kingdom of God, to make them
speakable one to another, if not to the several distinctions which God has set
among the creatures, unto which he elegantly aludes in the expressing and
revealing of himself, as in way of family, by father and son, in way of order,
by city and field; and in way of rule and authority, by Prince and people: if
we should not maintain such names, terms, and titles, how should the figure or
letter of the word be preserved in the world, which proves as true a snare,
through the wisdom of the serpent, to catch men in, unto destruction, as the
temptations of Satan have an issue and way of escape given unto them in the
Saints, by that wisdom of God, whereby they prove as inlets into the kingdom.

The Scriptures deny not a soldier his titles, only let him put no man in
fear, nor accuse any falsely, and be content with their allowance, in all their
prosecutions, using their place aright. And with like cautions, all places, and
titles, may be used, which are tolerable and useful in humane societies; even
by the Saints and people of God, for all things are lawful, though not in every
person at all times expedient; neither are we to be brought under the power of
any thing that is transitory and humane.

The most profitable use that I know, of all things visible to humane
understanding, is to take them all as proper figures (as the phrase of the
Apostle is) whereby we cast up an account of substantial, material, and eternal
things, and according as we are possessed of the durable treasure, so the
figure loses its natural use and virtue, (which otherwise it inclines and
serves unto) canselling it self in the very act of casting up the just and
perfect sum; therefore we are to use the world as though we used it not, both
with respect to the diversity, and also the universality thereof, because the
figure of it passes away.

Those renowned Christian expressions, pathetical, and plain, in edicts come
from your mouth, have rejoiced my heart, unto Immaduere Lachrymis genae; and
have imboldned me thus far, wherein I am prostrate as an unworthy servant to
your highness, in whatsoever is consonant to a Christian course.

Samuel Gorton.
From Warwick in the Naniganset Bay, this present October the 20. 1656. New
England.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER: Which may serve as a Paraphrase upon the ninth
Chapter of the first Epistle of Paul to the CORINTHIANS.
CHristian Reader; For unto thee only this small Pitance (which concerns
interpretation of the word of God) is intended by the Penman hereof; who cannot
expect from any other a voluntary consent from any concordancy of judgment, or
sympathy of desire and affection in point of any thing here expressed,
according to the true intent and scope of the Author; for where the Author
and the Penman are twain, there is never a true account of Stewardship brought
in by any imployd about the things of God.

Thus much through infinite favor and grace God has revealed unto us, that
wheresoever that spirit resides not, which first framed the mind of the Son of
God, according to the eternal wisdom, to judge of all things as God judges,
the love of God was never shed abroad in that heart, for the spirit of faith
works by love, and where the love of God is not, there is the love of this
world, which is of that wicked ones; and the love of the world is enmity with
God* and the spirit of envy never makes good construction of the expressions of
him it does repugn; therefore where the Spirit of Christ resides not, there can
never be good construction given of the words of Christ, for he has a name
given him that none can read but himself, and he is called the word of God,
therefore all other readers are false interpreters, and that is the only in*
let and progress of sin and death in the world unto this day.

There be many who arogate a Call to interpret the word of God; Some holding
themselves set a part from the common affairs of this life in such sort, as
they are not to intermeddle with any temporary occasions; but to have all
things brought in unto them, that concerns this present life, by the labors of
and means of others, who stand not in that relation, neither to God nor men,
which themselves do, being men whose Calling is spiritual, and therefore not to
be employed about any carnal things, assuming Scripture for that purpose; not
only from the equity of that Law given concerning Levy, but also as the Stand
in the room of Christ, who is of greater deserts to be maintained then Levy was.

There is one Scripture looks earnestly upon me concerning this Point, which
such men make great use of to prove their Apostolical Authority to require
Tithes, Stipends and Contributions; together with the honor of the upermost
Seats where they come, with respect unto the dignity of their Calling and
Office, above others of the Saints of God, in which regard (say they) all
others are become debtors unto them, to contribute both wealth and honor, for
which they aledge (as one special ground for such supply) as having divine
Authority on their side, 1 Cor. Cap. 9.

Which form of words they deal with as they do with all other expressions in
the word of God, using it to man's ends and intents, and not according to the
mind and intent of the Son of God.

For that which they go about to prove their Calling by to be spiritual and
heavenly, is a direct Declaration, given out by the Spirit of God to prove
their Ministry to be carnal and earthly; give me leave therefore as briefly as
I can, to declare from that Scripture, what God seems (as by his eye) to direct
and guide unto.

Our Apostle in the former Chapter shows the difference between Knowledge and
Knowledge; the one in way of the fall of man from God; the other in the way of
Resurrection and Ascension to God; the one puffs up, (as an empty blader
filled only with wind) above others; the other is filled with love to
edification, which ever prostrates it self to the party known, where or in
whatsoever he appears; the one sitting at meat, or communicating in the Idols
Temple; the other refusing to eat carnally so long as the world stands, rather
then to offend the Brotherhood.

And having concluded that an Idol, or an Idolathite (for there is a generation
of them) is nothing in the world; and that there is but one God in truth and
verity, though many do assume the names and titles of that one God; yet an
Idolathite is nothing in the world, though they so assume, and arogate the
terms, because the Son of God who is the Maker of all things, never
contributed any thing unto the form thereof, no more then it can be said that
the holy Son of God did ever give out any thing to the being of the uncleanness
of that unclean spirit, namely, the Devil, which an Idol is concluded to be by
the Spirit of God; for whatsoever the Son of God gives being unto, is a work of
Creation: but an Idol the Devils, is that Abaddon, and Apollion, that is,
destruction, which is nothing of the work of God in Heaven or in earth, and so
is nothing in the world: Therefore but one God, or power of Creation of all
things, for an Idol is the ruin and destruction of Gods proper creating virtue
where it is erected, which erection of an Idol is to terminate the scope, true
and proper intent, of any part of Gods word in any thing whatsoever besides
Jesus Christ and him crucified, besides which our Apostle acknowledges he
desires to know nothing.

For all other knowledge besides that, or without that is thus explained by our
Apostle, viz. If any man, or any thing, see thee that have knowledge, or see
thee knowledge, or thee that art knowledge; for such as man's wisdom or
knowledge is, such is the man, for as it gives man his being, above all other
creatures, so it gives distinctions of men among themselves: Sit at meat in the
Idols Temple, that is, continue and abide communicating in the word and worship
of God, as terminating any part of, or thing in, the Temple, or Palace, in any
carnal and fading matter or thing. Shall not the conscience, or shall not that
knowing together in thee, for there is a unity in Idols worship as certainly as
there is in the worship of the true God in spirit and truth. Of the weak, that
is, of such as are sick, or dead, being without, and destitute of that
healthful Spirit of grace and life in Christ. Be imboldned to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, that is, what ever is in thee, or belonging unto that
assembly of evil doers, shall be encouraged to yield up it self to the Rule of
such knowledge, for all things in man are governed by wisdom and a spirit of
teaching; therefore all things concerning the sons of men, make their addresses
to the light set up in the mind of man, of what nature or mind soever it be, to
take their form, receive commission, as also instruction for their progress in
execution; therefore thou Idolatrous knowledge set up in the Idols Temple, art
become the Author of destruction, for there was never any destroyed since the
world was, but by this thy knowledge, which puffs up with pride as an empty
bladder, filled with nothing but with the wind of Satannical delusion, where
the substantiality of the Son of God never was, nor never will be.

Therefore he says, Through thy Knowledge, or through this knowledge, for the
party and property to know are never separated, for man is not man but by
ability to know, and that with respect to a God to be communicated with and
worshipped. Shall thy weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed? that is, thou
art the proper destruction of mankind, and for to save mankind Christ dyed; so
that all thy weak brethren, sick in soul, void of that healthful spirit of
grace in Christ, who were, are, or ever shall be, thou art the proper inlet of
destruction unto them all.

Yea, all for whom Christ died, or all in whom Christ dies, that is* all in
whom Christ dies in regard of all the operations of his Spirit, he is dead in
them, and therefore he thus adds, when ye sin thus against your brethren ye sin
against Christ, that is, ye are not the Authors of destruction of such as are
near creatures, but ye are the Authors of the death and destruction of the Son
of God in, and unto, your selves, and all that depend on this Knowledge, in
whom the life of his Spirit has no being, neither takes it place being tendered
unto you. Whence our Apostle infers, If meat offend my brother, that is, if
communicating in the word of God carnally, be the destruction of the
Brotherhood, as that (sacrifices offered by Cain carnally was) I will not eat
flesh while the world stands that I may not offend my brother, that is, I will
not communicate carnally in the word and worship of God unto eternity, that so
I may not destroy, but save that brotherhood kinded and alyed in Christ; as if
he should say, I will vindicate and clear the state of the Gospel in the word
and worship of God; so as never carnal or transitory thing was brought in by
God to contribute, neither in point of being, nor of beauty, from the first to
the last, from the original unto the end thereof.

And from this our Apostle proves himself to be an Apostle or Leader, and
examplary by another manner of knowledge, and Ministry, according to that
knowledge and wisdom which transcends the knowledge of all the Idolathites in
the world: opened and manifested unto us in the nineth Chapter: Which he first
propounds unto us in a fourfold interrogation.

Verse. 1. Am I not an Apostle? Wherein is first magnifical challenge, given to
all false Apostles, or Leaders in that way of Idolatry, to bring in all their
allegations to the contrary, and they shall see them all frustrate, and of no
value, except to convince and condemn themselves thereby.

Secondly, A tryumphant interrogation or confirmation hereof unto all the
Saints, who can bring in their testimony and be as so many witnesses of the
truth hereof, being led by the same spirit, and therefore eyewitnesses of the
same thing.

2. Am I not free? that is, am I not freed from all intanglements of national
Privileges, natural Geneologies, Families, Tribes, and Ceremonial Injunctions,
with which

Verse. 2. If I be not an Apostle to others, or in others, that is,
Affirmatively; I am not a leader in that way of the Idolathite, which sits in
the carnal and idolatrous Temple, as the Author of destruction and leader
thereunto: Yet doubtless I am unto you, that is, there is no question or
scruple to be made of it; but the wisdom wherein I express my self, is the very
Author of, and Leader of you unto salvation; which he confirms by argument and
divine reasonings: For ye are the seal of mine Apostleship; that is, there is
not any thing which passes out of the Office of mine Apostleship, but it is
under the very Prints and Characters wherein the word of God has impressed and
formed it self in your proper estate and condition by Christ in this our
Lordship and Authority: So that a true Minister of Christ has the witness of
the Saints of God in all ages of the world for the confirmation of the verity
and authority of his Ministry, which is, That great cloud of witness which
compasses every Saint of God, causing them to cast away every thing that
presses down, and which hangs so f^st on, and to run with patience the race
that is set before them; yea, they witness not only to the truth of the
Ministry, but also to the manner and form of it, both which are only and ever
found in Christ, Who is yesterdy, and to day, and the same for ever: and that
is sufficient testimony and dignity to a Minister of the Gospel, so as he rests
content with whatsoever befalls him, or his portion may seem to be, in the
things of this presnt life; whereas such as terminate the word of God in any
thing else besides Christ, they will endeavor to invest themselves into any
place or dignity amongst men, which is above that which at present they are in,
either in way of Kingdom or Priesthood, if by any means they can possibly by
that aspiring spirit attain unto it, for their Law concludes, that the highest
place among men, is the nearest and likest unto God; and therefore binds them
over to conform themselves unto God, by being invested into the highest place
and Office they can attain unto.

Whereas the Saints of God are of the same Office and Dignity, under the same
Seal and Authority, for there is not one of them but witnesses the same good
confession before Pontius Pylate, that is they all oppose the power and
authority of God against all power and authority of the wicked world, which is
of that evil one.

Verse. 3. My defense, that is, my armor, weapons, fortress, or garrison; yea,
my prasidium, that is all manner of defense provision and comfort, to answer
them that examine me: or them that weigh me, as upon scales, namely, the false
interpreters, or apostles, for whatsoever such do to my doctrine they do to me,
for my doctrine and I are one, whatsoever the principles of a man's spirit are,
the man is not another but the same thing* so that they who purposly, as by
law, burn men's doctrine published by printing it in a book; they do in the
truth of the matter burn the Author, it is good to take heed therefore lest
the spirit of God was in the inditing of it; so when they weigh doctrine by
laying one reason against another, and one scripture against another, as upon
scales, such Jewish scales fell from the eyes of our apostle, when Christ
appeared in the ministry of Ananias, when he was filled with the holy spirit,
whereby a true apostle or minister of the gospel, propounds him who is all
things, in every point of doctrine; yea, all things that really subsist and
exsist in the proper work and Creation of God in Christ, and if ^o then what
can all false apostles and teachers bring in and lay on the scales against it,
to try the weight of it, surely nothing but vanity, emptiness, and distraction,
which can never hold weight with that truth and substance of all things
comprised in the doctrine, and incomprehensible principles of the Son of God.

My defense then, is this: that is to say; the sequel of this Chapter, or of
this whole epistle.

To prove therefore that mine apostleship stands not upon carnal principles, as
the ministry of all false apostles does, but upon such as are spiritual and
heavenly, I interrogated in the sequel of the Chapter, wherein are involved so
many effectual and undeniable arguments, affirmations and conclusions, which
are without all gainsayings of any false apostleship or ministry.

Verse. 4* Have not we power to eat and to drink: that is, have not we who
preach the gospel, and go upon Gods message and errant, sufficient authority
liberty and license to communicate and participate in temporary and terrene
things, for the comfort and sustentation of our bodies, being that the earth is
the Lords and the fullness of it, the world and all that fit therein, the
interrogation is in the way of a strong affirmation, that we have authority and
power from God for that purpose.

Verse. 5. Have we not power to lead about a wife that is a sister, or women
that are sisters, that is, shall not we enjoy the benefit of humane society for
our comfort in companionship in our journeys, if they be such as communicates
in the faith with us, shall any debar them from like authority with us to
participate in things common to all creatures* and apertaining to this present
life, does not God deny us the greater, as to be of the faith of Jesus, and
shall he deny us the less, namely, the things of this life, has he given us
his Son, and shall he not in him give us all things.

Have not we like privilege as other apostles the brother of our Lord and
Cephas; who are ministers of the circumcision, even brethren of the Lord, or
such as are kindred and of alliance in that brotherhood and Lordship proper to
the Son of God, who is made heir and inheriter of all things, does not our
faith and apostleship in that spiritual and miraculous sight of our Lord,
invest us into his authority rather then any carnal society or natural
alliance, as might be considered in James and John, and also in Peter, that
companion of Christ, in point of corporeal presence, who is here called Cephas,
which signifies a stone or rock, of whom it is said, in point of that mutual
confession between Christ and himself, that upon that Rock the Church is built;
namely, of the Lord and disciples being one; in the foundation, and in the top,
or head stone also, against which no power of hell can prevail, it is therefore
alliance in faith which gives true Lordship and authority in the use of all
things, and not any natural distinction, humane Relation, or companionship
whatsoever, shall not such therefore have liberty and authority wherever they
come to partake in terrene and transient things, seeing that the earth is the
Lords and the fullness thereof; that is, shall not the state of a Christian be a
sufficient testimony that all things shall be in motion to contribute to his
conservation in the glory of God, wherever he comes, without any foreseen
tender of the creature, certainty of stipend, or contribution, nor any
provision made, before Elijah sits down under the Juniper treee; if all things
were not in motion to preserve that Sonship by faith God should fail of his
end, for otherwise he had never existed.

Verse. 6. Or I and Barnabas have not we power not to work: as if he should say
I Paul, who am rest and quietness, from that spirit of breathing out slaughter
against the Saints of God, which remains in the carnal Jew, or turbulent spirit
of Saul's, and am ready to give rest where I come; and Barnabas joined with me,
that Son or seed of consolation, from whom springs and grows up comfort unto
the Saints in every place where we come, and the Son of peace appears, have not
we liberty and authority to refrain and forbear to labor or to trouble our
selves with any other employment but what is of this nature, or conduces
thereunto; nay, the power and authority of the Gospel stands in doing, or not
to do the same thing in point of bodily exercises, according as the hand of God
is pleased to present the same unto us.

Verse. 7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges, who planteth a
vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof, or who feeds a fl ^k, and
eats not of the milk of the flock.

Verse. 8. Say I these things as a man, or says not the law the same also; that
is, I speak not these things as as bounding them within the confines of humane
wisdom as man has respect to eating, drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, bodily labor, rest, or any such things, for therein the law of God
does not consist, for there is no proper law of God, composed between man and
any of the Creatures inferior unto man, because the Spirit of God gives the
relation of the law of God in all parts, and it is not a law but as considered
relatively; but no creature did ever partake of that Spirit of God, but that
only which was made in the Image of God; namely Man, and therefore they are all
put under his feet, he being Lord over them all and not tied or bound unto any
of them, but the spirit of God gives the relation of the law of God in all
respects as it stands between God and man, whether as it comes down from God,
or goes up unto God, else no proper law of God and of Christ.

The law of God therefore consists of relation between God and man in all
things that are proper thereunto, else the law of God would suffer loss in the
Saints when they cease to converse with these terrene things, but one jot or
title of the law shall never fail; for it is the Spirit of Christ, the Son of
eternity, which only fulfils the law in every respect and relation.

He therefore, what ever he be, that concludes the freedom, liberty, power,
authority, peace or plenty of the gospel, to consist in transitory eating,
drinking, marrying, giving in marriage, in any bodily labor, or cessation and
rest, in tithes, stipends, contributions, or uppermost seats in the assemblies
and synagogues* that man propounds a carnal gospel to the world, which is not
another gospel; but it is the gospel perverted and carnallized, wherein
salvation did never consist, but only the state of the Curse, although it may
be brought in, as by an angel from heaven in point of humane wisdom and
Eloquence, according to the judgment of humane reason viewing it.

For such fruits as we look to receive, as the proper privileges and crop of
the gospel, snch seed we sow, and of such nature is the gospel which we preach,
if we expect any earthly and carnal privilege, as a fruit wherein the
authority or the reward of glad tidings does consist, then do we preach from an
earthly and carnal root and principle, the very state of death, and not that
state of life which is by Jesus Christ.

Which is proved, as also illustrated by this threefold interrogation. First,
does any man go to war at his own cost, verse. 7. It is taken for granted that
he does not, as the consent of all, for a soldier is to be maintained by him
who has chosen him to be a soldier; to set him at liberty from the
intanglements of this life, that so all his strength care and courage may be
employed in pursuit of the adversary: If then we be soldiers of God in Christ,
it is the things of God which are durable, that defray our charges, and are our
livelihood and maintenance, and not the things of the creature, which perish
and come to naught; if the weapons of our warfare be spiritual and not carnal,
then is our war also spiritual and not carnal, and then such is the booty and
spoil we purchase unto our selves to live upon in all the accomplices thereof:
for if we conquer and overcome sin and death, Righteouss and Life is the only
riches which presents it self unto us: if we vanquish ignorance and error,
then is the light and straight way of the Lord our great advantage; and if we
subdue hatred and enmity, then the love of God shed abroad in our hearts is our
only Booty and bounteous reward.

And be that expects men's labors and estates, favor and respect of worldly
men for preaching, that man will also expect their persons and lives for booty
in case of his own advantage: and his doctrine shall be molded into such a
form as may attain thereunto, for it is an easy thing in point of carnal
reason, to make a man a sinner, so as a carnal law shall take away his life,
and so by carnalizing the law of God, they can make Christ a blasphemer, an
enemy unto Caesar, and subject to the sentence o^ their law unto death: many a
man had never lost his life by the hand of the magistrate, if a carnal
priesthood had not preached him to death; but God will bring to perdition them
that speak a ly, the man of Bloods and deceit.

We conclude then, that he who frames a law for carnal wages for warring the
warfare of the gospel, that man wars carnally and diabolically in all the
designs he is put upon.

The second query to illustrate and confirm this point, who plants a vineyard
an eats not of the fruit thereof, that is* he eats of the same proper fruit
which the same vine brings forth which he planteth, and not another fruit in
kind, or the fruit of another vine; if we plant a vine, it is the fruit of that
vine of fatness which does rejoice the heart of God and man, which we expect
and look for, and not the fruit of the bramble, or any inferior tree of the
woods; if we plant Israel that Noble vine, as one who as a prince prevails with
God, or the vins Christ the Son, whose father is the husbandman, we expect only
the fruits of righteousness and peace to spring up unto us, as the proper
vintage and harvest of such husbandry, even the virtues of him that has called
us out of darkness into his mavelous light: Such are the fruits which the
planters of that vine of the gospel do only expect, and not the apples of Sodom
nor the grapes of Gomorrah, things of another nature and kind then that which
we plant: such as are the tithes, stipends, and beggarly rudiments of this
world, which mortal men by worldly wealth and humane power and policies, may
indue us with, but for conclusion of this: If we make momentany and mortal
things our privileges in preaching the gospel, it is a mortal and deadly word
we bring unto the sons of men, and not that gospel of life and peace which is
by Jesus Christ.

The third point in the interrogation, does any man feed a flock and not eat of
the milk of the flock? which has in it a strange affirmation that no man does,
and what does the man feed and nourish the lambs of the flock with all, but
with the same milk which the flock afordeth, so that the lambs are not fed
with one kind of food and himself with another, but it is the same milk which
nourishes the one and the other: if therefore we lay out the breasts of the
consolations of that Jerusalem that is above, which is the mother of us all,
that men may milk out and be delighted with the brightness of her glory, which
is that sincere milk of the word, which only brings to the growth and
perfection of the Son of God, then we never expect to be fed (as a privilege
of the gospel) with any other thing whatsoever, but only with the same milk
wherewith the flock of God is fed, which flows out as rivers and streams to
noutish them, not in temporary, but in an eternal life, not with the tithes and
trumperies, which the priesthood of this world is so wedded unto, only in that
unity of the harlot, by adulterating the holy word of God, to bring forth such
a carnal and Bastardlike brood, which is nothing else (as it is mentioned in
adulterating the word of God to lay claim thereunto) but that price of a whore
which is abominable unto the Lord, as never to be brought into his Sanctuary.
And it is the law that says these things, namely, that injunction, which
coupleth God and man together to be one, and not man to any of the creatures,
where that spirit of conjunction is not on both sides, for so the law is
written with the finger or spirit of God on both sides of the tables.

Therefore he brings in reason to confirm the interrogation, as also an inlet
to a further argument, viz. For it is written in the law of Moses, verse. 9.
that is, it is engraven in all men's hearts universally, to grant the truth of
this threefold interrogation; in all carnal men, in whom Moses is veiled, where
the end of the law is not seen, which is the ministry of condemnation, there it
is written, for all men who preach carnally they look for, and expect a return
in carnal things, even as a Merchant looks for his return by sea suitable to his
adventure, and also all men who learn or understand carnally, they have a
conscience to contribute carnal things, to him who is their teacher, for the
labourer (by all men) is concluded to be worthy of his hire. Again, as Moses
goes into the tabernacle to have converse with God, or turns into the Lord (as
our Apostles phrase is) where the vale is taken away, there is in graven in
that heart conversing with God face to face, this doctrine in the truth and
verity of it, that is, he who ministers, spiritual, holy, and eternal things
as the truth is in Jesus, he looks for return in the same kind as the only
liberty and plenary privilege of the gospel, and expects not else, as any
return of the gospel, but only as things may be used as subservant to the
liberty and return of it.

So also he that is taught in the word and learned spiritually, freely makes
him that teaches partaker of all his goods, that is, there is not a tittle of
the wealth, privilege, and state of the Son of God that he can withhold or
keep back from him by whom he is taught, in any thing, according to the nature,
truth, and verity of the Kingdom of God; but freely yields all unto him that
teaches which himself has learned, and is blessed withal, because he cannot
part those goods wherewith he himself is enriched.

And shall we think that a Christian which cannot withhold any of those blessed
privileges proper to the Son of God from his brother, but freely communicates
them all with him: Shall that heart so a price of any private interest, as to
withhold it from his brother, in the season thereof, shall he freely
communicate in the greater and not in the less, shall he communicate in thy
crown, and not in thy grinding at the mill; verily that base ignorance of your
Sonship unto God, through a carnali ministry, is the proper ground of all such
suspicion, as also the only cause of such hugging of private interests, and
preserving them as such treasures uuto our selves.

Again, we see that the law of God is said here to be the law of Moses, so that
God honors his people, as being the Authors of his law, through that unity
that is between God and man in the faith of Christ, as though man were the
proper contriver of the law of God and the giver out and Original of the word
of eternity; therefore our Apostle is bo^d with respect to the rest of the
Apostles and holy men of God, to call it our gospel, where it is said, if our
gospel be hid it is hid to them that are lost; and again, our gospel came not
unto you in word only, but in power and in the holy ghost and in much
assurance.

And again, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my gospel: and again, now to him that is of power to establish you
according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the
mystery which was kept secret since the world began; and again Remember that
Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised up from the dead according to my
gospel: and again, our word toward you was not yea and nay; and again, if any
man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with
him that he may be ashamed.

Yea, it is indifferently expressed in Scripture, through this unity of faith,
to be the law of the Lord, or of his servant Moses; and from this ground it is
said, the people feared the Lord, and they believed in the Lord, and in his
servant Moses; for so the words are truly rendered.

We conclude then, that Gods Saints are honored as being Author of that,
namely his word or law, which is the framer, maker, and conservatour of all
things: it is written or recorded in Moses law, and here the record is an inlet
unto a further argument, to declare the truth of a spiritual and saving
ministry: the record is this. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn* By treading out the corn we are to understand, both the
manuring of the ground in the fitting of it for the sowing of the seed, and the
casting of the seed into the earth, and also the treading of the corn out by
the feet of the ox, or turning the wheel upon it, to manifest the increase, as
the words following do declare. In the sowing of the seed he is not to have his
mouth tied up, or any means used to terrify him, or any way to prevent him
from eating of the same seed that is sown; and therefore it is contrary to the
law to feed him with any other grain, or kinds of meat in the time of his
labor, only that which sown by his labor, is the proper and only food
appointed for him by the law to eat.

For, as he subdues the ground, so as it brings not forth its natural
ornaments, so he is to feed on the seed sown, which is to take root downwards
therein, and bring forth fruit upwards of another kind, then otherwise it would
naturally have brought forth. Now the gospel of the Kingdom, or ministry of the
word of God, does not plow up the fallow ground of the heart, to subdue men's
outward estates, but only the weeds of corruption which spring up from that law
of sin and death; neither is their outward things its refreshment in so doing
(no more then the ox is to feed of any other food but that which is sown in his
labor, even so the word of life and immortality, the same word which we
distribute, and cause to fall as Manna among Isreal's tents, that is the same
which a true labourer in Gods husbandry ever feeds upon) and it is his proper
livelihood to be exercised therein, and shall a man be hired to feed himself,
it is natural and delightful for all other creatures so to do, and shall the
man of God become so mercinary as to be hired to do it; what a shame is this
Judas Iscariot-like spirit unto the gospel of God: those sluggards of the world
that refuse to put their hand to their mouth to feed on that which they would
have the world to believe is their only food and livelihood, but as others lift
it up by outward estates, and giving them honor together therewith.

But there is no doctrine which the man of God teaches to any man, of what
place, office, rank, or degree soever he is, but himself is concerned in it, so
as he feeds upon it, either as it is the breaking of the head of Leviathan,
which became meat for the people in the wilderness, and so he feeds on his
deliverance therefrom, or else he is invested into the same thing which he
teaches, and so it becomes his food and one real substance with him, and to
fall short of this is to carnally the seed of life, the word of the Kingdom
bounding it to persons, places, and times, which is to have the word of God in
respect of persons; but the man of God finds sufficient food in whatsoever he
sows or labors in, and cannot himself live without it in the distribution
thereof; for multiplication and increase, and a good husband man needs no hire
to sow his own field.

Verse. 10. Does God take care for oxen, or says he it for our sakes only, for
our sakes no doubt. In these words is a two fold interrogation, and an
effectual answer, the first part of the interrogation has in it a strong
negation, in these words, does God take care for oxen? that is to say, it is
not oxen whom this care does concern, or the speech intends. The second part
contains a forceable affirmation, or says he it for our sakes only, that is,
the ministers of Christ are they which it only intends, and the answer takes
away all scruples or question, either in the negation or affirmation, in these
words, for our sakes no doubt: that is, without all controversy it is the
Saints of God, who under the term or name of oxen, laboring, are here meant;
the same spirit who speaks it does faithfully expound it.

Whence we are taught, that there is not any thing whatsoever taken up or
aluded unto the Scriptures, or Writings of the word of God, in the expression
of the will or works of God, that is or can be of any profitable or right use
unto the sons of men, until it be brought unto, and terminated in, the Man of
God, that is to say, in Christ Jesus, either as he is crucified or risen, it is
not oxen the Scripture Intends, it is only, or altogether, us; and the same may
be as trnly said in any other things wherein the Scripture expresses it self
in heaven or in earth, brought forth in the creation, generation, art* or by
putrefaction.

And for all other skill or learning, if I had all knowledge, could speak with
the tongues of men and angels; if I had the gift of prophecy, and understood
all mysteries, and though I had all faith so as to remove mountains, and though
I gave all my goods to the poor, and my body to be burned, all is nothing
without this manner of knowledge: for it is as true in this point as it is in
the point of love, and in the former Chapter where our Apostle sets in
opposition the true knowledge of the word, and that which is proper to an
Idolathite, he transforms the true knowledge into love; saying, that Idolatrous
knowledge puffs up, but love says he (meaning true knowledge) edifies, so that
true knowledge edifies not but in love, or knows not but in love, and love
knows not it self but in that which is beloved, prostrating it self unto the
service thereof, contrary to Idolatrous knowledge that puffs up.

And if I have not this art in my knowledge to bring all things unto, and
terminate them in the man of God, I am but as a founding brass which gives no
true distinct^on to a musical ear, or a tinkling and untuned symbal; yea, as a
thing of naught, a mere vanity.

It is for our sakes no doubt it is written, or it is translated, that is, out
of the Original copies composed and recorded unto our glory forever: for it is
not the voice of the Creator simply and alone considered, but of a creature
also, else the record is not full, neither is it the voice of a man simply
considered, but the of the Son of God, otherwise the writing is not perfect,
and they who have this voice shall live, and whosoever shall read this writing
is blessed.

Now the end why a true minister of the gospel lives only upon that which he
dispenceth, is, that he that ploweth may plow in hope, that is, whosoever
tilleth, manureth, or stirs the ground to the subduing of its natural and
earthly properties, may till it in hope, namely, in undoubted trust and
confidence, that the seed of immortality shall take places, and spring up
therein unto an abundant multiplication and increase; because in his labor he
knows both the nature of that which is subdued, as also that which reviveth and
springs up, because his strength whereby he conquours is exercised in the
one, and his joy in which he triumphs consists in the other, wherein there is
rest and feastivity through spoils, sufficient for a soldier of Christ to live
upon, and true planter or feeder of a flock to be fully satisfied with, without
seeking after other men's temporary things.

And he that thresheth in hope, may be partake of his hope, that is, he that
beats out the seed of life, by the skilful labor of love in the right handling
of the word of God, unto the proper multiplication thereof, according to that
infinite, and profound rooting of it, in that unmeasureable humilliation of the
Son of God, and assured hope of a true and skilful seeds man, which hope is a
present demonstration and possession, of things which also are not yet seen but
to come, because of the eternity of them; which expectation cannot have less
then an infinite increase for the object of it, because the seed has an
infinite and eternal life and virtue in it; and therefore it brings forth in
some thirty fold, in some sixty fold, and in some an hundred fold, which is not
to be taken gradually, as in some more and some less, and therefore the spirit
of God inverts the order: for Luke begins with thirty fold, and ends with an
hundred fold; but Matthew begins with an hundred fold, and ends with thirty
fold, to declare that it is not a diverse increase, as applied to diverse
persons; but they are all found in the same subsistence, three times ten is the
fullness and perfection of increase, which is only found in the seed of God
without any defect; three times twenty is the duplication of thirty, which is a
twofold perfection, that is, of perfection of life in the seed, and a
perfection of death unto all things which might tend to the annoyance of the
growth and increase thereof, and a hundred fold in Scripture Language is
innumerable, which can never be counted nor told over to find an end of the sum
of the increase; which threshing in the hope of such increase and fullness of
measure, pressed down and running over, in being made partaker of it, is a
plenary, plentiful, and sufficient maintenance for every man of God, without
any looking for of other manner of means, as being any liberty, authority, or
privilege, properly appertaining or belonging to the preaching of the gospel.

Verse. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, a great thing if we
shall reap your carnal things; as if he should say, if we have distributed and
laid out upon you, spiritual, durable, and eternal things: is there any
proportion of recompense found in any thing that is carnal whatsoever (in the
return) which fade, perish, and pass away in the use of them; and does not
equity and justice require, that whatsoever is given out in point of exchange,
that which is received any way, as in lieu thereof, shall hold correspondency
in weight, worth, and valluation therewith, else the law of the relation of the
contract is broken, which the order of the kingdom of God admits not of; and
therefore no carnal or temporary thing returned whatsoever, can answer the end
of Gods law in this point, for the distribution and publication of those
spiritual and eternal things of the gospel unto the sons of men.

But such things being required for the preaching of the gospel, as things to
answer the labor thereof, as a privilege belonging thereunto, is a real and
Sufficient testimony and witness, that such men have only an earthly and
carnal ministry, which the spirit of God has branded for a false apostleship.

Verse. 12. If others be partakers of this power over you not we rather, that
is, if such as are false apostles have this authority over you, or interest in
you, as to lay claim to your carnal things, who minister nothing but earthly
things unto you, have not we much more, or have not we only that authority, who
minister spiritual and durable treasures unto yon: is it possible for any to
communicate with us in the greater things, and not voluntarily contribute the
less, as things of no account or esteem, with respect to the excellencies of
them that perish not, we should villifie the grace of God, if we should so
think: for the gospel is of a more transcendent nature, then to lay a bond upon
any carnal thing, to contribute unto it, or to stand in relation with it in any
respect; for then it would suffer loss in the vanishing thereof: but the Son of
God, who is the subject matter of the gospel, cannot possibly suffer any
abatement in any thing, no nor any thing, no nor at any time, for true
Christianity consists not in any bodily exercise, and therefore suffers no
abatement or loss, while the body sleeps in the dust, no more then it does
while the body so often sleeps naturally in this present life. Nevertheless we
have not used this power; that is, we have not accustomed our selves to lay
claim to any such carnal right or interest as false apostles do, nor to receive
any such voluntary contributions from you for our maintenance, as the
authority of the gospel produces* in such as are endued with the life and
spirit of it, so as to refrain labor our selves to live upon the pains and
labors of others, but have labored with our own hands.

Yea, say the false apostles of our times, so they might well do, for they had
the immediate Spirit of God, which we have not, plainly professing herein that
their ministry (who thus speak) is only by humane helps, reading of other men's
labors, ordering their matters so, as they may not be not be known in the same
tract, inventing of some certain conclusions which they call doctrines;
devising of logical arguments which they call reasons to confirm it, and
composing uses which may take hold of bodily actions and humane affections,
proper to some particular men, as though the sun were set in the firmament to
give light unto men according to age, sex, and difference of estates, places,
and offices in the world, and when they have backed these things with the sound
of the words, or letter of the Scriptures, by means and help of their
concordances, and either brooded upon them to pile them up in their memory, or
else blotted them with ink upon paper, to take them secretly into the pulpit,
they are then as good Bishops, pastors, teachers, and godly independent
ministers, as men of all ranks and qualities (in these our days) do desire.

But our apostle opposing his gospel against all such, says, but we suffer all
things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ, we suffer all things: the
word suffer signifies not only to suffer as one oppressed, but also to suffer
or sustain as one that supports and bears up something, that otherwise would
fall; so that as a true Apostle suffers hardships in the world, as in labors
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often:
of the Jews receiving forty stripes save one, thrice beaten with rods: once
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and day I have been in the
deep, in journeyings often, in peril of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils
of mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren,
in weariness, painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and in thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness: these are the true and real expressions
of a faithful and true Apostle, with respect to the worlds carriage toward
him, and his faithful dealing in the cause of God, but this is his comfort,
that he sustains these things so, as that he supports and bears them up, as
being a prop and a pillar unto them, that they fall not down into that proper
element or sphere, which naturally they press and tumble down men into: for
they have not such effect upon us as naturally they have of all men, namely, to
make them discontented, murmurers, miserable and wretched.

But we bear them up, even all the wants and necessities of this present life,
wearing them as our crown, rejoicing under them, and in them all we become
conqueronrs; yea, more then conquerours, through him who has loved us: and to
this end we suffer them* namely, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ,
for the gospel is hindered from its fruitful and successful progress, when, and
in whomsoever any private interest is brought in as any privilege thereof, for
the gospel contains that common salvation, which is alike proper and peculiar
to every Saint of God, without any respect of persons; so that to bring in any
thing as appertaining unto to it, which every Saint has not alike interest in,
and that in all ages, is to bring in a private interest, as a thing
appertaining to the gospel, which is not beseeming, nor can it be compactable
to the state of Christ in the gospel, whether the bodily maintenance or any
temporary institution or apointment; bnt is a stoppage and hindrance of the
free course and success of the gospel, and that by intangling of men's hearts to
think meanly of the grace of the gospel, as a carnal and earthly thing: which
is only spiritual and heavenly, in whatsoever appertains and belongs unto it,
that doctrine of private interests and temporary institutions, to be a
privilege of the gospel, is the proper snare of Satan, laid and hid privily in
all ages under the letter of the Scripture, to delude and deceive the world:
for if Christ were a private interest in any Saint, in any particular
whatsoever, he could not be the Son of God; because in whomsoever he appears he
must hold proportion with the father, which could not be if Christ were more in
one of the Saints then is in another: Such doctrine therefore that maintains
private interests to be any part of the priviledgc of the gospel, such doctrine
prohibits the Son of God, forbidding him to be that which indeed he is, and
ever was and will be, only a holy use of all things in their proper time and
season; is a privilege of the gospel, for to the clean all things are clean.

Verse. 13. Do you not know: that is, it is taken for granted you do know, in
case you be but such as read Moses with your hearts veiled unto this day, for
these interrogations have in them the force of strong affirmations as has been
noted.

That they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the temple:
that is, they who rightly divide, distribute, and give out according to Gods
apointments and ordination, the holy things of that Sanctuary or Tabernacle,
which is not of man's building but of God; or they that minister, stand, or
serve in the holy of holies, or as the word is given by Moses, in the holiness
of holinesses, Numb. 18. 9. for that term he gives to the portion of the
priests, which is an excellency proper unto none but the Son of God to be the
most holy, or the holiest of all; for none but he alone can be the Original and
Author of holiness, and also a holiness constituted and made; therefore he
only is the holiness of holinesses: in, and of whom, whosoever ministers, lives
only of the things ministered, which are such things as appertain and belong (by
Divine appointment) unto that temple made without hands being of no temporary
constitution, or humane frame, not acknowledging any other livelihood, but only
what comes within the proper confines of that temple; which though the world
destroy perfectly three days and three nights in the heart of the earth yet
Christ builds it up perfectly in rising the third day, ascending, and living
forever, and of the things of this house, true ministers only live, and are
ashamed to bring in any thing, as food, raiment, and a worldly prosperous
course, to bear the place of a relative, to any thing in the house of God; and
thus they live in distributing and giving out that holy one of God unto the
world, which gift of God is in perpetual act, as well as any point of his
grace and favor, else would our salvation cease, therefore our ministry is of
the time and term of our Melchisedec.

Again they live also in receiving and taking in the holy things of God
therefore he adds: and the which wait at the alter are partakers with the
altar: that is, those that tarry and abide of the Sacrificatory or places of
slaughter, where all bestial things are slain in their appearance being
appointed for that end, in which the Saints watch for the incoms of God, in the
Revenues of the gospel, with no less diligence and desire, then they give them
out, not by poaring on books, and perusing of notes composed, but by lissoning
unto god, in what ever they read here, see, touch, taste, or seem to
understand, readily to receive, what interpretation he shall give thereof, by
the secret intimation, inspiration, and revelation of his spirit, for this is
an altar whereat they have no right or authority to wait, who serve in the
earthly and temporary tabernacles, for the form and materials of this alter are
no way, nor in any thing inferior to the son of God, who abides for ever; and
so long we wait in the reception, and living upon the incoms thereof; for there
is nothing wherein God ever did or shall speak, perform or utter himself: but
it has respect unto somewhat to be slain, consumed and burnt up, and therefore
this altar and waiters remain forever: so that the maintenance of a true and
acceptable minister, stands in such things as are so ordered and disttibuted as
beseems him who is Lord of all, and lives for ever, unto whom only they are
given out, as also in such things as a e brought in and received by him, who is
of no less authority and continuance.

Verse. 14. Thus has the Lord ordained, or even thus has he who is Lord of
all, having all things in his dispose (so as they shall never fail of their
virtues or of effecting their ends) appointed, or avowedly confirmed, as by law
irrevocable, that they who preach of the gospel shall live of the gospel, that
is, they who truly publish the joyful tidings of salvation, as it consists of
halcyon days, and all gladsome things in Christ, which never decay, such shall
live of the same things so received and published, as of a fonntain springing
up in their own spirits for ever, as also in a happy and plentiful return made,
of that fountain sent forth, in its success and multiplication, in, and from
all such as have joyfully embraced the same.

And here note the extreme folly and madness of all such Bedle^s, and
Gyrgathusians, who are so fearful and full of fencing of themselves from
error, left they should be infected from outward administrations of others,
who they say bring in new lights, contrary to those orthodox grounds and
con^^usious they have received (and so they have) from their father after the
flesh, who is a liar from the beginning, and has spoken unto them, not only
extrinsecally but intrinsecally and from within them, gives the proper form and
interpretation of whatsoever is commended or propounded unto them from without.

I might here insert, for the conviction or just condemnation of such furious
societies (and that under Authory of sufficient commission to maintain it) that
it is alike dangerous, to he infected with error by reading the Scriptures, as
by the temptations of the devil, in what instrument soever he appears: for
the letter of the Scripture, in perverting the scope and the intent, is that
great engine which Satan ever has enacted, and magnified, for the subversion
and destruction of mankind, which these men have made to be their proper bonds
and chains, wherewith they are tied, and tumble themselves as wild bulls in a
net, it follows.

Verse. 15. But I have used none of these things; that is, I have not accustomed
my self to make use of any private interests of men, as being any privilege of
the gospel, or any part of the intent thereof: therefore your selves may know,
that there is no such thing in any of them, as to be any ordinance or
appointment of God in the preaching of the gosyel; for then I should not only
neglect, but also violate, and prove my self to be a prevaricatour, of the
decree, law, and ordination of God (which has ordained and appointed me to
live of the gospel) in this my not accustoming my self, to refrain from labor
in my own person, and live upon the labors and endeavors of others, therefore
it is no natural or bodily maintenance, that the Apostle intends here by
living on the gospel, and they that so expound and apply this Scripture, do by
the spirit of Satan, pervert and abuse the word of God for their own private
ends and gain, making merchandise thereof, as they do of all the Scriptures of
God.

And whereas he says, I have not accustomed my self (as in time past)
implying, that it was never his custom so to do, nor of any of the ministers
of God, so he adds in point of time to come. Neither have I written these
things that it should be so done unto me; that is, I do not transcribe,
translate, or go about to register the word of God upon the heart of any man,
to any man, to any such end, as to purchase unto my self carnal things, or to
make any thing of that nature to be the fruits which are proper to the gospel
to bring forth, for the end the gospel infinitely transcends all such things,
and ever shall, and therefore for time to come I disclaim them all, as nothing
of the end and scope thereof.

For it were better for me to die, then any man should make my glorying vain;
that is it were better for me to loose this natural and bodily life, in the
want of all necessaries tending to the support and supply thereof, or it is
better for me to die daily unto them in spirit (as he says of himself in
another place) so as the want of them cannot Anoy me, no more then it can anoy
or trouble a man void of natural sense, rather th n any man (or as the word
will bear) then any thing should make my glorying vain, or void and empty, as
if he should say, I had rather be as a man dead, then that any temporary or
transient thiug whatsoever, should be brought in as an ordinance of Christ, or
any part of the glory and fulfillment of the gospel; for it being full and
complete of it self in Christ, cannot admit of any riches, honor, wisdom, or
power, but its own, as any means of its supply, nor of any office, institution,
Sacramental sign or relation* which is not of the nature of the Son of God, but
in time cease and vanishes away, for then my glory, or my boasting or thing
of my praises which I only speak well of, would admit of an emptiness, and
vacuities in it self, in case it should have need o^ supply and to be fulfilled
with such things as are not of like worth and duration with any thing whereof
it does not consist, and must of necessity suffer loss in the cessation of any
such thing, as should fade and vanish away in case it should come into the
account of any supply or means of the glory thereof, no temporary thing
therefore whatsoever, office, relation, or bodily exercise, institution, or
order that vanishes is to be named as any excellency of the gospel, for then
my praise and my glory (namely the Lord Jesus) should have an emptiness in him,
which is worse then death for an apostolical heart to give way unto.

Verse. 16. For though I preach the gospel, or thus, for if I preach the gospel,
I have nothing to glory of* that is, if I faithfully publi^^ and declare, doing
(...) embassage s ilfully concerning that good news came down to mankind from
heaven, then I have nothing of mine own, proper to the sons of men, in the of
their wisdom, counsels, and endeavors, to boast of or to glory in, as if he
should say: the gospel is so full and complete in the son of God, who is filled
with all the fullness of God, that there can be no transitory thing subject to
be bounded within the confines of this mortal life, brought into the account
and reckoning thereof; for then man might have something to glory in or boast
of, which is altogether excluded, that so all the praise and glory thereof may
be of God, which is immortal and fades not, and not of the creature: therefore
to bring in things subject only to this life, as parts and ordinances of the
gospel, is not to preach the gospel in the glory of it, but to boast and glory
in the creature and not in the things of God, which is nothing else but
abominable Idolatry.

For necessity is laid upon me: necessity is twofold, first in point of want
and penury, as if I should say, I am destitute and stripped of all humane and
carnal glory and excellency, such as the carnal Jew adorns himself with, unto
the putting of Christ to death; of which stock I naturally come, as I am made
of the dust of the earth, for by nature we are the children of wrath even as
others, so that necessity is upon me to exclude all boasting, for I am laid
waste and empty of all glory humane, as the spirit of God has breathed upon
it, and made it to appear to be vanity even as grass.

So also by nature considered in my ancestors the carnal Jew, I am destitute
of the glory and virtue of the Son of God, for it is impossible that a creature
simply considered, should have any of those virtues and properties peculiar to
the creator, as an eternal salvation and life, my necessity in that point also
stands in an utter devastation of all divine good; yet is my necessity in point
of being laid wast of all the wisdom and glory of the creature, the proper and
only capacity, for the reception enjoyment and exercise of all those eternal
and unsearchable treasures proper only to the son of God.

Secondly, there is a necessity of urgency and constraint, so as the things of
God are of that plenty, virtue, and motion, that they enforce, and constrain
unto the devulging and promulgation thereof, therefore it is said, that the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, for the
things of the kingdom of God, in whomsoever they please to convent themselves
as an Original fountain and wellhead, and from thence to distribute and
dispense themselves as a living spring; there can be no more stoppage made in
the outlet, and dispersing of them abroad, then there can be any prevention of
their inlet and reception into the places appointed for them; for as it was in
the beginning when no dry land appeared, or as in case of the deluge when the
waters covered the earth, the spirit of God testifies, that they went up by the
mountains, and down by the valleys, into the place which God had appointed for
them, even so it is in this case, neither way of ascension nor yet of
discention can hinder the Spirit of God, those waters of the Sanctuary, from
the proper place appointed for their abode: therefore he says,

And woe is unto me, (or as the word is) woe is in me if I preach not the gospel:
this word, woe, is a phrase wherein the tenure of the curse is expressed,
signifying a state most base, trod upon as being beneath all things that ever
God made, having in it a deprivation of all good that ever God placed in the
creature, whereof the Image of the creator is the sum; therefore an utter loss
and departure of all good together with the succession, and real possession of
all evils, as houlding proportion in way of Antithesis in all points with that
Image and goodness of God which is lost, which cannot be less then of an
infinite and eternal extent, which is the ground and Original of all vexation
and penalty in that way of eternal death. And the not preaching of the gospel
is accompanied with them both, namely, the loss of God and all goodness, for he
only is good, and the possession of all evil, which in that loss inevitably
succeeds; for according to the goodness of a thing, lost, ruinated, or
perverted through our own default; such is the evil that succeeds, this being
written in all men's hearts; therefore men proportion punishments for offenders,
as they judge of the nature of the fact, wherein they preach a greater point
then themselves are aware of, it is well if it prove not condemnatory to
themselves, for the mind without knowledge is not good: Our Apostle therefore
concludes, by transferring this woe unto himself in a figure, as he says in
another case of himself and Apollo, thereby teaching the proper state of the
false apostles in their practice, I say herein he concludes, that salvation
does consist only in the preaching of the gospel, as necessarily and absolutely
as it does consist in faith; for there is nothing that is a grace of the
gospel, but has in it the complete and full estate and condition of Jesus
Christ, without which no salvation.

For as the whole law in all points is fulfilled in one word, namely love, so
is salvation comprehended in every virtue that is in Christ, whereof the
revelation and opening of the mind of the Father is one.

And as it is true that he who breaks one commandment is guilty of all, even so
he that excludes any Christian from any one grace or virtue that is in Christ,
he excludes him from all; for as it is true that with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, even so, with the mouth confession (which is preaching) is
made unto salvation, and the one is as necessary unto life as the other, for he
that confesses not, or he that preaches not, that Christ is come in the flesh
is Antichrist, and Antichrist is that son of perdition, or destruction, and not
of salvation.

Every Christian therefore is to witness a good confession, or is to witness a
good preaching, as befnre Pontius Pilate, or else no attaining unto salvation,
that is, every Christian must with boldness and courage oppose the virtue and
power of the Son of God, against all the rulers of the darkness of this world,
which is of that evil one*

This woe, therefore pronounced, against false apostles, in this figurative
speech of the Apostle; as transferring it unto himself, rests upon all such in
its real abode, as either preach not the gospel according as the truth is in
Jesus, and simplicity thereof in the rest, or else neglect it, or forbid it to
be preached by others, or in themselves; for they may as well neglect, or deny
to themselves or others, the faith of Gods elect, or any virtue and grace
appertaining to life and salvation; therefore our Apostle (in whom is
personated all true and faithful Saints of God) is necessitated hereunto, and
does it by constraint, even as the love of Christ constrains him to deal
faithfully and plainly in the cause o^ God, according to the demonstration and
evidence of the Spirit of God in the salvation of his chosen, though the false
apostles judged him to be besides himself in so doing, therefore it follows,

Verse. 17. For if I do it willingly, that is, if I do it voluntarily of my own
accord, by any will or law of a creature, constraining and urging me thereunto,
then I have a reward, that is, suitable to the fountain from whence it comes,
which is the will of a creature, which Christ never came to do, nor to be in
motion thereby; but only to do the will of the Father, and from that to receive
motion in all his enterprises.

Or thus, then I have my reward, or my end, as the word imports, that is if I
preach from a humane will* my end is also humane; if I preach from the learning
and abillities of a creature, it is the obtaining of the things of the
creature, which I propound as my aim and end therein, and not the things of
God, my main scope and intent is so fading and perishing Mammon of
unrighteousness and not the durable treasure consisting in that righteousness
of God through the faith of Jesus.

For according to the nature of the spirit which goes forth, such is the
nature of the thing expected and looked for in the return, and such it ever
proves to be, for he that sows to or in the flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows in the spirit shall reap everlasting life, a
carnal ministry ever expects carnal things, and an expectation of carnal
things for preaching the word of God, is an evident demonstration of a carnal
and corrupt ministry, not acceptable in the house of God or in any Christian
heart, for it never knew what the liberties and privileges of the gospel are;
and therefore can never utter them.

But if I do it against my will, that is, against the will and proper law of
man, which is at enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God
neither indeed can be, as this our Apostle affirms, in another place, for
Christ is not brought forth or born of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of
man, but of God, as the Scriptures teach, then is the dispensation committed
unto me, as if he should say, then the ordering and disposing of all the whole
matter of the gospel, is committed to me in trust; as to a Steward, and so the
glory, excellency, and virtue, in point of the dispensation and disposure
thereof, in its going out, as also the return, of praise, honor, and all due
deserts* appertains and belongs solely unto my Lord, or unto that Lordship
derived unto me, (which is never abstracted from the steward) and not unto me
as a man, nor to any mortal creatures, who or whatsoever.

Verse. 18. What is my reward then, or as the word is, what is my end then, in
preaching the gospel: what do I propound unto my self in so doing, or expect to
be the return of my work, verily, or in truth, upon my serious asseveration, or
engagement, as upon oath, that when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel
of Christ free, that is, my end in preaching is this, that when, or in what
respect or relation soever I publish and declare salvation, and manifest
wherein it consists in Christ, my intent and full reward stands in this, to
make it of such fullness and perfection, as that it stands not in need, nor is
it beholding nor engaged to any earthly or transitory thing, either to give it
its being, add to its form, perfection, or virtue: for no earthly thing can
contribute thereunto, no more then dust in the beginning could contribute to
the Image of God (in any respect) which is immortal and eternal, nor can humane
nature contribute to the death of Jesus Christ, for it is a death which holds
proportion with the Son of God, and in all points according to the truth and
reality thereof, is infinite and eternal, because its virtue consists in the
eternal word, and not in any thing proper to a creature, though the creature
does really communicate therein: none therefore can ever say I have been his
counselor, to contribute unto his wisdom, neither to any thing that is
proper to Jesus Christ, neither can any thing of the creature say I have given
unto him first, that I may be recompensed no more then it can be said that God
is engaged or indebted unto man, for taking him into the unity of eternal life,
no more is the gospel beholding unto, or stands in need of any memontany thing
whatsoever, to add any thing in the least to the glory and virtue of it.

For as the holy Son of God contributes nothing of himself or heavenly thing,
to the form of Satan, or to his being such an unclean spirit as he is; so there
is no earthly or corruptible thing whatsoever, that* contributes any thing to
the form or fullness of the gospel; and therefore free from being engaged to the
world in, or for any thing* No, it stands in no need o^ the riches of the
world, for it has hiden treasures in it self in abundance, nor honor from the
world* for it has an exceeding and transcendent glory in it self* neither has
it need of any power from the world: for it is in it self a supereminent power
and virtue, no nor of any liberty of conscience (as from any man, or men of the
world) for it has the freedom and liberty of the son of God in it self, and
if the Son make you free then are you free indeed, all that I propound to my
self in preaching the gospel therefore is to make it free, that the world make
not an apprentice, or rather a slave of it unto themselves, setting themselves
up by it and above it,

That I abuse not my liberty in the gospel, that is, that I impair it not nor
suffer any infringement or diminution of the authority and freedom thereof,
that nothing detract from it* by setting it self so above it, as it cannot be
well without it; whatsoever is not of its own nature and substance, or enter
into co-partnership with it, as adding unto the stock and treasury thereof; for
then is a thing abused when it is villified and denied to be that which it is,
when it is lessened, weakened, or deprived of that which is proper unto it, and
of right appertains and belongs thereunto; but the gospel has all things
whatsoever, both in point of form and substance, that can properly be said to
be the work of God; therefore to add any thing thereunto, that is not of its
own nature, has been, and ever shall, is to abuse that great grace of the
liberty and freedom of the gospel.

Verse. 19. For though I be free from all men; in these words the Spirit of God
in our Apostle seems to change the subject of his speech, in that whereof he
treats, transferring that unto himself which before he gives to the gospel, for
the liberty of the gospel he makes here to be his liberty; saying, for though I
be free, and that I abuse not my liberty, which before he affirms, that it is
only the freedom of the gospel which he labors for, giving us to understand
hereby, that the Saints of God are the subject matter of the gospel, and not
only the Sainrs of God in general, as that mystical and universal body of
Christ; but every one in particular is the same subject matter* and of the same
concernment that the gospel of God is; for Christ cannot be divided, neither
can the spirit be received by measure, nor can one line or letter in that book
of the covenant be cancelled, but the whole covenant is void and of none
effect; so that God has respect to his Saints, as collecting all into one, and
distributing one into all, and therefore the whole and every particular are of
the same concernment.

So that we cannot teach the true state of one Christian in any respect; but we
teach the state of the whole body in that respect, and we cannot teach the
state of the mystical body of Christ, but we teach the state of Christ himself;
and if we preach Christ, we preach the gospel, and if we teach ought else as
any point or particular of salvation, we pervert the gospel to our selves (and
all that hear us with approbation) to destruction.

For a true Christian and the gospel have one and the same form, they consist
of the same matter, they have the same spirit, and are of the same spirit, they
are of the fame degree and dignity, and of the same respect and continuation
before God; yea David's seed is as the sun, that sure witness in heaven, that
fai^eth not, and therefore the Apostles are said to be the lights of the world,
as Christ himself is, truly delineate a Christian then, and you truly discribe
Christ, villifie, imprison, reject, and kill the one, and ye villifie imprison,
reject, and kill the other; for Christ is the subject matter of the gospel, not
as a man alone, or particular person* without being composed and consisting of
his mystical body, even as one shed forth and defused into all, and as all
gathered up and united in every particular; so that the Saint of Israel
singularly, or the Saints of Israel plurally* is, or are, the subject matter of
the gospel, so that open and set forth one Saint, or soldier of Christ, and
the whole host of heaven appears in the same rank; and do you order and
amplify the host never so magnifically, and it shall contract, imbody, and
convey it self into one particular.

No man can describe a Christian, but that which he takes his form from must
appear, which is the gospel, or form of wholesome words: nor can any man preach
the gospel, or set forth that form of wholesome words, but as it, or they give
form to a Christian; therefore the freedom of the gospel is the freedom of
our Apostle, and the freedom of an Apostle, is the freedom and liberty of the
gospel, or thus (as the word imports) the power and authority of the gospel is
the proper power and authority of a Christian, and the power and authority of a
Christian, is the proper power and authority of the gospel: For though I be
free from all men, or from all things, as the word will beat without straining
it, as if he should say, there is no man or thing that can lay claim unto me,
or has any right or interest in me, so as to challenge or countermand mine
authority as a superintendent power, being my freedom, is the freedom of the
gospel, the subject matter whereof is the Son of God: So that nothing can
challenge any title in me, save only the same spirit whereof I am, or the same
body wherein I consist; because nothing can add any thing to the fullness of
that one body, nor can be of like nature or constitution to be joined
therewith, by any ligament or bond whatsoever: so also contribute unto me in
any respect, as having the least desert, whereby to require any thing at all
from me, in way of requital, as its proper right; no, all schools of humane
learning never contributed any thing, neither unto my being, nor form (for I
received it not from man) neither can they challenge right or interest in any
point of doctrine in which I teach, according to the nature and true intent
thereof, and however it be true that my freedom and authority be such in all
particulars.

Yet I have made my self a servant to all, or as the word is, a minister in
all, that is, I serve and minister in, or usher in the word of God, by means of
all things in heaven and in earth, being such things which the mind of man can
give some form unto, whereby the word of God has made it self speakable unto
all the sons of men, which is the proper end of all Gods works, that the word
of blessing, and also of the curse, may take place and be eternized, which
otherwise could not be; for the manner of being, forms, relations, and
operations of all the creatures, are so many dishes, chargers, or platters,
wherein that food and bread of life (substantiated only in Christ) is presented
unto mankind to feed upon: for there is nothing in all the works of God,
wherein the food of eternal life is not commended unto the world, as being that
figure or letter of the Scripture, that great volume, or common Library;
standing fast in all ages, and as free to be read by the poor, as the rich, the
meanest, as the greatest Potentates in the world.

Therefore it is said, go and preach the gospel to every creature, or as the
word is, in every creature, that is, present Christ Jesus unto the world, as in
a figure by all things contained therein.

But the men of the world, like unnatural canibals, or meneaters, or as the
Ostrich, of whom it is said, she can digest Iron, falls upon feeding of
themselves with the dish or platter in which the food is brought (which is to
pass away as nothing of that meat fit for the son of man to feed on, in the
very representation thereof) and in so doing, they suffer the bread of life to
pass from them as a thing of naught worth.

And that wherein the reality of the word of God, is only signified unto us as
in a figure, is that great engine, which Satan has ever erected (as that tree,
good for food, pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired to make one wise)
whereby he has always ensnared the men of the world, and fastened the word of
the curse upon them, namely, the things wherein the word of life expresses it
self unto mankind; without which it were not speakable to man, no more then it
is now unto a brute beast.

Now the end why I thus serve or minister in all things that visibly appears,
is this, namely, that I may gain the more, or that I may gain all; that is, win
them by conquest, or subdue all things as subservant, and put under the feet of
Jesus Christ (as all things were concluded to be at the first) as such things
which are no part of the kingdom of God, no more then there could be a helper
fit for man, found amongst them all in the beginning, when the nature and use
of them all was seen, in giving names unto them accordingly: these are all to
be gained as by conquest, subdued, and brought under the feet of the Son of
God, as subservant unto him, and that in the very act of serving or ministering
in them, as nothing of that kingdom; which is not of this world, that the
truth and reality of all things intimated thereby, may appear to be realized,
substantiated, and eternized only in Jesus Christ that son of the living God,
who is the fullness of him that fills all in all, or is filled all in all; for
the word is both of active and passive signification, to show unto us, that in
the Son of God, there is both an aptitude to fill, and to be filled, which is
that grand grace of the gospel, in all things, and at all times, in all ages.

Verse. 20. To the Jews I became a Jew, that is that is to such as stand
strictly upon pedigree family, the distinction of tribes, churches, or
congregations of people, Sects and Seminaries, to keep entire, peculiar, and
certain, the genealogy of Christ, so as they may approve of him in his
appearance, to be such a one as to whom the promise is annexed, to such I
desire no better ground to work upon, or means of conveyance of my doctrine for
their conviction, whereby to gain by conquest, and subdue under the feet of
Christ, all such distinctions, anities, relations, and historical seed platts
of production, and from these humane and Jewish principles, to make good and
maintain, that all such conjunctions and propagations, in whatsoever they
appear to be holy and acceptable before God, do only consist in Christ Jesus
the son of God, so as they shall never end nor alter, in whom only they are
real, and in all other respects whatsoever they are, empty and vain; for there
is no true genealogy of Christ ever to be found, according to the real intent
of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, where the parties contracted to bring
forth, and the product or seed, are not of the same plurality and singularity,
the one as the other; yea, and of the same distance with respect to the tribes
or family, and of the same unity and nearness of blood: for neither in the
conjunction of stock, nor yet in the simplicity of the product is there any
unity of creature, and creature to be considered (otherwise) then only in way
of metaphorical allusion, and in point of doctrinal respects, only the unity
and conjuction of the Creator and the creature, is the matter and form of them
both, in all true and substantial respects and intents of the word of God, in
the intended consistance, without which all are empty void and vain.

Therefore the true stock and family, tribe and kindred, genealogy, and
offspring of the Son of God, is as strictly and precizely to be kept and
maintained unto this day, as it was to the days of the Virgin Mary, to make
manifest and confirm the promised seed, without which we cannot possibly know
who is the true inheriter of the promises, and so are void of the faith of God;
which continued act of genealogy, confounds and bring to naught all literal and
traditional genealogies of the carnal Jew, confirming the truth to be in Jesus,
and not elsewhere, from the beginning unto this day.

Which true Sonship and off spring only, can still utter this voice unto the
vain conceits of a carnal Jew, so as to confound them, namely, that although it
be true that I am the Son of David: yet it is as true, that be one David was I
am, and therefore David in spirit calls him Lord; which argument rightly
proposed by Christ, as reasly present, is of force to stop the mouths of all
Jewish pharisaical scribes and elders: again, though he be the seed of Abraham,
yet can he as truly say before Abraham was I am, and therefore it is that
Abraham pays tithes unto Melchisedec, and is blessed of of him; and without
all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater, and yet this ou^
Melchisedec is Abraham's seed, in which respect Abraham being his Ancestour is
considerable, in way of humane genealogies.

O fools and blind, shall we think that the genealogy and offspring of the Son
of God ended and was cut off in the Virgin Mary; or that it was more carnal and
bodily in onr forefathers then it is in our days, is not the flesh of Christ,
(though never a carnal and fleshly Christ) conserved in his offspring until
now, shall we think this word has not eternity in it, and is made good in his
mystical body wherever any member thereof appears, viz. My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, and he that eats not my flesh, and
drinks not my blood, has no life in him; or is this speech worn out so, as
that it comprehends not the whole body, viz. My heart and my flesh rejoices in
the living God.

Is there no more mention to be made of this word: My soul thirsts for thee,
my flesh longs greatly after thee, is a land of drought: Such as lay these
things aside, and count it blasphemy to say Christ is completely present in his
Saints in these days, in the reallity of whatsoever his body consists of, and
will but afford him only some certain spirit, or rather rays and influences
thereof, to be resident in his Saints; to this end, that the world may not want
power to do what they please with their bodies, these men are of that spirit of
Antichrist, which deny the coming of Christ in the flesh, as the Spirit of God
in his Apostle averreth; for if it were salvation to confess Christ come in the
flesh, as born of the Virgin Mary in such an age of the world only, then would
that wicked sea and lake of Rome, have as much salvation in it as thy people at
this day extant, who profess and describe him in that respect* by so many
abominable signs and Images: for our Apostle affirms, that that spirit which
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.

But this spirit which confesses Christ upon the same principles that Rome and
the rest of the rabble of the world do, who read the writings of the Apostles;
they do not acknowledge the insufficiency of man, in that alsufficiency of the
Son of God, nor that disability of the creature in point of all humane help, to
be born up and carried out, in that strength and desire proper only to the
spirit of God.

In case therefore of the Jews in their strictness about genealogies and
pedegrees, I am as a Jew in all such matters, and it is the only doctrine I
teach, whereby I find an ear in them to hear, but it is to confound and bring
to naught all carnal vain genealogies, tribes, kindreds, and families; as
having respect unto God, that the family and race of the Son of God only may
take place of them all, that so I may gain them all unto him or vanquish and
subdue them all under him, that the reality of them all may only be found in
him, as they are of any truth, holiness, honor, or of any acceptance unto, or
in any respect with God at all, and that all other are but vain and endless
genealogies, as our Apostle calls them.

Ignorance of this point, in that obcaeco^n and pro-caxiouse spirit in the
ministry of the world, is the cause of that carnal conceit, that a member of a
church, ordered, composed, and cast into a form by men, and the children born
in the confines of a church so framed, are the true seed and offspring of
Christ, and that all others are without any visible ensign of the true Religion
and worship of God. Again, ignorance in this point of the true and complete
proceed of Christ, whenever he appears really in any particular person or
office, is the very ground of that diabollical conceit, that the Spirit of God
operates in man here on the earth for a time, and at his death, man, as a
creature returns unto the earth both in regard of soul and body, and is
dissolved into the elements whereof natural bodies are made, and composed: and
that nothing but simply God, as an increated being is saved, or returns to his
ancient center: these two opinions seem to be far distant, but are both alike
diabolical, denying the truth and reallity of the Son of God, and are deceivers
of mankind, causing them to be inamored with, and door upon, the ways of death
and destruction, in the villification and rejection of that salvation which is
by Christ.

To them that are under the law, as under the law: that is, to such as are
under that Ceremonial bond and engagement, of being tied in the ways of their
worships, to persons, places, times, and terms of humane relations, as
necessary parts thereof; instituting of churches, creating of officers, setting
up seals, signs, and services of time, which in time will vanish away: to these
I declare my self to be under as strict bonds and engagements as themselves be,
so as I move not in heart nor by hand, utterance in tongue, or gestures and
demeanure in carriage. But with respect unto this my engagement, which is the
bond of the spirit, binding me over unto God, by freeing me from all
engagements and things whatsoever, inferior to himself in his Son Christ, and
not the spirit of bondage which ingageth unto the creature, as being set in the
place of the Creator, which is ever accompanied with trembling and fear,
because of the conscience of the insufficiency and uncertainty thereof.

And by taking up these their bonds and transitory engagements, whereabout, as
servants of sin, they spend their time, employ their studies, exercise their
zeal, in binding heavy burdens upon themselves and others, seeking rest by the
employment of that unclean spirit, but find none, busying themselves in picking
at the bark, rind, husk, or shell, and never come to taste of the pith,
marrow, or kernel, and by opening of these rudiments, and declaring what they
be in their strictest injunctions, which being followed to the uttermost of
their intent, in what they drive at and lead unto, which is no less; nor fall
they short of an impossibility to please God thereby, I do by these things
bring out the reallity of the law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, which is the only freedom from this law of sin and death.

Which law of God has all its relations operations and respects only in
Christ, and out of him it neither binds by any bond, nor lays it any burden,
but has in it in every respect, the liberty, freedom, and authority of the
Son of God.

And by this means I gain the truth and verity of all law, bonds, and
engagements, to have their subsistence and being only in the Son of God, being
of the same degree, power, and continuation which himself is, and ever will be,
which is the only freedom; and therefore the Saints of God are not bound
unto, but transcend, and are far above all humane and transitory things; from
which God has freed them, and set them infinitely above them, once and for
ever; making them Lords over them all, and not as slaves to any of them, even
as it is said that the Son of man is Lord of the subbath, which goes beyond all
pharisaical conceptions, therefore they bow and kneel unto it, as to aged of
the continuation of four and twenty hours.

Verse. 21. To them that are without law as without law: that is, to such as
have a spirit, of such liberty, as that they can give themselves leave to do
any thing, never having respect to any order or strictness of conversation, to
be enjoined by the word of God, but stand aloof, and a distance, from all ties
and engagements thereby, like the profane Gentiles, with respect unto the
strictness of the Jew.

To such persons I preach and profess as great liberty and more then they can
possibly do, as being free from all law, bonds, and engagements whatsoever, as
not being under an absolute command or prohibition to do, or forbear, any
earthly or transitory thing, and in opening of this my freedom and authority:
I must of necessity declare how, and upon what grounds I enjoy and am possessed
of this liberty; and that is only in becoming one with him who is Lord of all
things. So that I acknowledge no bond but what is only found in him, who is
both the giver and also the receiver of the law; or else I preach not Christ
only, but bring in some superfluous thing to join with him, which sacrifice so
brought, is an abomination unto the Lord. But in him alone, there is fullness of
freedom and liberty, and out of that freedom there is no true engagement,
according to the law and will of God: neither ever was nor shall be, and hereby
I bring in all true and lawful relations, according to the mind and intent of
God (in all his expressions from things transitory) to consist and to be only
in Christ: And therefore I bring by this means that spirit of extravagancy, and
licentious liberty, to yield it self over and become subject unto that bond of
the Spirit which is in Christ Jesus, wherein all true freedom and authority
does consist in all such as are appointed unto life.

And this is done by preaching liberty from all carnal and earthly ties, as not
being under any law or absolute engagement unto any of them all, further then
expedience and present opportunity calls for, in the prosecution of the work of
God; whereby we bring the whole law of God in all points to stand in its true
relation between God and man, all other things being inferior, and infinitely
to low, to answer in point of relation, in the spirit and state of a Christian,
so as to bear a part in the fulfillment of that Royal law of God; which is only
fulfilled in us, namely, God and man in the unity of faith, and so in every
Christian, and in no other relation whatsoever, no more then man could find a
meet help for the production of his kind in all the creatures in the beginning,
but must have one as taken out of himself, that so she might be flesh of his
flesh and bone of his bone, not only having his nature, but bearing his name
and authority aso, as Ish and Isha, only distinct with respect to Sex* as it is
in Christ in point of Creator and creature. So that by preaching freedom and
liberty from all law in point of relation to things which fade and come to
naught, I bring to naught and abrogate that law* or spirit of bondage, and also
gain unto my self that eternal law and engagement of faith, to consist only and
wholly in the Son of God, and therefore he inserts.

When I am not without law to God: Intimating thereby that the true property or
form of the law, is, only to face unto God, and not unto any creature, no, not
among the Saints themselves: for the Spirit of God in each other, as it is the
Spirit of Jesus, is the proper object of the bond of relation; so that
wheresoever a mere creature is made a relative in the law of God, it is the
adulterating of the word of God, by that spirit of an harlot, and of
fornications, as also an Idolizing of the creature, setting it in the place of,
or bringing it in competition with the Lord: for the Spirit or life of Christ,
though a man, yet was never destitute of the Image, wisdom, and spirit of God;
so that God had never respect unto mankind, as in unity and order of his law,
but with respect to that wisdom and Image of his own, and not of a mere
creature simply considered.

Therefore he adds, But in the law of Christ, or but under the law, or within
the law of Christ, that is, I am in, or under that law of the Spirit, as within
the bounds and confines of it in all things, namely, that law of the Spirit of
life which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; out of whose mystical body or spiritual
incorporation, there is not any pieces or part, no not a word or syllable of
the proper law and will of God, in any of the relations or operations proper
thereunto: for if any momentany thing or temporary office or relation, should
be that whereof any part of the law of God does consist, then would the law of
God suffer loss and detriment, when we part from all temporary relations and
things.

And we may as well affirm, that the almighty suffers loss of his Royal will,
and of his being, that which he is, in Christ; as to affirm the least
diminution of the law in any respect, or at any time* for one jot or tittle
thereof shall never fail nor pass away; no, though heaven and earth should pass
away, yet the law of God shall never fail.

Verse. 22. To the weak I become as weak; that is, to them who are destitute of
the power of godliness in the exercise of these virtues and offices peculiar to
Christ, to such I became as weak; that is, I preach my self and all flesh to be
utterly insufficient, and altogether disabled to move toward God by any
strength of the creature, in any way of acceptance with him, that is to say,
by means of any humane power or wisdom, art or ability whatsoever: and this
universal insufficiency of all flesh, where it is truly seen and rightly
acknowledged, I preach to be the only capacity of the reception of the Spirit
of God, wherein, and through which, it comes to move upon the mind of man, as
it is said to move upon the face of the deep in the beginning; which
insufficiency of the creature, void of the excellencies and abillities of the
Creator naturely, nor seen, nor rightly and groundedly acknowledged, is
nothing else but that mystery of iniquity, the depths of Satan: and the devil
that great deceiver of mankind, who is the proper fullness thereof, therefore he
is called the prince of the power of the air, because every vessel not having
in it real and substantial things, or matter wherewith to fill it; there the
air takes place, and is the fullness of it, even so wherever, and in what
heart the real and substantial things of the Son of God are not, there does the
devil take place, and is the fullness of that heart, whatever it be in the
judgment of men.

So that the true acknowledgement of weakness I am one with, as it is the only
capacity of the fullness of the spirit of God, in the exercise of its virtues,
and manifestation of the power of God, and not of man: And by this I gain
weakness, in the true acknowledgement thereof, to consist only in Christ the
alsufficient strength of God (and is not elsewhere to be found) where all
insufficiency must of necessity fly away; and there only is all true and
proper motion in way of holiness and honor, whereby the power and glory of
God, and not of the creature comes to move upon mankind, and manifest it self
in all his virtues and excellencies whatsoever; and by this means of becoming
weak, I gain all weakness, or weakness to become that alsufficiency and
strength of the Son of God, who is able to subdue all things unto himself, this
weakness being the proper receptacle and place of the abode, and hiding of his
power: So as none but himself can find out how to communicate or participate
therein: where only he is known in all his particular virtues, goodness, and
love, in the exercise and enjoyment thereof forever.

I am made all things in all men, or thus, I am made all men in all things:
that is, there is not any thing wherein the mind of man naturally moves with
respect to God, or with respect to any of the works of God, or wherein any of
the creatures are in motion toward mankind, or among themselves; but I make my
self a companion therewith, or a suting thereunto, in point of all operations,
relations, and respects, and that to this end, that by opening and disclosing
of my self what I am in any such operation, relation, or respect, in point of
the reality, substantiality, and continuation thereof, in the truth and verity
of the thing; as countable and of worth in the records of God, I may thereby
disanul and abolish and bring to naught, as things of no truth and of no
virtue, in whatsoever the natural heart of man moves toward God and the
creature: and also in whatsoever man naturally contains, or receives from the
motions of God, or the creatures toward himself, and make good that* all such
things come within the confines of that law of the carnal commandment,
consisting in ordinances which are against us, and therefore are nailed unto
the cross of Christ, and forever made sure and intailed only to that carnal and
fleshly spirit of the Jew, which ever crucifies the Lord of glory according to
the Spirit; putting him to open shame, or making a mock of him: and therefore
in the disanulling and abrogating of all these carnal things nailed unto the
cross of Christ; I make it plain and manifestly to appear, that the solid truth
and reality of all things consist and have their proper and only being in
Christ, and out of whom all things are vain and empty, only filled with that
spirit of cruelty and persecuting Jew.

And by this means I strip the world, lay it waste, and make it vacant of all
things whatsoever, that turn to any account or reckoning in the records of God,
or that is found written in that book of life, wherein all living and
acceptable things are written, and the rest are such as are written in the
earth. So that the world has nothing left to take hold of for any stay or
support, in which can be any hope or confidence to trust unto, for there is
nothing to be found of such nature or quality, that is not involved within that
proper state and real condition of Jesus Christ the Son of the blessed.

That I may by all means save some: that is, that I may by the true
controverting of all things, make it apparent and plain, that salvation does
consist in every thing, according to that which Gods wisdom has ordered, and
appointed all things to be and appear in Christ; either as he is given as a
ransom, and so as lost or given up unto death in all things that are holy and
spiritual in the men of the world: in whom nothing of his divine and proper
virtue does appear, or is in being and exercised; in which estate the reality
of all things appertaining to death, are for ever in their height of operation.

Or else as he is the ransomed from death in his chosen and elect ones, in whom
all things of life, righteousness and peace, are in their proper being, virtue,
and exercise thereof; and so in Christ, as dead or alive, are all real things
of death and life only found: and thus by becoming all things I save some, or
as the word imports, I save all, that is, as all things universally became
death and destruction, as Satan orders them, in putting Christ to death in all
spiritual respects.

Even so all things universally become resurrection and life, as the wisdom of
God orders them, in the mortification and death of all carnal and sensual
things in Christ, whereby the life of God is revived in the son of man, in all
spiritual and eternal respects* and thus all things are destroyed and brought
to naught by Satan, or by man in his defection from God, which is a universal
fall of mankind from his Creator, forever. And it is as true, that all things
universally are saved and confirmed in a state of excellency and perfection, by
the resurrection and ascension of the Son of man (through that wisdom of God,
into the life and reign of, and in all things, that are proper to God eternally.

And observe, that this death unto all spiritual things proper to the infinite
and eternal Son of God, must needs be of universal comprehension, and being
alive unto all the things proper to the same Son of God, must needs be of the
same universal extent; yet it is impossible that these twain should reside in
one and the same individual substance and being: and therefore a universal
estate of death, and also a universal estate and condition of life, is found in
the sons of men, of one and the same extent: because it is of the Son of God,
in way of his death, and of his life, that gives latitude and longitude to them
both, and therefore a two fold state and condition standing in due opposition
is found in mankind, and shall be forever.

Verse. 23. And this I do for the gospels sake, that is, that I may give all
honor and estimation unto the gospel, or unto the Son of God; so that
whatsoever has in it any worth or dignity, utility or excellency, it is only
substantiated and eternized in the subject matter of the gospel, and not
elsewhere to be found according to the true and real intent of the word of God:
And therefore all things which cannot be snmmed up within the account and
reckoning of the gospel, as being the matter and substance thereof; or else
used by the wisdom of the spirit thereof, so as to conduce to the promoting of
the gospel. I say, that all things not of this nature and used to this end,
namely, to advance and set up, as the only and alone thing to be had in honor
and esteemation, the gospel speech and triumphant act of man's salvation by
Christ: all things without the compass of this account, of what other nature
they may be, or of what other nature they may be, or of what other use they may
seem to serve unto, they are left under just rebuke, shame, reproach, and
ignominy, whatever they may seem to be in the estimation of the sons of men.

For to become all things for the advances, or for the sake, or cause of one
thing, is no less then to make that thing, the all in them all, without which
they are vain and empty, not coming within the account of real and substantial
things.

Thence it is that Christ says, for their sakes sanctify I my self, that they
also may be sanctified, it is for the elects sake that the Son of God makes
himself holy, that all the Saints may partake of that holiness, now the Son of
God is not made ^oly but in mankind; therefore man is the thing in estimation
with God, as not being content with an increated holiness in himself as God,
simply considered; but is made holiness, whereby it becomes communicable to all
the Saints, they therefore are the only thing in Gods esteem, and ^o he is made
holy for their sakes, and the Son of God promoted in the gospel, is the only
thing esteemed by a true Saint; and therefore he becomes all things, to commend
the dignity of the gospel, yea, Christ prefers his flock before his own life,
for he lays down life eternally to the wicked, that his sheep belonging to
that one sheepfold may live eternally in himself: in whom they die to all
carnal and transitory things, for the conservation and exercise of the life of
the Son of God, which is spiritual and not carnal, eternal and not transitory.

Hence it is that Daniel prays that the Lord will do, and not defer, for his
own sak, preferring the name and authority of God before all things, even as
our Apostle here makes himself all things, that he may terminate all in the
gospel, the result whereof follows, namely,

That I may be partaker of the gospel with you, or in you, and you in me, as he
says in another place, ye are our epistle written in our hearts, as if he
should say, we record nothing upon you, but that which we can read upon our
own spirit: therefore an enterchangeable act, if you express your selves we
read you in our selves, and if we express our selves, you may read us upon your
own hearts; such mutual agreement there is in the epistle or writings of Christ.

So here, that I may be the copartners or companions with you in the gospel,
or that we may be that unity and substantial fellowship of the gospel. The
meaning is, that we considered together as one mystical or spiritual body, may
become thereby the subject matter of the gospel, or of all good sayings between
God and man in Christ: For none can deny but the Son of God is the subject
matter of the gospel, ever was and ever will be, and it is not Christ as one
particular holy one of God only, born of the Virgin Mary in such an age of the
world: But it is Christ considered in his mystical body, that as it is said of
the mystery of the gospel, where it is described to be Christ in you the hope
of glory, so that it may as truly be said here in this case, Christ in us the
subject matter of the gospel; so that if we describe and delineate a Christian,
really according to his nature and form: we preach the gospel, and in case we
preach the gospel in the true manner and form thereof, we do neither more nor
less, but only set forth and describe a Christian.

And therefore the Spirit of God makes it a thing indifferent, to take a Saint
of God either as the author, or the product of the gospel; as where it is
said, in Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the gospel, in which words
Christians are brought in, as the proper fruit and product of the gospel. And
again, our Apostle says, God shall judge you according to my gospel, where the
Apostle brings in himself as author of the gospel: and again, If our gospel be
hid, it is hi^ to them that are lost; and again, our word toward you was not
yea and nay but yea: in which sayings the Spirit of God brings in the Saints,
as Authors of the word and gospel of God. So that as it is said, the children
being partakers of flesh and blood, he himself took part with them, that is, he
became one state and condition with them; even so it is here, that I may be
partaker of the gospel with, or in you, that is to say, that we together may
become and appear to be that complete state, matter, and substance of the
gospel, even that gladsome and triumphant state of salvation.

Whereas it is translated with you, the word you is not in the text* to show
unto us the liberty and scope the Spirit of God gives unto our minds, in the
viewing and perusing the word of God, either to apply it more particularly, or
extend it more universally, giving us freedom and anthority, either to apply
it to our selves and such as we immediately converse with, and so with you, or
unto such as have been before, or shall be hereafter, together with such as
are, and so with them in either respect, or with him; that is, with God; as God
and man in Christ being that complete, glorious and substantial estate. And it
is usual in Scripture to leave out words, or take them into the text, for such
honorable and fruitful uses and respects; as where one evangelist says, Go
show to the high priest, another says, go show thy self to the high priest:
again, where one says of the five loaves and two fishes, he blessed and brake*
(more generally) another says, he blessed them and brake; and where one says
more generally, he will gather the wheat into the garner; another says, he
will gather the wheat into his garner; and many such like, God giving liberty
to have an eye to the universality of a matter or cause, as also particularly,
to such whom it may concern, either as interest in, or excluded the same.

Verse. 24. Know ye not that they that run in a race run all; that is, you do
know it is taken for granted, that all men know what it is to run in a race,
for it is a thing written in the hearts of all men, so as they may read it in
themselves; and therefore I obtrude the knowledge thereof upon you, without all
peradventure, namely, that they who run in a race run all, that is, diverse are
in motion therein, as striving after the same thing; even so God has ranked
the creatures universally in heaven and in earth* that they are in a continued
motion, through Gods ordination, as things pointing at, looking toward, or
directing unto Christ; as so many rivers in motion toward the same Gole, or
more particularly: All men that ever lived (do, or shall) upon the face of the
earth, they aim at and move after that which is more excellent then themselves,
or any simple creature can ever be; and so are in continual exercise and
motion, to gain a price which has no less then God considerable therein, and
hence it was that wicked Pharaoh* though he would not acknowledge the God of
the Hebrews* yet he moved as in a race after a greater thing, or power, then
was in himself; and therefore fled to his Magicians, as such as had a more
eminent power to work by then himself had, and when they could ease him of the
plagues, he seeks to Moses, that he would me unto the God of Israel on his
behalf; so that he is in motion after a prize of more worth then all his
present seize.

So it was with the king of Babylon, he also was set in this race, moving
toward a greater price, when he could not interpret his own dreams he sought to
the Southsayers the Chaldeans, as having more skill then himself to interpret
the same, and when they could not attain thereunto, they also move toward
higher then themselves, and told the king that none could expound or interpret
such a matter, unless the gods should come down and converse in flesh, or with
flesh; so that all men, yea the worst of men, are in a race wherein they strive
after a gole of more worth and greater excellency, then yet they have attained,
and there is no true excellency (upon just account) to be found; but only in
the Son of God Jesus Christ, and as in a race, all men are striving to attain
nnto that state of Christ; but all cannot win the gole, it is one only that
gets the prize.

Note by the way the ignorance and vanity of such men that go about to bring
men unto the knowledge of God, by telling them stories out of the Scripture not
analizing them with something written in their own hearts, that by that living
letter, they may so converse with them, as they cannot deny the truth of what
is said to be in themselves, and by the verity of that, be gained to give
credit unto the truth of the manner and form of the being and exercise of the
Son of God, brought forth and declared from that which is formed and written in
their hearts: for every one in this point of running shall be set in the race,
endeavoring to win a prize greater then yet they have attained, from whence we
are to declare who, and what it is, that only gets the gole, for they who run
in a race run all: But one receives the prize, that is to say, Christ that one
Son of God, that mystical body in the unity of spirit* that one, whose feet are
made like hinds feet, and who is called the hind of the morning, he that renews
his strength as the eagle, who runs and is not weary, and walks and is not
faint; he only attaineth the gole, wins the prize, and wears the crown,
and he that is not of that one undivided being, and imbodied in that one faith
once delivered unto the Saints, that man shall never attain the gole, nor
obtain the prize: for it is only one that receives the same, for it is but one
wisdom which know the way, and rightly valueth the prize: it is but one
strength which inableth to outstrip and over*go all the rest, and it is but one
breath or wind of the spirit, that can possibly hold out from the first unto
the last, that is, from the first goings forth of the Son of God in the early
morning, or glory of his first appearance, unto that late evening, or setting
of the Sun of all humane excellencies, as the last or basest things, with
respect unto the glory and dignity of the Son of God, it is only one therefore
that receives the prize, from which he inforceth this exhortation, viz.

So run that ye may obtain, that is, cast aside all carnal seeming
excellencies, every thing which presses down as a weight to binder in the
race, and sin that hangs so fast on* even as the flesh cleaves unto the
bones, which we are as unwilling to part with, as from our natural life, and
run with all patience, that is, in the suffering of the loss of all transient
things* that you may accomplish and perform with great advantage the race that
is set before you.

Again, so run that you may obtain, that is, so gather up, attract and bring
all your abillities into one that none can go before you, in point of true
wisdom to Judge and discern, bring only into one, so also all true marrow and
oily substance to supple and supply the joints, bring it all into one, with all
agillity power and abillity to continue and persevere, state it all in one,
together with all ease of spirit in breathing livelihood and courage, bring
them all into one individual subsistence and being of that mystical body of
Christ, in which you consist and out of which you consist, and out of which you
never were, are, nor shall be, and so run as that only one who is endued with
able power sufficient to take the gole from all that are not of him; and he
only to recieve the prize, notwithstanding all other runners whatsoever, if you
cannot by that one spirit, reckon and account your selves as that only one, and
not another, you can never attain the gole nor receive the prize, but shall
fall infinitely short, and that with shame and reproach perpetual.

Verse. 25. And every man striveth for the mastery, that is, you well know that
there is no man that plays a prize, or fights a combat, but he gathers
up all his skill, uses the utmost of his abillities, takes his best advantage
both for offense and defense, neglecting nothing that he may attain his end;
and therefore abstaineth from all things, that might obstruct his strength
impair his skill, or abate his courage, wife, child, nor friend, inticeth his
heart to draw it aside, or divert it from the present act; he leads not himself
then with thick clay, neither incumbers himself with the cares of this life, no
wanton dallience then takes place, nor does any sloth seize upon him to hinder
his* watch for his best opportunity and advantage, nor is his life precious unto
him, in case the conquest be but gotten, for other glory o^ renown he expects
not: These things we know to be natural and insident to all men, and shall we
think that great strife for the faith of the gospel, that thrice honorable
mastery over sin and Satan, the vanquishing and subduing of the gates of hell
and all the powers of darkness, requires not a trible strength, courage, and
magnanimity, skilfulness, and activity, watchfulness, and eager pursuit of the
advantage and opportunity; and that in a total abstainance from whatsoever might
obstruct, prevent, or invalid the achievement.

And yet men destitute of the Spirit of God, do these things for a corruptible
crown: that is, for a glory which passes away and perishes, as our Apostle
affirms the ministry of condemnation does: The meaning is, such as seek to
purchase and procure unto themselves the honor, wealth, fame, and excellencies
of the world, they abstain from and decline the things proper unto the kingdom
of God, the offices of Christ, the operations of his Spirit, which ever
accompany the cross of Christ, and elsewhere are never found in use and
exercise; which cross of Christ ever blasteth and withere with that glory which
the world pursues and seeks after; for the prize and diadem proper to the
kingdom of God, cannot consist with that glory that passes away, and
therefore the world, to attain to this carnal and corruptible crown, abstain
from all the things that may hinder them of this corruptible and deadly
attainment; therefore wholesome and sound doctrine is cried down by such as have
learned their lessons from their Tutours in schools, how trimly, by art, they
are to manage all their affairs in teaching, also the Spirit of prophecy is
out of date in these our days, the immediate inspiration and revelation of the
Spirit, is abhorred both in prayer and prophecy; but all must be hewed out by
study, and so kept in schools of humane learning. Libraries, and in men who
have most means and time to exercise themselves in such things, as to compose
Sermons, to set up particular men in temporary authority, to praise the able
and wealthy, and to press the poorer sort with burdens of sins, and snch
abundance of servile obedience, as to make them slaves to themselves and to
others; so as they may purchase the favor and reward, and we must have our
prayers so sollid and fitted for particular persons, occasions, and relations,
that they must be studied beforehand, and piled up in the memory, to be readily
brought forth; or else some lofty expressions, affected phrases, or fantastical
flourishes, which themselves know not what they tend unto, nor have they any
footing in that continued act of the intercession of Christ, to set them upon,
and for the communion of Saints gathered together in the name and authority of
Jesus Christ the Son of God, as in the fellowship of his sufferings and
exercise of the cross, what carnal Eldership, Synod, Session, Parliamentory
assembly, or Army well appointed and ordered, according to the wisdom of man,
goes not beyond them all in the account and esteem of these men; yea though
there were not a true Nathaniel to be found among them all.

These things men do, and abstain from, or else they cannot attain and
accomplish their ends, and that in getting a mortal and corruptible crown.

But we for an incoruptible crown, that is, a crown that fades not but indures
forever, such as is not inferior unto, but well beseeming the state and
condition of that eternal Son of the living God: Shall not we then infinitely
more abstain from all carnal, earthly, and transitory things in point of our
love and liking of them, our esteem and preferring of them; Nay, shall we not
so abstain and keep a forty days fast from them, in excelling and expungeing
of them from being any thing, that can contribute in the least, either to the
being or well being of the gospel, seeing that through this abstainance only,
we come to wear the crown of life and immortality for ever; even as Christ our
forerunner fasted from, and expelled that triple temptation of the devil, as
being such as conclude not, add unto, or contribute any thing unto him. And
when did the gospel lose of its honor, or Gods power and presence suffer any
abatement, by the worlds depriving of the Saints o^ any of its glory and
liberty. Look into Egypt, Babylon, Chaldea, and Assyria, into the fiery
furnace, Lions den, stocks, and Elijah in the wilderness: Look unto Christ
under Herod, Pontius Pilate, beset with scribes, pharisees, lawyers, elders,
soldiers, and lying in the grave: as also to the Apostles in their reproaches,
imprisonments, banishments, beatings, and all manner of outward necessities;
and cast up the accounts of them all justly, and judge wherein ever the glory,
power, and presence of God, admitted of any abatement in the manifestation of
himself, in and by his servants; but always made these things occasions to
beautify and adorn the gospel, to show that the glory of the world can never
contribute any thing unto the gospel: but rather God makes use of the want of
such things, thereby to bring to light what power and glory the gospel has in
it self, which otherwise the world would not be convinced of but assume the
power and glory unto it self, as usually it does, in the Pharaohs and Herod's
thereof.

The running of this race therefore, consists of gathering together all the
perfections of life, glory, and immortality, into one entire and undivided
consistance, which is that mystical body of Christ.

And the trying of mastery, is the abstaining from all such things, whereby
that body of sin and death strengthens, adorns, and fortifies it self, and in
the one and the other the state and life of true Christianity does consist and
abide forever. Therefore ^he adds,

Verse. 26. I therefore so run, speaking particularly as of himself, for this
prize and crown so appertains unto that one body, as that it wholly and
completely belong to every member thereof, it is the portion of one as all, and
of all as being but one; therefore the Church or State of this body can say,
draw me singularly as being but one, and we will run after thee plurally, as
being many in that one.

I therefore so run, that is, so that he that wins the prize, for the honor of
this race, is applicable to every Saint and servant of Jesus Christ.

Not as uncertainly, that is, I am not uncertain of the prize, because I take
the gole together with my being a Christian, or in my becoming a runner in this
race, and I wear the crown in my first setting out, for a greater diadem can
never be attained, then to be the Son of God; the firstborn of God, yea, he
that first opens that womb of the early morning, in the first looking out of
the glory of God upon mankind, from whence I must derive my self, as in time
past, or else I can never propagate my self to abide forever in time to come;
so that this crown is taken up with the first, and worn unto the last, yea, it
is the beginning and end of all things, that Alpha and Omega: therefore never
from off the head of him who rightly runs in this race, for he is never void
nor destitute of that honor which is peculiar to the Son of the eternal, a
glory without compare, ever accompanied with sufficient courage, fortitude, and
confidence, to gain the prize for time to come, which is as certainly renewed
in the continued act and exercise in the race, as it is certainly enjoyed in
the present time: for as the operations of the Spirit of God, are in present
exercise upon him, so he knows that the Spirit of glory and of God shall remain
and rest upon him for time to come, through his suffering of the loss of the
glory of this world, which shall be the crown of all his exercise, in the
things of God, unto perpetual aye: and therefore he runs not as at
uncertainties, but upon present possession, which gives us assured hope for
time to come, as it is certain that God is faithful and cannot deny himself.

So fight I, not as one that beats the air, that is, I give not my strokes in
combat in my contending for the faith of the Son of God, as one that wounds
not* or as one that finds not reality of matter for the weapons of my warfare
to take place, in exercising their force, skill, and accomplishing their ends
upon; but I deal with such as I accomplish like atchievments upon, in the
management of mine affairs in the gospel, as David the beloved of God, did in
that 11. Psalm, which is a true commentary upon this my warfare.

For I am not as one beating or fighting with the air, as with a thing of no
substance, I doing no real exploit, nor it receiving any wound or foil from me,
but closes up and heals it self again as fast as it receives the strokes;
but contrarily I beat down and bring to naught, that which has in it the
reality of sin and death, which is the wisdom or law of the flesh.

As certainly as I guard and defend that which has in it the reality of
eternal life and peace, namely, tbat wisdom or law of the Spirit of life which
is in Christ Jesus my Lord, exercising it self in the one, and the other in my
soul, and that no otherwise, but as it shall be my life and peace, spirit and
power, prowess and victorious employment and conquest forever, for the offices,
exercises, and virtues of Christ, are all of like honor, worth, and duration.

Verse. 27. But I beat down my body, that is, the body of sin and death, and it
is my body as in the original and materials of it, consisting of God and man*
as truly as Esau and Jacob came both out of loins of Isack and Rebekkah, so
does the body of sin arise of God and man, being made one in that way of the
body of death, and also that mystical body of life in Christ; in the one the
properties and heavenly disposition of the Son of God are crucified, to the sin
and Satan in the Son of perdition, and in the other the properties and earthly
disposition of man, a^^ crucified to the life of righteousness and peace in the
Son of God.

Again it is my body, as I am considered from the earth, and so have naturally
(in that respect) the nature and disposition of all flesh, as the gospel is my
gospel, as in the spirit of God I come down from heaven, and so am one with the
Son of God, being of the same spirit with him, who is both the author and
product thereof.

Again it is my body, as I die thereunto daily (as the same Apostle speaks) and
also it dies nnto me; so, as it never has any power over dominion or me, or I
any community or fellowship with it, even as the body of Christ is mine, as I
rise and live in newness of life unto it, and it, unto me, wherein consists my
proper and only converse and fellowsh p.

Again it is my body, as I acknowledge the misery and wretchedness of all slesh
destitute of the wisdom and Spirit of God, and so it is gone over all, in
regard of the aptitude and disposition of all men naturally inclining
thereunto, and so I can say in that respect, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death.

Even as I can give God thanks as in that body of Christ, acknowledging by the
spirit thereof my deliverance, happy condition* and salvation, being enabled by
the same spirit to bring that body of death into subjection, in all things
exercising the rule and authority of the Son of God over it, so as it can never
prevail against me; but though the enemy may come against me as a flood, yet
the Spirit of the Lord lifts up a standerd against him to chase him away: so
that in my mind, that is, in the formings, fashionings, and framings of all
things in my spirit, I serve the law of God, but in my flesh, that is, as my
natural disposition is found in the men of the world out of Christ, there it is
under sin and death, being a servant thereunto forever. Now the ground and
reason why I thus beat down my body, and bring it in subjection, and not the
body of another, is this, viz.

Lest whilst I preach to others, I my self should become a reprobate, in these
words our Apostle does elegantly, as in a figure, (as he speaks formerly in
this epistle in a like case) transferring the state and condition of all false
teachers of the word of God unto himself, that thereby he may with modesty set
them forth and make them appear in truth to be that which indeed they are.

Lest while I preach to others, or as the word is, lest while I preach in
others: the word lest, is not brought in here as a doubt or supposition; but as
a thing of certainty, as if he should say, he who preaches in another, he is a
reprobate, or he is reproved, rejected, or is become a castaway, as disallowed
of God. So that the Apostles argument stands thus, he that preaches in
another, that which he preaches not in himself, as being matter of the gospel:
that minister and ministry is as reprobate silver, it is disallowed of God, and
never passes for current doctrine in his kingdom; So that he which forms sin
in such sort, as that he inveighs against it, and endeavors to beat it down in
another and not in himself, as being free from a sin of that nature, as in or
of himself, that is a reprobate ministry, he beats the air and does not beat
down that body which is his: that ministry therefore that forms sin so, as to
belong to one state of men and not unto another, to be a sin in one age of the
world, but not in another; or to belong to one six or age of man, and not unto
another: that man does not in all things beat down his own body, that is a
wicked and disallowed ministry, rejected and reprobated by God, and does in his
heart conclude, that the righteousness of Christ, is one thing to one Saint,
and another thing in another Saint, that it is of one virtue in one age of the
world, and of another virtue more or less, or some alteration in another age,
this is reprobate doctrine, rejected and reproved by God.

For our Apostle says, I beat down my body, not the body of another; So that
they who seem to beat down sin in another, and know not how to make it their
own, as it being naturally in that body whereof they by nature are: such are in
this ministry of reprobation, therefore all such as go about to cry down a sin
which was committed in a body destitute of humane nature, that is the sin of
angels before man was, or at the least before man sinned; these beat down sin
in another, not in their own body, a sin (say they) which man was never guilty
of, nor subject unto (for say they) man sinned by means of a tempter, but the
evil angels, the devils they sinned without a tempter, these men preach in
another, not in themselves, and these our Apostle, by transferring the thing to
himself, concludes by the Spirit of God, that it is a reprobate and rejected
ministry, disallowed of God in all good men throughout all ages.

They therefore that preach a sin without that body whereof man by nature is,
which are all those which preach the fall of angels not to be the proper fall
of man, and the sin of the devil in its first act, not to be the proper sin of
man, as well as of Satan, all these are reprobate ministers, and this their
ministry is reproved, rejected, and disallowed of God.

Again, they who preach a righteousness, a wisdom, a sanctification, or
redemption that is in another, but not in themselves; or that which is not in
all the Saints of God, as really as they in it, or as really in all as in any
one, these preach in another, but not in themselves, they build up (or seem to
do) another, not their own, these are reprobate ministers such as are rejected
and disallowed of God.

And wherewithal shall these men come before the Lord, and bow themselves
before the high God, shall they come before him with burnt-offerings, with
calves of a year old, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with
ten thousands of rivers of oil, shall they give their firstborn for their
transgression, or the fruit of their body, for the sin of their soul.

But thou, O man of God, who art known of him: he shall show unto thee what is
good; yea, what that good thing is which is only acceptable unto him, and what
does he require of thee; but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to abase thy
self in point of all humane excellencies, that so thou may walk in the power,
and glory of thy God, Amen.

S. G.

The Preface.
THe piece presented, according to the nature of it, is as a judge of assize
riding his circuit; who being set on the seat of judgment, is as a man
ignorant of all causes apertaining to that place where he is so set, as also
impartial with respect to any man's person; for he knows no man.

But when the cause is produced, the parties brought in and examined; with
observation of their countenance, carriage, and demeanure, together with manner
of speech and all circumstances.

The witnesses standing up; being such as are free from the act, as also from
passing of sentence, and yet have really communicated in the act, by eye or
ear, or some of the senses, in way of approbation or dislike.

The voluntary declaring their testimony, without any extraction, obstruction,
interruption, or mollestation; and it recorded.

The case opened, declared, and made manifest.

The records of the law read seriously, considered, and skilfully interpreted.

The Auditors satisfied in the conviction of the guilty, and clearing of the
innocent.

And the spirit of the judge animated, through sound and indubicable knowledge
of the matter and conscience of his office, freely determines in case of right
and wrong: passes sentence of absolution, or condemnation, without either fear
or flattery; and such manner of progress expect in this presented: and so I
adventure it to public view, as a thing impartial, having sufficient in it
self for its own defense --

S. G.

Matthew. the 23. 29.
Woe unto you scribes and pharisees, hypocrites, etc.


THis is the seventh woe denounced by Christ in this chapter against scribes and
pharisees, being hypocrites, and once being blind guides to lay open the fearfnl
estate and condition of such as oppose Christ Jesus in his doctrine, and seek
by all means to ensnare and entangle him therein: to make him appear unto men
as a guilty person, that so all men might contemn and despise his sayings, as
is plentifully declared in the former chapter, which is not to be limited or
confined to any particular time or age of the world as excluding others, nor to
any particular rank or calling of men, as belonging to them and not to others.

But is to be taken according to the true etymology of the phrases which are
here expressed.

The word scribe signifies an expounder of the law; and so the Evangelist Luke
has it, saying, woe be to you expounders of the law, that is, ye reporters of,
or bringers in the original and first foundation of the law, and records of the
kingdom.

The word pharise signifies one who curiously divides, makes distinctions in
the interpretation, or prophecy, foretelling what will ensue and come to pass
upon the principles and foundations premised, which are never separated, and
therefore Luke concludes them in one, Luke 11. 52. saying, Woe be to you
lawyers, or woe be to you interpreters of the law.

The word hypocrite or dissembler, is therefore added to declare that they give
a false exposition and interpretation of the law of God, both in the ground and
original of things, as also in all the success and prosecutions thereof,
otherwise the words, scribes and pharisees might be taken in a good sense.

1. The word hypocrite properly signifies a stage player, which sort of men we
know are counterfeits in diverse respects; first they counterfeit the persons of
men, representing godly or noble men, when they are of no such disposition, nor
degree; so do false interpreters represent the person of Christ, yet cannot but
confess he is as far remote as heaven is from earth.

2. The stage players counterfeit the records and histories of a kingdom, as
though they were now in their wise and grave agitation and solemnization, when
as they cannot but confess there is nothing but a bare resemblance of them; and
so do false interpreters, they treat of the records and histories of the
Scripture, when as they confess they were in act long ago, and are not now in
present and real existance.

3. The stage players counterfeit time, pretending the season of Gods
providence for the bringing forth of such operations; yet cannot but confess
the time of them is past, and at present is only assemblance of it: So do false
interpreters, they pretend the primative of the church, and yet know no more
how to make this time the first time, then they know how to make a Christian in
these days to be the first begotten of God, therefore mere counterfeiters of
time.

4. Stage players counterfeit places, if he draw but a curtain they act as in
the Kings palace, when it may be but in a stew or brothel house: So do false
interpreters, draw but out wine and wafer, or water, and a person without vale
or covering, and the act as in the palace of the king of Saints; and in the
mean time confess that his dwelling is in heaven* where themselves never as yet
came: and thus false interpreters are the stage players of the world, who
dissemble the being of persons, histories, times, and places, and cannot but
confess the reality of them is out of being in point of present appearance.

Whereas the truth of interpretation does not only comprehend them all,
extending it self unto them; but also gathers them up into present exercise,
and that in the reality of their proper being.

For he that can look back upon the word and work of God, he knows how to
convey himself thither (or else it is a dead letter unto him) he also knows how
to bring up and convey that word and work to take place and give it self a real
and present being in himself, otherwise it is not become a quickening spirit
unto him, and the like skill that the spirit of the Scriptures has to convey
it self back to the original and foundation of things, it has also to convey
it self forward to the accomplishing and finishing of them, not only in after
times, but also in the time present, otherwise it is as the word of man subject
to times and seasons, and not as the word of God that is ever the same as
himself is.

Therefore it is that Christ says before Abraham was I am, and the prophet
Hosea, speaking of Jacob, conversing with God, says, he met him in Bethel, and
there he spoke with us, and the Lord has set up this name as his memorial in
Abraham Isaac and Jacob, as being in them conveyed unto Moses and all the
Saints of God, namely, I am that I am, has sent thee: for if the sender had
not been in him that was sent, those great works in Egypt had never been
effected for the memorizing of the name of God forever.

Woe therefore unto false and counterfeit interpreters of the law of God, which
woe does not only concern such as know themselves to deal deceitfully with the
Scriptures for advantage, but also such as upon false principles, are never so
much persuaded that they speak truth, whether they deliver it unto others, or
receive and take it in as upon their own account it skils not, the matter is
the same, and has the same acceptance and reward, intailed.

The word woe, is a voice of cursing, as an edict or proclamation given out by
Christ as ruler of all things, which none can gain say, or contradict*
containing the whole sum in every part and particular of that cursed estate and
condition of sin and unrighteousness, as brought in and continued among the
sons of men, by false and hypocritical interpretation of the word of God, as
being no other but the spirit of the serpent from the beginning, who is said to
be the dragon that old serpent which is the devil and Satan, Revel 20. 2.

And this woeful and sinful estate and condition as the proper portion and
patrimony of all false interpreters being the only spirit, whereby they live in
fostring and maintaining the deeds of the flesh, is apposed unto that blessed
condition of the Son of God, the fountain and original of all happiness, whose
spirit is the true intent, and proper scope of the word of God, in which alone
his life is preserved and maintained forever, and therefore he is called the
word of God, and says of his proper language, the words that I speak are
spirit and life; therefore without true interpretation of the Scriptures, no
conservation but a crucification of the Son of God.

Therefore it is that Christ so often ingeminates and reiterates this word woe,
as the curse consisting in false interpretation being that, and also those
which put him to death, the persons and the spears being one, therefore the
Prophet cries out unto God, Rebuke the company of sp^armen, or the roor or the
crew of the Canes, or the wild beasts of the reed, as the word imports, Psalm
68. 30. prophesying of those who gave Christ vinegar upon a reed in his thirst
upon the cross, and put a reed in his hand, and smote him on the head head with
the reed, Matthew. 27. 29, 30, 34, 48. Psalm. 69. ^2. as such as make hollow the
word of God, emptying it of the proper spirit thereof, which thereby becomes as
a sponge to draw in sharp, bitter, and tart things to present unto Christ, that
is, cruel and savage persecutions even unto death: therefore the prophet calls
them the mighty bulls and calves of the people, that is, the high priests,
scribes, pharisees, and elders, who falsely expound and apply the word of God, to
the putting of it to death, of whom the prophet largely comments in that two
and twentieth Psalm.

Now to describe a false expositour of the word of God, as a general Maxim, to
hold true undeni bly and universally in the discovery of them in all times,
places, and persons, is this,

They deny the word of God its proper and natural rise, and accordingly carry
it to an improper and unnatural center.

First they deny the word of God its proper and natural rise, that is, they
conclude that all things whereinsoever God has expressed himself do not arise,
nor have their original in the word of God, as considered and consisting in the
unity of God and man, no nor that any thing in the first act of creating the
world, could possibly arise out of such a fountain; but say they, that device
of God and man being one, was only brought in after man had sinned, but in the
beginning all things were good, yea man himself in a goodness besides, short
of, and out of Christ.

Whereas the truth is there was never reality of goodness to be found as coming
within the account of God, but only in that work of God, and man being made one
in Christ, therefore it is that when the man said unto Christ (good master)
taking him for a mere man, Christ asks him, why call thou me good, there is
none good but God, not denying himself to be good, but that goodness does not
consist in the excellencies of the creature, but in the excellencies of the
Spirit of God that made all things, and what work soever holds nor proportion
with the mind of the maker, has not the reallity of goodness in it; and that
was never found but only in that device and workmanship of Christ, who is the
engraven form of Gods subsistauce, and that which gives being to all things,
without whom they are not, never were, nor shall be.

For the wisdom of God is the original and fountain of all things, as maker
and former of them all; but the wisdom of God does properly consist in that
device of the creature and creator, being made one in Christ, without which
Gods wisdom could never appear: for he cannot be known but by his own light,
Psalm 36 9. there efore the unity of God and man in that faith of Christ, is
the proper original, fountain, and cause of all things, and has all things in
it, wherein the reallity of goodness does consist, and all other things are but
as the hand upon the dyal, which points at time which it self is not, so do all
other things in heaven and earth point at an eternal state and condition, which
not any, nor all of themselves either are or ever shall be.

So that he that brings out an original goodness or righteousness in angel or
man, and not out of this fountain of God and man being one in Christ, he is a
false interpreter of the word of God, and the doctrine of such is that which is
and ever was, the proper inlet of sin and wrath upon the sons of Adam; for
being they raise righteousness and goodness from a false fountain, they bring
in the devils to be the state of Christ, as all Idolaters have ever don from
the beginning, and such is the falsehood of the fountain out of which their
doctrine springs; and therefore it is that the consultations of the serpent,
who is said to be wiser then any beast which the Lord God made, proves the very
devil and Satan, Revel. 20 2. himself.

Secondly, false interpreters terminate the word of God in a false and
counterfeit center, in that they carry the intent and scope thereof to other
things besides Christ, that is God and man in unity, such are they who center
the word of God in good angels, which they confess are not in this unity, also
in man in his first creation, which they exclude from this unity* of such
mistake is the centring of the word of God (as being the intent thereof) in
offices and ordinances called divine and civil, which have not the nature, and
also the duration of this unity in them; for Christ is the first and the last,
the beginning and the end, the proper rise and termination of all things,
therefore he is said to be the Lord our Lawgiver, and also the end of the law,
Revel. 22. 13, Isaiah 33. 22. Roman. 10. 4.

Therefore it is no law of God in what relation soever considered that
terminates, or ends in any thing short of, or besides Christ; yet do we not
deny the lawful use of any humane ordinances, no more then we deny the
ordinance of the Sun and of the moon: So they be used as becomes the nature of
them in their time and season, which are all found to be in the judgment of
God no better then empty husks, such as the prodigal fed upon, being destitute
of this unity which is in Christ, Luke* 15. 16, 17. so that further then they
direct us unto Christ, they are no bread becoming our fathers house, and so
will appear when ever we come to our selves, by getting out of that way of
prodigallity, but if we terminate the law of God in them, they all become
Idolatrous, which have proved the snares and Idols of the world unto this day,
whilst counterfeit and hypocritical interpreters present wood and stone and
foolish pictures unto us, that we may bend oll our zeal only against such
trash, that in the mean time Satan and his ministers may reign as angels of
light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.

And thus much briefly for present in the describing of a false interpreter of
the word of God.

Now that we may the better understand their just desert of so many woes
pronounced against them in this chapter, let us take a short sum and view of
the particular ground and cause of the pronunciation of every woe, as they lie
in order, before we come to this which we have read, The ground of the first woe
is laid down in the 13. verse and contains three things. 1. First that they
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men. 2. That they will not enter
thereinto themselves. 3. That they will not suffer them that are entering.


1. They shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, that is, you draw a vale
over the holy and eternal things of the Son of God, by terminating the word of
God in temporary and terrene things, that is, when men so expound the law of
God as to make things which endure not for ever, to be the intent and purpose
of the word of God, as titles, offices, relations, and operations, that shall
end by their own confession, when God is all in all; but for the present the
word has its proper center in them, this is a vail drawn over, those orders,
institutions, relations and operations proper to the house and kingdom of God,
as a door shut and fast bolted that men enter not, which is made up and
consists of the proper workmanship of man's natural heart, which has ever
appeared a glory in man's eye, to the darkening and hiding of that glory of the
Son o^ God; therefore it is said, that the ministration of condemnation is
glorious, glory is to be done away, otherwise the vail is upon the heart of man
to shut him out of the holy place (that is our of that state of Christ Jesus)
when Moses is read unto this day, 2 Cor. 3 so that the centring of the word of
God in an earthly glory which must be don away is the ministry of condemnation,
which shuts up the way of salvation which is by Christ, Luke therefore
expresses it in these words, Ye have taken away the key of knowledge, Luke 11.
52. that is, ye have hid and covered, by your earthly ties and relation, the
spirit of the Scriptures, which as a key passes through all those wards and
bolts of humane relations and respects, loosening and and dissolving them all
as things of no value, for the free passage of the Saints of God, into a
kingdom which fades not in any of its relations and respects but lasts for
ever, 1 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 4.

Or it causes the wisdom of the flesh, that great bar which bolts up the
kingdom of God, so to fall and fly back, as ^he bolt of a lock when the wards
are opened, of which Christ says, get thee behind me Satan, that the Saints of
God may enter into the exercise of the wisdom and knowledge of God, in which
Luke makes the kingdom of God to consist, saying, Ye have taken away the key
of knowledge, and enter not into it, that is, into that knowledge, of which
Christ speaks when he says, And this is life eternal, that they know (...) to
be the only true God in Jesus Christ, whom thou have s^at, John 17. 3.

2. (...) ^^d point in the cause of this woe, they will not enter in themselves,
that is, they will not pass through temporary and transient relations and
operations, to give the word of God its proper subject and intent, to consist
only in things that concern the kingdom of Christ, which is not of this world,
John 18. 36. but lodge themselves in carnal and sensual institutions and
respects, and will not enter into that knowledge or acknowledgment of that
ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. which says henceforth we know no man, or
as the word is nothing after the flesh, though we have known Christ Jesus after
the flesh, henceforth we know him no more, 2 Cor. 5. 16. that is to say, we
acknowledge no temporary or transient institution or relation, to be any part
or parcel of Christ or Christianity, no not in the most fined form, that man
can possibly mint or cast it into; for if it should, then would Christ sustain
loss in the cessation thereof, which is impossible the Son of God should do in
his own body, for then were he not one that saves to the utter most, which the
Apostle affirms he does, Heb. 7. 25.

Therefore the scribes, pharisees, and elderships of the world, they enter not
into the kingdom of God, not having the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ,
which is evident in all their ordinations and institutions, wherein they
terminate the holy word of God, and that by denying the proper center and
object thereof* for they may as well deny the Son of God to be the only
sountain, from whence the word flows, as to deny him to be the only intent and
subject matter unto which it goes, and in which, and not else it terminates it
self, and there is a like denial of the truth of the word of God, in the one as
in the other: Woe therefore unto all dissemblers of the word of God in this
point, who do avowedly not only shnt the kingdom of God against others, but
also voluntarily refuse to enter in themselves.

3. The third point is, that they will not suffer others that are entering to go
in, or as Luke has it such as are entering, ye forbid, or as the word imports,
such as are entered ye forbid.

1. That is, ye deny and forbid any such way of entrance into the kingdom of
God, as disanuls and unbolts all temporary institutions and humane and carnal
traditions, without which your kingdom retains not its proper Spirit, not can
it otherwise maintain and preserve it self, being properly the kingdom of this
world.

2. Secondly, you suffer not them that are entering or entered, that is, such as
are entered into that way of Christ, according to that law of the Spirit of an
eternal life, you suffer them not to express and walk by the rules of that
kingdom; you suffer them not to institute such laws, to authorize such
officers, to exercise such power as is suitable to that spiritual kingdom and
eternal Son of God; neither can you suffer them to reside and abide amongst
you, no if it were in your power, not to have a place of abode upon the face of
the earth; the cause of the first woe therefore is apparent and evident, in that
it is the life of the innocent Son of God, which we hunt after and seek for,
Luke 22. 2. John 5. 16. 18. Matthew. 2. 20. in all his Saints who have ever
appeared in the world as the hinds of the morning, hunted and pursued to be
wurryed by wicked Jews, scribes, pharisees, and elders, who stand strictly upon
laws constituted by the letter, and historical narration of the Scriptures.

As also by profane gentiles, who take a certain lycentious liberty unto
themselves, as though no command of God were come forth upon the face of the
earth, or religion to be exercised amongst the sons of men, who live as without
God in the world Psalm 22. see the title and also the whole Psalm, Eyhes. 2.
12.

The cause of Christ's denouncing of the second woe is expressed in the 14.
verse, in these words, For ye devour widows houses under a color of long
praying, wherein observe these particulars for the opening of it, 1. First what
the state of a widow is, 2. What is the widows house. 3. What is meant by this
color or pretense of long praying. 4. How the widows house is devoured by this
means of praying.


For the first, the state of widowhood does consist in these particulars.

First, she is one who has lost and is void of headship and authority,
therefore the Apostle says, the man is the head of the woman* 1 Cor. 11. 3.

Secondly, a widow is desolate and void of a protector, for the man is the
defense of the woman in all suits that come against her, or challenge that can
be made of her, and therefore Abimelech says unto Sarah concerning Abraham her
husband, Behold he is unto thee a covering of the eyes, Genesis 20. 16. that is a
defense unto thee wherever thou come, therefore Sarah is said to obey him
and calls him lord, 1 Pet. 3. 6.

Thirdly, a widow is destitute of one to provide for her, therefore the Apostle
stating it upon the man says, that if any provide not for his own, especially
for those of his house he has denied the faith and is worse then an infidel 1 Timothy 5 8.

Fourthly, a widow is destitute and void of an instructor and teacher; for the
Apostle gives that honor unto the man, saying of the women, If they will learn
any thing, let them ask their husbands at home 1 Cor. 14. 35.

Fifthly, a widow is destitute of means to multiply and increase the family,
therefore as she is a wife she is said to be as a fruitful vine upon the sides
o^ the man's house, Psalm. 128. 3. without which he is said to dwell in
solitariness, Psalm. 68 6.

2. The second point is what the widows house is, now the widows house is
properly and only that place where God is Judge of her condition, that is,
where he is Judge by righting her in all wrongs offered unto her, as also in
discerning of all her wants and necessities, for the supply of them* and that
the Prophet affirms God is unto her only in his holy habitation, which is the
proper place of his own real abode, Psalm 68. 5.

3. The third point is what is meant by the pretense and color of long praying
or continued and extended praying that is, when men interpret the word of God
so as to draw out prayer or prophecy to be a continued act, or exercise, trade
and calling of some particular men* wherein they are bound to exercise
themselves in the behalf of others, more then the rest of the people of God be,
who (as they say) are to be exercised in other employments and affairs which
themselves are freed from; so that they only may be drawn out in prayer, as a
continned act, office, trade, or calling, belonging only in that point unto
them, as their peculiar calling and office* this is a false pretense and mere
color and deceitful gloss set upon prayer to beguile the world, when men
ingross the holy and free spirit of supplication, monopolizing it unto
themselves, by denying the rest of the Saints of God to enjoy it in like
extent; and by as just and good right, in the exercise of it continually, and
as not being of like concernment in every one of the godly as it is, or ever
was in any one; or as thongh others of the Saints stood not so near unto God
therein, nor came into the holy of holiest by virtue of office as themselves do.

This is a mere pharisaical and hippocritical deceit, concerning praying, to
delude the world, namely, to draw out prayer as a continned act and exercise,
and to be of more concernment in some men's calling then in others of the people
of God; for the spirit of intercession is of like virtue, extent, and
concernment, when, and in whomsoever it does appear; otherwise the blood of
sprinkling should not be of like virtue to speak the same good thing in one of
the Saints of God, as it does in another; for it is the same eternal spirit by
which he offers up himself without spot unto God, Hebr. 12. 24: Hebr. 9. 14*
in all as one, and in one as all.

And by this pharisaical and hypocritical deceit is the widows house devoured,
for whosoever he be that sets himself by office nearer to God then the rest of
his brethren, that man must of necessity exclude and shut them out of that holy
place of Gods habitation and dwelling, which is that state and faith of the
Lord Jesus, that habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. and so
defrauds the desolate of that plentiful supply, which God has appointed for
all such as come unto him, by enterposing himself between God and them; for he
that sets one Saint of God nearer unto God then another, he devours and spoils
the habitation of God, that is, he corrupts the state of the Lord Jesus, in
which holy habitation God is only a father to the fatherless and a Judge of the
widow.

For therein and not elsewhere, is he become their head and only Lordship,
there is he their protection and defense, there is he their provision and
bountiful supply, there is he their only instruction and instructour, and there
and not elsewhere is he that happy multiplication, and multiplier of himself in
all those fruits of righteousness, which are of God by Jesus Christ, Romans 7. 4.
Philip. 1. 11.

Therefore Christ says in opposing these false interpreters) to all true
disciples, be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your master, even Christ, or, yet
have one mastership, even that unction which teaches you all things* John 2.
20. Hebr. 8. 11. and ye are all brethren, or ye are all one brotherhood, that
is equal in any point of dignity; and call no man father on the earth, for one
is your father in heaven. You are not the offspring of any earthly
progenitour* but are the royal seed of heaven, and have alike fatherly
authority in your selves to produce a like posterity; therefore he says, he
that is greatest among you shall be your servant, that is, the greatest dignity
in any of the Saints, is to be a servant unto all the Saints, therefore did the
Lord of all wash the disciples feet, and wiped them with the towel wherewith he
had girded himself* to give them an example of performing the like service,
John 13.

So Christ says to the disciples, Whether is greater he that fitteth at meat
or he that serves, is not he that ^itteth at meat, but I am among you as he
that serves, Luke 2^. 27.

1. He then, whosoever he be, that in pretense of being exalted by the word of
God into place and office above any of the servants of God, that is, such
servants as are the Lords freemen, 1 Cor. 7. 22. that man is a false
interpreter of the word of God; yea an hypocritical scribe and pharisee, it is
he that loves the uppermost seat in the synagogue, for it is not the sitting in
any seat, but the love of a high seat that he may appear as the nearest to God
in all acts of worship, and to come more immediately from God in all his
commands and exortations then any of his brethren, Matthew. 23. 6.

These are they that devour the widows houses by setting themselves nearer to
God then others, and thereby shut the desolate out of the place of Gods holy
habitation, where only the Lord is the present and full supply of them, Psalm
68. 5.

2. These are they who loved the uppermost rooms at feasts, as being the
proper cause of all festivity, they being the only instruments of peace, the
procurers of plenty, and chief cause of the joyful condition of the people, and
so interpose themselves between God and such as are in plenty also; that the
praise may redound unto them, and so deprive God of his glory in their
deceiving of the people, Matthew. 23. 6.

3. These are they that love greeting in the market place, and to be called of
men Rabbi, Rabbi, Matthew. 23. 7. they love to be honored as masters and lords
of the market, that is, of all commerce and trade, not only between man and
man, but also between God and man; and so in the feasts also, for who must be
an instrument to feast the soul but only they, and who must rejoice and sing
when they see cause of mourning: this point is not only practiced amongst them
who are raised b^ the help and addition of school divinity, to their natural
spirit; for it is evident amongst these Indians the Barbarians amongst whom we
live; for if any of the superiors mourn, if there be found any of the
inferiors rejoicing, if he escape with his life, it is much if it be not taken
away by one means or other: But these must be masters and lords of the market
also, in that they appoint the place, the time* the manner of commerce for
weights, measures, kinds of coin with the value of it; keepers of the peace,
quieters, and stillers of the people, and he that keeps not time, comes to the
place, holding weight and measure, acknowledging the rates and valuation set by
elders of church or state, that man is a sinner, culpable of punishment; what
are they then who love to be called lord, lord, but such as are nearer God then
others, stand in the place of God, which the rest of their brethren do not;
these devour the habitation of the widow, by shutting the desolate out of Gods
holy habitation, where he has related himself alike unto all, in that
judgment which he pass th upon all of them whose first husband the law of the
carnal commandment, is dead, Romans 7. 1. (where our Apostle makes the death of
the law, and the party dead to the law, to be one and the same thing, for where
the law is dead, so, as it operates not upon us, we are also dead from working
by it.)

For every one that comes into the holy of holiest, which is Christ, for so
Daniel the prophet calls him Messia, the holy of holiest, as the words are
truly rendered, Daniel 9 24. and every one that enters therein, is alike near
and acceptable unto God, and all the holy things of God, Hebr. 9. 11, 12. For
howsoever there was but one high priest in the days of Moses that entered into
the holy of holiest, to declare the dignity and unity of the priesthood of
Christ, yet there was an order of four and twenty in the days of David, who
served in their course by entering into the holy place, 1 Chronicles* 24. 1, 19.
Zacharia^ the father of John Baptist being of the eight order, Luke 1. 5. who
was struck dumm in the revelation of the conception of John, Luke 1. 19, 22. to
declare how speechless the priesthood of Christ is in point of Levitical and
carnal ministry; but in the bringing forth of John his mouth is opened, Luke 1.
63, 64. to show that freedom and fullness of the Spirit of God, in that way of
prophecy and praises in the bringing forth of Christ, in his spiritual
priesthood and ministry, Luke 1. 67, 79* wherein every one has a like dignity
and the same access unto God, Romans 5. 2. Ephesians. 2. 18.

He therefore who sets himself nearer to God then others of his brethren (by
office and dignity) whom he accounts to be of the faith of Christ, that man
under pretense of holiness does devour the widows houses, by denying them that
proper habitation, wherein alone all their supply consists, Psalm 68. 5. Nay,
it is a devouring of Christ, for to devide Christ into places and offices,
higher and lower, in point of his mystical body, is to destroy the faith and
doctrine of the gospel, for Christ cannot be the head of a body, wherein every
one of the corporation have not a like interest, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.

4. Again, these are they who make their phillactaries broad, and their fringes
long; Matthew. 23. 5. or as Luke and Mark have it, they love to go in long robes,
Luke 20. 46. Mark 12. 38. noting them to be such as love outward signs of
honor, as tokens of exemption from other men, to show them to be more grave
and wise then any of the rest.

So they make their phillactaries broad and their fringes long, alluding to the
Levitical law, to declare them to be of that litteral and carnal priesthood,
which puts Christ to death which ever seeks after a carnal and temporary
lordship and dominion, Matthew. 4. 8. 9. therefore Matthew uses the word
phillactaries, which signifies keepers, as though that grave and long-robed
eldership were the only keepers of men's souls, bodies, names, and estates.

The word translated fringes, in Hebrew Gedilim, which sometimes is translated
wreathes, 1 King. 7. 17. Exodus 28. 24. and sometimes ropes or cords, Judges
16. 11, 12. twisted together by the Levitical priesthood, or made of the
materials, and by the skill of the spirit of the Phillistians, which has no
power at all over our spiritual Sampson, but are broken in sunder as a thread,
in Hebrew also a fringe is called Tsitsith, or Zizith, Numb. 15. 38. which is
sometimes translated a lock of hair of the head, Ezekiel 8. 3. to show a
multitude united together in one head.

And the Greek word used by the holy Ghost in Matthew, Craspeda, does properly
signify twisted tassels of thread, and the Hebrew word used for fringe is
Englished a thread, Judge. 16. 9.

And this was to be put upon the four skirts or wings of the garment, Deuteron.
22. 12. as the word signifies, Ruth 3. 9. 1 Samuel 15. 27. and so the four ends
or corners of the earth are called the four wings of the earth, Isa. 11. 12.
Ezekiel. 7. 2. Job 37. 3.

The point then amounts to this in false interpreters of the law of God, in
making their phillactaries broad and their fringes long, on the four skirts of
their garments, that they love to be thought to be the keepers of people, and
to be heads of multitudes; even as the locks of hair on the head, and to have
them twisted unto them as tassels of thread, by their offices relations, and
respects; and that their spirit is not bounded, but passes as upon wings unto
the four ends or corners of the earth to gather strength, as the skirt, or hem
strengthens the garment, and honor it as the riband or thread beautifies the
vesture, that so they may wear their brethren as a long robe of honor, serving
only for the raising and maintaining of their headship and earthly authority,
which is the spirit of all men, from the father and master of the family, which
all men endeavor to come unto, unto the greatest Monarch upon the earth;
wherever that temptation propounded unto Christ (and in him to all men) takes
place; which was by him, and is in all his rejected and overcome, Matthew. 4. 8.

And let no man think by what we here express, that we hold government useless
and unlawful, but only desire that all things were considered according to
their nature, and exercised and kept within their proper confines and cercuits,
so as Christ may be all in all, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. For we know, that humane
wisdom wrapped up as in a bud or seed, Isaiah 18. 5. may by man's industry be
brought forth into the exercise of arts and sciences, admirable useful and
beneficial to man, so they be kept and judged of within, and according unto
their proper sphere.

So also, we know that there are such exorbitancies which may be so ripened in
depraved nature, that may be restrained, curbed, kept in, or cut off by humane
abilities; for Moses is said to be learned in all the wisdom of Egypt, or in
all the wisdom of Mizraim, for so the Scriptures call Egypt Mizraim constantly
in Moses and the Prophets, though the Apostles generally call it by the name of
Egypt; and we know Mizraim was one of the sons of cursed Cain, after whose name
it is called, Genesis 10. 2. as he being the first planter of it.

Now this wisdom of Moses could not come short of those arts of the Magicians
and priesthood of Egypt, who are instructers of the people; even as the
posterity of Cain were fathers of shepherdy and ordring of cattle, and of such
as handle the harp and the organ, and were such as instructed, or as the Hebrew
phrase is, were whetters or sharpners of every artificer in brass and iron,
Genesis 4. 20, 21, 22.

Which learning Moses forsakes and departs from, as being nothing of that
learning and language of the Hebrews, coming of Heber of the posterity of Shem,
and progenitour of Abraham, as things not coming into the account, nor of any
virtue or effect, in that great work of deliverance of Israel out of thraldom;
which being stood upon and urged, as any part of the intent of the word of God,
they become that which in setting up Pharaoh and his Magicians, keep Israel in
bondage.

1. Therefore if men will be instructours, whetters* and sharpners of people in
the historical narrations of the Scriptures, in proverbial and parabolical
sentences, according to humane reason and art drawn out and acquired by schools
and man's diligence; if they call this speaking or preaching, we gainsay it not,
if so be there be but this plainness and faithfulness adjoined, as to confess
that this kind of learning in the highest attainment thereof, is but the
learning of Egypt, of Mizraim, and not the learning of the Hebrew, Genesis 14. 13.
that is of Abraham who is of Heber.

And that in this learning of Egypt, Jacob and his Magicians are pregnant in,
and conversant about; and that this kind of learning must be departed from, as
being no part of Isreal's deliverance; or else we shall never attain to the
deliverance, unless it be to pass through the sea, as an Ethiopian, that Gods
judgment may be made manifest in another way of execution, by their carcasses
falling in the wilderness; as the Egyptians passed from one plague, that
another might take place; and so Israel may be said to be brought out of Egypt,
as the Lord brought the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Assyrians from Kir:
for the manifestation of a more eminent destruction, Amose 9 7* 8.

If men would but confess these things, let them preach to the drawing out of
that humane bud to the furthest, and whet it up unto the sharpest point,
otherwise they betray the cause of Christ, when men say unto these things hail
master, and kiss them; as their only Lord and beloved, in so doing they betray
the Lord Christ, as Judas did by confessing him in a carnal manner and to a
carnal end, Matthew 26. 49.

We conclude then that a humane ministry may be admitted in the world, so that
it keep it self within its proper confines, professing that an Egyptian or
Barbarian may attain the same; but if it be professed to be instituted
according to the faith of Christ, then does it become that Jewish priesthood
which ever takes away the life of Christ, not admitting him his due
administration in the world.

2. This bud of humane and depraved nature, being broke forth and ripened to
the thwarting of the common Society of mankind, may be by humane ability curbed
and restrained, so be it the design extend not beyond the limits of its proper
bounds, that is, that the parties curbed be such as are as the horse or mule,
void of true understanding, whose mouth must be kept or stopped with a reign or
bit, lest they come near unto us, Psalm 32. 9. which brutish spirit is never
found in any who are instructed in the wisdom of God, Matthew. 10. 16.

So likewise the party exercising this authority, in doing such an act; must
know that if there be not wisdom in him accompanied with eternal life, John
17. 3. his office goes no further then that which a gentile, a heathen, or
barbarian may perform and exercise; as well as he, whatever he may be called,
or however he may think or esteem of himself; yea he is of the same brutish and
untamed nature, how learned or how costly soever the trappings of the horse may
seem to be, he is of the same nature which those are that seem to appear
without any such costly ornament.

Therefore the Hebrew phrase used by the Prophet, may be read either actively,
or passively, whose mouth must stop, or whose mouth must be stopped, Psalm 32.
9. signifying unto us that the act may be appliable either to the agent or to
the patient, a like phrase is used by the Prophet where he says, that thou
may be justified in thy saying, and pure when thou judge, Psalm 51. 6*
which speech the Apostle takes up and says, that thou might be justified in
thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art judged, Romans 3. 4.

To Judge then in humane affairs is a thing necessary for the preservation of
mankind upon the earth; as eating, drinking, marrying, and giving in marryage,
so that we use them as though we used them not, knowing that the fashion of
them passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. and therefore are no part of office or
relation proper to the kingdom of Christ, and therefore prove good or bad
according to the spirit of him that is exercised therein: for men may eat as
making their belly their God, Phil. 3. 19. and as these did that lusted after
Manna, and were destroyed whilst the meat was in their mouths, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

And men may eat and drink, and whatsoever they do to the praise and glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

But when men go on in the exercises and executions of humane and temporary
things, as being offices and ordinances as the law of God intends, and in which
it terminates it self, as the proper scope or any part of the meaning, that is
no less then to disthrone the Son of God, and set up Pharaoh, justify Herod,
and take parts with those heathenish and barbarous princes that ever did, do,
or shall lift up themselves against Christ; for they have all that principle
written in their hearts, to terminate the mind and will of God (in point of
approving or abhorring) in temporary and transient things.

We conclude then that the matters of the kingdom of God are more eminent, and
so of higher concernment, then to stand either in the extention or extenuation
of any thing, which has its proper being and only exercise within the bounds
and confines of this mortal life, therefore it is that Christ says my kingdom
is not of this world, John 18. 36. no not in any vocal expression or bodily
exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8. but in the execution and intention of that eternal
spirit, whereby the Son of God offers up himself unto God, Heb. 9. 14. for if
the kingdom of God should consist in any thing bounded by this mortal life,
then would it suffer loss in every Saint, in the laying down of the body in the
dust, by cessation unto all these things, which every man holds rather to be
the perfecting of it.

But it stands in the meek and submissive reception of the word of eternity and
power, as an ingrafted word James 1* 21. that is, accord ng to the Metaphor,
the wisdom and will of God in his chosen has from the beginning, so cut the
proper branch and topped the height of the spirit of man, which it by nature
otherwise brings forth; and thereby submitted it to the reception of an eternal
and higher wisdom, which ingrafts it self as a science into the stock of man's
spirit (being a creature made in time) through this cutting of it off from its
natural growth, as from that superfluous foreskin of the flesh, which is the
proper cause of the seed of immortallity its not taking effect, which must be
laid aside or cast off, as that which is the only filthiness and enmity against
God, 1 James 1. 21.

This eternal wisdom therefore thus ingrafting it self into the stock of man's
spirit, does by virtue of that nature* life, and spirit proper to it self,
transform and change whatsoever is in motion, or springs up in the stock into
its own nature and kind, namely, into things not of time but of eternity, so
that whatsoever springs up, or fruit yielded, by that whole tree consisting of
stock and science, are the proper fruits of the Spirit of God, and not of the
nature of the spirit of man, though that whole tree of righteousness has the
virtue, glory, and benefit, and is the proper cause of the abounding and bring
forth of them all.

Christ therefore, as he is the fountain and proper producer of all spiritual
and eternal fruit, so is the fruit thus brought forth, the proper food and
refreshment of the Son of God, on which he feeds as his only delight and proper
preservation of eternal life, Cant. 4, 13, 14, 15, 16. Cant. 5. 1. John 4* 32.
John 6. 54.

Wherefore the distributions and receptions of the things of God mutually in
Christ, is the only conservation of that one state (being made of twain) unto
eternity, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.

Whence we may observe wherein that broad difference appears even in this life,
that is betwixt the holy ones of God, and the wicked of the world, though they
may use the like expressions, and perform like bodily actions, which is not so
visible but by the intentions and extention of spirit, that is, the Saints of
God make it their only errant in their passage through this life, to propagate
and promote the things of eternity peculiar to that state of the Son of God,
with the villification of, and sitting loose from all things of time, as they
being no part of their design in their appearing in this mortal and transitory
life, and so demean themselves in all things of time, if they abound, they
think not themselves the better, nor place any of their delight, courage, or
confidence in them, Psalm. 62. 10.

If they be deminished they judge not themselves the worse, because they reckon
not their estates according to the value of any or all of them, and therefore
are not under the vexation of an encumbered spirit in the absence of them, Job
1. 21. by which they show themselves plainly unto all men that they belong to
another city, and country, in which God is not ashamed, but counts it his
glory and honor to be called their God, and proper and peculiar interest, in
whatever he is, being they are but sojourners, pilgrims, and strangers upon the
earth Heb. 11. 9. 14, 15* 16.

Therefore Christ says unto all despised, by this shall all men know that you
are my disciples (or are taught and learned in me) if you love one another.
John 13. 34, 35. that is, if your love be shed forth only in the acknowledgment
of that new law of relation, and mutual community which is only found in that
mystical body of your Lord, as nothing else being worthy to be the object of
that conjugal love of the spirit, as a mutual help meet for it, Genesis 2. 20.
then this shall be your badge and cognizance, or cognomin^s, that you have my
name upon you, as a spouse the name of her Lord; so that I will own and
acknowledge you wherever you shall become, either in respect of time, people,
place, or condition, as my peculiar and exempted people, from the rest of the
world.

But the wicked and unbelievers make it their principal design to propagate
and promote the things of time, and villifie and disregard the things of
eternity* and in respect of that wherein their true virtue and glory does
consist abhor them in their hearts; only make use of them in way of adultery,
submitting them to their own lusts only to propagate and promote the things of
time, ^alsly calling the names proper to the eternal Son upon them, and thereof
weave a spiders web, as the only garment to cover them after the end of this
mortal life, Job 8. 13, 14* Isa. 59. 5. and in all their travels through the
same, their whole scope and endeavor is, to bring forth, promote, possess, and
endeavor the continuation of things of time.

Therefore it is, that they call their sons, their houses, and lands, by their
own name, Psalm 49. 11, 12, 13. therefore the Psalmist in uttering of his
parable, wherein he shows man's mortal condition by nature, and his baseness and
brutishness in setting his heart upon temporary things, he calls them
inhabitants of time, or dwellers upon transitory things, saying, here this all
people* give ear all ye inhabitants of time; for so the word translated world
does properly signify in the Hebrew phrase, Psalm 49. 1.

As a man therefore in his house and dwelling place, all his endeavors are to
maintain, reform, repair, promote, and honor the same: yea, and he is never at
his proper home but when he is there, nor in content nor at rest; so are the
wicked in point of the things of time, being from home, out of employment,
seeing nothing worth promotion therein nor yielding satisfaction and rest, when
the proper home and employments about the Son of God appear, which are only
eternal and fade not, 1 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 4. and the only employment and
dwelling place of all the Saints which are not only Symptoms, but evident acts
of separation between the just and unjust, which he that runs may read
wherever they both appear.

And for conclusion of this point note this, that as the wisdom of God is as a
graft in the spirit of the creature so as to eternize it in himself, even so
also the wisdom of the creature, ingrafts it self in the spirit of the
Creator, to the mortalizing and temporizing it in himself; for the wisdom of
man beholding the visible works of God which were all made before him; cannot
but conclude of an almighty power and wisdom which gave them their being*
virtues, and relation; and seeing none below him, fit to communicate his
wisdom with, seeks up unto God as the serpent (which is the same thing) did at
the first; and so in that way of the fall seeking for God in the light and
ability of principles proper to a creature, he does ingraft his wisdom in the
Spirit of the Creator; as a sciene into the stock which is of another nature,
by cutting of that Branch which springs out of a dry ground, Isaia 53. 2. (and
not out of any moisture of man's wisdom) submitting the stock to humane wisdom
and conjectures coming within the capacity and proper sphere of a creature
through which he does as absolutely temporize and mortallize the eternal Spirit
or word of God, as the wisdom of God in Christ does eternize the spirit of the
creature, which by its own nature and property is momentany and mortal.

So that in this inocculation of the wisdom or word of the creature, all the
motions and operations springing up in the Creator (as being the stock which
in it self is eternal) are all translated and changed into temporallity and
mortality, and so the power of God works effectually in the way of death, as
the wisdom of God implanted in the weakness of man, the creature comes to work
effectually in that way of eternal life, and that whole state or tree, is but
one eternal Son and Savior.

And in that implanting of the wisdom of man in the power of God; that whole
state or tree is a state of mortallity and destruction, and is but one son of
perdition, and law of sin and death, because all that spring up, and what fruit
it yields is of the nature of the science, and does not savor of the stock at
all, but is become mortal and diabolical, even as a man in that way of Christ
is become eternal and the real son of the immortal God.

So long therefore as an eternal wisdom abides to draw forth the stock, in
whatsoever it yields according to the nature of the science, so long shall the
fruits of righteousness and delight appear upon the Saints in a blessed estate
and condition.

And so long as the power and plenty of an eternal stock yields any motion or
matter of growth, so long shall that graft or science of the wisdom of the
flesh, mortalize it and change it into corruption in it self, (then the which
greater indignity cannot be done unto a pure and immortal word or spirit) so
long shall that unhappy, guilty, and accursed condition of the wicked abide and
remain, so that both estates have their pereminency arising from the eternity
of the holy word of God, though the one be a state of the eternal life, and the
other a state of eternal death; and the stock of each is no proper cause of the
fruit which the whole tree yields and forever brings forth.

Take in also Christ's inference and conclusion, in these words, therefore you
shall receive the greater damnation, Mat. 23. 14. The word damnation implies a
disinheriting, and binding over to destruction, and by greater, here we are not
to understand it comparatively, with respect to others damned, but
superlatively, as the greatest measure of destruction, so that false
interpreters are in the grand condemnation, that is they receive no less then
damnation of the devil, who is a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, or inheritance, John 8. 35, 44. a false interpreter therefore is the
grand sinner, and therefore receives the damnation of the devil, for as the
serpent set himself nearer to God then the woman, as knowing more of God then
she did, Gen 3. ^, 2, 3, 4* 5. So do those false interpreters, these
hypocritical pra^ers, as though their calling were nearer to God then others of
their brethren, wherein they act the part of the serpent, and are in the grand
condemnation of the devil, so in Scripture Language the eldest is said to be
the greater, Genesis 25. 23. the Hebrew word Rab, whereof great men are called
Rabbis, as first or chief in place and office, is translated by the holy Ghost
in Greek, the greater, Romans 9. 12. so that whilst men talk of Original sin
speaking they know not what (for man's sin cannot be Original if there was sin
in the devil before) they are in the very progress thereof, and are in that act
of false expounding of the law of God, as truly the first bringers of sin into
the world, as the continuation thereon; for a spirit cannot be divided though
the kingdom wherein it works may, and they have the proper spirit of the
serpent, which is only to make false repo t of the word of God, whether to a
man's self or to others, which may be comprehended in this bud, namely, that one
Saint or Son of God, is nearer to God and in more f^vour and respect with God
then another, or that God was ever or at any time, or in any thing at one with
himself out of mankind

For a man to conclude that any Saint of God fails or falls short of the grace
of God, in any particular wherein another has interest, is that root of
bitterness, or gall of wormwood, which springs up to the trouble of all the
world, for it is that which springs up as the Greek translates, en cholee, with
gall, Dent. 29. 18. and enochlee, with trouble, Heb. 12. 15. having both the
bitterness of death in it, being the bond iniquity, Acts 8. 23. and the trouble
and vexation of disinheriting in the loss of the first birthright: therefore
the Apostle brings in the fornication and profaneness of Esau thereupon, as
under the guilt of sin, Heb. 12. 16. as also the trouble of his being
disinherited, as seeking a blessing too late with tears; for there is no place
of repentance found in the father, Heb. 12. 17. or way to change his mind
forever; the Apostle concludes this to be the defilement of many, that is to
say of all the world, for so the word many is taken, Rom 5. 18.

We would think that man a fool that went about to teach any humane art to
another, if he did not conclude that the principles thereof were wrapped up as in
a bud in the disciple, and he only endeavors the drawing of them out in their
proper luster and use, otherwise a man might as well set himself awork to teach
a dog or a horse humane arts, who are altogether destitute of that proper
nature in which they are only found; and if we understand the bud, we see the
whole tree therein, and wrong the bud if we give it not the glory of it.

And though a grain of mustardseed be one of the smallest seeds, yet it has
branches for the fouls of heaven to make their lodging in the branch, or under
the shadow of it, Matt. 13 31. unto which Christ compares the kingdom of
heaven: So that if we give not the whole glory of the kingdom unto the seed in
which it is involved, we give not the seed its proper right and due which
belongs unto it; but are fa^sifiers of the word of God. And no man can look
upon a Saint destitute of the seed of God, 1 John 3. 9. nor void of the Spirit
of God, Romans 8. 9. he therefore that gives not the seed the glory of the whole
offspring of God, he wrongs the kingdom and is a false interpreter: and he
that denies the Spirit of God the complete life and virtue of the Son of God,
he is a false expounder of the work and operation of God, and so is under that
grand condemnation, Matthew. 23. 14. of the devil.

That ministry therefore that spends its time, study, and care in seeking and
hoping for the transfusing of the Spirit of Christ into such hearts where the
seed of God yet is not, is of like wisdom and will have like success, as if a
man should spend his time and study to teach a dog the art of arithmetic,
Astrology, or navigation, where the principles thereof never were nor never
shall be.

Such persons who think that their distillations may so insinuate into ^he seed
of the serpent, as it shall become the seed of the woman, may as well conclude,
that the suggestions of the serpent may so entice and inveigle the seed of the
woman, as to make it become Satanical, and so they think in heart; else would
never be so fearful of errors, that is, of any doctrine differing from what
they themselves deliver, which many of that ministry called papists, and
others, do freely teach, and confidently acknowledge, namely, a falling away
from grace, which is as great blasphemy as can be spoken against the Son of
God, for thither it reaches, as though he might fall away from being the Son
of God, or that a power might countermand the strength of the Father to pluck
the Saints out of his hand, which Christ affirms nothing can, John 10. 28, 29.

Yet we deny not but that the devil is really cast out of mankind, Luke 13. 32.
Luke 8. 2. Mark 1. 34, 39. but in like sense, diameter wise, as the Son of God
is said not to be left in hell, nor the holy one of God suffered to see
corruption, Psalm 16. 10. Acts 2. 31. which now time permits us not to open.

And from this endeavor of the world to convert the devil, observe the ground
of the third woe pronounced by Christ against thief deceitful interpreters*
which is laid down in the 15. verse in these words, For ye compass sea and land
to make one prosalit^, and when he is made ye make him two fold more the child
of hell then your selves, wherein observe, 1. First their great diligence they
compass sea and land. 2. To what end that is to make one proselite. 3. The
event and issue, that is when he is made he is two fold more the child of hell
then they themselves.


First for their diligence in compassing sea and land, a work suits with Satan's
profession, who says he walks to and fro, as one without any certain rule, and
so uncertain of the issue of all his designs; also making a circumference about
them all, as things earthly subject to time, place, the number of a man, and by
capacity merely humane, Revel. 13. ^8.

1. By sea and land here we are to understand he deep mystery of iniquity,
which the Apostle calls the depthes of Satan, Revel. compassing and making
their circles and circumferences therein, designing gifts, places and offices,
to particular persons of the same house and kingdom, as their only propriety
which others are not to come within the compass of, in which these hypocrites
say, Stand by thy self I am holyer th^n thou, Come not near to me, Isa. 65. 5*

By sea, therefore in this place is meant deeps of iniquity, as also places
remote and far off; Moses speaking of the law of God, says it is not hid from
thee that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us to fetch it
Deuteronomy. 36 13. which the Apostle alleging that place, applies the command, or
the word to Christ, saying, who shall go down into the deep to fetch Christ
thence, Romans 10. 7. so that by sea is meant deepness by the verdict of the
Spirit of God, so also the earth or land is taken for deepness, for the word
Abyss, or Abysses, deep or depths, is given both to sea and land, therefore the
Prophet says in the person of Christ, thou which have showed me great and sore
trouhles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths
of the earth, Psalm 71. 20. So that the depths of death hidden in that letter
which kills, that Christ is brought out of and risen from, are diligently
traveled in, and compassed and surrounded about, by that spirit of Satan in
all those offices and institutions of time, which passes away so carefully and
highly promoted by the false interpreters of the world, whereof not one of them
can pass through death with them, to accompany them after this present life,
Psalm 29 12, 13, 14.

2. Secondly, by sea and land are meant places remote and afar off, so
explained by the Spirit of God, Deuteronomy. 3. 11, 12, 13. apposed to things that are
near, yea, really present, and in act, Romans 108. so sea is taken for things
afar off or disjoined from that main continent, Psalm 65. 5. Psalm 89 25.

By land also is understand places remote and afar^off, therefore raised the
land of forgetfulness, Psalm 88. 12. and the Isl^es shall wait for thy ^aw,
that is, people afar off which the Apostle expounds to be the remote gentiles
that shall trust in his name, Isa. 42. 4* Marth. 12. 12. Psalm 106. 27.

And it is said that the Lord gathers his redeemed out of the la^^s, from the
east and from the west from the north and from the sea* Psalm 107. 3. as
places most remote and at the greatest distance false interpreters are ever
employed about the things of Christ, as the reality of them, (without which a
thing is not of any worth) being ever at a distance, they only having the
figures and the signs in present act, but the substance is only present by
reaching out an imaginary hand unto the place or time where and when the
substance has been, so the death of Christ was only in the days of Herod in
point of the time, and his ascension only in the days of those Apostles, the
time of his glorious appearance in his Sanctuary to be admired in all his
Saints, it is still driven before them and is yet remote and to come, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 10.

Again for place, it is remote where Christ now makes intercession for the
Saints, a place only where they never yet came by their own acknowledgement,
Romans 8. 34. the place of his death, resurrection, and sitting in judgment,
places remote beyond the sea or in another land; and for men to say that Christ
does these things in the Spirit in his Saints, it will not reach to be a
covering for them to wrap themselves in, Isa. 28. 20.

For however we know that their is a spiritual death, resurrection, and
ascension, and sitting on the right hand of God, and that there is a spiritual
kingdom, priesthood, eldership, Church, and people of God; yet we know also
that to say these are become such only by having the Spirit of Christ, that is
to say as he is God, and not as being Christ complete his body or any office
thereof, is to deny the Spirit of Christ to be that which it is, which is a
denial of Christ himself, and so a most false interpretation of Scripture; for
the Spirit of Christ never wrought nor appeared in way of salvation, but in
that way of flesh in that sense which it is said the word was made flesh, or is
made flesh and tabernacles in us, as the words are, and we saw his glory as the
glory, or as the word is verily the glory of the only begotten of the father
full of grace and truth, John 1. 14.

So that he maintains a Spirit of Christ (early or late) without the complete
matter whereof Christ consists, that man is ignorant of Christ, and interprets
the word in the denial of him, being that spirit denies that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, which is not of God but is that spirit of antichrist, 1 John
4. 2, 3. for to confess Christ Jesus as born of the Virgin Mary only in the
days of Herod, is not confession which the Apostle intends for it, that his
coming in the flesh in the confession thereof were to speak by the Spirit of
God, I think then all that ever spoke the Latin tongue would prove speakers by
the Spirit of God; and then such as they style Papists would be the most
eminent confessors of Jesus, which are so cried out against as heretics: for
as concerning that act of his doctrinal coming in the flesh, who have more
images, crucifixes, Sacraments, and Idolatrous monuments then they, amongst
whom there is no speaking by the holy Spirit of God at all, but are such as
compass sea and land, walking to and fro without certainty, and pitching the
points of their circumference at such a distance, as the coming of Christ in
the flesh never admitted of; the Jews propounded a time remote wherein he would
come, the Gentiles a time remote that he was here in the flesh, and neither the
one nor the other, led by that spirit, never would, nor will, acknowledge him
his true and real appearance, Psalm 2. 1. 6.

2. The second point in the pronouncing of this woe, is the end for which they
are in this care and travel, and that is to make one proselite, that is, one
religion to have all men of the same profession, that so the arm of flesh might
bear the sway without control or disturbance, this the world has traveled in
from the beginning, thinking it can never be glorious and secure till it be
effected, at the least in great measure, so as to be the major vote at the
least; to this eomes the study of reformation, that great toil of preaching
after the manner of the doctrine of the pharisees, that rigor of executions in
carnal governments, that all may come to be of one mind to make a glorious
Church and state to have no gainsayers nor such as shall offend.

These cannot be content to give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and
unto God the things that are Gods, Matthew. 22. 21. but they will make Caesar to
be God, and so convert the devil, and cannot rest till light and darkness,
Christ and Belial be made one, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.

These men are remote from hearing of that voice, my gra^e is sufficient for
thee, for if they know that the power of God were only made manifest and
perfected through the weakness of man, that is, by an utter cessation of all
humane abillities, in the matters of God, they could not but know also, shat
the force of man by means of multitude can be no hinderance of the good
success of the Saints, though never so few in number in any age of the world;
for that day of small things in the eyes of carnal contemners and dispisers,
break forth into those seven eyes of God, or seven fold light of the Spirit
which are about the throne of God, Zachar. 4. 10. Revel. 1. 4. together wit
that plummet or plumm-line in the hand of our Zorubbabel, to give a ^ight form
unto all things belonging to the temple in the perfecting thereof; then is the
time for power to appear in the oxes goad* Judge 3. 31. and strength in the jaw
bone of an ass, Judges 15. 15, 16. then will terror arise out of the
whistling or the wind in the top of the Mulberry trees, 1 Chronicles. 14 ^4, 15. and
fear from the appearance of Gidians Barley cake, Judges 7. 13* 22.

If men knew the manner of the resurrection of Gods power in the Spirit of a
Saint, how it perfects it self through man's own deficiency, they would never be
so industrious to make the world become of one religion, for fear of a
multitude of opposites.

Not but that the Saints of God may be furnished with abillity to know any art
or science as well as any other man, and have the practice of it, only with
this two fold caveat, they know all humane and temporary things through the
valing of them, and the vanishing of them; if they know them so as Christ is
propagated unto them by the knowing of them, as he is the true end of all
things, Romans 10. 4. Romans 11. 36. So to know them is to vale them in point of
all glory or excellency appearing in them, (heing so truly known) even as Tamar
was valed when Judah knew her in the propagation of Phares, Genesis 38. 13. 13,
14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21. of whom Christ came, Matthew. 1. 8. so that in knowing
her, he knew her not, the Saints look upon the glory of the world, as an
enticing harlot, nsing it as though they used it not, and buy as though they
possessed not, for the fashion of it passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Therefore in
the second place, they know the things of the world to the vanishing of them,
as a leaf tossed with the wind, Job 13. 25. Isa. 34. 4. and as the flower of
grass when the wind has passed upon it. Isa. 4 6, 7. even as Tamar was
vanished when the kid was sent to receive the robes of honor from her.
Therefore the Apostle speaking of that glory which seems to be in the
administration of the law, which he calls the ministry of condemnation, says
it has no glory when the ministration of the spirit appears, which he calls
the exceeding or excellent glory, 2 Cor. 3 9, 10.

To conclude this point, those who see such excellencies to appear in the
multitude as to use all their policy and industry to bring all into a
uniformity, they never saw the excellent glory; but they are such men of renown
as were in the beginning the Giants of the world, who to bring forth a mighty
and monstrouse generation, bring into contract and covenant the posterity of
Cain and Seth, in the point and matter of increase, abroad have been the ruin
of the world ever since it existed, Genesis 6. chap. the only composers of sea and
land to the production of the deluge of Gods displeasure upon the sons of men.

3. Therefore the third point is the issue, when you have made him he is two
fold more the child of hell then you your selves, that is, when false
interpretation of the law has begotten a spirit of pride and cruelty, to
execute according to those lying and dissembling dictates, which is the
bringing forth of a carnal kingdom erected by such a priesthood, which are
never separated no more then the kingdom and priesthood of Christ are
separated in Melchisedech, Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7. 1. then the child of hell is
completed as being two fold wreathed and twisted together, which the priesthood
alone could not be, which is universally a spirit of fear and terror, further
then it is backed with its trust in man, and in the power of the arm of flesh,
Jerem. 17. 5. and as Satan is a liar from the beginning and the father,
thereof, John 8. 44. even so this false interpretation, is a child tyrannical
and Satanicall, and also the father of it: So that the sons of men have ever
been deceived and undone thereby, and is the greatest judgment that ever came
upon mankind, Ierem. 5. 29, 30, 31. Ieeem. 6. 13, 13, 14, 15. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9,
10* 11, 12. for it is the proper fountain of all plague that comes upon man in
all ages of the world, and ever shall be; for being the only inlet of sin, it
must needs be the inlet of all mischief, Genesis 3. 4, 5. of such nature, product
and consequence is the false and deceitful interpretation of the word of God.

4. The cause of the fourth woe, is expressed in the 16. verse of this chapter,
and so on to the 23. verse, concluding these false interpreters to be blind
guides, the word translated blind, signifies not only to be blind, but also to
make blind; they are blind because they say they see, John 9. 40, 41. that is,
because they conclude the light of humane reason is the light of God, therefore
their sin of blindness does remain upon them, by which light and argumentation
they hinder and extinguish the wisdom and argumentation of God in themselves
and others, and so do make blind, as really as they are blindness, and if the
light that is in them be darkness, how great is that darkness, Matthew. 6. 23. Jf
salt have lost its savor wherewith shall it be cured or salted, Matthew. 5. 13.
It is henceforth good for nothing, for all remedy of recovery of taste is gone,
so if light be become darkness what shall inlighten it; for all means of
recovery is gone, if light be made darkness: So that if the light of life be
made darkness in man by translating it into humane wisdom, there is left no
means to recover it, for that which should cure, is become the very mallady it
self.

Therefore Christ tells them what they say, ye say, says he, that is, you
teach and affirm such things as blindness and ignorance brings forth, therefore
calls them blind guides or dark leaders, that is leaders in darkness, and
confusion where nothing takes aright form; but leaders and followers fall into
the pit together, Matthew. 15, 14. Luke 6. 39. before they are aware thereof,
Matthew. 24. 43.

The doctrine they teach is this, that wh soever shall swear by the temple it
is nothing, but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple he (...) a
debtor, Matthew 23* 16* that is, he that is sworn or engaged unto the temple or
palace, which is the dwelling place of the Lord, his Sanctuary and place of
worship, Psalm 29. 9. That man, say they, is not bound always to attend
there: for in some cases there was tolleration to send an offering to the
temple, and he that prayed and looked but toward the temple though remote in
banishment it was acceptable, 2 Chronicles. 6. 38, 39.

Again, the places of worship has been diverse, as in Abraham's family, in Noah's
family, in the Tabernacle among the tribes, in the temple, in Solomon's days,
in Christ's family, and in particular congregations in the days of the
Apostles; and yet a new Temple and new Jerusalem, with those glorious
foundations and gates to be looked for, Revel. 21. 10, 23. and a Church member,
whatever he be, in these days may be dismissed from one Church or dwelling
place of God unto another; therefore say these interpreters, an engagement to
the Temple is no absolute bond, and a man becomes not a debtor, or a sinner, in
falt, though he decline such an oath or solemn engagement.

But say they, he that swears by the gold of the Temple he is bound, and is in
fault, and under sin in case he decline his engagement; by the gold of the
temple we are to understand that which was laid upon it for ornament, Exodus
25. chap. Secondly, that which was the gold in the treasury, Mark 12. 41. Luke
21. 1.

Now for the golden ornament of the temple, wherein does it consist but in the
offices and officers thereof; what is the temple without Priests, Levites,
Nethinims, Porters, and Singers, Ezra 7. 24. Nehem. 10. 28. and what is a
Church, in point of glory, without Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons; or
Priests, Elders, Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers: these ornaments men are bound
and engaged unto, or else not a Church in honor; but being destitute of them,
they lie under censure and are in fault, therefore in their account and
doctrine engagement to the gold, is an absolute bond upon the spirits of men.

Again, for the riches of the treasury, being the reception of all the gifts,
Luke 21. 1. of the Church; where is that to be found but in the officers, who
have received them from Schools, Counsels, Libraries, and laying on such hands,
as may as well advance a man's self into a saddle, as raise up others thereinto,
such as are engaged in this respect, they only are debtors unto the disposure
of all the riches and excellencies of the Church, so as others are not, and
therefore are to have the benefit and the glory to redound unto them; such is
the doctrine of the scribes and pharisees concerning the gold of the Temple,
both in the ornaments and treasures thereof, so that they are the proper glory
and riches, the holiness and the righteousness of the house and Temple of God.

But what says the answer of God in Christ, ye fools and blind, that is, ye
that are as destitute of, and as far from, the true principles and grounds of
Gods wisdom, as a natural fool, or idiot, is from the use and exercise of the
true principles and reason of a man; ye blind, or dark, not only dark because
light appears not, but if the Sun of righteousness be set before your faces,
standing still as once the sun did in Gibeon, in Joshuas time, Joshua 10. 12.
ye neither will nor can behold the glory of it, no more then those carnal calf
merchants could behold the face of Moses, when he had been in the mount talking
with God, Exodus 34. 30. and he proves it by argument that they are such; for,
says he, whether is greater, the gold, or the Temple which sanctifies the
gold? whether is greater, that which makes holy, or that which is made holy?
but it is the Temple that makes holy; therefore ye are fools and blind to
prefer that which is made holy before it: for where are the ornaments of your
offices, unless the Church (in your estimation) prefer you? and where are those
treasures of gifts you have, if the Church have not distributed them unto you.

Again, ye fools and blind, is not the Son of God he that makes holy, as well
as he that is made holy, and are ye bound more strictly to the one then the
other, when as they are both one individual subsistence, Hebr. 1. 2, 3. Ephesians.
2. 14, 15. neither is there any place of glory, worship, or holiness, but in
that mystical body (in Gods account, Ephesians. 2, 16.) nor is there any gift,
person place, or office, in that Temple and dwelling place of the most high,
that is preferred in dignity one above another, save only, as Gods opportunity
calls for present use and exercise of any of them, and that prefers every one,
or every thing, in Christ our true and only Temple, to be chief and have
preheminency in its proper time and place* Eccles. 3. 1, 11.

Again, whosoever swears by the altar it is nothing, but he that swears by the
gift that is thereon he is a debtor, that is, say these false interpreters, he
that is engaged to the altar may dispense with his being present thereat, and
his attendance thereupon; even as there is a liberty in the alter it self, to
be erected not always of the same materials; for sometimes it is an altar of
earth, Exodus 20. 24. and it is also an alter of wood, Exodus 27. 1. Sometimes it
is an altar of stone, Exodus 20. 25. and sometimes an altar of brass, Exodus 39
39. Yea, and sometimes it is a golden alter, Exodus 39 38. and yet the truth is,
the difference of the materials whereof the altar is appointed to consist,
gives not the least liberty to dispense with the bond or oath; so as to be
freed of, or absent from the altar in any respect. For the difference of the
matter whereof the altar consists, is only to declare unto us, that when
Christ, Gods true and only memorial is erected and proclaimed unto the sons of
men in the world, when they through a misconceiving spirit, and miscarrying
womb, Hosea 9. 14. do cast that memorial of God into a form carnal; and set up
a statue destitute of the life of God, then are the Saints of God by his
authority and appointment to erect the worship of God, to consist in things as
far differing from their carved form, as wood differs from earth, and stone
from wood, brass from stone, and pure gold from brass, and yet no declining nor
departure from the altar in any respect.

Hence it is that the Spirit of God in its metaphorical expressions by the
prophets, in the appointments of the worship of God (in holy Writ) by its
elegant allusions to things within the sphere of humane capacity concerning the
ceremonies and services of the law, which carnal Israel understanding according
to humane reason, framing and erecting forms unto themselves accordingly. The
same Spirit of God in the prophets thereupon, inveighs against them, cries them
down, and disanuls them, as being man's mere inventions, and no part of the
scope of the Prophet, nor any thing of the mind, and intent of the Spirit of
God, Isaia. 1. 11, 15. Psalm 40. 67. Hebr. 10. 1, 9

Again, these false interpreters will confess that Christ is the true altar,
because the Apostle affirms so much Hebr. 13. 10, 11, 12. but their confession
is merely verbals: for they say Christ is the altar only as he is God, and the
sacrifice as he is man, when as the truth is, there is no office or act,
appertaining unto the Son of God, that can be ascribed unto a nature which is
not of twain made one, Ephesians. 2. 15. for if God at any time, or in any thing,
had reckoned himself one of, or absent from, the son of man, no possibility had
been left to have cast up or found out another form, for he is the Lord that
changes not, Mallac. 3. 6.

But these men say, however men may be engaged to the altar; yet they are not
bound always to attend uoon, and be present with, the Lord Christ, who is the
true altar; for he now only resides in heaven, a place remote from the Saints
on earth; as though Sh^cinah, (according to the Chaldee phrase) the divine
presence, or grace, were so bound up in one Son of God, as not extending it
self to another; as a first born of God also, of whom our Apostle affitms that
there is an assembly and Church of them, Hebr. 12. 23. or as though humane
nature in one of Gods holy ones, were nearer to divine grace and fatherly
compassion, then in any of the rest of that stock, whereas the Apostle affirms,
that through the great and precious promises we are made partakers of the
divine nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4. plainly showing, that the proper subject of the
promise, (which Christ in us the hope of glory) and the divine nature are never
separated; which is the subject matter and mystery of the Gospel, Coll. 1. 27.
2 Cor. 1. 20. Wherefore to hold our selves not bonnd to the reality of the
presence of the alter is to deny and falsify the mystery of the Gospel, for
the whole form and frame of the worship of God consists therein.

Therefore it is called in Hebrew Mizbeach, and in Greek Thusiasterion, that
is, the Sacrificatory, or place of slaying the sacrifice, as being that whereby
the world is crucified unto us we unto the world, Gal. 6. 14, 15. therefore
when the prophet foretells the calling of the Gentiles, under the term of
Egyptians, he says, In that day the alter of the Lord shall be set up in the
midst of Egypt, and a pillar by the border thereof unto the Lord, and it shall
be for a sign and witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt. Isa.
19, 20. that is, it shall testify the deliverance of the people from all ways
of Idolatry, and their investment into the whole frame of the pure worship of
the true God.

Somet ^es the altar is called Ariel, that is, the Lion of God, Isa. 29. 1. as
that which devours all adverse power which opposes any part of the purity of
Gods worship, as it is erected in Christ, who is that true pattern showed only
in the mount, Acts 7. 44. Exodus 25. 40. Hebr. 8. 5. therefore the altar is
sometimes called Ha^el, that is, the mountain of God, Ezekiel 43. 15. as that
which is lifted up, and established, above the heights and tops of the
principallities and powers of this world, the platform whereof cannot be seen
by any, but only him, who is taken up into the mount to converse with God
therein.

But the false interpretours affirm, that whosoever swears by the gift on the
altar he is a debtor, or bound and engaged thereby, that is, such as are
engaged in the gifts laid on the altar, or exercised in the form of worship, as
the gift of tongues, the knowledge of arts, the gift of forms of prayer, or of
preaching, exhortation, admonition, or reproof; they only who are invested into
these, in the way of a Judaical, Levitical and literal law, or law of the
letter, that is, according to that humane order where they live, these are
bound to the presentation, exercise, and ordering of these gifts as their
proper trade and calling, exempted from others of the household of God: And that
all the rest of the people are engaged unto these gifts, to yield their
submission unto them, as also to maintain the parties thus gifted in the
exercise of them, the parties also being gifts themselves unto whom the people
are bound and become debtors, concluding that pastors, teachers* prophets,
Apostles, and Evangelists are given of God unto the rest of the people, Jerem.
3. 15. Ephesians. 4. 11. therefore the gift binds, but not the altar, say they.

But what says the answer of God to these men, ye fools and blind, that is, ye
are fools and idiots with respect unto Gods wisdom and manner of arguing, even
as a natural fool void of reason, is not in a capacity to understand reason,
neither to receive it or give it out; no more do you understand the way of Gods
wisdom, either to propose it to others, or to receive and approve of it when
it is propounded to you; ye are blind also, or in the dark, not for want of the
light shining; for though the Son of righteousness cast out his beams upon you,
Matthew. 5. 45. ye perceive nothing, nay, ye turn light into darkness in your
selves, And if the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that
darkness, Matthew. 6. 23. for the God of this world, that is, the wisdom of this
world has blinded the minds of the infidels, that the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ, which is the image of God, should not shine unto you, or
should not shine in you, 2 Cor. 4. 4. for the world by wisdom, or in and
through wisdom, is ignorant of God, 1 Cor. 1. 21.

Now to evince this his taxation, he interrogates, whether is greater the gift,
or the altar that sanctifies the gift; he confounds them in their own wisdom,
to prove them fools and blind in the wisdom of God: for in humane reason, that
which makes holy must have the preheminency of that which is made holy by it,
the Author and Fountain is greater then the product and the stream, so that to
strive against the wisdom of God, brings a man to turn fool, even in humane
argument.

Again, in point of Gods arguing they are fools and blind, for Christ is the
altar that makes holy, Heb. 13. 10. he is also the gift that is made holy, John
3. 16 John 17. 19 and if he be the one and the other* which is of greater
estimation and value; for Christ is one, there is but one lord Jes^ Christ, in
whom are all things and we in him, 1. Cor. 8 6. he being one, there can be no
choice in one, nor preferring of one before another; for what he is, has the
worth and weight of the Son of God in it, and therefore they argue not
according to the order of Gods wisdom, which is not extant in the truth and
substance thereof but only in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 24. whence Christ infers a
threefold argument for the conclusion of this point.

First, therefore whosoever swears by the altar, swears by it and by all
things thereon, that is, no man can be engaged unto the true altar, the Son of
God, in whom the enmity is slain, Ephesians. 2. 15 16, the flesh killed and crucified
in all the affections and lusts thereof, Galat. 5. 24, 25. but he must be
engaged and sworn unto all things that belong and appertain to the Son of God;
for himself and his furniture are inseparably one, and can never be divided,
whosoever therefore is bound over unto God by faith in Christ, is bound over to
the gift of prayer, prophecy, intercession, mediation, to the gift of Pastor,
Teacher, Evangelist, Apostle, Priesthood, Kingdom, and whatsoever appertains
unto the Lord Jesus that true altar, for the altar withont the gifts is useless
and attains not its end, and what gift soever not found on that altar, is void
of holiness and falls short of acceptance before God and good men.

Secondly, he inferres that whosoever swears by the Temple, swears by it and
him that dwells therein, that is, he that is engaged to the palace, or place of
Gods abode, which is the Church of God, made an habitation of God through the
Spirit, that man is also engaged and bound over unto the inhabitant and
indweller, the Lord himself; for there is none engaged unto the house of God,
but by engagement unto God himself; for they are not twain but one entire
being, so that none can erect a house or habitation for God, but it must be
framed in a capacity to suit such an inhabitant, who is incomprehensible, which
nothing can do in heaven or in earth, but only the Son of God, Jesus Christ;
and none can describe an inhabitant fit to furnish and fill such a Temple or
palace, but it must be the Lord alone that can do it, when we set forth the
Temple therefore in its true form and beauty, we only declare the glory of
Christ in that consideration, therefore he says destroy this Temple, and I
will build it up in three days speaking of his body, John 2. 19, 20, 21. not
only of his body doctrinal, born of the Virgin Mary, which may be construed
literally and carnally, as well as spiritually and heavenly, John 6. 51, 58.
but of his body mystical comprehending all the Saints of God which if a man
eat or communicate in, he lives forever.

And when we describe him that dwells in the Temple, we only set forth the
glory of the Lord Jesus, who dwells not in temples made with hands, that is of
man's building according to humane reason and art, Hebr. 9. 11. for the heaven
of heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8. 27. 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. much less an
house coupled together, according to those mean and beggarly thoughts of men,
whereby Churches are erected in these days, which men may be bound too to day,
and loose to morrow; which is all one to say a man may be faithed and betrothed
to Christ to day, and unfaithed and devorced to morrow, which is no less then
to fall away from grace, which such builders seem to inveigh against: for the
Temple and he that dwells therein are one, never to be separated, no more then
God and man can be separated in Christ, therefore such pharisaical
interpretours who erect Churches as true Churches of God, that admit of decay,
and falling from God in whole, or any members thereof, are they who have
deceived and undone the world from the foundation thereof, unto this day, and
are the proper witches of the world which the Scripture intends; and that they
may pass without notice being taken of them, they expound the word so, as it
may be applied to poor silly women, whom they can entangle and trap in their
talk, and so make such the guilty persons and authors of mischief.

But the Temple and he that dwells therein is one, undivided, and never was,
nor shall be separated, whatsoever the pharisees teach to the contrary, which
our Apostle elegantly declares, saying, and has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be head over all things in the church, which is his body, the
full ness of him thht fills all, Ephesians 1. 22. 23. in whom all the building
fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple, in the Lord in whom you are
builded together, for an habitation of God in the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.

Thirdly, Christ uses another argument to evince the truth against these false
interpretours, which is an explication of the former, saying, And he that
swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him that sits
thereon, that is, he that is engaged and bound over as by oath unto heaven, he
is engaged to the throne of God, that is, to the kingly authority of the Son of
God, Psalm 132, 11, 12. and to him that sits thereon, to sit, is to abide and
continue, or dwell, Psalm 1. 1. Psalm 2. 4. in the execution of that
authority, the word translated seat, or to sit, signifies also, an assize,
session, or assembly for the use and skilful ordering and disposing of all
things, so the Hebrew word Moshab is taken in Psalm 107. 32. see what follows
to the end of the Psalm, the throne and him that sits thereon, are one entire
thing, for the unction is upon none, but Christ the anointed of God, and the
exercise of this unction, cannot be found extant but in the Son of God alone.

And whereas he brings in heaven and the throne of God to be one and the same,
so that he that swears by heaven swears by the throne and him sits thereon; it
is to explicate his former argument, that as by heaven here, we are not to
terminate our thoughts in these visible heavens, or in any thing or place
limited according to the bonnds of a creature, but according to the throne or
authority of the Son of God; even so we are not to terminate our thoughts in a
Temple or altar, in what sense soever they may be taken, if their edifice and
form were either erected, or shall pass away in time, which is the doctrine of
the pharisaical and false interpretours.

But true interpretours terminate, the subject matter of their doctrine, in
that state of the Son of God, who is the first and the last; yea, it is he
alone, who is, and was, and will be the same, Revel. 22. 13. Revel. 1. 8. out
of whom, or out of which, the heart of man can never enter into rest, Hebr. 4.
6, 11. And these deceitful prevaricatours of the law, in dividing Christ in
matter of doctrine, they divide themselves from Christ by unbelief.

And thence is brought in the ground of the denunciation of the fifth woe laid
down in the 23, 24. verses; which consists in their tything of mint, Annis, and
Commin, and neglecting the weighty matters of the law, wherein observe, 1.
First what they do, they tithe mint, annis, and Commin. 2. Their Neglect, that
is, of the weighty matters of the law. 3. Wherein these weighty matters do
consist, that is in judgment mercy and fidelity. 4. Wherein their doctrine and
practice out to appear, that is in doing these weighty things, not leaving the
inferior undone. 5. A severe charge laid upon them, to be blind guides. 6.
Their gross hypocrisy in straining at a gnat, and swallowing a camel.


1. For the first, they take tithe, and they also pay tithe, as Matthew, and
like compared together, declare, for so the law appoints in tithing or taking
the tenth, two things are to be considered, as the first born are known to be
the Lords, in that they first open the womb, and none can deny but the right of
inheritance belongs unto them: Yea, that first born of God Jesus Christ, is
known to be the Royal off spring of the most high, by opening the womb of
eternal life unto us, or in us; so that none can call into question the
blessing of the birthright, being he is descended of God.

But the tenth, as considered in the flock or in the field, none can give a
reason why the rod should pass upon this rather then upon that, Levit. 27. 30,
32, 33. even so the sons of God, as they spring out of the earth, and are
formed of the slime and dust of the ground, Genesis 2. 7. no man can give a
reason, why the rod or scepter of Jesus Christ should fall into the hand of
this man rather then that, which God has left in their sins, and given up unto
wrath, for by nature in that refpect, we are the same which they are, Ephesians. 2.
3.

2. Again, the word tithe, or the tenth, comprehends all of that kind which is
presented, even as the whole law is comprehended in one of those ten words (for
so the phrase is, Deuteronomy. 10. 4.) which God spoke unto Moses, for it is fulfilled
in this one word, love, Gal. 5. 14. Romans 13. 10.

The tenth also is taken for eternity, by the verdict of the word of God, the
tenth generation is expounded to be eternity, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. by the Spirit of
God; so that the tenth comprehends all times and all things, which nothing but
the Son of God can do, who only is that all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23. who is an
inheritance falling by lot in way of tithe, Psalm 16. 5, 6. as well as in way
of a purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. as really, as he is a son by adoption,
taken out of the house of a stranger, as he is man, and a natural son, the true
offspring of almighty God also, as he is begotten of the father of lights,
John 1. 13 14. James 1. 17, 18.

So that as the Hebrew word, Mas, is often used for tribute, signifies,
sufficiency, or enough, and is so translated Deuteronomy. 15. 8. because it gives an
interest in him that pays it, and to all that he has, if occasion be; even so
the tithe comprehends, an alsufficiency or enough of all thiugs whatsoever;
which is not elsewhere to be found but only in Christ. Let earthly
tithe-mungers who translate the Gospel into transient things: weigh this point
well, and know they are these deceitful pharisees.

3. Add further that in tithes the priest is to pay tithe, as well as to
receive it, for he is appointed to pay the tenth of the tenth, Nehem. 10. 38.
Therefore the Spirit of God says by Matthew, ye pay tithes of mint, Annnis,
and Commin, speaking to these hypocritical teachers or expounders of the law.

But Luke has it, ye tithe (as taking tithe) the Mint, the Rue, and all manner
of green herbs, Luke 11. 42. So that they receive inferior and base things of
the people, as things acceptable unto God, and a satisfactory refreshment and
comfort to themselves in lue of their labors, which have not the fullness of
the fruits of righteousness in them, which are by Jesus Christ; and as they get
an interest in mean, earthly, and carnal things, received from the people in
Schools. Synods, Libraries, Counsels, and carnal cases propounded unto them;
which is the tenth received by them to live upon, as the life and sufficiency
of their ministry, which is as plainly preached unto the world, as the labors
and benevolence of the people is, and must be, the life of their bodies, or
else their doctrine cannot be afforded unto them.

So likewise, they pay tithes of like nature, giving them out into the chambers
of that earthly house made with hands, that is to say, into persons and
congregations built up only in way of humane wisdom; for when these things
thus received, have passed in their hands under the rod or authority of Egypt
and not of Israel, then they carry out the tenth as it falls in their ordering
of it; as the proper store provided by God for the food and refreshment of the
poor, stranger, fatherless, and widows, in an apish imitation of that house of
God not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, Nehem. 10. 34, 39. Deuteronomy.
14. 28, 29. Deuteronomy. 26. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

The things therefore thar these expounders of the law do receive, and pay as
acceptable unto God, in point of tithing for, and to God, are mean and
transitory; yea, there is nothing wherein their doctrine does consist, that
shall be able to pass under the natural death of the body with them; but their
whole religion ends and perishes there: for whereas the Apostle concludes,
that now abides faith, hope, and love, these three, but the chiefest of these
is love, 1 Cor. 13. 13. they not understanding the Apostle in that (no more
then in the rest of his doctrine) do conclude that love is chief, because it
abides, and the others cease, at the end of this life.

But love, according to their sense, cease also, for in this life (they
teach) we love God in, and through another mediatly, but then we shall love him
immediately, which is not only love in another respect, but also another kind of
love, even as among men in humane love; a man may love a woman as a neighbor,
but to love her with a matrimonial love is love of another kind, so that their
whole religion is to seek after death, yea love it self, that conjugal virtue.

Add further, their God cease at death, for they teach that God in this life,
accepts of his children, in, and through another: but after this life he
accepts of them immediately in themselves, but if ever God change his relation
unto, and respect of, a Son of his, begotten of his own will, James 1 18. he
cease to be God: for the true God is as constant in his relation and motion
in every good gift and perfect giving, as that father of lights in Christ,
without shadow or motion of turning, James 1. 17. as the body of the sun in the
firmament (which gives light to the world) is free from any stain of darkness
in it self, or motion to turn from that course which it has held from the
beginning.

The doctrine and practice of false interpretours in point of tithe, is mean
and transitory, consisting of Mint, Rue, and every green herb; now the herb is
given and appointed by God, not only for food unto man, but also for every
beast of the field*, for every fowl of heaven, and for every creeping thing on
the earth, Genesis 1. 29, 30. So that the acceptable thing in the doctrine of the
lawyers, is that which is common to the unreasonable creatures, together with
mankind, as the herbs of the field are, wherein so much is signified unto us:
for if they preach the acceptable thing in rule and authority, carnal and
temporary, wherein the Son of God, Christ is not extant, then have recourse to
the Lion, whose roaring shall make the people afraid, that is, his people, the
beasts of the Forest, Amose 3. 8. is the order of a commonwealth extolled: go
to the Bee-hive and you shall see wonderful devises in the desposure of things
therein, for the commodity of the whole is preaching or speech, forewarning of
eminent danger (though temporary) for pharisees deceitful, cannot give warning
concerning eternal danger, because they know it not, no more then they know
eternal deliverance, and they are ignorant of Christ in whom only it is: Then
go to the fowl that watches whilst the rest feed, and you shall hear him speak
in the language of the rest (sufficiently for their flight) that danger
approaches their doctrine of excellency in an host, or army, as in their
sense. Go to the Locusts who all go forth by bands, Prove. 30. 27. though they
have no king, yet their natural instinct leads them in marching out to make
spoil, and the horse is fitted with skill for the battle, Prove. 21. 31.

If the observations of times and seasons be acceptable, go to the Stork and
the Crane, who observe the time of their coming, Ierem. 8. 7. yea the appointed
time.

If you accept (as a thing acceptable to God) bodily exercise in all diligence,
with prudency and study to forecast; then go to the people of the Ants or
Pismires, who have the art and exercise thereof, without any guide or governor
to teach or command them therein, Prove. 6. 6. Prove. 30. 25.

If you will see care in buildings and fortifications, you shall find it
without instruction or command in the people of the Conies, whose house is the
rock: and the Fir Tree the Stork nestles in, for there is her dwelling,
Proverb. 30. 26. Psalm 104. 17.

If you exalt conjugal ties of love in your marriage Sermons, go to the
Turtle-dove, who has it without your teaching or pains of study.

If you take pains to declare the excellency of art, go to the Bulfinch and the
Lenot, who shall learn a musical note as well as a man; and if you plead for
comeliness in apparel, go to the Lilly, Matthew. 6* ^8. and know of it who taught
it so modestly to array it self; in a word, for eating* drinking* sleeping,
marrying, giving in marriage, feasting, fasting, procreation, and the like; are
but as the herbs of the field, which other creatures may partake of as well as
man; and what but such inferior things as these, does the doctrine of the
pharisees employ it self in, and busy it self about which are things that the
instinct of nature brings forth; whereby that glorious image of the Son of God,
wherein man was made, is villified and debased, by turning it into transient
and corruptible things, Romans 1. 23 Psalm 106. 20. whereas there is not one
point in the true doctrine of the Gospel, but it is properly eternal, according
to the true scope and proper intent of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures of
truth: for however, Christ Jesus the Son of God (who is the subject matter and
sum of the Gospel) is a man, a creature of time, as truly as he is God the
Creator and eternal; yet he is not to be reckoned or accounted of in any thing
according unto man, but of God, for as his conception is, so are all the things
of Christ, Matthew. 1. 20. which is not by man, but by the holy Ghost: for as the
woman's name is not reckonable in marriage, but only the name of the man;
therefore in the beginning the woman and the man are both called Adam, Genesis 5.
2. so all the things of Jesus Christ have their denomination of God and not of
man, and are to be extended according to the dimentions that are in God, and
not bounded within the compass of humane capacity in any point of the Gospel
whatsoever, his power is the power of God and not of man, 1 Cor. 1. 18. Romans 1.
16. his wisdom, is the wisdom of God, Prove. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 24. and not humane,
the wisdom of the world, his love is the love of God shed abroad in the heart,
that many waters, or that all waters cannot quench, neither can the floods
drown it, Cant. 8. 7. and not love humane, the love of the world, which is
enmity with God, James 4. 4 his compassions are the compassions of a God and
not the compassions of man, Hosea, 11. 8. whose mercies are cruel, Prove 12. 10.

Woe be to the scribes and pharisees therefore, who falsely interpret the word of
God; for the deceitful construction thereof was that which first hatched sin
and brought it out in the world, and has been the continuation thereof in the
sons of men unto this day, Genesis 3.

Therefore the true ministers of the Gospel, and interpretour of the word of
God, receive nothing as the tenth, as an acceptable offering unto God, whatever
it be, that has not an alsufficiency and eternity in it, bearing the proper
form of the wisdom of God, and not the wisdom humane; which wisdom of God is
only extant in the faith of Christ, and this they offer according to its proper
nature and distinct quality, unto the Lord as a heave offering, as is
appointed, Numb. 18. 21. 32. and a wave-offering, the tithes are a
heave offering unto the Lord, as being such as are lifted up and transcend all
temporary things whatsoever, otherwise of on acceptance before God, or esteem
of an holy minister or a messenger of the Gospel.

They are also offered as a wave-offering shaken to and fro, or as the word
signifies, and is sometimes translated, sifted in a sieve, Jsa. 30. 28. that
is, the tithe which God intends in his word, are sifted from all earthly and
transitory things, or commixtures, consisting only of that simplicity which is
in Christ Jesus, that only acceptable thing before God in all the men of God, 2
Cor. 11. that ever lived or shall, in this transitory world.

Contrary to this is Satan's desire in all the men of Belial, to winnow, or sift
as in a sieve, the disciples of Christ, that if it were possible nothing should
be left in them of that simplicity that is in Christ, but turn all things into
that which is corruptible, and perish in the use, as they do the doctrine of
receiving and paying of tithes, Luke 22. 31.

The ministers of the Gospel, therefore even men, the Levites; as they are said
to pay tithes unto Melchisedech in the loins of Abraham, Hebr. 7. 9, 10. are
offered to the Lord as a wave-offering, sifted as in a sieve, and cleansed from
all humane conjectures, and carnal interpretations of the word, Numb. 8. 11. so
the Apostles were waved, or as the Greek translates the word, separated unto
the Gospel, as sifted from all the carnal traditions of men, and earthly
conjectures in the opening of the wotd of God, Romans 1. 1 Acts 13. 2. approving
of nothing, as being the scope or any part of the mind of God therein, which
has not an alsufficiency, and eternity therein; and thereby themselves are a
sifted offering, or gift, as the Greek translates, for the ministers of the
word of God are called gifts, Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. Wherefore when he ascended on
high, and led captivity captive he gave gifts unto men, or gave gifts in the
man, or g^ve men of gifts. Therefore the first fruit, were given as an oblation
and heave offering to the Lord, the first fruits signifying, as the Hebrew
phrase is, plenty, r peness* or fullness; or as the word first imports the
beginning or original or fruit, Exodus 22. 29. Exodus 23. 19. which is found only
in Christ, the fullness of him that fills all in all, who is the beginning of
the creation of God, and in the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God, Ephesians. 1. 23. Revel. 3. 14. John 1. 1. And so is the
tribute signifying sufficiency or enough, given as a heave offering to the
Lord, Numb. 31. 14. which is the proper portion of Jacob, that when he gives a
present to E au of things not naturalized to himself, as his wives and children
were; he retains in himself with respect to them, enough, or sufficiency, all,
or all things, as the word imports, Genesis 33. 11.

Therefore when the ^ithes, yea, the tenth of the tenth is given out into the
chambers of the house of the Lord, Number. 18. 26. Nehem. 10. 38. Exodus 22. 28.
29. as the store and provision for the poor, the stranger, the fatherless, and
the widow, which indeed are the places of abode, the chambers, treasuries, and
storehouses of the word of God; that is to say, such as are poor in spirit,
whose proper interest is the kingdom of heaven, the stranger alienated, and as
outcasts, with respect unto carnal Israel; the fatherless, that is, such as are
not begotten of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God, and
the widow; namely, such unto whom the law of works, their first husband, is
dead, Matthew. 5. 3. Psalm 147. 2. John 1: 12, 13. Romans 7. 2. And he that gives
not in, unto these chambers and treasuries of the house of the Lord, that which
is food convenient and in due season is a wicked steward, and false
interpretour of the word of God, which is not done in any thing wherein there
is not ripeness and plenty in the thing commended unto them, as also* it must
be seasonable, that is, of the time and age of the Son of God; even the
first fruits, or beginning of all fruits, and the choice, fullness, and
perfection thereof, as being ripe in the present time and necessity.

2. Whereupon the second point is brought in, that where this is wanting there
is neglect of the weighty matters of the law, that is, where, or in whomsoever,
transitory things are strictly exacted and stood upon, as being the subject
matter (in the inten^ of God) of the doctrine of the Gospel; yea, such things
as other creatures may (after a sort) be conversant in, as well as man: these
persons are such (of what rank soever they may be) as do debase, undervalue,
and have in contempt, the grand principles, and main pillars, of that law of
the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, and prefer things which perish in
the use, before the things of duration, wherein the grace of salvation does
only consist.

3. The third point therefore declares wherein this grace and weighty matters
of the law does consist, and that is,

1. In judgment, that is, ability to discern, and authority to give sentence,
of all things according to the nature and end of them, designing them to their
proper use, not villifying, or exalting, not shortning or extending any thing*
above, or below, the proper nature and end thereof.

2. These weighty matters of the law consists in mercy, now this word mercy, by
conference of the Scriptures, is of large comprehension; the Hebrew word
Ch^se^, signifies a sacred affection of mercy, piety, grace, piety, grace,
benignity, and bountiful good will to any without respect of person, or reward;
sometimes it is taken for bountious and liberal exercise of mercy in giving,
sometimes for the mercy or bounty received, for clemency, commiseration,
compassion, tenderness, and love, gracious kindness, or glorious grace, called
in Greek sometimes Doxa, glory, 1 Pet. 1. 24. Sometimes Eleos, mercy, which are
used indifferently, one for the other, as appears by comparing Hosea 6. 6. with
9. 13. and hence it is that a godly man is called in Hebrew Chasid, that is,
gracious, or merciful, Psalm 4. 3. In the former they neglect and despise the
law, as it is concerned in the true and strict view and sentence of things, as
a righteous Judge; and in the second, they villifie and contemn the law, as it
comprehends all that, tender care, compassions, givings, and forgivings, of a
gracious and merciful father.

Of such like consequence is that mint-like washing, in outward and bodily
baptism, that cummin-like eating and drinking in that humane frame of the
Sacrament of the supper, that Annis-like gathering together a temporary
congregation, which men call a Church, and that Rew-like sensure, of
excommunication, out of such a corruptible incorporation, with all the green
herbs of such like nature, which may be food for the beast as well as at the
use and service of the son of man.

3 The third thing wherein the weight of the law consists, and that is
fidelity, which is ready, seasonable, equal, just, and fruitful, disposure of
whatsoever is committed to any in trust, now God has committed his word and
law unto man to be interpreted, wherein he alone himself is expressed and made
manifest, therefore mankind only expresses and welleth out that Image and
engraven form of his subsistence, Hebr. 1. 3. And to falsify this word and law
terminating it in trivial, temporary, and transient things, and bodily
exercises, is to falsify the Son of God, in whose heart only the law is; and
is the very frame and form thereof, Hebr. 10. 5. 10. Psalm 40. 6, 7, 8. which
is no less then to disallow of the whole workmanship of God, and to charge his
Royal intention concerning the son of man, to be that which it never was, which
is no less then to give that which is truth it self, the lie, Romans 1. 25. but
let God be true, and all such interpretours shall be found liers, Romans 3. 4. 1
John 1. 10.

No man can deny, but that the whole word, and so the whole work of God is
committed to every one of the sons of men for the management thereof; even as
certainly as the whole kingdom of Isreal's, and not a part, was committed unto
Saul in point of government, and it was the whole kingdom which was rent from
Saul and given unto David, 1 Samuel 15. 26, 29. for the ordering and government
thereof: for it is the difference of unction that breeds the difference of
kingdoms in point of acceptance before God. Therefore it is that David
desires that the head o, l, or the oil of the head come not upon him (as the
words ought to be rendered) Psalm 141. 5. that is, that chief and principal
ointment which is the headship of S^ul my potent enemy, Psalm. 140. 9 namely,
that wisdom humane in the glory of the flesh, set forth in the sparing of Agag
so honorable a Captive, subjected unto him for glory, and the beasts to offer
in sacrifices to God, as man's wisdom being as far from attaining the things of
God according to his judgment, that is, the judgment of God, as a beast is
from attaining the things of man. So that Saul has the management of the whole
kingdom, turned into a kingdom of darkness, by disposing of it by that oily
supplement of man's wisdom the headship thereof: But as it translated unto
David, it is managed by the wisdom of God, that unction which teaches all
things; preferring the things of God in the villification of things humane,
things eternal, not seen, by the reason of man; villifying things which are
seen* and transitory, obvious to carnal sense, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. and upon Saul
the anointed David will not lay his hand, that it may appear unto all men that
there is in that way of Rule, sufficient matter of destruction in point of
handling that sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17.
turning it upon his own breast for his own voluntary ruin, 1 Samuel 31. 4. 5. but
when David, cut off a lap of Saul's garment, as a testimony that the honorable
ornaments and robe of the kingdom was translated unto him, through that holy
unction of the Spirit he was touched in heart, that is, felt, and was really
sensible (through that Spirit of God) of that weight of the glory of God, put
upon him for the governing and ordering of all the things of the house and
kingdom of God, 1 Samuel 24. 5. as all the Saints of God are, which partake of
the same Spirit, Phil. 1. 27. though the spirit of Saul think so meanly of
David's hold, or cave; that he makes it a place wherein to uncover his feet,
which base and mean spirit of Saul ends in the justification of David's
innocence, and vindication of his glory, and the just condemnation and shame of
his enemy, in the guilt of his own conscience, 1 Samuel 24. read the whole
chapter.

To conclude this point, the whole word of God is committed to every man in
trust for the interpretation of the whole, as really as in any part; for the
law is full in one word as in all words, Gal. 5. 14. and there is a vacuity,
and breach in all, if in any one, James 2. 10.

He that interprets therefore by the rules of humane wisdom, which education
and bringing up in the Schools may attain unto, he falsifies the word of God,
not only in point but in all and every particular that concerns the glory of
God in man's salvation by Christ; and whosoever interprets according to the
wisdom and spirit of God, if he justify the Son of God in any one point of
the Gospel, he is a fulfiller of the whole law, even as John, and Jesus,
considered in that one act of baptism original, and ministerial, the baptized;
and the baptizer, do therein fulfill all righteousness, Matthew 3. 15.

Woe be to him therefore, that neglects this weighty matter of the law, namely,
fidelity in this trust of the word of God committed unto him, the first stands
in judging and deserning of all things, the second in the bounty and goodness
of all things; and the third, in the safe custody and right distribution of all
things, which Luke comprehends in two, that is, judgment, and the love of God,
Luke 11. 42. to show that the love of God (opposed to the love of the world,
James 4. 4.) is the very original and fountain of all bounty, benignity,
goodness, and mercy; out of which love there is none to be found; but every man
seeks himself, or his own things, and none the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.
21. Again the love of God is the proper cause and fountain, of all trust and
confidence, for true custody and conservation, and right distribution, and
laying out of all things, without which there is none from whom we may expect
mercy, nor in whom we may repose trust, or have any affiance in at all.

4. The fourth point observed, wherein the doctrine of these scribes, together
with their practice ought to appear; and that is* in doing these weighty
matters of the law, and not leaving the other undone, wherein is contained two
points.

First, that the matter of true information, and light breaking forth from the
word of God, has in it, as real reproof and conviction to the wicked, as it
has true justification and acquaintance therein unto the godly. The splendor
and shining forth of the light in the beams of the Gospel, is the only way and
means of condemnation to the enemies of Christ, and that makes the friends of
antichrist, and lims of Satan, so fearful of that day which springs from an
high, and so diligent to guard the world by humane orders, left it should visit
the same, Luke 1. 78, Psalm 2. 1, 2, 3. Acts 4. 26, 27.

Secondly, the due observation of the prime weighty, and chief things in the
law of God, is the only way and means of regulating, and bringing into orderly
practice all inferior things whatsoever, whereas the preferring of mean and
transitory matters, is the devastation and ruin of the whole order, and full
intent of the law and work of God.

And whereas men think the invalliding of all earthly things is the inlet of
all disorder, it is nothing so; but it has the order of God in it, as he is
the God of order and not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14. 33. For as God in creating of
all things which are inferior to his Son, had respect unto him in them all*
not terminating his love and delight in all or any of them, but only in his
Son, Prove. 8 30. all the rest of the creatures being as so many significant, or
Hierogl^phical intimations, to point us with the finger to the Son of God; even
as the Star (a night light) directed the wise men of the East to Christ, Matthew.
2. For they are all of such nature, that according to the eye which beholds
them, they either lead men to turn in to Herod, to get intelligence, as though
Christ were of such offspring and so to lean upon the bare letter of the
Scripture, which can never give satisfaction from his priests, scribes, and
pharisees; therefore he commands the wise men to bring him word; or else
notwithstanding Herod's command; they direct (as the wise men were as in a
dream) to turn from Herod and his priests, and go another way. And when man
has attained to the end of all things which is Christ, he judges of all
things not by man's day, or light, 1 Cor. 4, 3. but according to the light or
judgment of God, not only of his own estate in Christ, bnt of all things,
inferior and subordinate unto that, according to their nature, end, and use,
and is possessed with a disposition and heart, to order and dispose of them all
accordingly, being freed from those bonds and injunctions which lie upon that
spirit of the world, in the exaltation or villification of them, therefore
neither monopolizeth, nor dissipateth beyond bounds, but can say with Agur,
Give me neither poverty no riches, but feed me with food c^nve ient for me,
Prove. 30 8. and therefore is disposest of that Spirit of contention about them,
that sore plague of vexation in the world, 1 Cor. 6 1, 7. Matthew. 5. 39, 40, 41.
which by setting their hearts upon that which is not, every man becomes a
vexation, and tormenter of his brother; yea, man becomes a t^ouble and vexation
unto himself, and all is about means to accomplish their ends.

But whoever attains to the end of the law, which is Christ: he is the end of
the law, for, or in, righteousness, in every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. he
also attains to the means to bring about that end, for the proper end of the
Lord in all; and the means to bring about that end, are all really, and
substantially, founded, reside, and are in being and exercise in the state of
Christ; so that the beauty, worth, and dignity of, and contention about all
things, is blasted unto him, and are become as the flower of grass Isaia. 4. 6,
7. save only that state of the Son of God where all things are realized and
eternized, both in point of an end, and means to bring about that end.

For Christ is the end finishing and topping up of all righteousness, for he is
that righteousness of God, higher then which none can ever ascend, Romans 3. 21,
22. Christ is also the means to bring unto this end, for he is that law of
righteousness which binds over thereunto, Romans 9 30, 31. and so Christ is
made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30 by whom all the seed of the promise do
become righteous.

Secondly, the end of the commandment is love, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and God is love,
that is, the Son of God is love, who consists of twain without which love is
not perfect, nor can it be in exercise, Christ also is the means to attain to
love; for it is the love of Christ that constrains, 2 Cor. 5. 14, and is the
means to carry us on in all things, for love suffers all things, it believes
all things, it hops all things, it indvreth all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. it
never falls away rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor. 13. 6, 8.

Thirdly, Christ is that contract, and covenant given for the people* Isaia.
42. 6. Set forth unto us in that marriage of Solomon and Pharaohs daughter
Psalm 45. and he is also that means to bring about that covenant and contract
as appears, in all those solicitations, invitations, commendations and strong
provocations se^ forth unto us in that whole book of the Canticles or songs of
Solomon.

Fourthly, Christ is that power of God that none can overcome, and therefore he
is said to sit at the right hand, or in the right hand of the power, higher
then which none can ever attain, Matthew. 26. 64 for power there is taken for God
himself, Luke 22. 69 Christ is also the means to b^ing into this power;
therefore the Gospel is said to be the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16.

Fifthly, Christ is the wisdom of God, set up from everlasting, from the
beginning and before the earth, Prove. 8. 23. Christ is also the means to bring
forth this wisdom; therefore the Gospel that brings men unto Christ is said to
be the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.

Sixthly, Christ is salvation, therefore the Prophet cries out, behold God my
salvation; and again, say thou unto my soul, I am thy salvation, Isa. 12. 2.
Psalm 35. 3. Christ is also the means to bring about this salvation, wherein
is communicated with us that seal of the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13.

Seventhly, Christ is that Real faith, or subsistence of the Son of God, Gal.
3. 23. Heb. 11. 1. who as he is the beginning, so he is the end of all things,
Revel. 22. 13. Christ is the means also to bring about this end; for we are
saved by faith and we live by faith, Acts 16. 30, 31. Roman. 1. 17. Roman. 3.
27.

Ye conclude then that a moderate, orderly, and inexcessive course of life, in
our converse with the things of this life, consists in this, namely, only to
value and esteem of the weighty matters of the law, which is Christ the end of
it, and to invallid all things inferior unto him whatsoever; and if once we
come to center our selves, together with God* in that Sonship of Christ, we
shall find therein all things come to their highest end, glory, and perfection,
as also all means alike glorious, and full of virtue and efficacy, to bring
about those holy and honorable ends, in their renewed and continued
perfections, which loosens the soul from all the snare; and intanglements of
this life, to betake it self unto such ends and means to affect them, as fail
not, but dure forever; and so much at this time for the doing of the weighty
matters of the law, and not to leave undone, ravel, make, spoil, or misplace
things of a far inferior rank:

5. The fifth particular noted in this woe, is a Severe charge, laid upon these
false interpreters, calling them blind guides, that is, leaders without light
in themselves. or in any that follow them; yea, they are leaders or authorized
persons of darkness, having the power of the devils, being the same spirit or
off spring of the serpent, that falsely expounded the word of God in the
beginning, Ephesians. 6. 12. and all their retinue are of the same brood and
offspring; for he that teaches and he that approves of the thing taught,
speaks the same thing, and are under the same condemnation; so that every one
has the same office, and are under the same guilt, of being the first opener
of the gate or power of hell; and made the first inlet of the wrath of God upon
mankind; being the proper author and original of sinking, all that ever did,
or shall descend into the pit of destruction; for the guilt, which is the
condemnation of the wicked, never departs from the devil that old serpent,
which is the spirit of the serpent, which was that spirit of false
interpretation, is, and shall be for ever.

So that every false interpreter, is the ground, original, and cause of all
guilt and wrath of the wicked, and so the cause of the cruel crucification of
the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 28.

Observe also, that whosoever truly opens the word of God, according to the
wisdom of God, by that true and only interpreter the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.
9, 16 there is in that the true honor of the first act, and original opening
of the kingdom of God, the disclosure of the mind and opening of the first
thoughts springing out of the bosom of eternity, the graving of Christ his
true form, and bringing forth the Son of God from the womb of eternity, having
the honor of salvation upon it; in all the ornaments thereof, and without
which act, salvation had never appeared; for it is measured according to the
comprehension of Gods Spirit and wisdom, and not to be limited to any thing
of the creature, no nor confined to any presincts of time, as within that
compass to be effected; for then it were not an eternal work, the doing whereof
gives being thereunto, and the being thereof consists in effectual working; and
so the means of salvation and the end accomplished are never separated but in
everlasting conjunction in that mystical body of Christ, as sure as the
Creator and the creature are become one therein.

Hence the Psalmist says, To the Lord the salvation; upon thy people thy
blessing Sela^; for so the words are rightly rendered, Psalm 3. 1. that is,
salvation appertains and belongs unto the wisdom, will, power, love, mercy,
and compassions of God, and not to any thing proper to a creature; but he adds,
upon thy people, thy blessing, that is, that blessing, thanks, or praise; for
so the word bless is taken, Deuteronomy the 8. 10 and that which is called
blessing, in Matthew 26. 26. is in Luke called thanksgiving* Luke 22. 19. So
that, that praise and honor, due and peculiar unto God in point of salvation,
is upon the people of God: for he communicates it with the son of man, and yet
gives not his glory unto another; for as Christ affirms, I and my father are
one, John 10. 30. Therefore the Prophet adds the Hebrew word Selah, which has
the signification of elevation, or lifting up; that as man is exalted in the
word of God, so his mind is to be raised in admiration, that God has so made
himself forever.

In conclusion of this point, observe that antichrist is not to be confined to
any one particular man, or devil, but every one of that spirit is the original
and proper inlet of sin, and inundation of Gods wrath into the world, 1 John 2.
18. 22.

Neither is the disposition, condition, office, and authority of the Son of
God, confined and limited unto one man, but every one that is of that spirit,
has that Royal prerogative given or set in him to be the son of God, even so
many as believe in that name, John 1. 12. and he that has not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his, Romans 8. 9. therefore the Apostle concludes the
mystery of the Gospel to be this, Christ in you the hope of glory, Collos. 1.
27. that is, the like glory wherein at any time he appears, is really to be
exspected throughout that his mystical body for time to come, even for ever.

6. The sixth particular observed in this woe, is, their gross hypocr sie, in
that they strain at a gnat and swallow a Camel.

These kind of interpretors, are very strict in straining out of some things of
small value, as very pernicious; and swallow down great abominations as things
of nothing, like a man which has great care to strain a mote or fly out of
his drink, but can swallow without let, a mountain or powerful serpent.

They can strain out the gnat, of dipping into or sprinkling with water in
their entrance into their Church; as also gestures and vestures in the
exercises of their Church, but they can swallow down that abominable idolatry
in falling down before, and attributing unto, the creature that which God never
intended, who desires mercy and not sacrifice (which will pass away as the
early cloud and as the morning dew) and the knowledge of God more then all
burnt-offerings, Hosea 6. 4, 5, 6.

Yea, such perfunctory services are nothing but rebellion against Gods command,
in the weighty matters of the law, and as the sin of witchcraft unto the
people, 1 Samuel 15. 21, 22, 23.

These men can carefully strain out of office, such as have not been trained up
in some university, and attained to orders merely humane; but they can swallow
down thousands that never came to the knowledge of the mystery of God; nor the
operations of his spirit, only expressed therein, and not elsewhere to be found.

Yea, they can strain out, by death of the parties, an act of adultery,
committed between creatnre and creature (as brute beasts) and in the mean time
swallow down that sin of iucest, in bringing the holy and eternal word of God
into copulation with earthly and transitory things, as a temporary Church
erected in time, and in time dissolved, offi^ers ordained in time* and in time
may be deposed, or by death, abrogated and void; ordinances, that may not only
be changed in time, from one form into another, but also surcease in time and
be no more; as though the Lord, by conjunction with things that pass away,
should conceive and bring forth his kind, and native properties: whereas the
word of life has only purified it self in that undefiled bed of the mystical
body of Christ; for in the Son of man, it is not only a word of putrefying, but
also putrified, and therein (and not elsewhere) conceives and brings forth its
own kind and native properties, in all the fruits of righteousness; w ich are
by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God, Philip. 1. 11. and makes use of
all other things, as taking occasion thereby, to express and declare the power
and virtue, which forever resides and dwells in that his mystical body: for that
end he preached in the Jewish Temple or Synagogue, went up to their feasts,
conversed with the Samaritan at the well, went to the marriage of Cana in
Gallilee, healed the man that was born blind, and for that end the word of God
has respect unto (in the expressing of it self) all things that come within
the compass of man's reason, or found in the nature or operation of any
creature, not lodging it self in that, but only visits it as a stronger, in its
going forth, and return to its native home.

Add further, these interpretours are strict to strain out bloodshed, in the
several distinctions and degrees thereof, but in the mean time can swallow down
the killing and crucif i^g of the Lord of glory, the Son of God, by condemning
the right of the firstborn, to belong unto that complete mystical body of
Christ; and depriving it of the reallity of one and the same spirit, virtue,
and acceptance, in the sight of God, in every part thereof, having headship in
whom, or in whatsoever it put forth it self in present exercise: for if the
spirit of the Lord be upon any, that party in that particular wherein it goes
forth, is the anointed of the Lord, which infinitely transcends all transient
things, Isaiah 61. 1, 2, 3.

And that doctrine that denies this glory to be the Spirit of Christ, takes
away and destroys that wherein the life of the Son of God does consist, which
is no other then the proper seed and off spring of him, who is a murderer from
the beginning; as also that lier, who abode not in the truth, John 8. 44. as we
are not to fear such therefore, that can kill the body, but have no power to
torment the soul when that is done; so we are to have in abomination that
doctrine, and those doctors, which strike at the life of Christ in the Spirit
of the Scriptures, though they should never lay violent hands on the bodies of
any of the Saints* nor outward estates, in point of their bodily well-being in
the things that concern this mortal and temporary life.

Woe then unto false interpretours, who highly advance mean and base things of
no account in the records of God; in neglect and villifying of the great and
weighty things in his accounts, and strain out, and endeavor to clear
themselves of such evils as are (simply considered) only evils in the judgment
of man, and thereby swallow up and devour, as a thing of naught, ^amely, the
things of God in Christ, which is the breeding and bringing in the greatest
evil; yea, the devil himself, and hence Christ brings in the sixth woe, laid down
in the 25, 26. verses, wherein observe these particulars. 1. First that there
is a clensing pharisaical. 2. Of what, that is, cups and platters. 3. The
manner how, that is the outside. 4. A manifestation of the inside, and that is
full of bribribery and excess. 5. A taxation in these words, thou blind
pharisee. 6. An exhortation in way of rebuke, for their preposterous practice,
first cleanse the inside of the cup and platter. 7. What would inevitably
follow thereupon, that the outside may be clean also.


1. For the first observe, that as there is a righteousness of the scribes and
pharisees which never enters into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew 5. 20. so there
is a cleansing which is only the purification of the flesh (in that sense as
slesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50.) and that
stands in an endeavor to conform a man's self to the letter of the Scripture,
which is the proper character of all men's minds naturally, according to the
principles of humane reason, under which, as the kernel in the shell, or the
corn in the husk, the will of God is devulged unto the world, so that a man is
exempted from the seed of the word of God, only the conception of it makes it
either a firstborn, or an abortive; either the seed of the woman or the seed
of the serpent: and the more a man inclines after this purification, Hebr. 9.
13. according to the law of the carnal commandment standing in outward
ordinances, Hebr. 7. 16. Ephesians. 2. 15. Col. 2. 14. the more he declines that
simplicity and purity that is in Christ, even as a spiritual minded man, the
more he imbraceth, and approves the wisdom of God, the more he rejects and
disallows the wisdom of the serpent, 2. Cor. 11. 3.

All Humane institutions, reformations, outward ordinances, and bodily
exercises, practiced as the scope and proper intent of the mind of God, and so
to conform our selves to God thereby, come under this censure of the Son of
God, as a woeful and hypocritical cleansing.

2. In the second place therefore is brought in the manner of their cleansing*
and that is, the outside, things temporary, and perspicuous to humane reason,
and to common or profane understanding, therefore our Apostle says, that we
look not upon things which are seen, but on things which are not seen, for the
things that are seen are temporary, but the things which are not seen are
eternal.

3. The third point is, what they cleanse, and that is the cup and platter, by
cup or viol in Scripture is understood, a full draught or portion of any thing,
either joyous, or sorrowful, either a full measure of blessing, or of the
curse, Psalm 16. 5. Psalm 11. 6. Psalm 23. 5. Psalm 75. 8. for the word of
God is that cup of salvation, Psalm 116. 13. containing the fullness of Gods
bounty and liberal distributions unto his people.

And it is that cup of the curse, filled with the dregs of that red wine of
Gods displeasure, which all the wicked of the earth shall suck and wring them
out, Psalm 75. 8. Therefore the Hebrew word Mizrak, and the Greek Phialee,
has the name of pouring out, as in abundance, so often used by the Apostle in
Revel. the 16. in pouring out the cups, or viols of Gods wrath.

Again, the word platter, or charger, in Hebrew Keghnarah, and sometimes
Cappoth, signifies hollowness, as the hollow of the hand or of a spoon; as
having a capacity to contain matter to be ministered for food, and the Greek
word Trublion, used also by Christ, Matthew 26. 23. Intimating it to be of such
capacity, that diverse hands may be upon it, not only Christ to dip therein, but
also Judas; the one exercised in the food of eternal life, the Spirit of God in
prophecy, signifying aforehand what Judas should do unto him; the other
receiving a sop of eternal death, in which Satan makes entire, who never rests,
till through dissimulation he has betrayed the Lord Jesus to his own
destruction. In which platter, dish, or continent of the word of God, the hands
of all men are, either in reception of the food of eternal life, whereby they
are strengthened and fitted for the work of the Lord; or else they receive that
bitter water of the curse, to make them to swell and burst with Judas, so as in
him all hypocritical and dissembling confessors are made known, John 6 51.
Numb. 5. 27. Acts 1. 18, 19. who seek only to purify and cleanse, according to
the visible and outward form of expressions in the word of God, but never look
into that hidden mystry of that spiritual state and body of Christ, which is
the proper scope and intent of them all, 1 Cor. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Revel. 2. 17.

4. The fourth point is the manifestation of the inside of this manner of
cleansing, and that is, fullness of bribery and excess.

1. For they are full of bribery, or extortion: this word is of double
signification, for it declares how false interpretours come to God in all their
endeavors as directed unto him, and that is with a spirit of bribery; for in
all their prayers, fasts, thanksgivings, sacraments, and services, their proper
endeavor is, to corrupt the Lord, even the God of Justice, and all purity in
putting their services into his hand, to divert him from judging according to
the law of the Spirit, which they call heresy, Acts 24. 14, and to draw him to
judge of things according to the law of the flesh, in which their proper cause
depends and does consist.

And hence it is that Balak and Balaam endeavored what in them lay, by gifts,
sacrifices, services, and southsaying* to curse that spiritual state and camp
of Israel, and to make it abominable, and themselves acceptable before the
Lord, read Numbers 22. and 23. chapters. And thus they are full of bribes
inwardly, in that they give them with desire to prevaricate the law of the
Spirit, to establish the law of the flesh, which desires and wisdom of the
flesh are enmity against God, because they are not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7.

Again, these men are also full of the receiving of bribes, for they do nothing
but out of hope, and gain, and receiving reward, as they are related both to
God and man; and therefore such Balaamites are said to have forsaken the right
way, and are gone astray, following the way of that son of Bossor, who loved
the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. whereas the people of God, perform
their works, not looking for any thing again, which distinguishes them from
the mercinary sinners and wicked of the world, by Christ his own testimony,
Luke 6* 34, 35, 36. Yea, the Saints act in all things as in that proper sphere
or element wherein their natural life consists, as they are of that fountain
of Israel, Psalm 68. 26. and that offspring Royal, being the sons of God, 3
John 1. 12, 13.

To whom it is as natural to be exercised in ways of worship and works of
mercy, as for a father to lay up for his children or the Sun to shine in the
firmament, without looking for any thing to be brought in thereby, and added
unto it self.

For the Saints of God move to declare what they are through grace in Christ,
and not to make themselves to be something, which as yet they are not, 2 Cor.
12. 14, 15. Psalm 19. 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15. 10. for that according to which they
reckon and account of themselves; is of God and not of man, Galat. 1. 11.

2. Again, as the word bribe imports extortion, that filthiness also is in,
these interpretours; in all their outgoings, under pretense of being sent out
from God, for so they assume the names, titles, attributes, and offices, proper
to the Lord Christ; as Bishop, Pastor, Teacher, Priest, Prophet, King, Lord,
Ruler, and the like, which they extort violently, pull from, and rob the Lord
Christ of, who never gave nor appointed those terms, titles, and offices, to
any that serves in the earthly tabernacles, or rule according to the carnal
commandment, and transitory office and employment; so that they are full of
extortion and robbery also: for never was the name of any thing given by God,
but the nature of the thing was found under it, else should it be a vain title,
and if the name of God be given to any, where his nature and spirit is not
under it, there is found nothing but a vain Idol, or thing of naught, what show
or comportment soever it may seem to bear in the eye of the world.

Lastly, these interpretours, compared to cups and platters, are said to be
full of excess, and riot, and that in two respects.

First, they are excessive in expending, for they voluntarily cast off the
Right of the firstborn of God, for temporary, vain, and corruptible things,
merely to satisfy their present sensual appetite, whetted and sharpened up in
them, by hunting after carnal things, which they tender unto God to procure a
blessing, according to the law of the carnal commandment, and the right of the
firstborn after the flesh, which God never appointed to be possessed with the
rights and privileges of his house; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50.

These follow the steps of Esau, who sold the birthright for a mess of red,
earthly, or bloody broth, Genesis 25. 30. for which he is called a fornicatour,
because he brings the word of blessing into conjunction with carnal things,
concluding the conservation of life consists therein; and also, a profane
person, in that he thinks so meanly and basely of that right of the firstborn
of God, esteeming that spiritual inheritance in Christ, as nothing in respect
of the satisfaction of the lusts of the flesh, Hebr. 12. 16. false
interpretours therefore are full of excess in expending; (being the castaway,)
the mystry of the Gospel, as a thing of no worth, by their so strict and
pharisaical standing upon the outward and visible form of the letter.

2. And thence arises excess in them; in the second place; in all their
receptions they become riotous, for they will not give entertainment unto the
Son of God in any thing, but they will join therewith the abillities of the
creature; his power is nothing to them, unless the arm of flesh be adjoined,
his wisdom is nothing to them without humane policy; his righteousness is
naught worth, without one of an inferior rank to make it good to them, by
laying hold of it, and what are his riches without the treasures of this life?
or his honor without the pomp and glory of this present world? Now if Christ
be sufficient in himself in all and every particular, then all things added
which are not his are superfluous, and more then enough, brought in to make him
honorable or prosperous: therefore these false interpretours in all their
receptions are full of excess and riot, being they make themselves drunk, and
are besotted with the things of this life, which are the subject matter of all
their interpretations, so that when this life ends, the word of God in point of
all hopeful things, must needs come to a period, and cease unto them; so that
in this life only they have hope in Christ (by stating his ordinances and
institutions, in transient things) and therefore of all men they are the most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

5. The fifth point in the pronouncing of this woe, is a sharp taxation in these
words, thou blind pharisee; in which words, Christ does collect all false
interpretours, centring them in one, not only of this or that age of the world,
but all ages: for there is but one false interpretour of the word of God, and
that is he who abode not in the truth, but is a liar from the beginning; and
there is but one false interpretation, and that is it which says, that that
shall make us wise and Godlike, which God has said is death to do it, and that
the wisdom and Image of God is not yet complete and perfect in the Saints, but
by eating or communicating in something, it shall be made perfect hereafter.

There is but one pharisaical blindness, which is that, proper only to the
kingdom of darkness and state of the devil, there is but one lying spirit goes
out to deceive, but he will fill the mouths of all Ahabs Prophets, there is but
one unclean spirit, to whom Christ says, what is thy name? singularly, and he
answers, my name is, in the singular number also, (but with this explanation
and multiplication) Legion, for we are many, Mark 5. 9. my name is Legion for
we are many.

There is but one seed of Abraham, namely, Isaac shall be called thy seed,
meaning Christ, of whom the Apostle interprets it, but this seed is multiplied
as the stars of heaven for multitude.

And there is but one seed of the serpent, or of Ishmael, but it is multiplied
as the dust of the earth for multitude.

There is but one light whereby a true interpretour perceives the vision: for
in thy light says the Psalmist, we see light, but it is multiplied in all the
disciples of Christ: therefore he says, ye are the lights of the world, there
is but one vail of darkness or shadow of death, but it is multiplied into every
heart, wherein Moses, only according to the letter, is Characterized or read, 2
Cor. 13, 14, 15. Thou blind pharisce, there is but one, and yet this one is
multiplied into all ignorant and unskilful interpretours of the word of God
that ever were, are, or shall be, which makes but that one kingdom of darkness
and of the devil: So that the woman Jesabel, or that mother of harlots, may as
well say by virtue of that conjunction of the harlot, draw me, and we will run
after thee, as uttering her self in the prince of the power of the air, who
now works in the children of unbelief.

As the Spouse of Christ, by virtue of her contract with the Lord Christ, can
say, draw me, (as the only one) and we will run after thee; as all the choice
ones of God, who are of the says of the Lord of life and glory.

To conclude this point, blind handling the word of God is but one, blind
handling the word of God is dispersed into many, and yet there was never unity
in Satan; for he is ever divided and at contradiction in himself, therefore his
kingdom cannot stand, but is perpetuated in its falling from God.

Nor was there ever division in Christ, but is at unity and peace with himself,
and therefore his kingdom is firm and established unto eternity.

6. The sixth particular is an exhortation in way of rebuke, for their so
prepostrous practice in these words, first cleanse the inside of the cup and
platter, wherein observe two things:

First, that Gods order and manner of working in all true ministry, chiefly
consists in purifying the inside of things which appears not unto any natural
or humane view, that is, to preserve and keep undefiled the hidden man of the
heart, 1 Pet. 3, 4* that secret, and mystical body of Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 27.
which is spiritual and eternal, not seen with any temporary or carnal eye, 2
Cor. 4. 18. being that great continent and cup of Gods grace and salvation,
Psalm 116. 13. so as no spot, wrinkle, or blemish be found therein, Ephesians. 5*
27. no not in any part thereof, nor at any time, in any case that may concern
it, or by any means that can be used to polute, or in the least defile or
strain it, in the sight of God or any good man.

And as it is with man, chiefly to look to the inside of vessels unto which
things of worth are committed, so it is Gods chief, principal, and first
intent, that the mystry of God in Christ, into which all the chief things of
his kingdom are consigned, should be preserved and kept in purity, without all
stain or putrefaction, and this is such a secrecy or inside of all things, as
no mortal eye can see into, Job 28. read the whole chapter, to know how to
cleanse it; for as the seed of which the Saints are conceived and born, is not
mortal, but immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. even so the light by which the Saints
do see* is not a mortal, but an immortal light, Psalm 36. 9. 1 Cor, 2. 9, 10.

Observe from this point, that whosoever has a form of teaching, holding a
certain residency of sin (for a time, and stain of corruption) in the mystical
body of Christ, or any of the vessels of mercy appertaining thereunto, Romans 9.
23. Acts 9. 15. unto that man the Lord Jesus utters these words, (and in him to
all of that spirit) thou blind Pharisee, the chief and only thing is, to
cleanse the inside of the cup and platter.

2. The second thing thing to be noted in this point is this, that in what term
or phrase soever the word of God does utter it self, it is a sharp and severe
rebuke unto all false interpretours of the Scriptures; here is an exhortation
uttered, as a sharp and bitter rebuste, of blindness in them to whom it was
given; even as Christ said to Judas, when he had given the sop, with which
Satan entered: what thou do (says he) do quickly, not as approving* Judas his
act, but to declare his restless and instant spirit, through the instigations
of the devil, to work wickedness.

It is not as vain men think, that the word of God only rebukes men when they
sommons in a use of reproof; no, in what manner or form soever the word of God
is uttered in way of true interpretation, whether in way of exhortation,
revelation, counsel, comfort a word of wisdom, or knowledge, in promises,
covenant, sonship, or right of inheritance; rightly explained, and faithfully
and seasonably set forth, they are all rebukes, reproofs, sentences of death,
and just acts of execution unto, and upon all wicked men; for they are still
wandering in the ways of Cain, and with Balaam they ever love the wages of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15, Jude 11. Therefore the whole word of God, as
it contains the curse, either expressed or inclusive, appertains and belongs
unto them, for the word of God cannot be divided, no more then God himself can
be divided, 1 Cor. 1. 13.

Therefore in whatsoever the word of God expresses it self in, unto the
Saints, they find a most sweet and comfortable intelligence therein; all and
every sentence becomes Gospel unto them, testifying unto them from what they
are delivered, and into what they are delivered in which twain consists that
harmonious mellody of the kingdom of God* Psalm 16. 10, 11.

7. The last particular noted in this Woe, is what would inevitably follow, in
case the mystery of the Gospel were kept pure, if the inside were cleansed, in
these words, That the outside may be clean also: wherein observe, that there is
nothing can keep men from defiling and being defiled in the sight, and
according to the judgment of men; but only, the conservation of the hidden
mystery of God in Christ, in its native, original and eternal purity, which
only consist in the faith of the Gospel, a secret, hid from the world from the
foundation thereof, only made manifest in the Saints, Coll. 1. 24, 25, 26.

Observe in this point, that the mystry of the Gospel is never kept pure, when
the word of God is terminated in any thing whatsoever that is inferior unto,
or below the Son of God; for as Jesus comes forth from God, and goes to God,
John 13* 3. even so the word of God, which word he is, John 1. 1. Revel. 19.
12, 13. comes forth from the wisdom of God, and terminates it self in nothing,
but in that wisdom of God, which is not found elsewhere, but only in Christ,
Job 28. 12, 28. for that wisdom he only is, 1 Cor. 1. 24.

For in whatsoever we terminate the word of God, which is the proper character
and form of his mind and will, (from which himself can never depart) unto that
thing what ever it be, we necessarily assign a Deity, and so bind over our
selves to the worship of it, in way of love, or fear, desire, hope, trust, in
it; or delight therein* or the like: and it being a thing inferior to the Son
of God, it is nothing else but bowing down to an Idol, and thence it is that
men are taxed for worshipping the Sun, the Moon, and the whole host of heaven,
Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Deuteronomy. 17. 3. 2 Kings 21. 3. Amose 5. 25, 26. because they lodge
the word of God in such inferior things, as being the scope and drift thereof,
and do not take all things below the Son of God as mere plankerings or
pavements, upon which our minds may pass unto Christ.

For there is nothing in the visible heavens and earth, wherein Gods proper
intent is terminated, in the framing thereof, nor have they or any of them,
either the good or the evil in them, which holds proportion with the mind and
intent of him that formed them, but become either good or evil, according to
the mind that passes upon them, for unto the clean all things are clean, but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is clean, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled, Titus 1. 15.

So that to terminate the word of God in any thing short of Christ, is to
attribute a certain divinity unto that thing, setting that in the place of
Christ which is not he, and that is Idolizing the creature, which is that
spirit of fornications and uncleanness, so detestable unto God in all ages; for
it gives that to the creature which appertains to the Creator, therefore the
Apostle says, there are gods many, and lords many, which men according to the
letter and outside of the cup and platter, impute power and authority unto; but
unto us there is but one God, even that father or fountain of all things which
we count upon, and we in him, as being made a fountain together with him, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, as being the end of all things, and we in him, as being
made the end of all things together with him, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.

If the mystery of the Gospel be kept pure, as Christ being the proper end of
the law, that is, of all things, relations, and respects whatsoever, and
elsewhere we lodge not the word of God as in its sphere or center, then is the
letter rightly managed and all things become clean unto us.

But if we lodge the word of God, as having its scope in any inferior
ordinance or appointment, which is not the Son of God himself, we then falsify
and corrupt the mystery of God, by Idolizing and adoring the creature, defiling
our selves by Idolatry, and so all things become unclean unto us.

And we are found false interpretours of the word of God, by washing the
outside of the cup and platter, in that we put a gloss of divinity upon terrene
and transient things, and thereby corrupt and defile unto our selves, and
others, that inside, or hidden mystry* of God in Christ Jesus, who is the
proper sum and substance of all things, wherein the word of God expresses it
self.

And from hence he brings in the ground of the seventh woe pronounced, laid down
in the 27. and 28. verses, that is, they are like whited tombs, which appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones and all filthiness,
wherein observe two things: 1. First, a description of false interpretours,
under the Metaphor of a grave, with respect unto what it appears outwardly, and
what it is really wi hin. 2. An application of the doctrine according to the
true intent of the Metaphor, to show the nature and condition of deceitful
interpreters of the word of God.


First, they are described under the Metaphor of a grave, sepulcher or tomb;
and first for their outward appearance, they are whited tombs, or as the word
imports, painted monuments; for as in the former woe* their cleanness on the
outside is set forth, and their filthiness within, arising there from; so now
in this Metaphor he shows the form they have on the outside of this sepulcher,
and what is the matter and form within, they are therefore painted or engraven
monuments, now we know that the painting or ingraving of a picture upon a tomb,
is only to set forth a resemblance of him that is not, Gen 42. 36. but is
turned to dust under that shadow that is set up to appear to men; for if the
party had been alive, to make himself manifest in his proper feature and
abillities, that painted form had not been there; so that it is the death of
the party that brings forth the picture, to declare that such a one was, but is
not, or in hope, that in time he will rise, return, and live again.

Right such is the practice of false and hypocritical interpretours, they draw
out forms and pictures of Christ (as one that has been, or will come) in
carnal ordinances, as in momentany Churches, offices, and officers, sacraments
and outward services, set up as certain pictures, or shadowish forms of him,
who in their true account, at present, and in point of reality of his presence
with them, is not; for, in case he were alive in them, he would not need such
pictures and formed resemblances to set forth or make manifest his lively
operations, and virtuous sufficiencies, which ever abide and are really
resident with him.

Therefore where such pictures and painted forms of transient and terrene
things, are set forth and ma ntained, Christ does by this Metaphor, declare and
publish to all the world, that he is dead in all such hearts, as are the
minters and maintainers of such things; for the ground and reason of all such
works, is, because he is not alive in any of his virtues, institutions, and
eternized ordinances, peculiar unto that his mystical body; and because he is
dead in them, and they dead to him, in all the life and power of his spirit:
therefore they draw out such pictures, and monuments of him, whilst their
doctrine is the proper sepulcher, wherein his mystical body is consumed, and
turned to rottenness, in regard of any life or virtue thereof appearing, or
exercising it self in any such interpretour.

And there Christ lies under the stone or strength of Herod, Matthew. 27. 60 Job
6. 42* his authority, as also under the seal or secrecy, of Pylates subtle and
pharisaical ministry, Matthew. 27. 62, 66. unto such time as the angel of God
fowl aside that heavy stone of the earthly strength and authority of Herod, and
break open that seal and secrecy of the mystry of iniquity, that the Son of
God may be made manifest by his resurrection, to be such a one, as no such
earthly thing contain, Romans 1. 4.

We conclude then, according to the intent of Christ in taking up this Metaphor
of a painted tomb or monument, that where temporary institutions are limned and
drawn out, as being the subject matter of the word of God, there the Son of God
is not, but is dead and departed thence in regard of all his properties,
virtues, and operations, which accompany salvation; for such doctrine is the
proper grave wherein Christ has been buried in all ages, since the foundation
of the world; and the letter, or outward form of words in the word of God,
resolved to be Gods proper intent, has been the proper engine wherewith Satan
has not only tempted, but also overcome the sons of men from the foundation of
the world, which is apparent in that threefold temptation wherewith he assaults
Christ; and Christ giving the true intent and interpretation, gives Satan the
foil and overthrow, in his complete mystical body: for the Apostle affirms,
that the temptations of Christ, and the issue of them are in like sort in all
his mystical body, without sin, Hebr. 4. 15.

It is good to consider wherein the grave consists that Christ is buried in, as
though he were not, Ierem. 31. 15. Genesis 42. 36. Lest whilst we set up our
monuments, and prepare clean linen clothes, with all respect and modesty in
purified and reformed humane ordinances, and put the body in a new sepulcher
hewn out of a rock, or new power set up which has not formerly appeared, and
roll a stone, or exercise that earthly power to keep him safe in that buried
condition; We do no more in all this, then Joseph of Arimathea did, who was a
disciple, but feared the Jews, and Nichodemas, who was but a night disciple,
lest he should lose his honor among the Jews, being both just and honorable
in the Jews account; and therefore would do nothing in that point of Christ's
burial but by their leave, and performed the same according to their customs:
we may use great diligence, begging and petitioning, modesty and humane, or
Jewish purity; making use of new hewn out rocks of authority, and stones of
strength, to effect our desires, intents, and purposes, and yet all may amount
to no more then the endeavors of these men, namely, to keep Christ in some new
hewn out, and formed earthly condition, so as none may remove him from thence,
but under penalty, Matthew. 27. 57, 66. Mark 15. 42. John 19. 38. Luke 23. 50.
with respect unto their so religious power, John 19. 10.

And with respect nuto such Jewish purifications, in their deifying of humane
and carnal ordinances, Luke brings in the sentence in differring phrases,
saying; Woe to you scribes and pharisees* hypocrites, for ye are as graves, which
appear not, and the men which walk over them perceive not, Luke 11. 44.
Declaring plainly, that men as they are endued with humane wisdom, and secular
learning, may travel and walk constantly, over doctrine springing from like
principles, and never perceive those gross and filthy abominations which lie
hid under the same.

Christ therefore perceiving their outward trappings, paintings, and pargeting
humane traditions with the name of God, to make them acceptable for the
deluding of carnal minds; he opens their inside unto the world and tells
them, that these graves, however they may appear to simple men unlearned in the
mystry of God, yet in truth they are full of dead men's bones and of all
filthiness and uneleaness.

1. Now we know that when men rif^le into a grave where nothing appears but
dead men's bones, they appear in a confused heap; there is no order nor
comeliness to be found among them, they are scattered* from the original unity
of all things; yea, they are therefore Babylon, with respect unto that
Jerusalem, which is compact, and a city in unity with it self forever, Psalm
12^. 3. such is the condition of all them where false interpretation of the
word of God takes place, there is not a jot of Gods order, or unity to be sound
amongst them.

2. They are dead bones also, being destitute of any marrow, wherewith to oil
the points for motion, they move not in the way of God, Psalm* 115. 7.

3. Again* they are dead bones without marrow to supple them, and make them
capable of conjunction with that which was their ornament; such are false
interpretours, not having the Spirit, Jude 19. they are not in any capacity of
conjunction, with that which is the only ornament of the sons of men, which is
the son of God, Psalm 3. 3. no more then dead men's bones are capable of unity
with flesh, and blood, vains, sinews, muscles, arteries, and the like.

2. Secondly, he tells them, that as graves, they are full of all filthiness
and uncleanness; wheresoever doctrine is not filled with the marrow of the
Spirit of God, there is a defiling and corrupting of all the holy things of
God: for as Christ sanctifies and makes holy man's nature in himself* which
otherwise is unholy and unclean; even so antichrist, by false doctrine in
misconceiving of the word of God* makes that unholy and filthy in himself,
which otherwise is most holy and undefiled, Mallac. 2. 11. Ezekiel 22. 26. For
as Christ says in like case, if the light that is in you be darkness, how
great is that darkness, Matthew 6 23. for there remains nothing to inlighten it,
or cure it, if the light be darkness it self.

So likewise if their paintings and pargettings, their purity and cleanness, in
their whited tombs, and glosses set upon their doctrine, amiable and delightful
in the eye of humane reason, be nothing else in the truth of the matter, but
rottenness, putrefaction, and corruption: how great is that uncleanness when
there remains nothing to cure it: for their cure is the proper corruption for
their proper way of cure is to turn the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 5. by
terminating the word of God in vanishing things, which is to erect avain Idol,
for it is all one to deny the Son of God to be the only Author of all things,
as to deny him to be the only end of all things.

For we may as well and safely conclude, that something in the word of God
comes from some other then the Son of God, John 1. 12. who is the only mind,
wisdom, consistance, and exsistance of the father, as to conclude, that any
thing in the word of God points at, any thing short of, or inferior to, the
same Son of God, in its proper intent and scope, then the which nothing can be
greater Idolatry, either in one respect or in the other; for he only is that
Alpha, and Omega, the first, and the l^st, the beginning and the end, Revel.
22. 13.

All things therefore, are from Christ as their Author, and to Christ as their
end and in him in their exercise, Romans 11. 36. For we know that an Idol is
nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8. 4. but a mere vainifying or falsifying of the
word of God, which is indeed the devil, 1 Corinthians. 10. 19 20. 21.

To conclude this point, false interpretours are corrupt and unclean, by
defiling the holy things of God, turning the glory of God into shame, Romans 1.
21. 25. by denying Christ, the right of inheritance and present possession of
all things, whether office or execution* within the confines of his kingdom,
which is no other then that Spirit of Saul, that ever denies David the present
right and possession of the whole kingdom of Israel in all the administrations
thereof, whatsoever, Psalm 4. 2. for to attribute or design an office, or
administration, to another beside Christ, is to defame and callumniate the Son
of God; as though he were unworthy of it, or wanted power and skill to
accomplish and perform it; or as one being in exile, and not really present to
undertake it, which must either deny the incomprehensible virtue of his
mystical body, or else such officer must exclude the Spirit of Christ out of
the world in their days, and then themselves must of necessity work by another
spirit then his body is quickened by* Romans 8. 9; 10, 11.

2. The second general point noted in this woe, is the application of the
Metaphor, according to its real intent, declaring the nature of the doctrine of
false interpretours in the inside thereof, not discerned by humane learning, or
the traditions of men: therefore they are said to appear righteous before men,
because it is the letter that kills which they teach, which comes within the
capacity of man's wisdom, according to the judgment and wisdom of God, and
therefore it can never stand before his tribunal, Psalm 1. 5. however men of
like principles judge them to be righteous, which is only in appearance without
the reallity thereof.

1. For in truth they are full of hypocrisy, that is, deceit and guile, being
of the same spirit which beguiled Eve at the first, as she is the mother of all
living according to the flesh* 1 Cor. 6. 16. 2 Cor. 21. 3.

2. Again, they are full of iniquity, unequal and uneven in all things* they
never reconcile the word of God, so as to have alike weight and worth in it
self all things, and of like use in all the Saints of God, who are all Kings,
and all Priests, all firstborn, all servants, and all freemen of the city of
God, Revel. 5. 10. Hebr. 12. 23. 1 Cor. 7. 22.

They cannot give like dignity unto the Son as to the father at all times and
in all things, as having received the inheritance, and has the disposure
thereof in all things, as truly it is the donation of the father, which twofold
act can stand together in Christ, though not in earthly relation, nor carnal
mind; and that perpetually, they cannot maintain a King of Saints, as one
having rule of all, and also a brotherhood of firstborn, having an equal
share, interest, and act in all; yet both can stand together in Christ, they
cannot make the woman subject unto the man, obeying Abraham, calling him Lord,
as giving him all honor, and yet make her the mother of all the Israel of God,
as coming down from heaven, having no more help of man, then the Virgin has
who knows not a man, in the conception and bringing forth of the Son of God; or
as Deborah, who bears away the glory of the field, they know not how to make
the husband and the wife of equal authority, that howsoever Pharaohs daughter
forsakes her fathers house and kindred, to submit only unto the glory, wealth,
and wisdom of Solomon; yet it is she that constitutes her sons as princes in
all lands, Psalm 45. as though no husband were concerned in any of them.

They cannot make the condition of a widow so honorable as a wife, which she
is if she be a widow indeed, 1 Timothy 5. 3. For as her first husband, (the law of
the carnal commandment) is dead unto her, so the rule and government of the
whole house of God is upon her not being subject to any Tutour or governor;
but has the power in her own hand and in her dispose, which is no less
honorable then Sarah to acknowledge Lordship and obedience.

Yea, the woman can order and dispose of all things in the family; yea, clothe
her husband and household in scarlet, so that he is known by her when he sits
in the gate, Prove. 31. 10, 31.

The interpretours cannot see alike riches and honor in the diligence of a
servant, as in the command and authority of the master, they cannot make a
child newly born, and a son newly given, to be the everlasting father, with an
eternal government upon his shoulder. The mighty God, the prince of peace, Isay
9.

These things are parables unto carnal reason, the rule by which false
interpreters work by; and therefore cannot make equal and even the things of
God, not knowing alike worth in the Son of God, in whatsoever he is expressed.

They are full therefore of iniquity, inequality, and partiality, ascribing
excellency, or baseness to things, as it may serve only for the excellency and
glory of the flesh, in maintaining an earthly, fading, and tottering kingdom.

For they know not how to exalt every valley, nor how to bring low every
mountain and hill, and to make the crooked straight, and the rough places
smooth and plain; and therefore cannot make in the desert a path for our God,
Isay 49 3 4. and as they cannot equalize, nor skilfully poise, and make of like
worth and weight all things in the word of God.

No more do they know how to reconcile, or bring into agreement and mutual love
and peace God and man, but leave them at a perpetual jar and enmity, and so are
full of iniquity, as it is considered sin, in missing of Gods mind and intent;
or as it may imply punishment for sin, procured and brought down upon men
thereby, Genesis 15. 16. Exodus 20. 5. Levit. 7. 18. false interpretation is full
both of the one and the other.

The last thing to be observed in this point of application of the Metaphor of
the grave, unto the present purpose and persons is this, that whatsoever the
wisdom of God takes up and makes use of for the expressing of it self, whether
things in heaven or in earth, or under the earth, whether relations,
representations, or acts done, whether they appear to be evil or good,
acceptable, or loathsome in the judgment of man, as a grave becomes both, it is
a thing acceptable to bury the dead out of our sight, Genesis 23. 3. 4. and it is
loathsome to open and behold the putrifactions of the creature, even of our own
kind, as in this place; whatsoever it be that the word of God sounds in, or
utters it self by, it is never brought into its proper sense, nor interpreted
according to its proper intent, till it be brought unto the state and condition
of mankind, and so unto the state of the Son of God, which the first man is
said to be, Luke 3. 38. which is found either in a state of death, as false
interpretours crucify him afresh unto themselves, Hebr. 6. 6. or else in a
state of life, as risen from the dead, Romans 8. 34. Coll. 3. 1. for man is
either to be considered in the word of Gods wisdom, possessed with eternal
life, according to the proper nature of that word; or else the Son of God is
formed by man's wisdom, and so mortallized in, and unto man; whereby man comes
to be possessed with an eternal death: and these two conditions utter themin
the world, from the foundation thereof, for the preaching of a true Apostle is
not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit
and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 2. it is not the wisdom of this world, neither of the
princes of this world that comes to naught; but we speak the wisdom of God in
a mystry, even the hid wisdom, which God has determined before the world to
our glory, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.

So that as the word of God springs originally from the form of Gods wisdom in
Christ, who is the true mind and manifestation of the father, and fountain of
all things. So it terminates it self in nothing, (as its proper scope and true
intent) but in the same form of Gods wisdom in the Son; and we may as well
conclude that some of the words of God in the beginning were framed by some
other wisdom then the wisdom of God, which were to frame and set up a gross
Idol in the place of God, for the Psalmist affirms that in wisdom of God made
them all, Psalm 104. 24. as to conclude that the word of God lodges it self
in any thing, as its proper intent and aim, save only that form of Gods
wisdom, which he has only contrived in his Son Christ, and is not elsewhere
to be found; and a like indignity is offered unto the Son of God, in denying
him to be the end of all things, as to deny him to be the Author and beginning
of all things, as he is that everlasting father, Isa. 9. 6. those then, who
build transitory fabrics, by engaging men's consciences, unto the labor of the
work by the word of God, as by intending the erecting of that fading form, they
do nothing else but bless an Idol, which is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
for it is the vanifying of the word and work of God to themselves and such as
follow them; therefore such false interpretours are such as bring their
brethren to destruction, or perdition, therefore the Apostle uses the same
word to such Idol worshipers and interpretours, signifying what their word
brings them unto, namely, to the state of Jadas where the same word is used of
him, Romans 14. 15. John 17. 12. which term is given to Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3. and to all antichristians; 2. Pet. 3. 7. yea, to the devil himself, Revel.
9. 11. as the original end and acter of, and in them all, with whom we leave
all deceitful interpretours, and close with the text intended, recorded for our
learning in the 29. verse of this chapter, the words are these,

Matthew. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32.
Woe to you scribes and pharisees, because you build the tombs of the prophets,
and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous.

And say if we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have beee
partakers with them in the blood of the prophets, wherefore ye be witnesses
unto your selves that ye are the children of them that killed the prophets,
fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.


In these words observe these particulars for the order and method in our
expressing of our selves. 1. First, a woe denounced in these words, woe unto you.
2. The parties against whom, who are described by a three fold term or title,
setting forth their office and the manner of execution, in these words scribes,
pharisees hypocrites. 3. The ground and reason of their woe, in these words,
because ye build the tombs of the prophets, etc.


For the first, woe to you: This word woe, is a word wherein the curse of God
utters and expresses it self, and is contrary to happiness and true
blessedness, containing in it the original of the curse, together with all the
offspring thereof, as a plural and multiplied wretchedness, or state, trodden
under all men's feet; the condition of that unclean spirit, that when Christ
demands his name, makes answer, my name is Legion, for we are many, Mark 5. 9.

There is wretchedness in point of deprivation of all goods, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12.

Wretchedness in point of depravation, being corrupted and defiled with all
error and wickedness, Romans 3. 13, 18.

Wretchedness in being surprised and possessed, with all anguish, horror, and
wrath, without diminution, release, or recovery, Matthew. 25. 41. Isa. 33. 10,
14. and comes of false and deceitful interpretation.

Contrary to which is the true disclosing and opening of the mind of God in the
Scriptures, which is the blessed condition, or as the Hebrew has it in the
form plural, blessednesses, signifying unto us the fountain and original of
blessedness, together with all the offspring thereof; as Abraham's seed is but
one, Isaac shall be called thy seed, Romans 9. 7. yet is it multiplied as the
stars of heaven that cannot be numbered, Genesis 22. 17, 18. Genesis 26. 4. there is
happiness in the enjoyment of all good, for God is all, and in them all, Ephesians.
3. 19. there is the happiness of all purity and freedom, from all uncleanness,
Psalm 18. 26. Masth. 5* 48. and there is the happiness of all freedom and
liberty with the enjoyment of the peace of God, and comfort^ of salvation, with
the blessing of all his presence in all things, Phillip. 4. 7. 9. Coll* 3. 15.
Exodus 33. 14, 15.

2. The second point is the persons in whom the woe is seated and takes place,
described by their office and manner of execution thereof.

1. Their office is described first in this title, scribes, or as Luke has it,
Lawyers, Luke 11. 46. signifying such as produce and lay open the grounds and
principles of that law, unto which they are engaged and bound over unto office
by, which in this place is the law of the carnal commandment, as in all the
former woes is declared, which law stand, in opposition unto the law of Christ,
Hebr. 7. 16.

2. Secondly, they are said to be pharisees, which titls signifies a more
particular interpretation* and distinct dividing of the word of God, with the
referring of it to times, places, persons, and occasions, and herein they
divide the word of God as one part of it, directed and intended to the King,
and not to the subject; and another part intended to the subject and not to the
King, one part of it concerns a father and not a son, and another part a son an
not the father; one part belongs to the husband and not to the wife, and
another part concerns the wife and not the husband; one part of it concerns the
priest and not the people, and another part the people and not the priest; one
part binds to the strictness of the law, in some cases, without respect to
conscience, and another part to regard conscience without respect to the
strictness of the law: and thus they make the word of God of a very novice,
training it up in their schools, according to their own lusts, to serve to the
glory of man, and not to the glory of that impartial grace and salvation of God
in Christ, who is the same for all, and to all, and in all, that are his,
without respect of person, or any earthly and transitory tie, or relation
whatsoever.

Therefore the fulfilling of the law consists in one word love, Romans 13. 8 9.
James 2. 9. which is common to every Saint of God, as well as to any of them,
and he that breaks one commandment is guilty of all, James 2. 10. which is
proper to all wicked men of what rank soever, as well as to any one of them.

The Pharisees interpretacions and prevarications of the Law in this point, is
the very cause of moulding the word of God into Sermons, according to
Inauguracions and Instalment of persons into temporary and terrene Offices,
Marriage Sermons, Fasting Sermons, Feasting or Thanksgiving Sermons, Funeral
Sermons, as though the word of God could be faithfully expounded and not
involve the state and condition of all Saints, or all wicked men, what, where
or whenever; men might as well affirm that something in the Son of God
concerns some part of Gods elect, and not others; which is nothing elce but to
divide Christ, and so make a nullity of him: this manner of interpretacion is a
sufficient and loud proclamacion of the Pharisaicall Doctrine of this age, who
cannot endure the Cross of Christ, as to be stripped of all carnal power and
glory, to be dead in point of the Jewish Government and Priesthood of the
world, without which death he never arises in the power and glory of God,
ascending into the Throne of Gods right hand, where he remains consecrated a
Priest for evermore, Heb. 7. 28. and not elce where did he ever exercise his
Office, nor never shall, for he is a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melkizadek. Psalm 110. 4. Hebr. 7. 3.

The third point is, the manner of executing of their Office, signified in this
term and title given unto them, namely, Hypocrites; wherein we may reminde our
selves and recent what was noted before, the word signifying Stage Players, who
counterfeit and dissemble things which are not, as themselves to be persons
whom they are not, Times and Seasons, Acts and Deeds recorded as though they
were in present act of providence, which they know are not, but that they
dissemble the same in point of any present being of them.

Thus these Hypocrites in expounding of the word of God, dissemble the Fall of
man as a thing that was and is not; the Concepcion, Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascencion of Christ, as things past, and now are not, but
only in Records and Histories. These Stage players do not only pick the purses
of their brethren, but pick out their eyes in beholding vain Idols, not knowing
the wisdom and power of God that has appointed his Kingdom in Christ, to be
alike present, of like glory, power, peace, and plenty; and of like noble acts,
and operacions, in all ages of the world, where ever and in whomsoever the
mystery of God in Christ appears and is made manifest, Col. 1. 26. 29.
otherwise let us only hear that Christ prayed, but never pray in our selves;
and so in all things that Christ did or said, for such is their doctrine.

The third particular noted in the Text, is the Ground and Reason of this their
woe; wherein observe these particulars.

1 First, their act, what they do; and that is twofould: 1 They build the Tombs
of the Prophets. 2 They garnish the Sepulchers of the righteous
2 Secondly, observe their speech, what they say, that is, If we had been in
the days of our fathers, we would not have partaken with them in the blood of
the Prophets: wherein observe, 1 First, they confess blood or murder to be a
capital sin. 2 Secondly, that they have washed and reformed themselves, and
are become better than their fathers. 3 Thirdly, they translate and remove the
cause or act of blood-guiltinesse from themselves unto their fathers.
3 In the third place note what they are in point of their condition or office,
in these words; wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the
children of them that killed the Prophets. 4 Fourthly, observe the extent of
the thing witnessed unto, in these words; Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers.
The first is their act, being twofould; and first they are said to build the
Tombs of the Prophets. We have heard before that a Tomb is a Monument or
Memorial of that which is not in present and real being, and by Tomb in this
place is meant the Historical Narracions or Literal Form of the word of God
as it utters it self in terms coming within the capacities of the natural
and racionall conjectures of man's heart, or words which man's wisdom teaches, 1
Cor. 2. 4.

So that these men assume the word of God according to the literal form and
verbal expressions of the Prophets, and thereby build and erect monuments of
Constituted Churches, Offices therein, Governments, Orders, and painted
Excellencies in the world, beginning and ending in Time, not compatible to the
Son of God, thereby expelling the proper intent and mind of the Spirit, which
is the soul or life of the Scriptures, and so set up a dead karkasse and
livelesse memorial, void of the life and spirit of our great and only Prophet,
Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.

For there is nothing wherein the heart of man expresses it self by bringing
forth some what wherein to employ himself for a time in this world being
temporary: But it is a grave wherein Christ is buried, if the angel or
messenger of God roll not away the stone* or take away the difficulty, guard,
props and defense thereof, and sit upon it as an inferior and subjected thing,
Mat. 28. 2. making it the footstool of his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. Yea the
Ordinance of humane Marriages is a grave to bury Christ in, that he appear not
in his espousall, when the conjugall ty of the word of God is terminated there.
For, it is in that point as it was at that Marriage in Canah of Galilee,
performed according to the Jewish Rites, or the Dictates and natural
Ceremonies of man's heart; where Christ came to declare, that the proper power
of the word of God consists not in such things, no more than that water filling
up those six water*pots according to the purification of the Jews, was like
unto that wine which Christ commanded to be drawn out of the same; for when his
mother (taken according to the flesh) offered to terminate the business of the
day, wherefore Christ was bid thither in that temporary feast or marriage,
teling him there wanted wine, to have his power and presence to honor that,
his answer is, woman what have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet, that is,
my time and authority consists not in these things.

But when his mother who brought him forth, submitted to his will, saying unto
the servants, whatsoever he commands, that do ye; then Christ commands those
weak and water-like Ordinances of the Jews, or of the sons of men, to be
drawn out, having the vigor and virtue of new and strong wine, to admiracion,
John 2. 1. declaring thereby that transcendent power and glory that is in the
time and presence of Christ in all his Commands and Appointments, beyond all
the Ordinances and Appointments of the sons of men, the natural Dictates of
whose hearts lead them unto such Orders in all temporary Institucions as
naturally as in that of Feastivity or Marriage; however the hypocritical
Pharisees solemnize them with the intent of the word of God.

The Tomb of the Prophets erected in these things in the departure of the soul
and spirit, stands upon four pillars, which enervate the sift and the sixth
Commandments.

1 First, in point of Superiority.

2 Secondly, in point of Inferiority.

3 Thirdly, in Equality, which is the sum of the fifth Commandment, and first
with promise, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3.

4 The fourth is our demeanor and carriage toward friends and enemies, in
killing and preserving life, which is the sum of the sixth Commandment.

First, in point of Superiority and Rule, false interpreters cannot find any
visible power upon the Earth but in Fathers, according to the extent of the
phrase in the Commandment, which phrase of Father and Mother include all
exercise of Authority. Neither can they utter any Glory of Submission and
Obedience, but as Children are there to be extended, that is, to all ways of
yeeldings of obedience: and these they resolve to be exercised between man and
man, creature and creature, which is no better than a Tomb wherein the great
Prophet is buried, yea the true spirit of all the Prophets is thence departed,
and the mystical body of the Son of God corrupted by such Doctrine. For, the
truth of relacion in point of Authority and Submission, Command and Obedience,
stands properly according to that real intent of the word of God, in the
relacion and respect that is between God and man in the faith and subsistence
of Christ.

Where the Spirit of God is the proper supply of the party in both respects,
that is, in the exercise of obedience, as well as in the power of Command, and
may as truly be found and exercised in one man as in twain; or as in a
multitude; For, superiority is not worthy that name (bur in the sense which the
Apostle speaks, when he says, There are that be called gods, for there are
gods many, and lords many) unless it be such a superiority that has power
over the Angel, so as to prevail as a Prince with God, when as the Angel or
Elohim, wept and made supplicacion, which is to be applied to the Angel, when
he peticioned our father Jacob to let him go, Genesis 32. 24. and 28. Hosea. 12.
4. Such authority as has power with God, is that which the Word of God
intends, and in that sense the Apostle says, that the spirit of the Prophets
is subject to the Prophets. 1 Cor. 14. 32. that is, when the Spirit of God in
any of the servants of Christ do rightly interpret and unfold the Wisdom of God
in Christ, in the glory and power of it, the same Spirit of God, in all true
interpreters of the Word of God, yield submission, and are obedient unto that
wisdom appearing in its power and glory, for this authority has rule in such a
spirit of obedience, as has Eternity in it, which is only found in the Son of
God, otherwise it is not worthy the name of superiority in the Language of Gods
Kingdom, as it is said, of the mercies of the wicked, that they are cruel,
Pro. 12* 10. So Rule Destitute of this is Cruelty. Neither is the way of
submission worthy to be called obedience, unless it yield it self over unto
that superiority peculiar to the Son God, in whom alone there is an everlas ing
Dominion, for his Kingdom is without end, Daniel 7. 13, 14. Out of which
kingdom there is no obedience, but arising from fear, which has painfulnesse,
either fear of Correction* or of falling short of Favor, to attain private and
base ends, or else the loss of favor when it is, or seems to be obtained:
But perfect love only (which it not found, but in Christ) casts out seat, 1
John 4. 18. and there is a reciprocal love on both sides of the Covenant* in
what terms of relation soever expressed, springing from the Spirit of God, as
in that state o^ the Faith of Christ, and the complete Covenant is to be
struck, and in exercise perpetually in every individual heart, or else Christ
it not formed therein, which is the only message and end of the Gospel, Gal.
4. 19. Upon these two pillars of Rule and Subjection, or Command and Obedience,
do false Interpreters set the Tombs of the Prophets, falsifying the spirit of
the Scriptures in stating them between man and man.

3 The third pillar is equality, lodging the Word of God in this point in men
of like honor in the world, of like riches, of like age, of like office,
trade, ocupation, art, learning, and the like, which is but a dumb show, and
lifelesse karkase of the Prophet, his spirit is departed and gone, it is not in
such ministration. For they know not how to equalize things in Christ, the true
end of the Law, and so of all Relations: take this one instance for all, to
show their ignorance in this point of equality, they knew not how to make the
state of Christ, as in the womb of the Virgin, to be of like power and glory,
as set upon the Throne at the right hand of the power, Mat. 26. 64. for they
know not what is taught unto us in that the Holy Ghost over shadowed the
Virgin, namely, to shield the Conception of Christ, that no Rey or Glimse of
the Wisdom, Will, Power, or any sufficiency arising from the creature, should
contribute in the least, to the being, or form of the Son of God in that holy
and God like Consistence of God and Man in one undivided state, which is the
Son of God, Luk, 1. 35. And in this Act the glory of the Son of God is made
manifest, in that he is shadowed and shielded from all stain or guilt of sin,
from all power and subtilty of Satan which are never separated, yea from any
evil or discommodious thing, touching Him which is as glorious a thing, and
full of power in point of freedom, and release, as his sitting on the right
hand of God in the exercise of all glory* grace and virtue, which twain never
were nor shall be separated from the state of Christ.

And thus might we equalize all things in Christ, which seem to be unequal,
unto carnal minds, according to the Letter, and Histories of the Scriptures;
which equality in Christ is that which the Scripture properly intends in all
things, and when it speaks of equality in point of friendship or brotherhood,
it intends not a brotherhood compassed within any term or time, but an eternal
offspring, equal in all points, with respect to the right of the first born,
and not as any one son being preferred before another; for there is but one
entire sonship of God, for we are born of God, 1 John 5. 1. 18. as being
conceived by the Holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. we also are begotten of God, for of
his own will begat he us by the word of truth, James 1. 18. so that we are not
only begotten of God, but also born of God: nothing but the wisdom of God in
that work of Christ, is in conjunction in the uttering and conceiving, in the
forming of him and bringing of him forth as the first begotten, the first born,
to be the first fruits of the Creacion, without which nothing is clean unto us.
And this twofould parentage, as father and mother, uttered in the Commandment,
are they or that which we honor as being the only offspring of both made one
in Christ; and hereby our days are prolonged in the Land which God has given
us; for herein consists the length of days, even eternal Life, and are under
the first Commandment with promise, for there was never Law before that,
Ephesians. 6. 1. 2. For God made the promise of Eternal Life before the world
began, Titus 1. 2. so that the Saints are equal in being first born of
immortal seed, equal in possessing the first Land or inheritance, even the
Land of Emanuel, that is, God with us, Mat. 1. 23. equal in being under the
first Law, even the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2. and
equal in having the first promise annexed, for it was made unto us before the
world began, Titus 1. 2.

The true Equality then intended in the word of God, is to make all the Saints
of God Kings and Priests of the same Honor, Holiness, Power, and Authority,
which is only of God; therefore a royal kingdom of Priests, and priesthood
kingly, a chosen generation, not one more choice than another; a peculiar
people, one not having less or more intrest in God than another; a purchased
possession, the same price paid for, and worth set upon one that is upon and
for another, Exodus 19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
Therefore to terminate Equality in temporary relacions, as the meaning of the
word of God, is a strong pillar to bear up and establish the Tomb of the
Prophet. And in these three points of Supportacion of the Tombs of the
Prophets, wherein their spirit is departed, stands the enervating and
disanulling of the fifth Commandment, and he that is guilty of one, he is
guilty of all, James 2. 10.

4 The fourth pillar supporting the Tombs of the Prophets for the expunging of
their spirit out of the world, that men may send gifts and gratifications one
to another, rejoyceing in the glory of the flesh, by abandoning the deeds of
the spirit, Revel. 11. 7. 8. 9. 10. stand in the abrogacion of the sixth
Commandment, Thou shall not kill; but shall preserve life; wherein all means
of offense and defense are strictly given in charge: for the effecting whereof,
how many are the terms, relacions, and respects of Honor contrived and
composed in Military affairs and Discipline! according to the differing peoples
and Nations wherein it is exercised! with their several Engines, and
Instruments to attayn their ends, and that from the Law of the carnal
Commandment as it is written in all men's hearts, Romans 2. 14. 15. And when the
word of God is expounded so as to consist in any thing as is naturally brought
forth in the heart of man destitute of the spirit of Christ, that is a mere
karkasse of the Scripture void of the spirit of true prophesy; so that to place
the word of God in warlike affairs attayning its end in gaining or recovering
temporary interests of honor, riches, lands, places, offices, revenues, safety
or destruction of body, goods, and the like: this may be done as a karkasse of
the Law, void of the spirit and life of it, and so no more but a Tomb wherein
the Prophet lies buried.

And the parties thus teaching and submiting to such Doctrine, by working
accordingly, may and are destitute of the current of the Law how it runs,
wherein the proper plea stands, and what is the true point of issue.

For the Law is spiritual, but the mind of man never so much refined by humane
Learning, gives a carnal construction thereof, Romans 7. 14. But true Martial
Discipline that is of God, must have Eternity in it, elce it is not of God: And
all warlike affairs temporarily managed without the spirit of Christ, is an
unclean thing, yea the Tombs of the Prophets, and all the strength manifested
therein is but as dead men's bones accompanied with rottenness and filthiness.
For, the Military affairs intended by the word of God, calling him The Lord of
Hosts, or of Armies, Psalm 46. 7. Psalm 48. 8. is to be followers of the Lamb
upon mount Zion, as an Army of an hundred forty and four thousand, every one of
the twelve Tribes being multiplied into twelve thousands, to signify unto all
men, that in whom soever Christ Jesus becomes a Root in Israel, whether the
Root in David, Revel. 5. 5. or a Root in Iesse, Isay ^1. 10. or the Root in
Ephraim, or any of the Tribes, Judges 5. 12. 13. 14. 15. he multiplies himself
into a complete and triumphant Host for the conquering of whatsoever opposes
him, who have their fathers name (as the Motto in their Ensign) written in
their foreheads, that is, the authority and power of God alone, openly,
cheerfully, and boldly professed and maintained amongst them, Revel. 14. 1

And for the Harness wherewith the spirit of the Prophet strengthens and
animates it self, it is the whole armor of God: for a good soldier of Christ
has his loins girt about with truth, and has the breast plate of
righteousness, the helmet of salvacion, the shield of faith, his feet shod
with the preparacion of the Gospel of peace, the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of God, and therefore a spiritual war, praying with all supplication
in the spirit, watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for
all Saints, Ephesians. 6. 14.-18.

And for their Onsets and Assaults, it is to resist the Devil in the
steadfastness of Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. to quench the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians.
6. 16. and war a good warfare according to the Prophesies that are gone before
of every son of God, 1 Timothy 1. 18. centring themselves in each of them as their
proper intent, in whom they are fulfilled and made good, by which we are made
able to war a good warfare; For, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,
but spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds; casting
down imaginacions and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.

And so much for the four Pillars upon which the Tombs of the Prophets are
erected, and are every one of them a complete grave wherein Christ is buried,
that he appears not in the world but in a sensual respect.

1 For, the Superiority and Authority of the world is a grave wherein Christ as
King is covered with that dust or earth, and men walk over it and perceive it
not, Luke 11. 44.

2 The Inferiority and temporary Subjection of the world is a grave wherein the
High Priest of our profession lies hid and covered, (men's eyes being directed
unto that Monument) that they perceive not the Subjection of the Son of God who
humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross,
1 Phil. 2. 8. Hebr. 3. 1.

3 The Doctrine of Equals in the world, is a Monument to cover Christ as he is
the Firstborn of God, when they state Equals in King and King earthly, in
Priest and Priest made by men, in Captain and Captain only for the slaughter,
or preservacion of an earthly body or corporacion; these things in Equality
being made the scope of their Doctrine, do fill the eyes of men as a Monument set
upon a grave, and so hide the state of the first-bornship that is in Christ
Jesus, where every one has equal Dignity; for every Saint and Son of God is
the first, prime, and chief act of God; for, the true form of Christ Gal. 4. 19.
is the principal and chief work that ever God did, and all other things
whatsoever are subservient thereunto, Romans 11. 36. P ov. 16. 4. No direct nor
true Equality can be found therefore out of the Son of God, which is hid and
buried by false interpretacions of the Word of God.

4 The fourth particular is a grave to bury Christ as he is the Captain of our
Salvacion, Hebr. 2. 10. whilst men set up a Hearse of temporary Conquest over
the bodies of men to be the end and accomplishment of the word of God, for
which their praise is to be returned, which has not Eternity in it, for they
dare not lay praises upon the Altar, for that they have thrust men's souls down
to Hell; therefore a temporary act that men's eyes must be held with as men
beholding a Monument upon a Grave, whilst that within is hid and covered, even
as the Captain of our salvation is, by this doctrine, who is made perfect
through suffering, and thereby obtains an eternal redemption, and not a
temporary one, Heb. 9. 12. Therefore to center the intent of the word of God in
a temporary deliverance by war, when there is a possibility to lose it again,
is a false interpretation of Scripture, a setting up of a Tomb, or Hearse, like
the Corpse of the Prophet, the spirit, proper to the Prophet being utterly
departed from all such doctrine, as it ever was, and ever will be, to the
corruption and putrefaction of that body so framed, whether Kingdom,
Priesthood, equality of Elders and Senators, or valor in Conquest.

2 The second point noted in this act, is their garnishing of the Sepulchers of
the Righteous, that is, of that Righteous, or just one Jesus Christ, who is
said to be the Lord of our righteousness, Ierem. 23. 6. As in the former point
they order themselves in way of worship to appear before God in an acceptable
and orderly manner; so in this garnishing of the Sepulchers of the righteous,
they adorn themselves as coming from God in the execution of justice, and
performing the doom, as from him; so that the Tomb of the Prophet, and the
Sepulcher of the Righteous teach, and instruct us in this, That wheresoever
there is the exercise and entertainment of a false interpretation of the Word
of God, there is ever a false and counterfeit proceeding in all acts of
justice; wherever the one is a Tomb to bury the true Prophet, the other is a
Sepulcher to bury the Righteous one, so that the proper spirit of the one, and
of the other is vanished, and appears not.

For, a false ministry of the Word of God, exercising all prudence and
diligence for the maintaining and upholding of the glory of man, and a cruel
Magistracy or Government, exercising like prudence, power, and diligence, in
the demolishing and pulling down the glory of God in Christ, are never
separated, 1 King. 19. 10. no more than the Spirit of true prophecy in the Son
of God, and the Spirit of Righteousness and meekness in the execution and
fulfillment of the same, can ever be parted, in the way of Christ* Zachary 99*
17.

But the men of the World know how to deck and adorn their cruelty, by which
they keep the righteous one as buried in the Sepulcher; they know how to point
and parget their actions so, as they shall appear glorious in the eyes of men,
as a monument upon the ^epulcher, that the corruption and putrefaction
contracted thereby shall not appear: and in the garnishing of this Sepulcher
there are four Ornaments of great use.

1. First, stately buildings, large quantities, and breadth of lands, great
revenews, learning, or trade, that so they may appear to be more than men* that
do inhabit, possess, and are indewed with such things, that so God may be
concluded to be there, because men naturally place the glory of God, and the
shame of Satan in terrene things; thence it is that men are so resolute, that a
Christian cannot be perfect in this life, because they place perfection in
bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4. 8. which cannot be free from natural infirmity
whilst these bodies of clay sustain their present aptitudes no more, than they
can be freed from desire of food and sleep; which conclusion of bodily
infirmities and necessities to be sin, does inevitably put men upon this
opinion, that Christianity cannot be perfect whilst men are conversant in this
life; if these men had lived in the days of Jesus, they would have judged him
a sinner as those Jews did, for these are of the same spirit.

And in like manner, men conclude that the state of Satan cannot appear in men
within the compass of this life, because they hold that humane abilities
exercised according to humane wisdom, have some goodness, or certain
tincture, or glimpse of holiness in them, therefore till that be extinct, the
state of the damned is not perfected, and so make both the blessing of God as
also the curse for some certain time to be lame and imperfect things, although
such offerings and tender of things have been abominable in the sight of
Almighty God, Lev. 22. 18. 22. Mal. 1. 8. 13-14.

2 The second Ornament in the pargetting of this Sepulcher of the righteous, is
gorgeous apparel, Crowns, Scepters, trappings of horses, decking of Couches,
Robes of Purple and Scarlet, as m^n raised up unto that which their brethren
can never attain unto: Jerem. 10. 6, 10. Luke 16. 19. Revel. 17. 3-4. and
therefore are to be looked upon as Gods, rather than mortal men, for so the
doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees hypocritically and falsely appoints them
to be though void of any tincture of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 8. 5,
6.

3. The third Ornament upon this Sepulcher in the solemnization of the burial
of the just one, consists of Chairs of State, Thrones, Seats of justice,
erected by men, pulpits and upper Seats, which are not to be touched by other
men, but reverenced as the party to whom they belong, as things made virtuous
by their alliance or relation unto them, Amos 7. 12. 13. Add unto this
Ornament, their assuming of names and titl s proper to the Son of God, as King,
Lord* Ruler, Governor, Judge, Lawgiver, Father, Master, and the like and that
as men being bound to attribute them* by the word of God according to its
intent, to glorify man though destitute of Christ, with such terms of honor,
whereas the Son of God gives warning to the contrary, Mat. 23. 8-12. James 3. 1.

4 The fourth Ornament in the decking of this Sepulcher, is their constituting
of Laws proportionable to every fact, that so they may appear to have the
wisdom and equity of a deity in them; such a law for the punishment of theft of
such a degree and nature, and another law for theft of another nature; this law
for one degree of bribery and extortion, and such a law for an other degree
thereof; this law for one act of Idolatry, or Blasphemy, and another law for
another act and degree thereof; this for one kind of Error and Schism, and
that for another; this punishment for one degree of Adultery, and that for
another* all these are new and transitory laws made by man, and shall perish
with man, and therefore are changed according to the various operations of the
mind of man, coming within the compass of such things as perisb in the use,
and are after the Commandments and traditions of ^en.

But the eternal law of the eternal God, that royal law of liberty or power,
Iam. ^. 8. according to which if we judge not, we are judged, and condemned of
God: for it is his proper miud and will which can never alter, and this law
concludes all sin under every one, as really as it concludes the guilt of the
breach of every law under the breach of every one, Jam. 2. 10.

And the multiplied and innumerable manifestation of distinct laws and
punishments for the breach of them, is to declare how unreckonable the ways
are, wherein that one holy mind and will of God in Christ may be contradicted
and violated with the variety of plagues and punishments appertaining and
annexed thereunto: but every one of them of an infinite and eternal nature,
which cannot admit of any conteinment, limitation, or bounds of restraint, even
as it is with one Son of God to have such infinite ways of the legal and
orderly expressing of himself, and to every one of them an eternal peace and
satisfaction in God annexed.

To terminate the word of God therefore in the distinctions of these humane
laws and institutions, together with their penalties or rewards annexed, is
nothing else but to garnish the burying place of that righteous and equal one,
declaring to all the world that his spirit is ceased therein, and departed
therefrom, so that all manner of dissimulation and cruelty is to e expected in
all the ways of their administration, indevouring only to uphold the throne of
iniquity by establishing the wisdom and glory of the flesh, in the pulling
down and demolishing that righteous Reign and Scepter of the Son of God, Psalm.
94. 20. 23. Heb. 1. 8. Keeping him in the grave as dead and buried in regard of
any of his life, vertues-wisdome*justice or righteousness, appearing in such
way of interpretation and administration: For God as he has formed himself in
Christ, is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4* 5. Psalm. 56. 5. For he that
forms another law to himself, besides the law of the spirit in Christ, as
under the bond of the word o^ God, that man frames another God to himself,
besides the true God, and lies under the breach and guilt of the law of God
expressed in the first Commandment Exodus 20. 2, 3,

2 The second point in the order proposed in the Text stands in what these
false Interpreters say; that is, in what they teach, for it is their doctrine
whereby they build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the
righteous; therefore where one Evangelist says, he said unto them, another
says, he said unto them in his doctrine. Compare Mat. 13. 3. with Mark. 4. 2.
so that it is matter of doctrine whereby both the Kingdom of God, and the
Kingdom of Satan are erected and maintained.

1 And first they conclude their Progenitors to be Murderers, in that they
took away the lives of the Prophets, by which we see that it is a maxim
written in all men's hearts, that the cessation of the spirit of prophefie,
(which is done by falsifying and counterfeiting of the Scope and intent of the
word of God) is a gross and capital sin, which is to extort, and violently to
take away the life of any one that is innocent.

Q. But if it be a sin to take away by violence the life of the innocent, is it
not a sin to lay down, and part with an innocent life, if there be power to
retain it? as Christ is said to lay down his life, John 10. 11, 12.

Answ. The Answer to this is twofold; first, it is not against law to suffer as
an innocent; for it is the gift of God to suffer, as well as to believe, Phil
1. 29. And it is a blessed thing to suffer for righteousness sake, 1 Pet. 3.
14. but it is against law to take away the life of the innocent; for God never
made law to take away the life of his Son, as the world do violently extort,
and take it away; for then he should institute a law against himself, and that
eternal life; for the Father and the Son are one, John 10. 30*

Secondly, we answer, that Christ lays down his life properly with respect
unto his death unto all the motions of sin and operations of the flesh in all
things, which is his proper quickening and reviving in the spirit, and living
eternally unto God, which death i^ nothing else but his Resurrection, and
possession of everlasting life; therefore a righteous and glorious act in the
Son of God thus to lay down his life, being an innocent act, to crucify all
the affections and lusts of the flesh, to the quickening and reviving of all the
operations of the spirit of God, Gal. 5. 24. Ephesians. 2. 16.

2 The second point in the order of the text stands in what they say in way of
excusing and clearing of themselves, in these words; if we had been in the
days of our Fathers, we would not have taken parts with them in the blood of
the Prophets, wherein they acknowledge their Fathers to be murderers, ^^t
themselves reformed, and become in better state and condition, than their
fathers were, wherein they profess a better condition, and a worse in the same
Line, Posterity, Generation and Offspring of Father and Son, as though there
were a better state and a worse, where God is the Father and Fountain, and his
sons and offspring, John 1. 12. and a better and worse condition also, where
Satan is the Father and Fountain, and his offspring and Children, John 8. 44. 1
John 3. 8.

This is the doctrine of all false and hypocritical Interpreters at this day,
who say, that Satan is in a worse condition than mankind, though never so
wicked, because the Devil sinned voluntarily without a tempter, but man sinned
being tempted and drawn aside by another, plainly declaring thereby, that they
know not what the Devil is, (who is so often in their mouths and hearts also)
nor what man's fall from God is, nor wherein consists that great, though secret
inlet of sin into the world.

Neither can they truly teach what Christ is, what his resurrection from the
dead is, nor wherein consists that great (though secret and hidden) inlet of
Gods righteousness into the sons of men.

Again, they teach that in the way of God there is a better, and an inferior
condition, as that one son of God is nearer to the father, and in greater
favor and dignity than another, whereas they real firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. or
else they cannot be an acceptable gift, nor are they to be consecrated unto the
Lord, unless they be the opening, or emission of the womb, Exodus 13. 1* 2.
Luke 1. 13. therefore they are called in Hebrew Coach, the first of Gods might,
or able strength, or the beginning ofstrengths; so the firstborn is named,
Deuteronomy. 21. 17. Genesis 49. which Christ complains to be dried up, personating
himself in those wicked Jews his persecutors, Psalm. 22. 15. These men teach
also, that the Fathers who served in their generations before us, were more
remote from God, under dark semblances and shadows, the light of salvation not
so appearing, nor the approach and appearing of Christ so near and perspicuous
as it is to us at this day, and such Fathers as were in favor with God also:
for we know, that it is common to carnal Israel in all ages to stand upon and
employ themselves in types, shadows, bodily exercises, and temporary
institutions, that perish in their use, Col. 2. 20, 21, 22.

In this point of their doctrine let all men judge; have these men that so
teach, more opprobation from God of the acceptance of their sacrifices in any
of their offerings than Abel had? Heb. 11. 4. Do men now walk nearer to God
than Enock did, who tasted not of any thing that savoured of death? Genesis 5. 24.
Heb. 11. 5. Have men attained to more skill in these days than Noah had, who
could make a house to contain all creatures according to their kind, both clean
and unclean? Genesis 7. 7, 8 9. and yet it is of no less difficulty to make one
field to contain both Wheat and Tares, Mat. 13. 25, 26, 27.

Was ever man more in favor with God than Abraham* with whom the Lord is said
to eat and drink, to walk with him toward Sodom, and converse with him about
Sodom, so as he will hide nothing from Abraham, Genesis 18 -- who is therefore
called Gods friend or familiar, James 2. 23.

Did ever man in these days stand nearer to God, or attain a clearer vision
and aspect of God than Moses, who talked with him face to face, as a man speaks
to his friend? Exodus 33. 11. had ever man more power with God in these days
than Jacob had, who as a Prince prevailed with God, and with men, and had
power? Genesis 32. 28. Can any man in these days in the finishing of his ministry
attain to a more honorable Funeral than Eliah did, or give a more effectual
and honorable Legacy than he did in his departure? 2 King. 2. 9. ^15. It may
seem strange, considering the voice of Scripture, and the nature of the Son of
God, who is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb 13. 8. that men
should believe such doctrine as proclames Christ to be nearer and more
effectual and glorious in the Saints in one age of the world than in another;
but by this means we see they glorify themselves, and say, we are not in so
low and mean ways of dispensation as our Fathers were, and by this means hide
the Devil in their doctrine, by telling men from this ground, that how ever so
pure and glorious estate appear not now in the Saints, nor those operations of
the Spirit so plentifully powered out, as the Scriptures foretell and make
mention of, nor that real presence of Christ in his ordinances, yet a time is
coming wherein a more glorious Dispensation shall appear, for the fulfillment
and making good of all such Prophesie^ and Promises as are recorded in the word
of God, Acts 2. 18. Mark ^6. 17 18. and thus men have been deluded, and the
word of God falsified from the heginning of the World unto this day, by men's
vayn Tradicions, with respect to time past; conjecturall and mere imaginary
hopes for time to come, never yielding unto Christ the reality and complete
blessing of his presence upon the Earth, Exodus 3^. 14. 15. but slanderously
entreat, and cruelly persecute him when or in whomsoever he appears, Mat. 5.
11. John 15. 20. Acts 7. 52.

3 Hence arises a third point in what they teach; that is, They falsely
translate the matter, to justify themselves in their present wickedness, as
though they themselves were of that spirit which loves, maintayns, and
justifies the Cause of the Prophets, and impute the persecution and murdering
of the Prophets only to their fathers, to be an act done in their fathers
days, as though their time afforded no such thing.

And in like manner impute the spirit of wickedness unto Christ, and translate
their own practice unto him, to justify themselves thereby to be the holy ones
of God, whilst they are seeking the life of the Son of God, to entrap and
ensnare him, as an evil doer, a friend of Publicans and Sinners, a gluttonous
person, a wine bibber, a Samaritan, and one that has a Devil, and works by the
power of Beelzebub the chief of Devils, Mat. 11. 19 John 8. 48. Mat. 12. 24.

Thus they translate the state of the Son of God into the condition of the
Devil, as being a practicioner of Devilism, and the state of the Devil, as the
state and condition of Christ, a lover and maintayner of the Prophets, which is
the very way of all false interpreters of the Word of God, who to varnish and
color over their deceitful and cruel spirit and practices, cry out against
Heretics, Scismaticks, Blasphemers, and enemies of Church and State; as
themselves being innocent, friends to Religion, and upholders of State and all
good Order; and are no such persons as their forefathers have been, out of
whose loins they are come, and upon whose proper principles they do proceed:
these are men of close conveyance by sleight of hand in their Ministry, the
juglers of the Time, the witches of the world in all the ages thereof,
according to the true intent of the word of God concerning witchcraft; for the
Hebrew word Cashaph signifying a changing or turning* intending properly false
Teachers, as our Apostle witneseth Gal. 4. 1. such as Iannes and Iambres were,
who withstood Moses, alluding to the Sorcerers in Egypt, which the Apostle met
with in his days, 2 Timothy 3. 8. such as change the things of God into things
humane, the Eternal Ordinances and Offices of Christ into such as are
transitory Institucions of men, Col. 2. 20, 21, 22. who delude men by proposing
a false object, and corrupting the air or medium of doctrine, in the conveyance
of the ey to the object.

For, as the word of Blessing in all its expressions terminates it self (as
its proper scope) in the plain and saving liberty of the Spirit in the Son of
God, so also the word of the Curse in all the manifestacions thereof,
terminates it self in that guilefull destructive enthraling spirit of
entanglement of that son of perdicion, which is the Real Communion of the
Woman with the Serpent, whereby the offspring of the Devil is brought forth,
as the other is the real fellowship of the Bride and Bridegroom* whereby the
Son of God that offspring of Heaven is brought to light in his true Office and
Exercise: and as these Ministers place the highest excellency of Christ now in
exercise and being on the Earth, in point of Regal Authority and Priestly
Virtue in Officers made and appointed by men, so also they place the basest
degree of Satan's Subtilty, in simple women laden with iniquity, whom they can
easily snare in the words uttered for their own defense, with the help of some
envious witness prejudiced against them, whilst they themselves do not only
pass away in the crowd as innocent, finding out and revealing of the iniquity
of the Times; but also sit as judges of them, and as gods over them, for
execution.

The third general point noted in the Text is, what these Interpreters are in
point of Office, that is, they are witnesses unto themselves, or as the word
will allow, witnesses in themselves; That they are the childreu of them that
murdered the Prophets: In which observe two things; first, that respect which
the fathers after the flesh have to them as being their original and
predecessors: secondly* the respect which they have to the fathers, as being
their children and offspring.

1 First, they confess that their fathers were murderers; they killed the
prophets, therefore they acknowledge (according to the true intent of the Law)
that they themselves are murderers; for whatsover may be said of an ancestour,
that may be truly said of the offspring; and therefore Levi is truly said to
pay Tithes in his father Abraham, being in his loins when Melkizedek met him,
H^br. 7. 9, 10. For, in all the works of God* Time wears not out in the
offspring, the true nature, disposicion and quality of the progenitor, for the
offspring retains the properties of the progenitor in all points. What might
be said of a Lion in the beginning, the same may be said of him now; what might
be said of a Lamb in the beginning, the same may be said of him now: and so of
all the creatures upon the Earth. What was said of the Serpent in the beginning,
the same is true of his offspring at this day; if falsifying of the word of God
was the spirit of the Devil in the Serpent at the beginning, then false
interpretacion of the word of God is the same spirit of the Devil in the
actors thereof at this day, what or whomsoever they may be, or seem to appear.

2 Secondly, as they are the children of such parents, we know that none can
assume a child*like relacion, but he must therein assume the fathers operacion,
or elce how should the child come by his being? therefore they conclude
themselves under the act and guilt of murder, even of taking away the life of
the Prophets, in that they are the seed and off spring of them who did it
before; for the disposicion and operacion of the progenitor departs not from
the true seed and offspring, Exodus 20. 5. therefore the sins of the fathers are
visited in the children, unto the thirds and to the fourths of them that hate
the Lord; the word generation is not in the Hebrew Text, the thirds signifying
the full and complete condition of all haters of God; as Three that bear
witness in Heaven are a complete and perfect testimony, and yet but One, 1
John 5. 7. and the fourths being the Number of Extension, as the four Corners
of the Earth comprehend the whole World in all the parts thereof, signifying
unto us, that all and every sin in that whole estate of the haters of God, are
inflicted upon every particular party found therein; and therefore accordingly
in point of opposition there is no period or bound set unto Gods mercy, in them
that love him, in the preservacion of his Law in the purity thereof; he
therefore that is related unto God in Christ as a son, bears the same
disposition, and has the same operacions of the Father really reckoned upon
him, and is in the exercise thereof according to the true intent of the word of
God: therefore is that speech uttered by Christ, hitherto the Father works, and
I work, John 5. 17. and however the carnal eye of the Jew never saw the man
Jesus making this visible World, yet without him was not any thing made that
was made, John 1. 3. and the spirit of the Son being one with the Father, is a
sufficient testimony and witness in every Saint of God, of his unity with the
Father in his whole work, as really as the same spirit witnesses a unity or
faith between the Creator and the creature; so that he which denies unity in
the whole work of God, not having the witness thereof, he denies also unity in
the Contract and Covenant of God, not having any witness in himself thereof,
but remains in the state of unbelief, and has that spirit which as it
witnesses relacion in generation to him who is a murderer from the beginning,
so has it the testimony of unity in the act (in it self) of being under the
guilt of crucifying the son of God; for if we confess a certain innocence in
our Progenitors, in the act of creation, destitute of the righteousness of God
in Christ, we therein testify our selves to be destitute of the righteousness of
God in Christ at this day, and a Pharasaical righteousness is the most we
attain unto; and if we confess our Progenitors, of whom we properly do
proceed, to be actors in falling from God, under guilt of sin, and out of the
favor of God for a moment, or any point of time, we have the witness in our
selves that we are now in the way of the fall, under guilt and condemnation,
and out of Gods favor and love unto this day, for the spirit of Satan
comprehends the parent* and the posterity, to witness in and of, both alike,
as really as the Spirit of God comprehends the father and the son to testify
of them, as one undenied act.

Note here, that the children of the Devil (as Christ calls them) are of him,
who is a Murderer from the beginning, a Liar, and therefore abode not in the
truth; for when he speaks a lie, he speaks his own, it is himself, both a
father and son, for he is a liar, or he is a lie, as the product, and the
father thereof, as the original of the same; so that wickedness was never
brought forth, but by the wicked one, who is from the beginning, as ancient as
the son of God himself, John 8. 44. Also the Son of God is he in whom life is
preserved from the beginning, and therefore an eternal life, as ancient as
himself, and so is said to be, the way, the truth, and the life, so that no man
can come to the father, but by, or in him* John 14. 6.

Whosoever then finds a time when the Lier was not, and the Murderer, he may as
well find a time when truth and life eternal was not; and he that goes about
to make a separation of just and unjust, and not from the first motion of God
toward man, which is from everlasting, as also to keep each of them, that is,
the way of life, and the way of death entire, in the whole course of their
progress, that man can never preserve and keep the word of God in its native
purity, but is a false Interpreter thereof, and a betrayer of the just and holy
One into the hands of the wicked.

Note further, in conclusion of this point, that when Abraham is said to be the
father of believers, as the Saints being reckoned as from him, Romans 4. 11, 16.
Abraham is personated, in that high father according to the Etymology of his
name, or in that eternal father, as the Prophet calls him, in whom he plainly
concludes both father and son, as one state and condition, which no man can
expound otherwise, Isaiah 9. 6. but he that is the son* is the father also,
according to the true intent of the Prophet, and in this respect the saints of
God as natural sons have the Spirit of a natural father* namely the spirit of
God, Isaiah 61. 1. and as the Saints of God are taken from that natural
disposition, and common reasonings of the spirit of mankind* as being chosen
out of the house of him who is estranged from God, (as mankind following the
natural propencity of his own spirit is) so they are truly said, to receive
the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba father, or father, father, Romans
8. 15. that is, they lay claim to God, as sons, in a twofold respect, he is a
father, as they are naturally descended of him and he is a father as he has
taken them out of the house of a stranger, as Solomon took a wife out of the
house of Pharaoh* and as Paul took Onesimus for his son, and as the Gentiles
became the family and household of God in Christ, Psalm. 45, Philemon 9. 10.
Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. 13. And the Saints of God come not unto God but with respect
nnto their Sonship in both respects, beholding therein for ever from what they
are delivered and set at liberty, and into what they are delivered and
invested, with power and authority.

By the spirit then it is that they cry Abba father, that is father, by natural
descent and generation, as springing from God, having that gracious inclination
and disposition of his son from heaven; and father, as being freely adopted and
chosen out of, and from that carnal, common, and sensual disposition that all
men by nature are subject unto, Ephesians. 21. ^8. To be sons and heirs of that
heavenly Kingdom of glory and of God, Romans 8. 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 4. 14.

4 The fourth point in the order of the text is the extent of their witness,
or that estate witnessed unto, in these words, Fulfill ye the measure of your
Fathers, that is, as your Fathers by your own acknowledgement are come down
unto you, and are extant in you in point of generation, and so no time vacant
wherein they have not appeared in the defcent; so fill you up the same measure
of your Fathers, in that your sin of false interpretation, by building a Tomb
upon the carcass of the Prophet in the letter of the Scripture void of the
Spirit thereof, which is the bloodshed and murder of the men of the world to
this day: this your sin reaches up in like manner unto them from whom yon are
descended, even to him who is a murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. And
you by virtue of that oneness of spirit are conversant in that first act in
the begin^ing, as really as the Serpent in his seed i^ extant in you at this
day* in your guileful and deceitful interpretation; and this your spirit shall
descend in like sort, in your posterity, generated by this your doctrine, and
their guilt shall ascend up unto you in the measure and fullness of the same;
so that the sin and guilt of the Progenitour and Offspring are the same, even
as the holiness and righteousness of the father and the son* are one and the
same in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 24. John 10. 30. Phil 3. 9. Romans 1. 17. and hence is
brought in the ensuing and following sentence.

The 33. Verse contains a vehement acclamation inveighing against these false
Interpreters, wherein observe two things. 1 First, The names he gives unto
them, in these words, Oh ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers. 2 Secondly, An
Interrogation, How can you escape the damnation of Hell*


1 First, in that he calls them Serpents in the plural number, it is to show
that all false Interpreters are of the same brood and offspring, though they
may seem to be diverse and averse one from another, and in that he calls them
Vipers also, it is to declare that every one has the poysonfull disposition of
all kind of venomous Serpents in him, of what name or manner of poison soever
i^ may be, false interpretation has it included in it, as being the proper
Cistern and continent thereof: and in that he calls them Serpents, he brings hem
back to their proper fountain and Original* whence they Spring, as being the
very spawn and seed of all deceit: Oh Serpents, that is, ye deceivers of
mankind from the beginning, by false exposition of the word of God, affirming
in your teaching, that man shall not dye, but live as Gods in that way wherein
God affirms death does confist, Genesis 2. 16, 17. compared with Genesis 3. 4, 5.
Romans 8. 13. That is, by eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
bearing men in hand that they shall communicate in a better, and a worse
condition then they have in their original and first motion of their
beginning, Genesis 3. 1.-5. Whereas God affirms that his image which is his holy
Son takes being together with man, for out of man, that is, that Son of man God
never was, for he cannot be all things out of man, and then he is not God, for
otherwise than he is God in Christ he cannot be a Creature as well as the
Creator, he cannot be death as well as life, the receiver as well as the giver,
the heater^ as well as the speaker, the obeyer as well as the commander,
without which salvation cannot be wholly and completely of God, therefore the
Psalmist calls him the God of salvations, in the form plural, as he is salvation
in all and every respect; for the hearing ear, and the seeing eye are both
alike of the Lord, Psalm. 68. 20. Prove. 20. 12.

When God affirms man to be in his image, that is, to have the complete form of
his Son, who is the engraven form of his subsistence, the Serpent affirms
something must be done before that be accomplished and perfected; they must eat
and communicate with sornthing elce to bring it about: so say all false
interpreters unto this day, elce for what serves your water in Baptism, your
bread and wine on the Table, your corporeal fasting and feasting,
ccommunicating with Schools, and corporeal laying on of hands, before the
gifts of the Spirit, your eating up of time before Christ come to Rule the
Nations, and before Christianity can be perfect: Oh ye Serpents that teach men
to communicate in something elce than that which is all things, before that good
work of God can be perfected! This is the Doctrine from the beginning, that does
and ever did deprive men of the glory and power of God, transforming men into
Devils, as we see him work effectually in all those destructive ways among men
at this day; and thus the Serpent is discovered by his speech.

2 He is discovered by his gate or motion, he moves not, but upon his belly,
Upon thy belly shall thou go, Genesis 3. 14. For his belly is his god, as is
affirmed of all false teachers* Phil. ^. 19. For they move not but to satisfy
their carnal appetite, with honor, wealth, friendship, outward peace and
prosperity, to be strengthened in the arm of flesh, and leave plenty of such
things unto their posterity; Oh ye Serpents that move not but upon the cause of
your belly, to satisfy your corporeal body and life, and when you attain to
any preferment herein, your religion either becomes a slavish underling, or
else withers quite away, as the Serpent casts his withered slough, or skin, in
the hear of Summer.

Yea, he goes upon his belly, breast or heart, as the word imports, that is,
their principal part, signified by breast or heart, cleaves unto the earth,
that is, unto carnal and terrene things, their mind, understanding, wisdom*
will, affections, and conscience, yea, all their learning is carnal and earthly
in the very prime and height thereof, so that their principal aptitudes, as
breast or heart move not but upon the earth, other creatures tread upon the
earth, as a thing mean and base put under their feet; the Serpent moves not,
but lays it to his heart and bosom.

Oh Serpents, the original of the curse of God, but for false interpretation,
there had never been curse in the world, nor wrath of God upon mankind, which
consists in going upon the belly or breast, that is, in carnalizing the word of
God, going upon it as upon the words of m^ns wisdom and principles, and not
according to the wisdom and power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. And in the words of man's
wisdom and principles, the letter of the Scriptures does properly consist, as
is apparent to all that are not wilfully blind, by the histories thereof,
proverbs, parables, relations, offices, buildings, battles, journeyings,
genealogies, life and death of the Saints, with the nature and operations of
all Creatures in the heavens, and on the earth, which we see come (in some
sort) within the confines of humane capacity, which is the common doctrine of
the world, only adorning it as with God, or making it as their God, which is
that which the Hebrews call Cashaph, of which the Greeks have formed their word
^a caino, and the Latins Fascino, which is to bewitch, and is the changing of
the glory of the incorruptible God into the image of a corruptible man, and
into birds and four-footed beasts, and creeping things, Romans 1. 23. Which is
nothing else but to place the glory of God to consist in conformity with the
letter of the Scripture, which is naturally written in every man's heart, else
the word of God could not express it self in all men, that is, in such as
unto whom the spirit of God is not given, also such as never had the written
word of God could not lie under the breach of any known law of God, and
therefore their consciences could not accuse or excuse, which is the portion of
all men, Romans 2. 15. for doubtless the sound of the Scriptures is gone into
all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world, Romans 10. 18.

3 Thirdly, the Serpent is known by his food, dust shall thou eat, says God,
Genesis 3. 14. to declare the baseness of his proper sustentation to be such as
all creatures decline* dry dust can bring forth nothing that is good to
perfection, Isaia 65. 25. This is the food of all false Interpreters, they
carnallize and corrupt the word of God in all things; for as dust is void of
moisture, which makes the earth fruitful, so do they bereave the word of God of
all that moisture and oily intent of the Spirit, or else its no acceptable food
for them to sustain the works of the slesh in terrene glory and beauty. Oh
Serpents, that feed on nothing but baseness by the verdict of God, for to cast
the word of God into a transitory form, is nothing else but that unclean Spirit
of the Devil, which Christ here, (as his manner is) rebukes: for though there
be an acknowledgement of Christ to be the Son of the most high God, yet in that
they profess Christ to be another thing than themselves are, for they are
afraid of being tormented by him, therefore reckon themselves to be another
thing: for Christ does not torment himself, no man hates his own flesh, Ephesians.
5. 19. In this they appear to have that unclean Spirit, for it is, and ever was
the very form of the Devil so to do, as really as it is the form of the Son of
God to make himself one with the Father, John 10. 30. John 14. 9. Therefore
Christ rebukes such, as unclean spirits, yea that spirit of Satan, as such as
has no interest in them that are his, Mark 5. 7. 8. Oh Serpents who feed so
basely, as upon the husk, the shell, the bark and rind of the word of God,
whereby the curse is formed and maintained in the world; and forsake the ^eed
of immortality, the kernel, the sap, the pith, and the marrow of all things,
which is the scope, intent and spirit of all things recorded and registered in
the word and works of God.

4 Fourthly, the Serpent is known by his hearing, for his custom is to stop
his ear, though the Charmer charm never so wisely, Psalm 58. 5. he will not
hear, now we know that to charm a thing, is to utter the same tune, note,
speech or language which that utters which we are about to charm, with an
interposition, or infinuation of something whereby to take with guile in the
motion or coming forth of the thing, as the Apostle uses the word guile in a
good sense, 2 Cor. 12. 16. But this Serpent in false Interpretation stops the
ear, let the good Charmer charm never so wisely it will not hear, that is, let
the Son of God in true interpretation and opening of the word of God, sound
forth and speak in the very same note and tune which man's heart is known by
naturally, according to the history, proverb, parable, and progress of the
word of God, in way of ushering it into the heart of man, or bringing forth the
thoughts of man's heart to symbolize and agree therewith, as it is propounded in
the figure, similitude, metaphor, allegory, and dialogiums thereof; yet when
the truth of the thing appears, which the spirit of God intends, and is
properly taken with, against that does the Serpent, and false and subtle
interpreter stop his ear, even as it is said of the Serpent that he lays one
ear to the ground, and stops the other with his tail, wherein his life and
motion properly resides; for some Serpents after their head be cut off, will
live and move many hours, which life and motion appears properly in the tail:
So these false Interpreters, when truth appears, stop their ear (in one
respect) with an earthly conjecture and conception of the word of God, and in
another respect, with that lively aptitude which naturally they have, to move
and act in such carnal and sensual ways and respects, which resides in the
tail, or in that inferior part or place of the sting of sin and curse of God,
Rev. 9. 10. made manifest in his word 1 Cor. 15* 56. Oh Serpents, this your
false and carnal interpretation has stopped the ear of man from the
beginning, that he will not hear the voice of the Son of God, though he uses
all his skill for the opening of it; it is carnal and earthly interpretation in
all ages that has stoped the ear from hearing, entertaining and approving the
good word of God, and by other means was the word of life never hindered from
making entrance into the heart of man, in any age of the world, nor among any
people or nation.

And it is only words of spirit and life, John 6. 63. that boar the ear, and
open it to hear the voice of the Son of God* Psalm. 40. 6. John 5. 25. that
they may live; it is that which incorporates into the house and family of God,
so as never to depart thence, for he is tied thereby unto the door post, even
by that sound of the word in his soul, that he can never depart from it: even
as the Servant that had served his Master seven years, and would have no other
freedom, but what was found in that house and service, was brought to the
door*post and boared through the ear, entering into covenant thereby to serve him
for ever, Exo. 21. 6. For there may be a Covenant struck by the ear, as well as
by the hand, Heb. 8. 9. Therefore the Psalmist proclames, Oh blessed is that
people that know the joyful sound, for they shall walk on in the light of thy
face: Oh Lord, in thy name shall they be glad all the day, and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted, Psalm. 89. 15. 16. alluding to the sound
of the Silver Trumpet at the Wars, Assemblies, Solemn Feasts, Iourneys, and
over the Sacrifices of Israel, Psalm. 81. 3. Numb. 10. 3. 9. 10. Joel 2. 1. 15.
The ear listening to true interpretation binds over to God, incorporates into
that mystical body of Christ* and keeps from ever departing thence any more,
knowing the shrill sound of the trump of God, which is the dictate of the
spirit of God, it preserves in the Camp for ever.

5 Fifthly, The Serpent is known by his act, that is, he crusheth the heel of
Christ; as the seed of the woman breaks or crusheth his head, so he breaks,
bruiseth, or crusheth the heel, or foot-soal of the seed of the woman, that is
of Christ, Genesis 3. 15. For as Christ bruiseth the head of the serpent, crusheth
or squeezes out the headship and power of the Devil, so that nothing of his
wisdom, subtilty, cruelty, hypocrisy and authority appear^ in the Saints of
God in any of their ways, even so does the Serpent by false interpretation
bruise and crush the heel, or soot soal of Christ, or the print of the soot, as
the word imports, that is, whereas the Son of God (in the Character, letter, or
historical records of the word written in man's heart) has therein secretly and
mystically involved his proper and saving intent, which the Saints of God know
how to take ^ut as their only and meet help, Genesis 2. 18. for the propagation of
their kind, as they are the workmanship of God in Christ, and his off spring,
Ephesians. 2. 10. Act. 17. 29. Even as the Lord took a^ rib out of the side of the
first man, that great and original Character of mankind, and made a woman of
it, Genesis 2. 21. for the multiplication of man upon the face of the earth, Genesis
2. 28. So false interpreters they take out the letter and history of the word
from the intent and mind of God, and by that means bruise and squeeze out the
life and spirit of Scripture, that not a print of Christ's proper footsteps
which he has truly taken therein can appear, being they have carnallized them,
by closing up the flesh instead thereof, as though the glory and power consisted
only therein, and as though no defect were upon man in the departure of the rib
or bone, the life and spirit of the word, wherein all true power and glory does
consist; which they by this means of spoiling the proper print of Christ's
footstep, which he has set upon all things in heaven and in earth, terminating
the form thereof in transient things, which is the arm of flesh, and so with
the Serpent are accursed, Jerem. 17. 5. Oh Serpents, who by the bruising and
disfiguring of the prints of Christ's footsteps (which he has set upon all
things rightly considered, to make his way known to the sons of men, according
to the Spirit) in closing up the flesh instead thereof to be the glory, have
thereby deluded and destroyed the world unto this day, Rev. 9. 10.

But these men cry out against such as stand for the scope, intent, life and
spirit of the Scriptures (which Christ says, his words are, John 6. 63) that
they turn the Scriptures into an Allegory, whilst in the mean time themselves
are the only persons that so do; for they will have all to consist in the
proper allegory, metaphor, history, outward form of parable, proverb, journeys,
buildings, sacrifices and ceremonies, and therefore in the laying down of one
form and figure, they take up another, or else they would lose all their
Religion, as they must needs do at the time of their death, for they have
nothing to do when they come to heaven (according to their own doctrine) which
they do hear, no not to love God himself, which they say only continues (not
understanding the speech of the Apostle, concerning faith, hope and love, 1
Cor. 13. 13.) for by their own doctrine they deny to love God in Heaven* as
they do now here in this world; for now they profess they love him mediately,
in another, but then they will love him immediately in himself. These are the
allegorizers upon the word of God, for they turn all into the proper figure,
Allegory, Metaphor, and miss of the truth and substance in all things.

6 Sixthly, The Serpent is known by his names, and they are many, whereof one
is Pithon, coming of the Hebrew word Pethen, a Spirit of delusion that followed
the Apostle Paul, thereby to maintain and uphold the way of its delusion: this
is a certain effeminate Spirit o^ divination, that for gain fi nds out a way
by subtilty to prostrate it self to any form of doctrine, and that which
seems to prevail and be in honor with the most, that it takes up (with great
applauding of the same, together with the Publishers thereof, Act. 16. 16. 17.)
And that this Sepent sets upon his own principles, which are carnal and
diabolical, which principles by that means, he covertly and cunningly
insinuates into the world, by transforming himself into an Angel of light, 2
Cor. 11. 13. for the upholding of the glory, power, riches, and outward
prosperity thereof, as though the way of Jesus Christ were promoted and
propagated therein. Oh ye Serpents, that can seem to prostrate your selves (as
an harlot) to any form of doctrine for gain, and to get your Masters and
Maintainers advantage; that can distill your diabolical principles through any
Lymbeck or form of expressions, for upholding of the trade and merchandise of
Tyrus, whereof read Ezekiel 27. the whole Chapter, in which you manifest your
selves to be the original and final cause of the destruction and ruin of
mankind, by your subtle insinuations and deceitful interpretations of the
word of God.

Again, another term or title given unto them, is, he calls them the generation
of Vipers, there is a brood and offspring of them as proceeding from the
Viper, a Serpent differing from the former in the bringing forth of its seed,
being most poysonfull and venomous; it is said that some of that kind biting a
man, that if present and sovereign remedy be not applied, he dies within the
compass of three hours; these breed not of eggs, as ^^her Serpents do but take
their form and life in the belly of the dam, and before they be brought forth
they eat and gnaw her belly, that she dies in short time after they be brought
forth, so that they breed not but by the destruction of her in whom they are
bred. Right so it is with these false interpreters, they breed not but in the
womb of that Harlot who adulterates the word of God, by making the copulations
thereof to consist in earthly relations and things, and the very breeding and
bringing forth of such a brood and generation is the destruction of that state
and condition in which they are bred; for the divinations and witchcrafts of
the Devil do not only bewitch, but it is also bewitched; it does not only
destroy, but it is destroyed, therefore says Christ of this Spirit* or Serpent,
Oh generation of Vipers, who has bewitched you, forewarned or forestalled your
hearts, as to think that baptisms, bodily exercises, verbal expressions, and
temporary institutions should be armor of proof upon you to escape the wrath
to come, being it is as truly to come as it has been from the beginning?
therefore a temporary act or institution cannot defend, nor shelter from it.

Yea, to destroy, and to be destroyed, to bewitch, and to be bewitched, are as
really in the wicked, as to save, and to be saved* to heal, and to be healed
are in the Son of God. So that whilst men are destroying silly women for
witchcraft, laden with iniquity, it is well if they be not destroying
themselves; for there are self destroyers which do not appear to all men, when
the spirit whereby they are held puts them upon defigns to pursue with great
eagerness, which becomes often, not only the destruction of their souls, but
their bodies also in fine thereof.

Again, it is said of the poysonful Viper, that the poison thereof retains its
virtue, after the Serpent is dead, which is not found to be in other Serpents;
So in false Interpreters, be they never so dull, incapable, naturally civil,
seeming to be dead in regard of doing any hurt, let them but be dead unto the
spirit and life of the Scriptures, they are as poysonfull and deadly in their
ways in the sight of God, as such as are most quick, lively and active in the
sight and judgment of men.

2 From which he brings the second point propounded in the Text, how should you
escape the damnation of Hell? In this interrogation he challenges them, if
they can find out any way or means of escape, any time or place of escape, any
hopes or expectation of a possibility of escape, and so is a strong
affirmation, that they never can, nor shall; in like sense Christ interrogates,
How can you believe and receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes from God only, John 5. 44? that is, you can never believe, repose
trust and confidence in the power of God alone, when ye prefer another honor
than that which is only of God; ye cannot have unity with God, when you joy n
another glory together with God, for he is of such nature, that is, either all
in all, or else becomes vain in that party, where he is not so in all things;
this interrogation therefore concludes and strongly affirms by arguing it upon
the conscience of the Serpent, together with all his offspring as the brood of
a Viper, that they can never escape or be released from the damnation of Hell.

By damnation in this place is meant a just and final Sentence, together with
the severe execution thereof, to an everlasting and utter destruction, Mark 3.
29. And by Hell in this place is meant the proper state of the Devil himself,
even as by Heaven the Scriptures intend God himself, or the Son of God;
therefore where one Evangelist says, the Kingdom of Heaven, another expressing
the same thing says the Kingdom of God, Mat. 19. 23. compared with Mark 10.
23. So the Prophet Daniel in the interpretation of Nebuchadnezzars dreams,
First he calls God by the name of the most high; and secondly by the name of
Heaven; saying, Thou shall know the Heavens rule, or thou shall know the Heaven
rules, Dan. 4. 25. 26. the phrase plural may be indifferently taken; even so in
this place, by Hell we are to understand the Devil. The force of the argument
stands thus, you have that spirit of the Serpent, by which the curse entered
upon mankind, therefore you are justly called Serpents, you are that generation
and off*spring of the poysonfull Viper, or seed of the Serpent, you have the
nature, disposition and operation of the Serpent who brought in the curse, and
propagates it in the world until now, which is nothing else but the Devil;
therefore you being the Serpent, the Viper, the generation, the original and
off spring of the Devil, how can it be possible that you should escape the
proper state and condition, the condemnation and destruction of him whom you
are; for the Devil is that false interpreter of the word of God from the
beginning, for he is a Liar from the beginning. John 8. 44. And that lie has in
it all manner of untruth, for he abode not in the Truth; yea it is an untruth
of an illimited comprehension, for it turns the truth of an infinite God into
that lie, Romans 1. 25. Therefore must needs contain all manner of
unrighteousness, as the truth of God comprehends all righteousness of what
nature or distinction so ever, and as the one is the proper seat and subject of
grace and salvation which is of God, Psalm 3. 8. so is the other the only seat
and subject of all wrath and destruction, which is of Satan, the Dragon, that
old Serpent the Devil, Rev. 20. 2. The 34. Verse is a Reason rendered how this
fearful and desperate estate of these false interpreters is brought about,
together with a secret insinuation of the state of the Son of God, as all
Christians, or true Prophets are personated in him, in which observe 1 First,
An act of Christ in sending Prophets, Wisemen and Scribes. 2. Secondly, An act
of these false Interpreters, in these words, Of them ye shall kill and
crucify, and of them ye shall scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from
City to City.


1 The ground and reason of this miserable and wretched condition on mankind,
is this, because they interpose something between God, and their supposed or
expected good and happy estate, as these interpose their fathers living before
them, and their supposed present good estate, in their not murdering the
Prophets: For thence it comes to pass that man becomes the Serpent, even the
Devil himself, as Christ affirms of Judas; Have not I chosen you twelve, and
one of you is a Devil, John 6. 70. 71? who interposed riches the love of
money, between the Son of God and himself, Mat. 26. 14, 15, 16. This Spirit
which interposeth something between God and it self, is the proper Author of
all mischief that ever came upon the sons of men, which seems to be a proper
maxim in the doctrine of the Priesthood of this age, that in the knowledge of
Christ every one must keep his S^cundumidem, a certain distinction or distance
between Christ and a Christian; that whatsoever is in Christ, Believers have
somewhat according to that, or after the manner of it, something resembling, or
like it, but not the very same; this is a Pillar set up which all must bow
unto, which is to appoint men to keep alive and preserve the life of the
Serpent. For to interpose any thing (if but a difference in any thing) between
Christ and a Christian, between one Son of God and the rest of sons, is to keep
alive the spirit of the Serpent in the world, by the falsifying of that word of
God uttered in Christ: So it was in the beginning; it is the very voice that
uttered it self in the Serpent at the first, and in his offspring unto this
day; For according to his consultation with the woman, or in the woman, as she
is taken with respect unto the fall of man from God; for, as the man is called
Enosh, with respect to shame, as well as Ish, with respect to honor; even so
the woman is called Eve, as being the original of shame, Genesis 3. 20. 21. 2 Cor.
11. 3. as she is called Isha, of ^sh, with respect to honor and dignity, Genesis
2. 23.

And with respect unto shame the woman is brought in, as never having any other
consultation but with, or in the Serpent, from her very first being; therefore
the Serpent faith, (as answering to a former discourse of the woman (the
beginning whereof cannot be terminated) Yea, has God said, thou shall not eat
of every tree in the Garden, Genesis 3. 1? Nay, but God knows that if you eat,
you shall have your eyes opened in that day, and be as Gods knowing good and
evil, and by that suggestion secretly denies them to be such for the present
as were in the perfect image and likeness of God, wherein God had affirmed he
had made them, Genesis 1. 27. Genesis 2. 7. and so does this Serpent by false
interpretation interpose the eating of the Tree, between their present estate,
and the completing and perfecting of the word and work of God, which was
passed upon them; as false Teachers ever bring in something to interpose
between God and that happy and perfect estate of Christ, as the spirit of
bondage in the elect, before the spirit of adoption, the pangs of death in the
terrors of the law, before that peace and quiet of the law of the spirit of
life* which is, and ever was in Christ Jesus, yea a state of innocence, wherein
is no need of Christ, before that blessed enjoyment of that image and likeness
of the eternal Son of God.

A state of sin in the Saints, wherein they are out of the favor of God a
time, before their participation of that righteousness and holiness of
Christ, which has the favor and love of God eternally annexed thereunto; yea,
a certain womb of a woman living in such a time and age of the world, before
the glorious and perfect revelation and appearance of the Son of God in the
sons of men; yea they interpose so many hundred years between God, and the
perfection of the son of man Jesus Christ, not knowing the diverse names which
the son of God has assumed and taken up, to express his real appearance and
presence by; for he is called Adam as well as Jesus, David, or Solomon, as well
as Christ, one that departs and goes away from us, or else the Comforter comes
not* John 16. 7. as well as he is said to be Emanuel, God with us, Isaiah 7.
14. Mat. 1. 23.

Yea, he is that Alpha, the first Letter or Figure in the Alphabet, and also
that Omega, the last, Revel. 22. 13. without which, and all the figures and
letters contained between them, no point of the law of faith can be spelled out
right, so as to contain the mind and will of the Author thereof, but prove a
deceitful interpretation, wherein the spirit of the Serpent does ever consist:
for these are they who interpose the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil to be
eaten of, or communicated with, to bring man to happiness, instead of that
Tree of life eternal, which is in Christ Jesus, that son of eternity, without
whom nothing was made, John 1. 3. which tree of life, Revel. 2. 7. has seed in
it self, sufficient to preserve it self for ever, without interposition of any
thing whatsoever, Gen 1. 12. 1 John 3. 9.

For he that brings in any thing to add unto, or to perfect Gods act and
workmanship, to make it more wise or holy than for the p^esent it is, as is the
pretense of such as say, the work of God is begun in the Saints here on earth,
but not perfected till death and departure hence; these persons if they hold
the unity of faith, as they say they do, that God and man are made one in
Christ, then are they no more twain, but one, Mat. 19. 5. 6. new man* Ephesians. 2.
15. or one Flesh, Ephesians. 5. 31. 3^. So that those who by their endeavors in
bodily exercises go about to make that condition better than at present it is
in it self, as to make it more wise, more holy, more able and sufficient, such
go about to amend and make better the son of God, as for present wanting
wisdom, holiness, power, or glory, which it may in tract of time, and means
used attain unto, either by bringing in somewhat which is not yet come between
God and his people, as sorrow, repentance, baptism, supper, fast, or some way
of ministry not yet raised up, or else not come to its growth and perfection,
or else by casting out something which for present stands between God and us,
as fin, guilt, defects, insufficiency and imperfections.

Now the fear, jealousy, and suspicion, the pride, presumption and ambition of
this spirit, let us read it in the woman and the serpent from the beginning,

Again, if we say it is we, as we are men, that must be made better by our
endeavors and use of means, and not the son of God, then we divide our selves
from Christ, making his condition one, and our own another, which is to divide
Christ, and has ever been from the beginning that main bar of infidelity that
shuts men out from entering into that rest of God, Heb. 4. 1. 2. 7. which is to
interpose some good thing, yet to be attained by doing or suffering, that is
not yet in its perfection in the state of a Saint of God; this is to reckon and
account of our selves according to the proportion and measure of a Creature,
and not according to the dimensions of the son of God, which is, and ever was
that great contest between the Angel of God, and the Devil about the body of
Moses, or incorporated state, according to law, whether it is to be measured
according to the periods and limitations of the Creature, or according to the
illimited and immense condition, and incomprehensible state of the son of God,
Zach. 3. 1. 2. Jude 9.

Again, if we interpose a thing that is evil between God and the perfection of
his Son or Saints, as sin, Devil, fall of man, terrors of the law, spots and
breaches in our sanctification, stains of conscieuce, and the like; then we
either add unto the death of Christ, who is a lamb s^ain from the beginning,
Revel. 13. 8. who was made sin for us, or in our nature, in them that perish,
proportionable unto that righteousness of God, which we that believe are made
in him, or in that nature divine, which is infinite, and therefore neither sin
nor righteousness can admit of increase or diminution, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 2 Pet. 1.
4. Christ then having perfectly suffered, the just for the unjust, nothing is
to be added thereunto, under the pain of making his death ineffectuall, 1 Pet.
3. 18. which it is in every one who makes it not perfect, infinite, and all
sufficient. And if the evils we bring in be such as concern us, and not the son
of God, then we take them up upon our selves, as we being the saviors and
deliverers of our selves, being out of that proper state and condition of the
son of God, and so deny the death of the son of God to be that which it is;
namely, to comprehend and comprize a^l evil whatsoever, as his life
comprehends all good, and so take upon us to bear our own burden in that state
of death, and of the damned for ever.

And thus false Interpreters bring in a Tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
to be communicated with, in the perfecting of the word and work of God which is
the way of the Serpent in his seed at this day, which ever kills and murders the
true Prophet in not suffering the life and Spirit of the word of God to come
forth and appear, which life is ever taken away by them, to raise up, advance,
and maintain the life of the flesh, in all the lusts, pride, glory, power, and
abominations thereof, according to their present state, as they can stand with
the rank and station wherein they are set, or serve in way of further
preferment. Therefore says Christ, Behold, that is, look up and wonder, to
your astonishment and overthrow for ever, for so much the word, Behold, imports
in this place.

I send unto you, says he, Prophets, etc. the persons to whom he speaks here,
are false Interpreters, who judge falsely of the word and work of God, whether
in themselves, teaching and declaring it to others; or approving it from
others, it matters not, it is alike detestable in all; the Serpent divulging,
and the woman approving, is all one in this point; and to parties of this rank
and quality, the son of God utters these words, Behold I send unto yon
Prophets, Wise men, and Scribes, which are all taken in a good sense, as good
and holy men (in this place) sent from the Lord our righteousness; from whence
this question may be moved; namely, how the word of God by good men, yea, by
the Son of God himself may be said to be sent to wicked men, yea to false
Interpreters thereof, which spirit of falsehood is never found but in the Devil
himself.

1 This point narrowly scanned, may breed some commotion in the mind of man;
for if God send his word unto the wicked, which has salvation in it, then if
he deal plainly with them (whose nature it is so to do) his intent is to do
them good thereby, and to save them; and if so, then salvation depends upon the
will of the Creature, in the approving or disallowing, in its reception or
rejection thereof.

2 Again, if God do not intend their salvation, that is, of these wicked
Scribes and Pharisees unto whom he sends it, then he may seem to pretend one
thing in sending it unto them, and to intend an other, which is deceit, and
therefore he being a God of truth, which cannot lie or feign a thing to be
which is not, it may seem that he sends his word only unto the elect of God,
which is contrary unto this expression of Christ; but the son of God being one,
is at unity in all his enterprises.

3 Furthermore the waters may seem to be troubled in this point, in regard that
the word of God was never sincerely expressed, as the word of God sent from
him, but by one who is of the faith of Jesus, made one with God by vert^e of
that covenant of grace in Christ; for in other way, the Lord never sent, nor
uttered himself in his own language, and upon his own proper terms, for
otherwise it is not the word of God, but the word of man, which is naught, and
brings to naught.

Therefore if the word of God be sent by a Prophet, a Wise man, or Scribe, men
that are godly and holy, as the word is holy, being one with it; for the word
of Christ never appeared, nor uttered it self, but in and by the spirit of man,
for if it come not from him in whom God and man consist in one, it is not the
word of Christ; how then can it be sent to all wicked men seeing as many men
live and dye, and a godly man never comes nigh unto them; yea it may be as is
like, people and nations; if we look but upon the Moors, Indians, and
Barbarians in these our days; doubtless it is and has been the case of many
thousand men in the world, never to hear a Prophet, and holy man of God speak,
although Scribes and Pharisees may speak plentifully for their own advantage,
as also many Infants dying before they have the use of reason; a godly man
therefore can never be sent or expesse himself unto them.

4 Add further, the voice of Satan never uttered it self, but as man was really
considered therein: so it was in Cain, in whom Satan is said to be a murderer
from the beginning, and so he is in all who wander in that way of Cain unto
this day: how comes it to pass then that Satan is said to tempt the Saints
when no wicked man is found near, nor seems to know thereof? for the heart of
man is deceitful above measure, who can know it, save only the Lord who
searches the same? Ier. 17. 9, 10. And every man is said to be tempted, when
he is drawn aside of his own lust, Iam. 1. 14. and Christ was tempted of the
Devil, where we read of none to be in that place, (but wild Beasts at that
time) saving himself and Satan, Mar. 1. 12. for at Satan's departure the Angels
are said to minister unto him, Mat. 4. 11, if then Satan tempt not, but in the
wick ed men of the world, how could Christ be tempted, and no wicked man there?

Answ. For answer therefore unto the question propounded, to clear the point to
our understandings, we first address our selves to lay down certain
conclusions, whereupon to build the answer, in the confirmation thereof.

1 First, that it is the word of God, whereby God and man become one; for by
the word of God alone, all things are accomplished and brought to pass: He
spoke, and it was done, he com manded, and it stood fast, Psalm. 33. 9. it is
the word that made a^l things, and it is the word that conserves all things
unto this day, Psalm. 119. 89. 90. 91.

Now the word of God is the will of God, and the will of God is the law of God,
as the word signifies, where it is said, Thy will be don, may as fitly be read,
thy law be don, Mat. 6. 10. and there is no law without a relation; therefore
the word or will of God, which is God himself, never was considerable nor did
acknowledge or own it self, but in that relation of God and man in Jesus
Christ, for that which is not all things, is not God, and he cannot be a
Creature as well as a Creator, but in Christ, he cannot be death as well as
life, but in Christ, he cannot be in time as well as eternal, but in Christ,
he cannot be a saved as well as a Savior, but in Christ, he cannot be a son as
well as a father, but in Christ, no, he cannot be that mutual espousall, so
set forth in their ornaments in that song of songs, which is Solomon's, to bring
forth his own proper offspring in the fruits of righteousness, but in Christ,
so that the Almighty and illimited one, not subject to time, stretches out it
self unto all times, taking into unity man's nature or manner of being, who is
truly said to be in time, and in that unity, the word of God does consist, and
out of it the creating virtue, and saving power of the word of God never
uttered it self, nor was the will or law of God, or God himself ever known or
found out of^ that consistence of God and man in one undivided act or being; he
was never God without an act, nor was he ever act without being God, his
operation gives form to Christ, and the form of Christ is the word of God, by
whom, and through whom; and for whom are all things, Romans 11. 36.

The subtle Philosophers of this age, who cunningly work in that art of the
Magicians, or Wise men of Egypt, in going about to describe God by the
delineation of several names and attributes, in a simple divine essence or
being, without respect unto, or any union had, with mankind; these are pure and
absolute Atheists and denyers of God, in that they prescribe a sta e of divine
being, wherein the son of God, as Jesus Christ, is neither reckonable, nor of
any use; this is as absolute and abominable Atheism* as to conclude that the
Creature, that is, the whole visible Creation, did produce it self, and give
it self form and motion, without the Almighty power of an infinite and eternal
God, for to describe or bring to light the Creator in any thing without respect
unto the Creature, is all one as to describe and bring forth the Creature
without respect unto a Creator, and how abominable that is let all men judge,
the one is the doctrine of the Priesthood of the world in their catechizing,
orthodox, evangelized divinity, and the other is, the doctrine of the
Soothsayers and Star-gazers, in their Astrological and prophetical fictions,
both of them alike deceiving the world in all ages thereof, Isaiah 47 13. 14.
15. Dan. 1. 20. Dan. 2. 27. 28.

2 A second conclusion for the answer of the question propounded is, that the
word of God never uttered it self, but as it lays it self in a twofold
fountain: for it could never utter it self, in that simple and single bosom of
eternity, for so there were not any thing to utter it self unto, and then
there can be no publication thereof, and therefore must be founded in a
creature to spring up from thence: therefore the Psalmist affirms, that out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have founded strength, Psalm 8. 2. that
is, thou have not only established and grounded all thy praises, there, but
thou have fitted and made them most perfect in that way, as the greek word
Katerti^o signifies, which the Apostle uses, Mat. 21. 16.

A like phrase is used concerning the enemies of Christ, they set themselves,
and take counsel together, that is, (as the words there import) they have laid
their plot and foundation, as persons united to accomplish their designs, Psalm
2. 2. so God has laid the platform and foundation of the manifestation of
himself in all his ways and works whatsoever in Christ, the weaklings of the
world who have no help of man at all, that they can any way depend upon, Psalm
146. 3. 4. Psalm 60. 11.

So that the word of God is laid and founded in the Creature, as truly as in
the Creator, to spring up and utter it self from the unity of them both, or
else how came the Creature to exist, if the word of God did not spring up in it
and utter it self thereby? only observe this, that as man was the last in the
Creation, as the end and scope of all, who only was made in the image of God,
even so the proper drift and scope of the word of God in a l the rest of Gods
works runs properly unto mankind as being that Masterpeece of all Gods works,
wherein the word of God only terminates it self, and not elsewhere, as in any
other Creature whatsoever in Heaven or Earth: for all the rest of the Creatures
are but as the hand in the Dyal, or sound of the Clock, which proclaim and
point at time, which they themselves are not, but may give true or false
intelligence according to the skill of him who has the ordering of them: even
so all the rest of the Creatures they point at, and poclame Christ, as another
thing, than any, or all of themselves are, and may give true or false
intelligence according to the wisdom or folly of that spirit by which they are
managed, even as the word of God does by true or false interpretation thereof,
in the heart or mouth of him who has the management of the same.

3 Thirdly, consider that the word of God terminated in the Creator, and in the
Creature, there is to be considered in the height and perfection of the one,
and of the other, a distinct wisdom, that is to say, a wisdom peculiar to God,
with respect unto the Creature, and a wisdom proper unto man with respect unto
God, by virtue whereof the same thing is formed and uttered in the wisdom of
the Creature, that is, in the wisdom and knowledge peculiar to God, and
therefore all things in the beginning are said to be good, that is, acceptable
and desirable unto man, as well as approvable unto God, so that there is
nothing in the visible Creation that man can reject, or desire to have
annihilated, and not to be, if he knew but the nature, end and use thereof,
with respect to himself; therefore all things are said to be good, both in
man's account, and in the account of God, so that whatsoever man called the
Creature, so its name was concluded to be by the Creator, Genesis 2. 19. 20. And
therefore the Apostle affirms of all men universally, the word i^ nigh thee, in
thy heart, and in thy mouth, Romans 10. 8. in order unto this, that man's wisdom
frames alike thing unto it self, that the wisdom of God does, the one being
the shadow without the substance, and therefore a lie and vanity, the other the
substance in the vanishing of the shadow, and therefore truth and verity.

If the wisdom of God express it self in way of King and Kingdom, Psalm 2. 6.
Psalm 74. 12. Genesis 14. 18. Psalm ^49. 2. the wisdom of man forrneth and
expresses it self in the like thing; if the wisdom of God express it self in
Priest, Prophet, War, Peace, Father, Son, Husband, Wife, Eating, drinking,
marriage, giving in marriage, City, Town, Fort and Tower, Youth and Age, Labor
or Rest, Night and Day, Summer, Winter, Seedtime and Harvest, Feasting or Fast,
the wisdom of man naturally expresses ir self in the same things, and so
expects a Savior in some, to whom power is committed above the rest, and an
anointed in some of more worth than the rest, as they are constitnted and
appointed by the Creature, else they are not such* yea in all points of trade,
Merchandise and Husbandry, man's wisdom speaks the same thing which the word and
wisdom of God does, Ezekiel. 27. Prove. 3. 14. Mat. 13. 45.-48. Isaiah 28. 24.-29.
the same expressions therefore wherein the wisdom of God teaches his people, are
engraven in the wisdom of man naturally* which Characters being taken for the
thing intended by God, is nothing else but the wisdom of the Serpent which
beguiles the men of the world, which Characters humane are by the wisdom of God
in all the Saints of God, as that handwriting contained in ordinances,
nullified, cancelled, and brought to naught, Ephesians. 20 15. Col. 2. 14.-19.

4 In the fourth place we conclude, that the word of God utters it self from
diverse principles, for according to the mind and wisdom of God in Christ, it
utters it self from eternal and unchangeable principles.

I^ it utter it self in way of King and Kingdom, it intends one that ever
reigns, Dan. 7. 27. Heb. 1. 8. i^ in Priest, he ever lives to make
intercession, and is after the order of Melchizedeck, Heb. 7. 3. 25. if in
Prophet, he ever foresees and interprets the Vision; if in Father, he is that
ancient of days, Dan. 7. 9. if in Son, his birthday is from the womb of the
early morning, that is, before the hills and mountains were made, Psalm 1^0. 3.
Psalm 90. 1. 2. if it speak of life, it lasts for ever; if of death, it is
eternal; if of Captain, it is he that leads captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. and
if it speak of war, it is that which never cease, 1 Pet. 5. 8. 9. Jude 3.
Although Melchizede^k knows how to reign in peace, as in Salem, in Abraham's
conquest and victory, when all the Kings of the Nation are in strife, and at
enmity, Genesis 1^.

But the wisdom humane utters it self upon principles momentany and transient,
as now man is clothed with the righteousness of the Son of God by faith in
Christ, but in the beginning man stood just before God, in a certain
innocence, which was not that righteousness of the son of God, Jesus Christ,
therefore transient, it is past away; for the righteousness of God is
sufficient for the Saints, and then all other is superfluous; neither was there
ever any other but such as is coined by the Pharisee; so also it says now the
Saints are in light, but there was a time when they were in darkness; now they
are converted and alive unto God, but ^here was a time when they were dead in
that respect; now they are under sin, but at such a time there was no sin, that
is, in the time of that false and counterfeited innocence; now the Saints are
remote from Christ but a time will come when they shall be near him* now they
have faith and hope, but then they shall have need of neither.

Yea, they make Christ a momentany and transient thing, saying, that now he is
one with man's nature, but the time was when he was not one with it, nor had any
use thereof; as also they affi m that now he is alive in the same sense, wherein
he was said to be dead, according to the proper intent of the word of God,
which makes him a transient and changeable son, sometime a live, and sometime
dead in the same respect in the intent of Scripture

Yea these men make God himself according to their Philosophical description
of him, to be a transient and changeable God, for they teach that he was once
well pleased with mankind universally without any exception, but in the fall he
was displeased with them, which is to make a change in the Allmighty and that
now he is offended and displeased with his Saints on earth in many things, till
repentance has wrought peace again, but the time will come when he will be
well pleased with them in all things; yea, and that he was once well pleased
with the Devil* but now he is at enmity with him, which enmity against Satan
therefore cannot be eternal, and so there is a dislike or disowning in God
which is not eternal, God then is not like himself, nor suitable to his own
nature; therefore by the doctrine springing out of these humane principles, for
it makes God momentany and transient, and in such principles consists the
spirit of that old Serpent the Devil and Satan from the beginning until now,
and the more studiously men exercise their thoughts upon such grounds and
principles, the further they wander out of the way, and stray from God, in the
sight of all good men, making it clear and manifest unto whom they belong, and
of what brood and offspring they are.

5 The fifth conclusion is, that the word of God is of like concernment in all
men, and takes hold of them with like force, whether it be laid in the way of
the blessing or of the curse; for it is of like concernment to maintain and
uphold the principles of the Creature, that it is to maintain and uphold the
principles peculiar to God; for if the principles of the Creature were not
upheld to their height, which argue themselves into the place, office, and seat
of God, 2 These. 2. 3. 4. then there were no place for the curse, and then the
redemption of Christ were without virtue, in that it delivered from no wretched
nor cursed condition, and then praise-worthinesse due unto God should cease,
having no matter, nor cause from which to take place.

Again, if man's principles were not maintained, as well as the principles
peculiar to God, the word and work of God should fail and be extinct; for the
word of God never uttered it self, nor did the work of God exist, but in order
to Gods wisdom framing the Son of man into its own likeness, making him in
conformity with it self, which is the state of the Son of God Jesus Christ, as
also the wisdom of man framing the Son of God into its own similitude and
likeness, conforming him into the proportion of natural and earthly
principles, which is the state of Antichrist, that son of perdition, and if
either of these should fail, the word and work of God should fail, which are
as durable as God himself, Psalm. 119. 89. 90.

The word of God therefore takes hold of all men, yea of whole mankind with
like authority and force, both in way of the curse, as also in the way of
blessedness, for each maintains its own proper principles as upon life and
death; for in case man's principles and reasonings should take place, and bear
sway in a Saint, the life and spirit of God should be extinct, and if the
wisdom and argument of the Son of God should take place and bear sway in any
wicked man, then the spirit of Satan whereby he lives would be extinct, so that
each of them has the fo^ce and authority of life and death upon them, than the
which a greater bond cannot be; for if the force and authority of the word of
God were not of like power in point of wrath in the way of the curse, as to
hold proportion with the word of blessing and peace, then could not the word of
God hold proportion with it self, which must of necessity be in all things, of
an infinite and illimited force and authority.

6 In the sixth place we conclude, that the word of God has ordained and
necessitated it self to come unto all men in way of interpretation, and that in
all its expressions and intimations whatsoever, because it speaks and utters it
self in mankind from diverse principles, and therefore the word must be
interpreted or translated ^ut of one into another, that is, out of one proper
speech or language into another, and the very formings and fashionings of the
heart is the proper speech or language of man, therefore the abundance of the
heart is that which he speaks, Mat. 12 34 Now God has taken up all things of
man as he has respect to all Creatures, to utter and reveal his secret wisdom
and counsel by in Christ, the spirit of God therefore in the Saints, takes out
the mind and meaning of God from that original Copy naturally written in the
Tables of stone, in all men's hearts, and translates it according to that wisdom
of God in Christ, into the fleshy Tables of the heart, fitted to receive the
impressions of God, by the removal of those stony, strong and earthly
apprehensions and conclusions which man naturally conceivs and concludes within
himself from the word of God; so that Gods true intent according to the
dictate of his spirit being taken out of that husk or shell, wherein it is
expressed, is no more the language of the flesh, but of the spirit, and this is
of necessity to be done in the conservation of the Spirit and life of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God.

Again, the spirit of error and false interpretation takes out of that
original copy of the wisdom of G d that law of the spirit of life in Christ,
and translates it into principles and conclusions humane, proper to the
thoughts, device and invention of a Creature, terminating the mind and will of
God in things limited by time, place and person, things transitory, which
cannot hold proportion with the Son of God, and by means of this translation*
it is no more the language of the spirit, but the language of the flesh, and so
the dictates of the Serpent, the mind and will of Satan, who captivates man by
the lusts of his own heart, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

Furthermore, the word of God is not the word of life without interpretation,
as it is translated out of death into life, therefore he says, Thou will not
leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see Corruption,
Psalm. 16. 10. Neither is the spirit of God, a spirit of Revelation, nor has
the honor of opening the mind of the father, in any, without this grace of
interpretation, whereby man is conformed unto the image and similitude of the
Son of God.

Add further, that man cannot lay claim to his proper being and prerogative
(as he is wicked) namely, to be wiser than the beasts of the field, or to have
dominion over the inferior Creatures, but as he translates the excellencies of
God into his own humane principles, and thereby exalts himself as Lord over all
the works of Gods hand, and by this his translation he interprets the word of
God in direct opposition unto Gods true intent, and proper meaning, in that
original Copy of Gods wisdom in Christ presented unto the world, and hereby
are the principles of humane wisdom set up to bear sway in the world, in the
vilifying of the wisdom of God in Christ, by which means the life of Satan is
continued in the sons of mortal men.

And this interpretation is by translating one tongue and language into
another, which cannot be done but by presenting the original Copy which by
this means is cast aside and vilified, as to be no more embraced nor accepted,
and in this presentation of the original Copy of the wisdom of God, which
cannot but be acknowledged by all men, ought to be magnified, and submitted
unto by all, does the answer of the question propounded consist; for in this
representation of the wisdom of God unto mankind, contained in such, yea the
same expressions written upon every man's heart herein, does the spirit of the
Prophet, the Wisemen and Scribes visit all the wicked of the world; yea there
where never good man bodily appeared a d in their rejection of the wisdom of
God, and embracing the wisdom of the flesh, they kill the spirit of the
Prophets, persecute and evilly entreat them, to their own destruction, and
final overthrow.

So that the word of God in way of the curse, as it utters it self in the
principles proper to a creature, cannot take account of it self in the
conservation of those principles and aptitudes, but as it terminates the mind
of the spirit of God in them which is an utter cessation of the proper language
of the Son of God, and killing of the spirit of the Prophets, of which spirit
and state of the Son of God there is not one Prophet, wise man, or Scribe in
Gods esteem and account suffered to live in the world; for the son of God
reckons and accounts of himself, only according to that wisdom, which
eternizeth all things in his estate and condition; for though the Son of God be
a Creature, as well as a Creator, yet his estate, through that unity of both,
is an eternal estate and condition, so that the spirit of the word of God, is
sent unto, and presents it self to all men whatsoever, in the very same things
themselves speak* as that the most Excellent is to have the pre-eminence, who
is the Author of all things, and the end of them also; and if this be but
granted, which no man can deny (for Pharaoh in his sober mood will acknowledge
Gods preheminency) of what worth, or of what excellent use then shall any
temporary thing be accounted, or appear to be, if God have pre-eminence in
wisdom, power, authority, riches, peace, plenty, friendship, and the like;
every thing in him is full and complete in whomsoever he communicates the same,
where then is there a vacuum found for, or a necessary use of, the glory,
wisdom, power, authority, friendship, riches and prosperity of the world, to
make the Saints of God more honorable prosperous or excellent, than that
wherein their proper being does consist, which the world cannot give, neither
can they take it away, nor work a diminution thereof in the least.

Note hence, that in regard the glory of the Creature is of no use, but
altogether blasted and withered as grass, wheresoever the spirit of God
breaths as a North wind, and as the South wind upon the garden of God, that the
Spices thereof may flow out, when the beloved comes to eat his pleasant fruit,
Isaia 40. 6. 7. 8. James 1. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 24. Cant. 4. 16. Therefore it is,
that the wisdom of the Creature, to exalt flesh, in preferring it before the
life and spirit of the Lord Jesus (who lives for ever) terminates the word of
God in carnal and terrene things, according to its own principles, whereby it
preserves a carnal and sensual life in its self, contradictory to the life and
spirit of the son of God, and the spirit and life of all true prophecy or
found interpretation of the word of God, and so quenches the spirit, and
despises prophecy, 1 These. 5. 19. 20. pursuing carnal doctrine and bodily
exercises upon the life and death of his spirit, being engaged and bound over
thereunto by the carnal Commandment, Customs and Traditions of men, and
thereby expungeth and evacuateth the life and spirit of the Scripture, which is
the life and spirit of the son of God, who is the only Prophet of the Church
singularly considered, and all the Prophets of the Church, in a true and real
distribution, and plural acceptance, according to the mind of the Scriptures,
Canticles 1. 3.

We conclude then in order to the question, that no man can carnalize the word
of God, out of the Characters written in his own heart, Romans 2. 13. 14. 15. 16.
(in which expressions, the spirit is involved) but his heart is touched with a
higher thing than himself can form in his present act, therefore Christ is
still to come, or has been here, but is departed in the judgment or doctrine
of a carnal Jew or Gentile, and takes not a perfect and real form in any thing
they do or say; but something is of a higher nature which these steps are
ascending unto: shall we think that men constituting a Church of a company of
people who were no such thing the other day, and in a few years following it
shall come to nothing, are not touched with something of a higher, more
excellent, eminent and durable nature, which this is only a help or step to
attain unto; shall we think that men exercised in ordaining officers, for their
defense, safety, honor, and instruction, are not touched with higher things
which these lead unto; shall men be exercised in bread and wine and water,
chewed with the teeth, taken into the natural stomach, washing and dipping the
natural body, which food perishes, which water slideth away; are not these
men touched with matters of higher concernment then any of these things are, or
ever can be?

These touches and intimations therefore are the visitations of the spirit of
the true Prophet, sent unto these wicked, hypocritical and dissembling Scribes
and Pharisees, the blind guides of the world, whose vilification of the spirit
in preferring carnal Rites and Ordinances, is the rejection, persecution, and
killing of the spirit of the true Prophet, maintaining nothing but a dead
carcass of Religion, or dead bulk or body of the Scriptures in the world, for
their own gain, honor, cruelty, and contriving of means, and making of
engines and instruments to exercise their enmity upon the spirit of true
prophecy and interpretation, in the person of whomsoever it appears in the
world, and herein consists the very root and rise, the seed and offspring of
the Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan in his operations in the men of the
world as at this day.

Observe further in this point, that the word of God as it utters it self,
according to Gods wisdom upon principles proper to the eternal Son of God,
cannot take an account of it self in the conservation and maintaining of them,
nor can it speak its own proper language, but as the original copy out of
which it is translated presents it self, which is the letter of the Scripture,
the characters written upon man's heart, the very engine and instrument of
Satan, whereby he exalts himself; whereupon the spirit of revelation is
necessitated unto interpretation, taking out the mind of God in rejection of
the will and wiles of Satan, and so becomes an interpreter one of a thousand,
to declare unto man his righteousuesse to be such, as becomes the only begotten
Son of God, Job 33. 23. 24. translating the language of the Creature, into the
proper wisdom and speech of the Son of God, in whom the proper language which
man naturally speaks, with respect to the word of God has no place, nor do
humane principles bear any sway in him at all; therefore when the Mother of
Christ, according to the flesh would have had his glory to have appeared at the
marriage feast (in Canaan of Gallilee) to the end, to lift up such relations,
he says, Woman what have I to do with thee, my hour is not yet, John 2. 1. 2.
3. 4. that is, my glory consists not in any of these things, nor never shall;
therefore calls her woman, as not acknowledging natural relations, as coming
within the account of his proper time and oration.

Humane principles therefore in the intent and extent proper unto them, have no
place in Christ no more than the Devil himself has, who has no part in him,
John 14. ^0. But there is an utter cessation of them, both in respect of their
proper progenitor and off spring, and are cancelled as that handwriting of
Ordinances, which is against us being nailed unto the Cross of Christ, Colos.
2. 14. which otherwise are that partition wall set up and interposing
themselves between the sons of men and all that power, glory, comfort and
virtue proper unto the son of the living God, Ephesians. ^. 14. and in this
translation or in e pretation of the letter of the Scripture into words of
spirit and life, does consist the very root and rise, seed and off*spring of
that blessed sonship* which is of faith in the Son of God, which is not done
without the presentation of that language or copy, out of which it is
translated, or that state from which it is delivered, which original language
or condition (in them of its own proper house) thus presented unto the son of
God, has in it the power of darkness, the gates of hell, subtilty and wyles
of the Devil, Ephesians s. 6* 12. Colos. 1. 13. Mat. 16. 18. Ephesians. 6. 11. having a
sufficient power to subdue and overc^me, being it is exercised toward a man,
who by nature (in that respect) as he comes from the Earth, has the same
principles whereby Satan exalts himself, and wherein he exercises all his
subtilty, power and authority, in the hearts of men: But it is presented also
to him who has the wisdom, power* and spirit of God, by which he overcomes the
wiles of the Devil, quenches the fiery d^rts of Satan, suppressing the gates
of Hell, and ruina^^s the powers of darkness, without which wisdom, power and
spirit of God, it were impossible to escape, Mat. ^4 2^.

And thus the Devil tempted Christ in the wilderness where no man, but only
wild beasts are said to be present with him, Mark 1. 13. And yet no temptation
of Satan can appear, but as God and man are both concerned therein; for the
letter of the word, which is the proper language of man, is never taken up by
the Devil, or by an Idolathite (for they are one) 1 Cor. 10. 19. 20. but by or
in the expunging of the spirit, and proper intent, whereby God and man become
one, according to carnal and humane principles which is Satan, or that son of
perdition, as really as man being made one with God according to the divine and
godlike principles, is that holy son of God.

Now the conquest of Christ consists only in the translation or interpretation
of such carnal principles and argumentations, so alleged in the language of
^he Devil, and urged against the man Christ for his overthrow into those
spiritual and eternal principles proper to the Son of God, productions proper
to he intent of the spirit of God, and that whereby that mystical body of
Christ does eternally consist, which is the proper and only way and means of
conquest in all the Saints of God, of whom and not else it does consist* who
are one body, and one spirit, one mind, and heart, speaking the same thing,
knit together in one judgment, Ephesians. 4. 4. Colos. 2. 2. Phil. 1. 27* 1 Cor. 1.
^0

Again, the spirit of the Scripture never utters it self, but as one with man,
out of which consistence it never speaks, in which it brings man's wisdom and
proper principles to naught, 1 ^or. 2. 6. 8. and according to this consistence
it utters it self in its solicitations of the wicked in all the world, for
reason cannot give it self a being, conservation and continuation, but in
order to an infinite and allmighty power, and therefore the word of God as i^
presents it self unto wicked men in all ages of the world, has in it self
sufficient power and authority to subdue and win them unto God, because it
speaks to them in whom God is, as really a^ man is in Christ, who is by nature
of a gracious, propense, and yiedling spirit unto his own voice, even as it is
said that the spirit of the Prophets is subject unto the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.
32. and therefore it is an allmighty power of darkness, and that infinite
force of the curse of God, changing the glory of God into a corruptible thing
through this false interpretation (to the extinguishing in themselves the
spirit of Jesus, that spirit of grace, and word of life and salvation) which
hinders the good and happy success of this solicitation given by God, Rom 1.
23. Psalm 106. 19. 20. So that God is in the wicked, who is by nature ever in
readiness to yield himself to his own voice, and to be taken with the
solicitations of his own spirit, yet in the wicked it is rejected by the power
of the God of this world, who blinds the minds of the infidels, lest the power
o^ the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine in them, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

So in like manner man is in that state of Christ tempted by the Devil, who by
nature in respect of his own natural propensity is as readily won, and
yiedling unto Satan, as the sons of the coal are apt to fly upward, Job 5. 7
but by that allmighty power and wisdom of that spirit, proper to the Son of
God, they are rejected, vanquished and overcome unto perpetual victory and
triumph, Hos. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 55. 5^. 57. And in the one, and in the other
of these visitations, the one unto life, the other unto death, the blessing and
the curse of God are reserved and kept in motion and exercise for ever.

And in one of these, namely the true translation and interpretation of the
word of God, which renders unto God his proper due and right in all things (as
being of him, and for him and to him) the exaltation and exercise of Christ,
(as the only begotten of God, and heir of all things) does consist. And in the
other, namely the fal^e translation and interpretation of the word of God, does
consist the employment and downfall of the devil, who cannot abide the truth,
who is that son of perdition and destruction; and by this means becomes that
deaf Adder, who will not hear, no though the Charmer charm never so wisely;
that is, though the word of God be presented unto him as a sweet and melodious
song of salvation speaking the very same thing which man utters in his own
heart, and it is that which unites and ties all Creatures to consort together;
namely, uttering the same voice* being of the same language, and thence it is
that Charmers use the same voice, note or tune, which the Creature has whom
they would charm, or allure to come out of their affected Course or Thickers
wherein they have hid themselves, as man in his guilt did in the beginning,
Genesis 3. 8. 9. 10. Yet will not the wicked hear, but by this earthly
translation, and false interpretation stops his ear, lest the word of life
should take hold of him to work him thereto, that so he may retain his own
language, in his own proper construction and principles, together with the
poysonfull and cruel practices, properly accompanying and appertaining
thereunto, still silencing in him self, and putting to death the spirit of all
true prophecy and righteousness of Saints by Jesus Christ whom he crucifies,
Heb. 6. 6. which he can no more cease to do, nor depart from, than he can cease
or depart from his own being; for every wicked man (that prevaricates the law
of God, and teaches men so to do) Mat. 5. 19. is habituated in the aptitudes
of Satan, and not of the son of God, John 8. 44. and of such certainty and
voluntary choice, is the curse of God founded in all the proper authors and
subjects thereof.

And so much at this time, in answer to that question, how God sends his
message and Ministers to wicked Scribes and Pharisees, and yet neither salvation
nor destruction depends upon the will of man as he is simply a Creature, nor
does God tender salvation besides his intent to the wicked, the Devil not
excepted, no more then Satan tempted the son of God besides or contrary to his
intent to overcome.

The next point noted in the Text is the party sending these Ministers and
Messengers, and that is Christ; Behold I send unto you, Prophets, Wise*men and
Scribes, in which words Christ secretly insinuates his own proper state and
condition, manifesting his wisdom and skill, in that he translates the
speeches and practice of these wicked and deceitful Interpreters into a
spiritual and heavenly respect and relation in himself, that as they relate
themselves unto their fathers, who they confess to be Murderers, and so bring
guilt upon themselves, as they are their offspring; so Christ relates himself
unto God that heavenly father, and makes himself one with him, as appears by
the conferrance of the Evangelists, for Luke has it thus; Therefore said the
wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, Luke 11. 49. or as the
word will bear, the wisdom of God says, in the present tense, as being a
present and continued act; and Matthew has it, Behold I send plainly declaring
the wisdom of God and himself to be one and the same thing, and Gods act in
sending, and his own, to be one and the same power and authority to invest into
office such Messengers; so that whatsoever the wisdom of God is, or what it
has done, the man Christ is the same; what platform it has laid what it has
devised, contrived, counseled about, uttered and brought to pass from the
beginning, that the man Christ Jesus is, it is his own present estate, and his
own proper and peculiar act; therefore Christ is called the wisdom of God, and
the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Prove. 8. Prove. 9. ^. 2. 3. 4. 5. and therefore
must be one with God in the root and foundation of all things; for it is not
another wisdom that gives being to the man of God to be that which he is than
gives being unto God himself to be that which he is, for he is not (in his own
proper nature and being) but in Christ, therefore Christ assumes most justly
the same title that God gives to himself when he sends Moses to Pharaoh in
Egypt, say, says he, I am have sent thee, Exodus 3. ^4. so Christ says to the
wicked Jews before Abraham was, I am, John 8. 58.

Whatsoever therefore the wisdom of God has said, and whatsoever has been
wrought and accomplished by i^, is all reckoned, and really accounted upon that
mystical body, and spiritual and holy being of Jesus Christ; what Prophets
have been sent, what wonders have been wrought, what revelations and
intercessions have b en made, what deliverances and salvations have appeared,
they are reckonable upon the true Interpreter and Revealer of the mind and
intent of the Father of Lights, where or whenever such an Interpreter
appears; not only what has been done in times past and at present, but also
what shall be effected and accomplished in time to come; therefore it is said,
the wisdom of God said, as in time past, I will send, as in time to come, and
behold I send, as an act in present being, and operation compare Luke 11. 49
with Mat. 23. 34. and so much for the insinuation of the state and dignity of
the party sending.

Secondly, observe who they are that are sent: Matthew says Prophets, Wisemen
and Scribes, and Luke says, Prophets and Apostles.

First, he sends Scribes, that is, such expounders of the Law, as are taught
unto the Kingdom of Heaven, bringing ^ut of his treasury things new and old,
Mat. 13. 52. Such as bring forth, and lay open the original Laws and Records
of the Kingdom of God, as they were first founded and laid in the beginning in
that platform and pattern seen and discerned only in the Mount, Heb. 8. 5. Act.
7. 44. Exodus 25. 40. Such a one as Ezra the Scribe, who brought out the Laws
and Records of the house of God, at the peoples return out of Babylon,
declaring plainly that original difference and unmeasurable distance that is
between the appointments and exercises proper to Gods house and Kingdom, and
those Ordinances and institutions of Babel, according to which the people of
God cannot tune an instrument to make any melody unto the Lord in a Song of
Zion; and all the people wept for joy, to behold their ancient right and
inheritance, in point of their glorious interest in the law of the spirit of
life, in opposition to the letter that kills, that building of Babylon, Ezra. 3.
10. 11 12. 13. Ezra. 7. 6. 11. Neh. 7. 4.-8. Psalm 137.

Such Scribes Christ sends to visit the world, yea to confound the
hypocritical and dissembling Scribes thereof, who prefer Babylon in the land
of ^hinar, before Zion the Mount of God.

Secondly, Christ sends Prophets, that is, such as foretell what shall come to
pass in the last days; yea, how these sent ones of God shall be entertained
by the men of the world, to the end thereof; For they are Seers to see a far
off; yea, what is to be in the utmost times, and farthest off lists of eternity
in respect of time to come* 2 Pet. ^9. 20. 21.

Thirdly, he sends unto them Wisemen, that is, such as have the spirit of
wisdom whereby they have sufficiency of skill to gather up the first foundation
and rise of things, so as to give them a real b^ing and exercise in the
present time, according to the proper scope and true intent of the Scriptures*
in what soever they express themselves; therefore it is that Christ says,
before Abraham was, I am* John 8. 58. and the gift of Prophecy, which went
before of Timothy, is to be in exercise in his present ministry, 1 Timothy ^. 14.

As also by this spirit of wisdom, the man of God knows how to cause the acts
of eternity (with respect to things to come) joyfully to face about, and
swiftly to countermarch to our present station, and to exercise themselves in
the present postures and operations wherein we are conversant, Ezekiel. 12. 27. 28.

Therefore it is, that Luke differs the phrase, abridging them into Prophets
and Apostles; Now we know that Apostles are Leaders to usher in the death,
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, as eye witnesses thereof; now an
eyewitness gives a real presence to the things testified, because his eye
does communicate in the things, else is there no ground of certainty for
judgment to pass, either in order to absolution or of condemnation.

Also a Prophet, foretell ing things to come, must likewise bring and state them
in present act and being; for he cannot be known to be a true Prophet, unless
the thing foretold become to pass, Ier. 28. 8. 9. And the reason of all this
is, because the work of God is an infinite, eternal and undivided act (as
himself is) which illustrates and conserves it self inpleasure and delight in
the Creature for ever, through the variety of operations, infinitely
comprehended in that one simple and entire act; so that no time nor place,
power, nor de^ect, can ever weave any thing thereinto, bearing another nature,
or working to another end than that which this simple and eternal act has
infinitely framed and disposed it self unto, Psalm 33. 9. 10. 11. And hence
Christ brings in that perpetuated act of false interpreters of the word of God,
in point of their entertainment of these Prophets and Apostles, who are thus
uncessantly sent unto them; that is, Of them ye shall kill, and crucify, and
of them shall ye scourge in your Synagogues and persecute from City to City.

1 they kill or murder them, as the word imports, that is, extort and take away
(without, or against law) the life and spirit of the prophecies and doctrines
contained in the word of God, of which Christ thus affirms; The words that I
speak they are spirit, and they are life, John 6. 63. and where the spirit and
proper intent of the Scriptures is taken away and extinct, there the life of
the Prophet is never found, but a dead carcass of the law of works; so that a
false Interpreter will not afford the word of God its proper place of
breathing; for the spirit of the Scriptures is the proper life of Christ, which
is in motion, wherever that is kept pure and preserved, even from everlasting
to everlasting; but these men stifle the word of God by confining it to times,
as thus, such parts of the word of God had their lively hood and operations in
the world, which is now past, and therefore not to be acted now, but only a
speculative or tipical use to be made thereof in our days, this is to murder
the Prophet; also such Scriptures are for our proper use to move and act by in
these days, which were not in times past, nor hereafter shall be of such use*
this is to murder the Prophet. Again, such Scriptures shall be in act herafter
(as many things in the revelation of John) which are not now to be practiced by
us in our days, this is to kill the Prophets* Again, they stifle the word o^
God by peece-mealing and confining it to persons, as that some places or parts
of the word of God are to be acted by some persons in place and office, but not
by others of the People of God, whereas Christ gives like liberty and like
restraint to all that are his, for as they are all firstborn of God, and
Kings, and Priests unto God, so are they all Subjects and Servants of God, and
one to another, Romans 12. 5* Moreover they confine the word of God to places; as
in such places it is not now heard of, but in such places the report of it is,
whereas the Apostle affirms, that with out all doubt or controversy, the sound
thereof is gone through the Earth, and their words unto the ends of the world,
Romans 10. 18.

These are the ways of strangling and murdering the Prophets, by expelling
the true spirit, and spacious intent of the word of God, in which life only
does consist, and ever did, in respect of the true being, motion and
conservation of the same, and to deny the word of God its proper and continued
operation and manner of being in the Saints of God, is all one, as to deny the
Son of God to be ever the same which i^ to cross and thwart the verdict of the
wisdom and spirit of God, Heb. 13. 8. and not to give Christ the extent of his
life, in the simplicity and integrity thereof, in his operations, in all times
and ages, yea, from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm 90 1. 2. is to kill and
take away the life of the Son of God, by measuring him according to the
dimensions of a creature, and not according to God; for he is made of God unto
us (or in us) that is, God is in the consistence, and the fullness of God gives
being to that state of the Son, and not the things of the creature; so that he
is made in us wisdom, righteousness, Sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
30. and that of God, not of the Creature, it is the righteousness of God, and
not a righteousness of a Creature, it is the wisdom of God, and not of a
Creature, it is the holiness of God, and not any thing proper to a mere
Creature, and so it is the Redemption of the Son of God, and not of one of
less worth, from all bondage, captivity and slavery, that he that ^loryeth,
may glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 31. or as the word is, that he that praises
himself may praise himself in the Lord; that is, we are to praise our selves,
or commend our selves in the things of God, and not of man; in the wisdom,
power, riches, righteousness, life, peace, truth, and holiness, roper unto
all mighty God, and not in any thing proper unto any, or all the Creatures.

For the word of God in the true and native signification thereof, was never
expressed but by the Spirit of God, for that only knows the mind of the Lord,
and searches the deep things of God, which none else ever did, neither can do,
1 Cor. 2. 9. 10. ^1. 12. neither was the word of God ever resident, or rightly
conceived according to Gods intent, but as in the mind of that Son of man, the
man Christ, and if his spirit and life be not extended and maintained according
to that form and comprehension of his mystical body (and otherwise he is not
taught a spiritual, but a carnal Christ) 2 Cor. 5. 16. then is his life and
spirit taken away; for not to give it to him, is to take it away, and so the
true Prophet is slain and crucified; for deny a Plant its residency in the
earth, and ye kill the Plant: deny a Fish her being in the water, and you kill
the Fish; deny the spirit of God its real residency and abode throughout the
whole Confines and Circumference of Christ his mystical and spiritual body,
and you kill the spirit of Christ, and have murdered the true Prophet in your
selves.

Count therefore, and reckon if you can, how many killers and murderers of the
Prophets there is extant at this day, who would be counted men that maintain
their lives, and say, if we had been in the days of Saul, Ahab, Iezabel, and
Herod, we would not have done as they did; or in the days of the Scribes,
Pharisees, Elders, Lawyers, and High Priests we would not have done as they
did; the proper plea of all such persons as these were is to kill the spirit of
the word, and build up the tomb of the letter.

2 They do not kill, but crucify those that are sent unto them, that is, they
nail or fasten them to the cross, or to the Gibbet, as the word Cross
signifies, or Gallows, which is the shamefulest Engines that man wisdom can
devise, to erect to take away the lives of such as are Enemies unto, or
Troublers of a state, a death fitter for a dog than a man made in the image of
God, a sensible and intelligible man cannot but be ashamed of his own kind (as
he is a man) to see a man bearing his form and visage to hang upon the gallows,
it is the shame of man, and therefore Christ is said to be made a curse, in
that he was hanged on a tree, Deuteronomy. 21. 23. Gal. 3. 13.

Now the crucifying or nailing of the man of God unto the Cross, or hanging
him on a tree, is the greatest shame can be done to the Son of God, which is by
false interpretation of the word of God, placing the glory of God, a consisting
in his humane offices and institutions, which is indeed the proper shame of the
Son of God, to account or esteem of him according to any momentany or transient
thing, whose Kingdom is eternal, Dan. 4. 3. 34. Heb. 1. 8. and therefore not
of this world, John 18. 36. for it affords nothing whereof a Kingdom of that
nature can be composed or ordered, but is the very inlet of the curse, and the
proper maintainer thereof in the world, being that whereunto the spirit of the
word is fastened, unto the giving up of the ghost of all those proper virtues
and livelihood appertaining unto the same, in all those who are proper actors,
in tying the spirit and intent of the word of God unto the outward form of
words, Grammatical and Logical construction of the Scriptures, who teach* that
the curse consists in being void and destitute of temporary Ordinances, power
and glory had and maintained by such institutions, and that they are cursed,
who seek to blast, and cause to wither such manner of glory, in whomsoever it
is promoted as chief to bear sway, which is no more, but to follow the Lords
direction in giving Caesar his due, in that which belongs unto him, Matthew 22.
verse 20. where Christ brings in Caesar in opposition unto God; and if all
manner of good be due unto God, and belong unto him, we must give him the glory
and right of it all, and then none belongs to any other; therefore the due of
Caesar must be all evil, according to the nature of that spirit which thus
comes to ensnare Christ, therefore nothing but p i would and cruelly, subtle and
mischievous devises and enterprises is to be expected or looked for, from the
world, wherever the glory of it bears sway, and the image and superscription of
the Son of God is not found, who is the brightness of the glory of the father,
which no man ever saw at any time, neither can a carnal eye behold it and
live, Heb. 1. 3. John 1. 18. 1 John 4. 12. Exodus 33. 20.

And therefore it is that the glory of the world (which is obvious unto man)
does vomit the spirit of the word of God out of their proper state and
condition, as an accursed and pernicious thing, as an enemy to Caesar, a
Sectary Schisma^ick-babler, broacher of new Opinions, a fellow of no learning,
or else too much learning has made him mad, an Allegorizer of the Scriptures,
or spiritual Leveller, though he meddle not with temporary privileges and
carnal interests; therefore it was that they hanged Christ upon a Tree,
between Heaven and Earth, as cast out of their jurisdiction, as being no part
of their Kingdom and glory, neither in point of subjection, nor rule and
command, and as the Revolution of the Heavens serve to putrify and corrupt a
dead body hanged upon a Tree, so is it with the revolutions of all wicked
states in the world, who corrupt and falsify the word of God; in all their
motions they corrupt and putrify that mystical body of Christ unto themselves
and become as guilty as those wicked Jews, in putting the innocent unto a cruel
and shameful death, because his doctrine exalts the glory of God, which is
eternal, wherein the life of Christ consists, and abaseth the glory of the
world, which is temporary, in which glory the life of Antichrist does consist;
yet it is not denied but a Servant of Christ may use the glory of the world in
the outward ^orm thereof, as though he used it not, 1 Cor. 7. 31. taking it up
only as a vanishing vapor, even as a limb of Antichrist may use the name of
God, when he makes small account thereof, but his heart is after the works and
power of Satan, Ezekiel 33. 30.-33. Mat. 27. 22. 23.

And because of this nailing of Christ unto the Cross, fastening his glory upon
temporary and carnal things, he complains against such wicked and carnal
Jews, saying they pierced my hands and my feet, Psalm 22. 16 that is, as the
feet are the instruments of motion, and the hands of skillful operation, and
curious works, which being nailed unto a Tree, there is a cessation of both; so
this fastening of the Spirit and glory of the word of God upon humane and
carnal things, as though that were the Law of the spirit of Life; this takes
away all that proper motion and skillful operation which the Lord Jesus has
exercised in his Saints from the foundation of the world, making a nullity of
them all.

Therefore contrary unto this, Christ nails this Law of the carnal Commandment
standing in the Ordinances of men, that handwriting which is against us, unto
that his Cross, where he is crucified in point of all spiritual life and
exercise, which is that accursed thing, Col. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 13. even that glory
of the world preverted before the glory of the Son of God, which is that wall
of partition or separation, interposed between the grace and favor of God, and
the sons of Adam, Ephesians. 2. 14. 15. and where the glory and power of the arm of
flesh is advanced, there is the proper place of residence for the carnal
Commandment, that middle wall of separation, for unto that is the separation
from God fastened for ever, and all carnal institutions in their proper nature
and kind are there to be found; for they are nailed there by the death of
Christ in point of all spirit and life, which are not in that way of
ministration to be found, nor never were, and yet therein does the Son of God
triumph over all carnal things, spoiling thereby Principalities and Powers*
making a show, or a shame of them openly, Gal. 2. 15. for as man being made of
the dust, is naturally carnal, but through that unity of faith, is become
spiritual in the word of life, and thereby is made King of Salem, or Prince of
Peace, set down at Gods right hand, as having conquest over all adverse power,
Heb. 7. 1. 2. Heb* 1. ^. Heb. 10. 12. 13. even so the word of God being by
nature spiritual, yet through man's infidelity or that unity of the Harlot, 1
Cor. 6. 16. it is become carnal by false interpretation, and so is made the
King of terror and fear, Job 18. 14. and contrary to its own nature is an
Executioner of wrath and vengeance, whereby he triumphs over the wicked, even
all Principalities and Powers of that nature, and is a just tormenter of them
eternally, thrusting down into Hell and that bottomless pit, even as man is
become a Savior, and lifts up unto the Throne of God, and Diadem of Heaven,
and hence it is, that God is said to be as a Lion, as a Bear, and as a Moth,
Lam. ^. 10. Amos 5. 18. 19. 20. Hos. 5. 12. and so many terms and titles of
horror and dread, are given unto him in the word of God, even as all power and
princely authority in Christ, peace, reconciliation, wisdom and judgment are
given to the Son of man, Mat. 28. 18. John 17. 2. Mat. 1. 21. John 5. 22.-27.

3 These false Interpreters scourge the men of God in their Synagogues, or
Assemblies; that is, there is no Combination, Session, Consociation, Coupling
together, or relation, according to the intent and exercise of a carnal
Commandment, terminating the word of God in fading and mortal things, but it
is the framing and twisting together of a whip or scourge shamefully and
ignominiously to beat or thresh out the spirit of the word of God, as a
Vagrant, and that which they cannot approve of.

For as Christ wips out the Buyers and Sellers, Money Changers, and all carnal
Commerce* to clear his Temple, and all the relations in his house, of all such
profane and common Commerce, because the intercour^e and mutual exchange
between God and man, are full in all points, through that plentiful Spirit, or
Spirit of plenty in Christ, where no need of any thing of another nature is
found, all being spiritual; even so false Interpreters whip out the spirit of
the Scrip ures in all their mutual converse in the way of the Harlot, to bring
in their own corrupt Commerce with God, according to their Jewish and carnal
institutions, in which the Spirit of God breathes nor, but is thereby extinct;
nor can a true Prophet be admitted amongst them, without a lash of what shame,
dishonor, or hardship they can possibly put upon him, to signify unto the
world, that he is rather a Vagabond than one of the household of Faith, an Heir
of Heaven, and Coheir with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and all this comes to pass,
because the spirit of a Christian can not but discover the spirit of falsehood,
hid under their hypocritical interpretation.

4 They persecute them from City to City, that is, they cruelly expel the
Spirit of the word of God, out of all the forms and orders in their
institutions, though they be many, as the orders of Cities are in the world, so
are the Ordinances of worship, as in way of Turk, Pope, inferior Bishop,
Presbyterian, Anabaptist, Separatist; but who can count how many Cities of this
nature? they are almost multiplied as men, for two are hardly found of one
mind; if their supposed principles were but ripped unto the bottom, there is
hardly a man but he will either be shaken out of himself, or run away in a
rage, before his nakedness be discovered; City Orders and forms of Religion
are multiplied in these days, much like those several Nations which Israel
passed by in the Wilderness, and met with in carnal Canaan, as named after
the son of Cham, the cursed, though they differ one from another among
themselves, yet they are all against Israel; even so all forms and statues of
worship, they all agree in this, to expel the Law of the Spirit of Life, which
is not extant, nor upon record, but only in Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 2. for
whatsoever their order or institution may be, if it terminate the word of God
in any transient thing that vanishes in time, there is no place of residency
or abode, for the Law of the Spirit in that City; whosoever therefore goes
about to lay a foundation in Gods building (not made with hands, but eternal
in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1.) according to the ancient customs of that Law of
the Spirit, as every true Zorubbabel and Nehemiah do, at their happy return out
of Babylon, then stands up Tobiah and Sanballat to hinder the work yea, to
expel and persecute all such enterprise and workmanship from every order and
institution of any humane constitution in the world, not permitting it to take
place, nor abide in peace in one or other, Order, Exercise, or Relation,
whatever it be, where holiness or righteousness is set and terminated in a
vanishing and terrene thing, to persecute the law of the Spirit, from Order to
Order, is to persecute the Saints that live thereby, and not to permit them a
place of residency; and they that persecute the Saints of God, they persecute
the man of God, even Christ himself, Luke 10. 16. John 13. 20. Now we come to
the Event and issue of this false dealing with the word of God, and the cruelty
manifested thereby, in all such in whom it appears, laid down in the Verses
following, 35. 36. That upon you may come all the righteous blood, that was
shed upon the Earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of
Zacharias the Son of Barachias whom ye slew between the Temple and the Altar:
Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this geneon. Luke has
it thus, that the blood of all the Prophets, shed from the foundation of the
World, may be required of this generation, from the blood of Abel, etc. Luke
11. 50. 51. Wherein observe two points: first, their guilt, Secondly, the
Progress and extent of that guilt: In the guilt, observe these things: 1 What
manner of blood it is, or whose blood it is, that is, righteous blood,
according to Matthew; the blood of all the Prophets, according to Luke. 2
Observe how it is dealt with, that is, it is shed, and the place where, upon
the Earth. 3 From what time it is shed, that is, from the foundation of the
World. 4 Unto what time, that is, to the present generation. 5 That of them it
is required, that is, of the present generation, as Luke records it. 6 And
lastly, that it comes upon them, according to Matthew.


For the first, the Spirit of God styles it righteous blood* and it affirms
also, that it is the blood of all the Prophets, from the foundation of the
World; so that there is the same guilt, in taking away the life of any of the
Saints or Prophets of God, that is, of any true Interpreter of the word of God,
in the present age, that ever was in the spilling of any righteous blood in the
world from the foundation thereof, Christ Jesus himself not exempted for there
is but one righteous life and death (as the word blood signifies both) which
are ever found in Christ, and never elsewhere, for in all the operations of
life, he is the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23. 6. by whom we live unto God,
now I live, not I any more, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20.

Again, there is but one righteous blood in point of death unto sin and Satan,
therefore Christ once suffered, and once offered up himself, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
Heb. 9. 26. Heb. 10. 10. which is not found but in Christ, for it is one act
which comprehends all the Saints; therefore the Apostle says, I now rejoice in
my sufferings for you, and fill up the remainder, or that which is behind of
the sufferings of Christ, Col. 1. 24. that is, I fulfill in my flesh that
offspring or posterity of the suffering of Christ, which are common unto that
incorporate body, according to the true intent and meannig thereof; shall we
think our selves to be the offspring and posterity of Christ, and not have the
similitude of Christ in all things? Was ever such a generation brought forth,
that bears not the image of the Progenitor? if we be implanted into his
resurrection, we are implanted into his death also, Romans 6. 5. if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not of his* Romans 8. 9. and so it may
be said of all things that are appropriated to Christ, as his peculiar
interest; if any man have not the life of Christ, the same is none of his* if
any man have not the wisdom of Christ, the same is none of his; and if any man
have not the death of Christ, that man is none of his; we conclude then there
is but one righteous life and death in the true posterity and off spring
thereof, wherefore he that spills the life by living carnally unto the things
of the world, or he that spils the death by dying carnally unto the things of
God* that man is guilty of blood in the highest degree, for there is but one
righteous blood, therefore the same guilt and condemnation in the shedding
thereof, in whom or what age or generation soever*

Moreover, it is but one and the same spirit of that one word of God, which
has been falsified and cruelly destroyed by false interpretation, from the
foundation of the world, which is that name of Christ that none can read but
himself; for, he is called the word of God, Rev. 19. 12. 13. Now if the letter
of the word were Christ's name or authority, then any wicked man might read and
know the name of Christ, yea the Devil himself in his tentations alleged the
letter of the Scripture, Mat. 4. 6. compared with Psalm 91. 11. 12. who is so
far from the knowledge of Christ, or from acknowledging him in his virtues to
be that which he is; But none can know this name of Christ, (namely the word of
God) but himself; therefore wheresoever the truth of the word of God is known,
there is Christ himself, he that is guilty therefore of the neglect, or
rejection of the spirit of the word of God, or of that law of the spirit in
whomsoever it is, that person is guilty of the neglect, and rejection of Christ
himself, Luke 10. 16. for none has or knows that name but himself.

2 The second point is, how they deal with this blood, where it is shed* that
is, on the Earth; false interpretation lets the blood of Christ, who is
heavenly* out of its proper place as Cain did the blood of Abel, which is
therefore said to cry from the ground, Genesis 4. ^0. it speak, but not as in its
proper veins, and place of its natural residency and abode, contrary to that
blood of sprinkling* which is therefore said to sprinkle, Heb. 12* 24. as
having livelihood and spirit in it, to give life and motion to the whole body,
and therefore speaks better things than that of Abel, in as much as life is
better than death.

But the blood being shed on the Earth, as Christ affirms here in this place it
is that is, expounded and applied carnally as that the death of Christ should
consist in the separation of the soul and body of a man living and dying only
in such an age or time of the world, and not else, thus to draw forth the death
or the life of Christ, is to shed it upon the earth; and as blood shed upon the
ground is a means for the ground to bring forth more abundantly earthly
fruits, which are natural to the ground where it is shed, but none of those
fruits which it brings forth in the body, the proper place of its residency;
even as the blood of a Lamb shed and sucked up by a Woulf, cease to have any
more the livelihood and spirit of a Lamb in it, but it is now translated and
changed by its community with the Woulf (as the ptoper agent to work upon) into
the li^e, spirit, motion, and nature of the Woulf; so is it in that way of
false interpretation, for it takes the spirit and life of the word of God out
of its proper place, that is to say, out of that mystical body of Christ, and
will not give it its proper place of its abode.

For they say that the Saints of God have only some created or creature-like
virtue, and certain influences of the spirit of Christ, but not the same spirit
in the reality of it, which the Son of God has.

They say the Saints of God have a death in them to sin and Satan, but not the
reality of the death of Christ.

They teach that the people of God have the righteousness of Christ, else they
could not be just before God; but it is not in them nor theirs properly, as
they are Saints, but it is the righteousness of another, that is nearer to God
than themselves, and is only imputed to them as others inferior to him.

These assume a life, spirit and righteousness of Christ, but confess that
the reality of their proper abode is in another, namely in Christ himself,
these have let out the life and spirit of Christ into another condition
distinct from himself, and therefore he is another than they upon whom these
things are imputed and powered out. And hence it is that as blood shed on the
Earth loses its proper spirit and life, and the ground converting it
strengthens it self thereby, even so this doctrine draws out the blood of
Christ, so as it loses its natural and proper virtue, and is no more the life
and spirit of the Lamb of God the Savior of the World, but is become the life
and spirit of a Woulf ravening and devouring to his utmost power the flock of
God whereunto he comes, it is no more the life and Spirit of Christ, but of
Antichrist; no more the Spirit of God, but is the spirit of that evil one.

3 The third point noted is the time that is* from what time it is shed, that
is, very ancient, namely, from the foundation of the World, that is, this
spirit of false interpretation is the original ground and cause of all
bloodshed and murder that ever was in the World, as it was in that wicked Cain
who slew his brother in the beginning 1 John 3. 12. by false interpreting of
the Sacrifices of God to consist in earthly things, therefore is said to offer
the fruits of the ground, Genesis 4. 3. unto the Lord, which is his evil work,
which the Apostle notes to be the cause of the murder, saying, And wherefore
slew he him, but because his own work was evil, and his brothers good, 1 John
3. 12. Even so it is unto this day* false interpretation in carnallizing the
word of God, falsifying that acceptable Sacrifice, which is the firstling of
the Flock that Abel brings, this is the cause of all murder and bloody
persecution unto this day, for it only upholds the way of Cain, and wages of
Balam in the World, Jude 11. which spirit of Cain kept alive in ceremonial and
traditionall Jews; Christ tells them they are of their father the Devil, who is
a Murderer from the beginning, alluding to that act of Cain, John 8. 44.

4 The fourth point is, to what time this act of murder reaches and comes,
that is, unto this present generation; for as false Interpretation is the
original of murder* and killing of the spirit of all the Prophets, so also it
is that offspring present appearance, and actor thereof in all ages; for as
the wisdom of God taking the Son of man, or Adam earth into unity with it
self, there is blessedness and conservation of eternal li^e, in all that
offspring, wherein this wisdom is pleased to propagate it self in the true
construction, given of that wisdom and word of God So also the wisdom of the
Serpent taking into its counsel or unity with it self, the Son of God or
heavenly condition which has Lordship over all by false construction of the
word and work of God, does thereby become guilty and accursed in all the off
spring and generation thereof, where and in whomsoever the spirit of the
Serpent in false interpretation appears; the one of these is the seed of the
woman, the other the seed of the Serpent, which in all ages, and in all things,
are at enmity, and in opposition; the one to victory to be set upon the Throne
of David, perpetuated as the Sun before the Lord, Psalm. 89. 35. 36. ^7. and the
other in way of the Fall, is cast down unto the Earth, where he makes war with
the remnant of the seed of the woman, yea is thrust down into the bottomless
pit and place of destruction for ever, Rev. 12. -- Rev. 20. 1. 2. 3. and at so
wide a difference does the true and false interpretation of the word of God
begin, proceed and end in.

5 The fifth point is that of them it is required, that is, the blood of all
the Prophets of God shed from the foundation of the world, is required of the
present generation, inquisition for blood being made, it is required at their
hands, and God will inquire after, exactly, exquisitely, or perfectly, as the
Greek word a^riboas translated inquire signifies, Act. 23. 20. for the Lord
will inquire, or the word of God will seek and find out bloods, in the form
plural, Psalm 9* 12. that is, such as corrupt both the life and the death of
the Son of God, both being included in the word bloods; he will inquire, that
is, execute vengeance exactly to the uttermost; therefore where Moses says,
God will inquire, or require of him that hearkens not unto the words of the
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 18. 19. the Apostle Peter alleging the words of Moses, says,
that he that will not hearken to the words of the Prophet, God shall destroy
him from among the People, Acts 3. 23. In which inquisition after blood, or
requiring of it exactly, note these two things.

I. First, Consider the incomprehensible nature of the Fact, in takingaway, and
disanulling the life and spirit of the word of God, for it is called, the blood
of God, Act. 20. 28. and if it be of that infinite and incomprehensible nature,
what shall be found of a valuable consideration to satisfy and make payment to
the uttermost farthing? which is exactly required to be done, or else
imprisonment for ever, Mat. 5. 25. 26.

II. Consider, that if this blood guiltiness have not only in it the original
of all murder, but also is in a continued act there of successively,
crucifying the Lord afresh unto himself, and puts him to open shame, Heb. 6.
6. When can a just and exact punishment cease, if the cruel act of the murder
be still in operation? for the cause of this complaint, They have pierced my
hands and my fe t is never out of act in any wicked man whatsoever, Psalm 22.
16. no more than the conservation of the life of the spirit of God is out of
act in the Lord Jesus Christ, whereit ever lives to make intercession in the
Saints, Heb. 7. 25. Romans 8. 25. 26. 34.

6 The sixth point is, that it shall come upon them, according to Matthew, that
is, the blood guiltiness, together with the exact punishment and plague for
taking away the life and spirit of the word of God, in carnallizing and making
a dead carcass of the same.

And it is said to come upon them in like sense (in way of opposition) as the
Spirit of God is said to come upon the Saints of God, so as to cloth them with
might and power to do great works, or to perform mighty and miraculous works
in and by them; so it is said the spirit of God came upon Othniel, Gideon and
Sampson to do mighty works unresistably, Judge. 3. 10. Judge. 6. ^4. Judge. 14. 5.
6. Even so the spirit of guilt and destruction comes upon false Interpreters to
their utter ruin and overthrow unresistably, even as the spirit of God
departing from Saul, an evil spirit from the Lord troubles him, and nevers
gives him ^est till he had brought him to destruction 1 Samuel 16. 14. 1 Chronicles.
10. 4. 5. 6. false interpretation is a transformation of the spirit of the
Lord, into a spirit of trouble and torment, as really as it transforms the
truth of God into a lie, Romans 1. 25. and therefore it is said of the Lord, I
will be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way will I observe them, I
will (...) them as a Bear that is bereaved of her Welps, and will rent the caul
of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion, the wild beast shall
tear them, Hos. 13. 7. 8. So that it is a real truth, that God destroys the
wicked with a mighty and unresistable power, in that way of Antichrist and
unbelief, though otherwise a God of salvation and deliverance, Psalm 68. 20.
even as it is a real truth, that man in that way of Christ saves the chosen of
God, though otherwise a worm and no man, and as a beast before the Lord, Psalm
^2. 6. Psalm 73. 22. and thus much for the first point, namely the guilt that
cleaves to false Interpreters, the second is the manner of their Progress, in
which observe these things. 1 First, A description of the parties on whom this
cruelty is exercised, and they are described: first, by their Names, that is,
Abel and Zacharias: Secondly, by an adjunct in the one, and by the ancestor of
the other, Abel the righteous, and Zachariah the Son of Barachiah. 2 Observe
the manner of the Fact, which does greatly agravate or extenuate a matter, that
is said here to be from blood to blood, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of
Zachariah. 3 The Application of the Fact done so long before unto the ^arties
then present, in these words, whom ye slew. 4 The place where the Fact is done,
that is, between the Temple and the Altar. 5 A serious asseveration, or an
affirmation of a just and proportionable recompense to come upon the Murderers
in these words, verily, I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this
generation.


1. And first, they are described by their names, upon whom this cruelty is
exercised, the first being Abel, as Luke has it, from the blood of Abel, but
Matthew adds, righteous Abel, whence observe that we are not to take up a
name, or to use it uponany occasion, title, or epithet given in the word of
God, but as we consider the nature of the thing therein included, otherwise we
use the name in vain, it is an empty and fruitless title unto us, without
truth and substance, and carries not in it, as conveying unto us, the weight
of Gods purpose and appointment unto his people.

Therefore when we use the word Lord, as speaking from the Lord unto others, if
there arise not in our hearts a royal courage and authority, as having dominion
over whatever might oppose his truth, with confidence of prosperous success to
accomplish his holy ends, otherwise we participate not in the nature of the
name used in that respect, and God never gave name without the nature
accompanying the same; therefore every Creature in the beginning had its name
according to its nature; if the name of God therefore be called upon us, or we
called by his name, Jer. 14. 9. we have the nature of it also, or else it is an
empty and vain title, which the wisdom of God never gives to any. Again, if we
use the name Lord, as speaking to God in Prayer or Thanksgiving, then there is
annexed unto it in our hearts, a ready, willing, cheerful and voluntary
submission and obedience unto his will in all things, otherwise it is but an
empty and fruitless title.

Likewise if we use the title or term Father, as we exercise the place of
gravity, beseeching men in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.
20, then are our hearts possessed and replenished with a spirit of tenderness,
and bowels of compassion earn within us, Hosea 11. 8. or else we take that name
of God in vain, in that respect it is an empty title unto us* and God will not
hold him guiltless that takes his name up as a bare and empty term, Exodus 20 7.

Also if we use the name Father, as we appeal unto God for instruction,
protection and supply, then does the disposition of a Child fill our hearts, as
though we stood in no other relation but of a Child to a tender and
compassionate father, for the Spirit of God is full in all its operations.

Add further, (but that which might be added in this point is infinite) if we
take up the name or title of King, we must bring in therewith the true nature
of eternity and immortality, the only wise God, who reigns in peace, is
glorious, and has everlasting life, Psalm 93. 1. Heb. 7. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
unto whom all glory does appertain and belong, and to none else (what ever he
be) where that Princely spirit is not found, otherwise we measure and account
of our selves, according to transient titles, offices and actions, a rule
whereby the Son of God never took form unto himself, nor does he account of any
thing in his condition and Kingdom, according to the worth or dignity of any
momentany thing whatsoever, but only takes them up as Gideons soldiers did the
water out of the Brook with their hands, not to lodge and lie down by the
River, but took up that contained in the River as a furtherance and help to
their proper intent and design; and those that lie down by them, by lodging the
word of God in them, they may turn back into Egypt from whence they came, for
they are no soldiers of our Lord Jesus Christ, they do but take up his name in
vain, without the nature annexed to the same, Judge. 7. 5. 6. 7. 8.

Note further in this name, together with the adjunct; Abel the righteous,
according to the Etymology of the name Abel, it signifies vanity or
emptiness, or a soon vanishing vapor, such is every man's life said to be,
James 4. 14. and here the spirit of God annexeth righteousness unto it,
saying, Righteous Abel, whence we observe that there is a righteousness in
vanity, which being rightly considered, it is a vanity or emptiness, wherein
all things are contained, both good and evil, and so the righteousness of
Condemnation, and the righteousness of Absolution are adjoined and annexed
thereunto, for there is a vanity and emptiness to be found in all unbeleevers,
and also in all the elect or chosen of God, and that Christ Jesus is personated
in Abel* is most evident, for in Abel he is said to be a Lamb slain from the
beginning, Rev. 13. 8. even as Satan in that wicked act of Cain, in staying his
brother, is said to be a Murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. And as Abel
has a respect, and a real relation unto Cain his brother, who takes away his
life* so as in a true sense it may be said of Abel as Jacob said of Joseph* he
is not; so also he has a real respect and relation unto his brother Seth, (who
is given or set instead of Abel, Genesis 4. 25) in whom his life is upheld and
preserved; and there Abel is brought in by the Apostle, speaking in the way of
faith in Seth, as well as in the way of terror and wrath in Cain, Heb. 11. 4.
Genesis 4. 10. 11. In Seth being dead to the things of sin and Satan, he yet
speaks, and in Cain, he being dead to the things of God speaks also, and
accordingly there is a twofold vanity, and also a twofold righteousness
appearing in his blood, and therefore it is said to be the voice of thy
brothers bloods, in the form plural.

There is then a vanity accompanied with vexation of spirit, as in Cain, who is
emptied of the glory and peace of God, who fears that all that sees him will
kill him, Genesis 4. 14. And there is also a vanity accompanied with the breath
and spirit of the Lord, in the propagating of the Son of God in the way of
Seth, in whom the spirit of the Lord breaths in the blasting of all humane
glory, and emptying man of all carnal reasonings, that the glory and wisdom of
God may take place, and become the fullness of that state and condition, Isaiah
40* 6. 7. 8.

The vanity filled with vexation, which is that evil spirit of Saul, is man
emptied of all the virtues proper to that holy Son of God* which emptinesseis
the filling of him with that evil spirit of Satan, which is that enmity against
Christ, and if there were not through Gods devise, a spirit, a state, and
condition of this Satanicall nature, corrupt and vile, and that in all
respects, and eternally, otherwise there had never been footing for the
appearances of Gods glory in the salvation of any of the sons of men, nor had
his power and proper virtue ever been made known to the Creature to render to
the Creator the praise thereof.

For if there were not a damnable and destructive estate and condition in man*
that is, in man so depraved and corrupted, there had never been deliverance of
man into the glory and purity of the Son of God, yea, and that the destruction
be of the same capacity and duration that the deliverance is, otherwise there
had never been ground for deliverance and salvation, such as becomes the
presence, the only Son, and excellency of the work of an infinitely wise,
allsufficient and an eternal God.

For what is salvation in reality more than the destruction that it saves
from, and how can the reality of mercy be extended further than the nature of
the misery which it takes the commiserated from, and what is an acquitting and
clearing either for sum or substance, further than there is weight and duration
in the guilt and condemnation.

Yea, the glory of God vanishes and comes to naught, in point of any eternal
salvation of man, if there be not an eternal damnation and destruction of man.
For what thanks worthy is there to save from nothing; for if mankind be not
eternally destroyed, then man is saved from nothing, if no eternal destruction
be; and if man be saved from temporary evils, then has he only a temporary
salvation, and than the creature has the glory of the salvation, no^ God, for
every Creature has an instinct or skill to save it self; that doctrine then of
universal salvation, makes man no better than a beast, and is no better than
gross Atheism, for denying a salvavation compatible to the Son of God, is to
deny God himself.

Therefore Abel is become vain and empty in his brother Cain (though propagated
of the same stock) to the fullness of vexation in that spirit of enmity, being
in him made void and emptied of all that love, life and virtue which is proper
to the Son of God, else were there no place for the glory of God in salvation
to be found, nor had it ever been heard of among the sons of men, nor had it
any ground or basis to stand upon; and to enervate salvation is no less then
to enervate the Son of God himself, for it is he alone who is our salvation,
Psalm 27. 1. Psalm 14. 7. let such as hold a universal salvation of all men
take notice of this point, and let others observe their abominable lascivious
and loose tenent, that they hold in the truth and intent of their doctrine,
that there is neither God nor Devil, nor man in better estate than a bruit
beast* Again, there is a vanity in Abel, as he has respect and relation unto
his brother Seth, who is set in Abels stead, in whom the image of the father is
upheld and preserved, Genesis 5. 3. and this is a vanity or emptying, not unto
vexation, but unto salvation, which is an emptying and a vanishing of all
things proper unto that spirit of Cain, or that firstborn after the flesh,
that so all the things of God, proper unto the firstborn of God may take
place, and therefore Seth is reckoned in the Geneology, as the only and first
begotten of Adam, Luke 3. 38. which emptying of Abel (or of Christ personated
in Abel) of all carnal and cruel things, which is the slaying of the enmity in
himself, Ephesians. 2. 15. 16. is the putting of them into their proper place, for
they are the proper right and inheritance of Cain, that first born after the
flesh, and therefore he is called Cain, that is, a possession, as the proper
inheritour of corruption, and all things pertaining thereto; for as there is an
inheriting of the promise, Heb. 6. 1^. and blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. so there is
an inheriting of the threat, and the curse, Psalm 109. 16.-20. Ier. 16. 19. or
as the Hebrew word following after his name, signifies, I have gotten, Kanuhi,
a man of Jehovah, that is, according as all men judge, that the prime and
chief things of nature shall have pre-eminence, and are most acceptable to the
Lord.

Faith therefore in its expression of vanity comprehends both the emptying of
man of all the things proper unto man, as he is made of the dust of the Earth,
and in that respect subject to corruption, to the filling of him with all
things peculiar to the Son of God, which the Apostle affirms is the fullness of
God, Ephesians. 3. 19. Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9. As also the emptying of man, or his
vanity, in regard of all things peculiar to the Son of God, as man was made in
the image of God, and so capable of life and immortality, to the filling of him
with all things proper unto Satan, which is that fullness of sin, Genesis 15. 16.
fullness of curse and bitterness, Romans 3. 14: fullness of that deadly poison
of the Serpent, James 3. 8. yea it is that fullness of all subtilty and all
mischief, the child of the Devil, and enemy of all righteousness, which
cease not to pervert the straight ways of the Lord, Acts 13. 10.

And without an emptiness of man, in both these respects from the first act of
his ordination or creation, the full, and complete death of Christ is never
known, nor does it appear in the world unto salvation, which sets man at an
utter distance from God in Cain, with respect unto Abel, as also it sets man in
unity with God in Seth, with respect to the same Abel, he being set in his
stead, and the father of Christ, Luke 3. 23.-38.

And from this twofold vanity, the death of the Son of God is forever
perfected, for in that way of Cain, he is dead to al heavenly and spiritual
virtue, as he is the Son of God, and yet God in the exercise of wrath and
displeasure is really there; and in Seth he is dead to all earthly and carnal
things, as he is the Son of Sons, man and yet man in exercise of goodness and
love, is really there, and without respect to these twain, the death of Christ
is not revealed, for it is not part of Christ that suffers for the salvation of
man, as only in his manhood, as the blind Pharisees of the world hold and
teach, but it is Christ complete, who consists of God and man; and in the same
respect he is said to dye, he never lives, therefore it is said that he is
dead, and is alive, as the words may be truly read, Rev. 1. 18. Rev. 2. 8. And
from this death of the Son of God in this twofold respect, there flows a
twofold righteousness or justice, namely, of absolution and of condemnation,
Mat. 25. 34. 41. Psalm 6. 8.

And if it were not for this death of Christ, thus considered, there were no
place for the righteousness of Faith, in the exercise of mercy, nor for that
of the Scribes and Pharisees in that exercise of Gods severity, Romans 11. 22.
Romans 9. 22. 23. but Gods glory were extinct in both respects, and therefore he
is righteous Abel.

For if a wicked man could content himself simply with the Creature in his
relation to it, as the bruit beasts do, then were there no severity of God to
be exercised in way of the curse, for there were no ground nor footing for it.

But man has a spirit, (as it appears in Gain) that will inherit acceptance
with God as well as his brother, though in that way of an earthly and carnal
sacrifice, whereby it comes to pass, that he kills his brother causelessly, nay
he kills him because his own works are evil, and his brothers good, even as all
wicked men quench and kill the spirit and life of Christ Jesus in their own
hearts by their earthly and carnal thoughts and imagination of that good word
and work of God in point of salsalvation, 1 John 3. 12. which is the kindling
of wrath in our souls, for as it was in Cain, so it is in all such as wander
in the way of Caein, Jude 11.

For according to the worth and dignity of the person, whose life is extinct
and taken away, which is the spirit and life of the Son of God, of such wce and
weight is the nature and guilt of his sin for so doing, which can never be
recovered, nor healed, and accordingly the weight of justice, and Gods severity
must of necessity go forth in the exercises of self in his just condemnation
and execution thereof.

And as the spirit of man naturally (being made one with God) inclines and
seeks after God whereby to honor and dignifie it self with his titles and
excellencies, without which he cannot make himself Lord of all, Genesis 1. 28.
which carnally enterprised works such effect: So also there is naturally in the
Son of God an aptitude and propensity unto man for the revelation and
manifestation of himself, in all his virtues, according to the fullness
thereof, which cannot be but by the crucifying of the flesh in all the
affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5. 24. which is a work of no less weight
than the overcoming of Satan himself, which none but the Son of God himself can
do, Heb. 2. 14. which conquest and v^c^um of the flesh is a work of no less
worth, nor holiness inferior unto that which is peculier to the spirit of
God, and therefore the righteousness of absolution and acceptance with God,
in the bountifu^l expression of mercy and goodness is ever annexed thereunto;
and thus is there a righteous Abel, or righteous vanity spread throughout the
Earth, overall mankind; there ore the Psalmist says, every man is vanity, or
as the word is, all A^am is vanity, taking Adam there as the root of all
mankind, which are either empty of the things of God, as the wicked universally
are, or else of the lusts of men as the elect of God in that mystical body of
Christ are, Gal 5. 24. And it is a certain and undeniable truth as Christ the
Son of God is set forth and taught herein; that he who is the Creator and Maker
of all things, emptyeth himself, and becomes vain in all things both of flesh
and spirit, that he thereby may manifest himself to have the glory of all
things, not only of life, but also of death; for in that he dies to the things
of the Spirit in the wicked, he thereby rises in wrath through the wisdom of
the flesh; and in that he dies unto the flesh in the Saints, he rises in mercy
and peace, in the exercises of the spirit, whereby he has the glory of all
things, which otherwise could never be.

For as man in Christ has the righteousness and glory of God, and yet nothing
can be attributed to the things natural, proper to man, in that wonderful
work of Gods Creation: even so God in Antichrist has the sin and shame of
Satan, and yet nothing of that condition can be attributed to any thing
naturally proper to God, in that wonderful destruction of the Devil.

And with respect unto vanity thus distributed it is called the bloods of thy
brother, in the form plural, Genesis 4. 10. And it speaks guilt and terror, from
the ground, or earthly heart of Cain, that so drinks it in, Genesis 4. 11. and it
also speaks as a witness of acceptance with God by faith in that way of Seth,
who is that set one unto this day, of whom is Christ, who yet speaks, Heb.
11. 4 for though Abel be cut off from all succession of mercy, in that way of
carnal sacrifices in Cain, yet has he a succession of terror in Cains heart,
Genesis 4. 13. 14. so also though he have no succession according to the flesh in
that acceptable Sacrifice of the firstling of the flock, being dead in that
respect in the way of Seth, yet has he his succession and language in the
witness and acceptance of faith unto this day, Heb. 11. 4. And according to
this vanity or emptiness through one eternal act, God is truly said to fill
all things through that descension and ascension of his Son Christ, Ephesians. 4.
10. therefore Cain is said to be a possession, and Seth a set one; for hereby
both life and death are possessed and eternally inherited.

That is life in that way of Seth, wherein the generation of the son of God is
found, as the offspring of Adam from the creation of all things, firmly
founded for ever, and death in that way of Cain, as one cast out from the
family and face of God, being become a Vagabond, in whom Satan that son of
perdition is, as another generation and offspring from the foundation of the
world; therefore Satan is said to be a liar from the beginning, John 8. 44. as
it is said of Christ, in the beginning was the Word, John 1. 1. the one being
called the seed of the Woman, the other the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15.
Cain therefore being thus cast out, and alienated from the Lord, he names no
house nor family from which he had his wife, to signify that he was quite cut
off from the family of his father, and from the creation of God, Genesis 4. 16. 17.

And therefore God arraigns mankind in this way of Cain, concerning his sin and
guilt, and gives him up to be both Judge and also Executioner in himself,
arguing himself in his own conscience a sinner, and exercising wrath upon
himself for it, Genesis 4. 6. 16. for it is God in Christ, who is the party
offended, and therefore another, and not properly Christ the Savior, who
sentenceth to death, and performs execution; therefore as God is considered in
Christ, he is no more the proper Judge of the wicked than he is the proper
Executioner of wrath, and he says of himself in that respect, anger or fury is
not in me, Isai. 27. 4. And the Judge and the Executioner are ever considered
as one, for the Judge gives not sentence, but with respect to the Executioner,
for otherwise his sentence is not in force.

Therefore it may seem strange that the Hangman sits not on the bench with the
Judge to communicate in the sentence of the Law, to know upon what grounds he
executes, without the knowledge whereof, he is no better than a Murderer, as
well as the Judge has respect to the Executioner for the finishing and
perfecting of his sentence, or else he is no better than a competitor with a
murderer, if execution be not done where just demerits appear.

The party offended therefore, which is Christ, is not the proper Judge of the
wicked, no more than he has that servile office upon him of being their
Executioner, for it is the proper officeof the Devil both to accuse and
torment, Rev. 12. 10. therefore his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he
is called Apollyon, that is, destroying, Revelations 9. 11.

2 In the condemnation of the wicked, there must be nothing sound in the fact
of putting Christ to death, that can savor of any goodness to him that
condemns; for then pure severity and strictness of justice to the uttermost
cannot take place to answer that mercy exercised in Christ, who is said to save
to the uttermost and farthest extent, Heb. 7. 25. and so must condemnation come
upon the wicked unto the uttermost, 1 These. 2. 16.

But God in Christ cannot behold that act of the world, in crucifying of
Christ, but he must behold that voluntary act of his holy Son laying down his
life therein, as the Lamb of God taking away the sins of the World, in that his
being a ransom for all the Elect and chosen of God, John 1. 29. Hosea 13. 14.
Mat. 20. 28.

Therefore the sentence of death, and execution of wrath must needs reside
properly in the wicked themselves, in whom is nothing but wrath and cruelty,
nor can they behold any thing that should in the least assuage or diminish the
same, and therefore it is wrath to the uttermost, even as the Saints cannot
behold any thing in Christ that may impair or diminish their joy, and
therefore it is salvation to the uttermost.

3 Consider, that in the sentence of absolution, it must be uttered completely
in the party acquitted, otherwise if any title thereof should reside in, or
concern an other then the party acquitted had not the full possession and
fruition thereof, and then it were not salvation to the uttermost, in case the
sentence, both as it is given, and also as it is received were not found in him
who is acquitted, the absolver, and the absolved being one, which is only found
in that throne of grace, erected in Christ, where the boldness of him that
appeals, and him who is appealed unto, are but one, Heb. 4. 16. otherwise the
King Christ could not be said to come in saving himself as the holy Ghost
affirms he does, Zachary 9. 9.

Likewise in the way of death and condemnation, it cannot be full unless the
sentence and the sentenced be in one, the party condemning and condemned, the
Judge and the Executioner, else wrath cannot be to the uttermost, as the wrath
of God, who is infinite and everlasting, without limitation in all things;
thence it is that Christ says to the wicked Jews, even of our times, I condemn
you not, there is one that condemns you, even Moses in whom you trust, John 4.
45. That is the word of God according to the letter that kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6. the
word carnalized, as those wicked Jews did the writings of Moses, to the
crucifying of the Son of God by their law, John 19. 7. John 12. 34. so falsely
interpreted.

Those then that are said to be on Christ's left hand, that are condemned, the
sentence arises, and is utered from the curse, which is not in any other, but
in themselves; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Matthew 25. 41.

So likewise to them on his right hand, the invitation and blessing in their
absolution and entrance into the Kingdom, arises out of the blessed estate,
which is not in any other but in the parties blessed, Man. 25. 34. So that the
word of God preaches it self, and gives sentence according to the proper
subject in whom it is, both in point of life, as also of death; of life in the
true interpretation thereof, according to Gods mind and intent, which is never
out of, but in himself, who is blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. and so is that
truth and life, which Christ affirms himself to be, John 14. 6. And it gives
sentence of death in them, by whom it is falsely interpreted, for in them it
proves a lie, which the Devil is said to be, John 8. 44 and so it becomes to
all them in whom it is falsely constructed and interpreted.

We conclude then, that there is a righteousness in Hebel, according to his
name in Hebrew, or in Abel, according to the Greek, or a righteousness in
vanity or emptiness, the name and the adjunct being but one, yea even the Son
of God is made vain and empty, to the end he may fill all things, and is made
nothing that he may substantiate all things, for so much is in those words
translated, he was made of no reputation, that is, he was made vain, empty,
nothing, as the word signifies; that is, he is nothing in point of the spirit
and life in the wicked, that they may be filled with horror, mortality and
wrath; and he is nothing in point of the flesh and glory of man in the godly,
that they may be filled with the fullness of God, in immortality and eternal
life and peace; and so much for present concerning the word Abel, together with
the adjunct righteous Abel.

The second point concerns the manner of this fact of murdering the Prophets,
which either aggravates, or extenuates an act, and that is said to be from
blood to blood; that is, from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharia: By
Abels blood here that is, his slaughter, we are to understand the sacrifice for
which he was slain; for Cain slew him for the goodness of his work or
offering, 1 John 3. 12. now we know that Christ is the sacrifice offered, as
really as he is the Sacrificer that offers it; therefore in Abel he is said to
be a Lamb slain from the beginning, Rev. 13. 8. also our Apostle affirms, that
Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. where he concludes him
to be the Sacrifice; so that the slaughter of Abel, is the unnatural
murdering of the true offering, or that illegal enmity which Cain has
against Christ, being brought in as the only acceptable thing unto God; for he
that hates his brother is a Murderer, and we know that no Murderer has
eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 15.

For Abel bringing the firstling of the Flock, which is the firstborn of God,
not at Cain, was the prime, according to the judgment of the flesh, as one
judged, who the Apostle says was deceived, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

But he is the first born, or he that opens the womb of eternal generation,
and true offspring of God to appear in mankind, and that by emptying man of
all humane and temporary glory and excellencies, to be filled and replenished
with the glory of God only, in the excellencies of his holy Spirit in all the
operations thereof; and the nature of that firstling Cain could never abide,
who is that firstborn after the flesh and judgment of humane wisdom, who
builds Cities and several Orders and Institutions, calling them by the name
given to his Son, to glorify himself in an Offspring of mortal and carnal
things, Genesis 4. 17. calling this City Enoch* or according to the Hebrew
Chanoch, that is, catechized, instructed or dedicated, as the same posterity do
at this day, set up new forms and orders of Religion, as Monuments to declare
unto men that they are the initiaters into Religion, and the only Chatechizers
and Instructers of the World, so as the posterity to come must keep their
order, and walk only in their steps, as Cain made provision for his Son so to
do.

Again, Christ is not only made vain, according to all carnal things in this
his offering, in his whole and entire mystical body, but also he becomes
bereaved of all things of the spirit in wicked men, who are void of all the
operations thereof, that so the depths of Satan may take place, which is as
much as to say the Creator and giver of life and being to all things is become
death, as also in that way of Christ, that the Creature is become eternal
life, which can have no other sound in a carnal ear, but as though the Creator
were dead, and the Creature become God, which Cain in all his Offspring could
never endure to hear of, neither of the one nor of the other, for in the one
the glory of man is consumed as the grass, Isaiah 40. 6. which humane wisdom
can never endure, and in the other stands the shame of Satan, in the quenching
of all the fruits of the spirit, which the pride of man can never endure, but
utterly denies both the one and the other to be the true Offspring and
Sacrifice of the Son God, yea rejects and contemns, and is in enmity against
them both, which enmity is the slaughter of the Son of God, as he has given
himself to be this firstling offered for the redemption of his chosen ones, for
he that hates his brother kills him, 1 John 3. 15. as well as he that looks
upon a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her in his heart
already, Mat. 5. 28. even so he that has enmity against the sacrifice of God
he has strangled it in his heart already, and not taken away the blood
according to Gods order and appointment, which is one of those great and
unsufferable abominations of the world, Acts ^5. 20. 25. joined with idolatry,
fornication and bloodshed.

And thus is Abels blood shed by every false construction and interpretation of
that one only and once offered Sacrisice of Christ, by such as wander therein
according to the way of Cain, Jude 11. even the men of the World, those
firstborn of Egypt, in regard of wealth, honor and humane learning, who would
make men believe thereby that they are the firstborn of Israel, who bring
earthly, momentany and transient fruits unto God, as an acceptable Sacrifice,
as Cain did; therefore they rest not in their enmity against and denial of the
true sacrifice, as that Lamb slain from the beginning; but they proceed also to
the taking away of the life of the Sacrificer, who offers the Sacrifice;
wherein observe that Christ is as really the Priest that offers, as he is the
Sacrifice offered, therefore he is said to be our high Priest as well as our
Passover, Heb. 2. 17. Heb. 3. 1. Heb. 4. ^4.

Therefore the blood of the Priest is brought in upon the same account against
them who slew Abel, that they have also slain Zachariah the son of Barachiah,
as being that holy Prophet and Priest of God, the cause and manner of whose
death is recorded in that second of Chronicles, Chapter twenty four. So that
whosoever he be that dislikes and contemns the true and real Sacrifice offered
unto God, he also contemns the true Priest and Sacrificer, yea whosoever is
officiated by the spirit of God, to be exercised in and about the offering up
of the same.

That Christ is a Priest, and the only and alone Priest in all ages is most
evident, where it is said, the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, saying,
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110. 4.
compared with Hebrews 7. 1. 2. 3. verses see also Hebrews 7. 15. 16. 17.

Yea, he is our high Priest in point of offering all true Sacrifice, as well as
the Captain of our salvation to lead us on into all conquest and victory, Heb.
2. 10. Heb. 3. 1. and is here personated in Zachariah, as our high Priest, and
Reconciler unto God by his office and ministry, as he is personated in Abel, as
the only acceptable gift and offspring, which twain are never out of relation,
but ever in conjunction, as here brought in together: for no man can prove his
office to minister before the Lord, further than he can prove himself the
acceptable Sacrifice offered up unto the Lord; therefore Christ brings in
himself here under the name of Zachariah, to note the nature and fullness of
his office, which these false Interpreters reject, describing himself by this
name, as well as by the name Abel; it signifying the mind of the Lord, or the
full mind of the Lord, or a man of the Lord, to declare that as he is emptied
of all humane excellencies, proper to the mind of man, so he is furn shed with
the fullness of the mind of God, for none knows the father but the Son, and he
to whom the Son reveals him, Mat. 11. 27* who minds only the glory and cause of
the Lord, and so according to this name, he is described to be mindful of the
Lord, or the full and complete mind of the Lord, signifying from whom he came,
as he is the fullness of Gods mind, and what his errand is, namely, to be
mindful of Gods cause only.

Again, it signifies a man of the Lord, to declare, that a Christian is of no
humane investment into office, nor acts by any humane authority, but has his
instalment, and authority to exercise from the Lord of all the Earth, and thus
Christ is declared by this name Zachariah, as one who is of the mind and
counsel of God, in the exercise of the Priests office, whom these hypocrites
reject, to the letting out and spilling the very soul and life, thereof by
their traditions, Mat. 15. 3. 6.

Again, he is here set forth, by an ancestour, as being the son of Barachiah,
in which the mystery of this Scripture is declared and signified unto us; for
this Zachariah was the son of Jehoida, the high Priest of God, in the days of
wicked Ioash, though it is said that he did uprightly in the sight of the Lord,
in the days of Jehoida the high Priest, 2 Chronicles. 24. -- namely that wicked
Ioash, being that what he did in the time of Iehoida, all his Actions (as the
History declares) ^ise from the counsel and operations of the high Priest,
which are reckoned upon Joash in like sort, as the choice of Christ is reckoned
upon Judas, together with the rest of the Disciples, and as Judas is said to
have part in that ministry, which was the proper portion of the rest of the
Disciples, out of which he is excluded, in point of any fruit or benefit
thereby, but departed therefrom by going to his own place, John 6. 70. Acts 1.
17. 25. so that his actions are said to be upright, namely the ordering of the
Kingdom, as it had respect to Iehoiada in his days, who was the proper Agent
in the affais of the Kingdom, as well as of the Priesthood in his days;
therefore Zachariah has not the name of his Father Iehoiada, by that name, the
son of Iehoiada, but by the name of Barachiah, being related here unto his
Ancester by virtue of that Kingly Priesthood, which his Father sustained,
signified closely unto us, under the name Barachiah, which signifies the
blessing of the Lord, which is the Priests office to bless in the name of the
Lord, Numb. 6. 23. 24. 25. 26. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 1 Chronicles. 23. 13. for ever: So that
he is related to his Father as the proper offspring of that Princely office,
which comprehends the virtue and power both of Kingdom and Priesthood, whom
these false Interpreters are said to slay; for Iehoiada the Priest was the
proper Ruler of the Kingdom in his days, in the time of wicked Ioa^, and
therefore Joash is said to do that which was upright in the days of Iehoiada,
because Iehoiada was the original and fountain of the work, as was noted
above, for he submitted unto the high Priest in all things, and therefore
Iehoiada is buried in the Sepulcher of the Kings, which was denied to Ioash at
his death, 2 Chronicles. 24.

Jehoiada was privy to his being hid and maintained in the house of the Lord,
for the space of six years, as a perfect escape from the hands of wicked
Athalia, and cessation from her Idolatry in the time of the high Priest, 2
Kings 11. -- And in the seventh year Iehoida brings a most Princely guard into
the house of the Lord for his defense, the high Priest lets the Crown upon his
head, and causes Athalia to be slain, he makes a Covenant between the Lord and
Ioash, and also between him and the People; he gives the King his Wives, as
being the proper Author of all relations in the Kingdom, and is the prime
provoker and stirrer up of the Levites, and all the people unto the repair of
the house of the Lord, who otherwise moved not at the voice of the King;
therefore Zachariah is related unto his Ancester, as being the Offspring, Son
and Heir to such a noble office, by the name of Barachiah, blessing and
speaking well of the Lord, or bowing the knee unto the Lord, as being subject
to none but he, no not to Ioash further than he follows his counsel and
advise* and therefore when Ioash falls away to Idolatry, Zachariah stands up
above the People* that is, as a man of God, in the name and authority of God,
as one above that idolatrous Nation, higher than the Princes or People thereof,
now fallen unto Idolatry, and fears not to tell them how they have transgressed
the Commandments of the Lord, and therefore cannot prosper, nor pass through
their design, but as they have forsaken the Lord, and departed from the ways
of Iehoiada, that is, from the knowledge of the Lord, as his name signifies, so
the Lord had forsaken them, declaring thereby that as then Iehoiada the high
Priest was dead in that time of their Idol worship, so wherever there are
carnal Ordinances and Institutions set up that men must submit unto, there is
the Lord Jesus dead, the high Priest of our profession, in point of all
spiritual and holy administrations, both in Kingly and Priestly office, which
includes all other offices whatsoever, as they were then dead in Iehoiada, in
order to Ioash and his Nobles, who as his name signifies disagreeing or fiery,
so he now manifests himself against the godly and prophetical offspring of the
high Priest in Zachariah, for he clothing himself with obeisance, counsel, and
honor of his wicked Princes, falls to Idolatry, in which act of his Iehoiada is
dead our high Priest in all spiritual respects.

Iehoiada is dead also in his son Zachariah, in point of all carnal
administrations, both in Kingdom and Priesthood, who is clothed as the Text
says, with the Spirit of God, and therefore declares that all true and real
office and administration springs out of Jesus Christ, as becoming vain and
empty in Abel; for being emptied of all humane abilities and constitutions, as
holding no weight nor being of any account in the Kingdom of God, thereby the
spirit of the Lord breaks forth, as the light at noon day, that shined upon
Saul, as he went to Damascus, Acts 22, 6. and so upon Zachariah, the spirit of
the Lord comes upon him, and officiates him as a Prophet of God, as one who is
above all the idolatrous Princes and Priests of Judah, cleaving to Ioash.

We see then that Ioash being made vain and empty of all the righteousness of
Kingdom and Priesthood, in that holy way of administration upheld and
maintained in the days and time proper to our spiritual Jehoiada and high
Priest of God, who is that wisdom and knowledge of the Lord, clothing himself
as the Text declares, 2 Chronicles. 24. with the praises of men, counsel of his
wicked Senators, and submission of the people, becoming thereby officiated in
all the corrupt ways of Idolatry, both in Kingdom and Priesthood, contrary to
the ways wherein Iehoiada the high Priest walked in his days, and ever does
where he lives, and therefore in his son Zachariah, inveighs against such
abominations, declaring in order to Abel, that all holy and acceptable office
and administration arises and springs out of becoming vain and empty of the
pursuit aprising, and love of the glory of this world; and that all diabolical
office, and idolatrous worship arises out of this, that men are become Abel,
vain and empty of all the holy things of God, in apostatizing and falling away
from God, as Ioash did; this doctrine taught by Zachariah (as it is by all such
as are mindful of the Lord, and have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16.) stirs
up apostatizing Ioash together with his wicked Servants against the true
Prophet of God.

For the world cannot endure to hear that Christ is so dead in Abel, unto all
carnal and temporary Sacrifices (exercised by Cain) that it sets him in all
spiritual, holy and acceptable offerings in the bringing forth of the Savior
in all things in Seth, or the fullness of salvation in that which is set or
arises in the stead of those carnal offerings.

Nor can it endure to hear that Christ is so dead in Iehoiada unto all carnal
and humane institutions and administrations (set up in Joash) that it is an
investing and installing of him into all spiritual office and administration,
as in Zachariah his son, upon whom the spirit of God comes in such sort, that
he stands up above the people, or (as the word stood signifies, to minister)
Ier. 52. 12 compared with 2 King. 25. 8. Numb. ^6. 9. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. he ministered
by a spirit supereminent, in order to all the carnal and idolatrous Princes of
Judah and Jerusalem, whereupon they find no other means to promote their
honor, but only to put to death him that is the true Successor of his Father
in office only acceptable unto God, which springs only from the power of the
Spirit of God, coming upon him from no humane education, or carnal way of
administration whatsoever, which vexes the spirit of the world, that it should
fall short in all its policy and power to create and institute a godly officer;
the World therefore in the rage of Cain, rejects and slayes the Sacrifice of
God, which Abel is, Rev. 13. 8. and also the Officer and Minister imployd and
exercised about the offering, which Zachariah the son of Barachiah is;
therefore the murder of false Interpreters extends from the blood of Abel,
that is, all true Sacrifices, and offerings unto the blood of Zachariah the son
of Barachiah, that is, all true Office and Officers, or all true Ministry and
Ministers, for they may not endure that all true Sacrifice and Offering should
be the firstling of the Flock, or else it is rejected, which firstling of the
Flock, is the Son of God himself, and they are ignorant how Christ is all in
all in his Saints, Ephesians. 1. 23. and therefore are in a rage against him, 1
Cor. 2. 8. or against it, that is; the true Sacrifice of Christ.

Neither can they endure that all true Office and Officers should arise from,
and be created and made only by the Spirit of God, without which they are of no
force, ver^ue, nor reckonable in the Kingdom and house of God, for then man's
common industry in humane Schools, public Votes, bodily conquests, with
Baptisms, laying on of hands, and common exercise of humane Elderships* would
be in no estimation, nor honor in the sight of God, nor any thing whatsoever,
further than the Spirit of God testifies of it self in the use of it,

No, the world cannot endure that all false worship, both in point of offering
and office, matter and manner of performance, springing from earthly and
vanishing things, in the glory or humbling of the Creature, in the exaltation
or mortification thereof, should be that evil one, that is, the Devil,
therefore in Abel they slay all true Sacrifice and offering, that those which
are earthly and carnal within their own Sphere may take place, and in
Zachariah they slay all true Office and Ministry, that so that which is
diabolical may be set up and advanced, a work of wicked Scribes and Pharisees,
false Expounders and Interpreters of the Law of God, who in the death of
Iehoiada, that is, in the silencing of the Lord, in point of all Kingly and
Priestly authority, they will only have Ioash to reign, in the maintenance of
all humane institutions in the way of idolatry, advancing the Creature into the
place of God: in the doing of which they despise and destroy the true
succession of the Kingdom and Priesthood of Christ, and therein all the proper
offerings, officers and enterprises of the Spirit, which is free in all its
administrations, not bound to any, where its own image and superscription
appears not, nor requiring ought from any where it comes not from the same
fountain, in the suppressing and quenching whereof, they set up that spirit and
advance it whose office is to accuse and condemn, deceive and beguile, destroy
and torment, which ever was, is, and will be the only exercise and office of
Satan, Rev. 12. 9. 10. which evidently appears in that wicked Ioash, with his
retinue, who cruelly murder Zachariah the true Successor of that Priesthood
royal, which only is of God* Exodus 19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. set forth in the Kings
command, and the names of his servants who did it, that afterward conspire
together to take away the life of the King, for so God makes the wicked
Executioners and tormenters one of another, 2 Chronicles. 24. 2^. 26.

The third point is the place where this Fact is committed, and that is,
between the Altar and the Temple, which includes the place both of the murder
of Abel, and of Zachariah* for they are never separated one from another, no
more than the Mediator between God and man is separated, either from God or
from man, but includes them both, 1 Timothy 2. 5. for whoever he be that cannot
endure Abels Sacrifice, that man can never endure Zachariah his office and
ministry; for a Sacrifice of the first born without blemish, that is, without
any thing superfluous or defective, and an office springing up only from the
Spirit of God (which is secret and invisible with respect to man's sight)
without the help or industry of the wisdom of man, nay, against the very form
and way of the operations thereof, 1 Cor. 3. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Such Sacrifice
and ministry the world could never endure to be in present existence and being,
but only are constrained to acknowledge that such have been, or such may be
hereafter, which all wicked men will easily yield unto, so be it they may be
tolerated for present to stand upon, and practice, according to their own
humane and carnal principles; as it was in the days of Cain, so it is now,
and will be the same with all wicked men, as also it was with wicked Ioash.

The slaughter then was in the Court of the house of the Lord, as is expressed
by the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 24. 21. And Christ opening the mystery of that
Historical Narration, says it is done between the Temple and the Altar, to
declare that wicked and idolatrous Kings, Priests, Princes and Elderships of
the world, false Expounders, Interpreters, and Prevaricators of the Law of God,
will never permit that such an offering or sacrifice shall be laid upon the
Altar of God, nor such an Officer as is only authorized and furnished with and
by the Spirit of God to enter into the Temple or house of the Lord to exercise
in point of worship, so far as their power and authority can put forth it self
to prevail against them, therefore they permit them not to come neither into
the Temple, nor upon the Altar, but slay them betwixt them both, for their act
of murder in that place is referred as well unto Abel as unto Zachariah.

And upon that Altar which the world has erected, where no perfect thing must
come, but al imperfect, or else not acceptable to their God (which is the
wisdom of the world) imperfect word, imperfect Sacraments, imperfect Prayer,
imperfect Prophecy, imperfect Fasts, imperfect Thanksgiving, imperfect Faith,
imperfect Hope, imperfect Love, imperfect Hatred, imperfect Joy, imperfect
sorrow, imperfect Life, imperfect death, imperfect Priesthood, imperfect
Kingdom, upon this Altar does Christ never come, but in the loss of his life,
for where he is alive, he is perfect in all things, Mat. 5. 48. Col. 2. 10.
Col. 4. 12. Mat. 21. 16. John 2. 5. 1 John 4. 12. Heb. 10. 14.

So also into that Temple made with hands, or man's ability, and not of Gods
building, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 8. 2. Heb. 9. 1. which the world in the wisdom of
man composeth, no Minister must be admitted therein, whom the ordination of God
only designs unto office, unless the ordination of man be joined thereunto,
nor any whom the Spirit of God only furnishes for the exercise of his office,
unless humane learning and education be joined therewithal; nor is the
operation of his ministry counted honorable, or of any esteem in hardening men's
hearts, that they cannot convert, and in blinding their eyes, that they cannot
see, as well as in opening men's hearts and eyes to come unto the Lord, Isaiah
6. 9. 10. For if a ministry according to Gods wisdom should be admitted by the
world, then would the wisdom of the world be in subordination to the wisdom
of God, and the calling of a Christian would prove more immediate from God than
any other office or calling in the world, and then would a Christian prove the
only and supreme person or state in the world, which is an honor which the
spirit of the world could never allow unto the King of Saints, which may seem
strange that they should conclude that a Christian shall have chiefty of, and
supremacy over all wicked men hereafter, and yet cannot yield it unto them for
the present, but rather must Lord it over them, according to the doctrine of
the Scribes, Luke 23. 2. Mat. 22. 16. 17. 18. whereas the Scripture speaks so
expressly, that a thousand years in Gods sight are as yesterday, when it is
past, Psalm 90. 4. Nay, the holy Ghost concludes that our time here is as
nothing Psalm 39. 5. and if so, then how shall we reckon a man in another
condition than he shall be hereafter in Gods account, according to whose
reckoning and Records, we ought to judge?

To conclude this point, an Officer of Gods ordination and appointment, clothed
with the Spirit of God, cannot be admitted into that carnal Temple, where
Ioash bears sway, and has rule and command, but in the loss of his life; for
where Christ is in office, he is exalted above all the ordinations of men,
therefore is Zachariah slain between the Temple and the Altar, not being
permitted to enter with life into the same, the world therefore in the letter
of the Scriptures only retains a dead carcass of the Prophets, being void of
the life and spirit in all the virtues thereof, kept in that condition only
through false and counterfeit interpretation.

The fourth point, is the Application of the Fact unto the parties present, in
these words, whom ye slew, as Matthew has it, particularly applying the fact
unto them of that present age; Luke says, who perished, or which was slain, as
giving being unto the fact in times past; or who perished, or perishes, for of
such scope and comprehension the words are, noting a continued act which
comprehends time past, present, and to come; for it is but one only Sacrifice
which they thus strangle, Heb. 9. 26. Heb. 10. 10. and slay contrary to Gods
ordinance and appointment. Act. 15. 20 29 not taking the blood, or the life
away, according to the law* Lev. 17. 12. Deuteronomy. 1^. 23. so that it is but one
bloodshed, and it is but one Officer which is excluded their Temple, who has
all offices upon him, whom they thus slay, denying all rule and authority, that
is of the nature of that installing, contemning all exercise of the party so
installed in all times and ages of the world, Psalm 2. 1. 2. 3. Acts 4. 25.-29.

Again, it is but one spirit and life of the word of God, which they
spightfully spill, and let out in an earthly manner, as Cain did the blood of
Abel, Psalm 79. 1. 2. 3. and it is but one spirit of enmity, and falsifying of
the word of God, which is extant in all the seed and offspring of the Serpent,
Genesis 3. 15. and therefore the fact in the full comprehension and operation
thereof, is really applicable to parties of that race and spirit of the Serpent
in all times and ages of the world, as really as the whole salvation of God,
and not a part or pittance thereof is applicable to every particular believer,
in any, or in all ages of the world, and to tie the salvation of God unto any
time, or party concerned in that mystical body of Christ, more than to any
other, is to divide Christ, and may as well say that Paul was crucified for us,
as to ascribe more power of salvation to one Saint than to another, ^ Cor. 1.
13. for it is nothing else but to deny God to be all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23.

Therefore false Interpreters are the proper and immediate Actors of that so
cruel and bloody murder, in the shedding of one and the same innocent blood of
the Son of God; for no more than Christ can be divided, or the proper spirit
and life of his word can be made twain, John 6. 6^. or the spirit of Satan
halfed or parted, which is the quenching of that immeasurable spirit of God in
all its virtuous operations, no more can any false Interpreter of the word of
God, free himself from being guilty of all the righteous and innocent bloodshed
upon the Earth, since the foundation of the World.

Therefore in the fifth place Christ affirms in way of an asseveration or oath,
saying, Verily, Amen or So be it, to that which he has, and shall affirm,
concerning this matter, being irrevocable, confirmed by an avowed sentence,
which depends upon the truth and certainty of his being, the word of God, to
perform and put in execution the same; Verily, I say unto you, that all these
things shall come upon this generation, that is, in how many respects, that one
Sacrifice of Christ is offered up to God, as an holy and acceptable offering,
which is multiplied according to the several Sacrifices and Offerings
appointed by the law, which are innumerable in so many respects shall guilt in
the annihilating of all these things come upon this generation of false
interpretation of the law of God, and also by how much the offices and Officers
by the appointment of God are multiplied in way of Family, Tribe, City.
Tabernacle, Temple, Army' and in the whole Kingdom of God, which cannot be
numbered, by so much shall the multiplication of guilt and condemnation come
upon this generation, for killing and unjust annihilating of them all;
therefore it is said, that all these things shall come upon this generation of
false Interpreters, as with full force and power never to be resisted; but it
shall come upon this age, line or offspring of false interpretation of the
word of God, as it is the proper portion of every particular of them, as their
inheritance, both by birth, as being the seed and offspring of the Serpent,
and also by due desert, as purchased unto themselves by their own act, Mat. 3.
7. Hos. 13. 9.

1 Note from hence, that such are false Interpreters of the word of God, who
teach that only the sins committed in one time, place, or age, shall come upon
those who live in that age, time, or place, they not being guilty of any other;
for it is the sin and guilt of all ages, that every Unbeleever attracts ur to
himself; for it is the nature of the spirit sinning that attracts the guilt,
and not any place or tract of time, therefore Luke says, it shall be required
of this generation, as one entire act; for as the demand of the Almighty is but
one, in making inquisition for blood, Psalm 9. 12. so the blood is but one, the
guilt is but one, and it is but one act of exaction of penalty requiring it to
the uttermost farthing at the hands of every one found in the Fact, Matthew ^.
26.

It is to be admired to see how zealous some persons are, to cut off exorbitant
persons where they live, to clear the Land of sin, and so free it from Gods
execution of vengeance; if they can cut off the seed of the Serpent, there were
some hope to attain their end, which is as difficult a thing to do, as to dry
up the water in the Ocean Sea; or if they could take away the life of Cain,
whom God has said, no man shall kill, Genesis 4. 15. for there is no man, that is
a mere man destitute of the Spirit of God, but will uphold and maintain earthly
Sacrifices, which whilst men cry out against other exorbitances, to the cutting
off the lives of thousands, as for Theft, Murder, Adulteries, and the like,
which are not to be tolerated amongst men, in the mean time the life of Cain is
not only preserved, but stood for, and maintained in earthly worships, and
carnal and blemished Sacrifices, halt, lame, and blind, brought unto God,
wherein Cain lives, as also the spirit of the Serpent is maintained in carnal
policies, subtle devises, and enterprises, in all estates, callings and
conditions of men, though secretly carried on, that the body and bulk of the
people discern it not, or else overawed they dare not express it; but Satan
in such things can transform himself into an Angel of Light, so as all hands
shall set to, to maintain it, 2 Cor. 11. 14. 15. And this spirit of the
Serpent, or of such as wander in the way of Cain, Jude 11. is that which
attracts, not only the guilt of the sin of the present age, but also the sin of
all ages past and to come; if these Zealots could cut off this spirit from the
Land, it were a work that was never heard of, that is, that it has not a
residency upon the Earth, yea, in every earthly minded man, though he never
come under the breach of the laws of man, but could walk as Paul speaks of
this Pharisaicall practice, concerning the law blameless, that is, in the
judgment and reason of man, Phil. 3. 6. if men could cleanse the world, or
their jurisdiction, of this spirit, which carries the guilt of the sin of all
times and places, in every particular time place, and person, when, where, or
in whomsoever it properly acts, then I should think, they would not rest in
Heaven, till they had been in Hell to vanquish it there also, and this is the
spirit that every Christian contends with, and stands in opposition against,
for falsifying of the word of God for ever, and to show the wickedness
thereof, is his proper errand in the world, in the justification of the words
of wisdom, which is of God, but he can no more desire that such a thing should
not be, than he can desire a nullity of his own salvation, or a cessation of
the justice of God.

2 Note further, that they are no less false Interpreters of the word of God,
who reach, that the labor of a Saint, and glory wherewith he is clothed,
consists in those particular acts and operations, done in that tract of time,
wherein he sojourns and abides here below, conversant among these terrene
creatures, whereas it is true that his operations, and the benefit and glory of
them, reaches according to the extent of that spirit whereof he is, and from
which all his actions do properly spring and grow, which spirit works
effectually, has done, and shall in all the Saints of God, who have been, are,
and shall be upon the Earth, and accordingly is every Saint of God to reckon
and account of himself, and his operations, and that the manner of his Sonship
is such, as whereby he inherits all things: for thus says the Lord, He that
overcomes shall inheri^ all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son, Rev. 21. 7. And he that takes away this prerogative and royalty from any
Saint of God, he takes it away from the Son of God himself, who never took any
account of himself, in any particular whatsoever, but as in his Saints, yea,
in that complete mystical body; therefore does every man receive according to
that which is done in his body, 2 Cor. 5. 10. that is to say, according to
whatsoever is done in the body mystical, whether it be the body of Christ, or
that body of sin and death, whether done according to the mystery of God, o^
that mystery of iniquity; woe therefore unto false Interpreters of the word of
God in all ages, yea if that bounteous, sull and plentiful word of God, which
is not to be limited, or infringed in any of i^s operations and excellencies of
glory, but as all being in one in the account of unity, and that one completely
in all, in the account of multiplication, Cant. 1. 7. John 17. -- for the word
of God knows how to terminate all its own operation, excellency and glory in
one Saint, as well as it knows how to make it self full in one word, which is
only love, Romans 13. 8. James 2. 8. So also it knows how to terminate the curse
in all the mystery and shame thereof, in all and every particular that
pertains thereunto.

And hence it is that Christ turns his complaint against Jerusalem, as the
proper Mother who brought forth these false Interpreters, which was founded and
constituted so long before, as being one and the same together with themselves,
conversant together with them, and alike guilty in the same act of that
bloodshed which he lays unto the charge of these Scribes and Pharisees, saying
in verse 37.

Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as the Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not!
Wherein observe for the orderly handling of the words, this Method.
1 First, a vehement acclamation or outery, in these words, Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem. 2 A serious and just charge, thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them that are sent unto thee. 3 A patheticall interrogation, in these
words, How often would I have gathered thy Children together? 4 A metaphorical
Description of the manner how, that is, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under
her wings. 5 An unnatural denial in them, and ye would not.
1 For the first of these, namely* his vehement Acclamation, in these words; Oh
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, wherein observe two things; first, an Ingemination and
doubling of the phrase, which notes the certainty of that unalterable state and
condition of the City, in order to them, as it is their mother, and original
from whence they spring.

2 Secondly it notes the unalterable nature and disposition of these false
Interpreters, as they are her natural Children proper offspring.

And for the opening of this point we are to consider how Jerusalem is to be
understood in this place; for as there is a Daughter of Zion who is truly said
to be a Virgin, Isai* 37. 22. in regard she never knew man, that is, never
acknowledged that way of the flesh, and carnal commandment, as our Apostle
speaks; henceforth know we no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. therefore it
is said, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and thou shall call his name
Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14. In this respect Jerusalem is called Virgin daughter of
Zion, and is truly said to be a daughter of Jerusalem, in like sense as Christ
is said to be the son of the Virgin, who is also the Author and maker of her.

In like manner, there is a daughter and virgin of Babylon and Egypt, that is,
one that never knew man, or acknowledged that way of spirit and life, which is
in Christ Jesus, that law of the spirit exercised in the holy Temple, that
mystical body of Christ, which he speaks of, John 2. 19. which Babylon could
never endure, but puts the Vessels thereof to profane use, and so destroys it
unto themselves, Isa. 47. 1. in like respect is Israel after the flesh called
Virgin* daughter of Egypt also who never acknowledged that holy message and
ministry of Moses in that great deliverance, but set up a Calf in the
wilderness, and worshipped the beast, Ier. 46. 11. Psalm 106. 19. or the
moulten Image.

Even so there is Jerusalem that is above, who is the true Mother of all the
free born sons of God that is, who is above, or more excellent and glorious,
than all the orders and constitutions of Hagar, that is, of the bondwoman or
law of the flesh whatsoever, Gal. 4. 26. and in this respect the City is called
Jerusalem, which is a word compounded of Iireth, Genesis 22. 14. and Salem, Genesis
14. 18. that is, seeing in peace, for the Lord in the offering of Isaac,
through his escape by the death of the Ram entangled in the brambles and
thickets of this world, sees that mount in a state of peace and laughter in
Isaac for ever, Genesis 22. 14. which is truly said to be Jerusalem, or Sara, Gal.
4. 22. 26. So likewise there is Jerusalem that now is, that is, which is
earthly below, and not heavenly and spiritual, therefore he says it answers
unto, or reaches unto Sina (as the word will bear) alluding to the mountains
of Arabia Pet^ea, unto Cadis Bernea of Jury, declaring that this earthly
Jerusalem signified in Agar, is the same with Sina, the works of the law, and
carnal ordinances, which only ingendreth unto bondage, and intangleth all her
Children, even as the Ram was caught by the Horns, or in the prime of his
strength, in the arm of flesh, to the deliverance of Isaac, and his own death
and destruction; and this Jerusalem is named of Iebus, and is so called, Judges
19. 10. 1 Chronicles. 11. 4. after Iebus the son of Canaan the accursed* Genesis 10.
15. 16. Genesis 9. 25. and therefore is said to be under the spirit of bondage in
her children, and ingendreth only thereunto (contrary to Sarah the free woman)
being only in the place of Mount Sinai, and in the state of Agar.

Jerusalem then brought in, in this place, according to Christ's account, is the
Mother of these Children, namely, false Interpreters of the word of God, being
considered as in her first original, being built, ordered and possessed in the
real state of the curse, by Iebus the son of Canaan, the son of Cham, the
accursed, or by Iebusie, who when David was made King in Hebron, he and all
Israel went unto Iebusie, which is Jerusalem, which resisted David, saying,
Thou shale not come in hither, 1 Chronicles. 11. 4. 2 Samuel 5. 6. So also Jerusalem
is called Iebusie, when the land is divided unto the sons of Israel, Ioshuah
15. 8. and by that name falls in the inheritance of Benjamin, in whose lot the
Temple was built, Joshua 18. 28. which is a Temple destroyed, into which Christ
never carne, and a Temple reedified wherein Christ stands and preaches, Luke
4. 16.-22. of which Moses the man of God prophecies, when he says, The Lord
shall cover him all the day, (speaking of Benjamin) and between his shoulders,
that is, in the midst of the Coasts of his Land, the Lord shall abide and dwell
in his Temple, Deuteronomy. 33. 12. So also when that Levite, who sojourned on the
side of Mount Ephraim, fetched home his Concubine, it is said they came over
against Iebus, which is Jerusalem, which is then said to be a City of
Strangers, and not of the children of Israel, Iedg. 19. 10. 11. 12.

We conclude therefore, that Jerusalem is to be understood in a diverse
respect, according to the mind of the Scripture, and that according to a real
state and condition in both; for it is to be taken in that order and
constitution of blessedness and peace, according to that order and place of
abode of our Melchizedeck, who has his Kingdom and Priesthood there, Gen 14.
18. for Salem is Jerusalem, and so the Chaldees paraphrase reads that place of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 76. 2.

Jerusalem is also to be taken as it is constituted, ordered or inhabited,
after the manner, and according to the state of the curse, as it is built and
inhabited by the Iebusites, who are of Iebus, who is of Canaan, who is of Cham
the cursed, Genesis 10. 15. 16. Genesis ^. 25.

Jerusalem then in this place, together with her children, according to Christ's
true intent, is to be taken in the accursed state of the Iebusites, Enemies to
Israel, as it is constituted, ordered and inhabited by her proper offspring,
of false and counterfeit interpreters even as the sons of men do erect,
constitute, order and possess the Cities and affairs of this world, namely,
for their glory, benefit, safety and peace, by advancing all honorable thing,
according to man's account, in the disparadgement, debasing, and abandoning all
things of shame, discommodity and danger, so far as man's wisdom in their
constitution can find out, with the exercising and executing their laws and
edicts accordingly.

Even so this City and Temple of these accursed Iebusites, it erects and
possesses it it self by the advancing and promoting of all things acceptable
in the eyes of man's wisdom, with contempt and despising of all things which
might impair, or any way abate the glory and luster thereof, which cannot be
maintained but by debasing and despising the Spirit of God, whose property is
to blast, and to wither as grass, and as the flower of the field all things
set up and consisting in whatsoever that perishes in the use thereof, as all
humane institutions do; if ever the spirit of the Lord breath upon them, they
wither and come to naught where such things then are, the things chiefly
maintained, we may safely say, that the Spirit of the Lord never breathed
there, Isaiah 40. 6. which are the only things that false Interpreters promote
and erect amongst men in the world.

It is not without cause therefore, that Christ ingeminates upon this word
Jerusalem; Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, most emphatically declaring thereby, that
false Interpretation is cruel and accursed, both in the Mother, and in the
Children, in the Root, and in all the Branches; these are accursed in their
Fathers, who murdered the spirit of the Prophets, and their Fathers are
accursed in them that do the same things; that spirit which is the original
and ground of their interpretation, is accursed and cruel, and all the fruits
that flow therefrom, are cruelty and accursed; Oh Jerusalem, ye carnally
constituted and moment any Churches; Oh Jerusalem, ye carnally instructed
Members made great of flesh, Ezekiel. 16. 26. Ezekiel. 23. 19. 20. Oh Jerusalem the
Mother of false Interpreters, as she is in bondage with her children by the
works of the Law, and in all things ingendreth thereunto.

Now the erecting of the curse in this City, is the same with the setting of it
up in Canaan the son of Cham, and father of Jebus.

Noah having planted a Vineyard after the Flood, which had swept away all Cains
posterity from the face of the Earth, as such as have not a being in order to
the new Heavens, and the new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
yet is the curse conserved in the Ark, in that spirit of the unclean Raven, as
well as the blessing is in that spirit of the Dove; for the work of God, as
well as the word of God, has its operation in way of death, as well as in the
way of life, 2 Cor. 2. 15. 16. for death springs up and revives through the
resurrection of Christ in the wicked, as really as life springs up and revives
through his death in the godly, and yet there is no savor of life in the
wicked, nor any savor of death in the just, and this conservation of Cham in
the Ark, who is of Noah, and so of Enoch, in the destruction of all Cains
posterity in the Flood, is to declare, that neither the blessing, nor the curse
is tied or entailed to any natural and carnal generation, according to man's
judgment, but God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardneth, Romans 9. 10-18.

But it is said that Noah drinks of the fruit of the Vine unto drunkenness,
Genesis 9. 20. 21. we know that the spirit of God alludes there unto natural
drunkenness in the stupifying of the senses, through excess of strong drink,
and deny not but that holy man might take liberally of the very fruit of a
natural Vine, to the obstruction of the use of natural reason, as it is in
the time of sleep* but we affirm that God teaches a higher thing hereby, which
is Gods proper intent, as the Apostle affirms concerning the care of God in not
mussing the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, 1 Cor. 9. 9. 10. God
therein takes care for men, and not for beasts, according to the true scope and
intent.

So God in Noah teaches what the death of Christ is, personated in Noah, and
not what taking away of man's natural sense, is by strong drink, which is
common to a beast, as well as man; so that as out of a deep sleep in Adam, a
woman is brought forth, that is, not only the way of man's propagation and
preservation on the Earth, but also one who through deceit brings in the fall
and death; so out of this drunkenness and sleep of Noah, there is not only the
blessing of Shem, and Iaphet brought forth, but also that cursed condition of
Cham and Canaan; so that Noah in this drunkenness cease from all carnal
argumentation in the things of God, even as a man drunk with Wine is bereaved
of the use of natural reason and common sense.

Noah therefore according to Gods intent and meaning is drunk, in that sense of
the Apostle, where he says, be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be
filled with the spirit, or as the word is, be drunk in the spirit, Ephesians. 5.
18. that is, as John is said to be in the spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10.
even as a man being in drink, it has dominion over his senses, carrying him
beyond the common operations of them, therefore it is said that a man s^outeth
because of wine, Psalm. 78. 6^.

Even so a man being in the spirit, it carries him beyond all natural reason,
common sense, and humane argumentation, to resolve, conclude and determine of
things according to the wisdom, power and glory of God, and not of the
Creature; therefore it is that the Spouse in the Canticles, says, Eat O
friends, drink abundantly, or as the word is, drink, and be drunk O
well-beloved, Canticles 5. 1.

The truth is, that the argument or wisdom of a Saint encouraging him to stand
in opposition unto all the world, (which he cannot but do though there were not
another to stand by him in the cause of God) is to carnal reason liker to a
man bereaved of his senses, than one in his right mind; and thence it is, that
Cham the youngest son of Noah, or the least son being so diminished in point of
Sonship that he comes not within the compass of inheriting any part of his
fathers blessing, because he looking upon his father as being uncovered of all
the ornaments of man's power and wisdom, and so asleep or dead to them all,
whom Cham declares to his brethren as the shame of his father, looking upon him
with that unclean spirit of the Raven, but Sem and Iaphet beheld not any shame
in that nakedness, but know it to be the only capacity of their father to be
clothed with those honorable robes of righteousness, which they bear upon
their shoulders as the Levites carry the Ark of God, and go backwards unto
their father, a quite contrary way than Cham does; therefore Noah awaking unto
God, or being alive unto the spirit, as really as dead to the flesh, exercising
himself in the wisdom of the spirit, knows what his sons have done through this
his sleep and drunkenness, ministering unto them according to their deed; and
therefore denounces a curse against Canaan, not naming Cham, but Canaan his
son, wherein a deep mystery is couched; namely, that the curse does not in the
least arise out of the Ark, wherein salvation is, but out of a spirit
propagated and engendered, by concluding that the glory of salvation consists in
that which it does not, namely in the glory of the Creature, and not in that
glory which is immediately of God, even as Cham looked at the blasting of man's
glory, through the power of the holy spirit of God, to be the shame of his
father, and not the true glory.

Neither does the curse arise and spring out of any proper work or operation of
God in any particular, but from a false construction and interpretation made of
that good work of God; therefore the act of ingendring Canaan, as accursed
merchandising (as his name signifies) by a false construction concerning our
deliverance (given by Cham) comes between Noah, and the blessing distributed to
his sons; and however Cham be not named in denouncing the curse, yet he is
included, else the curse were not full in original and offspring, even as the
blessing is pronounced upon the root and original of blessing; and therefore
he says, blessed be the Lord God of Shem, but Shem the true off spring is
included, and so it is full in the root and branch also.

So is the curse denounced upon Canaan, but Cham is included also, else the
curse were not full in root and offspring; and as Noah here in this place, is
not the immediate root of Canaan the accursed, no more is the Lord of all the
Earth the immediate root of any particular in the curse.

That spirit therefore that stands for mediate Ordinances and offices of God,
it stands for and upholds the proper propagation of the curse; and as the curse
goes out unto Canaan the son of perdition, including Cham the father of lies;
so Christ here denounces desolation upon the Mother Jerusalem, including all
false Interpreters her Children, in the Scribes and Pharisees, as her proper
offspring; and thus comes the curse to be propagated in all the men of the
World and the orders thereof constituted and established (if we may call it
order established) in all the Cities of the Iebusites, namely, by preferring
the wisdom, power, authority and glory of man, before the wisdom, power,
authority and glory of God, maintaining the ways and operations of the
Creature in the vilifying of the operations of the spirit of God, as a
shameful thing in that way of the cross of Christ, and in this stands all
those mother like conceptions in the orders of the World, to produce and bring
forth a brood and generation of false Interpreters, as the orders of Jerusalem
had brought forth these Scribes and Pharisees, as her children engendered by
that bond woman, or spirit of bondage. For the orders constituted and
established in the world, beget false Interpreters, as naturally as every
Creature begets and conceivs its own kind, for according to the form of order
established in any nation, Kingdom or jurisdiction, such is the officer it
brings forth, for he must be produced and established according to that law, or
else he is a Usurper; so that the immediate call, and invisible virtue of the
Spirit of God, is thereby to be rejected in whomsoever it appears; for the
Officer must be a child of that order and law wherein he exercises, of what
order and constitution soever it be, which this City order of Iebus, or
Ierusolem has ordained and erected, and herein she becomes murtherous and
diabolical in her self and in her children, or the children are such in the
mother, and the mother is such in the children, in that they reject all
immediate revelation of Christ and his Spirit, putting it off by their law to a
time past or to come, or to both, and so kill it in the present time, as these
Interpreters did, and as the City ordains and appoints such laws to bring forth
children by, so the children are bound to promote maintain and justify that
law and order by which they are brought forth.

Even as children do their Parents, whilst they stand in that relation of
children; for when they are once betrothed, they become a root in themselves,
and these two taken spiriritually according to the intent of Scripture are
never separated, whether in the mystery of God, or in the mystery of iniquity,
namely the root and the branch, the mother, as City order, and her children; so
that as false Teachers look back they are the children of an accursed mother,
or seed of an adulterous law of the carnal commandment; and as they look
forward at the fruit and off spring of their doctrine, so they are the root or
mother City of an accursed offspring, whose inhabitants are no other than the
accursed Iebusites, enemies to Jerusalem, that is above, and to the Israel of
God, Gal. 4. 26. Gal. 6. 16.

This City therefore, namely Jerusalem, ordered by the law of a carnal
commandment, which is to expound the bond and tie of the word of God (as Gods
intent) to stand in the relation of one Creature to another, in any thing
wherein God expresses himself.

This City is not only that mystery Babylon the ^reat, the mother of Harlots,
and all abominations of the Earth, Rev. 17. 5. But it is also the mother of all
murders, and therefore called the City of bloods, in the form plural, Ezekiel.
17. 2. Nahum 3. 1. and therefore woe is denounced against her as the bloody
City, Ezekiel. 24. 6. 9.

And so much for the acclamation and ingemination of the phrase, Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem; and hence it is that Christ brings in that just and deserved charge,
which is the second point, Thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee; wherein observe two things, first that they kill the
Prophets; secondly, that they stone them who are sent unto them.

1 They kill the Prophets, for this order and City government contrived by the
letter of the Scripture, for the maintaining of the glory, wealth, honor of
the Creature cannot preserve it self therein, but by imprisoning or cutting off
what ever seems to impair the same; Now the wisdom of God which has placed
all honor, wealth and happiness only in things that endure for ever, cannot
but vilify and bring to naught all fading and transient things, and therefore
our Apostle affirms, that the wisdom of the Princes, or most excellent, and men
of esteem of this world comes to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6.

Therefore the orders and institutions of this City, that is, of all carnal
policies and states, leaning only upon the letter of the Scripture, must of
necessity bend their force against that wisdom and word of eternity, as the
only enemy of their pomp and glory, being a shame and dishonor to all earthly
excellency and beauty, even as the glory and splendor of the Sun at noon day
abaseth the appearance of a candle; for the carnal laws and institutions of
the world cannot retain their force, if the wisdom of God take place; therefore
this Jerusalem in erecting of her orders and ordinances perishable she must
terminate the word of God in them, as the intent thereof, or else they are not
in force to ensnare the conscience, neither would they otherwise appear of any
more worth than the laws given to the beasts of the field or the fowls of
heaven, which is neither sin to break, simply considered, nor righteousness to
fulfill; therefore they are bonnd over by the law of a carnal commandment, to
terminate the mind and will of God in humane orders and institutions, in the
neglect and rejecting of that glory of God which appears in Jesus Christ,
disallowing and disanulling in themselves that eternal word and law of the
spirit of life, which is in Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 2. which only frees from the
law of sin and death, and wheresoever that law is not acknowledged there sin
reigns.

Now whosoever nullifies the spirit and life of the Scriptures, by erecting a
carnal commandment, he therein nullifies the true spirit of prophecy, and he
that nullifies the spirit of the Prophets, he takes away the life of the
Prophets, and so becomes a Murderer of all the Prophets; for the spirit of the
Scriptures is of that comprehension in the true intent thereof, as that it is
the only life of all Prophets in every age of the world, without any alteration
of Gods proper intent therein, no more than there was ever found salvation in
any other, but only Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 10. 11. 12.

And therefore every carnal spirit is bound over for the conservation of
humane order, in the erecting and maintaining thereof, upon its proper
principles, to extinguish and put out the proper life and spirit of the
Scriptures, otherwise he cannot maintain his laws in force, according to the
nature of them, in their height and glory, which man naturally strives after,
and can never attain unto any eminency therein, but by quenching of the spirit
of God, and despising true prophecy, 1 These. 5. 19. ^0. and all transitory
Rites and Ordinances, erected and maintained, as carrying in them the scope of
the word of God, are as so many Engines and instruments appointed, ordered and
maintained, for that very end and purpose, wherewith they kill the spirit of
the Prophets, in preferring the dead carcass, and setting up a dumb Image
before the spirit and real substance.

2 Therefore Christ adds the second act in his charge, against them, telling
them that they are such as stone them that are sent unto them; we heard before,
how true Prophets are said to be sent to these wicked Scribes and Pharisees as
they are the offspring of the Serpent, and of such fathers as killed the
Prophets, and here it is said, they are sent to the original and mother of
them, that is, Jerusalem, from whom they spring; whence we may observe, that
the Spirit and life of the word of God does not only enterprise to solicit the
world to break off, and turn from their gross aberrations and exorbitancies,
but also to reverse and repeal those Laws and Orders from whence they spring,
as things of no account in the Kingdom of God; nor is there any justice o^
righteousness to be expected from any humane or literal institution or order,
further than it is used by him who has that spirit of the righteousness of
faith to be his Instructor therein; therefore it is that Christ affirms that in
the Kingdom of God there is neither marriage, nor giving in marriage, but are
as the Angels of God in Heaven, and to be ignorant of this point, is to be
ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the power of God, Mat. 22. 29. 30. that is,
in case men acknowledge not that any temporary relation, simply considered,
attains not unto the end of the law of God; for men knowing the Scriptures and
the power of God, cannot but see and acknowledge that.

For shall we think that marriage, which is the way of the multiplication of
man, and so the ground of all humane institutions, is any point of the proper
end of the law of God, when as it is plain that Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness, Romans 10. 4. but marriage (as a humane act) may attain its
end in a wicked man as well as in a just man, or else it were sinful to
consent to the marriage of unbeleevers.

Again, if marriage (simply considered) were any part of the end of the law,
then would Christ Jesus the fulfiller of the Law, Mat. 5. 17. never have
neglected that relation; but he does it of purpose to declare, that as natural
conception is not intended to be that which brings forth the Son of God, and
therefore he is conceived by the holy Ghost; in like manner natural marriages
and contracts is not the thing intended by the word of God in the fulfilling of
the Law, and therefore he enters not into that relation, for the consultation
of the grossness of man's cogitations therein.

Therefore the spirit of the Scriptures solicit carnal Jerusalem, as having
relation to the Iebusites, for the abrogation of her sinful and murdering
laws, as she sets the scope of the word of God in vanishing things, which is as
durable in its proper end, in all things, as in its foundation, Rev. 22. 13.
and beginning.

Such laws therefore as receive strength by terminating the word of God in
transient and momentany things, (as the Laws and orders of Jerusalem that now
is, and is in bondage with her children, ever did) Gal. 4. 24. 25. and
therefore the Prophets ever cry out and inveigh against their Sacrifices,
Sabbaths, New Moons, and solemn Assemblies, Temple, Priesthood, Fasts, and all
manner of exercises, which God himself had commanded, only they understood and
used them in a litteral and carnal manner, terminating the end of the
commandment in things that fade and vanish, which laws are the very ground and
fountain of all uncleanness and abominations springing up among the sons of
men in the World, Isaia 1. Isaia 58. Ezekiel. 23. 38. 39. the mistake and
misconstruction of the word of God in this point, is the proper profanation of
all things amongst the sons of men; therefore Jerusalem is said to stone them
that are sent, intimating thereby, that she does it by her Laws and Ordinances,
alluding to the Law of Moses, which appointed Malefactors to be stoned to
death, Lev 2. 2. 27. Deuteronomy. 13. 10. Deuteronomy. 17. 5. and in that includes all other
laws instituted by a false construction of the word of God, whereby in her
executions she brings the word of God for what she does, for her defense, as
though she did nothing but by the command and direction thereof, which is only
brought in as the Devil did the word of God in the tempting of Christ, which
Christ gives a quite contrary meaning thereof, than the Devil intended, Mat.
4. 5.-10. which is the proper overcoming of the tentation, and by this false
and satanicall alleging of the word of God, false Interpreters do blind both
themselves and the world, and thereby direct the force of their law against a
wrong object, and so exercise their cruelty upon the innocent, instead of the
guilty party; for we shall hardly find a wicked Lawyer, or judge in the world,
that cannot by this means find some fault with a godly man, according to his
interpretation of the law of God; for it is easily said thou art an Heretic,
Scismatick, or a Blasphemer, a mover of Sedition, troubler of the state, or
enemy to Caesar, Acts 24. 5. Acts 18. 12. 13. John 19. 12. 13. Acts 17. 6. 7.

But the question is, by what law he is made such a one, whether by the law of
faith, or by the law of sin and death; for if the Judge be not able to
interpret the word of God, according to the Law of faith* and so be a Preacher
of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. otherwise the word of God is become in him a
law of sin and death, directing him to the innocent, instead of the guilty, and
therefore his judgment must needs pass, according to the will and law of
Satan, and not of Christ.

Not that we deny that the sentence and execution of death may pass amongst
men upon the face of the earth, we only plead for a just and righteous law, by
which it is done, otherwise the judgment is as ready to take hold of the
innocent, as of the malefactor, for the maintaining of the Judges own ends and
honor; for if a wicked Judge did it not for sinister ends and respects, he
would only bend the force of the l aw against the godly of the Land, and not
against them of his own spirit, as all wicked men are, only they become
Tormenters one of another.

If a man should ask many who sit in judgment (according to the law of
Jerusalem in bondage with her children) how it comes to pass that an
Adulterer, or an Adulteress is by the law of God to be stoned to death, and
yet Christ acquits one taken in the act, notwithstanding a grave Eldership are
her accusers, John 8. 3.-11. or how a Murderer is by the law of God guilty of
death, Numb. 35. 16. 17. 19. 21. and is to d^e the death* and yet God sets a
mark upon Cain, that gross Murderer, that no man shall kill him, Gen 4. 15. or
how it comes to pass that a Usurper or Tyrant is not to be suffered, therefore
David complains of Saul for usurping the Kingdom, Psalm 4. 2. as appears by
the word translated, men, in that place, which is ^sh, a name given to man with
respect to dignity, authority and power, as Saul had; and yet David though a
Warrior, will not lay his hand on Saul, when he was in his power to put an end
to such usurpation, though God had said the Kingdom was rent from him and
given to David, 1 Samuel 24. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 27. as one better than he, and many
the like, which no carnal Judge can reconcile to any satisfaction of a
rational mind, and he that cannot reconcile the word of God to be at one, and
in an eternal agreement in it self, as it is the word of God, that man can
never bring forth a pure law of God; and he that works by a corrupt and crooked
rule, must needs miss, or sin in all his operations; for he that cannot bring
the word of God to agree in all things, he can never bring God and man to agree
in Christ, in whom only all righteousness dwells, and abides for ever, and out
of whom is nothing but wickedness in all the sons of men.

The Law of God then applied unto false priuciples is the ground of all
disorders in the world; for can we think that if men did not put a certain
Deity in worldly wealth by terminating a blessing of the word to consist in
riches) that ever men would spend their time and strength, use such deceits and
sleights in trades, to deceive, ingrosse, monopolize, and inhaunce the price,
to grind the faces of the poor, alienating themselves from friends, family and
house, or people of God, to abide among infidels, for that end and purpose to
grow rich in the world? Nay, would men steal, rob, and slay but to get wealth,
or to attain some other thing thereby, wherein men have put alike excellency?
Further, if the law of carnal Jerusalem did not dei^ie marriages of man and
woman, by terminating the word of God in them so as men expect a certain Heaven
in fulfilling thereof, otherwise would they run into adulteries, but only that
they find not their hope at home, but resolve it is to be found else where? and
thus it is in point of honor, outward peace, great friends and allies which
Jerusalem after the flesh has set up as Gods in the world for men to adore and
worship, and spare nothing for the obtaining and maintaining the same.

Moreover this carnal Jerusalem makes gods of terror, or rather Devils to be
avoided, of temporary things, as poverty, idleness, fornication, drunkenness,
pride in gay apparel, want of obedience to Parents, Ministers, Majestrates,
terminating the word of God, as its proper errand to mankind in these things in
all their prohibitions, curses and comminations, which fills some with terror
and fear, it may be despair and madness in their coming short of perfection
in their abstaining from such things, and others are filled with itching
desires to taste of them, apprehending some strange and uncouth thing to be in
that which is so prohibited; whereas if the Law of God were rightly exhibited
and set forth, it would moderate men's hearts in the pursuit of any earthly
excellency, seeing the vanity of it, and quell all fears of wants and miseries,
arising from the want of the glory of it, knowing that God has given
commission to all things to work for the good of every one of his, Romans 8.
28.-35.

Christ therefore directs his speech against Jerusalem as that mother City,
law, or order, that brings forth Scribes and Pharisees, who by their law stone
the Prophets of God, and such laying claim unto the law is the real denial
of the law, as bad as those whom they call Antiscripturians, a term soon found
out to make men odious: But it were better to fill their ears with arguments to
the stifling of all such ignorant spirits as deny the present power and
authority of the word of God. Though these men think themselves such as are
flown beyond and above others, and therefore wait either for a new word, never
yet recorded, from the mouth of Christ, when he comes to reign on Earth as a
Monarch, or else for such a spirit as yet never breathed in the sons of men,
and so look at the word of God recorded as a thing now out of date, according
as they judge of the Ceremonies of the Law.

These are false Interpreters of the word, and are under a law of this carnal
Jerusalem, that Christ thus charge, in that they make the eternal word of
God, which is the same with God himself, and lives alike together with himself
in the Saints in all ages; these persons therefore that deny the ^^esent power
and virtue of the word of God, are as really these deceitful and hypocritical
Expounders, as those Scribes and Pharisees were to whom Christ speaks, and
arise from Hagar the bondwoman, as really as those descended of that
Jerusalem, who is in bondage with her children, declaring themselves to be no
children of the freewoman, and so no heirs of promise.

For they may as well profess the eternal word, that Son of God, and Savior
of the world, to be void of virtue, and have no operation, in or upon the
Saints of God, whether living upon the Earth, or departed this life, (who is he
that upholds all thingt by his power, Heb. 1. 3. and says of himself by the
Psalmist, the foundations of the Earth are weak, I bear up the Pillars
thereof, Selah, Psalm. 75.) as to affirm that the word of God recorded in
Scripture, is either out of date, and not of present use, or destitute of any
virtue and power, which once it had.

For if these men will have the Characters of the word of God void and out of
date, as records of no use, they deal not truly with themselves, unless they
make the whole work of God in the creation of this visible world to be out of
date, yea their own bodies and souls, with all the operations and imaginations
of their hands and hearts, for the Letter and Character of the Scripture is
engraven in them all; therefore it is that all things are called upon by the
Psalmist, to utter and set forth the high praises of the Lord, Psalm 148. -- as
all his Angels, all his Hosts, all high places, yea praise him Sun and Moon,
and all Stars of Light, the Heavens of Heavens, and Waters that be above the
Heavens, yea things from the Earth, Dragons, and all Deepes, Fire, Hail, Snow
and Vapor, stormy Wind and Tempest doing his will, Mountains and all Hills,
fruitful Trees and Cedars, the wild Beasts and all Cattle, creeping things,
and feathered fowls, Kings of the Earth, and all People, Princes, and all
Judges of the Earth, young Men, and also Maidens, old Men with Children; if men
will have the Records of Scripture, the Characters of the Word of God out of
date, let them profess all these to be out of date, and void of that virtue,
relation, motion and operation, which God at the first placed in them, and gave
unto them.

Yea let them profess that their places, offices and stations they stand in,
to be out of date, and of no use, a marrying, and giving in marriage,
procreation of Children, or of any Creature, with their eating, drinking,
sleeping, labor, and rest, let all these be dead and out of date unto them, if
the Characters of the word be out of use, yea their own thoughts, and motions
of their minds, for the word of God (as spoken of all men) says the word is
nigh unto thee, even in thy heart, and in thy mouth, Romans 10. 8. and says the
Apostle, this is the word of says which we preach, that is, our Ministry is
nothing else but an opening of that Husk, or Character written upon your own
thoughts and words, that you may participate of the strength, life and
substance, contained therein, which otherwise is a dead and killing letter, yea
the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 2. 16. 2 Cor. 3. 7.-11.

Those therefore that deny a like virtue and power to be in the letter of the
Scripture or Character of the word of God, that ever was at any time from the
beginning, such men are false Interpreters of the word of God, and alike
adversaries to Christ and his salvation, as these, against whom all these woes
are denounced, and do appertain unto them as their proper right and justly
purchased inheritance; for the word of God in the letter of it, is more firmly
imprinted, than in being blotted with Ink upon Paper: therefore our Apostle
affirms that it is graven upon stony Tables of the heart, as well as the Law of
the spirit is upon the fl^shy Tables of the heart, for they are both to remain
in their proper places, 2 Cor. 3. 7. though the Letter or ministry of
condemnation be done away in the Saints, yet it abides in the wicked; for unto
this day, when Moses is Read, the Veil of separation is upon their heart, 2
Cor. 3. 15. only in such as turn in unto the Lord in the holy place with Moses,
in them the Veil is taken away, Exodus 34 34.

We conclude then, that the true Character of the word of God, is the whole
work of God in the visible Creation, in their several^ natures relations,
motions and operations, wherein stands firm and stable the real Character of
the word of God, which becomes unto man (the true end and scope thereof) either
a Minister of condemnation, or a Minister of salvation, as the spirit of Cain
or Abel makes use thereof, in bringing unto God a heavenly and earthly
Sacrifice, Genesis 4. 4. 5.

Let these men therefore prove all things in Heaven, and in Earth to be worn
out of date and of no use nor benefit one unto another, otherwise the letter of
the Scripture shall stand firm unto this day, and the virtue and power of the
spirit of the Scriptures, (which is the proper spirit of God in Christ Jesus,
in that way of his salvation) shall only be out of date, and not in present use
and exercise in these men who deny the use of the letter of the Scriptures.

There is another generation of interpreters who are of the same spirit of
these Antiscripturians, though they cry out against such gross opinions; for
Satan's Kingdom is divided in it self, and therefore cannot stand, but is in a
continued act of apostatizing and falling away from God, and these are such as
hold and teach that some part of the word of God is out of date, and not in p
esent use, as the Leviticall and Judicial laws, (as they call them) likewise
that some part of the word of God is not yet ripened, and so not come into
present being and use, as the perfecting of the sound of the seventh Trumpet,
and the fulfilling of diverse Prophec^es, which foretell of peaceable and
glorious times and states, which (say they) were never yet accomplished, as the
new Jerusalem, coming down from God, with her glorious foundations, walls,
gates, form, and furniture, which these men never yet saw to appear, Rev. 21.
--

These Interpreters are real Antiscripturians: for he that denies any part of
the word of God to be in present use, as a thing too old, or yet not grown into
present use and virtue, that man denies the fullness and perfection of the word
of God, and he that denies the fullness of the word of God, he also denies the
fullness of Christ, and it is all one to say something in the Son of God is out
of date, and too old to be in present use, and also that something in Christ is
not yet come into ripeness and present use concerning that salvation that is
by him alone* these men look upon the word of God with the same eye that the
carnal Jews beheld Christ, who sought to kill him because he said he was the
Son of God, Mat. 26. 63.-66. no doubt but these men would say in like manner,
if they heard the word of God rightly and faithfully opened, this man
blasphemes, because he says, this is the word of God, Ioh. 10. 36. for if the
sum of the whole word and law of God be not so brought in, in every Scripture,
as to give Christ a perfect and present form and being therein, it is not truly
and faithfully interpreted, whether it be in Moses, or any of the Prophets, it
speaks the things that concern Christ himself, Luke 24. 27. who is the perfect
Son of God, that Immanuel, in what respect or relation so ever he appears, Mat.
1. 23. for there is a fullness in every law, as well as the law of love, and he
that breaks one command, all are included in that breach, James 2. 10.

We see here that the Son of God charges Jerusalem to be the ground and mother
of false Interpreters, as one that by law (falsely expounding Moses) kills the
Prophets; he finds their legislative Assembly to be the Author thereof, and
therefore bends his speech for the repeal and abrogation thereof, which he
attains in all them who are of Jerusalem that is above, and in none else of
what rank soever in the eyes of the world; which abolishing of the Law is this
namely, that all humane and temporary institutions and commands, lose their
force and authority in the Kingdom of God; for all humane laws in their proper
intent is to set one man in authority over another, which are all countermanded
in every true Believer, by that law of the spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus; for whether it be right in the fight of God to obey men, rather than
God, judge ye, Act. 4. 19. yet does not this hinder a Christians obedience to
humane authority, only makes it voluntary, according to that free and royal
law under which he is, James 2. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9. otherwise, if he were in
bondage to one, he were in bondage to all of the same kind, and then must obey
the order established wherever he comes, yea if it were to fall down to
Nebuchadnezzars Idol, Dan. 3. 1.-18. and every law that concerns mankind must
be either humane or divine, and all temporary institutions are humane, because
they spring from humane reason, and are under that bond for performance, for
humane reason can require no more but what it can devise and invent; but divine
laws, or that law of Faith has the spirit of Christ in it, which is the proper
moulder and constituter thereof, which spirit s eternal, and the only bond for
the performance thereof, which no other law whatsoever can supercede,
countermand, or entrench upon the authority thereof. Observe, that in the
ground of all Law, there are two Tables considerable, that is, not only the
Letter and the Spirit, but also Kingdom and Priesthood, and thence it is said,
The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, Psalm 110. 1. for there is a
Lordship on the right hand in both, and they are never separated in Christ, but
ever subsist and exist in the power and royalty of faith, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Exodus
19. 6. even as they were both found in that one Melchizedek, King of Salem,
Priest of the most high God, Genesis 14. 18. Heb. 7. 1.

And whatsoever is in a capacity to be presented as an acceptable thing to one
of these, is fit for the other; therefore when the Priests offered the lame,
the blind, the sick, and imperfect Sacrifices, the Prophet bids them go to the
Ruler, or Governor, and see whether he will be well pleased with it, or accept
the person of such as so offer, Mal. 1. 8. implying, that what is brought unto
the Priest, and what is brought unto the King, ought to be of like value,
perfection and consideration, so that these Tables of Kingly and Priestly
offices in Christ Jesus, are of like authority and dignity, and are the ground
of all Law and Order in that Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of all true
and faithful Interpreters, who dare never divide, nor put asunder those whom
God has joined together, Mar. 10 9.

In the one of these is submission unto all things that are of God through
death unto all the things of this world, and in the other there is ^ule and
authority over all the things that are of the evil one, through that living
unto God in Jesus Christ, or that life of God, which nothing can subject, no
more than any thing can cut it off, which is eternal, 1 John 1. 11. 13.

There is also a Kingdom and Priesthood, merely earthly and carnal, which as
two Tables of stone, are the fountain of all Law in this earthly Jerusalem,
which by law stones the Prophets of God, and these are never separated in a
state earthly, though ordered in several persons for the mannagement thereof;
for the grea^nesse of a King destitute of the spirit of Christ, has employment
sufficient, as head of so many people, that time permits him not to be
exercised in matters of his relation to God, therefore a Priest must be
appointed for that purpose to establish matters between God and man through the
Kingdom; and a Priest of such ordination, trained up of purpose, only by
humane Schools, and education suitable to that government for such a design,
being destitute of the spirit of Christ, must of necessity be possessed with a
spirit of jealousy and fear, and therefore dare not exercise himself in such
a work, but under the authority and power of such as will defend and maintain
him therein; so that the King and Priest are never separated in an earthly
state; and as a King is not honorable in divulging the Laws of the Kingdom,
but as he has Nobles to be conversant therein, neither is he honorable in the
divulging of the Laws of the Church, but as he makes some of the Priesthood
great in respect of some relation to himself: And both King and Priest maintain
a certain interest in men, as a foundation of all Law, by these two things,
that is, Tribute and Tithes, which two words are of great affinity and aliance;
for the word Tribute, signifying enough, or all, the acknowledgement of that
yields all unto the King, and so confesses him to supply the place, and have
the room and office of God upon him; so that wherein the headship and royalty
of the Kingdom consists, there is the ground and fountain of the Law, whether
in one, or in many; and whenever this fountain shall please to call it self
aside into consultation, what the result is, sent out by edict, that is the
Law, and all must obey it, because it is the mind of that which is in the place
of God, so as no other is, or others are, and this must hold according to the
rule of natural reason, and tenor of the letter of the Scripture, written in
man's heart, Romans 10. 8.

Again, the Priesthood of the world maintains an interest in men's hearts by
Tithes, which is the ground of all carnal institutions in the way of Churches;
for the word Tyth, or the tenth, signifies all or alsufficiency, which indeed
ought ever to be given unto God; for nothing isacceptable, or of any account
with him, but only his Son, who is all in all, or allsufficient; so the tenth
signifies all, where it is said, That a Bastard shall not eno^r into the
Congregation of the Lord, unto the tenth generation, that is, to all
generations, as is explained in the next words; The Ammonttes and the Moabites
shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even unto their tenth
generation shall they not enter into the Congregation of the Lord for ever,
Deuteronomy. 23. 2. 3. so as it is said that ten women shall bake their bread in one
Oven, in the City, in the days of famine, that is, all the women in the City
shall bake but in one Oven, Lev. 26. 26. even so the tyth, or tenth has the
signification of all, as giving the Priest an interest in the first, chief or
prime of all things, so that whilst the tenth is acknowledged to be due unto
the Priest, it sets him in the place, office and room of God, unto whom all
things are due and do appertain and belong. And as this Priesthood pleases to
take it self aside in its Eldership, in way of Synod or Assembly, to consult
about the laws of relation between God and man, whatsoever their consultation
concludes upon, to be a way pleasing to God, or profitable for man's salvation,
setting it out as a godly principle, or practice to be held and maintained,
that must be taken as authentic or original of authority, a bond sufficient
to bind men's souls over, and engage them thereunto, because these men stand in
the place of God, and are more immediately conversant with him than any of the
rest of the people, which is the very cry and voice of all false and
dissembling hypocrites in the world, Isay 65* 4. 5. and this is the proper
ground of men's pleading for tithes, not only to hold an interest in men's
estates, but principally to be as Gods in their consciences upon whom they must
depend for all peace and truth, and a carnal Priesthood cannot rest till this
ground of law and interest in the people be established upon them, which they
seek to maintain by the law of Moses, and equity thereof, as this Jerusalem
stoned the Prophets to death by the like law of Moses; and it is as much to cut
off a carnal interest of a Priest in a carnal people, maintained by tithes,
as to cut off the spirit of the Devil from the world* for all carnal and
earthly hearts comply with this foundation of Law and interest in the Church,
and all your required stipenda^ies, and necessary free will offerings, for the
maintenance of Priests before any other people, stands upon the very same
bottom, and is a branch of the same root of bitterness, sprung up to trouble
the world, whereby many are defiled, Heb. 12. 15. for they fall from the grace
of God or they fail and come short of the grace of God, that is, of
acknowledging the complete and perfect grace of God, in Jesus Christ, in whom
every believer has a like interest; for Christ is not divided, and therefore he
says, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. and there is
but one holiness, which is the holiness of the Son of God, and that not
acknowledged, we set up one man as holier than another among the People of God,
either in person, or by office, which is this root of b^tternesse, upon which
the profaneness and fornication of Esau depends, Heb. 12. 6. who for a mess of
red broth, that is, carnal and earthly things, to satisfy our lusts in our
hunting after the things of this life, give (as in exchange) the birthright
and inheritance of the Son of God, from our selves.

And thus much for the charge Christ lays upon Jerusalem as the foundation and
ground of killing the Prophets, as having reference to Moses law she stones
them to death; for it is her practice to murder the Saints by law, and in that
respect Gallio said well; If it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed, O ye
Jews, I would according to reason maintain you, but if it be a question of
words and names, and of your Law, look ye to it your selves, for I will be no
judge of those matters, Act. 18. 14. 15.

And how the true Prophets of God are said to be sent unto a City of such
foundation and order, as to kill them by law; not^ thus much in brief (as a
transicion into the next point) that God never uttered himself in his word, but
there was that in the expression, which accords and agrees with man's reason,
as well as that which only suiteth with the wisdom of God, therefore all his
works were brought forth by his word, Psalm 33. 6.-9. which are suitable and
agreeable to man, as well as man himself in the image of God, which only holds
proportion with the wisdom of God, Genesis 1. 27. So that the wisdom of God
never utters it self but with respect unto man's wisdom, and proper operations
of man's heart, which wisdom of man he prevents from taking place in that way
of Christ, framing the mind of man according to his own wisdom, wherein man
becomes the image and likeness of God, yea a true Son and holy offspring of
God, not only an Heir, but also the Author of all his works, Heb. 1. 2. Col.
1. 15. 16. And this is the turning of man from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan to God, Act. 26. 18. and without this, God had never been known,
for he cannot be seen possibly, but only in his own light, Psalm 36. 9. which
must be communicated with the Creature, otherwise no capability of knowing the
Lord; and this wisdom of God communicated with man is not only Gods
offspring, being his real and true image, but also the Author of all his
works, therefore the Psalmist (in way of admiration and outcry, in viewing the
works of Creation) says; How manifold are thy works O Lord, in wisdom have
thou made them all, Psalm 104. 24. and so says the wisdom of God; The Lord by
wisdom has laid the foundations of the Earth, and has established the
Heavens through understanding, Prove. 3. 19.

Again, the wisdom of man was never formed nor uttered, but the wisdom of God
was included in the expression; for the wisdom of man with respect to God and
himself, and all the Creatures, is the true Character or Letter of the
Scriptures; and this wisdom of man, for the preservation and exaltation of it
self, forms God unto it self according to its own proper principles, where the
light of the Spirit of God shines not, which this wisdom prevents that it
takes not place, which does so far manifest it self, that man cannot but
acknowledge that there is a higher and more principal thing than that which he so
voluntarily makes choice of unto himself; so that it is an apparition of the
wisdom of God, which he forms according to his earthly capacity, and in so
doing the word of God is in him altered from its own nature, proper disposition
and operation, which it has in that wisdom and form of the Son of God, as
man, in that way of Christ or wisdom of God, is altered and changed from his
own nature, disposition and proper operation, as he is considered a limb of
Satan, son of perdition, dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. Col. 2. 13.

So that the wisdom of God utters not it self in the Saints, but with respect
to that wisdom of man, which so falsifies the word of God, from which the
wisdom of God has freed us, and by a perpetual act triumphs over it; yet
notwithstanding this appearance of man's wisdom is a powerful assault of Satan,
because a Saint of God, as he is considered man, is by nature in that respect,
as prompt to work upon the same principles as any other man, and it is only the
wisdom and spirit of God by which he is a continued and perpetuated victor;
and hereby all the assaults of Satan are overcome only by this wisdom and Son
of God, and not by any thing that is of man.

So likewise the wisdom of man moves not, upon any word or work of God, but
there is a higher excellency and virtue presents it self, therefore Pharaoh
though he would not acknowledge the Lord of the Hebrews, yet he appeals unto
his Magicians, and unto Moses also, for help when they could not do it; so did
Nebuchadnezzar appeal to his Magicians for some higher revelation than himself
had, and they themselves acknowledge a higher than they; as if there were a
possibility for the Gods to come down and interpret the dream, Dan. 2. 10. 11.
whose dwelling is not with flesh, nor with any transitory and carnal ordinance
or institution whatsoever ordained by the King; and this appearance of a higher
wisdom and power is a strong solicitation and onset given upon all wicked men
to embrace and accept of that wisdom and authority wherein only safety does
consist, because the highest; and it is a strong assault and visitation,
because there is that in a wicked man, which is of its own nature as ready and
willing to accept and yield it self over unto that wisdom and authority, as it
is in any man whatsoever; for the Spirit of God is as really, and in a like
sense, in the most wicked that ever was, or shall be, as the spirit of man is
in the most just and righteous one that ever was or shall be, namely the Son of
God.

Now the wisdom of man by false interpretation preventing the wisdom and spirit
of God of its proper work, it is his fall from God, and falsifying the word of
God in its proper intent, destroys the true spirit and life of all true
Prophets, which are as really sent unto them that thus deal with them, as Satan
himself is a tempter of Christ, and as the Prince of this World coms in
temptation, and finds naught in Christ to, fasten a tentation upon, John 14.
30. so does the King of Saints solicit the world to accept of the wisdom and
work of God in salvation, but finds nothing in that Son of perdition, to
fasten salvation upon; therefore they stone them that are sent unto them.

Note hence, that there is no true, real and proper power of God, but that
which springs f om the true interpretation of the word of God, for it is the
word of God which gave all things their being at the first, and conserves them
in their being, and operation unto this day, now the word of God which gave all
things their being, is the wisdom of God, and this wisdom of God is only in
Christ who is the wisdom of God and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. out of whom
there is no proper wisdom and power, which God owns as his; therefore without
the opening and revelation of the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. there
is no proper wisdom or power of God extant among the sons of men, but what is
exercised among men, otherwise is that Kingdom of darkness, wisdom of the
Serpent, and power of the Devil, and what power or virtue there is in any, or
all other Creatures, is to be referred unto one of these, and according to that
use which man makes thereof, so it becomes clean or unclean, unto him, and is
either Christian (in its use) or diabolical, Titus 1. 15. Romans 14. 20.

3 The third point noted in the order of the Text, is Christ's interrogation:
How often would I have gathered thy Children together? wherein observe,

1 Christ's appeal to the conscience of all wicked men* that his solicitations
and visitations for their recovery have been evident and are apparently known
unto them, which stand upon record in their hearts, and can never be blotted
out, nor denied; for the clearing of this point, read Psalm the 78. throughout.

2 Secondly, note the multiplication of this his solicitation; How often, that
is, my onsets upon thy children and Offspring have been so reiterated,
multiplied, and constantly exhibited, and represented, that they cannot be
reckoned, they are altogether innumerable, Psalm. 81. 8.-16.

3 Observe what the proper will of the Son of God is; How often would I have
gathered thy Children together? that is, my will is only to gather mankind into
unity with God, for out of him there is no unity; therefore he says, how often
would I have gathered thy Children into unity; that is the proper nature,
endeavor, and will of Christ, and he can no more will the death, destruction
and dissipation of mankind, than Satan himself can will to submit, and subject
himself to the wisdom of God in Christ, which he is at utter enmity against;
Christ's will is therefore to bind over by law unto the way of salvation, and it
is this carnal Jerusalem which binds over by the law of the flesh unto
destruction, so as her children will not be reclaimed; God in the way of Christ
can no more will or desire the destruction of mankind, than he could will or
desire to annihilate the world upon the making of it, that his whole work
should be in vain, and to no purpose.

It is not in the Son of God to will destruction, therefore he takes a solemn
Oath upon it, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Ezekiel. 18. 23. As I live, says the Lord, I desire
not the death of him that dies, and his will is, that all men should be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. so that God in the way of
Christ has no will for destruction, for his will is his law, and the law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus only saves, and it is the law of sin and
death, wherein destruction does consist, which is no will nor law peculiar unto
God, but proper to Satan, therefore he adds but ye would not* so that
destruction consists in the law of this corrupt City, and practice of her
children; it is their will and law to have it so, not that destruction depends
upon the will of a Creature, but it depends upon the law of sin and death, in
false interpretation of the Word of God wherein they have formed the Word and
work of God into the will, and wisdom, or natural reason of a man, whereby
the word is become the word of the curse, a savor of death, and the Spirit of
God a tormenter of mankind, as really as man in Christ is become a holy and a
blessed Savior, and reconciler, making peace between God and man, and so
gathering them into unity for ever.

4 The fourth point is the manner how Christ strives with man, set out in this
metaphor, As the hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. In this Metaphor
we are to Consider, how a Hen gathers her Chickins under her wings, or her
Brood, or Nest, as the word imports, and therefore is to be taken either as
she broods upon eggs, to breed life, or as she hovers upon her Chickens, for
the safety and preservation of them, Deuteronomy. 22. 6. and secondly, how it is
applicable unto Christ.

1 First, we know a nest cannot be Complete without the maker of it, and
therefore the dam or mother must be brought in as one with the eggs or young,
therefore it is said that the Eagle stirs up or makes up her nest, and
fluttereth or moves upon her young. Deuteronomy. 32. 11. that is, the nest is made up
and complete, only by the presence of the dam, else either eggs or young
suffer damage.

So it is with the people of God, the Nestling place of the Alm^ghty, he is to
be considered, and is become one together with them in all things, and if we
take him from them, or them apart from him* in any thing whatsoever, we spoil
the Nestling place of fruitfullnesse and safety both of God and man, i^ we
separate them either in point of time, place, or subsistence, John* 17. 5, 21,
^2, 23.

2 Secondly, the Hen neglects her self, in the time of her brooding upon her
nest, that by her Constant hovering upon it, no air, or inconvenience, may
seize upon it to hinder life, in raising up her Kind.

Even so it is with Christ the wisdom of God, it neglects it self in all
wicked men, that none of the virtues, or excellencies of the Spirit of God are
found there, though he be God; it neglects it self also in that mystical body
of Christ, that no humane glory or excellency be found there, though he be a
man also; and from the sufferings of the one, and of the other of these twain,
he Broods upon the Saints to raise up an offspring and generation of sons unto
God. And in this respect it is said, that the Spirit of God overshadowed the
Virgin, Luke 1. 35. Yea the power of the most High, So, as neither the glory
and excellency of man, nor any wretchedness or misery of man, should take
place to Contribute any thing to the form and being of any of the sons of God.

3 Thirdly, the Hen in brooding upon her Nest transfuseth her own proper heat,
life, and virtue, to give form and life unto her Nest in raising up her Kind,
and not the heat or life of any other thing, the Fire, no nor Sun, or any
artificial heat devised will do it.

Even So the Wisdom, Life and Spirit of God transfuseth it self into the
offspring and sons of God, to give them form, life, and motion, as being
naturallized and Kinded unto God, and not any other influences, as a secondary,
or mediate thing whatsoever, therefore in every one that is called (for so the
word is) both of Jews and Grecians, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom
of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and thence it is that our faith stands not in the wisdom
of men, (or any thing that they can transfuse or instill) but in the power of
God* 1. Cor. 2. 5. which is one and the same in whomsoever it appears.

4 Fourthly, the Hen hovereth upon her Chickens, for their nourishment and
increase, that they may attain to her stature and ability.

Even so does the wisdom God brood upon his saints that they may come unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
13. Therefore it is said, that the Saints increase with the increasin^s of God,
Collos. 2. 19. Now we know that the Holy One dwells not it temples made with
hands, for the heavens of heavens cannot contain him, 2 Chro. 6 18. No more is
he subject to increase or diminution, therefore perfected at once and for ever
in all his demensions, and operations whatsoever, and his increasings are, that
bountiful flowing forth, and issuing out, of his Spirit in the variety of his
operations and revelations, springing from that inexhaustible Fountain in
Christ, that Storehouse and Treasury of them all.

5 Fifthly, the Hen broods upon her Chickens to save them from harm of storm and
tempest, or birds of prey, which otherwise they are Liable unto.

Even so the wisdom of God hovers upon his Saints to save them from danger,
Isaiah 45. 6. Psalm. 91. 1. even the cruel storms, and tempestuous gusts of
the Devil, who goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour, 1
Peter 5. 8. who though he come in against the Saints as a flood, yet shall this
spirit and wisdom of the Lord lift up a standard aganst him, to chase him
away, Isay. 59. 19. And this is the only safety of the Saints, who otherwise
are in continual danger, even as a Sparrow upon the house top, Psalm. 102. 7.
who watches alone, for if she fall upon the earth, there is the Fowlers
snare, and if she abide upon the rooff of the house she is subjct to birds of
pray: So are the saints of God if it were not for this wisdom and Word of God
rightly interpreted that watches over them, for it they look down to the
inferior and more gross things of this life, there is a snare hid in every
thing, to catch us with vain hopes and expectations to be enriched, and exalted
by them, in case we can but heap them up together and make the best of them,
and if we look up at the principalities and powers of the world, we are ready
to be devoured and swallowed up by them, if this wisdom move not upon us, as
the spirit brooded upon the waters in the beginning, to preserve them in purity
that they corrupt not, as we see they are in motion unto, this day for that
purpose in their ebbings and flowings; Nay if we look down to man's sin, fall
from God, and imperction in all things, we are ready to be ensnared with
doubts and fears, and discontentments with our own condition, and if we look
up unto that happy and blessed estate of man in Christ, we are Ready to wax
proud, arrogant, and wanton in the things of God, if this wisdom of God do not
brood and flutter upon us, and watch over us, that his power may prevent all
inconveniences, that otherwise would fall upon us, Psalm. 77. 10. This wisdom
and Word of God is our only strength and help, in the true interpretation
thereof, and without that there is no proper power or help of God at all, as is
formerly noted, therefore it is said, thou have advanced thy Word over all thy
Name, or upon all thy Name or Authority and power, Psalm 138. 2. So it is said
that the mercy of the Lord is over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9. or upon all
his works, That is, there is not a work of God in Heaven, or in Earth, but
there is a stamp and impression of the mercy of God upon it, with respect unto
the Saints of God, yea every work of God is a Monument or Remembrancer of Gods
mercy unto them: See an epitomee or breviary hereof, Psalm 136. 1.-26. where
the Spirit of God impresseth the mercy of God upon his works six and twenty
several times.

Even So the Lord has magnified his Word upon all his Name, or his authority,
and power, that is, there is no power and authority of God, but that which his
Word in the true interpretation thereof invests into, it is that, and that
only, which sets up, and maintains Gods Name and Authority in all things
whatsoever, and without the true interpretation of the Word of God, his Name is
not magnificall in the heart of any man, likewise there is nothing whereby the
power of Satan is advanced in the world, but only the false interpretation of
the Word of God, neither is there any contention among the sons of men (besides
that contending for the common salvation, by faith once given unto the Saints,
Jude 3.) But it arises from a mistake and false interpreting of the Word of
God, for it is at unity with it self, where and in whomsoever it is truly
acknowledged. We Conclude then; that it is Word of God which is the wisdom of
God, that is, the proper wing of God, under which the Saints are gathered,
which false interpreters refuse to come under.

5 Which is the fifth point in order, And that is their unnatural denial, but
ye would not. Not that the wickedness and destruction of man depends only
upon the will of a creature simply considered, but it depends upon the law of
the flesh, or the word of a carnal commandment, that is, the word of God
falsely interpreted.

Neither does Salvation depend upon the mere will of an Eternal God, simply
considered, but it depends upon the Law of the spirit of life, which is in
Christ Jesus, which is that word or wisdom of God rightly opened and
interpreted, else does not Salvation consist only in Christ Jesus, who is God
and Man, as the wisdom of God affirms it does, Acts 4. 11, 12. And this is the
Stone cast aside by you builders which is become the head of the Corner.
Neither is there Salvation in any other, for among men there is given none
other name under heaven whereby we must be saved, Mat. 1. 21.

1 This denial of being gathered into unity by Christ therefore, is the voice
of a law which wicked men are under in way of Hagar, the bond woman, which
speaks effectually in way of negation to every point expressed in the metaphor
taken from the Hen and her Nest or Chickens, that is, we will not have the Nest
to be one in original and offspring, that is, God and man making one in^ire
Condition in all and every Saint of God, in the point of time, place, and
individual subsistence, for the Spirit of God, in the soul of man, in every
operation of a Christian, is brought into a point of time, as really as that
act through the Spirit of God has in it the extension of Eternity, but this
false interpreters will not be gathered into.

2 They will not have Christ so to neglect himself in the world, that there is
no stamp of the Image and Spirit of God in wicked men, (as peculiar to his
nature) nor so ^o neglect himself as he is Man in the just* that there is no
excellency, or glory of man in any reckoning or account in him, that so he may
in the fullness of God and vacancy and vanity of all the things of man, make of
these twain one new man in himself, this false interpreters will not be
gathered into, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16

3 They will not have the same life and spirit transfused into every Saint of
God, which is in the Son of God, as he has respect to the Father, or not that
(however) which is in the Father himself, but some Secondary, or mediate
influence, else it is not a wing for the children and the bondwoman (earthly
Jerusalem) to come under, they are all bound by law of humane learning, and
their School Divinity, to keep with all care and study, their Secund^m Idem,
which is a principal pillar set up by Satan to underprop the Nest they belong
unto, Revel. 18. 2.

4 They will not have the form and fullness of Christ to be completed at once,
where ever, or in whom it appears, but must have it made up gradually by
peece-meal, hating inconsistent to the increasings of God, and impaires that
Salvation that is by Christ, for there is nothing peculiar to a Christian, but
Christ; salvation Consists in it; so that they will not have Salvation to be
perfect, it is a wing too sound and wholesome for the Scribes of the world to
come under.

5 They will not have the word and wisdom of God to be a complete and all
sufficient shelter unto a Christian to save and defend him from storms and
tempests, snares and intanglements arising from below, or descending from
above, without the help of humane learning, whereby to know, and humane policy,
to consult, contrive and determine, as also, humane laws and Lawyers, to
maintain rights and interests, otherwise a Christian cannot safely be Conveyed
through this World; we have known all these to come out against Christ, and the
servants of Christ in all ages, but we never knew them take parts with the
people of God, but as God by his wisdom turned them to another intent than
their proper s^ope and end was, but for the word and wisdom of God simply, and
singly considered, that wing false interpreters would never be gathered under,
for they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job 21* 13, 14. Psalm. 119. 53. They will not have a Nest of his
composure, a house of building without hands, only eternal in the heavens,
they know nor, for it is too apparent their Doctrine concerns the things of
this life, and so properly the state of the bodies of men, and for the nature
and state of the soul they Know not, being void and destitute of the wisdom of
God, such as have not the spirit* Jude 19. and therefore Christ in the words
following brings in that affirmation, and sentence against them.

38. 39. Behold your habitation is left unto you desolate, for I say unto you:
ye shall not see me me henceforth, till that ye say, blessed is he that comes
in the Name of the Lord.
In which words observe.
1 First a serious affirmation, in these words, Behold your house is left unto
you desolate. 2 Secondly a reason thereof rendered, in these words, for ye shall
not see me henceforth until ye say, blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord.
First observe in the affirmation, a note of admiration and wonder, that the
wisdom of God should speak and express it self unto men, and they not give
Credit thereunto, Behold says he and wonder, admire unto astonishment, and
destruction, that the prophecy which has foretold these things, is fulfilled
upon you, Habba. 1. 5. which the Apostle applies to a like act of the wicked
Jews, where he says, Behold ye dispisers, and wonder, and vanish away, Acts
13. 41. or, perish, for the reiection and neglect of the wisdom of God
presented unto the world, and uttered in Christ, is the proper condemnation and
destruction of the sons of men; therefore the Prophet says, For I will work a
work in your days, ye will not believe it, though it be told unto you.

Here is then a description of the habitation and abode, as the proper brood
and nest of all false Interpreters, in opposition to that which Christ
gathers his own people into.

And this devastation here affirmed to be the portion of all false
Interpreters, is the very same which is prophesied of all Christ's Enemies,
Psalm 69. 26. and is in particular applied unto Judas Iscariot that Confessor
for hire, Acts 1. 20. (as his name signifies) or man that praises the ways of
death (as all such do) to declare unto us that deceitful, treacherous, and
perfidious spirit; as also that horrid destruction which ever attends the false
interpretation of the Word of God, which ever bereaved men of all Office and
Apostleship, of all Virtue and Operation, of all holy Ministry and Service, yea
of all Life, Spirit, and Power that appertains to the House and Kingdom of God;
therefore Judas is said to go to his own place, as one estranged from that
place and inheritance of the Son of God, Acts 1. 25. So that this desolation,
and depopulation of the habitation of the wicked, is the fulfilling of it with
death and destruction, and with all wickedness and abomination, as in Simon
Magus, who valued the gifts of the Spirit of God according to an earthly
estimation, which is ever accompanied with a destructive and perishing
condition, Acts 8. 20. For it is that unclean spirit which goes out of the
Man, or out in a human manner in the things of God, walking through dry places,
barren of the distillations of the Spirit of God, seeking rest, but has none
to give, and therefore never finds it; for the Spirit of Christ does as truly
gives rest as receives it.

But this unclean spirit consulting with it self, preaches a return to his
house out of which he came* that is, he came out of the house of uncleanness,
and thither he returns; for as the holy Spirit of Christ comes, or proceeds out
of a pure and uncorrupted Fountain* as it descends from the Father, yet as the
spirit of man is in unity therewith* there is a real separation and
sanctification from uncleanness, and all impurity, which otherwise man
naturally is; therefore Christ is truly said to be made in us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemtion, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Even so that Spirit of man going out in the matters of God by human wisdom, in
that respect goes out of an unclean and corrupt Fountain or habitation; for
Earth holds no correspondencie, nor has any congruity with Heaven, the
Creature with the Creator, but falls infinitely short in all things; not a
blemish forbidden in all the Sacrifices and Offerings, but in that respect he
has the defect, superfluity, and defilement upon him, yet does he corrupt a
pure and holy thing in himself, and unto himself, namely, the holy Word of God,
in the false construction thereof; so that as this unclean Spirit corrupts a
pure Word of Eternity in it self, mortalizing it by putting it into a human
form, so also its return is into an house of uncleanness, of like antiquity, in
point of the state of death and mortality, and so is truly said to go out of an
unclean habitation, which never was otherwise, and yet he makes it unclean and
desolate of all the things of God unto himself, by false interpretation,
bringing the will of God unto the mind of the Creature, and not the mind of the
Creature to the will of God.

But the Spirit of Christ coming out of a clean Fountain, even from God
himself, and therefore is said to come forth from God, and go to God, Ioh. 13.
1. yet does he purify in himself that which by nature is otherwise unclean,
namely the spirit of man, else were he not the son of Man, as he is called a
matter of eighty eight several times in the Prophecy of Ezekiel; and according
to the eternity of that Word, or Spirit that purifies, such is the state and
condition of the purified; for they are no more twain, but one, Mat. 19. 6. And
thence it is, that Man, who otherwise is mortal, lives an eternal, and immortal
life, being that the Wisdom of God has formed his mind according to the Will
of God, and not to the will or law of a creature and so Man in Christ, who
otherwise is mortal lives for ever, and knows no death no more than En ch did,
Genesis 5. 24. who was translated that he should not see death, Heb. 11. 5. That
is, that he should never taste of it, or feel the nature thereof; so the
Psalmist says, Taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 81.

And the Son of God, who otherwise is immortal, does in that way of Antichrist
dye an eternal death, where never any life appears, but a mortal state and
condition of like time of him who is mortalized, therefore they are said to go
into everlasting fire, which must have respect to time past as well as time to
come, Mat. 25. 41. Therefore Tophet is prepared of old, or of antiquity, or
from eternity, as the word imports; yea it is prepared for the King, the
burning whereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, as a River
of Brimstone, kindles it, Isaiah 30. 33. So that as ancient as the breath of
the Lord is, so ancient is that place of abode for the wicked; therefore a full
measure of wrath, in point of time, as well as present torment. So that unclean
spirit is said to take seven spirits worse than himself; that is, fullness of
uncleanness and vexation; which a creature simply considered could never have;
therefore his going out in the matters of God in a carnal manner, is the way of
his multiplication of mischief in himself; therefore his house is empty and
swept of all the things of God, but furnished with all uncleanness and
wickedness suitable to that unclean and wicked condition; therefore the end of
that man is worse than his beginning; for the original, and proper ground
ofthis abomination, arises from the creature, whichin it self is but a finite
thing, as all other creatures are; but his end and scope being to adorn himself
with God, in making him like to himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 50. 21.
thence it is that God becomes a fearful and infinite death and torment to him,
which all the creatures in the world could never be.

And of such nature and concernment is the house or habitation of these false
Teachers, which is left unto them, or in them, desolate of all the things
proper to God, and filled with all the things of Satan, even as Judas was, to
become his own Executioner, and the bursting of him in sunder, that all men
might see his abomination and shame, who is said to go to his own place, Act.
1. 25. as one laid waste of all Apostleship and Ministry in the Faith of
Christ, and therefore his proper inheritance or habitation yields him nothing
that is holy or profitable to Minister, but is void and desolate of all.
Neither has he any life or spirit to move or act in the things of God, though
tendered unto him; for he is dead, and gone to his own place, and office of an
eternal executioner of himself. And this is the desolation of the habitation
applied to Judas, the false, and counterfeit betrayer of Christ with a kiss,
which Christ applies hereunto all false Interpreters of the Word of God (in
these Scribes and Pharisees) who faun upon Christ in their Doctrine in all lowly
demeanor, to maintain and uphold him in the ways of the flesh by things mortal
and momentary, and thereby give a sign unto the world for the betraying of that
life and spirit of the Son of God into the cruel hands of the wicked, that the
law of the Spirit, or Christ taught after the Spirit, wilnot be suffered or
endured among them, the habitation of such Confessors, Pharisees, or Preachers
of Christ (with Judas) is left unto them desolate, without any in-dwellings of
the Spirit of God with them, or any building up of the House of God by them,
but ruination of themselves and others (with Judas) who are their maintainers
and upholders.

The Reason of this Desolation and Destruction follows; For ye shall not see me
henceforth. Whence observe, that the want of Christ's sight and revelation in
the world, is the cause of all ruin and desolation of the world, as Christ
affirms, Without me (says he) ye can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 5. It is alike true,
without me ye have nothing, without me ye are nothing. Christ is unto man that
Microsmos, or little world, as the Sun in the Firmament is unto this spherical
world; take away and annihilate the one or the other, and all things therein
perish and come to ruin. Want of true Revelation is the cause of all Desolation
and Destruction.

By seeing here we are to understand the communication of the senses. The
Apostle Paul saw Christ when he went to Damascus, even that light that shined
about him clearer than the Noonday; for it is said he saw no man, Act. 22. 26.
Act. 9. 8. That is, he saw no humane shape of Christ, though he opened his eyes
to see; but Christ according to the spirit in his mystical body was revealed
unto him; therefore he says, Am I not a^ Apostle? am I not free? have I not
seen our Lord Jesus (...) Cor. 9. 1.

Paul al^^ ^eard Christ utter himself against that spirit of the High Priest,
and orders of carnal Jew and Jerusalem, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? For, the hearing ear, and the seeing eye are both alike of the Lord,
Prove. 20. 12.

Paul also felt Christ; for the force of the revelation struck him to the
ground, so as he was astonished at the sight of all the Jewish glory to become
earthly and corruptible.

Paul also tasted how good Christ was, therefore he reasoned not, or
communicated not with flesh and blood for his sustentation and support,
thinking to have it from other Apostles or any man, therefore he went
immediately from Christ to preach, having tasted how good he was, being that the
Son of God was revealed in him, Galat. 1. 16. and not out of him, as the world
imagines* And this Taste is to see; therefore the Psalmist says, Taste and see
how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8.

Paul also smelt the savor of the good Ointments of Christ, or else he had not
born his name before Gentiles, and before Kings, and the children of Israel,
Act* 9. 15. For his name is an ointment poured out, therefore the Virgins love
him, Cant. 1. (...)

The want of seeing Christ in such respects as these, is the cause of
desolation in the house or nestling place of all false Interpreters, ^u^ of
which they will not be gathered by the voice and tender compassions of Jesus
Christ; though he visit them with such sollici^ations as a hen does her
chickens to gather them under her wing, yet they will not come into any such
unity and safety.

Again, whereas he says, Ye shall not see me henceforth, the word henceforth
in this place comprehends the time past, as well as the time to come. So it is
taken by the Prophet Isaiah, where he prophesies of the Kingdom of Christ (with
an allusion unto, or under the name of David, by which name the Son of God i^
called, Hos. 3. 5. Jer. 30. 9. Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24.) saying, that his government
shall have no end, but that he shall sit upon the throne, and establish it with
Judgment and Justice from henceforth for ever; where he explains the word
henceforth to be for ever, Is 9. 7. which must comprehend the time past as well
as that to come, or else it is not ever, or for everlasting; for there can be
no time brought in, in which he reigns not, who overcomes and triumphs both in
life and death, Heb 2. 14, 15. Rev. 12. 6-10. therefore the word is often
doubled, for ever and ever, Psalm. 9. 5. Isaiah 3. 8. noting thereby the time
past as well as time to come.

And thus the Prophet Micha understands this phrase, where he says, that God
will make her that halteth a Remnant, and her that was cast far off a mighty
Nation, and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion, from henceforth, even
for ever; where he expounds henceforth to be for ever, which comprehends all
time past and to come; for the wisdom of God was set up and advanced from the
beginning; no time can be found when that has not the rule and supremacy,
Mich. 4. 7. Prove. 8. 22-30. Therefore there is no end of the Kingdom of Christ;
if we look back we cannot set our thoughts before it; and if we look forward,
we cannot span it out; for of his Kingdom and Government there is no end, Isa.
9. 7. it is for ever and ever.

As it is said concerning eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
In the day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shall dye* as the words are; that
is, if thou look back thou shall appear dead in thine Ancestors, and if thou
look forward thou art dead in thy Offspring. So in this place, ye shall not see
me henceforth, That is, this spirit of false interpretation never saw me to
communicate with me in the acknowledging of me as the Son of God in any of the
Fathers in timer part who have truly propagated me on the earth, and brought me
forth. Neither does it now acknowledge me, nor approve of me in this my
appearance and converse with you; nor shall it hereafter, and for ever, at any
time, or in any age acknowledge, or communicate with me in any of my true
offspring, when, or in whomsoever I appear, concerning any of those offices and
excellencies peculiar to the blessed Son of God.

And hence it is that he adds, until ye say, the word until, is here of like
signification, as when it is used concerning Mical Saul's daughter, when she
mockd David for Dancing before the Ark, when it was brought out of all private
and obscure places, subject to transmutation and change, to be placed in Zion,
not to remove thence any more, when he put upon himself the Linen Ephod,
exercising the Priests office, at the sight whereof Michal despises David in
her heart, and for that canse had no child after until the day of her death,
2 Samuel 6. 11.-23. That is, she never had child after that act, Nay, she never
conceived nor brought forth fruit according to that act and office of David, in
his rejoicing and glorying only in the Ark and strength of the Lord, but only
in that way of the house of her father Saul, who trusted in man, and sought
only to be honored among the people, 1 Samuel 15. 30. and so she had never
Child, as of the seed of David whom the Lord chose before the house of her
Father.

And so it is said of the Virgin Mary, that Joseph knew her not till she had
brought forth her first born, Mat. 1. 26. That is, Joseph never knew her for
the conception and bringing forth of that First Borne of God; So Christ says
unto his disciples, I will be with you till the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20.
That is, look how I have ever heretofore been with that spirit which teaches
the observation of the fullness and perfection of my Word in all things, so am
I with that spirit in whomsoever it appears, for ever. And so is this word
till to be taken in this place for all time, you shall not see me henceforth
till you say, blessed is he, that comes in the Name of the Lord, that is, ye
shall never see me, or communicate with me to the investing of you into the
office of the true Priesthood, which is to bless in the Name of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 21. 5. 1 Chronicles. 23. 13. Numb. 6. 22,-27. And to bless out of the House
and Habitation of the Lord, in opposition to this house of desolation, Psalm.
118. 25, 26. False interpretation of the word of God, therefore (upon the
affirmation, and verity of the Son of God) never did, nor shall, invest into
the Office and Priesthood of Jesus Christ. It never attained unto the skill to
Sacrifice and flay the Beast, upon the Altar, to Crucify the World unto it
self, and it self, unto the World, accounting that the only Joy and Glory to
be delighted in, Gallatians 6. 14. It never attains to the offering up unto God
the fruits of an Eternal spirit, as that which is only acceptable to God,
without the institution or addition of any things transient and temporary
(whatsoever) for Christ who is only acceptable to God, so offers up himself,
once and for ever, in the true operation, and continued act of acceptance
thereof, for the act and acceptance are of like continuance, and have the same
place of residenccy, for where the one is found, there is never the absence of
the other, Hebrews. 9. 14. For Christ is both the one and the other.

Again, false Interpretation can never make God its only inheritance and
portion, to live on him only in the exercise of its Ministry, because it
terminates the word in carnal things, and therefore is bound over to seek some
certainty and settlement in the things of this present life, and cannot as a
pilgrim in point of all transitory things where ever he comes, commit himself
to God, as his only and allsufficiency, as the true Priests, and Prophets of
God have ever done, according to that Royal Ordination and apointment of God,
Deuteronomy. 18. 1, 2. Number. 18. 20. 21. who is become their lot, and happy
inheritance, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. even of all true worshippers, who are made Kings
and Priests unto God, Revel. 5. 10. Revel. 1. 6.

False interpretation never invests into the spirit of intercession, an office
of the Priest, which Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, never received nor gave
out; the spirit of prayer never accompanies false interpretation, and it is the
Spirit only that helps our infirmities, and makes intercession in us or by us,
otherwise we know not how to pray as we ought, Romans 8. 26. and the spirit of
prayer never moves, but upon the words of truth, Psam. 45. 4. for it ever comes
to God in the name of Christ, or in the power and authority of the Son of God,
John 14. 13, 14. John 16. 23. which only consists in the true understanding of
his Word, Isay. 11. 4. Revel. 2. 16. For all things receive their being, form,
and proper virtue from it.

Moreover false interpetation never attaines the*Priests office to make an
Atoment and Reconciliation between God and man; to reconcile the Word of God,
so, as to accord and agree with it self in all things, and at all times, having
a like cessity of the utteriug of it self upon the same foundation, 1 Cor. 3.
11. in the same terms and form of Words according to the true scope and
intent, 2 Timothy 1. 13. and of the same seize, in point of the end and
issue, 2 Timothy 4. 8. James 1. 1^. without which there was never peace wrought
between the Creator and the Creature, nor form given unto the Faith of Christ,
for the Word of God never came out as from God, but in that oneness of spirit,
which appears in the man Christ, and he that cannot bring the Word of God into
an agreement, and harmony in it self, without neglect of what has been spoken,
or want of somewhat, which has not yet appeared, he Can never utter the truth
as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. and without the Truth as it is in Jesus no
peace with God appears, for he only is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14.

And this reconciliation of the Word of God, is as strange a thing to a
natural mind, as to bring the strict Jew, and the profane Gentile to become
one, and that to the mind of a carnal interpreter, takes a man (being a Jew,
or a Confessor according to the letter) as far from the Word of God (as it is
the ground of his beleese) as the Apostle Paul that Minister of the Gentiles,
was taken away from his religion, as it consisted of the orders of Jerusalem,
the mind, letters, and power of the High Priest and Elders, and those
breathings out of slaughters, against all that called upon the name of the
Lord, Acts 9. 1.-14. And as it takes a strict Jew that is one outward, and
according to the letter, so far from his religion, and so from his God which
he flies unto as his only help.

So also it takes the carnal Gentile as far from his religion, and God, who
walks at large without any tie, or bond upon him in the liberal and
licencious use of all things, as Corneli^s was taken far from being a thing
common and unclean, to become a devout man, one that feared God with all his
household, giving much alms, and praying unto God, yea became Baptized or
ingrafted (through the Apostle Peter's Ministry, who was a Minister of the
Circumcision) into the grounds and true principles of the whole Law of God,
Acts. 10.

To bring therefore the carnal Jew into liberty, as from under the Law in all
things, and the profane Gentile who has no bond upon him in the use of Gods
works, bu^ can use them all at his pleasure, to become as under the bond of the
law of the Spirit in all things: This power of God in freeing from the law of
the flesh, and bringing men under the law of the spirit, is in a carnal man's
eyes, as though religion cast off, both the Word of God, as also the works of
God; as though he would not be ruled by the one, nor acknowledge any thing to
be in the other; as though religion sprung from neither of them both, neither
from word nor work of God, but did annihilate both; and verily so it does,
according to that judgment, which a carnal Interpreter passes upon them,
according to which, he can never reconcile the Word of God, and therefore his
proper work is to set God and man at variance.

Add further, that false Interpretation never blesses, nor speaks well of
the King Christ, it never attaines unto the Office of Priesthood* so as to
speak well of the King of Saints, therefore he says, ye shall not see me so as
to bless, praise, or commend him that comes in the Name of Lord; it is a
definitive sentence given by Christ, that the spirit of a false Interpreter
will never speak well of the power and authority of the Son of God, who is King
of Kings and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19. 16. Revel. 17. 14. that is, his Kingdom
consists of none but Kings, for they all Reign over the things of this life, as
things put under their feet, Psalm. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9. as really as they are all in
subjection unto what soever is of God, which no earthly Kingdom can ever attain
unto.

1 Whosoever comes therefore in the Name of the Lord, as having authority to
command by virtue of the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus;
Carnal interpreters ever prefer the commands of men according to the law of
the flesh before that, John 19. 7. Setting up the glory of the Creature before
the glory of the Creator.

2 Whosoever comes in the authority of Gods Wisdom to order and contrive all
things according to that; false interpreters ever prefer Carnal policies,
and speak well of them in the vilification of that wisdom which approves of the
Cross of Christ preferring it as the only thing to be rejoiced in, Gal. 6. 14.

3 Whosoever comes in the certainty of truth as it is in Jesus; falls
interpreters, prefer the certainty of Grammar Rules, ^ogicall Reasonings,
Synods, and Councills o^ men, before ^he Evidence and Demonstration of the
Spirit and power of God, 1* Cor. 2, 4, 5.

4 Whosoever comes in the authority of conquest and victory of the King,
subiecting all spirits unto the power of God, either voluntarily, or else by
constraint, false interpreters ever prefer the Conquest over men's bodies, and
subjecting their estates, before that, placing their chief (if not only) cause
of thank f^lness in the success of the temporal Sword, and therefore can never
bless, praise, nor speak well of the King Christ, or of that Anointing of the
Spirit, whose weapons of Warfare are not Carnal but* Spiritual, yea mighty
through God, to cast down holds, Casting down the imaginations* and every high
thing that is exalted against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having ready the vengeance
against all disobedience, when obedence is full and Completed, which it ever
was, and is in the Lord Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.

We conclude therefore, considering the premises, that it is a most righteous
thing in Christ, to pronounce this sentence against the spirit of false
interpretation in whomsoever it appears, that it shall never bear that Vrim
and Thum^im, that Light and Perfection, so to see the Son of God, as to install
into the office of the Priest, who enters into the Holy of Holies, and
therefore shall never be authorized to bless or speak well of such as come or
spring up by the power of the Spirit in the Name and authority of the Lord,
that King of Saints and Holy one of God, separated marvellously, and exempted
by signs of honor from all common and profane use, to the exercise of
holiness and manifestation of Gods virtues for ever, 1 Pet. 2. 9. whom the
Spirit of false interpretation does ever vilific, preferring the Kings of the
Nations (round about Jerusalem that is above) who are appointed only to
profane and common uses, before that holy one of God, John 19, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Acts 17. 6, 7. therefore let that house be desolate, and that spirit of false
interpretation, let it be for ever ashamed. Amen. So be it.

FINIS.
Certain Copies of Letters which passed betwixt the Penman* of this Treatise,
and certain men newly come out of Old England into New;
Who when they were arrived at Boston in the Massachusets-Bay, the Governor
being informed they were such as are called Quakers, he sent Officers to fetch
them ashore, and being forthwith brought into examination what their business
was into these parts, they answered, To spread the Gospel, and to do the work
of the Lord, whereupon they were all committed to prison both Men and Women,
there to remain^ till the return of the Ship, and then to be carried back into
England, the Master being bound in 500l. with others for security with him to
set them ashore in England again, and that upon his own cost and charge, les^
the purity of the Religion professed in the Churches of New England should be
defiled with Error.

Warwick September. 16. 1656.
The Superscription. To the Strangers, and outcasts, with respect to carnal
Israel, now in prison at Boston for the name of Christ, these with trust
present in Massachusetts, New England.
Christian Friends,
THE report of your demeanor, with some others of the same mind with you
formerly put in possession of the place of your present abode, as is reported
to us, as also the errand you profess you come with into these parts, has
much taken my heart, so that I cannot with hold my hand from expressing its
desires after you; which present habitation of yours, our selves have had a
proof of, from like grounds and reasons, that have possessed you thereof, under
which in some measure we still remain in point of banishment, under pain of
death, out of these parts; a prohibition from that liberty, which ^o Christian
ought to be infringed of: And though we have a larger room in bodily respects,
than for present your selves have, yet we desire to see the prison doors open,
before we attempt to go out, either by force or stealth, or by intr^a^y, which
we doubt not but the bo^s will fly back in the best season, both in regard of
your selves and us: but we apprize more of the appearance of an evident hand of
God exalting himself in his own way, than we do of our bodily livelihood: for
we fear not the face of man, for God has showed us what all flesh is,
otherwise we would visit you in the place where you remain, though we came unto
you on our bare feet, or any that professes the Lord Jesus, opposing his
authori y against all the powers of darkness. If God have brought you into
these parts, as instruments to open the excellencies of the Tabernacle,
wherever the Cloud causes you to abide, no doubt but this your imprisonment
shall be an effectual preface to your work, to bring the Gainsayers to naught,
which my soul waits for, not with respect to any particular man's person, but
with respect unto that universal spirit of wickedness gone out into the world
to deceive and tyrannize, and in that respect my soul says, O Lord I have
waited for thy salvation: the bringing to naught of which spirit, is ever made
manifest in the blessing of the Tribes, for the Scepter of Israel is never
erected but in bringing to naught the Crown of pride, which Dan or true
judgment, ever brings to naught by our spiritual Sampson.

I may not presume to use a word of exhortation unto you, being I had rather
(as having more need) to be admonished by you, not doubting but you are
plentifully enabled to admonish one another, let me make bold to say thus much
to my self, Stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord we are Persons
lie here as buried unto the Sons of men, in a corner of the Earth, grudged at,
that we have this present burying place: But our God may please to send some of
his Saints unto us, to speak words which the dead hearing them shall live. I
may not trouble you further at this time, ouely if we knew that you had a mind
to stay in these parts after your enlargement (for we hear you are to be sent
back for England) and what time the Ship would set Sail, or could have hope
the Master would deliver you, we would endeavonr to have a V^ssell in
readiness when the Ship goes out of Harbor, to take you in, and set you
where you may enjoy your liberty.

I^ arvell what manner of God your Adversaries trust in, who is so fearful of
being infected with error, or how they think they shall escape the wiles and
power of the Devil, when the arm of flesh fails them, whereby they seek to
defend themselves for the present; sure they think their God will be grown to
more power and care over them, in, and after death, or else they will be loath
to pass through it; but I leave them, and in Spirit cleave unto him, *as being
in you) who is ever the same allsufficient,

In whom I am yours, Samuel Gorton.

A Copy of a Letter from the Men called Quakers.
The Superscription. For our Friend Samuel Gorton this deliver.
Friend,
IN that measure which we have received, which is eternal, we see thee, and
behold thee, and have oneness with thee, in that which is meek and low, and is
not of this world, but bears witness against the world, that the ways and
works thereof are evil; and in that (...) spirit we salute thee, and owns that
of God (...) is waiting for, and expecting the raising (...) is un^er the
Earth, and in the Grave, gro^ni^g ^or the removing of the stone, which the wise
professors has, and does lay upon, that it might not come forth, but the time
is come, and coming, for the Angel of his presence, to take away that which
hinders, that the Prisoner may come forth, and arise to the glory of him, who
is raised up to the glory of the Father, and has overcome Hell and Death, and
all the powers of darkness, and is a spreading his name forth to the nds of
the Earth, and has sounded his Trumpet in these parts also, and is a beginning
his war with Ameleke and the Philistines, and Egyptians, in this part of the
world, who are set and setting themselves against the Lord in this the day of
his mighty power, wherein he will exalt the horn of his anointed, and bring
down all the fat Kine, and Bulls of Bashan, whose eyes are ready to start out
with rage and madness, against that which is become as a burdensome stone
amongst them, and is that stone which will break all their imaginaries to
pieces* and shall become a great mountain, which shall bring down the stout
hearts of the Kings of Assyria, and all their high looks* and level their
mountains of wisdom and knowledge, and dry up the tongue of the Egyptian Sea,
and shall make way for the ransomed of the Lord to come to Sion with joy and
gladness, being redeemed from Kindreds, Nations, Tongues, and People, by the
blood of Jesus* which is spirit and life, in all those that obey the light,
which from the life does come, for the life is the light of men, and whosoever
believes in the light, which they are enlightened with, shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have the light of life, which light we have obeyed in
coming into these parts, and we do witness the life in the measure given to
us, whereby we are enabled to encounter with Principalities and Powers, and
wickedness in high places, and can deny the world and the glory of it, and
take up his Cross daily* and follow him; in which we witness the power of
God, whereby the World is crucified unto us, and us unto* the World; and in
that, in ^ur measure we deny our selves, and can wait in the eternal counsel,
which is out of time manifested in time not being hasty, but let the Lord alone
to do his own work in ^is own way, and there can sit down in our rest, which
is his will, and when he moves us, then we go and do his will in his power, and
when he clouds we stand still, waiting for the removing of the Cloud, and so we
know when to journey and when not, and herein are we a^ rest when our
Adversaries are in trouble, and in Egyptian darkness, sitted and prepared for
destruction which assurealy must fall upon them, from the God of (...).

Friend, the Lord has drawn forth our hearts, to this place in much love,
knowing in the light, that he has a great seed among you, though scattered up
and down* and are as sheep without a shepherd* and you are traveling from
Mountain to Hill in your wisdom and imaginations, the resting place being not
yet known, nor cannot be known by the highest wisdom of the world, but in the
denial of it; for there is something underneath, which is not, nor cannot be
satisfied with all the divings into the mystery of things declared in the
Scriptures of truth, which is the man of Gods portion, and was given to that to
profit withal, that it might be thoroughly furnished to every good word and
work, but this is too low a thing for those which are high in their wisdom and
knowledge, which they can hardly stoop unto, that is to become fools that they
may be wise, that the pure wisdom may dwell with them for evermore.

But the Lord is come, and coming ^o lovell the Mountains* and to rend the
Rocks of wisdom and knowledge, and to exalt that which is low and foolish to
the wisdom of the world, and blessed shall thou, and all those be, who meets
him in this his work, which he is doing in the Earth, and in this place wherein
thou now dwell, in setting up the King the Lord of Hosts to reign in
righteousness, for his tabernacle shall be among men and he will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and he will be their God, and they shall be his
people, from henceforth even for ever. Now to that which thou writes to us, to
know our minds to stay in these parts, ^e are unwilling to go out of these
parts, if here we could be suffered to stay, but we are willing to mind the
Lord, what way he will take for our staying, and if he in wisdom shall raise
thee up, and others for that end, we shall ^e willing to accept of it; but what
the Master of the Ship will do in the thing we know not, they indeaveuring to
force him to to enter into bond of 500l. to set us ashore in England, which he
did at first refuse, for which they sent him to prison without Bail and
Mainprize, as we are informed; but since he does proffer his own bond, but they
will not at present accept it without security b sides to be bound with him,
for they are afraid that we should be set ashore in these parts again,
therefore they make their Bond as strong as they can, but the Lord knows away
to break their bonds asunder. The Master has been writ unto and warned that he
should not enter into bond, which if he did not, it would be as a Crown of
honor upon his head but if he does, the Lord knows how to defeat themand him
too: Now what he does is out of a slavish fear, because he would not lie in
prison, and hinder his voyage, but if the bond hinder him not, he would have
been willing to have delivered us, and we should have been willing to have
satisfied him, which we did proffer him; and if he be not hindered, the Ship
will be ready to set sail about fourteen days hence, but at present the Master
does not know what to do, their demands being so unjust, to force him to carry
us, and they not to ^ay him for it, nor we shall not, and yet will not take hi^
own (...) but will have security besides, so that h^ and they are troubled with
a burdensome stone, the Ark of God does afflict them; send it away they would,
but yet they are not agreed what to do with it; so we shall leave thee to be
guided by that wisdom, which governs all men and things, according to the
counsel of his own will, and brings his purposes to pass by whom and in
whom he pleases.

From the Servan^s and Messengers of the Lord whom he has sent and brought by
the arm of his power into these parts of the Word, for which we suffer bonds
and close imprisonment, none suffered to speak or confer with us, nor scarce
to see us, being locked up in the inward prison, as the Jailer pretends,
because we do not deliver our Ink-horns, although he has taken away three
from us already, and will not suffer us to burn our own Candles, but takes
them away from us, because we shall not write in the night, though we are
strangers to thee, and others in this place, yet seen and known in the light,
yet known in the World by these Names.

From the Common Gaol in Boston this 28 of the seventh, 1656. William Brend.
Thomas Thurston. Christop. Holder. John Copeland.

Post. We and all the rest of friends with us remember their love to thee, and
if thou have freedom let us hear from thee.



Barwick in the Nanhyganset-Bay this prefone October 6. 1656.
The Superscription. To the Strangers, suffering imprisonment in Boston for the
name of Christ, these with trust present in Massachusetts.
Loving Friends,
WE have thankfully received your late and loving Letters, but are informed
that since the penning of them the Master of the Ship is engaged with two of
Boston bound with him, to set you ashore in England; so that we perceive God
has diverted our desired design, we doubt not but for the best in a further
discovery of that spirit so wickedly bent to hinder (if it were possible) the
fruitful progress of the grace of the Gospel; and it may be, the name given
unto you (we know not upon what ground) may come through an unalterable
appointment, to be the natural practice of such as so deal with you, when the
terrors of the Almighty shall take hold of them: And we are glad to see the
waters move, for then we know that spirit stirs which brooded upon them in the
beginning, and the Angel troubles them unto healing, but it is only of such
as first step in, after the troubling or moving of them, which must be he who
first looks out from the early morning, seeing in the first light that ever
shined in that day which springs from on high, who is endued with strength
sufficient to put himself in, without help of any other besides himself; for
there is none but the first begotten of the dead that can participate in this
cure; yet we know also how to cure the lame and impotent, who has no strength
nor ability at all (in himself) to move toward the waters, but only waits for
help from another, and therefore perceives how all come to be cured before him*
but the of word salvation passing upon him, retains its healing and creating
virtue from the beginning, and is no less healthful in the last, than in the
first, for they are one.

Yea he is not only the root, b^t the branch or offspring of David also; the
secret mystery of God, hid from the world, from the foundation thereof,
effectually moves the waters, and a mighty work done does visibly appear to
all men in uttering the word of salvation beyond the reach and capacity of all
carnal Jews, who are angry thereat, seeking to take away the life and light of
the Author of it, who never appears, but they find their Sabbath broken,
their power impaired, or one or other of their carnal laws of sin and death
cries out in them, as being violated, as by him that coms to torment them
before the time, so that in the visibility of him who is invisible, we rejoice
with Moses, and fear not the wrath of the King.

In that you say, that in the spirit of meekness and lowliness, out of much
love you came into these parts, such a spirit we can thankfully embrace,
knowing that it is the Spirit of the Redeemer, who is meek in the loss of all
humane and worldly helps, without the least murmuring or grudging, not opening
his mouth in the language of the world in any thing whatsoever: Also lowly
submitting unto the spirit and will of the Father, in whom, or in whomsoever it
appears the Spirit of the loving and loyal Spouse never admits of any
divorse in that espousall* but in all things submits unto, and obeys Abraham,
and calls him. And whosoever does not become as a little child, cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But we know also, that he who comes meek and lowly, he comes so (therein) as
he saves himself, which is the part of a Victor and Conqueror, and the prudent
and diligent woman or Spouse, clothes her Husband and Family with Scarlet, her
Husband is known in the Gate, when he sits among the Elders, by her
industry, yea the heart of her Husband does safely trust in her, so as he fears
no spoil; and whosoever becomes as a child, is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven;
for in the mouths of Babes and Sucklings God has ordained and founded his
strength.

And in us a Child is born, in us a Son is given, but the government is upon
his shoulder, and he is called Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God t e
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: so that wherever this lowly and meek
Spirit is, there is also the Spirit of that Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and the
Lord thereby shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem. and
the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, but the Lord is the hope of his people,
and the strength of the Children of Israel.

True lowlyness of spirit, and the loftiest mind that ever was, are never
separated; for these twain are made one so, as never to be separated, no more
than a child (in point of all humane abilities) and the ancient of days,
shall; For as we receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little child, so we are
never otherwise in the same respect, which we know, no wisdom humane,
serpentine, or upon principles properto a creature, can ever yield unto, or
find out: And therefore we are fools unto the world, being bereaved of all
their principles, in regard of any exercise of them according to their proper
intent in any of our designs. Our wisdom consults not upon any of their
principles, our judgment determines not according to any of their principles,
our faith depends not upon any of their principles, our love embraces not upon
any of their principles, our hope expects not upon any of their principles, nor
does our power and sufficiency stand upon any of their principles: And
therefore as brute beasts are unto them, so are they to us in the things of
God, and we are unto them as men bereaved of their wits; for they cannot but
discern a certain power of argument in us, beyond all brutish cogitations
whatsoever, yea such as transcends and over-tops, what is in themselves; for
the Wisdom of God, though a meek and descended Wisdom, yea foolishness in the
worlds estimation, yet it over-powers, and over-tops the highest Cedars
standing in the worlds Lebanon, and is bottomed and founded upon grounds and
undeniable reason, and true argument in Gods Wisdom, yea argumentation for
conviction and confirmation, infinitely surpassing and transcending all
Logical, and artificial argument, coming within the compass of human device and
learning; therefore we conclude, that the Wisdom of God, though become
foolishness unto the world, yet does it contain sufficiency of power in
argument to overtop any Council, Synod, Synedrion, or Assembly composed by
humane art and learning: And that makes them so fearful, and of such care to
guard themselves from the apparition thereof.

For as it is in that way of the devil, to propose his temptations from the
Letter of the Scriptures, thinking to win or subdue Christ thereby: So is there
sufficiency of spirit and wisdom in the true interpretation thereof, to
confound and bring them (in the party proposing them) to naught.

And whereas you say, There is a thing underneath, which cannot be satisfied
with the divings into the mystery of the Scriptures of truth, which phrase as
it seems to import, cannot be a truth; for the mystery of the Gospel is
described to be Christ in you the hope of Glory. Now this Christ the Son of the
Eternal comprehends all things really and eternally good, so that there is
nothing so low but it is raised up in him, nor any thing so high, but it is
descended in him, and so becomes a plain path, whereon our God passes in the
wilderness; so that dive into him, as to lay open this Mystery of the Word of
Truth, and there is nothing so low underneath, nor any thing so high and above
that can possibly fail, or come short of satisfaction which appertains unto
the Saints and Sons of God; now that he ascended, what is it but that he
also descended first into the lower parts of the earth; he that descended is
also the same that ascended up, far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things, therefore discover the mystery of the Word, and it fills all things to
satisfaction; for no man has ascended up to heaven but he that came down from
heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven. So that as you cannot go above
him who is height it self, nor below that which is depth it self, so you
cannot hide any thing above, or beneath, but the mystery of the Word, is the
light which finds it out, and brings satisfaction therewith; for the life and
the light are one, ever in conjunction with Christ from whom nothing is hid.

Therefore we honor that phrase in the true intent thereof, that when you are
clouded you vvait, and when moved you journey; for we know the cloud to be the
glory of Israel in the Wilderness, that wayless place, in point of any of the
Nations, who cannot take a step therein, but only to the fall of their
carcasses, yea even of carnal Israel.

For this cloud is a cloud of witness, presenting unto us a record, and
testimony of the acts and deeds of all the Saints of God. Therefore as a pillar
remains and abides with us day and night, and is a cover in the day; not to
darken that light, and leading of the Angel of his face, but to over-shadow us,
as we are the Virgin of Israel, than none of those scorching beams, or rays of
that Sunshine or light of the Nations takes place upon us, nor contributes no
more to our being, than Joseph (that just man according to the law, or letter)
did unto the conception of Mary. And in its stay and abode upon our Tabernacle,
we so wait on God, as in exercise, in uncovering the Ark of his presence,
ordering the instruments and glories thereof, according to appointment; and
with Moses turn in unto the Lord, without either vale or covering, which abides
on the heart of carnal Israel when Moses is read unto this day, when we with
open face, behold the glory of the Lord, as in a mirror, and are changed into
the same image, from all that glory of the Ministry of condemnation* consisting
in the letter, unto that exceeding glory of the Spirit, wherein we stand with
Moses, conversing with God face to face, as a man talks with his friend. And
this state and manner of waiting upon God, he has perpetuated in our host,
wherein (according to the prayer of Moses) the Lord returns unto the many
thousands of Israel, for we have the record of them all in this cloud, and
their order and exercise about the Ark.

The Lord has not left us without the testimony of the motion of the cloud
also, which he has in like sort perpetuated unto us; and that in the
dissipation and scattering of the Nations, who are Enemies unto God: And we
daily find; that prayer of Moses in use, and fulfilling it self in us, and
about us, viz. Arise, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; let them also
that hate thee fly before thee: For we daily have to do with that people of
that spirit amongst whom you now are (yea and from the flood unto the worlds
end) by a spirit of Prayer and Prophecy, which all the world can never bound,
nor Herod's Stone, Seal, nor Watch keep in the grave; But as it goes before the
Disciples into Galilee, so it rebukes the Nations, and brings the mad people to
naught; else had you not seen those lie dead before you on the shore (in your
approach) so evidently as now you do in point of any life, or light of Jesus
Christ.

And in this dismal and darksom night which is now upon the world, this Cloud
is a most firm and stately pillar of fire to give light unto us, and according
to its motion, either by night, or by day, we advance unto the vanquishing and
vexation of the world.

For the spirit of a Christian knows how to grasp and gripe in the Nations, so
as to cut off the spirit of Princes, and to be a terror to the Kings of the
earth, so as Herod, and all Israel after the flesh, in all their Jewish
institutions shall be in trouble.

A Christian becomes a fool, in point of Serpents wisdom in Herod's Wisemen, and
Pharoahs Magicians) is a comprehensive thing, no less than the proper continent
of an omnipotent power, who is able to do all things through Christ who
strengthens him; for we dare not deny him to be set in heavenly places in
Christ, yea at the right hand of power; and therefore sits at the stearn of the
world; lays hold on the helm, and governs the ship, to guide it unto its
appointed haven.

A Christian is still saying, let there be light, and it is so, he shall ever
divide the light from the darkness, and the waters that are above the firmament
from the waters that are below the out-spread firmament? In a word, he is
forever to form all things out of that ancient Chaos of God and Man being made
one, which is a formless confusion unto the highest topped-up pinacles of the
wisdom of this world, but only as they beat out a tract unto themselves
through the Schools of men's policies and traditions.

But a Christian knows how to adorn that world whereof Christ's Kingdom does
consist, with all those glorious ornaments of that new heaven and earth wherein
righteousness and peace dwells for ever (where sin and sorrow fly away) and that
out of the ancient Chaos that abides for ever; and it is his glory, and
perpetuated work in God, as also his rest from all the works of darkness and
death, to give every thing a right and due form, and an effectual nature, and
name, or authority, according thereunto, placing them in their proper
relations, and giving them their operations, in the propagating and promoting
of the glory of God. And this is a labor which for ever beseems the honor and
dignity of a Son of God, who will never be disrobed of his creating virtue, as
to admit a cessation thereof, no more than he can lay aside the glory of his
power to preserve, order, and govern his kingdom.

And this work or labor has the rest of God intayled, and is never out of
conjunction therewith, which is a day of rest or cessation, from all operations
of that evil one; yea it is a Sabbath (or as the word signifies) an Host or
Army, not bounded by evening and morning; for it admits not of any period in
the one nor in the other; for neither beginning nor end thereof can be found
out. And this rest and labor are of the same duration and continuance, else
were a Christian utterly undone, but God has made him Lord in, or of this
Sabbath for ever, whilst the carnal Jew (even those amongst whom you are) are
in bondage under their Sabbath, for it Lords it over them, which they have set
up as a God of time, as they have their Gods of creatures and bodily exercises,
and this they fall down and kneel unto, as a God of four and twenty hours
continuance.

We know the Word of the Lord has been amongst them, and they have rejected
it, which makes them so careful to guard themselves against you, having felt
the fury thereof, as a savor of death unto them. If you expect a feed of God
among them, take heed it prove not of the God of this world, that seed of the
serpent. Some of them may seem to commiserate people in prison or in some want,
or outward necessity, which is the top of their Religion, to be of that
compassion which Peter seems to express, when he said, Master pity thy self,
let not this come upon thee, not judging rightly, but fatanically of the Cross
of Christ, than the which there is nothing else that a Christian gloryes in and
desires, as it is that Baptism wherewith he is baptized, which in desiring he
still desires in the accomplishing of it, as really as he that sits upon the
white horse, goes forth conquering and to conquer; for if the Fountain of
every thing in Christ were not inexhaustible, heaven should have an end,
salvation ceased; for there is nothing in Christ wherein salvation does not
consist, and that for ever. And to preach, or profess Christ otherwise,
falsifies the Gospel, and makes the faith of the Son of God of no effect.

We conclude then, that labor and rest, harmonize, and kiss each other in the
Kingdom of God, consisting so in one that they shall never be parted, without
demolishing of that work wherein God himself is one, not only as a maker, but
is made, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, in that
mystical body of Christ; which workmanship, and Masterpeece of Gods Wisdom and
Skill, is only abolished in the men of the world, and ever was from the
beginning; for the wicked are estranged from the womb; but in the Saints it
never was, nor shall be impaired, for they are a congregation of the firstlings
of God which abide for ever.

Whereas you please to say, We are vvandring from mountain to hill in our
imaginations, seeking rest, but know not the place thereof. Indeed it is true,
we know not that rest which the world ever seeks after, in that way of the
unclean spirit which goes out of the man of sin, seeking it in barren and dry
places, which are altogether destitute of the dews of heaven, that are the
waterings of Zion, and of that Riveret which refr^sheth the City of God. But
that rest which the Son of God attains, and betakes himself unto, in his labor
of love, in the ending of all carnal operations of soul, that rest which yet
remains for the people of God, as to enter into; being daily as really renewed
(as our Apostle protests he dies daily) although it be that which we have
entered into from the beginning, being of an eternal rise, as all things proper
to the Son of God are; who, however it be true, that he is a man, yet that
which makes him to be such a man, is of God, and not of the creature, and that
in all things, yea death it self in Christ, is not the death of a mere
creature, or a momentany death, but it is the eternal death of the Son of God,
for what Christ is, or does once, it abides such for ever, and otherwise no
truth of the Gospel appears. This rest therefore we seek as diligently, as the
woman sought her lost groat, and by sweeping that vast house of God of all
uncleannes and superfluous things, which cannot be done but by carrying them
into their proper place, in which place of uncleanness, we see what the loss of
all the things of God (as wealth and glory) is; which wealth and honor of God,
we find, through our own emptiness of all superfluous things of man, which
continued and eternal act of loss of the Son of God in the world, is a
perpetual renewed joy, in the finding of him in our selves, which joy and rest
we wait for to come in our selves everlastingly, as really as we have the
present possession thereof, and see our selves in it also, from everlasting,
with respect to time past; for we judge not, no not of our selves, according
to man's judgment, but according to the account and judgment of God.

And for our imaginations, they are such as we can give a like good and certain
account of them (in all particulars, and upon as real and substantial
grounds) as we can give, for the appearing of the day, and succeeding of the
night, or as we can give the reason why we eat, why we drink, why we sleep,
marry, and give in marriage, without which things, man can neither multiply,
nor tarry upon the face of the Earth, and we know the nature of all things that
God reveals unto us, as well as we know the nature of the fire, by putting a
finger into it, either the things of Satan in that body of sin, as we dye unto
it, and it is dead to us, or the things of God in Christ, as we live to them,
and they live in us, and such are our imaginations. And for our wandering from
Mountain to Hill, we do profess our selves to be gone from that rigid and
mountainous power and pride of Pharaoh (under which in a Figure you now are)
three days journey, a perfect and perpetual departure therefrom, into that
Wilderness that is waylesse of the tracts of Pharaoh and his Host, else we had
not come to Sinai, or Horeb, that hill of God, where he calls us up to converse
with him, in the height of his own Son, where we meekly receive that law of the
spirit, in the laver of the People; yea, that fiery law, that borns up all
combustible and corruptible matter in us, purifying and trying our faith, as
silver is tried in the fire.

We also are gone, from that Mount, with the Ark of God, and law therein, three
days journey to seek a resting place for the Ark, which is a perfect and
perpetual removal from the place of the giving and receiving the law of the
flesh, the earnall commandment, in all the terrors, fears, effects and
operations thereof, or else we had never come to Mount Zion, the Hill which God
does love, and where he will dwell for ever, where glorious things are spoken
in that City of God; for in Judah is God known; his name is great in Israel, at
Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion, and there he breaks
the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield* and the Sword, and the Battle, Selah.

Yea there is he, more glorious and puissant, than the Mountains of prey, even
than all the Host of Sennac^arib, which compass about Jerusalem, thinking to
make a prey and a booty thereof, but it becomes a heavy stone, and a cup of
trembling (beyond all their expectations) unto them.

Whereas you say, the meek and lowly Spirit is not of this World but bears
witness against it, we freely own it so to be and that you bear witness
also unto the life, in the measure given you, which is eternal, and therefore
seems to be immeasurable, (for he receives not the spirit by measure) we do
heartily rejoice in any, that God stirs up to testify to his truth, inthat
verity of his word and life, and light of his Son which is to us, as lise from
the dead, knowing it to be as honorable an office, as ever a Saint can attain
unto* to be that faithful and true witness only found in the Son of God, who
only is an eye and ear witness of all the doings of the father, and therefore he
only can give true testimony and a just account of them, which we count to be
as great a Crown, and royal diadem, unto our selves to hear, as to be enabled
to speak thereof; and therefore can freely suffer our own eclipse for ever, so
that the splendent brightness of that Sun of righteousness may break forth
and have its proper place, seat and course being made marvelous in his Saints,
even in all that believe; so as it may be said with admiration suitable to such
an Aspect, Who is this that looks forth as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners.

A true witness is truly honorable, being one who only can give true
testimony of the state of all things so as true judgment passes to give every
thing its due, without which there is no righteousness on the Earth.

He only can witness against the world, concerning the nature of their act, in
crucifying the Lord of glory, whom they know not, for they that know him never
do it; and only they which can witness, what it is to take away and destroy
such a life, and to put out such a light, they only can witness what that
light and life is, in all such in whom it appears, namely what the eternal and
everlasting Sonship is, which is that which is in time, as well as that which
is eternal, which being gathered into one by that spirit of eternity, it is
made one state or incorporation, wherein all the several and various relations
therein, consist of, and are become a spiritual and an eternal law, which gives
unto it self an orderly being and form, in all its operations which operations
and offices are known only by that name which is writ upon them, which is that
particular power and authority they carry in them and express, and this is
such as none can read but himself, and he is called the Word of God, which word
is the law of the spirit of life, and this life is the light of men, and this
light gives a true form unto all things which it testifies unto; therefore it
is said by the Lord unto Job Have thou commanded the morning since thy days,
or caused the dayspring to know his place, that it might take hold of the ends
of the Earth, that the wicked may be shaken out of it, it is turned as clay to
the Seal, and they stand as a garment, but from the wicked their light is
withheld, and the high arm shall be broken.

So that this true light lights us up to see the Son of God, as being of twain
made one, for in what respect soever he appears, there is a true relation
considerable in it, or else it is not that Son of God, the Savior or salvation
of the world; for he is of twain made one new man, in which is the Unity, as
also the fellowship of the Gospel in all things, for there is nothing in
Christ, without its proper relative, and without relation, the word or law of
God is not; as in creation the thing made, as well as the thing making, in
knowledge, the thing known* in love, the thing beloved; in a Father, the
respect to a Son; in a Husband, the respect to a wife; which gives to each
other their proper being: so as if one cease, the relative cease also from
being such.

So that if I witness to the Son, word, light, life, Law, or peace of God, I
must witness unto the being of such a thing, that such a thing it is, as also
to the manner of its being, how it comes to be such a thing, together with its
necessary and proper operations, which must inevitably accompany such a manner
of being, with the comprehensions and extensions of such operations and motion,
or else I am not that faithful and true witness, the beginning of the
Creation of God, or that head and Masterpeece of his work, which carries and
bears in it the excellencies and glories, yea the most eminent principles of
his wisdom, goodness and power if I can witness thus of the light, then I
can witness how the world is in darkness; for I know that an Idol is nothing
of the proper workmanship of God, and that there is but one God, the maker of
all things, what ever the world assumes to be their titles, as though there
were many Gods, and Lords many, but to us there is but one true power, so that
an Idol formed and set up by man, is the Devil, that Abaddon and Apollyon, the
destroyer in, and unto himself, the whole work of God; so that in an Idolathite
there is no light, no life, no Sonship of God, no word, nor law of God, for
they are only governed by the law of sin and death, and have no more of the law
of God in them, than they have of the light or life God, being such as are only
in darkness and death; if I then bear witness against the world, I can
testify what the world is, namely, that Son of perdition, and not of peace;
that it is, destruction, and not salvation; the Devil, and not the Son of God;
darkness, and not light; death, and not life, as also the true witness
declares, how the world comes to be such a thing, namely how every wicked man
is made a Devil, as Christ speaks concerning Judas; Have not I chosen you
twelve? and one of you is a Devil.

For I can never give my self satisfaction how a sinner is made the Son of God,
unless it also appear unto me how Lucifer that day star, or Sun of the
morning, is made a Devil; If I know not how it comes to pass that the Devil
is justly condemned, I can never know how to bear witness of the justice and
righteousness of the Son of God, and then I fall short of being that faithful
and true witness: The like certainty then that I give and testify, that the
son of God is perpetuated in all things to be such a thing, as at any time he
appears to be, according to the truth of his being: the like certainty I can
give unto the Devil to perpetuate him in every thing, wherein at any time he
really appears to be that which he is; for the Black moor changes not his
skin, nor the Leopard his spots.

Neither do the true lights in the Sanctuary and holy place of God, at any time
go out, for the Trimmer of the Lamps, is skillful, faithful, and watchful,
neither do those two Olive Trees at any time want Oil to contribute, through
those two golden Pipes (of every particular relation in Christ) into that one
bowl, or unity of continent on the top of the Candlestick, for the supply of
the light, in the perfections thereof, being seven Lamps of light, which is
that Vrim and Thummi^, given unto the Holy one, namely, light in the
perfections thereof.

But I am ffraid of being over tedious unto you, yet you may please to see my
freedom, again ^o salute you, by the multiplication of my lines, and the
rather, because I perceive the engagement for your return so speedily to
England, and know not whether we shall ever come to speak mouth to mouth, or
find a way and opportunity again to write: I hope it will not be burdensome to
you to peruse this, no more than it would be to me, to peruse a larger Epistle
coming from your selves: And so with my hearty respects unto you all, I cease
to trouble you further at this time.

Remaining yours, as you are Christ's. Samuel Gorton.

FINIS.

