THE REFORMED BISHOP: OR, XIX ARTICLES, Tendered by (...), A Well-wisher of the
present Government of the Church of SCOTLAND, (As it is settled by Law) In
order to the further Establishment thereof.

Tertul. Praescript. advers. Haer. Id verum quod primum.

Sanctum est, Veritatem cujuslibet amicitiae anteponere. Aristot. in Ethic.
lib. 1. cap. 6.

Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1679.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IN order to the better understanding of the Nature of this ensuing
Remonstrance, I judged it fit to premit some Particulars to the serious
Consideration of the Judicious Reader.

1. That over and above the Homologation of our Assertions in the respective
Articles by Reason, and inartificial Arguments derived from Authority, and
dispersed (like so many Veins, Nerves and Arteries) through that Complex Body; I
thought it ^it to Confirm those great Truths embosomed in these XIX Proposals,
by a more evident Method. First, Seeing Divine Authority is both Infallible,
and more Noble than any other; Therefore we have Superscribed every Article
with the Royal Placet of the King of Kings: And that these Sacred Allegations
may also serve as Rubricks, or Titles, to Indicate the Principal Contents of
the several Articles. Yet we have not cited the places at large; Char^tably
believing, that whosoever will be at the pains to read these Lines, will think
it no trouble to find out the Chapter and Verse in the Holy Bible, as they are
^ere pointed at. Next, We have immediately subjoyned to every Article some
Canons of Councels; being extensively much more to be regarded than the
Authority of any Individual Father, seeing they necessarily presuppose a
Complex of many; (For without a Sanhedrim of diverse Ecclesiastical Seniors no
Council can consist.) And intensively too, in the Judgment of those who look
upon these Canons as binding to the Church; But in the eyes of all Rational
men, they afford a more Authentic Testimony of the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government of the Church of God at that time, than any One
particular could do. In the last place, We have annexed some Testimonies of the
most Famous Luminaries of the Primitive Church, whose Doctrine is not found to
interfere with the most approved Morals and Rituals of the Catholic Church in
the Ages wherein they lived; yet we have very seldom cited them at large, for
the Reason above expressed.

2. Let the Reader take notice, That as the Era of our Allegations is the
Apostolic Age, (though there was no Provincial Council Celebrated therein, far
less any General, save that at Jerusalem, which was obligatory to the whole
Church then in Being; whatever some Divines imagine to the contrary.) So the
Terminus ad quem of the Citation of Councels, is, The Sixth General Synod,
called otherwise Synodus Quinti-Sexta. It had been very easy to amasse a
multitude of Canons posteriour thereunto; yet we judged it neither necessary,
nor fit to proceed further; because not long after that Convention, the
Imagestorm arose; Some adhering to the Councels which were Assembled by Leo
Isaurus, and Constantinus Copronymus, where the Image Worship was Condemned by
the Iconoclastae; (as they were then termed) and others cleaving to that of
Constantine and Irene, at Nice, and to some Roman Synods, where the Adoration
of Images was approved by those who were named Iconolatrae. Then the Greek and
Latin Churches began to be divided, which have never since that time been
thoroughly Cemented. As for the Vltimate Term of the Allegation of the Fathers;
We have fixed on Gregory the Great Inclusively, whom I look upon as the Last of
that Venerable Number. Yet we have sometimes mentioned (though very sparingly)
Isidore of Sevil, Beda, Anselm, and St. Bernard; The three former, because they
are so often alleged in the Canon Law; and the Last, in regard of the Sublimity
of his Style, (blended with so much Eloquence, and Divine Zeal) in his 4. Books
De Consideratione, Ad Eugenium tertium; Though I am not ignorant, that he was
at the Distance of many Centuries from Gregory the First at Rome.

3. In the third place; I shall subjoyn a word or two concerning the Apostolic
Canons, (as they are usually termed) in regard we have here made some Use of
them. They were indeed to the number of 185, Received by the Sixth General
Council; (But whether they were the same which are now extant, is not certainly
known.) But in respect that some Ecclesiastical Writers reject them all, as
Apocryphal, and some admit but 60 of them; Yea, the Plurality but the 50 which
are first in order; Therefore I have laid no great stress upon them, citing
these only which (either in express terms, or sense at least) are adopted by
some of the most approved General or Provincial Councels: But whether these
Canons were Collected by Clemens of Rome, or of Alexandria, we shall not
Determine, though the last is most probable.

4. Next; I shall give a brief account why the sixth General Council is termed
Synodus Quini-sexta; because under that Notion we have many times cited it. The
ingenuous Reader shall know, that the fifth General Council assembled by
Justinian the Great, and the sixth by Constantinus Pogonatus, made no Canons
for Discipline, but only some Defitions or Declarations in Matters of Faith;
the Former determining against some Errors fathered upon Origin; (fathered, I
say, by Heretics upon that Zealous man, whose Books they Corrupted, if we
believe Ruffinus, and him whose Testimony is more to be regarded, viz.
Vincentius Lyrinensis.) and Condemning the Writings of the T^ia Capitula, v. g.
Theodorus Mopsuest^nus, Theodoret of Cyrus, and Ibas of Edessa, as savouring of
Nestorianism: The other against the Monothelites; and Condemned the Doctrine of
diverse Patriarchs of Constantinople, One of Alexandria, and one of Rome, viz.
Pope Honorius; for the Heretics themselves were dead long before that time.
But, that the Church might be regulated, not only in Matters of Faith, but also
in point of Manners, Justinian the second, Son to Constantinus Pogonatus (boni
Patris, Filius pessimus) Summoned a new Synod for that effect, who did again
meet in T^ullo, an apartment of the Imperial Palace. And in regard the Fathers
thereof made 102 Canons to supply the defect of the fifth and sixth General
Councels; therefore that Council was termed Synodus Quini-sexta; so the Greeks
(as Balsamon observes) call that Convention, (...), or Synodum Quintam-sextam.
And it being re-assembled within few years to the Former, (four or five at
most) so that the greatest part of the Eastern Bishops who were present at the
Former, were also present at the Later (as may appear by their Subscriptions to
hoth these Councels;) therefore the Canons of that Synod usually pass under the
Name and Notion of the sixth General Council. This we take to be the more
probable Account, which Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople, and Petrus,
Bishop of Nicomedia, gave of it in the Face of the second Council of Nice, as
it is termed; (viz. Actionem quartam istius Synodi.) for the Reasons just now
expressed; than what Theophanes, Anastasius, and G. Cedrenus, averr That there
interceeded no less than 27 years betwixt the one Synod, assembled by the
Father, and the other, by the Son.

5. And that the Candid Reader may lay the greater stress upon some Canons of
Provincial Synods here alleged by us, he shall further observe; That there
were diverse Provincial Councels adopted by the Quini-sexta, or sixth General
Council; so that we are to look upon their Canons as is equvalent to the
Constitutions of one Ecumenical Council: These are Concilium Neo-Caesariense,
Gangrense, Antiochenum, Laodicense, Sardicense, and Carthaginense; as is
evident from the second Canon of the sixth General Council. And in regard there
were no less than seven Councels holden at Carthage, betwixt the first and
sixth General Councels; therefore it is the Opinion of some Judicious
Antiquaries, That this indefinit Homologation does approve, and adopt them all;
five of which, with the four General Councels, make up the Code of the
universal Church, as Justinian in his Novels phraseth it.

6. Seeing the Discipline, and Government of the Church, are mainly concerned
in (almost all) these Articles, an Ingenious Reader may happily find fault,
that we make so little Use of the Canon Law, in order to the Confirmation of
these Points. For Answer; though formally we have seldom cited it, yet upon
the matter, we have built upon the same Foundation, which is the Base of the
best and ancientest part of the Canon Law; which is Decretum Gratiani. As for
the Decretalia of Boniface the eighth, and Gregory the ninth; with the
Clementines of Clement the fifth, and Extravagants of John the twenty second;
they are indeed extravagant enough, for they are so stuffed with the Decrees of
the Bishops of Rome, and of recent Popes, and the worst of Popes too, that they
have scarce noticed any thing else; and if it be done, it is but obiter, and
(as it were) ex superabun danti; the (...) of that Roman Idol being
all-sufficient Authority to the Adorers of it: whereby they have sufficiently
verifyed that Observation concerning the Decretalia; That, Since the Decreta
received alae, they have soared above Reason and Discretion too. Therefore (as
if we had studied to be Antipodes to them) we have not adduced any of the
Rescripta of that Roman Dictator, since he arose to any worldly Greatness, save
only of Pope Leo the first, who was contemporary with the Council of Chalcedon,
and whose name is very great in all the Churches of Christ. But though the Text
is too extravagant, yet the Gloss upon it (in the approved Gregorian Edition)
is much more: For, what greater Extravagancy imaginable, than to call the Pope,
Dominus Deus noster? The parallel Blasphemy thereunto may be found in Additione
Glossae, in Extravag. un. Sanct. by Pet. Bertrand. a Roman Cardinal.

Neither was it any Commendation to the Decretum Gratiani, that it was first
confirmed by Pope Alex. the third; so proud a Priest, that he presumed to tread
upon the Necks of Emperors, even in a literal Sense; but this commends it
indeed, that it is framed in Imitation of the Corpus Juris Civilis: For, in
lieu of the Rescripta Imperatorum, we have the Decreta Pontificum, in stead of
the Responsa Prudentum, the Judgments of the Primitive Fathers; and in place of
the Senatus-Consulta, the plebis-scita, and Edicta Praetorum, we have the
Canons of the General and Provincial Councels: and above all the Oracles of God
consigned in the holy Scriptures. Yet it cannot be denied, that this best part
of the Canon Law is too defective as to the Citation of those infallible
Responses. Neither can we omit, That Gratian himself not only Cites many
dubious and spurious Books, which are falsely fathered upon those great Lights
of the Primitive Church; but also, that he is such an abettour of these
Supposititious Arts, as to fix such Paraphrases upon some ancient Councels and
Fathers, which are like to the Gloss of Orleance, that destroyed the Text: and
all for that end, to make them subservient unto the Interest of the Roman
Church, per fas aut nefas. I shall point at some few Instances, ut Candidus
Lector ex ungue leonem pelle vulpina adumbratum facile dignos^at. Let him only
Collation Decret. Gratian. par. 1. Did. 19. c. 6. with August. lib. 2. De
Doctr. Christ. c. 8. and Decret. Great. p. 3. De Consecrat. D. 4. c. 125. with
Council. Arauscan. 1. c. 1. and Decret. p. 1. Did. 22. c. 6. with Can. Trullan.
36. and Decr. Great. p. 3. De Cons. Did. 4. c. 4. with Can. 99. and 100.
Council. Carthag. 4. and Decr. Great. p. 2. Cause. 2. Q. 6. c. 35. with Council.
Milevit. Can. 22. Contra Trans-marinas Appellationes. We might easily adduce
many other falsifications of this nature practiced by Gratian; but by these
Trumperies and strange Metamorphoses we have instanced, (which are well known,
with many more, to those who have any gust of Antiquity:) the Candid Reader
may, with no less Facility, perceive, what Arts the Emissaries of the Roman
Church have improved to buoy up a sorlorn Cause: so that these pretended Sons
of the Ancient Fathers make no bones to practice Jupiter's Cruelty in reference
to his own Father; so much talked of by the Heathen Poets.

7. I am not ignorant, that we have not always observed the exact series of
time, in the allegation of Councels and Fathers: But, seeing that Method is not
very material in this matter, I have pursued that order (for the most part) in
which they crowded into my mind: Yea, we have made an Hysteron-proteron
purposely, as to the time of the Celebration of some Councels, and Writings of
the Fathers, that, what we judged fit to express at length, might be either the
Prologue or Epiphonema of the Probation.

We have also purposely forborne to Cite the Canons of the Eastern Councels in
the Greek Language; but thought good, eos jure Latii donare: because these
insignificant Lines may happily fall into the hands of some ingenuous
Gentlemen, who are acquainted with the one Language, and not the other: the
Latin Tongue being much more Epidemical in Scotland, than the Greek Dialect.

8. The Author has also carefully avoided the Citation of all those Books
which are Sublectae Fidei, and rejected as spurious by those who have best
skill to judge. Once indeed, (and I think but once,) Opus imperfectum in
Mathaeum is cited; but so worded, that the Candid Reader may easily perceive,
that the Author does not believe St. Chrysostom to be the Author thereof: yet
because it contains many excellent things in it, he judged it worthy of a
single Citation. Yea, he has been also sollicitous in giving the Child to the
right Parent: For many Books Fathered on St. Hierom (some of them being found
in the Volumes of his Works;) are by him appropriated to Origin, as the only
true Author of them.

9. There be diverse Testimonies of the Fathers, and of Ecclesiastical, and
Secular History, produced in these Articles, without any Indication of
Paragraph, Chapter, or Book, where to find them; But there be two Reasons of
this Omission: first, Because these Authorites are generally obvious to any who
understand any thing of Antiquity or History; So that they who daily carry
about a far greater Library in their Brains, than is here pointed at, cannot
but easily find them out. The other Reason is once and again hinted at already;
viz. lest this little Book swell to a great one. And for that same End we shall
put a Period to this Premonition; reserving Liberty to make this Protestation;
(which I hope all Charitable Readers will believe.) That I have shunned as the
Syrenian Rocks, those four Ways whereby the Judgment of a Writer may be
perverted; (though it were but in Penning nineteen Articles for the good of the
Church:) viz. Timore, Cupiditate, Odio, vel Amore; so says Hierom, in Amos,
cap. 6. and Isidorus Hispalensis, lib. 3. cap. 57. But if the Reader will have
Patience till we arrive at the Peroration, he will then find this Protestation
much enlarged. To which we hasten,

Propitio Numine. Carpere, and detrahere, vel imperiti possunt: doctorum autem
est, qui laborantium novere Sudorem, vel lassis manum porrigere, vel
aberrantibus iter ostendere. Hieronym. Com. in Cap. 4. Ion.

THE REFORMED BISHOP.
SEEING there be too many who are apt to exclaim against the Governors of this
Church, under the Notion of Ambitious, Auaritious, and Luxurious Persons, as if
they designed not the Glory of God, nor the Good of his Church, and
Reestablishment of its Government upon lasting Foundations; But that Honor,
Gain, and Bodily Ease, are the adequate Ends of their undertaking that eminent
and weighty Charge: It is most probable, That if the Primitive Pattern were
retrived into this Age, it would endear the present Government to all those who
have not put off the Use of Reason, with all sense of Religion and Loyalty.
Which holy emulation may be rendered practicable by the seasonable and speedy
improvement of the ensuing Proposals. And would to God, our present
Church Governors could say, in reference to all their holy Predecessors, what
Themistocles the Athenian did usually declare concerning One of his; viz.
Miltiadis Trophaea sibi somnos adimere.

Article I.
Exodus 28. 36, 37, 38. Levit. 21. 6, 17. Psalm. 132. 9. Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12.
Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4, etc. Mal. 2. 1, 2, etc. Mat. 9. 15. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor.
6. 5. and 11, 27. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, etc. and 4, 12. and 6, 2. Tit. 1. 7, 8, 9.
1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.

THAT None be Elected to that Sacred Order, but these only who are approved to
be Eminent in Piety, Charity, Learning, Humility, Gravity, Hospitality; and in
the Exercise of the Four Cardinal Virtues: Whose Pedigree and Education reflect
no stain of Dishonor upon them. And I do heartily wish, That all Churchmen
(especially the Governors thereof,) were honorably descended; which, being
joined with the former Endowments, would render their Piety the more splendid,
and their Example the more efficacious. For, as it contributes to the Temporal
Felicity of our holy Religion, to have Kings to be its Nursing-Fathers; so,
without all peradventure, it tends not a little to the Honor and Enlargement
of the visible Church, to have Nobles to be it is Priests. Greg^rie the seventh
(usually termed Hildebrand.) and Sixtus Quintus were indeed men of Illustrious
Spirits, (if they had been sanctified, though their descent from one
Illustrious House was merely Ironical. But these are rare to be found, and
scarce one such in an Age; the Gifts and Parts of those who are Terrae Filii,
being generally as low as their Birth.

And let the Godliness of our Church Governors be evidenced to all Charitable
Judgments, by a blameless Conversation in the World; so that no man may truly
say black to their Eye. And let their Christian Prudence be demonstrated by a
well-ordered and Religious Family; all the Constituent Parts thereof being as
far removed from Vanity, Intemperance, Prodigality, and all sort of
Profaneness, as the East is from the West; So that it may justly be termed a
Sanctuary, for its Devotion: as (was the Court of Theodosius the Younger.) For
if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall be take care of the
Church of God? vid. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. etc. and Tit. 1. 6, 7. etc.

Now if these indispensible Apostolic Precepts were conscionably practiced by
the Governors of our Church, a generous Disdain of all Carnal Illectives, and
Blandishments of the Flesh, would immediately spring up in the Soul; So that
they should have good reason to say, with that noble Roman; Major sum, and ad
majora natus, quam ut Corporis mei sim Mancipium. Yea more than so, it shall
produce in the Soul such an absolute Mortification, that the Result will be, an
entire Resignation of the Ecclesiastic to God, without any Reservation,
Limitation, or Exception; and (to borrow but once a Phrase from the Mysticks,)
an universal self-abnegation, and (as it were) a Soul-annihilation. Then they
needed not fear, that the men of the World would at any time tax them with that
Diabolical Ceremony of Kissing Bandstrings; there, where the living God should
be adored, and not the Idol of a beautiful Strumpet; and that they abominate a
Crucisix in their Closets, much more than a Cestus, or any other Symbol of
Venus. The Mitre, which should be engraven, HOLINESS TO THE LORD, should not
any more be reproached, as being impressed with the black Characters of an
Whore's Name; or that the Priest's Rocket has too much Sympathy and Fellowship
with the Kirtle of a Courtezan. But, on the Contrary, all charitable Persons
would be so just to them, as to suppose them of the temper of Bernard, who
cried cut, Thieves, Thieves, when he was unlawfully accosted: and that in the
Practice of Mortification they imitate S. Hilarion, who did thus expostulate
with his own Body, Faciam Aselle, ut non amplius calcitres; Nec te hordeo alam,
sed paleis; Fame and siti te conficiam. They would apply to them that
Commendation of Alexander the Great for his Continency, Victor, magis Darii
Vxorem non videndo, quam Darium vincendo; and that of the Poet. Fortior est qui
se, quam qui fortissima vincit.
Moenia. --
Yea they would be apt to conclude; that these had not only studied to good
Purpose, the (...) Chapter of the Enchiridion of that excellent Stoic,
Epictetus; and the brief (but very emphatical) Advice of that Christian Poet,
Boethius Sever. lib. III. De Consol. Phil. Metr. 5. But also that they have
merited from the World that Character which Clemens Alex. lib. 7. Strom. has
given of a Man that is Vere Gnosticus, or a devout Ascetick; Voluptatis causa
aliquid agere, ^is relinquit qui vulgarem vitam seq^^tur. Et r^^era non potest
fieri, ut qui Deum cognovit, magnifice and vere ^is quae adversantur ser^iat
voluptatibus: and that Description of a self-denyed man found in the third Book
of Theophilus Antioch. Ad Autolycum; Qui omnes Affectiones, and Animae
Perturbationes debellacit, faci^^ Mundum ^espicere potest.

But they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with all the Affections
and Lusts thereof; and consequently, they not only endeavor to subdue the
Irascible Faculty; (that Furor brevis being most unsuitable in a Churchman,
and that which usually deforms his Countenance worse than that of Thersites,
unless that Passion be transformed by Grace into a well-ordered Zeal.) But this
general Mortification is also extended to all the Appetites of the
Concupiscible Faculty; So that a Churchman who makes this his Study and
Delight, will never be ranked by the World with the most brutish of the
Epicurean Sect, Who did not eat that they might live, but lived that they might
eat; such as Sardanapalus, Apicius Lucullus, Heliogabalus, the Emperor
Maximinus, (whose Gigantine Appetite was above the Proportion of his vast bulk)
and that Usurper Bo^osus, (of whom it was said, That he was born, not to lead a
Life, but to lift a Pot) But, on the Contrary, all just m^n w^ll be so ready to
reckon them with the ancient Fabricii, the Bruti, and Ca^ones, who were so much
renowned for Temperance; Yea more than so, they shall be reputed the true
Disciples of that great Doctor of the Gentiles, who 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. etc.
recommends S^briety to all Ministers of the Gospel from his own Example, and by
an Argument drawn ab incommo^^* all which Inconveniences of (...) in
Churchmen) are expressed at (...) by Clemens Alex. In his Paedagogus; Who
(...) us there; that the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Bacchus will never
thrive together* and that he cannot be a Spiritual Minister of the Gospel, who
is a sensual Man, and immersed in Voluptuousness: and that Gluttony and
Drukenness are brutish Vices in all sorts of People; But odious in Great men;
very detestable in Women; but most abominable in the Clergy, who ought to be
Paterns of Temperance, Abstinence, and Fasting to all the World; It being a
great point of Christian Prudence in a Churchman, to habituate himself, by
abstaining now and then from things lawful, that with the greater Facility he
(...) to things unlawful; (...) still trenching nigh to a Precipice, may
sometimes stumble and fall into it.

It is very observable, what the Judgment of Am. Marcellinus (though a Heathen
man) was, concerning the Splendor and Luxury of the Roman Bishops, which he
liked not; but said, That there was another way for them to be truly happy, si
Magnitudine urbis despecta, ad imitationem quorundam Provincialium viverent,
quos lemulas e^^ndi, potandique parcissime, ut puros Numim Commendant.

I say not, that Fasting is a formal part of God's Worship; though we read in
Scripture of one that served God, with Fasting, and Prayer; But as it is said
of the Knowledge of Languages, that it is not properly Learning, yet a good
help thereunto; so it may be deemed of Fasting, that it is not properly the
Worship of God, but a good Adminicle thereunto; For a gross Belly makes not
only a gross Understanding, but also a stupid Devotion. I wish, this were well
observed on the Day of the Consecration of Bishops; For it is but too much
noticed; that though the ancient Ceremony, of reading the 13 Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles be still in Use, yet the Duty therein recommended, which
is Fasting, (not to speak of that Moral one of Prayer) has fallen into such a
desuetude, that in lieu thereof, too sumptuous and excessive Feasting has
succeeded; so that the Solemnity of such a Day does rather resemble the Pagan
Cerealia, Floralia, the Saturnalia, and Bacchanalia, than the ancient Agapae of
the Christian Church; of which, Tertullian, in his Apologetick, tells us, That
they were so far from supping prodigally, as if they meant to dye to morrow,
(as Diogenes said of the People of Megara,) that what cost was laid out upon
those Love Feasts, was not expended for Vainglory, and to nourish Parasites,
but upon the account of Piety and Religion, and to refresh the Poor: And that
they fed sparingly at them, as remembering they were to rise at night to worship
God; So that they appeared not so much to have Feasted at Supper, as to have
fed upon Discipline, and Order. Sure, it were much more commendable, (and
fitter too) to vouchsafe these hundreds of Crowns misimployed that way, by way
of Charitable Largess on the Poor; that the Consecrated Person may have many
Supplicants at the Throne of Grace, to pray for the health of his Soul, and for
the Divine Blessing on the future Exercise of his Office; that (as Charlemain
used to say) by these Hounds he may hunt after the Kingdom of Heaven. We find
indeed that St. Cyprian, the three Asian Gregory's, Basil, Chrysostom, and
Augustine did prepare themselves for that most eminent Ecclesiastical Degree,
by various Acts of Mortification, (as is evident from the respective Histories
of their Lives) but none of them (...) in Apollo the night of their
Consecration.

But, as the Wise man has told us, There is a time for all things; So that
even Fasting it self may be sometimes unseasonable; not only upon a Physical,
but also upon a Moral account; which is never more untimely than upon the
Lord's Day. I shall not be so uncharitable to such Fasters, as is the Author of
that Epistle to the Philippians, (Fathered on St. Ignatius, though none of
his:) who says, That they are no better than murderers of Christ, who fast on
that day; yet one thing is most certain, That the Ancient Church prohibited
Fasting (both privately and publicly) on the Lords Day; (I mean all Religious
Fasts,) and never permitted them, no not in the Time of Lent, because that Day
was the most ordinary and constant Festival of the Church; It being a weekly
Solemnity Instituted for the Resurrection of our Savior. And though these
detestable Heretics, the Manicheans, and Priscillianists, made it their
Practice, (in Opposition to the Catholic Church) to Fast on Sunday, yet even
the Montanists (who pretended much to that kind of Mortification) abstained
from fasting on the Lord's Day; as is evident from Tertullian's Treatise De
Iejuniis, which he wrote after his unhappy Montanizing.

But this Fasting in our Church on the Lord's Day, is a part of that old
Presbyterian Leaven, not yet half well purged out of this Land; For when that
Tyrannical Usurpation was culminating in the Cuspe of the tenth House, such was
their Meridian Line, that they thought it their Glory (though it was indeed
their Shame) to run counter to all the Practice of the Primitive Church;
therefore the Pilots of the Leman Lake steered such a Course, as they might at
last become perfect Antipodes thereunto: For whereas the Primitive Church
solemnized a joyful Remembrance of the Nativity of our Blessed Lord, on the
Anniversary thereof; (which in the time of Dioclesian proved a dismal Solemnity
to some in Bithynia) and of his Resurrection, every Lord's Day, especially on
Easter, which is Caput institutionis; they on the Contrary, (as if they had not
been unvaluable Mercies, but rather great Plagues to the World:) must needs
Fast on these Days; and always on that Sunday which did immediately preceed
the Lord's Day on which the Holy Communion was to be celebrated; though the
Anniversary of our Savior's Passion was judged by the Ancients the much fitter
season for solemn Humiliation, and Preparation, in order to the due Reception
of that Commemorative Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, on Easter Day; (for
when Persecution ceased, by the Haloyonian-dayes of the Great Constantine, too
much of the Christian Fervor abated therewith; So that in the later Centuries
of the Primitive Church, The Holy Eucharist was not received every day, no not
every Lord's day, but appointed to be celebrated thrice a year; viz. On the
Anniversary of the Nativity and Resurrection of our Blessed Lord, and of the
Descent of the Holy Ghost, on the day of Pentecost; (which Canons did at last
terminate in Easter Day.) But these Antipodes are at the Expense of a Calendar,
only to shun those days, as a S^ylla and Charybdis, or the greater and lesser
Syrtes.

And that they might give a Demonstration to the World, that they are not sworn
Enemies to their own Flesh and Blood, and that it was not the Mortification of
their own sensual Natures they designed by such Abstinence; but rather that
they fasted for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness,
under such a Religions Palliation; It was usually observed, that their most
solemn Fasts did usher in the greatest Villainies they intended to act; so that
all honest-hearted men looked upon these Intimations as prodigious Meteors
portending some bad Omen either to Church or State, and too frequently to both.
But that they might make a sufficient amends to the animal Life for these few
Politic Substractions, they gratified the same with Feasting (when they could
come at it) all the days of the Week; though Epiphanius has told us, that in
his time Fasting was practiced throughout all the World, every Wednesday and
Friday, unless the Anniversary of our Savior's Nativity did happen upon one of
these days. As for Saturday's Fast, (though Pope Innocent pretended the
Apostles Fasted that Day, because Christ lay in the Grave all that time;) It
did not so early, nor universally obtain; For it was not practiced at Millan,
in the Time of S. Ambrose. Yea more than so, they were most willing to Feast
all the time of Lent; the Passionwee (kwhich was deservedly termed by the
Ancients, Hebdomada magna and Sancta; Not, that it has (says Chrysostom)
either more days or hours than other Weeks; but because this is the Week in
which truly great and ineffable good things were purchased for us:) not being
excepted: and were more ready to gormandize, than on the Anniversary of our
Saviors Passion; all the Sympathy they discovered with his imparallel'd
Sufferings on that Day, being merely Symbolical; and that in a Physical sense
too. For as the Flesh of our Blessed Lord was inhumanely torn on that Day, so
they were ready, with too greedy Appetites, to tear the Flesh of Brutes:
hateing so much to be reputed Pythagoreans, or Manicheans, on that Day; that
they would have chosen rather to be accounted Canibals: and ever since that
time, the Flesh-Market on that day is the greatest of all the year; and though
the Change of it to some other Day, has been frequently desired by some sober
Persons in this Church, for the avoiding of Scandal; Yet, such is the
Prevalency of Fanaticisme in some Royal Burghs, that the Bishop with his Clergy
could not obtain that most reasonable Request: This being one of the Cimelia e
Scrinio Polonico eruta, which they fail not to bring home with them, per
Hellespontum Danicum. Whereas the Emperors Theodosius the first, Valentinian
the second, and Gratian (as we find in the Theodosian Code,) commanded all
Suits and Processes at Law to cease, and all Prisoners to be set free, in this
Holy week. Whence it may appear; these Carnivorous Animals have never seriously
pondered that Typical Expostulation of our dying Redeemer, which we find in the
Lamentations of Jeremy, Chap. 1. ver. 12. (interpreted by all the Ancients, of
Christ himself,) and which concerns them as much as any.

But, that they might show themselves Prefect in that Art of Opposition to the
Primitive Church, they still presumed to approach to that Holy Table, absque
Virgin Saliva; though it was also condemned by the Ancient Canons; (and I wish
some of them had rested satisfied with their Ordinary Repast, in that great
Morning of the Feast.) But there is good reason to fear That the Generality of
Plebeian Christians, shall rise in Judgment, and condemn those Epicurean
Fanatics; For these will not (upon any account) usher in that Spiritual and
Incorruptible Food with any Temporal and perishing Harbinger. Now if any shall
say, That they are afraid of Fainting; I must confess, Necessity has no Law:
But I wish, some have not contracted that Necessity by Intemperance; For Nature
is content with little, and Grace with less.

I have also heard some object, That Christ himself Condemned Fasting in the
Pharisees. But take St. Chrysostom's Answer to this ignorant Scruple, who tells
us, That Christ did not simply Condemn the Pharisees their Fasting twice a
Week, or their exact payment of Tithes; but their Hypocrisy and Ostentation.
But if we shall judge by the Practice of too many of those, we have good reason
to Conclude, That they have persuaded themselves, that Christ Condemned both
these Matters in Thesi; and that there is no necessity of any Hypothesis to
expound the Text.

But in the Last place; Some of the more knowing of them are ready to adduce
the Authority of Thorndyke and Jeremy Tailor, (both which were very far from
Phanaticism,) that they have sufficiently evinced the Lent-Fast not to be an
Apostolic Tradition, as it is now Calculated by a Quadragesima dierum; But,
that the proper Lent of the Infant Christian Church, was only a Quadragesima
horarum. For Answer, I cannot but reverence the Judgment of those great Clerks,
and do indeed look upon the Quadragesima horarum, as the only Apostolic
Tradition; (though the strict Observation of the whole Passion-week did begin
very early in the Church:) But I think it a very strange Parologism, to infer
from thence, That Feasting on Good Friday is Lawful, seeing it must needs be
inclusively the (...) of that most absolute Fast of Forty Hours. But in these
days of (...) and (...), Animosities and Epicurisme have made the Usage of
Fasts by Papists, a Command to us not to use them; And to conclude, the Abating
any thing of our Gluttony, to be an encroachment on our Christian Liberty: But
the best Apology which can be made for such absurd Arguings, is that old
Dicterium, Anima est in patinis.

I might speak also of their usual Marriages on the Passion-week (which the
Primitive Church would have deemed a very indecent Pageantry:) and of the
Fatality which Observant Christians have noticed to attend them: But, lest any
should take occasion from the period of this Invective against Superstitious
Sensuality, to judge me also Superstitious, I do instantly put a close to this
overgrown Article.

Vid. Can. Apost. 42, 65, and 68.
Item Council. Gangrens. Can. 18. Council. 1. Gener. Can. 3. contra subintroduct
as mulieres; ( which the Greeks call (...). ( which is repeated in many General
and Provincial Councels. Council. Caesar. August. Can. 1. Council. Bracarens. 1.
Can. 4. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 64. ( the tenor whereof is this; Qui die
Dominico studiose jejunat* non credatur Catholicus.) Council. Anti (...). Can.
11. Council. Bracarens. 1. Can. 16. Bracarens. 2. Can. 10. Council. Toletan. 7.
Can. 1. Council. Genesis 6. Can. 29. (quo abregatur Synodi Carthag. tertiae
Decretum, Vt quinta Feria, in qua Coena D^mini perag^tur, Fideles coenati
Communicent: F^ renovatur Can. 50. Concilii Laodic. Ne co die solvatur
Iejunium.) Council. Laodic. Can. 52. Council. Illerdens. Can. 1. Council.
Aurelianens. 4. Can. 2. Council. Turonens. 2. Can. 13. Council. Braccarens. 2.
Can. 9. and Council. Toletan. 8. Can. 9.

Vid. Clem. Romans Epist. ad Corinth. page 55.

Vid. S. Hieronymi Comment. in Tit. Cap. 1. (on these words, A Bishop must be
blameless;) Quomodo potest Praeses Ecclesiae auserre malum de medio ejus, qui
in delicto simili corruerat? Aut qua liberta^e corripere peccantem potest, cum
tacitus sibi-ipsi respondeat, eadem admisisse quae corripit. ( To which that of
Greg. 1. runs parallel; Cujus vita despicitur, restat ut ejus Praedicatio
contemnatur. Hom. 12. in E^ang. Lib. 14. Moral. and Praefat. in Job. Cap. 3.
and in Exposit. Job. Lib. 30. Cap. 27. Where also he gives an excellent
Description of the Quinque Vitia gulae.) Idem in Cap. 3. Mich. Tibi, O
Sacerdos, de Altario vivere, nonluxuriar^ permittitur. Ad Heliodorum Epist. 1.
De Laud Vitae Solitariae. Ad Nepotian. De Vita Clericorum. Ad Eustochium Virg.
and lib. 2. advers. Iovinian. Origin. Hom. 15. a^ cap. 21. Matthaei: Augustine.
Tract. 41. ad Cap. 8. Joan. Lib. 7. Epist. 39. ad Aurclium Episcop. Epist. 64.
Chrysostom. Hom. 29. ad Cap. 12. Epist. ad Heb. Ambros. Sermon. 20. super Beat^
immaculati, etc. Isidor. De Eccles. Ossic. Lib. 2. Cap. 2. B^da, in Cap. 8.
Joan. De Iudicio Adulterae. Vid. etiam August. Epist. 118. Pro Virgin saliva;
Ex hoc enim placuit S. Sancto, Vt in honorem tanti Sacramenti, in Os Christiani
prius Dominicum Corpus intraret, quam caeteri ^ibi; nam ideo per Vniversum
Orbem mos isle servatur. And for the Quadragesimal Fast, in order to our
Preparation for the holy Communion, Vid. Comment. Hieronymi in cap. 3. Ionae.

Article II.
Number. 18. 26. Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. Mat. 16. 24. and 18. 2. and 20. 26. and 25. 35.
36. Luke 12. 33. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. etc. 1 Timothy 4. 12. and 3. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Tit. 1. 8. Heb. 13. 2, 3. Iam. 1. 27.

THAT none be chosen to that Eminent Degree, but they only who have formerly
vowed (and sure I am, some Presbyters in this Church have put on such
inviolable Resolutions in Reference to that Election) to employ (almost all)
the Revenue of the respective Bishoprics, to which they have a Lawful Call,
and which is secured to them by Law (whether it be an Episcopal or
Archiepiscopal See) for Pious and Charitable Uses; such as; The Building and
repairing of Bridges on high ways; Maintenance of poor Widows and Orphans;
Endowing of indigent Maids, of an honest Descent; The Erection of Hospitals for
infirm Persons who cannot work, and are ashamed to beg; And the Building of
Monasteries for Contemplative Souls; yet without any Bond upon the Conscience,
(as it is in some Convents of Germany.) save that, of serving God more strictly
in their Speculative Retirements. And I suppose, there should be much more
Purity within the Walls of these Cloisters if the Recluses had not Vows of
Continency imposed on them; (that of the Poet, Nitimur in vetitum. etc. being
too frequently verified in every Age:) For that Fervor Novitius may last a
while beyond the years of Probation, and then degenerate into a perfect
Congelation; which by an hellish Antiperistasis does frequently produce an
Vstulation.) But there be two great Advantages which a Contemplative Life
affords to some Christians.

First, It is a most secure Sanctuary to all those, who, in regard of a
Choleric Nature, are very obnoxious to Impatience; The matter about which Our
Patience is exercised ordinarily proceeding, either immediately from God, or
from our Neighbors, or from our selves; If they come from men (as Injuries
either real or verbal) they are generally more bitter than those that come from
God, as Sickness, etc. though in themselves greater; because other men are but
equal to us, and we know not their secret Intentions, but are apt to suspect
the worst when they do us any Ha^m; therefore we take such things worse at
their hands than we would at God's, who (besides that He is omnipotent, and
^ath the supreme Dominion over us,) we know that his Goodness is infinite; So
that we can assure our selves, that all his deali^gs toward us are meant for
our good; though sometimes we cannot see how they can contribute to it. And as
for matters of Affliction, which through Imprudence, or any other defect, we
bring upon our selves; we are less moved to Impatience by them; (though often
to a secret Shame:) because that (besides we are too apt to excuse and favor
our selves,) we are secure that we meant no harm to our selves. Whence it is
evident, That a Speculative Life (being far removed from the crowd of the
World,) is less obnoxious to Impatience than an Active Life.

The other great Advantage which redounds to Christians by Comtemplation is,
That Virtues are more easily obtained, more securely possessed, and more
perfectly practiced, than in an Active Life. Let us suppose a Person to aspire
unto Perfection in this, yet he stands in need of many things to enable him for
the Practice of the Duties disposing thereunto: For the Exercise of the
external Works of Charity, the^^ are needful Riches or Friends, etc. And for
Spiritual Almsgiving there is required Learning* Study, Disputation, etc. And
if by the help of these there be acquired an established habit of solid
Charity, it is not very securely possessed in the midst of so many
Distractions, Solitudes, and Temptations: But a comtemplative Life (as the
Angelical Doctor observes, even from Aristotle himself; vid. Thom. Sum.
secunda secundae. quaes. 182. Art. 1.) stands in need of very few things; being
to it self sufficient. Such a Person alone, without needing other Assistance,
or Favor from abroad, can both purchase and exercise all Virtues; yea and
liberally Dispense all kinds of Charity to others also; for by Prayer alone,
exercised in Solitude, he can employ and engage God's Omnipotence, Wisdom, and
all the Treasures of his Riches, for the supplying all the Necessities,
External and Internal, of his Church. Yea the greater Solitude there is, the
Soul is at the more Freedom to run speedily and lightly to the Course of
Virtue: For nothing does indeed fetter her but Self-love and Propriety. And
when the Habits of Virtue are once acquired, they are most securely possessed
in Solitude, from whence all Distractions (and almost all Temptations) are
excluded.

There is yet another Advantage to which the Poverty of this Country would
frequently exhibit the Occasion; which is, That these would be excellent Cities
of Refuge for some Persons of a Noble Descent, (specially of the Female Sex,)
whose prodigal Parents have wasted all their Patrimonies; so that they (finding
too good reason to despair of a Match according to their Quality:) live exposed
to the Contempt of the World, even to their dying day: For though some of them
are so happy, as to twist Nobility and Virtue together, yet that Conjunction
not being irradiated with the splendid Aspect of Plutus, they become despicable
in Vulgar eyes, which are only dazzled with the Glistering of Gold and Silver.
So that I heartily approve the Judgment of the Author of Claustrum Animae;
Necessary Reformations (says he) might have repurged Monasteries, as well as
the Church, without abolishing of them: and they might have been still Houses
of Religion, without having any dependence upon Rome. I have insisted the
longer upon this Theme, (though it may be termed a Digression;) because I
judged my self concerned to vindicate that most excellent kind of Life from the
Imputation of Vselesness, as if they were all Ignavum pecus fruges consumere
nati. Et,
-- Telluris inutile pondus.
Sure I am, If the Practice of the Devout Asceticks of Nitria, and of the
Primitive Monks in general, (whereof S. Hierom, Augustine, Palladius, Cassian,
and others, give us an account:) were retrived into our Church, Judicious
Calvin would not have been so uncharitable, as to say of them all, that --
Velut porci saginantur in haris. For if the Abuse of a thing should always take
away the lawful Use thereof, the most laudable Institutions of the World would
fall to the ground; For what therein has not been abused? But to take off the
groundless Odium of the name, let these Habitations be also termed Hospitals.

But above all; Let the Governors of the Church make Conscience to educate
Towardly Youths, (whether Descended of the Clergy or Laity,) whose Parents are
not in bonis to entertain them at Schools; yet are well principled, and derived
from honest Families: That (having a liberal and holy Education in the Bishop's
Family, and their Conversation being always in his eye,) they may prove
excellent Materials at last, to build the House of God; when, being found good
Proficients in Knowledge, and in the School of Holy Jesus; they may be called
forth to that Holy Function in God's good time; It being the practice of St.
Augustine and diverse others in the Primitive Church, to have always such
Seminaries about them. And these (even in this Age) would be looked upon as the
Succedanei of the ancient Acoluthi, who were the individui Comites of the
Primitive Bishops; and being constant Witnesses unto their holy Conversation,
were thereby framed (through the Divine Grace) to the exact imitation of that
excellent Pattern. This Method would be found, not only a Charitable Office,
but also an act of great Prudence and Christian Policy, in reference to all;
but especially the Ministers of the Gospel. And would to God all Churchmen
were taken up with the Study of such Laudable Politics, and Piae frauds, as
the Apostle phraseth them: For it could not but persuade them who have any
Principles of Generosity within them, to a Cordial Compliance with the
Government, when they perceive it their great Care to do good to them and
theirs. Yea, more than so; It would excite a commendable Emulation amongst the
Clergy of the same Diocese, which of them should appear most Deserving in the
eyes of their Ordinary, and that in order to a Preference as to the
Foris-familiation of their Sons; when they perceive, That over and above the
Poverty of their Estates, and Riches of their Principles, these Presbyters are
most Countenanced, and Their Sons regarded by their Bishop in the first place,
who are Persons of a pious and prudent Conversation, Diligent in their Studies,
and Faithful in the Discharge of all the Duties of their Holy Vocation.

I might add to the former Instances of Charity, The Redemption of Christian
Captives; (For which merciful Acts Acatius, Ambrose, Paulinus, and many other
Primitive Bishops, are highly applauded:) As also, Bequeathing the Holy Bible,
and other Books of Devotion, gratis, to poor Christians; (the Soul being the
principal Object of Charity to our Neighbor:) For which the Martyr Pamphilus
is Celebrated by Eusebius and Hierom. And in ^ine; The furnishing of some
resolute Evangelists with a Viaticum, to propagate the Christian Faith among
Infidels; which was one of the Elogiums of St. Chrysostom: (For which Act of
Universal Charity Demetrius of Alexandria was, long before him, highly
applauded; for sending the Learned Pantaenus to preach the Blessed Gospel unto
the remotest Indians.) And that the Roman Propaganda may not rise up in the
Great Audit, against the Governors of the Reformed Church, they should be no
less solicitous for it.

We need not multiply any more Particulars; For if the half of these Instances
of Charity be practiced to purpose, there will be few Materials reserved for
the gaudy Busks of Wives, the Prodigality of Sons, the Vanity of Daughters, and
Debauchery of their Retinue: For the Treasure of the Church (thus S. Lawrence
termed the Poor, and not Works of Supererogation:) would exhaust all those
Conduits of Luxury, and nothing would remain to be bestowed on costly
Furniture, rich Hangings, curious Coaches, etc. For the Primitive Bishops used
not Coaches, neither had they any Swords to draw upon their Coach-men. (not to
speak of their expending more on their Horses yearly, than some poor Ministers
have to maintain their Families: the very Possession of which (as Clemens Alex.
has well observed,) creates Envy, especially to the Clergy, whose Ornaments
ought to be of a more Spiritual Make and Temper. Neither would they have any
Temptation to re-act that Tragedy of the Ewe-Lamb in Nathan's Parable, by
designing to abridge any poor Minister's Stipend; far less to substract that
inconsiderable Pittance destinated for the Provision of Communion-Elements:
Least of all would they find in their hearts, to give Money to an Advocate, to
obstruct the Reputation of a Church; if ten Merks Scots be all the Sum which
is expected from a hard-hearted Patron, to uphold a decayed Fabric. Yea,
suppose they had a legal Title to part of that Salary, yet they would dispense
with it as a part of their Charity unto those who may be said sedere super
Chaenicem, in regard of the smalness of their Intrado, and greatness of their
Families: and None should have occasion to upbraid that Order, That no public
charitable Works have been done by any of them; Such as, the Such as, The
Building and Repairing of Bridges on Highways; (though some of those already
half demolished, are within the Prospect of their Ordinary Residences, and
daily invite them to put to their helping hand.) Neither would any who Travel
by their Parish-Churches, find any ground to admire that pitiful Spectacle, Of
Bells hanging upon Trees, for want of Bell-houses, as if they owned that part
of Mahomet's Doctrine, which Condemns Bells in Steeples; or did join Issue with
the Invectives of the Quakers against Steeple Houses.

And till Reason and Religion can suggest no other Employment for that parcel
of the Churches Patrimony in their hands; Let them not be sollicitous to make
that invidious and uncharitable scrambling for a great Estate, to aggrandize a
near Relation in this World, who (deserendo Castra nostra) do (as it is too
frequently observed) in the next Age, if not in that of their Creation,
resemble the Viper, in tearing by Scorn and Contempt the Bowels of that Parent,
which alone produced their Fortune and Honor; It being, through the just
Judgment of God, the unhappy Fate of that Sacred Grove, to lend an handle to
that Ax which lops its Reputation: For the Clergy had no greater enemy, nor
vilisier, in that Age, than Caesar Borgia, the perverse spurious Brat of an
Ecclesiastic.

But for them to retain so much of their Revenue as is requisite to supply the
Necessities of Nature, or the Wants of Others, ought neither to be the Object
of Envy, or Fear: For he must needs be worse than a Momus, or Zoilus, who carps
at the provision of Food and Raiment, which a poor Tradesman makes to his own
Family by his Lawful Calling. Yet the Dignity of that Sacred Office is such,
that Decency requires a more ingenuous manner of living, than the sordid and
mean way of Plebeians; in regard they are particularly commanded to practice
Hospitality. (For which, not only Spiridion was Famous, but also the generality
of the Prelates of the Primitive Church, whether in a Celibate, or Married
state:) But as that Famous Bishop of Cyprus was far from Superfluity in his
Entertainment of Strangers; So should they be, who are bound to know, That
simple Habit and Diet are most consonant to the primitive Simplicity of
Christians; but especially of Churchmen: There being no Heavenly-minded
Ecclesiastic, who is thoroughly Mortified as to the Blandishments of the Flesh,
and has absolutely resigned his Soul to God) but uses even these things which
are Necessary, sparingly and moderately, not paying Nature its Tribute without
some regret, grudging the little time he spends about it; and therefore makes
haste to get from the Table, that he may return to his better Exercises. And
seeing (in imitation of St. Augustine) he comes to his Meat as to a Medicine,
it cannot be presumed, that he will cast away much of his precious time in such
unedifying Employments, but rather (after the Example of that Great
Conqueror,) will drive away all curious Cooks, and other Artificers of Luxury,
far from his Habitation.

And let not any imagine that this Practice of Charity, which cannot but
interrupt the study of these Persian Arts of Splendor, and effeminate
Gallantry, (too much in fashion in this Age) shall expose that Sacred Order to
Contempt in the eyes of the World: Sure the contrary will fall out; There being
no Person (of what Quality soever) that has any ti^cture of Christianity
within him, but will be apt to deferr more internal Respect unto them on that
account, than can be procured by all these Characters of Honor which the most
bountiful Temporal Monarch is pleased to conferr upon them. Yea, more than so;
when they accost those Holy Persons in the way, they will be ready to alight,
and beg their Blessing; as was usually done to St. Basil of Cappadocia, and to
our Countryman S. A^danus, though his Mode of Traveling was no more
honorable than that of a (...). And that this visible Impress of the Divine
Image does extort Admiration, and a rever^^d Esteem, from the most virulent
Enemies of the Christian Religion, may sufficiently appear from that Epistle of
Julian the Apostate, to the High Priest of Galatia: And it is very observable,
That the Greatest of this Land (who understand the nature of true Nobility) are
apt to caresse some Presbyters who are of a good Descent, and have the repute
of Pious, Charitable, and Learned men, and the Discretion to demean themselves
handsomely in the company of their Betters, as much as any Bishop of them all,
(balking only some Titles and Places, in lieu whereof they a^^ord them the more
internal Respect) in imitation of Monsieur de Renty, that excellent French
Nobleman, who thought it his greatest Worldly Honor, to Honor the Clergy. And
they who are knowing Persons of the Nobility, look upon it as no Disparagement
to their Grandeur, to put Characters of Respect, and Signatures of Honor, on
the worthy Ambassadors of Holy Jesus: Remembering Constantine the Great his
Kissing the hollow of Paphnutius his Eye, because he was a famous Confessor;
(who also used to treat those of the Clergy at his own Table, though in the
meanest and most despicable Habit; which some Reguli in this Age would think it
below them to do:) and the high Respect which Theodosius the Great carried to
St. Ambrose: (Not to speak of Theodosius the Younger, S. Lewis of France, S.
Edward of England, (called the Confessor) and St. David of Scotland, with many
other Great and Pious Princes: and for the Female Sex, Placilla the Empress,
and St. Margaret of Scotland, are Examples instar omnium; For they caressed all
in Holy Orders to the Admiration of the World.

And though it be very commendable in any great Person (as being a great
Evidence of true Piety in them) to put such Respect upon the Representatives of
their Great Masters; yet I cannot but condemn the ambitious Affectation of it
in any Churchman, or a solicitous Desire in any of them, to be preferred to
the great Officers of State: For this vanity they did never learn from him who
gave them their Commission; (if ever they were sent of God,) For, He was meek
and lowly in heart, and commanded all his Disciples to learn that Document from
his Example.

But, if it be objected; how then shall a Churchman vindicate himself from
Contempt, seeing it is their Fate to be sometimes palpably dis-respected: The
Blessed Gospel is indeed a Bundle of Mysteries and a Complex of innumerable
Wonders; (viz. In the Dispensation of the Incarnation;) That the Ancient of
Days should become an Infant; That he who Thunders in Heaven should cry in a
Cradle; That he who has his Center every where, and Circumference no where,
(as Mercurius Trismegistus describes a Deity:) should be enshrined, for the
space of nine Months, in the narrow Womb of a Virgin: That he who grasps the
World in his Fist, who upholds all things by the Word of his Power, whose
boundless Arms are stretched in^initely beyond the vast Expansion of the Poles
of Heaven, and who hangs the Earth upon nothing, should be sustained by the
feeble Arms of a Woman: all these are incomprehensible Mysteries. And, In that
of the Passion; That the Lord Paramount of the World should become Servant to
all; and impoverished, that we might become rich; abased, that we might be
exalted; exposed to much Ignominy, that we might be glorified; and to suffer a
painful and cursed Death, that we might enjoy a Blessed Immortality: all these
are unfathomable Wonders.) Yet this Degenerated Age has added one Mystery
thereunto, whereof the Apostles themselves never dreamed; That the preaching
thereof should render the Sons of Plebeians, Gentlemen in the Vulgar Esteem:
and on the contrary, be a Disparagement to those of a more Honorable Descent;
as if (forsooth) their Blood (be it never so noble) were attainted by the most
honorable Employment in the World: whence it comes to pass, That some
Gentlemen in Decimo-Sexto (whose Nativity is scarce so honest, whose Fortunes
are inferior, and though they be but too insolent, yet are not so impudent to
enter the Lists of Competition for Gifts and Parts:) do set themselves forward
before such Persons; which they would not have presumed to do; if they had not
become of the Clergy: (doing that to the Tribe of Levi upon the matter for
which the good Levite is highly applauded in Scripture; viz. They forget their
Father's house, and acknowledge not their most valuable Worldly Concerns; but
it wants this Formality, they do it not in the Cause of God.) And these are too
much animated to such Insolences by the Countenance of some Great ones of both
Sexes, who (being Strangers to God and themselves) did never yet dream, that
true Nobility consists rather in their proper Virtue, than in those empty
Scutcheons which the Virtue of their Ancestors has transmitted unto them.

For Answer; to return Pride for Pride, Folly for Folly, and Madness for
Madness, is neither a Christian, nor a generous Method of vindicating one from
Contempt: For in effect it amounts to no more than this; that because they are
mad with Pride and Folly, therefore we must be like them. But the first Course
a Churchman is to take, is, To reflect upon himself, if there be any proper
Objects of Contempt within him, For if the Cause be taken away, the Effect
^sually c^aseth: and these are, Ignorance, Imprudence, Levity, Scurrility, and
a sordid way of Living; but above all, a Scandalous Habit, too much noticed by
the World. And such is the unhappiness of Our Church, That the particular
Eclipse of one Organical Member thereof, casts a dark Shadow upon the whole
Order. As for the Baseness of (...) in some of the Clergy, (though I heartily
wish, that, as it is the Foundation of some Monasteries in Germany, whereunto
None are admitted save Gentlemen of good Families, it were so in our Church,
yet) That being no Moral Defect, it merits no such Contempt as any of the
former, provided they become the Sons of their own right arm, (as the Spanish
Proverb has it) and by sublimated Parts and Piety, the Sons of the most High:
So the strength of their Intellectuals, and goodness of their Morals,
preponderating that first Original Defect, when a good man is tempted to any
such Act, his heart will smite him; as we read of that good Emperor Sigismund,
when he reflected on that of the Prophet, It was God that made us, and not we
our selves: Yea the Heathen Poet could say,

At genus and proavos, and quae non fecimus ips^.
Vix ea nostra voco. --
The same Poet elsewhere speaking to the same Purpose; has these Lines,
Ingenua de plebe virum, nec Census in illo Nobilitate sua major; sed vita
sidesque Inculpata suit.

But if none of these Natural or Moral (...) can justly be charged on some
Churchmen, (who shine in their own O^bs like Stars of the First Magnitude) all
the Retaliation I would have them make for these undeserved Undervaluings, is,
a generous inward Contempt. For, seeing it is yet Controverted among Moralists,
whether Honor be in the Giver or Receiver, they have good Reason to conclude,
That such despicable Arts will rather rebound a dishonorable Stigma upon the
Subject, than leave any durable Impression upon the Object.

And all Churchmen should carefully avoid the Company of such who have little
Civility, and less Christianity; as being unedifying and contagious: For the
General Disrespect of the Clergy flows usually from one of the ensuing
Principles.

The first is Atheism; And it is no Wonder that they hate and despise the
Servant, who could never yet find in their Hearts to love and honor the
Master. And because the Presence of an holy man (how mean soever he be) does,
as it were, fetter the Devil with Chains in a wicked man, so that he cannot
actuate his perverse habits so frankly as before, therefore these Gadarenes
drive away such Persons from them with Contempt, that they may enjoy their
swinish Lusts without Control.

The second Principle is Sacrilege; they who have a vehem^nt Desire to rob God
of that poor Pittance which has fallen beside the Tallo^s of some rapacious
Vultures, (which ravenous Harpyes did, with a Cyclopaea^ Impiety, sight against
God, by robbing the Fountain of all Goodness:) cannot endure to see any secured
by Law in the Possession thereof; Therefore are they too prone to put Affronts
upon them. But I wish these would consider, that if they snatch a Collop from
off God's Altar, a fatal coal may adhere unto it, which will burnt up Nest and
all. And if they were acquainted with (...) History, they would take example
from Cambyses, Xerxes, the Phocians, Brennus, the Consul Cepio, Mar^us Crassus
and Heliodorus, before they be made such Examples: neither should ^ wish that
any in this Age become the detestable Instances of Vice running in a Blood, by
tracing the sacrilegious Footsteps of some other ancestors, who have
impropriated no small part of the Patrimony of this Church.

The third Principle is, Want of Civil Education; they who have traveled
beyond Seas, and have noticed that great Respect which the Grandees there put
upon the Clergy of the Roman Church; When they return they cannot Dis-respect
their own, unless they have brought home either Atheism or Superstition with
them. But, as we read of a Laplander, who imagined there had been no better
Country than his own; (though it is one of the worst in the World:) So it fares
with some Young Heirs of great Families, who come to their Land long before the
dawning of their Wit, they look never above them, but converse only with their
own Swains that are below them; so that their Breeding cannot chose to be
without some great tincture of the Plebeian in it: whence it is, tha^ they
vainly imagine, none are shapen t^ be their Companions, but those only wh^ have
an aequilibrium of Fortune wit^ themselves; yea ( Narcissus-like, becom^ing
fond of themselves,) at last they com^ to think, that every man is bound to
stoop to that Idol which they adore Which exactly resembles the old Egyptian
Temples, that were curiously garnished without, but the Deity that wa^
worshipped within was some vile and despicable Animal.

The fourth Principle is that of Pride which is most apparent in some
Fantastic^ Mushroms of a Night's growth, who (pe^^as aut nefas) have scraped
some Fortune to themselves. Now, as King James ((...) Blessed Memory) used to
say; that the first War the Scottish young heirs commenced, was against their
Mothers; so it may be said of these Singular Successors* They begin their
First Quarrel with their Mother, The Church: whereby they demonstrate, that
they have not God to be their Father, Yea, they think it their Glory to
undervalue Churchmen, and to contend with them, whereby they hope to become
Famous: And lest the Clerk should forget to enroll their Names at the next Head
Court, as heretours of such a Parish, they take this boisterous way of
Intimation: But their Glory is their Shame, and they render themselves infamous
in the Ears of all good men. I deny not, but that the Devil has thrown a
Temptation in the way of these Doegs; For let a Churchman be never so
innocent, and do no more but what the Law of Nature allows to all living
Creatures, which is, to defend themselves the best way they can; they shall be
sure to bear the Blame of it, and be taxed as men of Contention: so
uncharitable is this Country to the Clergy; who are obliged to remember, that
the Fortitude which is mainly required of them, qua ^ales, is passive, and not
active: and that they ought (like to the good Palm Tree) to grow up in Charity,
Humility, and Patience, under the Burden of Reproach and Contempt. But I would
have those whom God permits to be the Scourge of his Church, seriously to
consider, That there is a Curse attends all, who strive with the Priest, and
have a complacency in doing so; which many in this Land have experimented: The
very Plebeians being apt to observe; that some, since they began with the
Church in a preposterous way, in that day made an end of Thriving in this
World, and th^re is nothing more observable in humane History, than that all
they (which was no small number) who had Accession to the barbarous
Assassination of Bomsace the eighth, and Cardinal Beton, cam^ to violent ends,
though these two were the worst men of their Age: (not to speak of another
great Cardinal, Georg. Martinusius whose murderers did undergo the same
unhappy Fate.) For God reserves the Punishment of wicked Ecclesiastics to
himself; they being, Noli me tangere to all the rest of the World; excepting
God's Vicegerent upon Earth, whose Subjects they are.

The last Principle is, a Compound of Vanity, Fanaticism, and Epicurism; which
three naughty ingredients are most usually found mixed in some of the Female
Sex; whose way of living has been a sufficient Demonstration, that they are
void of the Life of Religion: yet they endeavor to shroud all their Impieties
under the Title of Catharism, much like ^o the ancient Gnostics, who,
pretending to Eminency of Knowledge, did pal^iate, under that name, the most
abominable Villainies in the World. Now seeing the Prora and Puppis of the
Religion of these Persons consists in an Antipathy against the present
Constitution of this Church, it must needs have such an Ascendant upon them,
that they cannot choose but Hate (and consequently Undervalue) all that bear
Office therein. But the main Reason of that Contempt is Luxury; For their
carnal Brains are so overclouded with the fuliginous vapors of Sensuality,
that they cannot put a right Estimate upon a Spiritual Office.

But I am confident, there is no Conscientious Minister of the Gospel who is
not ready to render Good for Evil to all such Despisers, by pitying them, and
praying earnestly for a dissipation of that Cloud of wrath which is hanging
over their heads, like a hovering Meteor; and ready to fall upon them: any
Indignity which is done to a Churchman, the Son of God looking upon it as done
to himself; and because he is wounded through their sides, he will not fail to
avenge his own Interest. That dreadful Sentence of the Gospel may awaken the
securest amongst them all, (if they had Grace to lay it to heart) They who
despise you despise me, and they who despise me despise him that sent me: It
being a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God; For our God is
a consuming Fire.

I am not ignorant that this is a prol^^ Digression; but the Interest of the
Gospel induced me to enter upon it. For i^ ought to be Lamented with tears of
blood, That there is no Civil Nation und^^ Heaven which conferrs so little
Respect on their Churchmen as ours does; and that but of late too. Sure I am,
the ancient Pagan Dr^ides were (almost infinitely) more Honored in this Land*
than the present Ministers of the Gospel ar^ I pray God it be not a sad
Prognostic of the extinction of the Gospel among us* and it is God alone that
can disappoint our Fears.

We come now to answer the Second Scruple against that Method of Charity
proposed in the Entry of this Article. Let not any of that Sacred Order say, If
we do thus, what shall become of our Wives and Children when we are gone;
seeing it is not now the custom of Nourishing the Relicts and Orphans of the
Clergy, out of the Churches Intrado? This is easily answered. For, without all
Peradventure, a good and holy Education is a rich Patrimony; as Gregory
Nazianz. tells of his Sister Gorgonia, (who was also Daughter to an humble and
Selfdenying Bishop, That she bequeathed great Riches to her Children, in
leaving them such an excellent Pattern as her self, and a desire to follow her
Example. Yea more than so, seeing the best way to gather is, thus to scatter,
these Charitable Husbands and Parents may considently leave their Widows and
Fatherless Children with God: For the Heavenly Compost of the Divine Blessing
will not fail to enrich their poor and small possessions. It was a remarkable
Story, concerning a Charitable Minister (whose Surname was Crow) who had many
Children, and very little of a yearly Income to bequeath to them; when he was a
dying, yet considently cried out, The Great God who hears the young Ravens when
they cry, will not suffer these young Crows to starve for hunger. And it was
observed, that God provided very well for them all. Christum Debitorem habere,
(says Gregory Nazianz.) plus est quam omnia possidere. It was also a golden
Sentence, worthy of that Golden Mouth which uttered it* Eleemosyna est Ars
omnium artium quaestuosissima: to which that Dutch Proverb is consonant, Thest
never enricheth, Alms never impoverish, and Prayer hinders no wark: and when
the hand of Violence seiseth on a charitable man's Estate; he may say with him
in Seneca, I have at least tha^ still which I have given away.

And lest it should be objected; tha^ this Method of gratifying this I^on Ag^*
is singular and unpracticable: I must (...) them, in the end, That many in
(...) Primitive Church have gone a (...) length in Self-denial: For S. Cyprian
(...) no sooner converted to the Christian Faith, but he instantly abandoned a
very plentiful Patrimony to the Use of the Poor. So did S. Paulinus afterward^
Bishop of Nola, And so soon as Epiphanius, and diverse others undertook th^^
Eminent Employment, they immediately expended all for the behoof of the
indigent Members of that mystical and glorious head, from which exhaustible
Fountain every good Gift is derived.

I have been the more prolix on this Particular; First, Because I would have
Bishops carefully to avoid the Application to themselves of that Satirical
Character given by one, of a Puritan, That he is such an Enemy to Merit, and so
afraid of Pharisaical Ostentation, that in a seeming Compliance with our
Savior's Precept in the matter of Charity, Not to let the left hand know what
the right Hand does, he lets none in Heaven or in Earth know it. And next,
Because People are generally apt to look upon Charity, as the most infallible
Demonstration of the Sincerity of the Faith and Piety of Churchmen; all being
naturally prone to homologate that of S. Augustine; Quanta est Charitas! quae
si desit, frustra habentur caetera; si adsit, habentur omnia. And Clemens Alex.
gives it as the best Motto of an Ecclesiastic, Terram calcare didici, non
Adorare. And if this Self-denial were universally practiced by Churchmen,
there should be no place found for that Complaint of Boniface of Mentz,
(usually termed the Apostle of Germany) Ecclesia Antiqua ligneos habuit
calices, sed aureos Episcopos: At Hodierna calices aureos, sed ligneos
Episcopos. Neither would any sober Person take Occasion from any Donation made
to the Church, to say, Hodie venenum infusum est Ecclesiae: or, Ecclesia
peperit divitias, and Filia devoravit Matrem; Yea there should not have been
any need of that eloquent Sermon of S. Chrysostom, preached against those who
envyed the Wealth of the Clergy.

Vid. Can. Apost. 58.
Item Council. Turonens. 1. Can. 1, and 2. Council. Toletan. 3. Can. 7, and 19.
Council. Antisiodorens. Can. 38. Council. Cabilonens. Can. 3. Council. Toletan.
11. Can. 2. and 5. Council. Bracarens. 3. Can. 4. Council. Turonens. 2. Can. 9.
Council. Gener. 6. Can. 33. (ubi legimus, quod non Genus, sed Mores attendendi
sunt ad Manus-Impositionem.) Et Can. 50, and 51. istius Concilii. Council.
Carthaginens. 4. Can. 15. Cujus haec sunt formalia verba; Vt Episcopus vilem
supellectilem, and mensam ac victum pauperem habeat; Et dignitatis suae
authorita^em Fide, ac vitae meritis quaerat. Et Can. 95 ejusdem Concilii.
Council. Agathens. Can. 3, and 4. Council. Vasens. Can. 2. Council. Aurelianens.
4. Can. 14. Council. Turonens. 2. Can. 18. Council. Parisiens. Can. 1. Council.
Aurelianens. 5. Can. 10, and 11. Council. Hispalens. 2. Can. 10. (as for
Monasteries; There is s^arce any ancient Council, whether General or
Provincial, but speaks of them.) But all the Qualifications of St. Paul's
Bishop, are expressed at length in the first Canon of the fourth Council of
Carthage: To which I remit the ingenious Reader.

Vid. Chrysostom. Homil. 65. in Genesis 47.
Vid. August. Ad. Bonifac. Comitem, Epist. 50. Si autem privatim possidemus
quod nobis sufficiat, non illa nostra sunt, sed pauperum, quorum Procurationem
quodammodo gerimus, non Proprietatem nobis damnabili Vsurpa^ione vindicamus. Et
Sermon. 2. Cap. De Vita Clericorum. Vnum filium habes; putes Christum alterum:
duos habes; putes Christum tertium: december filios habes; Christum undecimum
facias, and suscipio: Hieronym. Ad Nepotian. Habens victum, and amictum, his
contentus ero; Et nudam crucem nudus sequar. Comment in Galat. cap. 6. Qui
clementiam non habet, nec indutus est viscera misericordiae and Lachrymarum,
quamvis spiritualis sit, non adimplebit Legem Christi: Ambros. lib. de Offic.
1. cap. 30. Non satis est been velle, sed etiam been facere: Non quid dixeris,
sed quid feceris, etc. Lib. 2. Offic. cap. 21. Gregor. 1. Lib. 5. Epist. 29. De
Episcopo Mariniano. Largam manum habeat, necessitatem patientibus concurrat,
alienam inopiam suam credat; quia si haec non habeat, Vacuum Episcopi nomen
tenet: and in his Epistle to the Emperor Mauricius, he holds forth at length
the great Advantages of a Monastical Life; though I cannot approve that
Sentiment of his, Plerique sunt, qui nisi omnia reliquerint, salvari apud Deum
nullatenus possunt.

Anselm. lib. 13. cap. 28. Pas^e same morientem; quisquis enim pascendo hominem
servare poteras, si non pavisti, occidisti: Vid. totam Chrysostom. Hom. in. cap.
6. Epist. ad Hebr. Greg. 1. Lib. 12. Epist. 6. Et Tertul. De Iejunio. (though
at that time he was Montanizing.) Vid. omnes libros Prosp. de Vita Contemplat.
Et Hieron. Panegyric. in vitam solitariam. Idem Epist. 2. Isidor. Pelus. Epist.
ad Palladium Diaconum. and Bern. Declam. in illud Evang. Reliq. omnia etc.

Article III.
Ier. 23. 21. Ioh. 10. 1. Act. 19. 13. 14, 15, 16. 1 Timothy 3. 6. Heb. 5. 4. 3.
Ioh. 9.

IT were to be wished, That none set themselves forward to leap into a vacant
Chair, and to ascend with too much Precipitation that Summum Sacerdotii
fastigium, before others much more modest, and more worthy. It was the regret
of Gregory Nazianz. That some in his time were (...), they Commenced Divines
and Bishops in one Day, who yet understood nothing before; nor brought any
thing to the Order, but only, a good Will to be there. Whence he fitly compares
such Mushroms to the Dragon's teeth sown by Cadmus (as the Fable has it) which
immediately sprung up Giants out of the Earth, armed Cap-a-pe, perfect men, and
perfect Warriors in one day. But this is the excentrick Motion of rash and
ignorant young heads, and ambitious Heretics. For the most eminent Pillars of
the Primitive Church (such as S. Cyprian. Gr. Naz. Ambrose, Augustine,
Nectarius, Chrysostom, Synesius, and many others) from a Principle of Humility,
and a serious Consideration of the weightiness of that Charge, declined the
same with all Vehemence imaginable, till by the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Authority, and the Inspiration of the Almighty, and great Mortifications, they
were at last inclined thereunto. By which Shieness they verified that
Observation of Sulpitius Severus, (speaking of the ninth Persecution:) Men in
those days (says he) much more greedily sought Martyrdom in the Cause of
Christ, than for Bishoprics, or other Preferments in the Chuch.

Vid. Can. Apost. 30. and 31.
Item, Council. Gener. 1. Can. 2. Council. Carthaginens. 4. Can. 1. Council.
Antioch. Can. 17. Council. Toletan. 1. Can. 10. Council. Avernens. Can. 2. and 6.
Council. Parisiens. Can. 3. Council. Aurelianens. 5. Can. 9. Council. Matisconens.
2. Can. 11, and 13. Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 18, 20, 21, and 24. Council.
Agathens. Can. 6. Council. Genesis 6. Can. 35, and 86. Council. Toletan. 8. Can. 8*
and ad finem; Solus ergo accedat ad sacra Dei Mysteria tractanda, quem Morum
innocentia, and Literarum splendour reddunt illustrem. Council. Toletan. 3. Can.
1. Nullus deinceps ad promerendos Honores Ecclesiasticos contra Canonum Statuta
aspiret indignus. etc.

Vid. August. Tract. 46. ad cap. 10. Joan. Quid est sua quaerentes, non
Christum gratis diligentes, non Deum propter Deum quaerentes? etc. Hieronym.
Comment. in eum locum Titi, Nemo te contemnat. Qualis enim aedificatio erit
Discipuli, si se intelligat Magistro esse majorem? quia vehementer Ecclesiam
Christi destruit, meliores Laicos esse quam Clericos: L^onis 1. Epist. 22. Sin
in Laicis vix tolerabilis videtur In^citia; quanto magis in iis qui praesunt,
nec excusatione digna est, nec venia, Vid. etiam Origin. Hom. 6. ad cap. 8.
Levit. and Hom. 4. in lib. Iudic. Vid. Panegyric. of Greg. Nazianz. upon S.
Basil (the Expressions whereof, which mostly concern this Particular, we have
already cited in the Article;) and what he says on S. Basil he almost repeats
in that great Encomiastick upon Athanasius: and further adds; Et priusquam
pergentur, purgan^; heri Sacrilegi, hodie Sacerdotes; heri sacrorum expertes,
hodie in sacris Duces; veteres in malitia, ac novi in Pietate: quorum mores
haud quaquam Gradum indicant, sed Gradus mores. etc. And Leo magnus, Epist. 91.
speaks to the same purpose; Cum valde iniquum sit, and absurdum, ut imperiti
Magistris, novi antiquis, and rudes praeserantur emeri^is: nam inordinata erunt
omnia, si ^ictilia aureis, and lignea prae^erantur argenteis. etc. Likewise
Greg. the Great, did frequently wish, (as is evident from his excellent
Treatise, De Cura pastorali:) That Church-Offices were bestowed on those alone
who did not ambitiously sue for them, but fled from all Promotion, and yet had
deserved well of the Church, by honest Principles, and an holy Life and a
diuturnal Proof of the excellency of their Knowledge and Prudence; It being
(says he) in this Divine Art, as it is in all other Sciences and Trades, viz.
no small Disgrace thereunto, to promote any to be Masters in that Profession,
who are nothing else but Bunglers and Smatterers: For which he cites the usual
Saying of Gregory Nazianz. Nemo per legem Nauticam admittitur ad gubernacula
navis, nisi prius din sederit ad remos. etc. And what Theodosius the Great was
wont to say of his two Sons Arcadius and Honorius, is applied by this great
Bishop to all ignorant Clergymen, Conducibilius est, ut vitam privatam agant,
quam doctrina nulla, cum periculo, aliis imperarent. The serious Consideration
of which sad Truth, was the great Prompter of Charlemain, to prefer only those
in the Church who were good Prosicients in Knowledge and Virtue; and to reject
all lazy Drones from those rich Hyves: the frequent Reflection on that no less
prudent, than conscionable Practice, gave occasion to that excellent Masculine
Queen, Elizabeth of England, to keep always beside her, an exact List of the
worthiest men in the Universities, and that in order to Church-Promotions.

Article IV.
Mat. 21. 12, 13. Ioh. 2. 16. and 10. 1. Act. 8. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 3. Tit. 1. 10,
11. 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15.

MUCH less should they be preferred to that Sacred Function who are rei
ambitus, and have endeavored by indirect means to purchase that Degree unto
themselves: These by the ancient Canons being declared Inhabiles for ever to
officiate at the Altar. As also they who had been public Penitents; lest the
Umbrage of their former Scandals should stain the pure white of the Ephod. But
to obviate the Inconveniences mentioned in the foregoing Proposal, and this in
hand; It were most desirable, that this ensuing Method should be observed, for
Election of Bishops to vacant Places; (there being first a most humble Address
made by the Clergy of the Nation to our Gracious Sovereign, graciously to
permit the same; and the Favor supposed to be granted:) viz. That immediately
after the Vacancy, the Primate should warn (by his Letters) the Chapter of that
Diocese to convene themselves: and they being assembled, to call the whole
Synod together unto a certain day, appointed for Fasting and Humiliation; at
which some of the most grave and learned of the Ministers, appointed by the
Chapter, should Preach, in order to the Conscientious Choice of a Person fit
for that Eminent Employment. And that after Fasting and Prayer in the Cathedral
Church, a List be made of a certain number of the most Pious, Learned, Prudent,
and Grave Persons, by the common Suffrages of all the Ministers of the Diocesan
Synod: and that some discreet Persons among them be commissionated to carry the
said List to Court, and humbly to present the same to his Majesty; and (with
all due Submission) to entreat his gracious Majesty to present, out of that
number, one to the vacant Chair: They sufficiently knowing them all to be Pares
Negotio, and thoroughly acquainted with the State of the Diocese, and with all
the Tempers of the Clergy, and considerable Laics who live within that
Precinct.

I shall not mention the Observation of Spondanus upon the Enterview of Francis
the First (one of the French Kings) with Pope Leo the tenth, at Bononia; (the
renowned Historian I. A. Thuanus, having made the same Observe in the first
Book of his admirable History.) Neither shall we reflect on the most Christian
Deportment of Valentinian the first in reference to the Postulation of St.
Ambrose: Nor what is decreed by Charlemain, and Lewis the Godly; Lib. 1.
Capitular. cap. 84. Least of all on the pious Act of Lewis the ninth,
(deservedly termed St. Lewis) his burning with Indignation that pretended
Privilege of Nomination, granted by the Pope, saying that the Election of
Bishops belonged only to God and his Church. It being a trite Axiom of the
Canon Law, Petitio plebis, Electio Cleri, and Consensus Principis. (vid. Leonis
1. Epist. 85.) But sure I am, If his gracious Majesty (who is a Lover and
Protector of this Church ex traduce, it being one of his Royal Epithets to be
the Defender of the Apostolic Faith, and Government, which that glorious
Martyr, King Charles the first, sealed with his most precious blood) were well
informed, that this way of Election was the Apostolic Method, who in the first
Vacancy of that Sacred College of Apostles, did fill it in this manner; (as we
read in the first Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles;) and that it was the
most Ordinary Custom of the Primitive Church to do so; and of our own also, not
many years ago; I am fully persuaded, that our Gracious Sovereign (whom God
bless with a long and prosperous Reign over us) who has also manifested such
transcendent Goodness toward this Church, would be pleased graciously to
Condescend to the humble Address of his obedient Subjects and Servants: whereby
the mouths of the Adversaries of our Church may be stopped, and these
Reproaches which are cast upon the Office, wiped off; as, That Bishops are only
the Creatures of Courtiers, or of some Leading Churchmen, introduced by
Motives best known to themselves; and that they are yet but Presbyters, as
having no Call from the Church, but only invested with a little more Secular
Power than they formerly enjoyed; and that the said Office amongst us is
nothing but a Politic Design, contrived rather to serve Secular ends, than the
Evangelical and Ecclesiastical Interests; And, in fine, That the Prayers of the
Chapter in their Elections, are but a Mocking of God, in seeking Grace to
direct them in the Choice of a fit Person for the vacant Place, whilst (being
predetermined by a Conge-d'elire from Court) they make indeed no Election at
all.

Vid. Council. Arelatens. 2. Can. 35. Council. Avernens. Can. 2. Council.
Aurelianens. 5. Can. 3. Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 18. Synod. Antiochen. Can. 23.
Council. Aurelianens. 2. Can. 7. Council. Aurelianens. 3. Can. 2. Council.
Avernens. Can. 2. Council. Aurelianens. 5. Can. 3, and 4. Council. Toletan. 4.
Can. 18. Council. Parisiens. Can. 6. Nullus Civibus invitis Ordinetur Episcopus,
nisl quem Populi and Clericorum Electio plenissima quaes^erit voluntate, etc.
Et Council. Cabilonens. Can. 10. Si quis Episcopus, de quacunque Civitate,
fuerit defunctus, non ab alio, nisi a Comprovincialibus, Clero, and civibus
suis, alterius habeatur Electio; sin autem, hujus Ordinatio irrita habeatur.

Vid. Ambros. Lib. 2. Offic. cap. 24. Bonis artibus, and sincero proposito
nitendum ad Honorem arbitror, and maxim Ecclesiasticum: ut neque resupina
arrogantia, vel remissa negligentia sit, neque turpis affectatio, and indecora
ambitio: ad omnia abundat animi directa simplicitas, satisque seipsa commendat:
Greg. 1. Lib. 9. ex Registro. Epist. 50. ad Ethericum Episcopum Galliae, ita
fatur; Nihil in dandis Ecclesiasticis Ordinibus auri saeva fames inveniat, nil
blandimenta surripiant, nil gratia conserat: Honoris proemium vitae sit
provectus, sapientiae incrementum, madestia morum: ut obtinente hujusmodi
observantia, and indignus, qui proemiis quaerit ascendere, judicetur; and
dignus, cui bonum testimonium actio perhibet, honoretur. Vid. ejusdem Greg.
Hom. 4, 13, and 14. in Evang. ( in qua postrema site describit Mercenarium)
Vid. etiam Hieronymi Comment. in Tit. ad ea verba, Constituas per civitates
Presbyteros.

A Brief Historical Account of the Form of Electing Bishops in the Primitive
Church.
THat the Method of Election expressed in the Article, was observed in Ecclesia
primo-primitiva, (as Gratian somewhere speaks;) That is, in the First Three
Centuries, may appear from the subsequent Historical Instances.

Clemens Romans the First of the Christian Fathers next the Apostles, in his
excellent Epistle to the Corinthians, gives a full Account of that Method of
Election, which was practiced in the Infancy of the Christian Church, and is
absolutely consonant to that we wished for in the last Article. But, for
brevity's sake, we remit the ingenuous Reader to the 101 page of that Epistle.
Yet, for all our haste, I must make a little stop, and Congratulate (with all
Lovers of Antiquity) the Restitution of the only genuine Treatise of that
Apostolic man, unto the present Church; this notable Epistle, so full of
Primitive Simplicity, Candor, and Zeal; having (like the River Alphaeus) run
under ground, for so many Centuries of years: But in this last Age, that
Fountain Arethusa has appeared to the Public view of the World.

The next Instance is in the 39th Chapter of Tertullian his Apologetick, where
he speaks to this purpose; Praesident probati quique Seniores, honorem istum,
non Pretio, sed Testimonio adepti etc.

The next in the Series of time, is the Famous Origin, in Hom. 6. in Levit. who
there speaks to the same purpose. Yet it cannot be denied, but that Sixtus
Senensis, Praesat. in Bibliothec. averrs the said Commentary to be falsely
ascribed to Origin; as also, that on Job; and he pretends solid Reasons for his
Assertion.

S. Cyprian is so copious in this matter, and his mind so well known therein,
unto all that have read his Works, that we need not consume any Paper in citing
that zealous Father. I shall therefore remit the Reader to his 68th Epistle
throughout; and the 52d; wherein he tells us, That his fidus Achates, Cornelius
Bishop of Rome, was chosen Clericorum pene omnium testimonio. This amicable
Couple may put us in mind of those friendly Pairs Celebrated by the Ancients;
viz. Damon and Pythias, Pylades and Orestes, Achilles and Patroclus; if all our
Bishops were so affectionate, no Rebeckah could persuade them to steal the
Birthright, by supplanting an elder Brother.

And that the Patriarch of Alexandria (who was next to Rome, till
Constantinople (quoniam erat nova Roma) shuffled him by) was chosen by the
Presbyters there; and that from among themselves; even from the days of S.
Mark, is evident from Eusebius, Hierem, Theodoret, and Eutychius.

To this Purpose Athanasius in his Second Apology introduces P. Julius the
first, Complaining of the irregular Promotion of Gregory the Cappadocian, by
the Arrians, unto the Sea of Alexandria; Si enim pos^ Synodum in Culpa
deprel^ensus fuisset Athanasius, non tamen oportuit Crea^ienem no^^ Episcopi,
ita illegaliter, and praeter Canonem Ecclesiasticum fieri: sed in ipsa
Ecclesia, and ex ipso sacerdotali Ordine, atque ex ipso Clero ejus Provinciae,
Episcopos constitui; and nequaquam ex illis qui nunc Apostolorum Canones
violant.

To the same Purpose also Gregory Nazianz. (in Oratione, Quando assumptus est
in consort. Pat.) Nam etsi Paternis laboribus succedere, dulce est, ac noto ac
familiari gregi praeesse, jucundius est, quam externo and alieno; addam etiam,
Deo carius, (nisi me fallit, and mentem eripit consuetudo:) non tamen
conducibilius est, nec tutius, quam ut volentibus praesint volentes;
quandoquidem neminem vi duci vult Lex nostra; nec coacte, sed sponte gubernari.

Ambrose, Com. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 4. (if it be his) says; Antiqua
consuetudo fuit, ut antiquissimo Presbytero, antiquissimus succederet in
Episcopatum.

There be many Epistles of S. Leo, to this Purpose, which are adopted by the
Canon Law. Vid. Epist 88. (habetur Did. 63.) Epist. 93. (habetur etiam Did.
63.) Epist. 95. (habetur Did. 62.) where he speaks thus; Nulla ratio sinit, ut
inter Episcopos habeantur, qui nec a Clericis sunt Electi, nec a Plebibus
expetiti. And Epist. 90. he requires these things as necessary to the
Ordination of a Bishop; viz; Subscriptio Clericorum, Honoratorum Testimonium,
Ordinis Consensus and Plebis: And in the same Epistle, speaking of the Choice
of a Bishop, he says it was done, Subscribentibus, plus minus, septuaginta
Presbyteris; Therefore it is observed, That all the Clergy concurred to the
Choice of the Bishop of Rome himself, (except what was done in that time called
the infaelix Seculum, which turned all good Order topsy-turvy in the Church.)
till the Rise of Gregory the seventh, in whose time Popery began to culminate
in the Cuspe of the Tenth House; thence Casaubon calls it Haeresin
Hildebrandinam. That it was so, before the time of Hildebrand, is evident from
the Gloss upon the Canon Law, which from the Decree of P. Honorius the third,
Concludes, Non posse eligi Praelatum ex aliena Dioecesi, sed illum postulandum;
and praevalere electionem personae de proprio Clero, electioni factae de alio,
etiamsi illa facta sit a minore part electorum. And in the Theodosian Code,
(L. 33. De Episcop. and Cler.) we find an Imperial Constitution of Arcadius and
Honorius, Corroborating that Ecclesiastical Law; ne, viz. in Ecclesiis, alii
quam Originarii Locorum ordinentur. For it was ob inopiam Clericorum
Catholicorum, that Nectarius a Laick was chosen; and Ambrose designed, somewhat
miraculously. As for Tarasius and Photius it was long before other Bishops gave
them the Right Hand of Fellowship.

But whosoever desires more ample Satisfaction in this matter, let them read M.
Anton. De Dom. Repub. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3. where he proves at great length from
Councels, Fathers, and Church History, that the regular Election of Bishops did
pertain to the Clergy Sedis vacantis; and that many Ages after the Famous
Council of Nice.

Sure I am, if that Method had been constantly observed; some, who are now
situated in the Zenith of the Church, should have still remained but few
Removes from the Nadir thereof, as Henry the third of France said to some
Bishops of his own Nomination, who pressed him to pemit the Election to run in
the ancient Channel, That if it had always done so, they should never have
been Bishops.

Article V.
Ier. 23. 11. Zeph. 3. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 4. and 4. 7. and 6. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 16.
Tit. 2. 1, 2, 3 (...)

WHEN the Prelate of this Church is regularly Elected and Consecrated, let him
manifest the Sacredness of his Order, rather by the Gravity of his Deportment,
and Spirituality of his Discourse, tending always to the edification of the
Hearers, than merely by his Canonical Garb: Though it was always my Judgment,
that it is most consonant to Reason and good Order, that the Clergy be
differenced by their Habit from the Laics; For that Sacerdos Habitus
(according to the African Dialect of Tertullian, in his obscure Treatise De
Palli^) imports no less. And if they go abroad without that Discrimination,
they should not enjoy the Privileges which the Civil Law has granted in their
favors: (as was well discerned by that Learned, Devout, and Resolute Prelate,
Archbishop Lawd:) that he may verify of of his Function what Minutius Foelix
said of Christians in general; Non habitu Sapientiam praeserimus, sed mente;
Non magna eloquimur, sed vivimus: And may give no occasion to any to apply that
of St. Hilary to himself, Sanctiores sunt aures Plebis, quam corda Sacerdotum;
Not to mention that more Celebrated Sentence, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt
Coelum, etc. That which the Traveller Sands says of the Mufti at
Constantinople, ought to be the Commendation of all Churchmen, Grave were his
Looks, and grave was his Deportment.

I deny not but Urbanity (if seasonable) is tolerable in a Churchman; There is
a time to laugh, says Solomon; and they who have a solid Interest in Holy
Jesus, have the greatest reason in the world to be merry. The Morosity of an
Aristarchus, and Soureness of a Diogenes, are not only unpleasant to Company,
but also Scandalous to Religion; as if it behoved all real Christians to be
sick of Bellerophon's Disease, (which was A furious Sadness;) On which account,
some Brainsick Heretics in this Land have brought up a Reproach upon the most
Rational and Excellent Religion in the World. St. Cyprian had a most
complaisant Conversation with his Presbyters, (as is Recorded by Pontius
Diaconus in the History of his Life:) and Martin of Towrs had his own Jests, as
Sulpitius S^verus reports of him; and St. Ambrose had his witty Repartees, as
is testified by St. Augustine; yet they were accounted the gravest men of their
Time.

But as for Scurrility, and a trade of Buffoonery or Drollery, and the least
shadow of Obscenity, with all trifling Discourses, Churchmen should hate them
all Cane and Angue pejus; remembering that old Maxim, Nugae, nugae in quolibet
ore; At in ore Sacerdotis, Blasphemiae: It being Noted as a great Crime in Pope
Julius the third, (by that great Historian Thuanus) that he was, ad
Scurrilitatem usque festivus. And if before Plebeians they lose the least of
their Gravity, they may resolve upon it, to lose infallibly so much of the
intrinsic Authority of their Office.

Vid. Council. Carthaginens. 4. Can. 45. Council. Matisconens. 1. Can. 3. and 4.
Council. Bracarens. 1. Can. 30. Bracarens. 3. Can. 2, and 3. Synod. Quini-Sext.
Can. 27. (where we have these words) Clericus vestem sibi convenientem induat,
tam in urbe quam in via. Council. Agathens. Can. 28. Council. Carthaginens. 3.
Can. 3. Carthaginens. 4. Can. 60. (where we find these words) Clericum
scurrilem, and verbis turpibus joculatorem, ab Officio retrahendum. Vid. etiam
Can. 61, and 62. ejusdem Concilii.

Vid. Clement. Alex. Paedagog. circiter finem. Et Lib. 3. Strom. circa initium.
Tertull. Lib. de Pudicitia: Chrysostom. Lib. 3. De Sacerdotio: Prosp. de Vita
Contemplativa. Lib. 1. Greg. 1. Cura Past. part. I. Bernard. Lib. 1. De
Considerat.

Article VI.
Isa. 56. 10. Act. 6. 4. and 20. 20, 31. 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17. 2 Timothy 4. 3.

LET this Prelate be frequent in preaching the Blessed Gospel; not neglecting
that Duty every Lord's Day, whether at home or abroad, if he be in health.
(Which was expressly ordained by the 19. Canon Synod. Quini-sext. and 20 Can.
of the fourth Council of Carthage:) That he may not only avoid the Sarcasm of
that Buffoon, who said, He would hide himself in the Pulpit, where the lazy
Bishop would not find him for a Year and Day; But also by his Practice may
demonstrate to the World, that his Heart joins Issue with St. Augustin's Wish,
That when Christ comes again to Judge the World, he may find him either praying
or Preaching. Which last behoved to be the Practice of Bishops in some Parts of
the World; unless either they, or the People belonging to their Cathedral, were
deprived of Preaching on the Lords Day: For in the Churches of Africa no
Presbyter was permitted to preach in Presence of the Bishop, till the time of
Valerius, St. Augustine's immediate Predecessor in the Sea of Hippo: Who (as
Possidius in the Life of Augustine reports) being a Greek, and by reason of his
little Skill in the Latin Tongue, unable to Preach to the Edification of the
People, ( Hippo being a Roman Colonie) admitted S. Augustine (whom he had
lately ordained Presbyter) to preach before him: which was ill resented by some
Bishops, yet became a Precedent at last to other Churches.

But there is another Exception (besides that of bodily Infirmity) which may
sufficiently warrant the Conscience of a Bishop to forbear Preaching, pro hic
and nunc; and that is; a desire to experiment the Gift of another within his
Jurisdiction; (whether a Candidate, or one already in Orders) for seeing he is,
Virtute Ossi^ii, Pastor pastorum; that Inspection must needs be a special part
of the Episcopal Function.

Vid. Council. Aurelianens. 1. Can. 13. Cujus haec sunt formalia verba; Quod
Episcopus, si infirmitate non fuerit impeditus, Ecclesiae cui proximus fuerit,
Die Dominico deesse non debet. Et Can. 2. Council. Toletan. 11. Where an
unpreaching Bishop is fitly termed Praeco mutus. But because the Elegancy of
the Style and Matter, would invite any to read that Canon, I shall therefore
give the ingenuous Reader an account of it. Quantum quis praecelsi culminis
obtinet locum, tantum necesse est praecedat caeteros gratia meritorum, ut in eo
qui praesidet singulis, singulariter ornetur eminentia Sanctitatis; habens
semper and in ore gladium veritatis, and in opere efficaciam luminis: ut, juxta
Paulum, polens sit exhortari in doctrina sana, and contradicentes revincere.
Nos proinde nostri Ordinis gradum, vel suscepti Regiminis modum magnopere
cogitare debemus, ut qui officium Praedicationis suscepimus, nullis curis a
divina Lectione privemur; Nam quorundam mentes Pontificum ita corporis otio a
Lectionis gratia secluduntur, ut quid doctrinae gregibus subditis exhibeat, non
inveniat Praeco mutus. Insistendum ergo semper erit Majoribus, ut quos sub
Regiminis cura tuentur, fame Verbi Dei perire non sinant.

The Ninteenth Canon of the sixth General Council speaking almost to the same
Purpose; and adds something more; That in the Exposition of Scripture, they
ought to follow the Interpretation of the Primitive Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church; and not presume to deliver to their Auditors, Quicquid in buccam
venerit. And for that end, recommends unto them the accurate Study of these
Ancient Luminaries of the Church. Which useful Speculation is too much
neglected in this Age; To which, that of the Egyptian Priest to the Grecian
Philosopher, may be applied; Ye have neither knowledge of Antiquity, nor
Antiquity of Knowledge.

Vid. Augustine. contra Faustum Manish. Lib. 32. cap. 10. At vero qui Electus ab
Ecclesia ministerium Evangelizandi renuerit, ab Ecclesia ipsa merito
contemnitur: Qui enim and sibi prodest and Ecclesiae, been intelligitur utroque
pede calceatus. Vid. etiam Lib. 19. De Civit. Dei, cap. 19. Chrysostom. Lib. 2.
De Sacerdot. Hieronym. ad Nepotian. and Greg. 1. Part. 1. De Cura Pastor.

Article VII.
Prove. 27. 23. Act. 15. 36, 41. and 20. 28. Act. 8. 14, 15, 17. Heb. 6. 2.

NExt, Let this Shepherd of Pastors be careful to visit his Diocese once every
year, in Conformity to the Ancient Canons; unless it be of a very great
Dimension, and the Churches therein so numerous, that the Difficulty is
insuperable: But what is wanting the one year, should be supplied in the
beginning of the next; that by such accurate Visitations he may find
opportunity to Water what God has Planted, and to thrust those out of the
Vineyard, whom the Great Master never sent to work there: (they being hurried
thereinto by their own insufficient forwardness, Simoniacal Pactions, and other
unconscionable Principles; and whose after-Practices are found too suitable
thereunto.) And let him exactly take notice, when he comes upon the place, if
the Minister and People perform reciprocal Duties, and afford mutual
Encouragements one to another. But, seeing all these Particulars are fully
expressed in the Books for Visitations, I shall add no more but this General;
That he is bound to take inspection, If the Incumbent use a conscionable
Endeavor to perform all Personal, Relational, and Functional Duties; Which if
he be found to do, let him have his due Encouragement: For, Virtus laudata
crescit, etc. and laudando praecipimus. But if any be deprehended to be very
defective in their Intellectuals, or Morals, or in any of the elicit, or
imperat Acts of those Faculties, so that Charity it self cannot be so blind,
but may perceive, that they throw down more with the one hand, than they build
with the other; Let these be Censured according to their Demerits. For (as a
Skilful Physician) our Prelate is obliged to purge the Mystical Body, of its
most noxious Humors, by applying seasonable Catharticks, and a Dose too that
is proportionable to the Distemper; and (as a good Surgeon) speedily to cut off
these Organical Members, which are already sphacelated, lest that Gangrene
invade the whole Body.

Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur, (says the Poet.)

Which if he do not, he must resolve to be accountable to the most impartial
Tribunal imaginable, (which is infinitely above the pretended Justice of
Aeacus, Minos, and Radamanthus) for those destructive Neglects, which carry the
apparent Ruin of many Souls in the front of them.

Likewise, at these Visitations, they may find an excellent opportunity of
retriving (jure-postliminii) that Ancient Ceremony of Confirmation, excluding
(in the mean time) all Superstition therefrom; though some are apt to believe,
that it is not the fear of giving Offense, which is the Remora of this useful
Practice, but rather the Laziness of some Church Governors; that Ceremony
being one of the honorable Prerogatives of Episcopacy, and, (as some thought)
incommunicable to Presbyters; there being very few Instances of any of them,
who in the Primitive Church were delegated to perform the same. And sure, the
seasonable noticing, if Ministers and Parents have exercised their respective
Duties in order to the Education of Young Ones, is so far from giving just
matter of Offense to any, that (if rightly considered) it would be found in it
self a Work highly commendable, and very profitable for the Church, if
Conscionably practiced. For what harm can the Imposition of a Bishop's hands do
to any, unless they have the Polonian Plica, or a Fanatical Leprosy in their
heads? And sure I am, the fervent Prayer of an Holy Bishop, seconded with the
Devotion of that Church before which the Confirmed Person has Solemnly
Homologated his Baptismal Vows, may do much good, in order to the procuring of
their growth in Grace, and the Knowledge of Holy Jesus, and the enabling of
them to perform these vows and Purposes, and that Profession of Faith which
they had before embraced in Baptism. But we need not insist any more on this
particular; for the Usefulness thereof is so evidently, and fully holden forth,
by D. Hammond, Tailor, Dallee, Hanmer, and Baxter, that no rational man will
any more doubt thereof.

Vid. Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 35. Cujus haec sunt formalia verba; Episcopum
per cunctas Dioeceses, Parochiasque suas per singulos annos ire oportet; ut
exquira^ quo unaquaeque Basilica indigeal: quod si ipse, aut languore, aut
aliis Occupationibus implicatus, id explere nequiverit, Presbyteros probabiles,
aut Diaconos mittat, qui and Reditus Basilicarum, and Reparatio^es, and
Ministrantium vitam, inquirant. But the Form of these Visitations is holden
forth at greater length, Can. 1. Council. Bracarens. 2. Sic incipit. Placuit
omnibus Episcopis atque convenit, ut per singulas Ecclesias Episcopi, and per
Dioeceses ambulantes, primum discutiant Clericos, quomodo ordinem Baptismi
teneant vel Missarum ( whereby we are to understand the ordinary Liturgy of
the Church: for what the Greeks called (...), the Latins about that time
called M^ssa.) and qualiter quaecunque Officia in Ecclasia peragant. Et si
recte quidem invenerint, Deo gratias agant; sin autem minime, docere debent
ignaros, and modis omnibus praecipere; sicut Antiqui Canones jubent, etc. Et
sic postea, Episcopus de illa Ecclesia proficiscatur ad aliam.

As for those Canons which concern the Ceremony of Confirmation, and the
Privilege of Bishops therein, they are so Numerous, that it is in vain to
consume Paper about them.

Vid. Hieronym. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 5. Resecandae sunt putridae Carnes,
and scabiosa ovis a caulis repellenda, ne tota domus massa, corpus, and pecora
ardeant, corrumpantur, putrescant, interiant: Arrius in Alexandria una
scintilla fuit, sed quia non statim oppressa est, totum orbem ejus flamma
populata est. Vid. etiam Prosp. lib. 2. De vita Contemplat. cap. 7. and
Bernard. de Considerat Lib. 4.

Article VIII.
Isa. 42. 19, 20. Mat. 10. 16. and 23. 16, 24. Luke 6. 39. and 12. 42. 1 Timothy
4. 6, 13. and 5. 22. and 6. 3, 11, 12, 13, 14. Tit. 1. 8, 9. and 2. 7, 8. Mat.
26. 52. Act. 23. 5. Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.. John 2. 16. Act. 8. 20,
21. 1 Timothy 5. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 3.

SEEING the Candidates of the Sacred Function are no inconsiderable part of the
Episcopal Charge, Let those of that Eminent Order, exactly note the ensuing
Particulars, before they proceed to Ordination.

1. If they have a competent measure of Knowledge, whereby they are able to
oppose, and Convince Gainsayers. Vrim and Thummim, should be laid up in the
Pectoral of every Gospel-Priest; That is, The Light of Knowledge, and
Perfection of Manners: For, if they be sent of God, the Almighty will put his
Word into their mouths, before he set them over the Nations. And if any be
found to reject Knowledge, let them be rejected from being Priests unto the
Lord; Our Savior having told us, that if the blind lead the blind, both shall
fall into the ditch. But, alas! there be too many in this Age, to whom that old
Observation may be too justly applied, Multi fiunt indoctorum Magistri, etc.

2. Yet there be some who undergo the Fate of our first Parents; The Tree of
Knowledge bereaves them of the Tree of Life: For, as there be Comets which have
the Light and Elevation of Stars, so there are Vicious Persons that are endued
with excellent Parts, and though they have the Venom of Dragons in their
Hearts, yet they have precious Stones in their Heads. And there be too many who
resemble the Carpenters of Noah's Ark, they are Instrumental in saving others,
and, in the mean time, by acts of Immorality, ruin their own Souls; and though
their Heads be like the Winter-Sun, which is sometimes full of Light, yet their
Hearts resemble the Winters Earth, which is always cold and barren. Therefore
their present Conversation should be carefully examined: And let a Prelate of
the Church choose rather to lay his Hands upon Thorns, than on the Heads of
those, whose Hearts are polluted, and their Deportment is scandalous to the
World; which cannot but prove a Stumbling Block to many, and paves the way to
Speculative Atheism in their Hearers.

3. But as a Compound of Intellectuals and Morals, let the next Inquisition be
after his Prudentials. (Which Inquest is too much neglected in this Age.) S.
Gregory of Rome has told us, that, Ars Artium est, Cura Animarum: And sure,
he needs no small Measure of Christian Prudence, who has not only his own Soul
to govern, but is also appointed to be the guide of others. Our Savior has
Commanded all his Disciples, to join the Wisdom of the Serpent, with the
Innocence of the Dove: Which holy Sagacity is indispensably necessary in all
Ministers of the Gospel; in Destitution whereof, he that is Iuvenis moribus, if
admitted to Sacred Orders, will bring that Curse upon the Church, Children
shall rule over them.

4. Neither ought he to be Iuvenis aetate: For; The word of the Lord was
precious in those days, when the Child Samuel ministered before him in a linen
Ephod. I wish, the Canonical Year appointed by the Ancient Church, were well
observed in this: Then no Minor should be found to intrude himself into the
Administration of Spiritual Matters, to whom the Civil Law permits not an
irrevocable Management of his own Temporal Affairs. And let not a Dispensation
be given to any, upon the pretext of the more early Blossoms of his Youth; For
that will open too wide a door to many others, to claim the same Privilege,
though no praecox fructus is visible in them, or scarce any appearance of
Winter-fruit: For, unto all such, that Dicterium may be fitly applied, Malitia
supplet aetatem. Therefore let all the Governors of the Church be careful to
stop the Career of those hasty Births, who run abroad with the Shell on their
Heads.

5. And let them not fail to search diligently into the Principles of the
Candidates, before they give them Imposition of hands. And if they be found to
be, either Schismatical, (as that they are apt to Controvert the Lawfulness of
the present Government of the Church, by Archbishops, and Bishops, or to
question any innocent Ceremony which may be imposed by Authority.) or Disloyal;
by justifying the late damnable Rebellion, at least as to the two great Wheels
of that hellish Combination: viz. By maintaining the Lawfulness of Defensive
Arms in Subjects against their Prince; which (if once taken up) do seldom fail
to become offensive, e're they be laid down. I shall say no more against this
Infernal Spring, but that the Primitive Church knew no such Doctrine, nor
Practice: and they must be grossly ignorant of their Tenants who imagine the
Contrary; it being Lippis and Tonsoribus notum, That Preces and Lachrymae, were
the only Offensive and Defensive Arms of that Church, against her most violent
Persecutors, under the Notion of Authority: So that we need not Instance S.
Mauricius, with his famous Thebaean Legion; Nor the Army of Julian the
Apostate; Nor make a Retrogradation unto the Apologetick of Tertullian, who
tells the Roman Emperor, That the Christians in his time were so numerous,
that they had so filled the Court, and Places of Judicature, yea and the
Imperial Army it self, that they wanted not sufficient Physical Power to defend
themselves against all their Adversaries; If their excellent Religion had not
taught them, rather to suffer patiently for God, than to resist the Authority
then in Being; which (though wickedly exercised) they acknowledged to be
derived from God. Or if they have the Confidence to say, That there is an
Obligation lying upon People, (when they dream of a Necessity) to Reform the
Church, if they suppose the Prince to be negligent; and that, not only without,
but also against the Authority of their Sovereign: Such Bigots, though dying in
the Attempt, were never reputed Martyrs by the Primitive Church, but rather
judgjudged Seditious; as is evident from Can. 60. Council. Elib. Which
insinuates this Reason; That Paul made not Use of his Hands, but only of his
eloquent Tongue against the Idols of Athens. If such Phanatical Principles be
found in them, let them be rejected, as the dangerous Spawn of Presbyterian,
Independent, and Anabaptistical Brood, which is still endeavoring to hatch a
Cockatrice Egg, that may prove a Basilisk to this Church. And I fear there be
too many such young Snakes already taken in her Bosom, which, being once
warmed with the heat of Sedition, will do their endeavor to sting unto death
the Mother that fosters them.

Yet, I should wish, that if any of these Youths be found towardly (though
pitifully marred in their Education) the Bishop who is most concerned in them,
would take them home to his own Family, and (by piecemeal) instill better
Principles into them; It being found by Experience, that they who are sincere
Converts, become most zealous for the Interest of the Church.

6. The next Particular I would have noticed, is that of Simony: Therefore let
all those who desire to enter into Holy Orders, or who are to be transplanted
from one Church to another, purge themselves by Oath of that Crime. It cannot
be denied, but that the usual Oath tendered in this Church, is indifferent
strict, though some (in this subtle Age) have invented modes of evading it; But
whatsoever Paction Parents make privily with the Patron, let not the Sons be
balked from vindicating themselves of being Art or Part of those hellish
Transactions; it being more consonant to Reason, that they who are of approved
Integrity should be waved, than those who are under Suspicion: For, as Julius
Caesar said of his Wife, so it should be with all Ministers of the Gospel, even
not only void of a Crime, but also of Suspicion. But I fear the contrary is too
frequently done; That Oath being tendered in Course to those who are under no
Suspicion but these sometimes pretermitted who are under a flagrant Scandal of
Simony. Which Omission not only verifies that of the Poet, Dat veniam corvis.
etc. but also brings an indelible Reproach on the Church, and Governors
thereof. And if any Churchman, having come by a blank Presentation, should be
so graceless, as to fill up the Name of his reciprocal Beneficiary, because he
has replenished the Pockets of his Patron with some money; though a jeering
Laick would happly say, Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest: Yet there is
not modest Ecclesiastic, but would be so far out of Countenance with that
Reproach upon the Church, as to return nothing else, save that Lamentation of
the Poet, -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
And if any refuse to take the Oath when it is tendered to them, let them be
declared Inhabiles, according to the ancient Canons. And if they be found
afterward guilty, notwithstanding they have taken the Oath; let them be
degraded and excommunicated, for adding Perjury to that Crime which needed no
Complication to make it great; for they who, living in the Gall of Bitterness,
and Bond of Iniquity, have owned Simon Magus for their Father, ought not to be
reputed Sons of the Church. And let all those Gehazites, who have the Impudence
to sell such Matters (that kind of Merchandise having become too much in
fashion in this Age) be Censured according to the Canons of the Church: For to
their Souls, (as an old Father has said, St. Ambrose by name) in lieu of the
Grace of God, a Leprosy does cleave, much worse than that which did adhere
unto the Covetous Servant of Elisha, and his Seed for ever.

Their common Apology may be easily answered. For, though it is no Spiritual
Gift which they sell, and consequently not properly Simony; yet it is
Spirituali annexum, and therefore declared by the Canons of the Church, to fall
under the Censure of that Crime, and its Denomination. And seeing, by all the
Laws whereby our Church is Governed, the Officium is declared inseparable a
Beneficio, (there being no Ministeria vaga amongst us) and by the Canon Law,
when a Presbyter was Ordained sine Titulo, the Bishop who did so, was bound to
maintain him, till he were otherwise provided; Therefore our Church has good
reason to censure the Buyers and Sellers of Benefices, as Simoniacal Persons.
Now over and above that Pathetical Declamation of St. Ambrose, I could amass
many other sharp Invectives of the Fathers against this Crime; but I forbear,
lest this Article swell to too great a Bulk: and shall only add this Wish;
That, seeing there be too many Laick Patrons who have a liquorish Appetite
after the sweetness of God's Bread, (as one phraseth it to a very bad Sense,) I
say, I wish that they were authorized by a Municipal Law, to gather up the
Fruits of the first Year's Vacancy, or of the half thereof, where there is an
Annat; provided, that the Bishop of the Diocese, with the Advice of the
respective Presbytery, (who may be presumed to know better than any, the State
of a vacant Church within their own Bounds) have the Nomination of the
Incumbent. Which expedient, would not only obviate that detestable Crime, but
should also prevent many other Inconveniences, not fit to be here expressed. As
for the pretense of a Law, wherewith some in this Land are apt to ^alliate
their Simony; I shall remit them to the Epistle Dedicatory of D. I. Forbes of
Corse, before his Tractate upon Simony, Where our learned Compatriot, with an
Holy (...), declames most rationally against that Surreptitious Edict, which he
fitly terms, Non Lex, sed Labes: and though some account it Lex soli, yet, that
it should never be reputed by any Christian to be Lex Poli.

If we should amass all the Canons of the Councels, and Invectives of the
Fathers, these alone would amount to no small Volume; but lest this Enchiridium
swell too much, I shall supersede many of them: yet the ingenious Reader may
find diverse of them subjoyned, by way of Confirmation, to this Article. But to
show how detestable that Crime of Simony was in the eyes of the ancient Church,
and how cautious these Primitive Lights were in that Affair, I cannot forbear,
just now, to notice that Canon of the Council of Ancyra, which determined, That
nothing should be given at the time of Receipt of the Eucharist, though under
the notion of Charity to the Poor; lest any should suspect that Donation to be
made for the holy Communion, But, alack! we have reason to fear in this Age,
that the time is come of the fulfilling of the Prophecy of S. Bernard, That
Christ will again descend from Heaven, and take the whip in his hand, and
scourge mercenary Priests out of his Temple, as formerly he did other kinds of
Merchants.

Which Flagellation too many avaricious Prelates of Rome have good reason to
fear, for presuming to dispense in this Matter; not only with all the ancient
Canons, but also with the inviolable Law of God; by practicing various kinds of
Simony, not fit here to be expressed. I am not ignorant of that base Flattery
of some Roman Parasites, (I mean the Sycophantine Canonists:) who look upon the
Pope of Rome as the Lord Paramount on Earth of all the Degrees of Priesthood;
whence they infer^, that he cannot commit Simony, though he should make Sale of
them all; because a Lord may lawfully sell his own. Which perverse Doctrine (as
it was well observed, so it) is most rationally confuted by that moderate and
learned Roman Doctor Cl. Espencaeus in his excellent Comment. on the Epist. to
Tit. to which I remit those base Flatterers for their Castigation. And I wish
from my heart, that some leading men in this Church, did not transcribe that
Copy of pretended Dispensations: If it were so, we should not find any of them
so impudent as to give it under his Hand, that a simple Rebuke is an adequate
Punishment unto a Presbyter who is convict of notorious Simony; and that this
least of Censures is an Expedient fit enough to unload the Church of that great
Burden of Reproach, which such a flagrant Scandal had laid upon it. But seeing
this Oracular Response of Delphi is so diametrically opposite to all the
ancient Canons, we hence perceive Fortuna quem nimium favet, stultum facit.

7. In the last place, I would tender this humble advice to all the Governors
of this Church. Seeing they enjoy the Privilege of the Advocation of some
Churches, that they be exceedingly solicitous, to provide Persons for those
Vacances, that are Pares Negotio: and let them be of Alexander the Great his
Mind, about the Succession, whose last words were, Detur digniori; rather than
the more uncertain Testament of Pyrrhus the Epirote, who bequeathed all at
Random, unto him who had the sharpest Sword. For if it be otherwise,
indifferent Spectators will be apt to pass this Verdict upon it, That Bishops
are no more concerned with the Interest of the Church than Laics, and that
they have drawn them a Copy, to present insufficient men. But, as I hope, none
of the sacred Order shall in that Race which God has set before them, be found
to resemble Atalanta, who was diverted from her Course by the three golden
Apples of Hippomanes, (a fit Emblem of the Profits, Pleasures and Glory of the
World, which are a Snare to all, and ruin the greatest part of the Sons of
men.) So I should wish, that none of them be so blind with natural Affection,
as to bring a Reproach upon themselves, and give Scandal to the Gospel, by
preferring unworthy Relatives in the Church. Perit enim omne judicium (says
Seneca) cum res transierit in affectum. I cannot deny, but if indifferent
Persons (who have a Faculty of judging such Matters,) do observe in those, a
competency of means adapted to the end of their Employment, so much Respect may
be deferred to a natural Obligation, that caeteris paribus, they may be
preferred: for there is a Possibility of erring when they consult not with
Flesh and Blood; as is evident, in civil Matters, from Antipater's Mistake, in
preferring Polyspercon to the Protectorship of Aridaeus, though his Son
Cassander was found by experience to be the fitter man: and that Greek Emperor
who mixed the Meal of the Western Christians with Lime, when they went to
recover the Holy Land from Infidels, was recommended to the Imperial Dignity,
by his dying Father, before his elder Brother, merely upon the account of that
public Spirit, and Sentiments of Justice, which the misjudging Father
apprehended to be in him. But if the Tie of Nature be the A and (...) of his
Recommendation, there being scarce any thing else to make the aequilibrium,
(far less to preponderate the Scale;) but only some grains of homogeneal Blood;
then let a Churchman remember, that in the Cause of God, a good Levite regards
not his nearest Relations, nor does acknowledge his Brethren. And let them
trace the Footsteps of that Holy Groslhead, Bishop of Lincoln, when one of his
Relatives (who was but a ground-Labourer,) heard of Grosthead's Preferment, his
gross Ignorance and meanness of his former Employment, were no Remora to his
vain Ambition, in desiring to be a Labourer in God's Vineyard; But that famous
Prelate repelled him with this deserved Sarcasm, Cousin (said he) If you want a
Yoke of Oxen, I will cause buy them to you; if ye are destitute of Seed to sow
your Ground, I will supply that also; or if your Plough be broken, I will give
you a new one; But an Husbandman I found you, and an Husband man I leave you.

Vid. Can. Apost. 30.
Item Synod. Neo-Caesariens. Can. 2. Council. Arelatens. 3. Can 1. Council.
Toletan. 4. Can. 19. Council. General. 6. Can. 14, 15. Council. General. 4. Can.
2. Where the Giver, the Receiver, the Mediator (even all that are found to have
trucked in that sinful Affair of Simony) are condemned to great Censures. Yea
Can. 3. Council. Bracarens. 2. there is an Anathema danti, and Anathema
accipienti. Council. Aurelianens. 2. Can. 3, 4. Council. Avernens. Can. 2.
Council. Aurelianens. 5. Can. 3. Council. Toletan. 8. Can. 3. Council. Toletan. 2.
Can. 8, 9. Council. Bracarens. 3. Can. 7. Council. Cabilonens. Can. 16. sic se
habet Nullus Episcopus, nec Presbyter, vel Abbas, seu Diaconus, per proemium ad
sacrum Ordinem accedat; si accesserit ipso honor privetur. Council. Toletan. 6.
Can. 4. the express words thereof, being adopted by Council. General. 6. Can.
22. are these; Ob pecuniam promotos, sive Episcopos, sive Clericos, deponi
jubemus. and Council. Toletan. 10. Can. 3. Where at great Length, Bishops are
prohibited to prefer unworthy Relations to Churches.

Vid. Hieronym. in Malach. ad cap. 1. Coecum animal offert qui ordinat indoctum
loco docti, Magistrumque facit qui vix Discipulus esse poterat. Origin. Hom. 6.
in Levitic. and 22. in l. Number. August. lib. De Catechizandis rudibus cap. 9.
Ambros. de Dignita^e Sacerdot. Cap. 5. Cum Ordinaretur Episcopus, quod dedit,
aurum fuit; quod perdidit, Anima fuit: Cum alium ordinaret, quod accepit,
pecunia fuit, quod dedit, Lepra fuit? gratiam cum Ordinareris non suscepisti,
quia gratuito (...) non meruisti. Idem, Lib 4. ad Cap. 4. Luc. Leon. 1. Epist.
84. and 85. ad Episcop. Afric. ubi invehitur adversus Candidatos nimium
juvenes. Greg. 1. in Evang. Tract. Hom. 4. and Lib. 4. Epist. 55. Vid. etiam
Lib. 5. Epist. Ambros. in Oratione contra Auxentium. Non pila quaerunt ferrea,
Non arma, Christi milites.
Coactus, repugnare non novi: Sed Dolor, Fletus, Orationes, Lachrymae, fuerunt
mihi arma adversus milites; talia enim sunt mumimenta Sacerdotis, aliter nec
debeo, nec possum resistere: fugere autem, and relinquere Ecclesiam, non soleo:
servum Christi, non Custodia corporalis, sed Domini providentia, sepire
consuevit. Here we have a clear Authority of a great and good man, condemning
Defensive Arms in Subjects, against their Prince, in any Case whatsoever. But
the Iambicks which usher in this Testimony, have been prefixed thereunto by
another hand.

Article IX.
Isa. 30. 20. Zech. 11. 17. Act. 6. 2, 3 4. Romans 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8.

THIS Article may be termed the Corolary of the two former: as diverse ensuing
fall under that Denomination: For if the Superintendency of the Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship and Government of the Church, (especially of his own
Diocese) should be the (...) of this Office, yea the Center and Circumference
of the Episcopal Vocation, as may appear from the preceding Proposals:) then we
may pertinently infer, That the Crime of Non-Residency, must be very odious in
the Sight of God, and scandalous to the Church; unless very urgent Reasons
plead for a Dispensation for a short time. What was said of some Monks, by
Anthony the Father of them, Monachus in oppido, ut piscis in arido, may be
applied to all wandering Levites, who are found straying in Cities where there
is no Cathedral. The Spanish Bishops in the Council of Trent, argued well
against Non-Residency; That it was contrary to the ancient Canons, and
repugnant to that which was established jure Divine: yet they needed not have
gone further for a Topic to prove the Point, than their own Natural Reason; It
being a self-evident Principle, That when the End is commanded, all the Means
are supposed to be enjoined, without which it cannot possibly be obtained: Now
this Spiritual Employment alone, being a burden too weighty for Atlas his
Shoulders, (it being S. Chrysostom's Judgment, that the Burden of a Bishop was
formidable, even to an Angel, to undergo,) unless sufflaminated with the Divine
aid* so that a Church-Governour would need Argus's Eyes, and Briareus's Hands,
to buoy up the Church from sinking; Therefore there can be no place left for
the (...) of Non-Residency.

And if any have the Forehead to say, that the most part of these Duties
incumbent on a Bishop, may be performed per Vicarium; he must give me leave to
apply the other part of that Maxim, per Vicarium intrabit Regnum Coelorum. Sure
the ancient Church had no such Sentiments; For, when the Fathers of the Council
of Sardica took notice, that some Bishops used to go to Court upon By-errands,
and private Designs of their own, they ordained; That no Bishop should go to
Court, unless either immediately Summoned by the Emperor's Letters; or that
their Assistance were required, to help the oppressed, to right Widows and
Orphans, and to rescue them from the unjust Grasps of Potent and Merciless
Oppressors; or to seek Occasion to represent unto the Supreme Magistrate the
most pressing Grievances of Church and State, not suppressing the Oppressions
of great Ones, whether without any Shadow of Law, or under some Pretext
thereof; ( Summum jus proving too often Summa Injuria;) and finally, to
preserve their Respective Cities from imminent Ruin; thus Flavianus the
Patriarch resorted to Constantinople, to intercede with Theadosius the Great,
in Behalf of his Antiochians, whose Extermination that exasperated Prince had
designed; and who can blame S. Leo of Rome, for traveling many Miles, to
divert that Flagellum Dei, from being a Scourge to his City; who at last, (like
to the high Priest Iaddus*) prevailed in his Suit?

Neither can we omit the usual Temptation to Non-Residency; which is; Plurality
of Benefices* a Scandal condemned even by the Council of Trent, for a Crime.
Such Ingrossers would never have troubled Rome, as ^nce a Scottish Bishop did,
prompted by his Conscience, to be rid of a considerable part of his Charge and
Revenues. But, as the Peace of Conscience, so this Heterogenial Conjunction,
passes my Natural Understanding: and I think, my shallow Capacity shall never
reach it, How one man can be Parson in one Diocese, and Bishop in another, and
yet have a simultaneous Sufficiency for both: For who is sufficient for one of
these Things?

And if it be said, that they are not without a Precedent, being nothing else
but Emulators of that infamous Bishop of Lincoln, of whom it is written, That
he had an Organical Church within himself, as having monopolized all the
Species of Ecclesiastical Offices in his own Person, at one time; yet I would
demand of these Monopolists, (for I ingenuously confess, that such a Davus as
I, would need an Oedipus to unriddle this Mystery.) If they can determine the
proper Boundaries and Measures of the Subordination of that Excentrick Rectory
to the Bishop thereof; and whosoever does it intelligibly, erit mihi magnus
Apollo, and much wiser than that Monster Sphinx, in my Esteem. For under the
Notion of a Presbyter, he ought to be subordinate to his Ordinary, and should
reverence him as a Father; and yet (in the mean time) he may possibly claim
(jure Stationis) the Place and Privilege of an elder Brother. But, seeing I
have not so much Geometry as to determine these Marches, I shall only subjoyn
this Sentiment of mine; That though many have good Reason to doubt how these
scattered Flocks shall be competently fed by one who does not pretend to
Bilocation, yet I have not the least Scruple imaginable to believe, that they
have a Cordial Design to feed their own Families to the full, and not to live
precariously. But I fear, that this Tympany in their Splenes, shall at last
produce an Atrophia in the Mystical Body; unless a more skillful hand than that
of an Empyrick, do speedily apply Chalybeat Potions to their Hypochondria.

Vid. Can. Apost. 14. and 37.
Item, Council. General. 1. Can. 15, 16. Council. Sardicens. Can. 8, 9, 10, 11,
14, 15, and 20. Council. General. 2. Can. 2, 3. Council. General. 4. Can. 5. (
the Canon Law having adopted that; and the 10 Canon of that Council, against
Plurality of Benefices.) Council. Antioch. Can. 3. and 11. Council Carthaginens.
3. Can. 37. Council. Aurelianens. 2. Can. 13. Council. Carthaginens. 5. Can. 5.
Cujus haec sunt formalia verba; Placuit, ut nemini sit facultas, relicta
principali Cathedra, ad aliquam Ecclesiam in Di^eces^ constitutam se confer;
vel in repropria, diutius quam oportet, Constitutum, curam vel frequentationem
propriae Cathedrae negligere. But what would these Fathers have thought of
those Bishops who reside not at all within their own Diocesses, and see their
Cathedral but once or twice a year at most? Their Punishment we find in the 80
Canon of the sixth General Council; Si quis Episcopus, vel eorum qui in Clero
censentur, vel Laicus, nullam graviorem habeat necessitatem, vel negotium
difficile, ut a sua Ecclesia absit frequentius, sed in Civitate agens, tribus
diebus Dominicis una non conveniat: si Clericus est, Deponatur; si Laicus, a
Communione separetur.

Vid. Athanas. Apolog. ad Constantium Imp.
Vid. Chrysostom. lib. 2. de Sacerdot. Prosp. Lib. 2. de Vita Contemplativa:
Greg. 1. lib. 8. Epist. 11. Et Secund. Part. Cura Pastor. Bernard. lib. 3. de
Consideratione, ad Eugenium.

Article X.
Luke 12. 14. Ioh. 18* 36. 2 Timothy 2. 4. and 4. 10.

IF Non-Residency be a Crime in Ecclesiastics; their immersing themselves in
Secular Affairs, must needs be a piacular Transgression, and Scandal of the
first Magnitude: For such demonstrate themselves to be the genuine Issue of
Demas, who first harkened to the Gospel, and afterward embraced this present
World; but with this Difference, that Demas again devoted himself entirely to
the Ministerial Function; but these who leap out of their own Element, (as if
they were Animalia Amphibia) declare by their Polypragmatick^, that they have a
Complacency to live and die divided betwixt God and the World: and, for all the
World, resemble that infamous Pope Boniface the eighth, who the one day
appeared in the Habit of a Priest, and the next, in that of a Secular Person:
Yet with this Discrimination, that some have adventured to do so, when it was
no year of Iubilee to the Church.

It cannot be denied, but that it has been always reputed (even in Pagan
times too) one of the Honorable Flogiums of an absolute S^cular Prince, to be
Mixta persona cum Sacerdote; He being Cus^os utri^sque Tabulae; and (as
Constantine the Great said of himself) Episcopus extra Ecclesiam: But I did
never read that it was accounted an Encomium of a Churchman, to be Mixta
persona cum Saecularibus: Sure, the Primitive Church judged not so, it being
the great Care of these Times, to free Ecclesiastics from what might be either
Scandalous, or Burdensome to the^ Calling: Therefore, by their Address to the
Great Constantine, they p^^rchased that Decree in their favors; That the
Orthodox Clergy should (...) exempted from all Civil Offices, or whats^^ver
might hinder their attendance upon the Services of the Church. His Son
Constantius decreed; That Bishops in many Cases should not be chargeable in the
Se^ular Courts, but be tried in an Assembly of Bishops: Which Privilege was
extended by Honorius to all the Clergy, That they should be tried before their
own Bishops: and by another Constitution, That, for the Veneration which is due
to the Church, All Ecclesiastical Causes should be decided with all possible
speed. The Scope of all which laudable Constitutions was, to obviate the
unnecessary avocation of Churchmen from their own peculiar Employment. But let
those ^insey-woolsey M^dlers take example (before they be made such Examples)
from the Tragical end of that famous Chronologue, Funcius, who commanded this
instructive Epilaph (composed by himself) to be engraven upon his Tomb;

Disce, m^o exemplo, mandato munere sungi:
Et fuge, ce^ Pestem, (...).
Vid. Can. Apost. 7. and 80.
Item Council. Chalcedonens. Can. 3. Council. Carthaginens. 1. Can. 6, 8, 9.
Council. Carthaginens. 3. Can. 15. Con^il. Mil^vitan. Can. 19. Council. Agathens.
Can. 7. The Reason which is generally given by these Canons, why Ecclesiastics
ought not to immerse themselves in S^cular Affairs, is that of the Apostle,
Nemo militans Deo, implicat se negotiis Saecularibus.

Vid. H^eronym. ad Nepotian. De vita Cler. Neg^tiatorem Clericum, quasi quandam
pestem, suge, etc. Cypr lib. 1. Epist. 9. Augustine. (...) Quaest. Vet. and Nov.
Test. cap. (...) ^mperf. in Matthew. ( quod (...) tribuunt Chrysostomo) Hom. 38.
ad cap. 21. Matthew. All which Homily speaks very pertinently to this purpose.
Cassiod. in Ps. 70.

Article XI.
WE have not yet done with the excentrick Orbs and Epicycles of the Episcopal
Function, which should be carefully evited, as Distractions from their proper
Employment, and no less dangerous than the Syrenian Rock. Therefore let me
persuade all Office-bearers in the Church, to be very shie in meddling with
State-matter, and to hate (cane and angue pejus) the abbetting of
State-Factions; and let them be ashamed to be found Parasites to any: For all
these Irregularities are abominable Stains in a Mitre; It being an Observation
of a very ancient Date, that Churchmen never made good Politicians; (the fatal
ends of many of them in Britain, being a sufficient Evidence thereof.) For,
when Ecclesiastics abandon Christian Simplicity, (which is the great Ornament
of all the Disciples of Holy Jesus, but especially of Churchmen:) and betake
themselves to the infamous disingenuity of Pope Alexander the 6th, and that
Mali corvi malum ovum, Caesar Borgia; (For, as Guicciardin reports, the Father
never spoke as he thought, and the Son never thought as he spoke;) it is but
just with God, (who is Truth it self, and abhors all deceitful men:) to cast
them out of his Protection; and not only to cause them taste (even in this
Life;) the bitter Fates of Tantalus, Sisyphus, Tityus, Prometheus, and the
Belides; but also to permit them to dye the Death of Slaves, rather than of
ingenuous Persons: because they have divested themselves of the proper Ga^b of
the Sons of the Church, as a Pope said of a French Bishop, taken armed with a
Cask and Corslet.

Yet this Dehortation is not so to be understood, as if it were absolutely
unlawful for the Governors of the Church to be Assessors in any Secular Court:
For, if a grand Case of Conscience be under debate there, or if the Interest of
the Church be highly concerned, they may be lawfully present, if called
thereunto; not only as the fittest Persons to resolve those Doubts (which must
needs be granted by all, if it be supposed they have the due Qualifications of
their Office; For, Artifici in sua Art ^redendum est;) but also, in regard
they are the Representatives of a considerable Body in the Nation. Yet (in the
mean time) let them with all Modesty and Humility decline to intermeddle with
Affairs that are purely Secular; in imitation of the Arcients their Abstention,
and of that most Reverend Modern Prelate L. Andrews, the Pious and Learned
Bishop of Winchester.

And when they are called by their Prince, to give their Advice in the Supreme
Council of the Nation; let them not be m^er Pedarii Senatores, or the
insignificant E^^oes of some leading Secular Subject; but, with a Christian
Freedom of Spirit, (as having Dependence upon none, save God, and his
Vicegerent upon Earth:) let them give their Judgments impartially, according
to their Consciences; eying singly in all their Consultations and Suffrages,
the Glory of God, and the Good both of Church and State.

But if it happen, (because of the Sins of the Land, that the Prerogative and
Privilege seem to interfere; let them use their utmost Endeavors to find a
Temper, that they may be always found to be Nuncii Pacis, and not Bellows of
Sedition, and Whirlwinds, agitating the contrary ^ides of Faction, and
sometimes tossed upon a S^ylla or Charybdis by them: To which unstable Elements
the Graecians resembled the Orators and People of Athens.

But if any of them desire to ride safe at Anchor, nigh to a calmer Shore; let
them make it their chiefest Study, to become Favorites of the Court of Heaven,
without any Affectation of being Darlings of the World, or special Favorites
of any Court-Minion upon Earth: For if they be found to entertain no sublimer
Studies than these little Arts of Policy, they need not expect an Euge bone
serve, from the Lord Paramount of the World, and but little Trust, in the end,
from those Terrestrial Grandees whom now they pretend to adore. For, though the
great Minister at the time, has, by his admirable Abilities, served the
Interests of Church and State, much better than all of them have done; yet he
may be afraid of as ungrateful a Requital from some of them, as a very generous
Person, in the like Circumstances, did meet with not long ago; though he had
done very good Offices to this Church. For, alas! these old Aphorisms, Semel
malus, semper malus; and qui sallit in minimis, etiam in maximis, are too
frequently verified in this Age. And that prodigious Wit who now sits at the
Helm, has the more reason to apprehend that distastful Event, it having been
his Fate heretofore, to find such unsuitable Returns from many who had
experienced his real and great Favors in Abundance. The best Antidote against
this unthankful Venom of these Vertiginous Creatures, is, the unparalled
Constancy of his Prince's Favor, which (I hope) will not fail to buoy him up
(in the midst of all these fluctuating Euripi, and most violent Hurricanes,
which have threatened, more than once, to tear all his Sails in pieces:) as
long as the sinking Example of the great Deputy of Ireland is recent in Memory.

And in fine, Let them all study such an abstractedness from the World, and an
entire precision from Secular Affairs, that all may find reason to judge, that
they are the Persons who use the World (as the Apostle phraseth it) as if they
used it not; because the fashion thereof passes away. Yet though any of them
were at much Pains, to promove the Mystical Espousals of any Heretrix in this
Land, with that Lion of the Tribe of Judah, it were a very commendable
Procuration, as being a part of their Charge; But to go about with vehement
clandestine Solicitations, to make up a Match betwixt Secular Persons, as if
they had been employed Ambassadors to conclude the Treaty, and Marry them by
Proxy, is so far from an Ecclesiastick's due Recollection, that it argues an
intolerable Distraction; yea, so invidious and disobliging, that it has proved
no small Temptation to many Persons of Quality, (known to be Lovers and
Supporters of the Order:) to have fallen, by that excentrick Motion, into no
small disgust therewith.

Vid. Council. Toletan. 10. Can. 2. Which Ordains those of the Clergy, who are
Seditious or Factious against Authority, to be immediately (...) all Dignity
and Honor. Council* Carthaginens. 4. Can. 56. Gujus ha^c sunt formalia Verba;
Cleri^us qui Adulation^. and Pr^ditio^ibus, vacare deprehenditur. ab (...)
degradatur. Vid etiam Can. 5^, 58, 5^, and 61. ejusdem Concilii.

As for the Testimonies of the Scriptures, and of the (...); Seeing these which
are adduced to Homologate the Article immediately preceding this in hand, do
(...) very ^itly for Confirmation of the sam^, I shall therefore, (for brevi^y
sake) (...) the Reader unto the perusal of them. But if any grudge for want of
these, let them read Epist. Clem. Romans ad Corinth. Cypr. De Simplicitate
Pra^lat. vel de Unit. Eccles. and Ambros. De Dignitate Sacerdot. In which
Excellent Treatises, they will find abundant Testimonies to this purpose.

Article XII.
Act. 1. 15, 16, 23, and 15. 6, 22, 23. and 22. 18, 20, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 3. 3
Ioh. 9, 10.

HAving mentioned in the foregoing Article, That Bishops are the
Representatives of the Organical Church, it is a most Rational Consequence,
That in all the great Concerns thereof, they ought to consult the Represented;
otherwise let them not any more usurp that Title: it being an approved Maxim of
Law, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet; and there is another, (whose
Application I wish they deserve not;) Nem^ fiat deterior, per quem melior
factus non est. This was asserted long ago by a most Ancient and Honorable
Bishop, St. Ignatius, in Epist. ad Trall. where he calls Presbyters (...),
Councillors and Assistants of the Bishop, and his Synedrion; making them
parallel to the Sanhedrim, or Council of Elders, that were joined to Moses in
his Government, to facilitate the Burden to him. But within the Sphere of their
own Dioceses, I hope none of them will act any matter of Importance, without
the Advice of the most Judicious and Conscientious of their Clergy.

I shall not take upon me to determine, Whether Episcopatus be Ordo, or Gradus
tantum; or if Presbyters in the ancient Occumenical Councels, had a Decisive
Suffrage; sure I am, in some later ones they had: And in the most Ancient, we
find Presbyters Subscribents to the Canons. And if it be alleged, that they
were but Delegates of some absent Bishops; (for the Chor-Episcopi did
unquestionably Subscribe for themselves:) yet it is as certain, that their
Delegation could not make them Bishops. Nam quod alicui suo nomine non licet,
nec alieno licebit. But they must needs be Hospites to all Antiquity who deny
them, even in General Councels, to have had a Consultive Voice; seeing some
Deacons (who could speak good sense, and understood the matter in Controversy,
intus and in cute:) were admitted to all their Deliberations. This is evident
from the Instance of the Great Athanasius, at the First Council of Nice; who
(as he testifies of himself) was then but a Deacon of the Church of Alexandria,
and not the President of the Council; (the As^ertion whereof, was a great (...)
in I. Calvin) yet permitted, not only to Debate, but also to Consult; because
he understood the Arrian Heresy as well as any of them all. And that they had
a Decisive Voice, (I mean Presbyters, and many times Deacons also) in the
Provincial Councels; we need no other Evidence, than the Inspection of the
Inscriptions and Subscriptions of these Synodical Acts and Canons.

Neither did any approved Bishop of the Primitive Church erect a Tribunal
within his own Precinct, from which, velut a Tripode) he alone, inconsulto,
Clero, pronounced Oracular Responses, and Fulminating Sentences, against any of
the culpable Clergy, whose gross Midemeanours deserved the highest Censures of
the Church: But this was done by a Judicial Concurrence of the Synodical
Meeting, at least of some select Brethren delegated thereby to be the Bishop's
Assessors in that Act of Judicature. This is most evident, from the Resolution
of S. Cyprian; (and in so clear a matter we need not amass any more Instances.)
who, being consulted by some of his Clergy, what they should do in the Case of
the Lapsed; he answered; That being now alone, he could say nothing to it; for
that he had determined from his first Entry upon his Bishopric, not to adjudge
any thing by his own private Order, without the Council, and Consent of the
Clergy: which in the present Case holds very well a minori ad majus. Yea it is
one of the most trite Axioms of the Canon Law; Episcopus solus honorem potest
defer, sed solus auferre non potest.

Vid. Can. Apost. 38.
Item Council. Carthaginens. 1. Can. 11. Carthaginens. 2. Can. 10.
Cartharginens. 4. Can. 22, and 23. The express Words of the last Canon, are
these: Vt Episcopus Nullius causam audiat absque praesentia Clericorum suorum;
alioquin irrita erit Sententia Episcopi, nisi Clericorum praesentia
confirmetur. Can. etiam 28, and 29. ejusdem Concilii. Council. Aurelianens. 3.
Can. 15. Council. Turonens. 2. Can. 1. 6. Council. Hispalens. 2. Can. 6. Cujus
haec sunt formalia verba; Comperimus quendam Presbyterum a Pontifice suo
injuste olim dejectum, and innocentem exilio condemnatum. ( which Tragedy has
sometimes been acted upon other Scenes than that of Spain) Ideo Decrevinus,
(juxta Priscorum Decretum) Synodali sententia; Vt nullus nostrum, sine Concilii
examine, dejicere quemlibet Presbyterum vel Diaconum audeat. Episcopus enim
Sacerd. libus and Ministris solus honorem dare potest, auferre solus non
potest; Tales enim neque ab uno damnari, nec, uno judican^^, poterunt honoris
sui privilegiiste exm: sed praesentati Synodali judicio, quod Canon de illis
praedep^^it, (...).

Vid. Greg. 1. Lib. 11. Epist. 49. Si quid de quocunque Clerico ad aures (...)
pere en^rit, quod te just possit offendere; facile non credas, sed
praesentibus Senioribus Ecclesiae tuae diligenter est veritas perscrutanda: Et
tunc si qualitas rei poposcerit, Canonica Districtio culpam feriat
Delinquentis. This was the Advice of that great Bishop of Rome, to one of his
Suffragan Bishops. And I wish it were well observed by all of that Order: If it
were so, we should not at any time hear of the Relegation of any Presbyter,
without a Judicial Ecclesiastical Process first deduced against him. Epist.
Ignatii, ad Trall. Orig. lib. 3. Contra Cells. compares the Bishop in the Church
to the (...), and the Presbytery to the (...); as S. Ignatius before him,
resembled the Bishop to the Nasi in the Sanhedrim, and the Presbyters as the
Common Council of the Church to the Bishop. Vid. Cypr. Epist. 6. 10. 18, 24,
34. Hierom. ad cap. 3. Isai. Nos habemus in Ecclesia Senatum nostrum, Coetum
Presbyterorum. Ambros. in 1. Tim. c. 3. Hic enim Episcopus est, qui inter
Presbyteros primus est. Idem, in Romans 5. (though it is more probable, that
Hilary the Roman Deacon was Author of that Commentary, which is frequently
cited by S. Augustine with great Applause.) Nam apud omnes utique gentes,
honorabilis est Senectus; unde and Synagoga, and postea Ecclesia, Seniores
habuit, sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. But if any desire to
be fully cleared in the matter of Fact, let them read Blondel his Apology;
where we find a Shoal of Instances for the Assessorian Dignity of Presbyters
and Councels. I shall only point at two or three, which are obvious to any who
have any acquaintance with Church History. We shall begin with Pope Victor; and
though his Spirit was too violent, (which peaceable Irenaeus scrupled not to
tell him;) yet he acted not any matter of moment without the Consent of his
Clergy. So at Antioch P. Samosatenus, that Heretical Patriarch, was Deposed by
a Synod, consisting of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons; and in their Names the
Synodal Epistle was penned, and directed to the Catholic Church; and Cornelius
at Rome declares, That all his Presbyters concurred with him in Condemning the
Schismatic Novatus, though (as Eusebius informs us) he had sixty Bishops to be
his Associates in that Synod. Neither can we pretermit that Excellent Council
of Illiberis, (whose laudable Canons are yet very instructive to thee Catholic
Church:) in which there were but nineteen Bishops, and twenty six Presbyters:
But that which is instar omnium in the first and best of General Councels, (I
mean that at Jerusalem) that the Presbyters had a decisive Voice with the
Apostles, is evident to any who can read (without Prejudice) the Tenor of
those Decrees. I shall shut up this Point with the Judgment of a learned and
moderate Episcopal man, who, in his Irenicum, speaks to this Purpose; The
Top-gallant of Episcopacy cannot be so well managed for the right steering the
Ship of the Church, as when it is joined with the Vnder-sails of a moderate
Presbytery.

A Succinct Dissertation
Concerning the Chor-Episcopi, (as they were termed in the Greek-Church,) or
the Vicarii Episcoporum, as they were named in the Western Church.
WE have added this Paragraph ex superabundanti, to prove that some Presbyters
were honored Iure Suffragii in General Councels; It being granted by all, that
the Chor-Episcopi did subscribe in their own names, even in those Ecumenical
Assemblies: If we shall make it appear, that they were nothing else but
Presbyters, invested with some more Power than ordinary; I hope the point is
gained which we designed to prove. Now the same is evident from the 13th Canon
of the Council of Ancyra, and the 13th of the Council of Neo-Caesarea; as also
the 10th of the Council of Antioch: In all which, the Privilege that is
accounted most essential to the Episcopal Function, viz. The Power to Ordain
Presbyters and Deacons (which Ierom supposed to be the only formal Difference
betwixt Bishops and Presbyters) is denied to the Chor-Episcopi. And though it
may be objected; That the tenth Canon of the Council of Antioch (which is one
of the Provincials that was adopted by the sixth General Council;) insinuates,
that the Chor-Episcopi were consecrated as Bishops, by the Imposition of the
Bishop's hands; yet, that seems either to be a sophisticated Canon, or that it
was a Ceremony of particular Designation, like to that of the thirteenth of the
Acts; For it is most certain, S. Paul was an Apostle long before that
Imposition of Hands. Which Gloss upon the Canon appears to me to be most
probable; because this Provincial was celebrated a little after that Famous
Council of Nice; and it is most improbable, that they would have contradicted,
so expressly, that great Ecumenical, in two Particulars; viz. The Ordination
of a Bishop by one individual of that Order; and the making two Bishops in one
Diocese: whereas that first General Council ordains, three Bishops, at least,
to concur in the Ordination of a Bishop; and appoints but one Bishop in every
Diocese: The Ignorance of which Canon was a matter of Regret to the great
Augustine, qui Valerio in Episcopatu Hipponensi non successit, sed accessit. On
which account, although he designed Eradius his own Successor, yet he would not
have him ordained in his own time: erit (inquit) Presbyter ut est, quando Deus
voluerit futurus Episcopus. And though it may be presumed, that P. Damasus was
not ignorant of that Canon of Antioch, (if there was truly any such:) he living
so nigh to the time of that Council; yet, in his Constitution, whereby he
endeavors to abolish the Chor-Episcopi, (which we find in Decr. Gratian. p. 1.
Did. 68. c. Chor-Episc.) he calls them, mere and single Presbyters; and that
through Pride only they usurped the Episcopal Office: and that by virtue of
their Ordination they could not exercise any Episcopal Privilege, both the
Council of Neo-Caesarea, and Damasus, ground upon this Foundation, That
Presbyters succeed only to the 70 Disciples, and not to the Apostles. But
suppose the Foundation on which they build to be a tottering Basis, yet we may
clearly read so much upon the Frontispiece of that Superstructure, That they
judged the Chor-Episcopi to be nothing else but Presbyters. But as to the
Succession, the Learned Spalatensis (a great Asserter of the Episcopal
Privileges) judges aright, that both Bishops and Presbyters are the Apostles
Successors in potestate ordinaria; but with this difference, that the former
succeed in plenitudinem potestatis, the latter in partem sollicitudinis; which
in the case of the Chor-Episcopi, was a little amplified: that Restraint which
the Ecclesiastical Law has laid upon the intrinsecal Power of a Presbyter
being taken off. For an Ecclesiastic may be empowered jure Sacerdotii, to do
many things in actu primo, even when the exercitium actus is sitly bound up by
the Canons of the Church, in order to the eviting of Schism, Scandal and
Confusion in the House of God; which ought to be Domus Ordinata. And if that
accurate Antiquary Beveregius had well considered this, he would not (I
suppose) have so bitingly maintained, That the Chor-Episcopi could be nothing
else but Bishops.

Article XIII.
Mat. 20. 26, 27, 28. 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Philem. 8. 9.

HAVING but just now mentioned the Honor of the Clergy, I would next advise
all the Governors of the Church to demean themselves courteously and affably
to all; their Christian Gentileness and Condescendence being the fittest Machin
to scrue out internal Respect from all Ranks of People. For nothing commends
Churchmen so much, as a Pious Modesty: all Degrees of Persons, but especially
theirs, being like Coins, or Medals; to which, howsoever Virtue give the Stamp
and Impression, Humility must give the Weight. Let not therefore any of them in
their Travels toward the Northern Pole, use insolent Boastings toward any
Person of Honor; especially in their own Habitations, which ought to be Asyla
to all. And let them not improve that strange Logic any more, as to infer,
That some Gentlemen are bigot Fanatics, because they earnestly entreated them
to preach on the 29th of May, seeing they were upon the Place, and the Church
was vacant: though they were not pleased to do it. Or, to conclude, that they
called some other Bishops, Cheats and Knaves, because they wished, that all of
them were as good and just as their own Ordinary. For, without all Peradventure
one haughty expression of a proud Priest, has a greater Tendency in it to
proselyte a far greater number to Fanaticism, than twenty uttered by the
humblest of them all, can bring over to Conformity.

And let all honest Ministers of the Gospel have a large share of those Acts of
Humanity; (none of which deserve that Title, who afford not a due Respect to
their Superiors, either in Church or State; he being most unworthy to command,
who has not first learned to obey.) nothing being more easy than a little
Civility. And yet an obliging Deportment in reference to the Clergy, is a
matter of great Importance for the good of the Order; For by cherishing all
those, as Sons, and Brethren, who are well principled, and make Conscience of
their Office, they insinuate themselves into the Hearts of those, who (next to
the favor of God, and of their Prince,) are indeed the best Support of their
Government; for (as the Excellent Historian has said) Concordia res parvae
crescunt; Discordia maximae dilabuntur. O! how lovingly (as there had been no
disparity at all) did St. Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenaeus, Cyprian, the three
Asian Gregory's, Athanasius, Basil, Augustine, and many other Lights of the
Primitive Church, converse with their respective Colleges of Presbyters?
Neither will I ever forget that excellent Attestation of the Pious and Eloquent
Bishop Hall, (deservedly termed the English Seneca) who appealed to his own
Clergy, If his Deportment amongst them were not such, as if he had been no more
but a Presbyter with them, or they all Bishops with him.

Away then with that invidious expression in reference to Presbyters, The
Inferior Clergy, (though it is one of my Eusticks, That all the Governors of
our Church were superior to all their Presbyters, in that which is usually
termed Clergy:) But whether that Fantastic Phrase savor more of Pride or
Ignorance, it can hardly be determined. Sure I am, in the Primitive Church only
Deacons and Subdeacons, with the rest of the Orders inferior to them, were so
accounted: As for Presbyters, they were called Clerici Superioris loci. And
though some Popish Schoolmen have multiplied the Sacred Orders into the number
of Nine, yet the Generality of their Theologues and Canonists, reduce them to
Seven, whereof Sacerdotium is the highest Order; Which Opinion indeed makes
Episcopatus to be but Gradus Sacerdotii; and compriseth Cantores under the
Lectores. It is also the Judgment of some Moderns, That, after the
Chor-Episcopi were exauctorated by the Primitive Church, as useless and
burdensome; that Presbyters were termed, Antistites in secundo Ordine; which
they collect from that Iambick of S. Gregory, (...). etc. i.e. The venerable
Senate of Presbyters, that preside over the People, and possess the second
Throne. Deacons were indeed prohibited by the ancient Canons, to sitdown before
Presbyters, without their Leave and Command: But as for the Demeanor of
Bishops in reference to their Presbyters, it was a Canon, renewed more than
once Ne sedeat Episcopus stante Presbytero.

Yea, more than so; There be some, not inconsiderable Antiquaries, who are so
far from thrusting Presbyters below the Hatches, that they have elevated
Deacons to the upper Deck of the Superior Clergy; imagining, that only
Subdeacons, and these Orders below them, are to be accounted the Inferior
Clergy, which they would collect from Hierom. on Tit. and Aug. Epist. 162. But,
non sic fuit ab initio; if we consult the 6th Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, where we may find, that they are not (...), but (...), viz Mensarii,
and Eleemosynarii. (See Can. 16. Concilii Sexti Generalis, and Can. 4.
Con^cilii quarti Carthag. and S. Chrysostom's Comment on the 6th of the Acts.)
Yet it cannot be denied, but that in the latter Centuries of the Primitive
Church, the Order of Deacons at Rome, (who were but seven in number, according
to the Primitive Institution; and that of Presbyters very numerous;) began, not
only to equal themselves, but also to look big upon the Presbyters; and the
Archdeacon assumed the Title of Cardinal Deacon: which Superciliousness, not
only gave occasion to the framing of those Canons we have already hinted at,
against them; but also to St. Hierom, a Presbyter, to take the Pen in his hand,
that he might vindicate his own Order from the Contempt of their Inferiors,
which he does at length, Epist. 85. ad Evagrium. For let Blondel and Salmasius
pretend what they please, this Renowed Father had no quarrel with the Order of
Episcopaly but was not a little irritated by the saucy and arrogant behavior
of the Deacons: and that they might learn to know, and keep their distance; and
that Presbyters might look down upon them, as the Church-Nethinims, he screws
up the Presbyteratus as nigh to Episcopacy as possibly he can.

And, (if I were not afraid to be accounted an impertinent Digressor) it were
easy to demonstrate from the Writings of this Father, that he acknowledged the
Power of Ordination, Jurisdiction, and Confirmation, to belong most properly to
Bishops. And, even in his Comment on Titus (on which Blondel lays the greatest
stress;) he has this differencing Expression, In quo differt Episcopus a
Presbytero, excepta Ordinatione? Now, as Exceptio firmat Regulam in non
exceptis, so the Exception is presumed as true as the Rule. And his, ad evit
and a Schismata etc. is by the greatest Antiquaries looked upon (and not
without good reason) as such an Accident that did emerge in the Apostles days.
And how can it be conceived, that a man of Hierom's Temper, who was indeed very
Pious and Learned, but withal had much Keenness in his Spirit, (neither did his
great Adversary Ruffinus belie him in this Character, ut erat in quod
intenderat vehemens:) that he would have taken it in good part, that Augustine
should call himself, Major Hieronymo qua Episcopus, if he had not believed the
truth thereof? Credat Iudaeus Apella, non ego: Not to mention his writing
always respectfully to Pope Damasus, as his Superior in the Church. So that
one of the fifteen passages usually cited out of St. Hierom's Works, to prove
the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters; and that is, his Dial. adv.
Luciferian. does preponderate more with me, than Spalatensis lib. 2. c. 3. who
says, That Hierom's Prejudice against Bishops cannot be excused; Neither can I
deny, but that he was much irritated by the insolent Pride of John, Patriarch
of Jerusalem. I shall only take notice of that, which indeed I account a
Punctilio not worth the noticing, though the Enemies of this Sacred Order we
are pleading for, lay no little weight upon it, therefore I shall speak a
little unto it: and that is, Hierom his asserting, that in the Infancy of the
Christian Church, there was an Identity of Names; and that Episcopus and
Presbyter signified one and the self same thing. For Answer. I never judged it
a real Controversy which is managed about Names; He must be drenched very deep
in the dregs of Malice, (says Tertullian) who raises deadly Quarrels about
Words or Names, if there be no real Controversy about Things. Therefore I
shall readily grant unto them that Bishops of old were called Presbyters, or
Elders; and shall go a greater Length too, than Ambrose in his Comment on the
Ephesians, (if it be his) who tells us; that Omnis Episcopus est Presbyter; sed
non omnis Presbyter est Episcopus; For I verily believe, that in the Infancy of
the Gospel, Presbyters were also termed Bishops or Overseers; and that the
Appropriation of those Names to the different Orders, or Degrees of the same
Order, was not made till a little after. Yet I join not Issue with these, who
cite the 20th Chapter of the Acts, verse 28. to this purpose: They who are for
the Genevian Platform, will have those Elders to be nothing else but
Presbyters, and they hug this Text as their Palladium; because (as they fondly
imagine) it affords them an Achillaeum Argumentum against Episcopacy; for here
(say they) the very Name and Office is confounded with that of Presbyter;
Overseer in the Original being (...). But I must take the boldness to say, that
I lay more stress upon the sole Testimony of Irenaeus, than on all the
Commentaries which have been written on this Text, since the year 1638, to
1600, or since 1536. (when Calvin settled at Geneva) till this present year of
God: For that Ancient and peaceable Father, (who carried Peace in his Breast,
as well as in his Name; living within 180 years of the Birth of Christ; He was
the Disciple of Polycarp, who was brought up at the feet of S. John the
Apostle, and conversed with many Apostolic men, and had an easy Tradition of
the sense of this place; This Irenaeus, in his five Books against Heresies,
(especially the Valentinian Gnostics) expressly te^ls us, lib. 1. c. 14. that
these Elders were Bishops of Asia, He of Ephesus being their Metropolitan, or
Archbishop. And lest any should imagine, that it would have been a tedious
Work and Attendance, for the Apostle to call for all the Bishops of Asia, we
must suppose it was not of such a Latitude, as the then Third, and now Fourth
Part of the Terraqueal Globe, at least, of the known World; Nor the Dimension
of all Asia the Lesser, called Anatolia by the Greeks, (as being East from
them;) and now Natolia by the Turks; Neither was it the Roman Asia in its
greatest Latitude, which comprehended the great Kingdom of Pergamus, viz.
Ionia, Aeolis, Lydia, Caria, with the two Mysia's and Phrygia's. The
Proconsular Asia was yet less; for it comprehended only Ionia and Aeolis, with
the Islands of the Aegaean Sea, and about the Hellespont: But Asia propr^^
dicta, (of which the Apostle and Irenaeus speak,) was least of all; for it had
no more in it but Ionia and Ae^li^, as I herom t^stisies: and Erasmus is of the
same opinion, that Asia in the Acts ^mports only that Country where Epheus
stood, that is, Ionia. Now, though (...) the (...), (as it is distinguished
^^om the Greater). consisted of many other Provinces, over and above what we
have expressed; (...) Bithynia, Paphlagonia, (...) Pontus, Armenia, the Lesser,
Ly^aonia, Pisidia, Isauria, Lycia^, and (...) yet all of them amount not ^igh
to the Dimension of the Famous Kingdom of France. And though Ionia was very
Fertile, and consequently Populous; yet the Dimension thereof being but small,
it was ^asie for St. Paul, staying at Miletus, a little City on the Coast of
I^nia^ not far from Ephesus, (and St. Hi^rom says truly, within ten Furlongs
of the Ostiary (...) that famous River Meander) to call for all the Bishops of
that Province to come unt^ him. We have insisted the longer upon this
^istorico-Geographical Digression, to demonstrate to the World, that
Presbyterians make much ado about nothing, and build their largest Hopes on a
sandy Foundation.

But let us grant to them, (which I know D. Hammond, and they that follow him,
will not yield;) that the Apostle, in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, us^th
these Names promis^uously; what have they gained thereby? Were Bishops of old
called Elders? So were the Apostles in Scripture sometimes termed (...), and
sometimes (...); yet no man in his right Wits, but will grant, that they had a
Superiority over Presbyters and Deacons. Use is certainly the best master of
Words; For Nomina being ex ins^ituto, that which is applied to signify such a
Notion of the Mind, may (by common Consent) import a contrary Conception: as is
well observed by that glorious and learned Martyr King Charles the first, in
his Dispute at Newport, in the Isle of Wight; where that Royal Champion (like
another Athanasius, fighting against the World:) tells those Presbyterian
Ministers, That he is not much concerned, whether they call Episcopatus Ordo,
or Gradus; or what Name they give it; provided they acknowledge the Superiority
of those Church Officers, over Presbyters and Deacons. This was formerly
^^^^uated by that great and good Prince, in his Disputation with M. Henderson
at New Castle, whom he routed both Horse and Foot, and s^nt home that Apostle
of the Covenan^, a Royal Proselyte. For this great Athleta (like to the
invincible Hercules in all his Labors:) was, in all the Disputes that he
managed with his unparalled ^en, more than Conqueror, through Him that loved
him. Yea Salmatius and Blondel (the two great Champions of Presbytery) are
constrained (...) least in the (...), betwixt Presbyters and (...). And if
Blondel from the year (...) (which he makes the Epoch of that (...)
Impropriation;) had made a (...) to CXI, he would have found S. Ignatius, in
his Epistles, which are accounted (...), cl^arly and frequ^ntly distinguishing
betwixt Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons* (and that in no less than 35 several
(...), which we have no leisure to (...), accounted (...), for these (...) so
fully vindicated by (...) and D. Pearceson; that all the Gratings of Salmasius,
Blondel, Capellus, and D. Owen, will never file off the least Atom from their
Solidity.

I hope all they of the Episcopal Order, and Way, will pardon this Digression;
I shall therefore only deprecate for the Tediousness thereof, if these
insignificant Lines chance to fall into the hands of others; all my Design
being to speak a Word for Truth, and to give an evidence to the World, that I
am no bigot Presbyterian. But we have not yet done with this Article; For there
is something yet quod cadit in Consequentiam.

Let not therefore the Governors of our Church be inaccessible to any of their
Presbyters, nor suffer them to dance Attendance at their Gates, as if they were
the poor Yeomen of their Guard: Clemens Romans in his excellent Epistle,
describes the Lord Jesus to this Purpose; (whom all Churchmen ought to
imitate) Dominus noster I. Christus (Sceptrum magnificentiae) non venit in
jactantia Superbiae and arrogantiae, quamvis potuerit, sed in humilitate. For I
would have them to remember, That it is not Nature, but only the Providence of
God, that has made the Difference betwixt them; and, it is possible, rather the
Grace of their Prince than any Merit of their own, which has dignified them
with such a Title. And if the same be subtracted, their ^rest would instantly
fall down to the Point base of the Shield. And when Presbyters come where
Bishops are, let them enjoy a ferene Countenance, without any supercilious
Command to keep their Distance, or (according to the new coined Phrase) Know
your Measures. But I wish they consider, and practice that sober Measure, which
an Heathen Poet prescribes unto all Mushroms of a Night's growth, Fortunam
reverenter habe, quicunque repent, Dives ab exili. etc. For good Words never
hurt the Mouth, nor excoriate the Tongue.

And when any Presbyter (who is sufficiently known to have been constantly of
sound Principles, and Practice conform:) shall, with all due respect, Represent
some (...) of the Ecclesiastical Government; (For, I believe, they think not
themselves, we are living in Platonis Republica, sed in Faece Romuli:) to which
Regret he is prompted by his. Loyal^y (...) Church and State; let him not be
(...) away, as presumptuous and Impertinent* to tender an Admonition (be it
never to Brotherly and humble,) to one that i^ (forsooth) so much his
Superior: as if the ingenuous Presbyter had committed a Solaecism greater than
that of (...) who pr^sum'd to teach the Great (...), the Stratagems of War. But
(...) them to remember, That Humanum (...) and aliquando bonus (...), and has
need to be awakened to (...) his Charge: and (...) times suggest (...)
Alexander the Great (...) to Abdolominus, a poor Gardener, ((...) of the Blood
Royal of Sid^n;) That (...) spoke bett^^ (...) point of (...) than eve^ (...)
heard from any of his greatest Captains: Yea, Anti^^^us the Great declared
solemnly, That he had learned more concerning Tru^hs (as to the Interest of his
Government) from a poor Country Peasant in one Night's Con^renee with him,
than he had done from all hs Courtiers heretofore. For if such Presbyters be
discountenanced, and their Company slighted; that Disrespect put upon them will
give occasion unto many to imagine, that some Bishops conceive an internal
Honor at the first vi^w of those who have been constantly Lo^al; (as if a
ravenous Wolf had suddenly appeared unto them, or that Per^eus had accosted ed
them with Gorgon's Head upon his Shield;) because in the glass of their
straightness, they behold their own Obliquities; Rectum (being) Index sui and
obliqui.

But seeing good words (when they are given very liberally) are but empty
Complements, without good Deeds; (for that Cha^acter of the Echo may be applied
to ma^y Promises and Oaths, now-a-dayes; For est, praetereaque nihil.) It is
also one of my Euc^icks, That the Fathers of the Church espouse the just
Interest of their Sons, to the utmost of their endeavors: and, that if a
Minister of the Gospel have any Business before a Secular Court, the Bishops
would be pleased to assist him in his innocent pursuit or Defense, according to
the Sphere of their Activity: For, whither shall a Son flee for Protection, if
his own Father abandon him? But if they shall meet with more humanity, and
readiness to dispatch their affair, from those Members of the Court who are not
in Orders (...) the Great Officer of State for the present, is highly applauded
by all the Clergy, for his Assability and Favor in their Addresses to him for
Justice^) some will be apt to conclude, that these Fathers are only so termed
Equivocally, and deserve rather to be called Step-fathers; as being too like
unto Saturn, of whom the Poets feigned, that he devoured his own Children. But,

Arbor honoretur, cujus nos umbra* And what greater evidence can b^ desired of
any Allegorical (...), a Bus^ris, a Polyphemus, a Diomedes, or the Inhabitants
of Taurica Chersonesus, than this Hypothesis? Let us suppose it the great
Endeavor of some, to undermine and blow up, by base Calumnies, and false
Sugg^stions, (as if they carried Faux's da^k Lanthorn in their Tongues,) the
Reputation of some of their Brethren; they having no other provocation to that
Diabolical Office, except their Envy of a little favorable Aspect, and good
opinion* which some Great Persons have conceived of them; they being hugely
concerned to study a Monopoly of those Grandees, lest at any time they give an
ear to any true Suggestion against themselves; or that any ascend an empty
Chair, who are not their Creatures, or of their own swarthy Complexion; Truth
it self having told us, Qui male facit, odit Lucem. But the best Countermine I
know to the Fears and Jealousies of those men, the most forcible Antidote
against their Cordolium, is, to undeceive them by this Assurance, (which every
honest man is ready to give them:) that they would deem (...) the greatest
unhappiness in the World, to be constrained to draw in the same yoke with those
that have cast off the yoke of Holy Jesus; or to be of the same Order with
those who are guilty of so many Disorders. Which voluntary Engagement may
afford them more security against their Imaginary Fears, than if the Object of
their Dread did affect the stupidity of Iunius Brutus, whose counterfeited
Folly paved the way to the first Consulship of Rome. And let us suppose these
Obloquies to be as successful as Malice it self could wish; (it being a very
old Maxim in the School of Envy, Calumniare (...), aliquid adhaerebit; and, as
one said truly, concerning that accursed Combination, called the Covenant, That
Lies were the Life of their Cause;) yet these traduced Brethren have, not only
the gracious Promises of the Gospel to support them, with that blessed Spirit
who did Dictate those Holy Lines, but also the consideration of that of St.
Augustine, Quisquis detral^^ ^^mae meae, addit Mercedi meae: Yea, a seriou
Reflection upon that of an Heathen man, cannot but somewhat solace them; Sen^^a
having said, Mala opinio been parta, delectat; The Brazen-wall of a good
Conscience within, being a sufficient Fence, and Cordial too, against the
malicious Batteries from without, which the Infinite Wisdom usually makes to
end in a Brutum Fulmen, because these uncharitable Arietations proceed mostly
from Persons of Brutish affections.

But, let us jubjoyn this last Hypothesis, That some of these Sons of Belial
(as if they had sucked the Breasts of Hyreanian ^yge^s, and had petrified
Bowels;) were as implacable in their Malice, as those cruel Roman Emperors;
(one of which Monsters of Nature said, Non adhuc ^ecum ^edii in gratiam;
another ita serii, ut se ^^^ri sentiat; a third wished, That all they whom he
hated, had but one neck, that with (...) blow he might cut it off; And a fourth
said concerning the (...) of his own Brother, (...) Divus, modo ne sit vi^us.)
Yet I would have these suffering Brethren seriously to consider, that the
Servant is not greater than his Lord: and, seeing Innecency it self was
persecuted from the Womb to the Tomb, and from the Cra^^^ to the Grave, both
with the Scourge of Hands and Tongues, they, who are almost infinitely guilty
before God, ought not to take it in ill part, (far less to be overcome with
despondency of mind) when they trace the Footsteps of their Lord and Master;
for not only the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, with the Apostles of our Great
Master, but also many other eminent Lights of the Primitive Church, have run
the same Fate (so that they are not singular in this rugged way) such as,
Narcissus of Jerusalem, Eustathius of Antioch, Athanasius of Alexandria,
Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil of Cappadocia, and S. Chrysostom of
Constantinople; Most of which were persecuted by the Instigation of Churchmen,
because they endeavored to rectify those Errors, and to redress those Abuses,
which had fullied the very Altar of God; That Aphorism, Corruption optimi est
pessima, being not only a Physical Observation, but too often verified of
Morals also. And these suffering Brethren have good reason cheerfully to
undergo the Fate of Aristides, even to suffer the Ostracism, because they are
too virtuous: Though I confess, let them be as innocent as was once the man
without the Navel, they will be looked upon as Criminal, if they do not
homologate all that some men say, or do.

Vid. Council. General. 1. Can. 14. Council. Carthaginens. 4. Can. 34. Vt
Episcopus in quolibet loco sedens, stare Presbyterum non patiatur. Can. 35. Vt
Episcopus in Ecclesia, in Consessu Presbyterorum, sublimior sedeat; intra domum
vero, Collegam se Presbyterorum esse cognoscat. Can. 37. Diaconus ita se
Presbyteri, ut Episcopi ministrum esse cognoscat. Can. 39. Diaconus quolibet
loco, jubente Presbytero, sedeat. Can. 40. Vt Diaconus in Conven^u
Presbyterorum, interrogatus loquatur. Council. Arelat. ^. Can. 18. Arelat. 2.
Can. 15. Council. Laodic. Can. 2^. Synod. Quini-Sex^. Can. 7. Council. Bracar. 2.
Can. 2. (a part whereof has these words) similiter and Parochiales Clerici,
servili timore, in aliquibus eperibus, Episcopis servire non cogantur; quia
scriptum est, N^que ut dominantes in Clero.

Vid. Hieronym. Epist. 2. ad Nepotian. where he says, S^a subjectus Pontifici
tuo, and quasi Animae Parentem suscipe: (which Counsel savours very little of
Fanaticism) se Sacerdotes, non Dominos, esse noverint; Honorent Clericos, quasi
Clericos; ut and ipsis a Cleric^s, quasi Episcopis, honor deseratur: s^itum est
illud Oratoris Domitii, Cur ego te (inquit) habeam ut Principem, cum tu me non
habeas ut Senatorem? Augustine. Epist. 48. Nonomnis qui parcit amicus est, nec
omnis qui verberat i^micus* etc. Ambros. Sermon. 14. Leon. 1. Epist. 82. Greg. 1.
De Cura Past. par. 3. Admonendi sunt Subditi, ne plus quam expedit sint
subjecti: ne cum student, plus quam necesse est, hominibus subjici,
compellantur Vitra eorum venerari.

Article XIV.
Psalm. 95. 6. Mat. 18. 20. Romans 15. 6, and 16, 17. 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 5. 8. and
6. 20. and 11. 2, 4, 7, 22, 34. and 14. 33, 40. Col. 2. 5. Tit. 1. 5. Heb. 10.
25.

SEEING we have so frequently mentioned the ancient Canons of the Church; (it
being as indecent, if not as dangerous, for a Church to be without Canons, as
for a State to be without Edicts; these serving not only as a Directory to the
reciprocal Duties of Bishops, Presbyters, and People, but being also Boundaries
to all.) I wish we had some thing that looked like them, and served in Lieu of
them, till they be imposed by Authority. For the Tender of the Canonical Oath
unto the Candidates of that Sacred Function does necessarily presuppose some
Canons according to which their Obedience should be squared; and by which also
the Injunctions of their Superiors ought to be regulated. For I hope none of
them are so simple, as to imagine, that this Oath does imply an absolute
implicit Obedience unto the Beneplacita of Ecclesiastic Governors, as if Sic
volo, sic jubeo, slat pro ratione Voluntas, were the adequate Law of our
Church. The Angelical D^ctor has better de^in'd it, who tells us, that (to
speak properly) Lex, est Sententia praecipiens honesta, etc. and that it must
be enacted with the general Consent of the Clergy, otherwise it cannot be a
binding Law to the Church: and if those Qualifications be wanting, though that
Precept may be ^ermed An Ecclesiastical Law; yet it is not truly such, but
Violentia: Yea, more than so; as the Swearing of a Soldier to the Colors of
his General, does not only import, that he knows them from the Standard of the
Common Enemy; but also, that this Sacramentum Militare is with a due
Subordination unto him who gave that General his Commission; (unless any have a
mind to imitate the Treachery of that famous Wols^ein, of whom it is reported
by some, that, before his fatal Retreat to Fgra, he took an independent Oath of
the Imperial Army.) For the Precepts of the Superior must not interfere with
the Commands of the Supreme; which, if they be found to do, they ought not to
be obeyed. And if it be concluded, that this Canonical Oath in the privation of
Canons, is but a mere Non-ens; Certainly these Fanatical Preachers are most
obliged to some Bishops, who have permitted them still to Officiate in this
Church, and yet were never so impertinent as to require from them any
Subscription to this Chimerical Fiction. Therefore, I would humbly entreat the
Reverend Fathers of our Church to meet privately amongst themselves
(accompanied with one or two of their respective Presbyters, (...) they judge
most Judicious, and kno^ to be of unquestionable Principles;) and let them
unanimously resolve upon an Uniformity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, to be practiced in this Church. It is certainly a matter of
Lamentation, that our National Church should resemble America, in its first
Discovery: for (as Peter Martyr, and Joseph Acosta report,) a good Horseman, in
one Summer's day's Travel, might meet with variety of Languages, Habits, and
Religion, amongst that Barbarous People. Sure I am, (not to speak of
Confirmation, which is already pressed;) they might easily introduce a Platform
of Administrating the Blessed Sacraments of the Gospel; For when one varies
from the precise words of the Institution, (which is but too frequently done;)
he shall hardly persuade me, that he has Consecrated those Holy Symbols or
Elements, (as they are usually termed) at that time; the words of the Divine
Institution being the Essential Form of a Sacrament. And let not the Lord's
Prayer be any more neglected in the Consecration of the Eucharist, which (as
St. Cyprian testifies) was the constant Epiphonema of that Solemn Benediction,
in all the Churches of Christ, in his time: The same is also attested by St.
Hilary, and St. Augustine. As for the Gesture at the Holy Table, I humbly
suppose, Standing will be found the best Expedient to introduce Uniformity into
this Church; not only because it staves off the serupulous Fears of an
Arto-latria, but also in regard we find direct Evidence for the Practice
thereof in the Primitive Church. I shall only produce one Private, and another
Public Authority for it, though many more might be adduc'd to this purpose.
Dionysius Alexandrinus (who lived about the middle of the third Century, and
Wrote Anno Dom. 260.) testifies, in a Letter to Pope Xystus, That it was the
Custom of the Church in his time, to stand at the Lord's Table. As for the
Public Authority; The 20th Canon of the Great and First General Council at
Nice is sufficient, where we find Kneeling on the Lord's Day, and on the day of
Pentecost, expressly prohibited, and the practice of Standing at their
Devotions, explicitly enjoined: And that because the Lord's Day is the ordinary
Christian Festival, and the whole time of Pentecost (which comprehends the
fifty days betwixt Easter and Whitsunday inclusively:) the constant Festivity
of the Church. Tertullian and Epiphanius, looking upon it, as an Apostolical
universal Tradition, not to kneel all that time. Whence we may infer, That if
some men speak Consequenter ad Principia; (one whereof is, That this Blessed
Sacrament is the most solemn part of Christian Devotion:) they must either
grant, that the Eucharist was received on those days in a standing Posture; or
that the People of God did not at all communicate at these times, which were a
very absurd Notion; seeing they are acknowledged by all, (who are not wildly
^a^atick) to be the fittest Seasons for the Participation of that great
Mystery; whereas that of Kneeling is but consequentially inferred, because the
Fathers usually term the Holy Eucharist, The most sublime, the most solemn, and
most useful part of Christian Devotion; and that it is, Tremendum and adorab^le
Mysterium: though, under Favor, we must expound it (and so the Context usually
imports:) of internal Adoration: unless we intend to join Issue with the Popish
Idolatry. As for that irreverent and lazy Posture of Sitting, we find neither
direct nor indirect Testimony for it: Those Canons which command Standing every
Lord's Day, do consequently exclude Sitting, if we look upon that Solemn Action
as an Act of Devotion: and Optatus has told us, Lib. 4. That the People may
not sit in the Church; and Tertullian gives the reason, Lib. de Oratione, cap.
12. That it was an Heathen Custom, and therefore ought to be reprehended. Let
all those who plead so much for that irreverent and lazy Posture, remember,
that they comply in their Gesture, not only with these detestable Arrian
Heretics, (who designed thereby to vilify the Son of God:) but also with
those who are worse, the damnable Socinians; as is evident from Socinus his
Tract. De Coena Domi^i. And I wish all Sober Christians would seriously advert
to this; That it is not a Corporal Repast, but a Spiritual Refreshment they are
called unto, when they come to that Holy Table: and let the consideration of
the Great King who invites them, and of the unparalled Mystery they are to
receive, (the Feast-Maker being the Feast it self;) persuade all Christians to
present themselves at this Gospel-Altar with much more reverence than they are
obliged to practice at an ordinary Banquet, or a Penny-Bridale.

Yet, Let not any imagine, that we intend by these Lines, to reflect upon some
Canons of our Church; Truly I had no such Design; but on the contrary, de
regret that these Articles are fallen too much in des^etude: But it is a
Principle of Love to Uniformity, that did prompt me to tender this Overture
(yet with all due submission) to the Governors of our Church; It being a most
desirable thing to see all those who desire to fear God's Name, blessed with
one mind, one heart, and one way. As for mine own judgment, I can easily
subscribe to those words of R. Mr. Baxter; If it be lawful to take a Pardon
from the King upon our knees, I know not what can make it unlawful to take a
sealed Pardon from Christ and his Ambassadors, upon our knees.

Likewise, a set Form of Excommunication to be used by all; whether it be the
Lesser, called properly Abstentio ab Eucharistia; (the practice of the
Primitive Church, which was so copious in this matter, being too much neglected
in this Age;) or the greater Anathema; with their respective Relaxations, may
be easily resolved upon; with a form of Ecclesiastic Testi^icates, in
Conformity to the (...) formatae of the Ancients.

And let all Bishops, wherever they are, (if they be in health) preach on the
Anniversaries of the Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection of our Blessed Lord,
and on the Anniversary of the Descent of the holy Ghost; as also, on that of
the Nativity and Restoration of our gracious Sovereign upon Earth. And let it
be recommended to all their Presbyters to do so; as also to celebrate the Holy
Communion on Easter and Pent^cost, at least on every Easter Day, which (as has
been said already) is Caput institutionis of the Christian Sabbath; for though
these things be not authoritatively enjoined; yet the Governors of the Church
may easily thereby find the Pulse of their Clergy; and by this Tessera
Discover, if there remain as yet any amongst them, who are fermented with some
of that four leaven of Presbytery. It were no difficult Province (if I did not
study Brevity;) to answer all the Paralogisms, and most foolish Cavils of the
Fanatics, against these Festivals of the Church: But I shall remit them for
their Doom to S. Augustine, who makes it a Character of a true Son of the
Church, to solemnize the Festivals thereof. Sermon. 253. De Temp. (in which
number he places that of the Nativity in the Front:) and to Epiphanius, who in
his 75th Heresy, tells us, That Aerius was condemned as an Heretic, as for
other things, so for opposing and condemning the Festivals of the Church. But
the ingenuous Reader may find the Lawfulness and Usefulness of these Festivals
fully asserted by that admirable Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical Policy; and the
(no less) wonderful D. Hammond, in his Treatise on that Subject: and in
particular, whosoever desires to see the Feast of the Nativity vindicated from
the Imputation of Novelty, let them peruse Origin lib. 8. contra Celsum: and
his Hom. 3. in Math. the Treatise of Cyprian, on that day: and the Homily of
Chrysostom, to the same Purpose; and they will find each of them deducing it
from the Practice of the first Antiquity: yea, that the 25th of December is the
Anniversary of our Savior's Birth, (in my humble judgment) is notably
demonstrated by Baronius, in his Apparatus, and the Learned Mountague, in his
Answer to him: But most of all, by M. I. Gregory, Oxon: of whom it may be truly
said, That he has dived into the very bottom of Antiquity.

If these things, and such as these, were Universally practiced, a Liturgy
might be stolen in pedetentim upon this Church. And I wish we had a
well-reformed one, purified from the Dregs of Popery and Superstition, and
framed after the pattern of the most Authentic Liturgies of the Primitive
Church (of which the Learned G. Cassander has collected no small variety;)
that we may again resume the Face and Garb of a National Church; which has
been, too long, as a Body without the Natural Ornament of Skin and Muscles, or
as a flat Picture, not duly heightened with its Shadows: a Liturgy being
found, by the Experience of all ancient Times, as a necessary Hedge and Mound
to preserve any Profession of Religion, and Worship of God in a National
Church, from Irreverence, Confusion, and Contempt: without which Boundary, it
is impossible that a tolerable Uniformity should be long retained in any great
Incorporation of Christians. And it is observable, That M. Calvin himself, when
from Frankfort he had received an odious, malicious account of many Particulars
in the English Liturgy, (as any will acknowledge, who shall compare the Report
then made, with what he finds:) though he were so transported as to call them
Ineptias tolerabiles, yet in a more sober mood, he gave positive Approbation of
the same; as is evident from his Epistle to the Protector of that Kingdom; in
these words: As for Form of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I very much
approve that it be set, or certain; from which it may not be lawful for the
Pastors in their Function to depart: that so there may be Provision made, for
the Simplicity and Vnskillfulness of some; and that the Consent of all the
Churches among themselves, may more certainly appear: And Lastly also, that the
extravagant Levity of some, who affect Novelties, (or at the best, vent a
Rhapsody of pious Nonsense:) may be prevented. etc. Whence we rationally
infer; that they who endeavored the total Abolition of a Liturgy in that
Church, had a design to Reform, (or to say better, Deform) Geneva, as well as
England; and to chastise Calvin's Estimation of it, as well as that of the
English Prelates: Not to speak of that applause which the Learned Isaac
Casa^bon gave, of the great care of Antiquity and Purity observed in the
English Liturgy, proclaimed every where in his Epistles to all his Friends;
That there was not any where else in the World the like to be found, nor ever
hoped he to see it, till he came into that Kingdom. But it seems Hippolitus,
the old Martyr, prophesied of these Haters of all Liturgies, under the Notion
of Antichristian; (for all their Declamations against Antichristian Rites;)
For in his Book De Anti-Christo, he tells us; That in the times of Antichrist,
Ecclesiarum Aedes Sacrae, Tugurii instar erunt; pre^^osum Corpus and Sanguis
Christi non exstabit; Liturgia extinguetur; Psalmodiae decan^atio cessabit;
Scripturarum recitatio non audietur. And sure I am, at the Reestablishment of
this Government, it might have been introduced with as little Noise and Odium,
as the Governors themselves were; for this (...) Policy then might have done
the (...), even to have holden away the odious Name of the Service Book; which
(...) hateful to many who have a Zeal for the Reformed Religion, but not
according to Knowledge; they ignorantly imagining, that it is stuffed with
Popery and Superstition. As for any Expressions therein which sound harshly in
the Ears of tender Consciences; the Governors of the Church might have
indulged them that favor, as to expunge what they could justly pretend gave
the least Offense. But they neglecting to take Occasion thus by the Foretop,
they have ever since found it bald behind. Which puts me in mind of the great
Soloecism committed by the great Hannibal, in point of War, (though he was one
of the slyest and wariest Captains that ever lived:) who went not immediately
to Rome, after the mighty Defeat given to the Romans at the Battle of Cannae;
for during that great Consternation he might (as Rawleigh has judiciously
observed) easily have plucked up the Roman Empire by the Roots; but being too
much taken up with the Pleasures of Capua, and his Amors in Salapia, he lost
that Occasion, which he could never find again* and therefore was justly
upbraided by Maharbal, the Master of his Horse, in these Words, Vincere s^is
Hannibal, Victoria uti nescis. And gave occasion unto the Romans to say, Capuam
Poenis alteras ^uisse Cannas.

But in my weak judgment, the best Succedaneum to this neglected Solemn Fo^m of
Divine Service, and that which is also the best Expedient to pave the Way into
a more perfect one, is; To recommend unto all the Ministers of the Gospel, that
every Lord's Day before Sermon they read, with great Reverence) a Lesson at
least, out of the Old Testament; and a Chapter or two from the New; (this being
much more properly The Word of God, than what they preach:) that their People
may, in Process of time, be as well acquainted with the Historical part of the
Scripture, as with the Precepts, Promises, and dreadful Comminations of the
Gospel; For they are mere Strangers to Antiquity, who do not know, that
preaching was scarce the third part of the Solemn Service of the Lord's Day,
that being but a Tractatus (as Augustine testifies) on the Lesson which was
last read. And let them solemnly pronounce the Decalogue, and Apostolic Creed;
all these Steps of Divine Service being variegated and intermixed with short
Acts of Prayer and Praise. And sure I am, there is no Congregation (unless the
People thereof be very rough hewn: but will stand up (if desired by the
Minister to do so,) when he solemnly pronounces the Sum of the Moral Law, and
(as the Mouth of the People) makes a public Confession of Faith; whereby they
shall testify their willingness, through Divine Grace, to believe and obey all
that God has revealed and commanded.

And let not those, who have the Cura Animarum, forget, specially to enjoin
their respective Flocks to put themselves in a reverent Posture, when they
accost Heaven with solemn Acts of Prayer and Praise; that being indispensibly
practiced by all the Primitive Church, whose bodily Infirmities proved not an
invincible Impediment to them. And, seeing the seeking of a Blessing before
meat, and Thanksgiving after it, are brief Adorations of the infinite Goodness,
Let all Ministers by their own Example recommend a reverent Posture to the rest
of the Guests. Sure, it is a matter of Admiration, to see the Generality of
Fanatics (the Quakers only excepted: making their Graces (as they are usually
termed) commensurable with any pertinent Prayer that is void of Tautologies,
and yet not to accost the great Provisor of all the Families of the Earth, with
more Reverence than a Temporary Host. And when that short (but very
substantial) Hymn was sung, which is termed the Doxology, and is a direct
Adoration of the Blessed Trinity, (which if I were not ashamed of frequent
Digressions, I could easily evince by good Authorities, to have been composed,
as a lesser Creed, by the first Council of Nice* as a Testimony and Pillar of
the Catholic Verity, against the Arrians:) all they of the Primitive Church
stood up and uttered the same with an audible Voice, as a discriminating
Character of the Orthodox, from these detestable Heretics, the Cerinthians,
Samosatenians, and Arrians: (the Samosatenians being called Paulianistae, in
the 19th Canon of the Council of Nice from Paulus Samosatenus, the
Haer^siarcha, and pe^verse Bishop of Antioch.) For, though it is an
unquestionable Truth, That the Heart ought to be the Primum Mobile in all our
Acts of Divine Worship, without whose primary Influence and Concurrence, it is
at best but a Carcass of Devotion we offer unto Heaven; yet, seeing by the Law
of Creation and Grace of Redemption, we are bound to glori^ie God with our
Souls and Bodies. (for both are his says the Apostle.) Therefore when we make
our Addresses to the Throne of Grace, we are obliged to put them both in an
humble Posture of Adoration: the Primitive Christians being so far from
practicing that irreverent and lazy Posture of Sitting in the time of Prayer,
that Tertullian (as we find in his excellent Treatise De Oratione:) inveighs
sharply against those who did sit down instantly after Prayer; and he tells
them, that they upbraid God to his Face, that they are soon weary of the Duty.

And it were also very fit, that all Ministers were desired to exhort their
People, to hear reverently, and with discovered Heads, that Weekly Proclamation
from Heaven: (I mean the Preaching of the Gospel,) which was the constant
Practice of Constantine the Great, who was so far from covering his Head then,
that he could not be persuaded to forbear standing all the time of Preaching,
much less to sit in the time of Prayer: and of the two Theodosii, and
Martianus, the immediate Successor of Theodosius the Younger: and I wish that
of the Poet were fulfilled in this particular, Regis ad Exemplum totus
componitur Orbis. But the Deportment of the far greater number of those who are
called Christians, is so intolerably notorious, and desperately profane, that
if St. Paul's Infidel should come in, he would be so far from falling down and
Worshipping, that he would be presently bound to report, God is not in you of a
truth. Yea, some Christians do more reverence to the outside of a Church, than
we to the presence of God within it: These of Habassia, (says Alvarez) if they
pass by a Church (be their haste never so great) they instantly dismount, and
walk on foot, till they leave not only the Church, but also the Churchyard,
very far behind them. And, I fear, the Turks shall rise up in Judgment against
many Christians for their irreverence in Gods House; for (as Busbequius tells
us) if a Turk should but scratch his head in the time of Divine Service, he
would be verily persuaded that he should lose the Benefit of coming to Church
at that time: but with us it is Iniquity, even the Solemn Meeting. But take we
heed lest we come to know, that God was here, by his departure from hence; and
that Voice be uttered out of our Temples, which was once heard out of that of
the Jews, (...), Migremus hin^.

And, in sine, Let it be recommended to all Preachers, to humble themselves
when they ascend that Sacred Ambo, where they are to be the Mouth of the People
to God in Prayer, and the Mouth of the Almighty to the People in Preaching:
which Introitus they ought to commence with much more Reverence, than if they
were to begin a Dance.

Neither should we have such occasion to mind that famous Story (if it may be
so termed) of the seven Ephesian Sleepers; if the Governors of our Church,
during these eighteen Winters last bygone, had studied so much Uniformity, as
to be at the pains, unanimously to compile a plain and brief Catechism; (but
withal a material Sum of the whole Christian Doctrine) and that for the public
Use of this Nation: that every Country-Curate may not improve a Mode of his
own; which, if it be not contradictory, is at least disparate from the Platform
of his Neighbor: But that by a Form of sound words generally authorized, and
practiced, young ones may be early informed of the Principal Duties of Piety
they owe unto God, of Charity to their Neighbors, and of Sobriety to
themselves.

If such things as these were accorded unto, and accordingly performed, it
could not truly be said of the Governors of this Church, That they never yet
pursued the right Ends of their Government. Yea many such Acts would be a
sufficient Gagg to stop the Mouths of the virulent Adversaries thereof, who
stick not to say, That they look upon Bishops as the easiest Persons in the
World, who scarce take any thing else in hand, but to gather up their Rents;
and do apply to them that Blasphemous Character which Epicurus has given of
his imaginary Deity, That he is an idle Spectator of the Affairs of the World,
and does no more notice humane Actions, than a ^ational man does the Humming of
Gnats in a hot Summer's Day. They do also accommodate that Epicurean Motto unto
them, Satis magnum alter alteri Theatrum sumus: Some compare them to the
Hedg-hog, which rolls it self in its own soft Down, and turns out it is Bristles
to all the World besides: Yea some resemble them to a young Gentleman, who
takes a flying Crop of a Possession, and regards not the Reparation of its
Buildings: And Finally, some make no Bones to assimulate them to that fat Monk
in the Story, who (when the Abbeys were a going down) having received Assurance
of a Pension during his own Life, stroaked down his Belly, and said, modo hic
sit been, he cared not whether Religion did sink or swim. But leaving these
odious Comparisons, (as favoring too much of an Anti-Episcopal Spirit;) I
proceed to the end of this Article.

When such things as these are resolved upon for the Behoof of the Clergy, they
ought to be prudently recommended, but not imperiously commanded, under the
Notion of Church-Canons; For it is only a General Convocation that can make
them such; as being the sole true Representative of a National Church: And till
his Majesty's Authority be interposed, they cannot have the Force of Laws. It
being a well known Saying of Optatus Milevit. Ecclesia est in Republica, non
Respublica in Ecclesia. Let us therefore patiently wait till Divine Providence
give us serener times, and more Tranquillity in the Land, (for as Physicians
say, Cocta movenda sunt, non cruda.) and till it please his Majesty to indict a
General Convocation of the Clergy. (and, that the Determination of the
Circumstances of such a meeting, is one of the Royal Prerogatives, none, but
they who are Fanatically Principled, will Question.) But if once this Church
were so happy, as to enjoy, with his Majesty's Favor, such a Convention; then
all the ancient Canons, which are judged useful for this Church, ought to be
retrived: and whatsoever is (after mature Deliberation) found Convenient, pro
re nata, should be reduced into Canons, that all may know the proper Standard
of the Church.

And let an effectual Course be taken to suppress and eradicate all Schism,
Heresy, and Profaneness, out of this Land; that the Church of God may become
terrible to all such, as is an Army with Banners.

And let a door be opened to all Accusers (who are habiles in Law) to give in
Indictments, sub periculo, against any simple or organical Member of this
Church; the King's Majesty alennarly excepted; who (as Tertullian says,) is
solo Deo minor, and consequently has no Judge upon Earth. The same Father
usually terming the Supreme Magistrate, post Deum S^cundus: Parallel whereunto
is that of Optatus Milevit. Super quem non est nis^ s^lus Deus. But that
Churchmen must needs be more presumptuous than any Pope of Rome, who imagines
himself to be both infallible and impec^able: For, though there be some Roman
Doctors (especially the Canonists: so parasitical, as to adore that Bishop of
Rome as a Demi-God, and more than a man; and to teach, That he is Judge of all,
and can be Judge of all, and can be Judged by none upon Earth; yet the most
sober and judicious of them, even when they conclude him to be Major singulis,
yet acknowledge that he is minor universis, and consequently subordinate to the
jurisdiction of a General Counc^l. And that this was the Sentiment and
Determination of two late General Councels, (when the Pope's Usurpation was in
its (...) and Zenith;) is evident from those Instances, which the Acts of the
Council of Constance and Basil do afford us: (not to speak of that Anathema
which the Sixth General Council pronounced against Honorius of Rome, for being
a Monothelite. Vid. Council. 6. Gener. Act. 1, 4, 12.) For the first deposed a
threeheaded Cerberus, the simultaneous Popes, (so monstrous was the Roman
Hierarchy at that time.) viz. John the 24th, (or 23d as some reckon) called
Bal^hasar Cossa, Gregory the 12th, formerly named Angelus Corarius, and
Benedict the 13th, termed otherwise Peter de Luna; and in the Vice of these
Anti-Popes surrogated Martin the 5th. Likewise the Council of Basil pronounced
the Sentence of Degradation against Eugenius the 4th, and in his Place
substituted the Duke of Savoy, under the Name of Pope Foelix the 5th: and,
though Providence permitted not this Deposition to take effect ( Amadee being
at last content to exchange the Triple-Crown for a Cardinals Hat; which (as
Calvin says wittily) was a Loaf thrown into the Mouth of Cerberus:) Yet, that
the Authority of this last Council, was no less than that of the First, is
evident from the 39th Session of the Council of Constance. From which brief
History we may infer, That these Roman Doctors, who teach, That the Council is
above the Pope, would laugh heartily, if they heard any other Bishop pretend to
a Negative Voice in that Assembly: For if any Church^man dream of an
Infallibility in himself, he may be justly derided, as was that dissolute
Prince Demetrius, in whose favor the Athenians made that wild Decree; That
whatsoever King Demetrius should Command, ought to be held Sacred with the
Gods, and just with men. Yet I have heard it many times Debated as a Problem,
Whether some Bishops, or the Fanatics, would be more filled with consternation
at such a General Meeting of the Clergy. But it may be easily Determined, that
John the 23d, Paul the 4th, or any other Pro^ligate Pope had not more dreadful
Apprehensions of a lawful and free General Council, than some of those would
have of a rightly Constituted Convocation.

Vid. Can. Apost. 73.
Item Council. Gerundens. Can. 1. Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 1. and 4. (also the
5th and 17th Canons of the same Synod.) Council. Bracarens. 1. Can. 20, 21, 22,
23. (where Uniformity in all the steps of Public Worship is recommended.)
Council. Toletan. 11. Can. 3. Council. Milevitan. Can. 12. Council. Agathens. Can.
21. Council. Vasens. Can. 7. Council. Valentin. Can. 1. Council. Turonens. 2. Can.
14. Council. Toletan. 3. Can. 2. Toletan. 4. Can. 9. 12. Toletan. 5. Can. 1. In
all which, a Liturgy is recommended, and Ordained to be used in the Church;
viz. A Public Platform, as to the matter of Solemn Prayer, Praise, and the
Administration of the Blessed Sacraments of the Gospel; None being permitted in
the Ancient Church to invent and vent Battologies or Tautologies, nor any
irreverent Expressions (favoring either of Blasphemy, or pious Nonsense at
the best) in the Solemn Acts of Divine Adoration. In the ensuing Canons, the
Solemn Anniversary Festivals and Fasts of the Church are appointed. Vid.
Council. Elibertin. Can. 43. Council. Agathens. Can. 14, 38, 39. Council.
Aurelianens. 4. Can. 1. Council. Matisconens. 2. Can. 2. Cujus haec sunt verba;
Pascha nostrum, in quo Summus Sacerdos and Pontifex, pro nostris delictis
immolatus est, omnes debemus festivissime colere: and in illis sanctissimis
diebus, nullus servile opus audeat facere. (where by Pascha we are not to
understand Easter Day, but also Good Friday, which was that great day of
Expiation.) Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 6. Statuimus in sexta feria Passionis
Domini Mysterium Crucis (quod ipse Dominus cunctis annunciandum voluit)
praedicari, atque indulgentiam criminum clara voce omnem populum praestolari;
ut Poenitentiae compunctione mundati, Venerabile Festum Dominicae
Resurrectionis, remissis iniquitatibus, suscipere mereamur, Corporisque ejus
and Sanguinis Sacramentum, mundi a peccato sumamus. Et Can. 7. ejusdem
Concilii; In die Passionis Domini, jejunium (praeter parv^los, senes, and
languidos) quicunque art peractas Indulgentiae preces, solverit, a Paschali
gaudio depellatur; nec in eo Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis Domini
percipiat, qui diem Passionis ejus per abstinentjum non honoravit. Which is
more fully expressed in the 89th Canon of the 6th General Council, where we
have these words; Qui dies salutaris Passionis in jejunio, oratione, and
compunctione cordis peragunt, oportet circa horam mediae noctis Magni Sabbati,
jejunos esse: sum Evangelistae Matthaeus and Lucas, ille per Dictionem,
(vespere autem Sabbati,) hic vero per, (profundum Diluculum,) tarditatem noctis
nobis praescribant. Vid. Council. Bracarens. 1. Can. 4. Council. Caesar-August.
Can. 2. and 4. Item vicesimo primo die, i. e. a 16. Kal. Ianuarii, usque in
diem Epiphaniae, qui est 8 Idus Ianuarii, continuis diebus nulli liceat se de
Ecclesia absentare, nec latere in domibus, nec secedere ad villam, nec montes
petere, ne^ nudis pedibus incedere; sed ad Ecclesiam concurrere: quod qui non
observaverit, Anathema sit in perpetuum. But it seems this endless Curse is
little regarded by these Fanatics, whether Preachers or others, (for that four
Leaven is not yet sufficiently purged out of those who Officiate under
Bishops;) who are so far from Preaching on the Anniversary of our Blessed
Savior's Nativity, that they cannot be persuaded to countenance with their
presence the shortest Homily thereon, no not on those days of the Week,
whereon, by Public Authority, Royal Burghs are appointed to have Sermon. And
how can it be expected, that these Non-conformists should cordially bless
Heaven for common Mercies, when they cannot find in their hearts to adore
Solemnly the Infinite Goodness for that unparalled Demonstration of Free
Love? Heaven having no greater Gift to bestow, neither was Earth capable of a
greater, than this matchless Mercy, which was celebrated by the Heavenly Anthem
of Celestial Quiristers, in the dawning of that blessed Morning, wherein Oriens
ab alto, that bright Morning Star first appeared; yea, wherein that Glorious
Sun of everlasting Righteousness arose with Healing in his Wings, upon a sinful
World. Vid. etiam Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 3. Statuimus, ut saltem semel in anno,
a nobis Concilium Celebretur, etc. And a little after, Omnes autem qui causas
adversus quoscunque habere noscuntur, ad idem Concilium concurrant; and pro
compellendis quibuscunque personis, quidam Executor a Principe postuletur, etc.

In regard we have cited many Canons at length, for the Confirmation of this
Article, and that there be many Testimonies of the Fathers inserted in the Body
thereof to the same purpose; Therefore, left this Enchiridium should be too
much dilated, we have forborne to allege any more Authorities to that Effect.

Article XV.
Mat. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20, 21. and 5. 4, 5, 7, 11. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
1 Timothy 1. 20. Tit. 3. 10. Rev. 2. 2, 14, 15, 20.

BUT till this Church be blessed with such a General Rendezvous of its Clergy,
let every Bishop vigorously set about his Duty in his own Sphere. For what One
said well concerning a General Reformation; That if every man would Reform
himself, there would little remain for the Supreme Magistrate to do, may be
here fitly applied; For, if every Governor would act his part within his own
Precinct, sure there would be less trouble given to a General Assembly,
whenever Providence shall give the occasion thereof. Therefore let them use all
Means possible, which are purely Ecclesiastic, to reduce all Schismatics to
the path of Unity, and all Heretics to the path of Verity. But if (after much
patient waiting for the fruit of their Labors) there be no hope of their
Conversion, then let them proceed to a Judicial Conviction of these obstinate
Sinners, who are found to be Irreclamable: and let the Church Censures always
prevent the Castigations of the Civil Magistrate; it being a most invidious
thing, for the Governors of the Church to clamor upon the Criminal Judge to
Fine and Confine those Delinquents, whom they have scarce ever noted as such in
their Ecclesiastic Courts. This preposterous Method looks, not only like the
Duo gladii of Boniface the 8th, but does also resemble Pope Julius the second,
his throwing S. Peter's Keys into Tyber, that he might betake himself unto S.
Paul's Sword.

But this was not the Method of the Primitive Church, which permitted none of
it is Organical Members to meddle, either directly, or indirectly, in the
Matters of Blood, or bodily Coercions; as is evident from the ancient Canons;
the passive Effusion of the precious Blood of Holy Jesus, and of his Blessed
Martyrs, being a rich Compost to the Soil of the Church; but not the active
Shedding of the Blood of others, under a Pretext of Religious Zeal for the
Enlargement thereof. Which looks liker Mahumet's way of Propagation, than the
Tranquil Methods of the Gospel of Peace.

Primitive Christianity (which did almost infinitely transcend this Age, in the
Glowings of Divine Zeal,) knew no such Calentures of Passion: Bellona was not
then looked upon as a Nursing-Mother to the Church; Nor Mars as a God of
Reformation: Neither were the Laws of Christ like those of Draco or Mahumet,
written with the Blood of his Enemies; though he sealed them with his own, and
sprinkled them with the Blood of Martyrs; as Tertullian says: It being very
observable, that the Temple of Ianus was then shut, when the Prince of Peace
was born. For the Church is sufficiently furnished with Means of saving Souls,
though she never draw a Temporal Sword: The Diseases of the Mind not being
cureable like those of the Body; for Asperitie is no proper Remedy for them,
but only Reason, and Lenity of Words. Those good Emperors, Constantine,
Valentinian, the two Theodosii, and Martianus; proceeded unto no greater
Extremity against the most to no greater Extremity against the most damnable
and incorrigible Heretics of their Times, than the Sentence of Banishment.
Which Christian Lenity was consonant to the Judgment of Tertullian, cap. 24.
and 28. Apologet. And in his Book to Scapula, we have this excellent
Expression; Sed nec Religionis est cogere Religionem; quae sponte suscipi
debet, non: vicum and hostiae ab animo libente expostulentur. With whom S.
Cyprian joins Issue, Epist. 62. and Athanasius, Epist. ad solitar. Vit. again.
and Orat. 1. cont. Arrian. Hilar. con. Auxent. and lib. 1. ad Constan. Ambr.
Epist. 32. and lib. 2. Epist. 27. Hierom. Epist. 62. ad Theoph. August. lib. 3.
con. Crescon. Grammatic. c. 50. Nullis bonis in Ecclesia Catholica placet, si
usque ad mortem in quemquam, licet Haereticum, saeviatur. Whence we may
perceive, that the Apology of some Ecclesiastics, for imbruing their hands in
the blood of that detestable Heretic Servetus; is point blank contrary unto
the unanimous Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

And if we shall alter the Scene from Geneva to Rome, it will be found no less
tragical and bloody: For (as East and West meet together at last, by going
asunder) so the Jesuit and Fanatic trust most unhappily in that Antichristian
Conjuncture of Treachery and Cruelty, and in those damnable Arts of Rebellion,
and King-killing; to which execrable Assasinations, and perverse Intendments,
Britain has been too long the fatal Theater. And though these pretend to be
Christians, yet I suppose they have no other Apology for their Perfidiousness,
than that of a barbarous King, who said, That his Tongue was not made of Bone.
For it is impossible that Christian Religion should afford them any; it being
very observable, That in all those famous Persecutions of the Primitive Church
(whereby many Millions were absorpted in the gulf of Death:) not one was
found, who thought it lawful to make use of defensive Arms, (though in a just
cause) against the supreme Authority then in being; but did conquer their
Victors and Tormentors, with Constancy and Patience; it being most false what
Bellarmin asserts, that it was not a Moral, but a Physical incapacity, which
restrained them; For Tertullian in his Apologetick does clearly evince the
contrary.

Whence we may easily conclude, in what Shop those Offensive Arms were framed,
wherewith Hildebrand assaulted the German Emperor Henry the fourth, and by
what hellish Council his Successor Paschal the second, was influenced to excite
Henry the fifth against his Father and Sovereign; not to speak of those Storms
which disquieted Frederick the first and second all their Days; the Clouds
that ingendered them being exhaled at Rome. But we had need to transcribe the
Annals of Germany, to enumerate the Hostilities of the Roman Bishops against
the Emperors their Lords; eight of which they excommunicated, and when that
was done, then they made the Temporal Sword cut off those whom the Spiritual
had struck at. Which Antichristian Methods became so formidable to the
languishing Emperors, that Rodulph of Habspurg, (the Founder of the Austrian
Greatness) would not go into Italy, to receive the Crown of Gold at Rome, after
he was chosen Emperor; calling that bloody City, The Lyon's Den: And unto
those who urged him to go thither, to receive that third Ceremonial Crown, he
frequently uttered that of the Poet,

Olim quod Vulpes aegroto, cauta, Leoni Respondit, reseram etc. But Germany was
not the sole Theater of the unchristian Plots and Practices of these
Anti-Primitive Prelates; For, no little Trouble was given to Philip the Fair,
of France, by P. Boniface the eighth of whom it was truly said, intravit ut
Vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus est ut Canis. Likewise Lewis the 12th had his
share of Disquiet from that Martial Prelate Julius the second, by whose
Fulminations the poor King of Navarr was Thunderstruck without Remedy.
Ferdinand of Arragon, having indeed a most Catholic Appetite after the
Dominions of his Neighbors; not to speak of the barbarous Assasination of
Henry the third, and fourth of France, by two desperate Villains, who had been
carefully instructed by their Ghostly Fathers in that meritorious Art of
King-killing: Sixtus Quintus having the forehead, in a public Consistory at
Rome, to celebrate that Iacobin Friar, as a notable Martyr upon that account.

But we need not cross the Seas for Instances of this Nature; For if Innocent
the third (the Hatcher of that most seditious and perfidious XXX Canon of the
Council of Lateran:) with his Legate Pandolphus, were now alive, they would be
found to talk of that inauspicious King of England, named John, his constrained
Resignation: and it is no small wonder, after so many Centuries of years, to
hear again (in this Age) any noise of that vain and illegal Pretense which all
sober Persons imagined, had been blown up long ago by that Subterranean
Powder Plot: but it seems, they intend to give a Demonstration to the World,
that no Prescription of time can render a common Whore honest. And if a
grain-weight of Christian Ingenuity, or Humanity, can be found in that late
prodigious Conspiracy against our Church and State, let the Universality of
that infernal Design, with those base Appendages of diuturnal plotting, vile
Ingratitude, Treachery, and Cruelty, be the sole Judges thereof.

And, in fine, it is my humble Judgment, that, till these Coals of Juniper be
quenched, which have too long inflamed all the Vitals of the Christian Church
(I mean the Puritanical Papist, and Jesuited Puritan: our unchristian
Animosities and Feuds (many whereof are mere Logomachies, and groundless) shall
never be thoroughly extinguished, till the devouring Fire of Hell consume these
lesser Flames.

Neither will I ever forget that notable Instance of this Concordantia
Discordantiarum, which that excellent Historian I. A. Thuan. affords unto us,
in his 56th Book, where he tells us, that the Daemagogues of Paris, and
Pulpiteers of Rochel, centered in that point of treacherous inhumanity, viz. to
put to Death all Prisoners of War, even after the public Faith had been given
unto them. But Tractent fabrilia Fabri. Therefore the Antisignani of the
Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, and Eutychians, (not to speak of many other
Heretics:) were not only convened before the respective General Councels,
which are accounted the most famous of them all; but were also judicially
convicted and Sentenced with the highest Censures of the Church, before the
Civil Magistrate took any other notice of them as Delinquents, than to compel
those erroneous Schismatics to appear personally before the Ecclesiastical
Court, to which they had been legally summoned: The Church in these Days
laying down this, as an inviolable Conclusion, that they would not fail to do
their own Duty; and if the Civil Magistrate afterward neglected his, let him
answer to God for it, who punishes Potentes potenter: and (...); as says
Herodot. in Chione and Seneca, omne sub regno gravi^ri regnum est. And in that
great Audit, every man must stand and fall to his own Master. The Brachium
Seculare being indeed fit enough to restrain exorbitant Practices, but it has
no direct Influence upon irregular Judgments; and I fear, it makes more
Hypocrites than sincere Converts; Fire and Faggot (the beloved Argument of the
Roman Church*) having a more natural Tendency to a preternatural Consumption,
than to a Spiritual Conversion. Therefore the Arrians (whose Courses were
generally very violent, and bloody:) are deservedly looked upon as the genuine
Parents of these Coercive Motives, and disingenuous Arts, which were judged
very heterogeneal to the Nature and Constitution of the Church; which as it
transacts only in Spiritual Matters, so it could inflict no other than
Spiritual Censures and Chastisements. But when the fiery Dominicans arose, (the
Dream of Dominicus his Mother being a sad Prognostic of the Violence of that
Order*) they might justly have been termed, in this Regard, Arriani Redivivi;
so merciless was that Persecution of the poor Waldenses, to which they carried
both Lanterns and Faggots: Which bloody Method continues to this day in the
Spanish Inquisition: these violent Spirits being usually the cruel Lords of
that infamous Judicatory, whose inhumane Machins resemble the wild and
Barbarous Fancies of Mezentius and Procrustes, the unnatural Bellowings of
Phalaris his Bull, the Turkish Gaunching and Impaleing upon Stakes, much rather
than the harmless Engines of the Gospel. And if a Pythagorean (...) were
possible, I would imagine, that there had been a transmigration of the Souls of
these Dominicans into the Bodies of some late Presbyterians; one egg, or Fish,
not being found liker to another, than is the Resemblance of some of these
Incendiaries: on which account, one of their abortive Issue has (in one of his
Pamphlets) not unfitly termed their Covenant, Taht great Instrument of Blood;
whereby he verifies that common Observation, Omnis Apostata persequitur suum
Ordinem. But seeing the Dominicans were nothing else but the Emissaries of
those Masters who pretend to be S. Peter's Successors, and in their fierce
Anger, and cruel Rage, have cut off more than the Ears of many who were much
more innocent than that Servant of the high Priest; Therefore I cannot forget
to take notice, in this Place, of another great Abuse committed by some Popes;
For the Croysade (which was at first designed to rescue the Holy Sepulcher from
the Possession of Infidels; to which great Undertaking many Myriads of
Christians were animated by the preaching and Miracles of S. Bernard:) was so
perverted from that Primary pious Institution, that it was employed to the
utter Extirpation of many thousands of the simple and harmless Inhabitants of
the Mountains of Languedoc, and Provence. Such is the Affectation of the Roman
Bishops to wear the Livery of that Scarlet-colored Beast.

But the bright Olybian Flames of the Primitive Church (which were not Ignes
comburentes, sed lambentes:) hated, with a perfect Hatred, those Sanguinary
Spirits; as may appear from the Deportment of S. Martin of Tours, who (as
Sulpitius Sev. reports) refused to communicate with Ithasius and Idacius, two
Spanish Bishops, because they did prosecute unto Death some of the
Priscillianists, and that before the Tyrant Maximus; (though it cannot be
denied, but that they were detestable Heretics, even Manichaei Redivivi, and
consequently but half Christians.) So great was the Aversion of these truly
Evangelical Spirits, from Shedding of Blood, even in the Cause of God.

Yea more than so: so great was the Antipathy that S. Martin had conceived
against such violent Courses, that when he was informed, the Tyrant had
empowered some Military Tribunes to go into Spain, and there to depopulate the
Country, and pillage the goods of all those who would not conform, he
immediately went to that Emperor, and freely told him, That this pretended
Zeal was not kindled by a Coal from the Altar of God, but rather an infernal
Fire bred in the Breasts of some furious Bishops, and fomented by the Venom of
that old Red Dragon, the natural Feuel thereof: the Event whereof could be no
other, than that of a furious Tempest, or overflowing Inundation, which bears
down all before it, and puts no Difference betwixt the Good and the Bad, Old or
Young, Male or Female, but sweeps away all promiscuously: or like unto a number
of ravenous Wolves let loose upon a Multitude of harmless and naked Animals,
which have not the Faculty to discriminate betwixt the mangy Sheep and those
which are sound in the Flock; So it should fare with those defenseless
Creatures, if an Hostile Army should invade a peaceable People, living securely
without any Fear or Apprehension of such a sudden Deluge; Friends and Foes,
Heterodox and Orthodox, Conformist and Nonconformist, would be all overflowed
alike: the insolent Soldier having no other Eyes to discern (but what Nature
has given to all living Creatures;) betwixt the Faith of an Heretic, and the
Orthodox, save only by their Paleness and Garb. So that they who are accustomed
to Rapine, almost from their Infancies, if they found rich Movables, and
easily transportable to their own Countries, whether the Owners were rich in
the Faith, or not, they would not concern themselves with that nice
Distinction; But, as it was said of the days of Caligula, That it was then
Crime enough to be rich; so all should be Fish that should come in their Net:
so impartial would these rude Soldiers be. And the Emperor would be so far
from attaining his End, that it would rather harden these deluded People to
persist in their Nonconformity; they looking upon themselves as Martyrs (at
least Confessors) for their imaginary Faith: the most ignorant among them being
at least so intelligent, as to understand, that this is not the peaceable
Method of the Gospel, to proselyte any to the Christian Faith, but point blank
contrary thereunto. By which (truly zealous) Intercession, this Devout man at
last diverted the Tyrant from that most cruel Design.

But, in fine, I shall remit them to the serious Consideration of the State and
Practice of the Primitive Church, when the Civil Magistrate was no Christian,
but a Persecuter of that way, whose Concurrence they could not expect to their
Discipline, but rather a violent Opposition thereunto. And if any of them
seemed to put to their helping hand, it was not any Love to the Discipline of
the Church, but Ragione del' Stato, as the Italians phrase it; Thus the
Emperor Aurelianus did drive away Paulus Samosatenus, that Arch-heretick, and
Bishop, from Antioch; but it was out of no Principle of Respect to the Church
that he did so, (for he was accounted one of the Persecuting Emperors;) but
from Reason of State, because that proud Heretic was a great Incendiary in
that City. Let therefore the present Church imitate that excellent Pattern of
the Primitive, before the Halcyonian day of the great Constantine.

But if (in ordine ad Spiritualia) they will needs make their Address to the
Secular Magistrate, for the Coercion of Delinquents, I wish it were rather in
the matter of gross Scandal, contumaciously persever'd in, notwithstanding of
the highest Censures of the Church inflicted upon them; than of the Sentiments
of the Judgment which proceed not the length of unwarrantable Practices. For
they who are incorrigibly profane are more overawed by the Terror of man, than
by the Fear of God; and much more by the Temporal Sword of the Criminal Judge,
than by the Spiritual Sword of the Church; for habitual Practical Atheists may
(without breach of Charity) be presumed to be such in Speculation. I shall only
instance the Profanation of the Lord's Day by Salmon-Fishing; there being a
vile Pack of brainsick Heretics in this Land, who allow the Practice of it. I
am indeed far from pleading for a Judaical Sabbath in this Church; But for any
who are called Christians to be so employed in the time of God's Solemn
Worship, must needs be very odious in the Sight of Heaven, and exceedingly
scandalous in the Eyes of all those who are devoted to a Religious Service.
Neither find we any such Irregularities tolerated in any Christian Church,
which passes not under the name of Barbarous; no, not in Geneva, or Amsterdam.
I know certainly, that this Insolency has been represented, both privately and
publicly, to the chiefest Governors of this Church; and they obtested, to
implore the Assistance of his Majesty's Secret Council, in order to the
effectual Suppression of that Scandal, as being so reflective upon the present
Government: but I fear, it has not yet been done, for there is neither Bruit
nor Fruit of that Address.

But if the Governors of our Church desire to avoid those bitter Sarcasmes,
Medice cura teipsum; and Turpe est Doctori etc. De ingratis etiam ingrati
queruntur: qui non ardet, non accendit: Si vis me flere etc. Which (in plain
English) import that we should wash our own Mouths before we apply Gargarisms
to others; Or (to use our Savior's Phrase) pull out the Beam, before thou espy
the Mote; then let them have a special Care, not to be found Profaners of the
Lord's Day themselves. Which Scandal' they ought to shun the more solicitously,
because it was one of the Rocks on which their Predecessors did split; if we
may believe the verbal Assertion of many living Witnesses, and that which a
late learned Writer has consigned in print: Which Reflection should serve, at
least, as a Pharos, to prevent all Shipwracks of that nature for the future.
But how this Beacon has been observed, may be perceived from the ensuing
little Story. A Bedal of a Country-Church being questioned, not long ago,
before a Country-Session, for bringing home a Burden of Flax on the Lord's Day,
made this Apology for himself, That not many Days before, there had been a
Bishop in that Village, who in his Return from the North, (where he had been
visiting his aged Father, of the same Order with himself;) lodged all Night in
the Minister's House, though the Incumbent was not at home; and (not staying to
supply that Vacancy) traveled many Miles that Day of his Removal, which was
the Lord's Day, with a great Baggage-Horse in his Train, whose Burden was far
above the Proportion of Flax he had brought home; Whence he inferred, That he
thought the Bishops had brought such Carriages in Fashion on the Lord's Day,
and that he might lawfully imitate them who were the Fathers and Lights of the
Church. From which blunt, but true, Story, (for the poor doorkeeper was
censured in Public, for all his imaginary Authentic Apology.) I shall also
deduce this Inference; That all Churchmen should be as vigilant as Dragons,
over their Conversation in the World, that they give not the least Offense unto
any; (that Stumbling Block occasioning the most dangerous Fall, which is laid
by the imprudent deportment of an Ecclesiastic.) The Plurality of men being
more inclined to live by Examples than by Rules, the former being much more
obvious to Plebeian heads than the latter, besides it has a secret Magnetical
Virtue, like the Loadstone it attracts by a Power of which we can give no
Account. Yea such is the perverseness of humane Nature, since that woeful Lapse
of our first Parents, that the generality of men are more prone to follow Evil,
than to imitate that which is Good.

But, that we may shut up this Point, I shall add no more to the Prosecution of
Delinquents in Foro Ecclesiastico, but only this Wish, That the Governors of
our Church do not (by their applying violent Corrosives to some who are
obnoxious to Error, and too great Lenitives to others who are Scandalous,) give
occasion unto any, of applying to them that usual Observation concerning the
Roman Church, That she punishes more severely the Violaters of her own Laws,
than the Transgressors of the unquestionable Laws of God. I cannot deny, but
that it does exceedingly grate my Spirit, to hear the Adversaries of our Church
upbraid the present Government with a Connivence at some Scandals, by saying,
That it was not so in the Time of their Covenant, (for so they term that
Rebellious Combination against Church and State:) and that Presbytery was a
better Bulwark against Error and Profaneness, than Episcopacy; I fail not
indeed to tell them, that it must needs have been a very precious Rampart which
was cemented with the Blood of Kings; and that I could give them an account of
many Tyrants (both in regard of Usurpation and Domination) who made very good
Laws, and put them severely in execution; For, Ex malis moribus bonae oriuntur
Leges. Yet I wish from my very Soul, That our Church (as it is now Constituted)
did in Piety, Charity, and Purity (both as to Error and Profaneness) outvie
all the Sects and Conventicles in the World.

See the Acts of the First General Council at Nice, under Constantine the
Great, against the Arrians. The Second General Council at Constantinople, under
Theodosius the Great, against the Macedonians. The Third General Council at
Ephesus, against the Nestorians, Auspiciis Theodosii Iunioris. The Fourth
General Council, against the Futychians, under Martianus. The Fifth under
Justinian the Great, against the T^ta Capitula. And of the Sixth, under
Constantinus Pogonatus, against the Monoth^^^es. (Not to speak of many
Provincial Synods during that Interval.) Vide Council. Ta^raconens. Can. 4.
Council. Antisiodor. Can. 34. Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 30. Tolet. 11. Can. 6. Tol.
1. Can. 5. Conc. Matiscon. 2. Can. 1. Where we have these express words, Nemo
Die Dominico ^alem sibi necessitatem exhibeat, quae jugum cervicibus jumentorum
imponere cogat. Fslote omnes Hymnis and Laudibus Deo intenti. Si quis vestrum
proximam habeat Ecclesiam, properet ad eandem; and ibi Die Dominico seme^ipsum
precibus lachrymisque afficiat, etc. Vid. etiam Council. Antisiodor. Can. 16.

Vide Hieronym. Comment. ad cap. 4. Thren. Peccantes mansuetudine provocentur,
non austeritate abjiciantur: August. (scribens ad Proculianum, partis
Donatianae Sectarium;) Doceri, and moderata ratione ad Colloquia and amicas
Collationes invitari debent, qui cogi non possunt: Decere quippe ^erae
Religionis cultores, ut a perpetuo proposito non recedant, vincendi in bono
malum. Idem ad Cecilianum Praesidem i^a scribi^; Vt tumor sacrilegae vanitatis
terrendo potius sanetur, quam ulciscendo resecetur* and Epist. ad Aurel.
Episcop. Si quando minae ab iis qui praesunt adhibeantur, id cum dolor fieri
oportere, ultionisque ^^^tum ex Seripturis intentari debere, ne ipsi in sua
potestate, sed Deus in little sermon timeatur. Et in Luculenta illa ad Bonifac.
Comitem Epist. idem subdit; In hujusmodi Causis, ubi pergraves dissentionum
s^^ssuras, non hujus aut illius hominis est periculum, sed populorum strages
jacent, detra^endum esse aliquid severitati, and majoribus malis sanandis,
charitate subvenien^lum. ( Quod adeo in Ecclesia obtinuit, (...) Sententia
semel atque iterumin Gratiani Decretum transcripta sit.) B. Ambrosius a
Valentiniano Imp. puero, ad Maximum Imp. missus (sub id tempus quo iste
Tyrannus Priscilliani caput amputasset:) in Relatione sua testatur, cum
Treviris esset, abstinuisse se ab iis Episcopis qui (...) communicabant, and a
side devios ad ^ecem petebant. Vid. etiam Greg. 1. Moral. Lib* 2^* Par. 4. c.
6. Et Lib. 2. Epist. 52. Lib. 11. Ep. 15.

Article XVI.
1 King. 21. 19, 20. and 22. 14, 15, 16, 17. 2 King. 3. 13, 14. Isa. 58. 1.
Ier. 1. 17, 18. Ezekiel. 2. 6. and 3. 9. Mat. 10. 28. Act. 4. 19, 20, 29. and 9.
27, 29. 1 Timothy 5. 21. Tit. 2. 15.

IN the foregoing Article we have hinted at the Execution of Discipline. And
seeing diverse Appeals come from Inferior Church-Judicatories to the Bishops,
and their Diocesan Synods; Let me entreat them with a holy and discreet (...),
to reprehend all who are found guilty within their Jurisdiction, by
discountenancing and Censuring all who are Contumacious in Schism, obstinate in
Profaneness, and pertinacious in Error; especially, if they be Apostates from
our Religion, to Quakerism, Popery, or Atheism. For, if they be observed to be
destitute of that Courage or Resolution which is necessary in any Governor, it
will give occasion unto many to conclude, That God never Called them to that
Office, seeing they are not e^du'd with the Spirit of their Calling* For (as
the Spirit of Government was imparted by Heaven to the Son of Kish, before his
Election to the Regal Office, so) the Almighty sends none to labor in his
Vineyard, but he first furnishes them with competent Abilities to work there.
The Passion of Fear (as Syracides tells us) betrays those Forces which Reason
brings into the Soul, and many times argues an evil Conscience within; For the
Righteous are bold as a Lion; but the Timorous and Wicked are hide-bound,
irresolute, resty, and unactive, always obnoxious to a pannick fear, and void
of zeal for the Glory of God, through Want of the Virtue of active Fortitude;
so that they are many times afraid of their own shadows. And it was upon the
account of that destitution, that the Primitive Church did declare the Lapsi
and Clinicks, who were Baptized in that condition, irregular, and inhabiles to
Ossiciate at the Altar; the Former, because they wanted Christian Courage; as
is insinuated Can. X. Concilii Magni Nicaeni: and the Later should not be
Ordained, because their Faith (who are Baptized on their sick Bed) seems not to
be voluntary, but of necssity, which is explicitly given as the reason of that
Interdict, by the 12th. Canon of Neo-Caesarea. And, without all Peradventure,
He (and he only) is framed by Heaven to be an approved Governor, either of
Church or State, who can say in sincerity, with S. Chrysostom, I fear nothing
but Sin: For as the Poet says, Degeneres animos Timor arguit.

Now the Courage of a Church-Governour imports such a Magnanimity that excludes
Pusillanimity on the one hand, and Temerity on the other; that foelix temeritas
(which, as Seneca observed, attended the Actions of Alexander the Great) being
unsuitable in a Churchman, who ought always to order his Affairs with
discretion; For Christian Prudence admits of the Sagacity of the Serpent, in
conjunction with the Harmlesness of the Dove. Therefore this Virtue in an
Ecclesiastic, must also shut out that Volatile Salt which is observed in some
who pretend to Greatness of Spirit, and should be reduced to such a Fixation
that amounts to an immovable Constancy in that which (after mature
deliberation) has once been well resolved upon, in conformity to that Advice
of Judicious Salust. Antequam incipias Consulta. -- ubi Consulueris mature,
facto opus est. But that Fixation must never come the length of a Caput
Mortuum; For, as a faint-hearted Creature is easily frighted by the Audacious;
so an unconstant wavering Spirit is, with no less facility, imposed and wrought
upon by the Crafty.

That Character of Socrates; Semper eodem incedebat vul^u; and that Prince's
Motto, Semper idem, are decent Epithetes in a Churchman. As the inflexible
Justice of Aristides merited that Elogium, That the Sun might be sooner
diverted from its Course, than that Noble Athenian from the Path of Justice; So
the inviolable Resolution of Athanasius to adhere unto the Truth, procured that
deserved Encomium, Sedem potius mutare voluit quam Syllabam: Yea, less than a
Syllable (even the interposition of one Letter into the Churches Creed,) would
have composed the Difference betwixt the Orthodox and Arrians, and have
procured eternal Peace to the Christian World, all the Years of the Reign of
the Emperors Constantius and Valens: and that (in all probability) much more
effectually, than the Nine disparate Creeds Penned by the Arrians, during the
Reign of Constantius. But they adhered closely to the Council of Nice, and did
choose rather to cast themselves upon the Providence of God, than to consent to
the least Alteration; they perceiving that the substitution of (...) for (...),
did not only pervert the Sense, and enervate the Authority of that great Synod;
but that it did totally invalidate its Determination for Consubstantiality. For
the Orthodox considered, that as Wisdom is always justified of her own
Children; So that Wisdom which descends from above, is first pure, then
peaceable; And that Optabilius est Bellum pace impia, and a Deo distrahente.
But I greatly fear that there are too many in this Iron Age so flexible, that
they would Cause to renounce, not only any Letter of the Alphabet, but also all
the Dutch Consonants, and Selavonian Words, yea, both A, and O, before they
willingly abandoned their Seats, they being Willows, and not Oaks: Which was
given as the reason, by an old Courtier, why he stood (but I suppose not
uprightly) in favor, during all the Twenty four Years of Bloody War betwixt
the Red Rose and the White: such persons having a Versatile Ingenium (as was
said of Cato the Elder) which can uti foro, and servire Scenae.

But a prudent Resolution with a Courageous Constancy, in a Church-Governour,
will not fail to animate all the Presbyters within his Jurisdiction, to
exercise Church Discipline impartially, without any fear of finding their own
subordinate Authority baffled in the matter of Appeals, when Scandalous persons
provoke from their Award to the Bishops Tribunal; which is too frequently
practiced in this Age. But if (in lieu of strengthening) they perceive their
Superiors palpably weakening their hands, by conniving too long, and indulging
too much unto some Delinquents, it will give occasion, even to those who cannot
but approve the form of Government, to wish that they had never seen such
Governors, who regard not the Glory of God, or the Good of his Church, nor the
Credit of their own Office, nor the Reputation of their Clergy; and that they
are too like unto K. Saul, given rather for a Curse, than a Blessing unto the
People of God: All Laodicean Bishops, and all who (as the Satyr said) blow hot
and cold with one mouth, being hateful in the sight of God, and odious in the
eyes of those who have a pure zeal for the Glory of God, and the Good of his
Church; for Corruption optimi est pessima. Yet I doubt not, but that this free
Remonstrance (though made by the most Conform of the Clergy,) shall verify
that of the Royal Prophet, Tange montes, and fumigabunt; which by some of the
old Fathers is applied to these rancorous Vapors which barefaced Truth exhales
from some Mountains of worldly Dignity. And from these little partial Policies
(which savor too rankly of a timorous sinful Compliance:) Judicious Spectators
will take occasion to compare them unto Aesop's Dog, who would neither do good,
nor let good be done; and to the Crimaean Tartars, who will not suffer the
Polonians to manure a parcel of fertile ground interjacent betwixt them, and
that part of the Ancient Scythia Europaea, neither will they be at the pains to
cultivate it themselves. I deny not, but Pax cum hominibus, and Bellum cum
vitiis, is an Ancient Christian Maxim; But sure I am, Pax cum hominibus and
vitiis, is an Antichristian Conjuncture.

But the impartial execution of Discipline has also a Train of many other
excellent Advantages following after it; For all the Cardinal Virtues do
evidently and eminently appear therein: And it is an imitation of the (...) of
our Great Master; as also the best Expedient to persuade all Ranks of people to
comply with their Admonitions, and to submit enirely and cheerfully to the Yoke
of Discipline, when they perceive their Rulers to be no Respecters of Persons,
and that their Justice is so far blind, as not to put any difference (in their
Censures) betwixt the Noble and the Ignoble, the Rich and the Poor. But if any
Bias be perceived toward the Left Hand of Secular Interest, unbyassed persons
will be apt to resemble those Canons whereby they pretend to be regulated, unto
Spiders Webs, (as one compared Solon's Laws;) which catch the lesser Insects,
but the greater ones pass through them Scot-free. It was certainly the
Consideration of the unmalleable impartiality of a Prelat, which prompted that
Great Emperor Theodosius to say, That he knew no Bishop but Ambrose. There is
but little fear, in this biased Age of the World, of the violation of that
Antique Precept, Ye shall not countenance a poor man in his Cause; but the
Reverse thereof is too frequently transgressed, it being an old Complaint Dat
veniam Corvis, vexat Censura Columbas.

Another Advantage of the impartial Execution of Discipline, is, a great
Conformity to the Method of the Primitive Church. And sure if the prudent
practice of many disused Penitentiary Canons were retrived into this Age, it
would resemble the Face and Garb of the Ancient Christian Church, much more
than it does. Me thinks, it cannot but be a matter of great admiration unto any
that is acquainted with the Primitive History, to find (even before the Roman
Empire turned Christian;) such a Crowd of Penitents, especially the Lapsi,
willingly offering themselves to undergo the severest Penances enjoined by
those Ancient Canons, which were so strict and diuturnal, that many of them
required many years appearance in Sackcloth and Ashes, before they were
accomplished; the Church-Guides wanting the Brachium Saeculare to second their
Discipline, and many times meeting with much opposition therefrom. Neither had
the Penitents any Temporal Hopes or Fears to induce them, but only a firm
belief of the Future Rewards and Punishments of another World. The Principal
Canons which contain a Platform of that Ancient Austere Discipline, and which
do enjoin an impartial Execution of Church Censures upon all Delinquents
without respect of persons, shall be subjoined at the period of this Article. I
shall only here take notice of the (...) of the Primitive Fathers; For in some
Cases, these Disciplinarian Canons permitted a great Latitude to the Governors
of the Church, to dispense with the (...) or rigorous execution of them, upon
the account of Humanity, Charity, Prudence, and Compassion, especially toward
those who were in danger to be swallowed up of too much Grief, or to be
absorpted in the Gulf of Death, before they were reconciled to the Church by
fulfilling the whole Canonical time of Penance. This Discretion is recommended
in the 11th. Canon of that great Council of Nice: And the reason of this
Remission of the Rigor of the Law in some Cases is expressed in general, by
the 7th. Canon of the XIth Council of Toledo; where we have these very Words;
Ecclesiarum Rectoribus discretio esse debet, ne per inconditam and indiscretam
Disciplinam, subeant Homicidii nolam. And the 12th Canon of the same Council of
Toledo may be termed a Commentary upon that 11th of the Council of Nice. Now
this Relaxation of Penance (which was nothing else, but a Dispensation with the
Rigor of the Canon, upon Prudential and Charitable Motives,) being a great
Favor granted by the Poenitentiary, or Spiritual Guide to the Public or
Private Penitent, it was fitly termed by the Primitive Church, an Indulgence;
Which Word in the later Ages was grossly abused by the Roman Church, in the
matter of Purgatory; and the unlawful Gain which redounded from that Doctrine,
reckoned upon as one of the Three Spiritual Fountains of the Temporal Intrado
of the Popes of Rome.

But whether this Politic Invention did contribute more to the Avarice, or
Ambition of that Hierarchy, can hardly be determined. But sure I am, the
Primitive Fathers knew no such Lucrative Doctrine: And if they could have heard
Ticelius, with the rest of his Dominican Pardon-mongers promulgating that most
Scandalous Sale of Indulgences in Germany, (where, for a little Money, they
promised in the Pope's Name, That the Living should be preserved from the
Flames of Purgatory, and the Dead immediately extricated out of them;) they
would undoubtedly have concluded, That these Praecones came from Hell, to
publish that Simoniacal Doctrine, of which we find ne (...) quidem, in all the
authentic Decrees of the most ancient Bishops of Rome: Yea to him that reads
the Decretals, it may plainly appear, That an Indulgence is, an Absolution from
Penance imposed in Confession only; which was the Opinion of that Learned
Cardinal Cajetan, after he had once and again conferred with M. Luther at
Ausburg; the Judgment of that great Cardinal being homologated by that
ingenuous (but miserably deluded by his Cardinals) Pope Adrian the 6th, who was
also a great Divine, and had written on that Subject long before Luther thought
to handle it. As for the Era of that unhandsome way of gaining money; It was
certainly posteriour to the 11th Century, and did not commence, till Urban the
second, having granted a plenary Indulgence and Remission of all Sins to
whosoever made War in the Holy Land, to regain the Sepulcher of Christ out of
the Hands of the Mahumetans; which was imitated by his Successors for some
hundreds of years; Some of which granted it to those who maintained a Soldier,
in case they could not go to war themselves in Person: and after, in Progress
of time, the same Indulgences were given for the taking of Arms against those
that obeyed not the Church of Rome, (at which we hinted in another Article,)
although they were also Christians; and for the most part, in^inite Exactions
were made, under these Pretenses; all which (or the greater part) were applied
to baser Ends and Uses, than was pretended. But it is high time to crave pardon
for this brief polemical Digression, and I shall speedily shut up this Article
with an Answer to one or two Objections.

Peradventure some are ready to say, it is impossible to retrive that Primitive
Pattern unto this Age, unless it were reduced (whereof there is but little
hope,) unto that intense Contrition, and Zeal, Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility,
Patience and Temperance, which abounded in the Infant Christian Church. Yea,
more than so, There were many Schismatics in the Primitive times, (such as the
Novations, Donatists, Miletians, and Luciferians.) and some Heretics,
(especially the Montanists, called otherwise Cataphrygians,) who, with a
malicious vigilance, watched for the halting of the Orthodox; which made them
bestirr themselves the more vigorously against Delinquents; and with a seeming
Severity, lest these watchful Dragons should upbraid them with too much Lenity.

For Answer; It is a matter of great Regrett to all the true Lovers of Sion,
that these Christian Virtues are at the best practiced among us in too remiss a
Degree; And it should be the Endeavor of all Christians to come up to the
length of that grand Exemplar; for we have Souls to be saved or lost, as well
as they; and there is no less Obligation lying upon us to glorify God, than
was on them. And if every one who professes that Holy Calling, would in his
own Sphere move aright through Divine Grace, we needed not doubt, but that
Golden Age would, in a great part, be brought back to the Church, and that we
should anticipate that blessed Millenium which was expected by the most ancient
Primitive Fathers, before the Consummation of the World. To which Purpose the
most Learned M. Mede applies the Doctrine of the ancient Chiliasts, and
vindicates the Sectators of Papias, from the Imputation of S. Hierom.

As for the other Objection; It is but too evident, that we have but too many
Heretics and Schismatics living amongst us, whose Lyncaean Eyes are as
maliciously observent of the Defects, and Neglects of our Church, as any of
those of the Primitive times were: and whosoever has not noticed this, it may
be truly said of him, that Domi peregrinatur.

Vid. Canones fere omnes Concilii Illiberini, Neo-Caesariensis, and Ancyrani.
Council. General. 1. Can. 2. and 19. Council. Tolet. 3. Can. 2, 16. Council.
Agathens. Can. 37. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 74. Council. Turon. 2. Can. 19.
Council. Hispalens. 1. Can. 3. Council. Matiscon. 2. Can. 14. Council. Toletan. 4.
Can. 31. Tolet. 6. Can. 3. Synod. Quinisex. vel Council. General. 6. Can. 95.

The Practice of holy Bishops being the best Commentary upon their Doctrine,
before we subjoyn any of their Testimonies for the Confirmation of this
Article, I shall give a brief hint of some Histories, in order to the
refreshing of the Memory of the judicious Reader; for he must needs be a
Stranger to all Church History, who is altogether unacquainted with these
ensuing Instances.

The first is of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, a blind Bishop, yet he fought not
Andabatarum more, but boldly told the Emperor Julian to his Face, That he was
glad the Almighty had bereaved him of his Eyes, that he might not see such a
vile Apostate as he was. Such was the Freedom of Spirit wherewith even an
Arrian Bishop was endued in Behalf of the Christian Religion. But the (...) of
S. Basil (a greater, and much more Orthodox Bishop,) was so admirable in the
Eyes of the Lieutenant of the Emperor Valens, that this Heretical Servant told
it as one of the greatest Wonders in the World, unto his Arrian Master, That
there was no Threatening imaginable could deterr that Metropolitan of
Cappadoc^a, from the Path of Truth and Virtue. St. Chrysostom his Freedom of
Spirit in reprehending the Vanities of the Empress Eudoxia, was so great, that
some supposed it had too much of the Satyr in it: and that his wonderful
Eloquence would have run in a smoother Channel, if a little Gall, Vinegar, and
Vitreol, had not sometimes troubled the Stream. But he deserved from all (and
in a right Sense too) to be termed (...), or a kneeless Bishop, he being
inflexible to all the Petitions of Ignorant and Scandalous Ecclesiastics, who
lived within the Priphery of his Patriarchate: Neither could all the Hopes or
Fears, wherewith the greatest Secular Persons in the World accosted him, divert
that Resolute Prelate, from that which he judged just and Good, and a part of
his Episcopal Charge.

Though we might subjoyn many other Examples to this Purpose, yet I shall
forbear, for the reason above frequently expressed. Yet we cannot balk in
Silence the well-known Instance of that most worthy Prelate of Millan, who
repelled, for the space of eight Months, that good Emperor Theodosius the
Great, from the Holy Eucharist, (that blessed Sacrament being frequently
celebrated in the Western Churches, at that time;) and that for his temerarious
and cruel Sentence in the mattter of Thessalonica. But whether the (...) of
that great Bishop, or (...) of that great Emperor, were most admirable, I
shall not determine; but shall shut up this Historical Account, with that
Resolute Answer which this courageous Prelate gave to Valentinian the second,
Emperor of the West; who (being instigated by his Mother, an Arrian, to give
the Principal Church at Millan to those Heretics) did meet with this
unexpected Repulse from S. Ambrose, in the Porch of his Cathedral, Non prodam
Lupis gregem mihi commissam; hic occide si lubet. In which Expression his holy
Boldness, in Conjunction with a due Submission to superior Powers, affords new
matter of Admiration.

Now, in regard that this little Cento of History has wasted more Paper than
at first I imagined it should do, we shall therefore add no more Authorities to
this Article.

Article XVII.
Mat. 23. 6, 7, 8. etc. Act. 21. 20. Romans 12. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 15.

WHatever Bombast Epithets others give unto them, Let all Bishops when they
Converse and salute one another viva voce, or by writing, use no other
Compellation than that of Brethren, which is most consonant unto the Primitive
Pattern; all Christians then living as Brethren, and denominating one another
under that notion of Fraternity; (which word was much used in the Infancy of
the Church: and from it the Pagans also took occasion to traduce our Religion.)
But none used it more than the Ministers of the Gospel, whether Bishops or
Presbyters; it being (as Baronius that great Annalist has well observed;) the
most usual Compellation of all Bishops among themselves, where there was a
parity of Age, or no great disproportion. But when any of the Order, who had
stepped in upon a decrepit old age (called by the Latins, Aetas Capularis, and
Silicernium:) did converse with one of the same Order much younger than
himself, he usually called him Son, and vice versa, the younger termed the
elder Father; (though none of them were so young, but that forty Winters (at
least) had snowed upon their Heads; yea, very few Presbyters were Ordained in
these Times of Persecution, whose Pulse had not beaten twice twenty years:) To
which, if some late Critics had well adverted, they would have made Use of a
better Argument to repudiate the pretended Areopagite, (as there want not some
solid reasons to do the feat,) than his impertinency, in calling Timothy, Son,
at the Close of his Book, Of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; though (say they) the
said Timothy was equal to him, (if not his Superior) in Piety, Doctrine, and
Authority, both being Bishops of famous Churches, and Ephesus (where Timothy
Governed) rather a Mother Church than Athens; and that it was the General
Custom of the Primitive Church, for Bishops to call one another Brethren: But
this is a mere Fallacy, a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter; For in
respect of Age, he might have called him Son, though in many other things he
had been his Superior; seeing we find, more than a thousand years after that
time, (when Christian Simplicity and Humility were much rarer in the World,)
that Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople, flatly refused the Emperor thereof,
(whose, almost desperate, Affairs, in that Conjuncture required as great
Compliance with the Latin Church, as Conscience could possibly permit,) to
prostitute himself to the Bishop of Rome, by giving him the usual Adorations of
the occidental Church at that time; and plainly told him, that if Eugenius the
4th (by whose Influence the Council of Florence was celebrated, which was first
assembled at Ferrara:) were a man much elder than himself, he would call him
Father; if but of equal years, he would term him Brother; if much younger, he
would style him Son, without the ^east mention of his pretended Title of
Holiness. And this was all the Compellation and Obeisance could be obtained
from that peremptory Patriarch.

It were also desirable, That all our Bishops took Place among themselves
according to their Age; (excepting the Metropolitan or Primate, who is constant
Praeses of that Sacred College, and who usually in the Primitive Church was
eminent above the rest, not only in all laudible Qualifications, but also in
respect of Age.) For in doing so, they would not only imitate the Sons of that
great Patriarch Jacob, but they would show themselves humbly obsequious to many
ancient Canons, which appoint the Precedence of Bishops among themselves, to
be, at least, conform to the Era of their present Dignity (of which we shall
give an account at the end of this Article;) it being a most indecent
Spectacle, (and that which in the City of Sparta would have appeared a very
ridiculous Pageantry:) to see a Reverend old man treading upon the Heels of one
who might have been his Grandchild, and yet of that same Order with himself.

But whether young or old (if they be once of the Order) there is all the
reason in the World, that all of them should be interested in all the material
Concerns thereof. Time was, when there were no such peculiar Precincts in this
Church, which are now termed Dioceses; but all of that Sacred Order Governed
this Church Communi-consilio and Suffragio, and therefore were denominated
Episcopi Scotorum, in general: And without Peradventure, all Bishops and
Presbyters, Canonically Elected and Ordained, are, Iure Divino, Organical
Members of the Catholic Church, (as is sufficiently demonstrated by M. Hudson,
and diverse others:) though we should prescind from all Limitations of Diocesan
and Parochial Churches; which restrictive Boundaries were only determined Iure
Humano: (Damasus and Platina testifying, that P. Evaristus, primus in urbe
Roma, divisit Titulos Presbyteris.) For, if this most reasonable*
correspondence, and good Understanding were observed amongst all the Bishops of
a National Church, there should be no occasion given unto any of that Order, to
regret that they are seldom called to give their Advice in the most important
Affairs of the Church; far less their Consent required to the Management of
them. Nor should they complain, that when their Assistance is offered, they are
used much worse than the Pedarii Senatores at Rome; the point blank contrary
being put in execution to that which the Plurality had resolved upon; as if
they were not the Edifiers of Sion, but the Builders of Babel, and understood
not one another's Language. Which Slight put upon Bishops, may a little
alleviate the Neglect of Presbyters; For, Solamen miseries, etc.

But I would humbly tender my Advice to the Governors of our Church, not to
use such singular Methods, and dis-joynted Counsels; lest they give occasion
unto intelligent Persons, for to resemble them unto Lewis the Eleventh of
France, of whom it was said, That he carried all his Council about with him
upon one horse. And Philip de Commines, that excellent Historian, observes it
to have been the cause of the final Ruin, and fatal end of that King's Rival,
Charles the Warlike, That he harkened to no Counsel, save that of his own.
Perhaps some of these Leading-men have not only the Vanity of Themistocles the
Athenian General, who dispatched all the important Concerns of his Office, the
last day of his Abode in the City (as Plutarch reports in the History of his
Life;) but also the ambition to be thought no less sufficient than that
Perpetual Dictator, whose great Parts did cast such a dark shadow upon his
insignificant Colleague in the Consulship, that they, who in mockery did
calculate the Fasti Consulares, designed that Year thus; Iulio and Caesare
Coss. (the remaining Bibuli sitting rather as Ciphers, than Consuls, in the
Church of God.) Yet let them be never so sharp, I hope they will acknowledge
there is some acuteness in that expression of the Wise Man, In the multitude of
Counselors there is Safety; and some sense in that old Maxim, Plus vident
oculi quam oculus; and in this also, Vis Consilii expers, mole ruit sua. For
they who will not give ear to the Advice of any other man, (be he never so
godly and Learned) must needs be such Opiniators, as Iamblicus out of Aristotle
speaks of, who imagine themselves a middle sort of Rationals, betwixt God and
Man. Yet these Fantastical Semidii, shall not only dye like men, but they have
good reason to fear, that there shall be no such King found as David was, to
follow the Bier, and to Lament over them thus; Dyed these Generals of the Ten
Tribes as Fool dies? Nay, on the contrary, they may apprehend the Fate of
Iehoram, that wicked King of Judah, who departed Not being desired; i.e. None
seriously affecting the prolongation of that Life, which was so useless and
noxious to the World. And let them remember, that there is scarce any Ancient
Council (if ever they did read them;) whether General or Provincial, (so that
we need not amass Citations to this purpose;) but Ordains every Metropolitan to
Assemble a Council of his Comprovincials once every year at least, that with
common Advice and Consent they may resolve on those things which concern the
Good of that Church, at whose Helm Providence has placed them.

And it is very observable, That there have been some in the World, who, having
dreamed of an (...) in themselves, (as if these Fantastic Deities did emulate
one of the Names of the true God, which is Schaddai,) yet have been led by the
Nose by some Sycophantine Creatures of their own; which sons of Ptolomee
Ceraun. and Campobasso, will not fail (when occasion serves) to cut the Throats
of their deluded Patrons. But whatever Success their Subterranean Attempts may
have, that Ecclesiastic must needs be too prodigal of his Fame, who is
surrounded with such disingenuous Varlets, that cast so dark a Shadow upon him,
which proves not only a great Scandal to the Church, but also a very great
Reflection upon his own Judgment and Honor; For (as Constantius Chlorus said
well) He who is not faithful unto God, can never be faithful unto man. It was
an old saying, Nulla fides pietasve viris qui Castra sequuntur.

I wish there be no ground to apply this to any of the Spiritual Militia of
this Age: and that none of them may be found like to that perfidious Grecian
Lysander, who vaunted of himself, That, as some men cheated young Children with
a little dose of Sweet Junkets, so he used to Trepan men with Oaths. And it is
beyond all doubt, that they must needs be men of prostituted Consciences, and
who would make no bones of falsifying their own Oaths for a little Worldly
Interest, who endeavor to persuade a Metropolitan Council to become guilty of
Perjury; without all Peradventure, such Persons would not think any singular
Wickedness too great for them to boggle at.

Vid. Council. Arelat. 1. Can. 9. Cujus haec sunt verba; Vt nullus Episcopus
alium Episcopum conculcet. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 83. Council Milevit. Can.
13. Council. Agathens. Can. 16. Council. Bracar. 1. Can. 24. Cujus haec sunt
formalia verba; -- Item placuit, ut, conservato Metropolitani Episcopi Primatu,
caeteri Episcoporum, secundum suae Ordinationis tempus, alius alii sedendi
locum deferat. Council. Antioch. Can. 9. and Council Carthag. 4. Can. 25.

Vid. Greg. 1. Lib. 12. Epist. 15. Cum certum sit Honoris ista Distinctio, ut
ipse prior and major habeatur, qui prius fuerat Ordinatus, Communitatis
consilio, and concordi action. Clem. Alex. Paedagog. and Lib. 5. Strom.
Tertull. contra Marcion. Lib. 4. and contra Psychicos. ( though he had followed
the Error of Montanus, before he wrote that Invective against the Orthodox;
yet there be some sad Truths in it.) Orat. Gregorii N^zianz. post reditum.

Article XVIII.
Act. 20. 30, 31. Romans 16. 17. Philip. 3. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11.

HAving hinted already at the Sentence of Inhability pronounced by the
Primitive Church against all those who had been Public Penitents, Declaring
them for ever incapable to Officiate at the Al^ar, whether they were Candidates
of (...) Holy Function, or already in Orders; It (...) here subjoyn, That they
took the same course with all those who deserved to be such, (suppose they
continued for a time Refractory to the Discipline of the Church;) whom they
reduced, if of the Clergy, to the Laick-Communion, and thought it favor enough
in doing no more. Which Censure was not to participate of a mutilated
Sacrament, (as some ignorant Papalins pretend, in their pitiful Arguings for
that detestable Sacrilege:) but to be in the state of Laics, that they should
not any more enjoy the Honor of sitting among the Clergy, or of being reputed
such. And they must needs be void, not only of Greek and Latin, but of common
Sense too, who do not perceive that to be the genuine Import of those numerous
Canons of the Eastern and Western Churches, which have pronounced that kind of
Censure against the great Delinquents of the Clergy, these refractory Persons
being so much the more Criminal, because they added Contumacy to their Guilt,
and were many Removes from Conviction.

I wish from my very heart, that the same Method had been used in this Church;
which would have obviated that great Reproach which has of late befallen it,
in reference to those of the Clergy, who engaged into a Schismatical and
Seditious Combination against the Government of Church and State; that
pernicious Conspiracy levelling both at Prince and Priest, though many
well-meaning Creatures were seduced by these Ignes fatui, like those simple
Souls which followed Absalom to Hebron. Yet this was not the sole Aggravation
of their guilt; For (as if it had been too little for them to become once the
Sons of the Devil;) they confirmed that hellish Confederacy by reiterated
Oaths, in Compliance with that old Maxim, Tutum sceleribus per scelera est
iter. And (not satisfied with raising a devouring Fire in this national
Church;) they rested not till they promoted that Combustion, by throwing
Firebrands into the Bowels of our Neighbor Kingdom; (as if they were the
genuine Issue of Semele, after Jupiter had approached unto her with the Ensigns
of his Deity.) which, raging there much worse than Aetna or Vesuvius could have
done, or the most violent Vulcano in the World, inflamed all the Vitals of that
well constituted Government: the Universal Conflagration of this poor Island
being carried on by these Boutefeu's, with no less Pretense of Divine Zeal,
than if they had fetched the first coal thereof from the Altar of God.

If Justice had been done on those Incendiaries, they would at least have been
reduced ad Communionem Laicorum; and they ought to have looked upon it as a
very great Favor indulged them, to have been permitted to remain in Statu quo
prius, without any other Chastisement, than the Corrodings of their own
Consciences, (when they reflect upon the Catastrophe of that horrid Tragedy
they had been Acting; which was, the Barbarous Assassination of one of the best
of Princes.) and a final Desperation of being Advanced to any higher Degree in
the Militant Church.

That Heretics and Scismaticks, even after they have returned with penitent
Hearts to the Catholic Church, should look upon it as a very great Favor, to
be permitted to continue in the Order wherein they were before that Scandalous
Lapse, (yet absque omni spe Promotionis,) is so evident from the ancient
Fathers, that we need not wast any Paper thereabout: there being no less than
thrice mention thereof in prima Causa secundae Partis Decreti Gratiani. Vid. Q.
1. C. 42. and C. 112. Q. 7. C. 21. In all which Paragraphs, that Expression is
still mentioned, Vt in magno habeant beneficio Tolerantiam in Statu quo prius
permanendi, absque etc.

But O! How my heart does ach, (For, as the Tragedian has said, Curae leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent,) when I consider, what a Scandal the Preferment of
some of these, has given to the Church of God. Their grasping of that which
formerly they had solemnly abjured, and persecuted odio Vatiniano, as one of
the strongest Limbs of Antichrist, puts me in mind of that of the Poet, Ille
Crucem sceleris pretium tulit, hic Diadema. Which Honorable Elevation is too
apt a Temptation to pave the way in corrupt Nature unto inveterate Knavery,
when it is observed, That early Villainy is prosperous in Youth, and has the
hap to be Crowned in old Age; unless it be such a Mock-Diadem wherewith an
Ambitious Nobleman was once Stigmatized in this Land. To which unhappy
Advancement and ominous Elevation, as the Causa defectibilis, (together with
that Curse which usually attends such Weather-cocks,) many are apt to impute
the Non-pursuance of the true Ends of this present Government, and the
re-establishment thereof on sure Foundations; that Proverb being too often
verified, (...). i.e. Mali principii, malus exitus: and Errors in prima
concoctione are most dangerous. For, Sir John Presbyter is scarce yet warned to
Remove from his Usurped Possession, save only, that in lieu of a Presbyterian
Moderator, we now have a Presbyterian Bishop, invested with a new Title, and
larger Revenues.

And what greater Demonstration need we of it than this, That some Presbyterian
Preachers, and Ministers too, are Tolerated, by the sole Authority of some
Bishops, to enjoy the Officium and Beneficium of those Churches wherein they
have been Bellows of Schism and Sedition: and never yet acknowledged any
Church-Judicatory higher than their Kirk-Session, since the reestablishment of
this Government? Which is a sufficient evidence, that simile simili gaudet, and
Birds of one feather flock together. For if there were not such Bigots to
cajole the Populace, the Fanatics of this Land would soon crumble away to
nothing.

Another evidence of the Continuance of their doting upon their Darling
Presbytery, is, Their Design to depress (as much as possibly they can) those of
the Conform Clergy, who have been constantly Loyal to Church and State. Who (in
his right Wits) would imagine, when any Episcopal See, Theological Chair, or
Headship of a College is vacant, but that they would be ready (secundum vires
Inventarii) to prefer unto those Vacancies, a well-qualified Person, who would
be fast to their Government, upon the account of his Loyal Principles? But we
see the contrary practiced; Their old associates in that Hellish Combination
must be the only men of whom they are fond; whereby they embrace Ixion's Cloud
instead of Juno, and verify the common Proverb, Quos Jupiter vult perdere,
illos dementat: and Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? which join issue with that of
Homer, Talis est hominum Terrestrium men's,
Qualem quotidie ducit Pater Virorumque Deorumque.
But -- aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo. For (these being the inveterate
Socii Criminis) they are sure they will never upbraid them, either directly or
indirectly, with their former Immoralities; For, Carere debet omni vitio, qui
in alterum dicere paratus est. And if any of them should prove such bold
Adventurers, they have this recriminating Repartee in readiness, for such
shameless Upbraiders, Quamvis dignus essem hac Contumelia, indignus tu qui
diceres tamen; or that other, which is parallel thereto, Loripedem rectus
irrideat, Aethiopem albus.

But it is a matter of Lamentation, that their Endeavors of Depression have
proved too successful. (though, Nascitur indigne per quem denascitur alter.)
For, (suppose we had lived the Life of Nestor) none could remember, that ever
they saw this Holy Function under so much Obloquy and Contempt, as it has been
these few years past. For, unless a man have something else to Commend him than
the Dignity of his Office, (though it is most Sacred, and should render the
Exercisers of it every way inviolable:) yet it is no (...) to protect him from
the Scoffings, and scurrile Expressions of the Profane; nor from the
Undervaluings of those who pretend to some Shadow of Civility and Religion. Yet
I should wish, (in behalf of the Church) That, what is grated from the
Circumference, were at least, cemented with the Center. But alack! we find
there is such an unhappy Conjuncture in this Affair, that there is too perfect
a Resemblance thereof, unto Pharoah's Dream, of which we read, That the lean
and ill-favored Kine did eat up the first seven fat Kine, yet it could not be
known that they had eaten them up; for they were still lean and ill-favored,
as at the Beginning.

But that we may put a Period to this grating Article; I do firmly believe,
That if his Gracious Majesty had been well informed of those deplorable
Inconveniences, He would have chosen rather to have sent down some English
Doctors to have governed us in prima instantia, than have permitted any of
those Willy-wisps to jump into these empty Chairs; our Neighbour-Church being
such a fertile Soil, that it could easily spare a Charitable Antidote against
the Famine of another; (though, to speak Truth, it is a kind of Nazareth to our
wildest Fanatics; for they cannot foresee, that any Good shall come from
thence.) Yea, I am con^ident, if our own Jerusalem had been searched with Light
Candles, as many, who have been constantly Loyal, (and have suffered much too
upon that account;) would have been found to be Pares Negotio, who are
inferior to these late Daemagogues in nothing that is truly good, and much
superior to them all in real Honesty. Yea it is the Opinion of many judicious
Persons, That some leading Secular Subjects, whose Hearts were not well
disposed toward the Government, had a hand in the Advancement of such; that
through their sides (which were too patent to Reproaches) this sacred Regiment
might be easily wounded: their feeble Arms not being able to susslaminate that
Burden, they conjectured that the weight thereof would make them faint at last,
and so permit that celestial Load to fall to the Ground, before an Hercules
could be found to support it with his Shoulders.

But as for those who longed for the Reestabliment of that ancient Government
upon lasting Foundations; and cordially wished to see all that Dirt of Obloquie
and Contempt, which had been thrown in the Face of that Primitive Regiment, and
sullied it for half an Age, so wiped off, that it might shine with a greater
Luster than before: these well-wishers knowing, that outward Esteem and
Reputation is the same to great Persons (especially of the Clergy) which the
Skin is unto the Fruit: For, though it be but a Slight and Delicate Cover, yet
without it, the Fruit will presently dis-colour, and rot. Sure it would never
have entered into the minds of those real Friends of the Church, that no better
Expedient could be found to appease a raging Sea, and to procure Halcyonian
Seasons unto that Storm-beaten (and almost Shipwrack'd) Vessel, than to invert
the Story of Jonah by placing those runnagate Prophets at the Helm of the
Church; the more dexterous and auspicious Pilots being, in the mean time,
thrown over Board, into a Sea of Confusion and contempt, like to the scattered
Limbs of Innocent Absyrtus, and all for that end to retard the just Pursuit of
a Criminal Medea.

But, seeing it has been the unhappy Fate of this Church, that such Persons
have become the Steer-Masters of that fluctuating Ark; yet true Repentance
being (as S. Hierom has said) Optima Tabula post Naufragium; I should wish,
that there had been a day of Solemn Humiliation appointed, wherein these
Fugitive Lapsi, might have given Glory to God, by confessing before all his
People, (and that from deep Conviction too) a penitent Sense of their former
Schismatical and Seditious Courses. Which Exomologesis (in my humble Judgment)
should have been found more justifiable, and much more edifying too, than to
attest the Searcher of all hearts, That their Consciences did still approve
that persecuted Way, even then when they were preaching, and acting with all
their Might against it: whereby they detected themselves, either to have been
Hypocrites all that time (than which Heart, and a Heart nothing is more odious
in the Sight of that God who delights in Uprightness:) or at least, that they
would have others to repute them such.

For, I deny not the truth of that Maxim, Ne pudeat ad meliora transire, the
meaning whereof, as to the present case, is this; That these Malefactors should
not be ashamed to repent of their former Perverseness, and to learn more
Candor and Christian Ingenuity for the future. But, I fear, that many of those
who were Protei before the year 1660, if there come a new Revolution, (which,
as long as I breath, I shall every day pray God to prevent,) would easily
become Vertumni: And that the canting Language of a bold Usurper, would cast
them into a new Paroxysm of their old Vertigo; so that they should again become
the Ecebolii of their Age.

Vid. Council. General. 1. Can. 9. Council. Elibertin. Can. 30, 51, 76. Council.
Arelat. 2. Can. 25. Council. Aurelianens. 4. Can. 8. Council. Toletan. 4. Can.
52. Council. Valentin. Can. 4. Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 68. Council. Tolet. 1.
Can. 2. Council. Agath. Can. 29. 33. Council. Illerdens. Can. 5. Council.
Aurelianens. 3. Can. 5. Council. Matisconens. 1. Can. 2.

Vid. Tertul. Apolog. Arnob. Lib. 7. adversus Gentes. Eusebius. De Praep. Evang.
Lib. 12. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. contra Julian. Apostat. S. Basil. Lib. De Spiritu
Sancto. S. Ambros. Lib. 2. De Offic. Chrysostom. Lib. 1, 2, and 3. De Sacerdot.
Greg. 1. Lib. 4. Epist. 17. and Lib. 7. Epist. 25. Isidor. Hispal. De Eccles.
Offic. Lib. 2. Bern. De Consid. Lib. 3, 4.

Article XIX.
THIS Article concerns only those Bishops who are Chancellours of Universities:
And I wish they look upon that Honorable Prerogative, as a special part of
their Province; having a particular Care, that the respective Houses entrusted
to their Charge be well Governed, by causing exact Discipline to be observed in
them, and edifying Doctrine always taught, even all the Learned Languages, and
Liberal Arts, if there be competent Maintenance settled for these several
Professions, or which may be provided by a right improvement of the old
Revenues, and the encouragement of pious Christians (who are in bonis) to make
some Charitable Donations for that effect.

And let them regard all Professors impartially, by hugging them all (as a
common Father) with an equal Paternal Affection; provided they be men of
Conscience, Learning, Prudence, and Authority, joined with a faithful
Sufficiency to exercise their respective Functions seasonably and diligently.
And, above all, that they be Persons of Loyal Principles, both in reference to
Church and State: as also, peaceably disposed, and averse from intrinsecal
Factions. As for these Salamanders, who (like the Seditious in Jerusalem) are
still jarring within, when they should be opposing the Common Enemy from
without, let such be speedily turned out, lest that Brood of the Viper at last
tear out the very Bowels of their Mother.

But, seeing the Education of Youth, at their first appearance upon the
University-Theatre, is immediately entrusted to the care of the Professors of
Philosophy; Let not these Masters be permitted to be vain in their Conversation
or Apparel; (as if they were Schoolboys themselves, who needed to be tutored,
and have not as yet attained to that measure of Prudence, as to govern
themselves aright:) but let them be ordered to be patterns of Piety, Gravity,
Sobriety, and all kind of Temperance, to Young ones; that they may edify them
both by their Example and Doctrine.

And let them be careful to teach Youths the most Solid Parts of Philosophy;
viz. The most useful part of Aristotle's Logicks, (which was his greatest
Talent wherein his strength did lie, and whereby he did merit most from the
World:) Remitting the vain pursuit of these Aereal Notions concerning
Universal, Ens rationis, etc. to Brainsick Creatures, whose (...) it is,
Festucas legere, and chief Employment, Nugas and quisquilias prosequi. Let them
be also taught somewhat of the Physics, Ethics, and Metaphysics: But, I
humbly suppose, Moral Philosophy may be more exactly learned from the
Platonists and Stoics, than from Aristotle's Ethics; viz. The Books of Plato,
Hierocles, Plotinus, Epictetus, Simplicius, Antoninus, Arian, Cicero, Seneca,
and Plutarch: But seeing Christians are to call in Auxiliaries from such, there
is no question but Thomas Aquinas his Secundae Secundae would be very useful in
this Affair. And, I should wish, that the most Learned, Solid, and Discreet
Philosophers of an University, or Nation, were employed, not only to draw up an
exact Systeme of Moral Philosophy, but also of Natural, Collected from Des
Carts, Gassendus, the French and English Virtuosi, not forgetting the Learned
Works of Sir Francis Bacon, (whose profound Philosophical Wit gave the first
Rise to the Modern Experimental Philosophy:) especially his Natural History and
Novum Organum; yea, his Advancement of Learning, his History of Winds, and The
Prolongation of Life, would be found also good Adminicles (...) such a Design.
But, as that Systeme should be very material, so it ought to be succinct, like
to that brief (but excellent) Epitome, composed, as some suppose, by M. Arnold,
and termed Ars cogitandi, which is a notable Summary of Logic. Such a Systeme
should serve, at least, as a Text, both to Masters and Scholars; a little
Latitude being indulged to Professors to Paraphrase on that Diuturnal
Ephemerides. But let not capricious Brains presume to set forth a new
Philosophical Almanac every year, with a design to put the former out of Date,
till a new Authority re-enjoyn it.

But, above all, (in destitution of a particular Professor of the
Mathematics) Let every Master of Philosophy Teach his Scholars every Year some
of the most useful Species of that excellent Science; viz. Arithmetic,
Geometry, Geography, and Astronomy, which will be found infinitely more useful,
than these Operosae nugae, taught heretofore in those Places; which have no
better Effect, than to stuff the Brain, like to a Bubble of Water, or a blown
Bladder; and which directly resembles those delicious Viands wherewith
Necromancers pretend to feed their Guests, but when they go away, they find
their Maws as empty, as when they began that imaginary Feast. So that when
these deluded Youths come to Commence Masters of Arts, their Instructors may
say of them, (though not with a good Conscience) Accipiamus pecuniam, etc. And
(without any humble Modesty to be their Prompter) they may say of themselves,
(with as much truth at least as Socrates, when he was pronounced by the Oracle,
to be the wisest man in the World) This I know; That I know nothing.

And, that with Secular Learning they may drink in the first Milk of Piety,
from the Breasts of that Alma Matter, Let the Principles of Christian Religion
be early instilled into the Minds of young ones; that, Being seasonably taught
to remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, they may not forget him
in their old Age, nor be forsaken by him; For Quo semel est imbuta, etc. For
that end, let such a Book as H. Grotius his excellent little Treatise De
veritate Religionis Christianae (which, without any Hyperbole, is worth it is
weight in the purest Gold,) be so inculcated into their Memories, that they
may, not only have it all by heart, but also thoroughly understand it. As also
that notable Summary of Christian Offices, called, The whole Duty of man,
composed by an unknown Author: or the Practical Catechism of the Learned D.
Hammond; or that of D. Usher of Armach, Primate of Ireland: provided they be
first jure Latii donati; For all the Communications of the Lycaeum ought to be
in the Dialect of old Rome, or that of the City of Minerva; that the tenacious
Memories of the young ones may be habituated to those Learned Languages.

And how necessary the good Education of Youth is, may appear from that
excellent Observation of the great Lo. Verulam, That, The great Multiplication
of Virtue upon humane Nature resis on Societies well ordered and disciplined:
For Commonwealths and good Governments nourish Virtue grown, but do not much
mend the Seeds. Whence he infers, That there ought to be a most exquisite
Delectus of the Tutors of Youth. And (if we give Faith to Plato, Seneca, and
Plutarch;) they should be as well qualified Persons as are lightly to be found
in the World. And sure, this solicitous Choice of the Educators of Youth was
never more necessary, than in this Iron Age, wherein many have been so marred
in their Education by Schismatical and Disloyal Principles, too early instilled
into them, that this foundering in the Feet has caused Convulsive Fits, and
unsteady Motions in them, as long as they lived. But if the Universities of
this Land were blessed with such Professors as we have above described; it is
most probable, that from those Seminaries of Knowledge, and fruitful Nurseries
of the Muses, eminent Plants might blossom, in Process of Time, to the great
Advantage either of Church or State, as Divine Providence shall determine their
Lot.

And, seeing these Stations of Philosophy are the best Seminaries this Nation
enjoys, for perfecting Young men in order to that Sacred Function; Therefore
let not these Professors Monopolize them for many Years, by nestling their
Families therein, as if the Foundator had designed nothing else, but the
Provision of their Posterity. But let them be enjoined to live in a Celibate
State, that with less Distraction they may prosecute their Studies: and, after
the expiration of five, or six years at most, let them give place to others;
that, by such a happy Circulation, all the Corners of the Land may reap the
Advantages of that Foundation.

It were (in my humble judgment) a very desirable Blessing to this Nation; That
His Gracious Majesty, with his Great Council, would be pleased to allow some
few Months Cess, to be stocked, for the Inhancing of the Revenues of the
Universities; especially of the Primar, and Masters of Philosophy; that the
Head of the House may have a competent and constant Annual Intrado, to live
Splendidly, according to the dignity of his Station. And this opening of
Free-Schools to the Professors of Philosophy, (without any expectation of the
least acknowledgment from any Scholar, and that under the pain of immediate
Extrusion from the respective House where they Officiate:) would not only
obviate those Scandalous Animosities which too frequently occurr betwixt
Masters of different Colleges, in the Exercise of their beggarly Trade of
Mendicating Scholars, but would also be found the best Expedient to Retrive
(jure postliminii) that ancient University-Discipline, which has been
obnoxious to such a woeful Lapse, that it has undergone the Fate of an
immemorial Dispossession. For, if Avarice and Self-interest did not prevail
with too many, over the Qualifications and Proficiency of those entrusted to
their Charge, yea, and preponderate the Public Reputation of the House where
they live, many who are now ambabus ulnis amplexi, would be declared incapable
to enter within the Philosophic Porch, as being deprehended foundered in the
feet, and frequently Criminal in breaking Priscian's Head. And not a few who
have already entered within these Gates of the Muses, would either be found
unworthy to remain there, upon the account of Vitiosity of Life, (which is
contagious to the rest of the Society:) or be Extruded for Non-proficiency in
their Studies: Degradation to a lower Class, till they caught hold of Minerva's
Train, would certainly be the least of their Censure. Neither should the
Subject, by this wished for Contribution, be a Loser; but (as we use to speak)
he should prove a Gainer at the long run; for, what is now expended by them,
would, by this Method of Free-Schools, preserve no less, (if not much more) to
their Posterity, over and above their more laudable Education: For Persons of
all Ranks in this Nation, usually sending their Sons to be taught in some
University, (which is highly Commendable, and much applauded beyond Seas:) they
are, (according to their Quality) obliged to Dispense proportionable Salaries
to their Instructors; Yea, they who have the Inspection of them, are
necessitated to require these Honoraria, seeing the Provisions of some
Foundations are so small a pittance, that they are disproportionable to that
Victus and Amictus which the most Sober Person stands in need of; Not to speak
of the fuel of Charity and Hospitality, and those Materials for buying of
Books, and Entertainment of a Servant to wait upon them, which the Dignity of
that Office calls for. All which require much more money, than the Poverty of
some Foundations can afford.

And let this Chancellor of the University contribute his utmost endeavors
that the Provost, or Head of the College, (usually termed Primar) excel, not
only in the above expressed Qualities, (that he may deservedly be termed the
Principal of that Incorporation) but that also he be Doctor of Divinity, and
the Reformed Canon Law; that he may be in a capacity to conferr that Dignity
upon the most Learned of the Clergy, when their Ordinary shall call them
thereunto, that many may be encouraged to merit that Degree; Honor being the
best Nursing-Mother of Arts, and Promover of Sciences. -- But, let those who
are, not only Pious, Learned, and Prudent, but also known to have deserved well
of the Church, by their constant Loyalty, be invited in the first place, to the
participation of that Honorable Degree: For it is well enough known, that
Bishops are not in a capacity to promote all such to the most eminent Dignity
of the Church; (it were indeed a pitiful Nation, if the number of those did not
far surpass that of the Episcopal Sees, suppose the Church were so happy, as to
have the absolute Disposal of them:) therefore it were but just and fit, that
such deserving Persons were (at least) rewarded with those minute and
inexpensive Honors, as a Character of the Churches special Favor toward them.

But seeing the Royal Family (the sole Fountain of Honor) has gratified our
Universities with that honorable Privilege and Faculty, To dispense that
Cognizance of Learning to the Worthy; let the Chancellours have a special Care,
that the same be not abused and disgraced, by the Promotion of the Unworthy:
For, if old Knaves, Epicures, Buffoons, and gross Ignorants, who have not a
mouthful of good Latin, nor the art to form a right Syllogism, (not to speak of
those Doctorculi Dominarum:) be advanced to that Honor; it may provoke his
Majesty to recall that Privilege from Universities which has been so vilified.
And, suppose his Majesty be not informed of such an Abuse, yet it will
infallibly render that Honor despicable, for an Age at least. We read indeed
of that famous Epaminondas, that by his undertaking the sordid Office of a
Scavenger, he rendered that (which was formerly accounted the basest,) the most
honorable in his City: But I fear, these pitiful Doctorculi shall be found the
Reverse of the Story, and the Antipodes of that gallant Theban; for the Degree
will never dignifie them, but they will vilify the Honor: And it shall fare
with it in the end, as it did with the Order of S. Michael in France, which was
at first reputed very honorable, but when two or three unworthy Persons were
admitted unto that Fraternity, no man of any worth would look after it any
more, nor regard it in the least, who had any Regard to his Reputation. Thus
Thuan in the 23d Book of his excellent History, introduces a French Gentleman,
speaking to this Purpose, of that Order of Knighthood, (which was first
instituted by Lewis the 11th, and at last abolished by K. Henry the Third.)
Torquem Conchiliatum postquam indignis promiscue communicari coepisset, non jam
esse fortium virorum Insigne, sed omnium bestiarum Collare. And it shall be the
Fate of those ignorant Knights Errant, to be compared unto that vain Roman,
Ventidius Bassus, of whom it was said, That he spoiled a good Muleter, and made
but a bad Consul. But I shall shut up this Paragraph with the Observation of
some very Judicious Persons; That the Principal Reason wherefore Pallas has so
few painted Shields in this Nation, is, because the Sons of Minerva receive so
little Encouragement from their Superiors; the much easier Arts of Adulation,
and implicit Obedience, being more valued, than the wearisom Trade of
Evisceration; (it being no unfit Etymology of the Word Minerva, quod nervos
imminuat; and of Pallas, quod pallidos reddat.) For there is much Sense in that
of the Poet, Sint Maecenates, non deerunt Flacce Marones.

And some in this too, -- quis enim Virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas?
Time was (even among the Heathen) that Learning was a sufficient Protection
against Tyranny; Winess Antonius Triumvir, who, when Varro (his Enemy, and of a
contrary Faction) was listed for Death; thus gallantly superscrib'd his Name,
Vivat Varro vir doctissimus: Not to mention Alexander the Great his sparing of
the House and Family of Pindarus, in that total Eversion, and Epidemical
Destruction of the Thebans; because he was the Renowned Prince of the Lyrick
Poets, and unimitable, as Horace terms him. For, though this Domitian,
Maximinian, and Lycinian Age affords but few Examples of this nature, yet
ancient Records have (almost innumerable) Instances to this Purpose.

It cannot rationally be expected, that this Article should be confirmed (as
the former are) with many Ecclesiastical Canons; seeing in the (...) of our
Citations; there were few Universities in the World, (that of Pavia and
Bononia, the oldest in these Western Parts of the World, being by many years
posteriour thereunto:) and scarce any Doctors, Honor Doctoratus, as it is now
used; which is not properly an Ecclesiastical Dignity, but a Civil Honor
conferred, by the Secular Prince, upon Incorporations, (I mean the Faculty of
dispensing it) or on particular Persons: Thus D' avila, in his excellent
History of the Civil Wars of France tells us, of that Privilege, which Henry
the third, the French King, vouchsafed on the Cardinal Bur^on; (...) make
Doctors (...), or liberal (...). For, it being a (...) Honor, most originally
desire it is (...) from the (...). Yet (...) somee mention of Doctors, and some
Orders concerning them, in a Council holden within the Intervall of our
Allegations; viz. Council. Caesar Augustan. which was celebrated in the 6th
Century. But whether it was that Honor we have been lately describing, or a
Dignity purely Ecclesiastical, adhuc dubitant Doctores; though it is most
probable, that it ^lludes unto those Catechists who were appointed to instruct
the Catechumem gra^des, (which was an Office equivalent to our Professors of
Theology.) such were Pantaenus, Clemens, and Origin in the School of
Alexandria. And, (if we give Faith to S. Hierom. Lib. De Script. Eccles.) there
was a continual Series of such Ecclesiastical Doctors in that Church, from the
Days of S. Mark the Evangelist, unto Pantaenus. Of which some interpret those
Teachers, mentioned Ephesians. 4. 11. For, as pastors govern the Church, so these
Theologues (say they) govern the Schools. But of this Article enough, if not
too much.

THE PERORATION.
BEing stirred in Spirit, I have adventured (yet with all due submission) to
tender these Nineteen Proposals unto the serious Consideration of the
Governors of this Church. And sure I am, the Conscionable Practice of them,
would be found more Honorable, and much more useful, both to Church and State,
than were the Propositions of an equal number, which by the mischievous Long
Parliament, were sent after that Glorious Martyr, King Charles the first, whom
they had first driven from his Royal Residence, by most insolent Tumults.

If the Author had not resolved, long ago, never to raise his insignificant
Name out of the Dust of Oblivion, by giving the Press the Trouble thereof,
(which is already too much oppressed with a Shoal of others,) he would not have
been ashamed to own those Lines before all the World, with as much Confidence,
and more Innocence too, than Heliodorus espoused his ingenious Romance: But
this ingenuous Boldness had never its Rise from a Reflection upon the Eloquence
of these few Sheets; for he is thoroughly convinced, that his blunt Style is
very far from the Art of Oratory, and his Genius no less removed from any
Affectation of the Flowers of Rhetoric: but it is the Sense of these sad
Truths, and good Wishes, embosom'd in those Lines, which did create that
Confidence; with something also which his Conscience calls Zeal, for the Glory
of God, and good of his Church: Wherein he has endeavored to trace the
Footsteps of Salvian, (that zealous Bishop of Marseils, who, in a Parallel case
to Ou^s, speaks to this Purpose, Non verba, sed res; non Ornamenta, sed
Documenta affectamus: nudus enim Veritatis ensis intimius penetrat; at vitrum
fucatum veritatis Lucem excludit) and Gildas his ruthful Lamentations for the
great Degeneracy of the British Church.

And, if his heart deceive him not very much, he may confidently appeal to the
Searcher of all Hearts, That it was no Dissatisfaction with the present Form of
Church Government, which prompted him to pen this Pamphlet; but rather a
sincere Affection thereunto, and an ardent Desire to see the Glory of the
second Temple transcend the Splendor of the First; which he would account a
kind of Beatifical Vision upon Earth; and wishes not to live one minute
Longer, than to behold this Church once in Possession of that Blessing: For,
since he was blessed with any Understanding, he had always a Veneration for
that mode of Government, as having (in the greater Lines thereof) a greater
Analogy to the Primitive Regiment, than any other Form coined in the Mint-house
of Geneva: And if the most ancient Records of Church History, and Fathers of
the Church be made Judges in the matter, (which, in matters of Fact, must needs
be; unless any be so Enthysiastick as to expect Divine Revelation de novo, to
determine this Controversy.) I suppose the little Antiquity which he has
read, would engage him to pawn his natural Life upon the Probation of that
Assertion, against all the Paralogisms of Blondel and Salmasius (the two great
Genevian Champions) and the more foolish Cavils of many other Praters to the
same Purpose.

Now, though the Author has humbly tendered this Advice unto all of that
Sacred Order; yet he would not have any to imagine, that he undervalues any of
them, or that he values all alike: He knows, that there were some two or three
Stars among them, of the First Magnitude, now Eclipsed from us; (the dark
Curtain of Death being drawn diverse years ago, betwixt them and this World:)
who, (when they were in it) were looked upon by all honest men, as Persons of
approved Integrity, and who suffered much for Conscience Sake, even
Imprisonment, Banishment, and Confiscation of their Goods; yea, some of them
hardly escaped with their Lives: that Hellish Conspiracy amongst us being
somewhat of kin to the Grecian Confederacy, whose Insolent Cruelty did so
oppress the poor Trojans, that it gave occasion to the Poet to say, Vna salus
victis, nullam sperare salutem. Yea, the Author being honored with the
intimate acquaintance of some that are alive, he does highly esteem them, as
very good men; and so they were generally reputed when they were but
Presbyters; yet, either the want of a resolute Courage in them, (the privation
whereof is a great Remora to great Actions:) or the destitution of Concurrence
in others, (it being the Fate of those who are unequally yoked, when one
presses forward, another draws back; has nullified their best Wishes, and
annihilated their good Endeavors; Nothing being more contrary, nor a greater
Adversary to a direct and strait motion, than that which is Oblique and
Retrograde; and nothing more repugnant to a natural Conamen, than a
Peristaltick Motion. Which deplorable Disappointment cannot but give occasion
to those well-meaning men, to take up that Lamentation of Pope Adrian the
Sixth, (whose best motions were retarded, and absolutely hindered by his unhappy
Colleagues in the Consistory:) who said to his familiar and trusty Friends,
That the condition of Popes was miserable; seeing it was plain, that they could
not do good, though they desired and endeavored to do it. (which Obstacles are
set down at length by Padre Paulo, or Pietro Saove Polano, in his excellent
History of the Council of Trent.) From which Story Marcellus Cervinus (another
Pope, of 22 days standing) took occasion to say, Non videre se, quomodo qui
fastigium hoc altissimum tenerent, saluti suae consulere possint. Yea, they
will be apt to join Issue in the End, with the Protestation of that dying
Emperor, Faelix si non Imperassem: and multum incola fuit anima mea. And from
this inefficacious Employment, many Spectators (who see not these hidden
Impediments, and secret Back-sprents;) are ready to take Occasion to pass this
uncharitable Verdict on those good men; That their best Wishes are but
Velleities; and that they have marred good Presbyters, and made but ill
Bishops: And, in fine, will apply to them the Observation of the Historian
concerning the Emperor Galba; That all men thought him Worthy to reign, before
he did Design to Reign: the same being observed in the last Age, concerning
Henry the third of France. For, Magistratus indicat virum.

Neither was it any Schismatical Humor in the Author, which prompted him to
this Remonstrance: For he is so far from having any Design to trouble the Peace
of the Church, that he is still apt to comply with the Counsel of Clement of
Rome, to the Corinthians, (...). Epiphanius -- (Haeres. 27.) says, that
Clement was an Instance of this Christian Advice, by resigning the Roman See to
Linus and Cletus: But sure Chrysostom (Hom. 2. in Ephesians.) professes so much of
himself; and that excellent Theologue Gregory Nazianz. did really practice it
at Constantinople, making himself a Jonah (as he protested in his eloquent
Oration to the Second General Council.) to pacify those Tumults which were
raised about that Patriarchate, (...), says Socrates, Hist. L. 5. c. 7. He
would willingly choose rather to be exiled into Terra Australis incognita, and
to be transported extra Anni Solisque vias, than to throw the least Spark of
Fire into the Bosom of the Church: which pernicious Flame (if he were conscious
of any Guilt of his own that had kindled the same;) he would judge his
heart-blood too mean a Sacrifice to extinguish it; having still in mind the sad
Sentence of S. Cyprian, That Schism is such a Crime, which cannot be expiated
by Martyrdom. Neither is he unmindfull of the Words of Diony^ius Alex. his
Contemporary, who tells us: That it is better to suffer any thing, than that
the Church of God should be rent in pieces: And it is no less glorious to
suffer Martyrdom, to keep Division out of the Church, than to die for not
sacrificing to Idols; For in the one Case a man suffers Martyrdom only upon
his own account, but in the other, he suffers for the Advantage of the whole
Church. It is also very remarkable to this Purpose, what Optatus (lib. 7. cont.
Parmen.) has said, Bono Vnitatis, sepelienda esse peccata. But he must needs
be very uncharitable to a skilful Physician, who imagines, that he has a bad
Design upon the Life of his Patient, because he applies Corrosives, when
Lenitives are found by Experience to have done no Good; yea, he who has tasted
of that Art of Esculapius but summis labris, may know, that one whose Body is
Plethorick, and Cacochymick, may sleep for a time in a whole Skin; yet he
cannot enjoy perfect Health, till these Superfluous Humors, which oppress
Nature, be evacuated by seasonable Phlebotomy, and Specific Catharticks: And
that there be some stupid Diseases, (such as a Lethargy-Fever) whose Narcotical
Distemper so benummes the Brains, that the Patient cannot be thoroughly
remedyed, till he be awakened, and kept waking, though it were with Pinching.
It is indeed easy for any Surgeon to Cicatrize a dangerous wound, but it
will certainly fester and corrupt within, if it be not first launced, and
searched to the Bottom: Paracelsus his Palliative Cures lasted not beyond the
year. But that methodical Physician merits most Praise, who, by removing the
Cause of the Disease entirely, is an happy Instrument (under God) of producing
the noble and diuturnal Effect of Health: Men's sana in corpore sano, being the
most excellent Blessing of this World.

Much less was Ambition his Instigatrix to this Remonstrance: For the Author
knows very well, that this Freedom of Spirit, is not the Mode of this Age
Levare se humo. He was accounted a wise man in his time, who uttered that much
experienced Truth in ours, Obsequium amicos, Veritas odium parit: it being the
Temper of this Iron Age, to look upon ingenuous Persons as none of the wisest;
(so much Honesty appearing as so much Folly, in the Eyes of all those who have
not yet learned to discern true Wisdom from Cunning and base Craftiness; though
there is usually no better Fence against the Blows of Envy or Malice, than the
received Opinion, of not being greatly wise.) And, if his Conscience had
permitted him to study the modern Politics, he would have found the Advice,
which Tiresias the Sooth-fayer gave unto Ulysses, a very useful Reflection to
this Purpose; who, being inquired, what was the readiest Stair to rise unto
Preferment in this World, that Hermaphrodite ingenuously told him, That he
ought to make Use of a Ladder consisting of three (...); viz. To learn to lie,
to (...) to dissemble. Now, as that (...) was found but too docile a Disciple
in that School; so these Matchavelian Arts of Modern Policy, (as Policy is
now-a-dayes defined by Falsehood and Knavery:) are but too much in Fashion in
this Age, where Disingenuity is accounted Wit, and Honesty the height of Folly:
Astrea having fled to Heaven it is no wonder, that Heroical Virtue has ascended
with her, and scarce left any thing behind, but Species Virtutibus similes;
which Shadow cannot expect much caressing and countenancing in this World,
seeing bold-fac'd Vice has usurped both the Place and Name of her Antagonist.
But he who lives every day in the View of Death, and is very sensible of its
swift Approaches, is far out of the Reach of that Temptation: (being thoroughly
convinced, that He who walks uprightly, walks securely; and that Frost and
Fraud have dirty Ends; and that no truly Generous Person (though he were no
Christian) can be disingenuous, seeing it always argues some Principle of
baseness within.) Yea, the dark Visage of that King of Terrors has, long ago,
Ecclipsed from his Eye the sight of a Mytre. I remember a Story, which one of
my Intimate Acquaintance told me; (whom I have very good Reason to believe:)
About the time of the Reestablishment of this Government, a Motion was made to
him, by one that was a great Favorite then, That he would procure unto him a
Call to ascend one of those empty Chairs. But he answered to this Purpose
(having first returned a homely Complement of Thanks to that generous Person,
for that immerited Favor:) In such a Conjuncture, when that Tabernacle is to
be reared up again, which (not many Years ago) was thrown down with so much
Malice, Obloquie, and Contempt, so that the very Name of the Government was
odious to a Multitude of bigoted People, who demolished that ancient Fabric,
with no less aversation of it, than the Government of the Decemviri was at
Rome, or the Thirty Tyrants of Athens; and who would be no less averse from the
Restitution of it, than those of Old Rome were, from the Restoration of the
expulsed Tarquins; or those of Syracusa, from the Redress of Dionysius the
younger; or the People of Constantinople, from the Return of Justinian the
second: That these vile Aspersions which had been thrown upon the late
Government and Governors, (many whereof he supposed were Invidious and
Groundless:) might be speedily wiped off; and that Apostolic Regiment restored
to its pristine Beauty and Vigor; there was an indispensible Necessity, that
the New Governors should be endued with Piety, Charity, Learning, Humility,
Meekness, Patience; with self-denial, Gravity, Hospitality, and all the
Cardinal Virtues, far above the ordinary Level; that by the extraordinary and
admirable Luster of their Parts, they might again restore this Church to its
former Splendor. Which being a very Impar Congressus for him, who was juvenis
omni modo, and the unfittest of ten thousand; therefore he neither could, nor
would undertake that Office, in such a ticklish Conjuncture. I have not the
Ambition (subjoyned he) to say with Cato the elder, That I had rather it were
enquired, Wherefore Cato has no Statua, than, wherefore he has one; but sure
I am, it would be a matter of no less Complacency to me, than it was to that
noble Spartan, to hear, that there be, not only 300, but also 3000 of my
Countrymen, more capable of those sublime Employments, than my poor self. Yet,
(as he further added) if I thought my self Par Negotio, I bless Heaven for it,
that I have the same Sentiment that possessed the Soul of dying S. Martin of
Tours, who in his last Agony cried out, Domine, si adhuc sim utilis tuae
Ecclesiae, non recuso Laborem; provided that Labor could be useful to the
Church: which, in this present Conjuncture, can hardly be expected. Yea, the
Reporter, being honored with some Familiarity by that great man, when he was
in Private, (for, as Minutius Faelix has said, Amicitia aut Pares invenit, aut
facit:) he had shut up this Declinator with these very words, quia nec possum,
nec debeo, ideo non volo, For (if there be any Truth in that old Maxim, qui
clam vixit, been vixit;) it must needs be verified in this vertiginous and
critical Age. And, sure I am, he then spoke as he thought: and if at any time
since he entertained any such Thoughts, God knows he had no other Design, but
to retrive again the Apostolic Pattern into this Church as much as possibly
could be effected by one moving within the Sphere of his own Capacity. Yea
suppose he had the fairest Invitation imaginable to be elevated unto the
Solstice of Ecclesiastical Honor in this National Church, yet he would
entertain it with no other Complacency, but this alone, That he had now a Call
from Heaven to exercise an Art of very great Self-denial, even to Sacrifice all
his worldly Contentment, and Enjoyments, for the Interest of the Church, and
Glory of his heavenly Master. If S. Paulinus did willingly make himself a
Slave, to redeem a poor Widow's Son from Bondage; (not to speak of those
Heathen Heroes, Codrus Zopirus, Curtius, and the two Roman Decii, who devoted
themselves to Death for the Good of their respective Countries:) sure it
becomes all the true Sons of the Church (in imitation of Moses, and S. Paul) to
devote all their dearest Interests, that they may procure the Manumission of
her that conceived them.

But, lest this Pamphlet run out at the Gate of a tedious Peroration, (as the
Cynick Philosopher said of the little City of Mindus, with its
disproportionable Gates:) I shall therefore period it with this humble Entreaty
to all Ingenuous Readers, That they be not so uncharitable to the Author, as to
impute these Lines unto a Principle of Envy or Malice against the Persons of
any of our Governors, as if he had the desperate boldness to run the hazard of
that Curse of Cham, for discovering his Father's Nakedness: But, let us suppose
the Author to have been basely injured by some of them to whom he had done good
Offices, and palpably betrayed under Trust; (though he is not so Dispirited
with the consideration of their Sublimity, and his own Lowness, but that he
knows, that Formica habet suam bilem, and that the despised Scarabee avenged it
self on the Bird of Jupiter, though the same is reputed King of the plumed
Animals;) yet Christianity would have prompted him to have gone a greater
length in Self-denial than Christopher, (who said only, If I were not a
Christian, I should be avenged:) by heaping even coals of Fire upon the heads
of his greatest Enemies, when occasion served: And in doing so, would have
expected a Reward from God. Which Self-denial he might have learned from some
of the Heathens; even from the Practice of Lycurgus and Zeno, and from the
Doctrine of Seneca, who has taught us, That immane verbum est Vltio: in which
regard he discovered himself a much better Moralist, than that Stagyrite, who
reputed Revenge an act of Magnanimity. For when the Author ruminates upon all
these things which fall under consideration in reference to that Office, he is
very apt to acknowledge, that whosoever undertakes it in this Age, becomes
rather the object of Pity than Envy; it being truly said by the Emperor
Dioclesian, Difficillimum est recte imperare: how much more in this Iron Age,
in which that Wish is absolutely unnecessary,

Materiamque tuis tristem Virtutibus opta. And as for any imputation of Malice,
(if his heart deceive him not very much) he would be much more ready to make
Use (...) Paludamentum of Constantine the (...) make any i^vidious Detection.
And till the Reader can convince him, that there cannot be Pax cum hominibus,
and bellum cum vitiis, in sensu composito, he hopes Charity will dissever them
in his behalf: Yea, (as Seneca has observed well) Cato the Elder was no less
useful to the State of Rome, than Scipio Africanus; because, as this Noble
Roman did defeat the Physical Enemies of his Country, so that austere Censor
did successfully Combat against the Moral Adversaries thereof. That Apology
which St. Hierom made for his Tartness, is a sufficient Vindication of the
Author; For, if a Stylus aculeatus be allowable against a Charge of Heresy, it
is no less lawful in the Cause of God. For when the Honor of the Divine
Majesty, and the Interest of his Church, are deeply concerned, we ought to
regard the Glory of the Supreme, infinitely above that of any other Superior;
For Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica Veritas: To which (...) for
the Truth, and Interest of the Church, all truly zealous Ecclesiastics are
animated by that notable Saying of Saint Augustine, Qui veritatem occultat, and
qui prodit Mendacium, uterque reus est: ille, quia prodesse non vult; hic, quia
nocere desiderat.

But, though Tiberias (none of the best of Emperors) used to say, In Civitate
libera, linguam, mentemque liberam esse debere; yet sure I am, If these
Gravamina (which would amount to the number of German ones, if they were
subdivided, and sold by Retail) had been heard patiently in private, they
needed not have been told in Public; though there were never more Provocations
for all men to speak than now, when all the Mischiefs that other Ages did but
imagine, are now practiced, and when Oppression has made a Wise man mad, and
(in the mean time) the dumb Asses are taught to forbid the Madness of the
Prophets. But there being too many in the world, who, (as Aristippus said) have
their ears in their feet, and they who are straight, finding it very
inconvenient to stoop so low, therefore are necessitated to take other measures
of Communication: Desperata ejus Principis salus est, (as said a Wise man)
cujus aures ita formatae sunt, ut aspera quae utilia, nec quicquam nisi
jucundum accipiant: Nam Libertas Consilii est ejus vita, and essentia, qua
erepta, Consilium evanescit.

But perhaps it may be objected, That it is fit, that all Papers which are
designed for the Press, should (in prima instantia) be presented unto those,
who, Iure eminentiae, are appointed Supervisors thereof. I shall refer it to
the Judgment of the Candid Reader, if the Author had not good reason to
conclude, that he might spare his pains in making such an Address, by the
strange ensuing Narration told him (not long ago) by one who had designed
something very useful (as he supposed) for the Church; viz. An exact Method of
studying the Primitive Fathers, even to the Death of Gregory the Great, whom he
accounted the Last of those Worthies; (as one called Brutus and Cassius, Vltimi
Romanorum:) though Venerable Bede, Holy Anselm, and Devout Bernard, have
merited eternal Remembrance in the Church. Which Method, (if prosecuted as he
intended) he humbly conceived, would be found more useful for all Unbyassed
Readers, than the Treatises of Baronius, Sixtus Senensis, Bellarmin, Possevin,
Perron, Lawney, Sirmundus, and Contius, to that purpose; or the Tractates of
the Magdeburgenses, with their Epitomator Osiander, Scultetus, Reinolds, Cocus,
Rivet, Blondel, and Dallee, the Popish Authors being generally too lax (though
the four last in order are either Nasutiores, or much more ingenuous than the
rest,) and the Reformed too strict, on that Subject; the former discovering too
palpable a Design to buoy up a forlorn Cause by Supposititious Fathers, and
Spurious Books; and the latter having too much of the Critic and Satyrist in
them.

The Diagram of which great Design being presented by the Author to a Principal
Member of that Order, in order to the giving of his Judgment as to the proposed
Method; And what he concluded to be either defective or redundant therein, the
Author was resolved to take in very good part; (thinking himself bound to
reverence the Opinions of his Superiors. But he did meet with no other Verdict
or Complement, save this astonishing Answer from such a Person; That he had no
Leisure to look after such Books, (he being distracted too much with other
Employments:) and that there were too many Books already in the World. (which
hasty Censure he passed on that whereof he had never read one Line.) Which
could not but appear very strange to any in his right Wits, when he reflects
upon the Disposition of the Country whereof it was spoken. We find indeed in a
late Satyrist, (who had the Spirit of his Calling as abundantly as any;) a
Nation taxed as being Epidemical, because they send forth many Examina of the
Fruit of their Bodies into foreign Countries, and diverse Colonies to New
Plantations; but it is the first time I have heard them charged with the
exuberant Spawn of the fruit of their Brains. And though that Observation
concerning Africa, semper aliquid adfert novi, may be also applied to this
Country, yet it is not to be understood of the one or the other, in reference
to new Books; but rather of renewed monstrous Productions; both these
Countries being, in these latter Ages of the World, sandy and barren, as to
intellectual Births.

But, in fine, he remitted the perusal of that Platform to another of his
Order, who was no less taken up with the Study of Modern Politics than
himself; yea, was become so much in Love with that Trade, that he had put the
intervall of many German Miles and Years, betwixt himself and his proper
Charge, that he might practice the Principles of his beloved Art upon a fitter
Scene: whereby this ghostly Mountebank did emulate the Sagacity of a Sharleton,
as to the Convenience of the Erection of his Stage; all Quak-salvers (who have
the Spirit of their base Calling) being sure to resort unto those places where
there is most Money, and the greatest Concourse of People.

The slighted Brother finding such Addresses to be in vain, immediately called
to mind the Answer which that cruel Duke de Alva gave to Henry the 4th of
France; who having demanded of him, if he had observed that great Eclipse of
the Sun which had lately happened; the Duke ingenuously replied, That he had so
much ado upon Earth, that he could not get leisure to look up to Heaven: And
at last concluded, that the true Cause of their aversation (though they were
ashamed to utter it) was that old Maxim, Ignoti nulla cupido, and Blind Men
should not judge of Colors. Yet that indiscreet Repulse proved such a
Temptation to the Author, that he had much ado to restrain himself from
throwing those painful Papers into the jaws of Vulcan; and hardly refrained
from crying out with Scipio Africanus, Ingrata Patria, ne ossa quidem mea
habebis: but could not forbear the pronouncing that Expostulation, Bone Deus!
Ad quae tempora me reservasti?

Yet some were more charitable to their Intellectuals, than to their Morals;
And did apprehend, that the Fear of the Expense of a Dedication, made them so
shye; wherein they were indeed greatly mistaken: For, as it was never the
intention of the Author to prey upon his Patron, (he having always hated a
beggarly Dependence;) so it was as little in his mind to shelter himself under
the Wings of such Protectors, (lest that Support should prove a Staff of Reed
in the end:) that Lucubration being designed for a Noble Person of much greater
Worth and Eminency, who was pleased, out of his own mouth, to permit that
Honor to the Author; yea, more than so, who was so obligingly condescending,
as to declare, That he looked upon it as a special Honor designed for himself:
(so vast is the difference betwixt a Noble and a Plebeian Education) the Effect
whereof will appear in its own time: there being (as to this great Undertaking)
an indispensible necessity of complying with that sound Advice, in reference to
the Writing of a Book judiciously, In nonum prematur annum: And, I wish, that
even these years be found commensurable to such a Work. For the Author of such
a Laborious Task, has good reason to say, as Virgil did of his Works, se
versus suos componere, ut Vrsi foetus, lambendo. But from this supposed
Misconception, we may infer, That none should controvert upon the (...), till
they be sure of the (...). And thus ended that Narrative.

But if it be further Objected; That, (howsoever those of the Order employ
their time,) they have Chaplains whose Province it is to Supervise the Press.
For Answer; This were indeed a pertinent Objection, and fit Expedient, if they
who pass under that Notion, did emulate those of that Office in England; (some
whereof, not only merited to be Doctors of Divinity, but have also a stock of
Knowledge little inferior to any of the Nation:) But with us, some have not
any Servants that go under that Denomination, (and, I wish, in the destitution
thereof, they be not wanting to that Oeconomical Religious Solemnity, termed
Family Worship.) And as for those who are invested with that Title, they are
usually such pitiful, ignorant Striplings, that they have not sufficient
capacity to examine, to good purpose, the most inconsiderable Catechism, far
less are they pares negotio for so great a Work, which cost the Learned Bishop
Andrews eighteen years Study. And if any of these Chaplains had the forehead to
undertake such Animadversions, it might be deservedly said of them, velut
Asinus ad Lyram; and they would be found to resemble Aesop's Cock, who
preferred the Barley-grain to the precious Gemm; and greater fools than Paris,
who put a greater estimate on fading Beauty, than on Wisdom or Power; yea, they
would be observed to run parallel to the Phrygian Midas, who preferred the Pipe
of Pan to the Harp of Apollo, and got Asses Ears for the Guerdon of his foolish
Judgment: Neither should they have any thing to magnify their ignorant
boldness, save that Epitaph of Phaeton, (whose Fate they would surely undergo;)

Et si non potuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis. But it is high time to end this
little Enchiridium, which is swelled to a greater bulk than at first we
designed it; (it being one of my greatest troubles, in studying brevity to
avoid Prolixity:) Therefore I shall conclude with this one Sentiment upon the
whole Premises.

I am fully persuaded, that if our Governors did cordially comply with the
foregoing Proposals, this Church (which has been long Militant in the most
pitiful sense,) would at last become Triumphant, and should erect the Trophies
of its victory over its most implacable Enemies; And our Bishops, being
honored by the Almighty to be the Instaurators of this Church, should (in
fine) have occasion to say of it, as Augustus Caesar said of Rome, Inveni
lateritiam, relinquo memoream. For I have heard many well-meaning Persons, who
pass under the Notion of Fanatics, solemnly declare, That if they observed our
Bishops making Conscience to perform all those Duties which are incumbent on
their Office, they would be as forward as any to hugg them in their Arms, and
ready to submit cheerfully to their Jurisdiction: Yea more than so; That if
their Morals were entire and eminent, their moderate Rituals would be but
feeble Scar-crows, and fearless Bug-bears to them. For when they see any
Ecclesiastic of an Holy Life, and who sets about all the Duties of his Calling
diligently and faithfully, though he be diametrically opposite, and point blank
contrary to their Way; yet they inwardly reverence him, and defer no little
external Respect to him: yea, they are apt to envy our Church the Possession of
him, and to say, Talis cum sit, utinam noster esset: And I am fully persuaded,
that this would be a more durable Enoticum, than that German Interim, which was
contrived with so much Craft, by that Triumviri of Almain, viz. Flugius,
Eslebius, and Sidonius. But this is to be understood only of those Fanatics,
whose Hectic Fever has not as yet proceeded the length of an incurable
Marasmus.

The best Epiphonema I can subjoyn, as an Epilogue to this Enchiridion, is, the
Royal Judgment of one who deserves to be termed A Nursing-Father both to Church
and State, who has testified of himself, That he esteemed it his greatest
Title to be called, and his chiefest glory to be the Desender of the Church,
both in its true Faith, and its just Fruitions; equally abhorring Sacrilege and
Apostasy. This is that Glorious Martyr King Charles the First, in his (...),
where he expresses himself thus: Not that I am against the managing of this
Presidency and Authority in one man, by the joint counsel and consent of many
Presbyters: I have offered to restore that, as a fit Means to avoid those
Errors, Corruptions, and Partialities, which are incident to any one man; also
to avoid Tyranny, which becomes no Christian: least of all Churchmen: besides,
it will be a means to take away that burden, and odium of Affairs, which may
lie too heavy on one man's shoulders, as indeed I think it formerly did on the
Bishops here. And a little after, in that same Section, concerning the
Difference betwixt the King and Two Houses, in point of Church Government, His
Majesty adds this Brief, but most Judicious Sentiment concerning
Church Government;

A right Episcopacy would at once satisfy all just Desires, and Interests of
good Bishops, humble Presbyters, and sober People; so as Church Affairs should
be managed neither with Tyranny, Parity, nor Popularity; neither Bishops
ejected, nor Presbyters despised, nor People oppressed. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Advertisement to the Reader, page 4. lin. 21. for 185, read 85. p. 7.
l. 14. for, as is equvalent, r. as equivalent. 1. 15. for, one, r. an. p. 8. l.
4. for happily, r. happily. p. 10. l. 19. for, collation, r. collate. p 12. l. 1.
for happily r. happily.

Book. p. 3. l. 17. for one r. an. p. 5. l. 15. for rocket r. rochet. p. 15. l.
19. for we (k which, r. week (which. l. 25. for were more r. were never more.
p. 25. l. 23. for Solitudes r. Sollicitudes. p. 32. l. 16. for reputation r.
reparation. p. 38. l. 16. for officers r. offices p. 45. l. 7. for other r. of
their. l. ult. for chose r. choose. p. 52. l. 18. for his r. this. p. 53. l. 4.
for exhaustible r. inexhaustible p. 80. l. 27. for speaking r. speaks. p. 93.
l. 23. dele Judge. p. 182. l. r. for churchmen r. Churchman. p. 190. l. 3.
for irreclamable r. irreclaimable. p. 251. l. 18. for regiment. r. regimen. the
fame p. 152. l. 2 p. 268. l. 13. for flacce r. flacci. p. 298. l. 8. for (...)
r. Marmorean.


