A SERMON On Occasion of the DEATH OF The Reverend and Learned Mr. STEPHEN
LOBB, Who Dyed June 3. 1699. By THOMAS GOODWIN.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for John Marshall, at the Bible in Gracechurch-street, near
Cornhill, Where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's Works: Likewise the
true Effigies of Dr. Owen sold alone.

TO Mr. Theophilus Lobb.
I Knew none to whom I could better direct this Discourse on the Mournful
Occasion of your Worthy Father's Death, then you his Son. Do not fix your Mind
too deeply on your Loss of him to aggravate your Sorrow, but turn your Thoughts
to a Review of the Example of his Life which he has left you, and which
deserves to be imitated. Be Good and Generous, ready to do kind Offices to all,
and be true to Friendship as he was. Seek the God of your Father to be your God
in Covenant, and devote your self with all Sincerity unto him. Love Jesus
Christ, and his pure Gospel, espouse his despised Interest, and dare to
vindicate his Truths so much invaded on every side, though to do so may be
contrary to your Interest in this World. Value Humane Learning in subserviency
to Divine and more sublime Knowledge, industriously pursue it by close, and
unwearied Studies, and after all dedicate it to Christ's Service, and zealously
employ it for the Defense of his Truth, as your Father did. But never let
Learning through any Vanity of Mind make you to disgust the Plainness, and
Simplicity of the Gospel. That a double portion of the Spirit may rest upon
you. That you may stand up in your Father's room. That your Mature Years may
produce that Fruit which your Blooming Youth promises; and that the God of all
Grace would establish, strengthen and settle you, and make you useful, and
serviceable in the Churches of Christ, is the Hearty Prayer of

Your Dear, and Faithful Friend, Tho. Goodwin.

There is in the Press, and will speedily be Published a Book Entitled the
Mystries of God finished. Sold at the Bible in Gracechurchstreet.

A SERMON On Occasion of the Death of The Reverend and Learned Mr. STEPHEN
LOBB, Who Dyed June 3. 1699.
HEB. 11. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood,
he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil.
THIS one Thought that our Lord Jesus Christ has conquered Satan, and
destroyed the Power of Death, may give us Courage and Resolution to look that
otherwise formidable Enemy in the Face. The same Consideration may comfort us,
when, by Death, we lose our Relations and Friends: For though they depart, yet we
knowing that they Dye in the Lord, and that though Death strike them to the
Heart; yet the Strength and Curse of it is taken off, we ought to Regard their
departure out of this World as a Happiness to them, however it gives an
occasion of Mourning unto us.

I shall briefly explain the meaning of the Words of the Text, before I raise
my Doctrine from them. They declare that our Lord Jesus was partaker of Humane
Nature, with this design, that by Dying he might destroy the Power of Death:
and at the same time they give us a thought that will suggest the strongest
Consolation in a Dying Hour. Christ found, us to be held equally in the Fetters
of Sin, as in the Bands of Death: He therefore came into the World, assumed our
Nature, and dyed, that by the Sacrifice of himself Expiating our Guilt, and
satisfying Divine Justice, he might deliver us from the Slavery of Sin, and the
Tyranny of Satan who held us under the Sentence of the Law as condemned to Dye,
and so had the Power of Death over us. That we may more clearly understand that
sad Condition into which Sin has brought the Sons of fallen Adam, and by which
Satan has obtained such a dreadful Dominion over them, we must consider that
the Scripture expresses a threefold Death to which Sinners are obnoxious. One
is that of which we continually see visible Instances, and of which every one
of us, though now alive and in health, shall at the appointed hour be an Example.
This death puts an end to a Man's being in this World, and the time will surely
come in which we shall cease to dwell here, and our Friends shall know us no
more, though they may remember us. This Death parts Soul and Body, once so dear
Companions in this World, and mutual partners of Joys, and Pains: And this
Death sends the Immortal Spirit to an everlasting State of Bliss or Misery; and
lays down the decayed. Body in the Grave to be Rebuilt in a joyful, or dismal
Resurrection. Though it is this Death which the generality of Mankind does most
fear, who regarding this World as all their Happiness, account it the worst
thing they can suffer to be removed out of it; Yet there is another Death which
is far more dreadful, that Death which though stupid Sinners do not feel, yet
strikes through the Vitals of their Souls, and which not only darkens the Mind,
and damps that holy Fire which in Man's primitive Constitution perpetually
flamed in his Breast, and enkindled his Affections, and moved them toward God;
but deadens all our Powers and Faculties, and makes Man to be dead in Sin, Ephesians.
2. 1. and utterly disabled to do any thing that is Good. It is by this Death
that Satan has the advantage and gains a Dominion over us, and leads us
Captive at his Will, and prevailingly tempts us to Sin and Dye, were it not for
this Spiritual Death which has disarmed and weakened us, and which exposes us
defenseless to his Attacks, he could not on all occasions get so easy a
Victory over us. Nay, were it not that this Spiritual Death has universally
seized Mankind, the Devil would have little business on Earth, and have no more
to do here, than in Heaven. And now consequent to this Spiritual Death is that
which is Eternal, which is all Anguish and Torture of Mind without Intermission
or End, and which is that neverceasing Misery and Woe under which the Devils
and Damned Spirits do hopelesly groan. Whereas then we were dead in Sin, and
appointed to dye, as it was a Curse threatened to the Sinner, and were Sentenced
to undergo all the horrors of Eternal Death, Christ came on purpose to take off
the Curse of the one, and entirely to free us from the other. And since it was
by dying that he designed to subvert the Devil's Empire of Death, he took
Humane Nature into Union with himself, that he might be capable of Suffering,
and Dying. Forasmuch as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood. The
Children, those of the Sons of Men whom God the Father had given him. Thus in
the Verse preceding the Text. Behold I, and the Children which God has given
me, in which he refers to Isa. 8. 18. The Children, those whom Christ came to
redeem from the Curse of the Law, and to save from the power of Sin, and Death;
and cruel Dominion of the Devil. Forasmuch as these Children were partakers of
Flesh and Blood, etc. If any ask what is meant by Flesh and Blood, his own
experience may sufficiently resolve him. We all feel the Miseries, Sorrows and
Pains of our corrupt and frail Constitution, and after having been weakened by
various Diseases which incessantly batter our decaying Frame, we must lie down,
and die. By Flesh, and Blood in Scripture, not mere Humane Nature is always
signified, but it is often meant as it is depraved by Sin, corrupted, and
polluted, Romans 8. 4, 5. Gal. 5. 19, 24. 1 Cor. 15 50. But in other places of
Scripture Flesh and Blood import the Natural Constitution of Man's being
without the inherent Malignity of Sin; (Matthew. 26. 41.) but yet infirm, and
frail, and subject to Pains, and Sorrows. Now the Children of Men are partakers
of Flesh and Blood, not only weak and frail, but sinful and defiled. They all
communicate of it (for so the word (...) signifies) and this corrupted Mass of
Humane Nature tainted first in Adam, is diffused through all his Posterity, and
is the common portion in which they participate, and Miseries and Sorrows are
their wretched Inheritance. Now our Lord Jesus assumed Humane Nature into Union
with himself not with those Corruptions and Lusts which Infect it in us. No! He
was Holy in the first Constitution of his Being, (Luc. 1. 35.) in his
Conception and Birth: And all the time of his abode here below he was Holy,
Harmless, and separate from Sinners, Heb. 7. 26. And the manner of the
Expression in the Text implies as much. For when the Apostle speaks of
Christ's assuming this our Nature, he alters the Phrase, he does not say (...),
he communicated it with us, or possessed it in common, as we have it in our
Persons with all the Contagion of Sin adhering to it: But (...), he took part
of the same, the sound part in all the Essentials of Humane Being without the
other that was tainted, and polluted. Now that the Eternal Son should be as
truly Man, as he was God, was necessary, that he might be a fit, and proper
Mediator, that the Threatening of the Law might be made good, for as it was
denounced that Man sinning should die, this Punishment was inflicted on a
Person who was really Man bearing our Sins as imputed to him: It was necessary
also. that our Redeemer should assume Humane Nature, that there might be a
Change or Commutation of Persons between him and us, not Natural as if we were
transformed into his Being, or he into ours, but Legal, so that he truly
appeared in our stead to answer what the violated Law charged upon us, and to
satisfy offended Justice. He really represented us in what he suffered, and
acted for our Redemption, insomuch as the Sufferings which he endured, and the
Righteousness which he performed are placed to our Account by God his Father,
who admitted that he should put his own Person in the room of our Guilty ones,
taking our Sins upon him and suffering the Punishments due to them, and
accepted for us what Christ did, and suffered in our stead, to all the real
Intents, and Purposes of our Justification as if we had suffered, and done it
our selves. And since the manner of making satisfaction for Sin was to be by
undergoing the Penalty which it deserved, and God had threatened, and this was
Death (Genesis 2. 17.) not only Separation of Soul and Body, but the Wrath of God,
which gives deep and piercing Wounds to a Spirit, it was therefore needful that
the Person who offered up himself as an Expiatory Sacrifice for us should be
Man, that he might be capable of Dying. For God cannot dye, nor be susceptive
of the Inflictions of his own Wrath and Justice. Nor could an Angel dye, as
Death imports separation of Soul and Body which those Spirits have not, and
therefore this among others may be given as a reason why the Apostle says (Heb.
2. 16.) That he took not on him the Nature of Angels but the Seed of Abraham.
For by Death which cannot make any impression on an Angelick Nature, but may on
the Humane, Christ intended to destroy him that had the power of Death, that
is, the Devil. These Words which are the latter part of my Text express the
means by which our Triumphant Lord Jesus gained the Victory over Satan. He
might have employed his Invincible Power as God to conquer this Enemy of
Mankind who had usurped a Dominion in the World. The same Jesus who made
Legions of Devils tremble at his Voice, when he forced them by a powerful
Command to go out of the Man possessed; could by the Power and Glory of his
Divinity have entirely not only vanquished but destroyed him without Dying
himself. But since God was angry with Man, and provoked by his Sin had justly
permitted Satan to have Dominion over him, and since it was by Man's Sin that
the Devil had obtained the power of Death, therefore his Empire could not be
subverted but by taking away Sin the strength of it. And Sin could not be
removed but by an Expiation of its Guilt, and abolishing the Curse of the Law,
and appeasing God's Wrath, and satisfying his Justice. And all this could not
be effected without a Sacrifice sufficient to make an Atonement. And no other
Sacrifice was there, or indeed could be but our Dying Redeemer: So necessary
was it for him to die, That by Death he might destroy him who had the Power of
Death, that is the Devil. This latter part of the Verse which I fix on as the
Subject of my Discourse affords a Doctrine suitable to the occasion of it.

OBSERVATION.
That though a Believer is not excused from Dying, yet Satan being conquered by
Christ has not the power of Death over him. He cannot make it a Curse to him,
for Christ has taken away Sin which rendered it such. He cannot distract him
with amazing Fears, nor throw his Conscience into the Convulsions of Despair
from Apprehensions of Guilt, for Christ by his Blood has purged his Conscience
from Dead Works, that he may draw near unto God in full dssurance of Faith,
Heb. 10. 22. He cannot affect his Soul with the malignant Influences of a
Spiritual Death, for though indeed it was once dead in Trespasses and Sins, yet
it is now quickened by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 1. He cannot bring the believing
Soul within the Confines of Eternal Death, for there is no Condemnation to him
being in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. And he having overcome shall not be hurt of
the second Death, Rev. 2. 11. Not the least part of it can ever be his Portion,
none of its Anguish and Woe ever fall upon him, nor shall any of the Flames of
Divine Anger which burn to the lowest Hell, ever pierce his Soul, for his
Blessed Jesus has delivered him from the Wrath to come 1 These. 1. 10. What
though his Soul must part from the Body as well as others since it is appointed
unto all Men once to die Heb. 9. 27. Yet there is no Curse in his Death, nor
can the Devil strike any Sting of it into his Heart, nor wound his Conscience
with Despair, nor can all his Malicious Arts do him any Mischief. What tho the
Believer is not priviledg'd against the common Fate of all Men, yet he is
secured from the bad Effects of it, and from all the dreadful Consequents which
pursue every wretched Man who dies in Unbelief and with the weight of all his
Sins sinking down his Soul. But the Believer even in dying is in a state of
Safety, and Death from being a Curse as it is to all others, is changed into a
Blessing, for it does not extinguish his Life, but only translate it to
Happiness and Glory.

I. I shall show how Satan has the Power of Death. II. I shall prove that our
Lord Jesus Christ has destroyed the Devil, and his Power of Death at once.
I. How is it that Satan has the Power of Death? Has he any just Title to his
Dominions? Is any Authority due to him? Or does he by right sway the Scepter of
this Kingdom? Or has he the supreme Command over the Lives of Creatures as God
has, who kills, and makes alive as he pleases, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. 1 Samuel 2. 6. No
certainly. It is all an usurped Tyranny which God permits him to exercise over
fallen Man to punish the Rebellion of that Ungrateful Creature who would not be
subject to Christ's Milder Scepter. But how did Satan gain this Power of Death?

1. He obtained it by the Conquest of Man, and by making him a Rebel against
his God, subdued him to himself. He erected his Empire upon the Ruins of this
fallen Creature, for ever since he overcame our first Father in Paradise, his
wretched Posterity have been the Trophies of his Victory, till Christ as a
mightier Conqueror rescued those whom God had given to him to be Redeemed. Thus
it was by Sin that the Devil conquered Man, and obtained the power of Death
over him Condemned to Dye. Thus it was by Sin that he enlarged his Dominions
beyond the Confines of Hell, and got footing here on Earth, and set up his dark
Kingdom in the World, and rules in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 3.

2. He has the Power of Death as he has brought Men under the Law of Sin and
Death, insomuch as they are so far from being subject to God, and his Righteous
Laws as they are enslaved to those of Sin, and the Reward of their wretched
Service and Obedience is Death, of which the Devil has the Power, and it is
Sin that gives it him. What is the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom? It is
Righteousness Heb. 1. 8. What is the Scepter of Satan's Kingdom? Nothing but
Sin. It is by this he gets his Power. It is by this he holds Men in Bondage. It
is by this he wracks, and tortures their Consciences, and drives them to
despair. And it is by this he endeavors to keep the Soul in slavish fear and
bondage, and to hinder it from believing and trusting in Christ.

3. Satan more and more increases this Power which he has of Death by
promoting the Efficacy of Sin, and tempting Men to commit it. How does he
strengthen the Bands of Death, and tie them faster on us? It is by increasing
the force of Sin in drawing us to reiterated Acts, and so we are the more
entangled, and with all our Struglings are unable to get loose. How is it that
he binds Men over securely to Eternal Death? It is by hardening them in
Unbelief and Impenitence; To treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, Romans
2. 5. If we then did but seriously think, that every time the Devil enticeth us
to Sin, Death is in the Snare, and that tho he covers the Mischief with the
alluring colors of Pleasure, Profit, or Honor, yet he really tempts us to
Murder our Souls, we should be more aware of his many Devices, and
Industriously avoid all those little Artifices by which he exercises on us the
power which he has of Death.

4. He makes use of this power in torturing the Consciences of Men with the
Fears of Death. Death indeed is so contrary to Nature, and looks so like an
utter extinction of Being, that if Christ had not given us assurance of a
Blessed Immortality, there is not even a good Man who would not regret to dye.
But he is not upon the wrack perpetually tortured with the horrors of it as
wicked Men are when they see it make near approaches to them. For not only the
Face of Death it self is dreadful as it comes to hurry them from all enjoyments
of this Life, in which they placed all their happiness; but going out of the
World they have a prospect of the sad Regions of Despair into which they are
entering. The Devil who flattered them before, and gently seduced them to Sin,
now puts on his natural affrighting Visage, accuses, and threatens them with
all the merciless Looks of an Executioner. And that which makes the thing more
dreadful, the Law of God accuses and condemns the unbelieving Sinner, and
this gives force to the Devil's Accusations, for without it he could not
accuse, threaten, and perplex any Men with the Terrors of Death. No! It is Sin
which is the sting of death, and the strength of Sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 56.
It is thus the Devil uses his Power to keep Men in a slavish submission to
him, and as a true Tyrant he Governs his Subjects only by fear.

5. The Devil has the power of Death inasmuch as he is the Instrument of God's
Vengeance inflicting the second Death. He is the Jaylour and Executioner in
Hell, where Death keeps its Court, and sits on a Throne. Now in this respect
Satan has nothing to do with a Believer, who being freed from Sin, and the
Curse, and Condemnation of the Law shall never be delivered to this Tormentor,
as the Expression is Matthew. 18. 24. Nor has he power to inflict Temporal Death
on the Believer. He cannot separate our Souls and Bodies as he pleases. If
this were permitted him, what Slaughter and Devastation would he make in the
World? He destroys indeed the Souls of Wicked Men, but it is with their
consent, and they are their own Murderers. But Men die according to God's
Appointment, and by those ways and means which he had fore-ordain'd to put an
end unto their Lives.

II. The second part of my Discourse is to prove that Christ by dying has
destroyed Satan and the power of Death at once. He has destroyed Satan not by
extinguishing his Being, for the innumerable Mischiefs which he does, show him
to be alive, and very vigorous and active. But as a Tyrant is said to be ruined
when his Throne is overturned, and his cruel oppressive Government is
subverted; so Satan is said to be destroyed, when his Kingdom is so, and this
has Christ accomplished by his Death, for he has Redeemed the Elect Sons of
Men out of the Devil's Power, and reduced them to his own Kingdom, insomuch as
Satan has no more Dominion over them.

1. It is evident that Christ has destroyed Satan, and the Power of Death,
because his great Design in assuming our Nature was to accomplish this Glorious
Work. He came into the World not to make himself Great and Honorable, and to
raise an Earthly Empire, which he might easily have done whenever he pleased.
But he came to perform a more dreadful and difficult Undertaking. He came to
suffer the Punishment due unto us, that so he might be a proper Sacrifice and
the great Propitiation to satisfy God's Justice, and appease his Wrath, and
Redeem us who were obnoxious to it, and subject to the Curse of the Law. He
came to bear our Sins, to be wounded for our Transgressions, to be bruised for
our Iniquities, to have the Chastisement of our Peace laid upon him, that by
his Stripes we might be healed, Isa. 53. 5. He came to live miserably, as a Man
of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and at last to die for us to endure
God's Anger, and undergo Divine Vengeance. And he dyed on purpose, that he
might destroy the Power of Death, and that the Curse and Sting of it being left
in his own Soul, it might do us no hurt. Thus his great Design was to deliver
us from Death, that it might not be a Curse and Horror to us when we pass
through its Gloomy Shadow, that it might not have power to hold us in its
Bands, but that our Souls might immediately at the expiring of our latest
Breath pass into a state of Immortal Life and Unfading Bliss, and our dead
Bodies revive, and breaking the Prisons of the Grave rejoice in a Glorious
Resurrection. This was the great Performance for which he came into the World;
It was for this God the Father appointed him in the Eternal Councils between
him and his Glorious Son. It was for this the Father sent him, Joh. 3. 16. And
this was the Work which the Son did cheerfully undertake, Heb. 10, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. It was this great Business which he had in his Mind and Thoughts, when he
lived here on Earth, and of which he so frequently discoursed to his Disciples.
And what! Can we think it possible for Christ to fail in the Execution of his
principal Design. How should he who was declared to be the Son of God with
Power fail in accomplishing that Work which was the aim of his Mind, the desire
of his Heart: That Work concerning which he expresses the warmest eagerness of
Spirit till it were accomplished, Luke 22. 15. Nothing certainly shall
frustrate what Christ so earnestly intended. Nothing can hinder the Believer
from partaking the Fruits, and Benefits of his admirable Performance, Romans 8.
33, 34, 35, 38, 39. No! He Travailed in the Greatness of his Strength as one
Mighty to save, Isa. 63. 1. Sin, Satan, and the Power of Death are therefore
undoubtedly destroyed by his Death. For though he dyed yet he fell in the Field
of Victory, and all those Enemies lay conquered by his side, and he conquered
them that we might rejoice in him as being more than Conquerors through him who
has loved us, and done so much for us, Romans 8. 37.

2. That our Lord Jesus Christ has destroyed the Power of Death is apparent
from his having disarmed it of its Sting, and Power. What is the Power of
Death? It Is Sin, and when this is taken off from our Consciences, the other in
whatever unpleasing Forms of Diseases it approaches us, is really nothing more
but an easy Sleep in the Bosom of Jesus. What makes Death a Curse? It Is Sin.
What puts a Sting into it? Nothing but Sin, and when that is removed Death has
no Curse in it to blast us, no Sting to annoy us, but is changed into a
Blessing. Now our Lord Jesus has made an end of Sins, Dan. 9. 24. He has
taken off the Guilt of them from the Conscience of the Believer, and purged it
from dead Works that he may draw nigh to a reconciled God, and to his satisfied
Justice in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. How has he removed the Guilt
from us? By taking it on himself. And how did he become Guilty in the Judgment
of a Just God, and his Righteous Law? Not as having committed any Sin, not as
having any inherent in him, but as having our Iniquities imputed to him. He was
made Sin for us and so was adjudg'd Guilty, and obliged to suffer the
Punishments which he had deserved. And this was absolutely necessary for our
Pardon and Justification. We could not have been made the Righteousness of God
in him, unless he had first been made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Thrice Blessed
then is the Believing Soul whose Sins and Guilt and Punishment Christ has
born. For whom Christ has sufferd the Anger of an Incensed God which he the
wretched Sinner had provoked. For whom Christ has satisfied Divine Justice,
and answered the Law. To whom therefore Iniquity is not imputed, Romans 4. 8. And
for that reason Death is deprived of its Power and can do him no hurt. And for
whom Christ has brought in everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. That his
naked Soul being clothed with it, may when divested of the Body appear with
confidence before a Holy, and Righteous God.

3. It cannot be denied that our Redeemer has destroyed Satan and the Power of
Death. Forasmuch as he has put a stop to his Accusations: Put a stop did I
say? I did not speak enough, Christ has invalidated them, they are of no
force, and virtue, they are frivolous Gavils, and are rejected at God's Court
of Justice. Is Satan thus thrown over the Bar, that he cannot implead the
Believer, nor lay any thing to his charge, Romans 8. 33? Why then truly he is
destroyed, for it is the Pleasure, the Strength, the very Life of his Soul to
be an Accuser. This is the Name that is given him to express that Temper and
Disposition, which is inseparable from his Nature, Rev. 12. 10. And therefore
when he is cast down, when he is thrown out of this ill Office which was his
Malicious Delight, he is wholly dis-spirited. Nor is Satan's Courage and
Strength only enervated, but the Power of Death is broken too. When does the
fear of Death prevail over a Man? It Is when his Apprehensions of are not only
disquieting, but tormenting. It Is when Conscience flasheth Guilt in a Sinner's
Face, and Satan joining with it enforces the Accusation, and urges it with
the greatest vehemence on purpose to drive the wretched Soul to despair. But
our Lord Jesus disanulls these Accusations, insomuch as they are of no force
against a Believer. Were it not for this, Satan would perplex the poor Soul all
its Days, and weary it out by continually accusing it, and distract it at the
last moment of Life. It must be acknowledged, indeed that the Devil is often
permitted to disturb many Holy Persons with his Accusations. But what then?
Christ who has ruined his Power in this respect, steps in to the Soul's
Rescue, and driving Satan off prevents the attempted Mischief, and restores
Peace to the Afflicted Conscience.

4. It is evident that this our mighty Savior has delivered us from the Power
of Satan, because he has recovered our Souls out of that Spiritual Death, into
which Sin, and the Devil had thrown them. This was the Strength of the Devil's
Empire in us, for he could never have ruled us, had we not been dead in Sin,
nor have led us Captive had we not been thus weakened. It Is this Spriritual
Death that makes Men an easy Conquest to him, and secures the Peace of his
Dominion in their Hearts. Christ therefore by quickening the Soul which is dead
in Trespasses and Sins (Ephesians. 2. 1.) frees it from the Power of Satan and Death.
He thereby gives us a new Life from the dead, and we are not within the
Dominions of the Devil any longer, for the Spirit of a Believer is Life, (Romans
8. 10.) and he is therefore no Subject of Death's Kingdom. And to strengthen
our Assurance, that if we are Believers we are quickened with Christ, (Col. 2.
13.) and so are no more any part of Satan's Empire than he himself is: Let us
consider that our Lord Jesus has Life in himself for this purpose, that as he
Lives, we may live also. God has therefore given to the Son to have Life in
himself, as he has Life in himself. Joh. 5. 26. This assigns the cause of what
is said V. 25. Why the Dead should hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they
which hear shall Live. It is the Soul's Vivification by the Voice of Christ in
the Gospel that is meant. For the Hour that Christ speaks of as now coming and
instantly present, must import the time of the Preaching of the Gospel which
was very near, whereas the Day of the Resurrection was Seventeen Hundred Years
distant in Futurity. The cause why the Voice of Christ makes dead Souls live is
assigned v. 26. The Son has Life in himself, and therefore Quickens whom he
will, v. 21. Thus that Spiritual Death in our Souls by which Satan once kept us
under his Subjection is removed, and so his Power, and Dominion over us is
destroyed.

5. It is plain, it is openly visible that Christ has destroyed Satan who has
the Power of Death, inasmuch as he has broken his dark Kingdom, subverted his
Throne, deposed him from that Authority so arrogantly assumed by him, and
thrown him out of that Empire which he had usurped in the World. This Christ
has done not by Arms, but by Dying. As Sampson his Type killed more at his
Death, than he had through his whole Life, and tho he dyed, yet fell a
Conqueror: So our Great Savior destroyed all his and our Enemies by dying, and
in the sight of all the Angels triumphed over them when he Ascended after his
Victory, and will at last openly triumph before the Eyes of all the World when
he shall sit on his Throne having all his Enemies put under his Feet, Hoh. 1.
13. Heb. 10. 13.

6. The Believer knows by his own Experience, which is more convincing than all
Arguments which can be urged, that Christ has delivered him from the Power of
Satan, and Death, because he feels himself freed from the fear and bondage of
it. He knows that Christ has made his Peace with God, and brought him into a
Justified State insomuch as nothing can be laid to his charge, and therefore is
not afraid to go to a Reconciled God who has fully Pardoned, and perfectly
Justified him. He sees his Soul sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus (as that of
the Paschal Lamb was on the Posts of the Israelites Houses, Exodus 12. 13.) and
knows himself secure from any destroying Angel the Instrument of God's
Vengeance. In what a Horror were they on that dismal Night, when Death marched
in pompous Destruction through all the Cities of Egypt: But how were they
reassur'd and comforted when they saw the badge of their Safety on the Posts of
their Doors? In what a Consternation is a poor Soul when he regards Death not
only as his Dissolution, but as having the Wrath of God, his offended Justice,
and all the Horrors of Hell joined with it to render it terrible? But when he
sees his Conscience sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus, and purged from Dead
Works, that he may draw nigh to God in full Assurance of Faith, he dreads Death
no longer, when he sees Christ the Captain of his Salvation to be with him to
hearten, comfort, and support him in charging through this difficult Pass, he
is not apprehensive of any danger, but encouraged by his Presence tho he go
through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, yet he fears no Evil, Psalm, 23. 4.
And is so far from thinking it to be any Unhappiness to die, as he desires to
depart and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.

7. Every Instance which we have of a Believer's dying proves the Assertion of
my Text, and Doctrine, for even by this Death our Lord Jesus finisheth the
Ruin of Satan, and of the Power of Death. The Believer's Victory is now
completed who is more than Conqueror, through the Power and Strength of
Christ, he had before fought many a Battle with Satan, and put him to flight.
He had often resisted Sin successfully, and given it a Repulse: And now he
conflicts with his last Enemy, and overcomes, and his Death is a Triumphant
Chariot to carry him to Heaven, where he rejoices in a safe Retreat from all
Sin, and Misery. It is there he is out of the reach of all Evils. It is there
that being freed from the Body of Sin; and Death under which he groaned (Romans
7. 24.) he feels Diseases and Pains, and Pangs of Dying no more. It is there he
is placed out of the reach of Satan's Temptations, and violent Assaults, for
tho that Active and Malicious Spirit pursued him with the fiercest Rage while
in this World, yet he cannot follow him to Heaven, nor will any of his
Batteries carry so far. Thus the Day of Death is the Day of a Believer's
finished Victory, in which he may truly say he is more than a Conqueror, Romans
8. 37. And then the Blessed Soul is removed from a wretched Abode to an happier
Mansion, and by Death comes to be more closely united unto God the Spring of
all Life, and to the complete Enjoyment of that which is Eternal, which is
God's Gift to him, who first begun it in him by his renewing Spirit, and
brought him to the entire possession of it at last.

8. The last, and most signal Evidence of Christ's destroying the Power of
Satan, and Death, will be when he raises the Dead Bodies of Believers from the
Grave by his Spirit which develleth in them, Romans 8. 11. This last Day is the
Day of Christ's complete Victory, when, as himself was Victorious over it at
his own Resurrection, so all his Members in theirs shall Triumph over it too.
Then he will appear with all whom he Redeemed, and whom he now makes entire
Conquerors by virtue of his Victory, and he will appear as having made a
Conquest over the Grave it self (1 Cor. 15. 25, 26.) For he must Reign 'till be
put all his Enemies under his Feet, and the last Enemy which shall be
destroyed, is Death. Then the Bodies of all the Elect which have lain for so
many Ages in the Grave shall at last have the dark Prisons opened, and ascend
Triumphant over Death it self. How Great, and Glorious will that Day be in
which at one Word of Command from Christ, the Earth and Seas shall give up the
Dead which are in them. (Rev. 20. 13.) and all the Bodies of the Saints shall
come forth new formed like unto Christ's Glorious Body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21. when
we shall meet the Patriarchs; and Prophets, the Apostles, and Martyrs, and all
our Relations, and Friends (who have slept in Jesus) in the Morning of the
Resurrection, and see them shining in Glory, and our Lord Jesus with refulgent
Majesty at the head of them. What an Illustrious appearance of things will this
be? Never was there brighter day then this, when Christ shall make an utter End
of Death, as he has conquered, and destroyed Satan, who had the power of it.

As there is no Truth in the Gospel but may and ought to be practically
applied, let us see what use we may make of this Important Doctrine, which I
have endeavored to Explain, and prove to you.

USE 1.
Is it so that Satan has the Power of Death over the Soul, and Conscience of
every unbeleeving Sinner: Then every one of you who have not believed in Christ
tremble at the thoughts of your dismal condition. Seriously reflect upon your
present misery, and future danger. What can be more deplorable then your
present misery? You are not only under the Tyranny of Satan, and a base vassal
of his dark Empire. You are not only servilely addicted to his obedience, but
you are also exposed unto all mischeifs which he may and will do you by
exercising that power which he has of Death. He will strengthen and increase
that spiritual Death which is in your Souls, for he will prevailingly tempt you
to Evil, and sad experience may convince you, that a Man by continuing in Sin,
and frequent commission of it grows more, and more Insensible, and Dead, and
all the powers of his mind are more weakened to any Holy or good Action, and
the more he Sins, the more he becomes Slave to it. What a dismal consideration
is this? And yet this is the woeful state of every unbeleever. And now do but
look beyond the spaces of Time, and this World and take a due prospect of your
future danger. If you Dye in this condition, it is not more certain you are now
alive then that you will be condemned, nay are (...) condemned already to
Eternal Death. The indignation and wrath of a provoked God will be poured out
upon you, Romans 2. 8. 9. And who knows the power of his Anger? (Psalm. 90. 11.)
Who then can bear it?

USE II.
Has Death entered into the World by Sin, let then our sorrow for our Dead
Relations and Friends sharpen our hatred, and indignation against it. In every
Sickness we see, or feel the effects of it, and though our Friends Dye in the
Lord, yet their Death shows us what Sin brought into the World, and when we
hear them breathing out their last Groans, this may bring to our minds what
mischief Sin does. Let us consider that though our Lord Jesus Christ has obtained
the pardon of Sin, and taken away the infliction of Vindictive justice, yet it
is true, that by every Sin which we commit, we displease God and so displease
him that he will make us to feel his Fatherly correction. He will put us in
mind by some severe chastisement how we have been wanting in our duty and that
we have done that which has not been right in his sight. This sad occasion then
which causes us to Mourn for the loss of our Friend, may at the same time make
us Mourn for our Sins. Were it not for them, this had never been, for both he
and we should have been Immortal and so never have parted. Therefore the
greater our loss is, let us detest our Sins the more. Now to Press this thought
upon you, and to excite in you, and my self a just hatred and indignation
against Sin by which we have displeased God, and which is the cause of that
loss under which we Mourn, Let us consider the worth and excellency of the
Person who God has been pleased to move from us. I know very well that Sermon's
Preached upon such occsions are too much abused to flattery, but there is no
fear of it in this case, for there is no need of it. I shall only speak that
of our Friend and Brother Deceased, which all that were acquainted with him
must acknowledge to be true: And to speak the truth, cannot be imputed to
Favor, Affection, or any prejudicate opinion. If we consider him as a Man or
as a Christian there was every thing in him to endear him to us. He was of an
excellent benign temper, rarely provoked to anger, and if he were it must be
from some weighty cause, and yet even then his passion was soon over. He was a
Man prone to do good, ready to receive the distressed, active to promote any
public interest, any cause of Christ, and the prosperity of his Church. He was
a Man of a discerning, penetrating Spirit, of great strength of mind, of a firm
and sound judgment and yet which was an excellency most to be admired; He was
not proud of these admirable endowments, And as God had bestowed upon him these
natural abilities (and therefore to praise them is to praise God the author of
them and to give him the Glory.) So he took care to improve them, and to
cultivate the rich Soil. He was industrious to increase his knowledge by a
severe application to God and useful studies. But you will say these are but
humane accomplishments, knowledge, Learning, and Generosity of Spirit were
found in many of the Philosophers who knew not Christ. It Is true, but our dear
Friend and Brother knew and loved Jesus Christ and his Gospel, and in the whole
course of his Study, those were most delightful to him, that led him into the
Mysteries of our Redemption. The knowledge of Divine things most ravished his
Soul, and was the Element in which his Spirit breathed, and as he loved the
Gospel, so he understood the truths of it, and knew how to vindicate them. In
their necessary defense he employed that Art of reasoning of which he was a
Great Master, I do not mean an Art of Sophistry and Cavil, but that which gives
just Rules for the framing clear, and distinct Ideas, which direct us to judge
according to the due perceptions that we have of things; and which Instructs us
in an orderly Method of Arguings, that we may not be confused, perplexed, or
mistaken in our Reasoning. This was the Art of which he made use, and he Argued
without Wrangling, and knew how to be zealous for the Truth, and yet not be
Angry. If we consider him farther as to his relative Duties, he was a Loving
Husband, a Tender Father, True to his Friend, Punctual to all Acts of Kindness,
and never promised more than he meant to perform: And to name that Station in
which he most shined, he was a Faithful Pastor, laboring in the Word and
Doctrine, conversing with Souls, enquiring into their Cases, and Necessities,
and administering Counsel, or Reproof as was needful. The Churches of Christ
have lost a Man of great Use and Service, a Loss which I fear they will every
Day feel more and more. You who are Members of that Congregation over which he
was in the Lord; you especially have lost a Faithful Pastor, and there is
nothing to relieve you under this severe Affliction, but this one Thought,
(which indeed is sufficient) that our Lord Jesus Christ is the Universal Pastor
never dies, and you walking in his Ways and observing his Ordinances, may be
assured of his Presence, Care, and Direction. I am now to speak unto you who
are his Offspring, you have lost a Loving Father, but he has left to you a
grateful Memory of himself and the Example of his Life. You lived and conversed
with him, imitate him in that Good Nature, Candor, Ingenuous Temper, Piety
toward God, and Virtuous Deportment among Men, which endeared him to you, and
to all that knew him. But above all know the God of your Father, and serve him
with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind, if you seek him he will be found of
you, as a Father of which you can never be deprived, But if you forsake him he
will cast you off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And now let every one of us make a
right use of this Afflicting Providence. Let us seriously reflect how many
Worthy Ministers of the Gospel we have lost, and that within the compass of a
few Years. Let us lay our Hands upon our Breasts, and make a close Enquiry,
what have I done? Or how have I been wanting in the Performance of my Duty? Let
us all consider this and turn to the Lord with our whole Hearts least he make
an utter End of us and not only take away some Ministers but all, and the
Gospel together.

USE III.
Is it so that our kind Redeemer by dying has delivered us from the Power of
Satan and Death? Let us have an high, and grateful Sense of his Love in the
Performance of the extraordinary favor he has done us, and of the Inestimable
Benefits, which we have received. It is a small Matter in our Account that the
Eternal Son of God should descend from Heaven and all its Glories, and take
upon him the Form of a Servant, and he a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Griefs, and after a Miserable Life passed on Earth die to Redeem us from Death?
Is it a small matter that this Glorious Person who lay in the Bosom of the
Father should by undertaking our Cause, and putting his own Person instead of
ours, and bearing our Sins imputed to him, expose himself to all the
Threatenings and Curses of the Law, and to all the Wrath, and Justice of the
offended Deity? What moved him to do this? Nothing but that Infinite Love which
is above all our Thoughts, and which we can never sufficiently Adore. And if we
regard the Blessings which flow to us with his Blood, and spring out of that
Grave in which he lay but three Days, how Inestimable will they appear to us?
What greater Misery could befall us, than that Spiritual Death which had seized
our Souls, made us Vassals to the Devil's Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Sway, and
enslaved us to every Vicious Inclination, and bound us in Fetters ready for the
execution of Eternal Death? What Happiness is there greater, and in which we
have more reason to rejoice than to feel the Power of this Death destroyed by
that of Christ, then to experience that as he died unto Sin once, we die unto
it daily, then to be free indeed by his making us the Sons of God, and to see
the Devil's Fetters knocked off, and our selves delivered from Vengeance, and
the Wrath to come? What could be more vexatious than to be subject to the
Bondage of the fear of Death which oppressed us with its intolerable weight?
And what can be more pleasing to our disquieted Souls then to be delivered from
these Fears which perpetually tortured them? Now looking on Christ by Faith as
their Resurrection and Life, they are ready cheerfully to go out of the World
at God's Call, knowing that their departure hence is but the beginning of their
Happiness.

USE IV.
If any of us when we come to die would encounter this our last Enemy in the
strength of Faith, and so be Victorious: If we would look Death in the Face
with a firm Courage, and Constancy of Mind; let us look to it that we now
believe on Christ, that we now live by Faith on the Son of God, and then we
shall die in Faith, and Joy. If we trust in him all our Days, he may, he will
be our Confidence at our latest Hour. If we hold this Shield of Faith, and
never suffer it to slip out of our Hands, we shall be able to repel Satan's
Fiery Darts, even those which are thrown thickest at us when we are dying; we
shall with undaunted Resolution face our last Hour, and in whatever-shape Death
appears it cannot affright us. But if we come to die, and have no Faith in
Christ, if we come to give up our Souls before we have in trust committed them
to him, we can resign them to nothing but Hell and Despair. Let us consider
what a dreadful Scene of things will open upon us in that Hour. Wherever we
shall turn our Thoughts, they will encounter nothing but Objects of Horror. If
we reflect on our forepast Lives, we see innumerable Sins unpardoned coming in
Troops to assault us, we hear our own Consciences accusing us, and feel the
Devil driving us to Despair. If we look back on the World which we are leaving,
the thoughts of loosing all these enjoyments whom we so much loved, and pursued
as all our happiness will Torture us with regret. If we take a view downward
there is nothing but Hell, and Flames ready to receive us. If we cast our
languishing Eyes up to Heaven, there is God indeed before whom we must appear,
but it is an angry God, an avenger of Sin, and now no longer manifesting himself
Glorious in his Grace, but terrible in his Justice. What hope can the Poor
Guilty Sinners have, when he has not one Minute more to promise to his
affrighted Spirit, but he must immediately appear before God, whom he has
provoked all his days? Where will he have a shelter to secure him? What place
can he run to for safety? Where shall he find a Sanctuary to protect him from
God's Anger? The Blood of Christ he despised, and he who came to save Sinners
was never thought of by him. The Grace of God was either slighted, or turned
into wantonness, and how can such a Soul think to find mercy in this hour of
its greatest need. But if we are Believers on Christ in our last moments we
shall more, or less Act Faith on him for our support, and comfort, and we shall
then have a Gladsome prospect of a different face of things. We leave this
miserable World with joy for a better Country above, of whose Possession we are
assured. We have not the least regret in loosing the pleasures of Life, because
we know that we are going to our God who with smiles and kindness in his looks
invites us to his presence where there is fullness of Joys, and at his right
Hand Pleasures for evermore. We shall fear no Hell nor Devils, for Christ has
delivered us from the one, and Conquered the other. In whatever manner
therefore Death shall attack us, our Souls ready to take their flight, and
knowing what a change they must undergo, yet will not be Amazed. If Death comes
on a sudden, we shall Dye without pain, and one easy step out of the Body sets
us in the other World of Happiness. If Death makes gradual approaches, and we
feel pains of Diseases, and expiring Pangs, yet still the thoughts of God our
Kind Father who makes our Bed in Sickness, the assurance of Christ's Favor,
and that our Peace is made will make every thing lie easy under us, and cause
us to rejoice through all the Traverses of a Tedious Sickness. We shall account
them but as so many steps, tho a little Wearisome to our Father's House, and
when Nature is quite spent, and our Souls must fall from their Bodies, they
will yet fall gently into the Bosom of our Redeemer. If we would thus Dye, let
us now by Faith commit our Souls to Christ for Life, and Salvation. If we do
so, we may make this wish in full assurance of hope, may we Dye the Death of
the Righteous, and may our latter End be like his.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by John Marshal, at the Bible in GraceChurch-street,
1699.
GOD's Exaltation in the Glorious Work of Man's Salvation through Christ, the
Highest End, and the Greatest Desire of all Gracious Souls: In a Sermon upon
the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Tub, from the Text (chosen by Her) Psalm. 18. 46.
The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be
exalted. Preached by Samuel Blower Pastor of the Church at Abington. A Call to
Weeping: Or a Warning touching approaching Miseries. In a Sermon Preached on the
23th of March, 1699. At the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Westen, who departed this
Life on the 17th. of the said Month, in the 38th. Years of Her Age. By Benjamin
Keach.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in
Gracechurch-street.
THE Works of Thomas Goodwin, D. D. Sometime President of Magdalen College in
Oxford, the 4th Vol. containing Discourses, (1) Of the Object and Acts of
Justifying Faith, in 3 Parts. (2.) Of the Constitution, Order, and Discipline
of the Churches of Christ. (3.) The Government and Discipline of the Churches
of Christ, proposed Familiarly by way of Question and Answer. In Folio. The
Regular Architect, or the general Rule of the five Orders of Architecture of M.
Glaconia Barozzia Da Vignola, with a new Addition of Michael Angelo Buonaroti,
rendered into English from the Original Italian, and explained by John Leake,
Student in the Mathematics, for the use and benefit of free Masons,
Carpenters, Joyners, Carvers, Painters, Bricklayers and Plaisterers, in general
for all Ingenious Persons that are concerned in the famous Art of Building. The
Works of that Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. John Bunyan, late Minister of the
Gospel, and Pastor of the Congregation at Bedford: The 1st Vol. containing Ten
of his Excellent Manuscripts, prepared for the Press before his Death, never
before Printed, and Ten of his choice Books formerly Printed, viz.
Manuscripts.
An Exposition on the Ten first Chapters of Genesis. Justification by Imputed
Righteousness* Paul's Departure and Crown. Israel's Hope encouraged. The
Desires of the Righteous granted. The Saints Privilege and Profit. Christ a
Complete Savior in his Intercession. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ. The
House of the Forest of Lebanon. A Description of Antichrist and his Ruin.
Books formerly Printed.
Saved by Grace. A Map of Salvation and Damnation. Christian Behavior. Pray
with the Spirit and Understanding. The Strait Gate. Some Gospel Truths opened.
Light for them in Darkness. Instruction for the Ignorant. The Holy City, New
Jerusalem, Resurrection of the Dead.

Collected and Printed by the Procurement of his Church and Friends, and by his
own Approbation before his Death; that there his Christian Ministerial Labors
may be preserved in the World. Together with a large Alphabetical Table,
containing the Contents of the Whole.

A Treatise of the Holy Trinity, in 2 Parts: The 1st asserting the Deity of
Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit, in the Unity of Essence with God the Father:
The 2d in defense of the former, contains Answers to the chiefest Objections
made against this Doctrine, by Isaac Marlow. Price Bound, 1. s. Christ Exalted,
and Dr. Crisp Vindicated in several points, Called antinomian; cleared from
Neonamian Suggestions alleged, by some Remarks on Mr. A. his Rebuke to Mr.
Lobb, showing from Scripture and most Orthodox Authors, the Invalidity of his
Rebuke, with some Observations on the Bishop of Worcester's Letter, concerning
the great Point of the Change of Persons between Christ and the Believer. All
Jcomb Behmen's Works complete abridged in 4to. Bound Price 6s. An Inquiry into
the true Nature, Power and Communion of Evangelical Churches; with the true
Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government, wherein these Particulars are
distinctly handled. 1. The Subject Matter of the Church. 2. The Form, and Cause
of a particular Church. 3. The Policy Rule and Discipline. 4. The Officers. 5.
The Duty of Pastors. 6. The Office of Teachers. 7. The Rule, or of Ruling
Elders. 8. The Nature of Church Policy. 9. Of Deacons. 10. Of Excommunication.
11. Of Communion of Churches, complete, 1st and 2d Part Bound. Those that have
the 1st Part, may have the 2d Part singly, Entitled, The True Nature of a
Gospel Church; treating of the 11 Particulars above mentioned. A View of an
Ecclesiastic in his Socks and Buskins, or a Just Reprimand given to Mr. Alsop,
for his Foppish, Pedantick, Detractive and Petulant way of Writing. The 2d
Edition. A Confutation of some of the Errors of Mr. Daniel Williams, by the
Reverend Mr. Vincent Alsop, in a Letter to the Reverend Mr. Daniel Burgess. A
History of the Union between the Presbyterian and Congregational Ministers, in
and about London; and the Causes of the Breach of it. The 2d Edition. Lately
Printed Baxteriamsm Barefaced, drawn from a Literal Transcript of Mr. Baxter,
and the Judgment of others, in the most Radical Doctrines of Faith compared
with those of the Orthodox, both Conformist and Nonconformist, and Transferred
over by way of Test unto the Papist and Quaker, by Thomas Edwards Esquire A
Discourse of the Government of the Tongue. The 2d Edition. By the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man. In large Octavo. Price 2 s. The Lover in Fashion, being an
Account from Lycidus to Lypsander, of his Voyage from the Island of Love. By
Mrs. A'Behn. In Octavo. Price 2 s. The Holy Bible in Welsh, in large Octavo.
Anatomy Spiritualized, in which is considered, 1. The Happy State of Man's
Integrity in his first Creation. 2. The woeful Apostasy of Man from God by his
Original Sin, and how his Posterity is guilty of the same. 3. Man's Restoration
by the Second Adam, the Mediator Jesus Christ, and the great Excellencies of
the Covenant of Grace. 4. The whole Series of Christian Duties, with promises
of Assistance. 5. The particular cases of Affliction, especially Spiritual
Desertion, Sickness, Poverty, Imprisonment, Reproach, Desertion of Friends and
Relations; and the Promises in the several cases. 6. The great Encouragement to
Believers, for Patience and Perseverance; from the great Reward of Eternal
Happiness, and Promises of Assistance: To which is added an Index of the whole.
Price Bound 1 s. 6 d. Vindiciae Justificationis Gratuitae. Justification
without Conditions; or the Free Justification of a Sinner, explained, confirmed
and vindicated the Exceptions, Objections, and seeming Absurdities which are
cast upon it, by the Assertors of Conditional Justification: More especially,
from the attempts of Mr. B. Woodbridge, in his Sermon entitled [Justification
by Faith] of Mr. Cranford, in his Epistle to the Reader; and of Mr. Baxter, in
some Passages which relate to the same Matter. Wherein also the Absoluteness of
the New Covenant is proved, and the Arguments against it are Disproved. By W.
Air, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of a Church in the City of New Sarum.
The 2d Edition. Meditation and Discourses on the Glory of Christ, in his
Person, Office, with the difference between Faith and Sight; with a 2d Part
annexed: Being the Application of the foregoing Meditations. 1. Applied unto
Unconverted Sinners. 2. To Saints under Spiritual Decays, and of obtaining
fresh Springs of Grace: Both Parts bound together, Price 2 s. 6 d. There have
been two Impressions on the 1st Part of the Meditations of the Glory of Christ,
in his Person, Office and Grace: Those that would be supplied with the 2d Part,
may have it for 1 s. Bound alone. Discourses of the Holy Spirit, being an
Addition to his Folio, in 2 parts. 1st part in 7 Chapters, of the Holy Spirit
and his Work. 2d Part treating of Spiritual Gifts, their Names and
Significations; with the difference between Spiritual Gifts and Saving Grace;
of Extraordinary Spiritual Gifts, and of its Original, Duration Use and End: Of
Spiritual Gifts inabling the Ministry; how obtained and improved, in 8
Chapters, which compleats the whole the Doctor intended on this Subject, as you
will see in Mr. Mather's Preface. Both parts Bound together, price 2 s. Maltum
in Parvo, or a Compendious Spelling-Book, to be used so soon as Children know
their Letters; by the help of which, in a very short time, Children may be
taught to Spell and Read the hardest Words. It is set forth for the benefit of
Little Children, and may also help those that are of better Capacities. The 2d
Edition, Illustrated with diverse Copper Cuts, price Bound 6 d. William Penn and
the Quakers, either Imposture or Apostates, which they please: Proved from
their avowed Principles, and contrary Practices, price Bound 1 s. A Reprimand
for the Author of a Libel Entitled, George Keith an Apostate, written by a
Churchman, price 4 d. The Faxonian Quakers Dunces, Liars and Slanderers, proved
out of George Fox's Journal, and other Scriblers; particularly B. C. his
Quakers no Apostates, or the Hamerer Defeated: Ammanuensis, as is said, to G.
C. (as he sometime wrote himself) Gulielmus Calamus, alias William Penn. Also a
Reply to W. C. (a Churchman the Quakers Advocate) his Trepedantium Malleus,
Intrepidantur Malleatus, etc. Price 6 d. All three by Trepidantium Mallaeus.
Meditations on Justification by Christ alone. In Verse. Price 1 d. A Divine
Discourse Representing the Soul of a Believer speaking to God by Faith,
according to the Doctrine of the Scriptures: In Verse. Price 1 d. But by the
Dozen are sold for 9 d. The History of England, giving a true and Impartial
Account of the most considerable Transactions in Church and State, in Peace and
War; during the Reigns of all the Kings and Queens from the coming of Julius
Caesar into Britain, with an account of all the Plots, Conspiracies,
Insurrections and Rebellions. Likewise a true Relation of the Wonderful
Prodigies, Monstrous Births, Terrible Earthquakes, Dreadful Lights in the Air,
Famines, Plagues, Thunders, Lightnings, and Fires, to the Year 1699. Together
with a particular Description of the Rarities in the several Counties of
England and Wales, etc. By J. Seller, Hydrographer to His Majesty. The 2d
Edition. Pen's Dexterity, or the readiest way to the Art of Shortwriting, by
incomparable Contractions, whereby a Sentence may be wrote as soon as a Word:
Allowed by Authority, and past both Universities with great applause. Licensed
and Entered according to Order. By Jeremiah Rich, price 6 d. Where you may be
supplied with the New Testament and the Singing Psalms in the same Character,
they being of great use to the obtaining the said Art, and keeping of it
perfect when attained. Youths Recreation, or a speedy help to Writing displayed
in a compact Number of Copies, price 6 d. Divine Poems by way of paraphrase on
the Ten Commandments, illustrated with 12 Copper plates, showing how personal
Punishments has been inflicted on the Transgressors of these Commandments, as
is Recorded in the Holy Scripture as also Metrical Paraphrase upon the Creed,
and Lord's Prayer. By George Wither:, price Bound 1 s. A Friendly Letter to all
Young Men, showing the Benefit of a Religious and Friendly Reproof and
Admonition; with a Letter to Masters of Families, advising them to pray with
their Families, to which is added a Familiar Conference about the Unlawfulness
of Trading on the Lord's Day, as also Hymns and Spiritual Songs to be used in a
private Family or Society, to which is added Rules and Orders of a Religious
Society of Young Men, as now practiced in the Cities of London and Westminster,
price Bound 1 s. A Friendly Discourse concerning profane Cursing and Swearing,
wherein is showed the heinousness of them, of Necessity of private persons
giving Informations for suppressing of them pursuant to the late Act of
Parliament, with an Abstract of the said Act, price 2 d. Three Contending
Brethren, Mr. Williams, Mr. Lobb, and Mr. Alsop, reconciled and made Friends,
by an Occasional Conference with three Notorious Heretics. Mr. Humphreys, Mr.
Clark, and Dr. Crisp. Vindiciae Anti-Baxterianae, or some Animadversions on a
Book, Entitled, ^^liquae Baxterianae, or the Life of Mr. Richard Baxter. The
2d Edition. The last Plot smelt and foretold by a Nonconformist, who by long
conversing with Seditious Priests, who either openly prayed not for His
Majesty, or else secretly black'nd him, suspected a Plot which broke out in the
close of a poetic Combat, a Sermon on that Occasion, of Esther 2. 21, 22, 23.
Of the Hanging of two Assassinators Bightan and Terish. Also a Sermon preached
on the Death of the Queen's Majesty on Ruth 2. 11. Wherein a parallel is made
between Virtuous Ruth, and Virtuous Queen Mary, both every where known to be
so, price 6 d. The Golden Treasure, or the complete Minor, being Royal
Institutions: Being proposals for Articles to Establish and Confirm Laws,
Liberties and Customs of Silver and Gold Mines, to all the King's Subjects in
such parts of Africa and America, which are now (or shall be) annexed to, and
dependant on the Crown of England: With Rules, Laws, and Methods of Mining and
getting of precious Stones, the working and making of Saltpeter; and also, the
Digging and getting of Lead, Tin, Copper, and Quicksilver Oars, in any or
either of those Countries; whereby Navigation and Trade, with the Subjects
Interest and Riches, together with the Crowns Revenues, would be greatly
increased in a little time. Most humbly Offered to the Consideration of the
King's Most Excellent Majesty, and this present Parliament. By Thomas Houghton
of Limestreet. Separation from the Church of England Justified, or diverse
Reasons of the Author's Separation justified, price 3 d. The Ten Commandments
in Verse on a large Copperplate, price 4 d. Good Company, or sudden Thoughts,
partly suggested, and partly collected, by George Liddal, price 2 d. The
Accomplishment of Scripture Prophecy, by Peter Junea. Youths Comedy, or the
Souls Triumph, price 1 s. Variety without Vanity, or a complete Set of
RoundHand Coppies according to the best Masters, fit for Nurseries of Youth in
City or Country, Engraven on copperplates, and printed for the benefit of such
as would readily attain a good Hand in Writing, price 6 d. A Copy-Book with
Coppies on the top of the Book, containing about 30 Copies. Several other
Copy-Books printed and plain, price 1 s. The Great Day of Judgment, or a
Description of the Separation that will be made on that Day by the Great God of
Heaven and Earth, represented by Figures from a large copper-plate, price 4 d.
Likewise you may be supplied with several other large Figures on copper plates,
and diverse French Habits. The Travelers Song, or pleasant Meditations on the
way, by George Liddal, price 4 d. A New Years Gift for the Antinomians, price 6
d. A Dialogue between Robert and Ferguson, in relation to Socks and Buskins,
price 6 d. A Friendly Epistle to Mr. George Keith, and the Reformed Quakers at
Turners-Hall, with some Animadversions on a Discourse about a right
Administrator of Baptism, etc. and of Episcopacy, price 6 d. A Choice Drop of
Honey from the Rock Christ. The Fourth Edition Corrected and Amended, price
Bound 4 d. Childrens Bread or the first principles of Knowledge, by way of
Question and Answer. By A. Palmer, price 1 d.
At the Bible in Gracechurch-street,
You may be supplied with Paper-Hangings of the Newest India and Japan Figures,
either by Yard or Sheet, very delightful for Rooms, or Closets, and all other
sorts of Paper, both Brown, Whited-brown, and Writing: And Paper-Books, as
Shop-Books, Pocket-Books, and Mathematical-paper-Books; Affidavits for Burying
in Woollen, Slates in Frames, or without, and Slate-Books, Letter-Cases,
Copy-Books, best Ink for Records, Royal shining Japan-Ink, Holman's Ink-powder,
India-Ink; Quills, Pens, Wax, Pencils, Files Wafers and Boxes, etc.

Likewise Bibles, Common Prayers, Testaments, Psalters, Catechisms,
Spelling-Books, Accidences, Grammars, Rich's Shorthand, with his Testament and
Singingpsalms, and other Shorthand Books; and most sort of Books, either
School-Books, or others; and most sorts of Almanacks, or Old Books New Bound,
of any sort, etc.

You may have Bills, Bonds, Bills of Lading, or Funeral Tickets printed at
Reasonable Rates.

Also Dr. Daffy's Cordial Elixir, Blagrave's Spirits of Scurvy Grass Golden and
plain; The Queen of Hungary's Water; Pawlet's Chemical Water for the Teeth, and
Gums, a Cordial, or a present Ease for the Chollick, etc.


