The Six Booksellers Proctor Nonsuited. WHEREIN The gross-falsifications, and
Untruths, together with the inconsiderate and weak passages, found in the
Apology for the said Booksellers, are briefly noted and evicted. And the said
Booksellers proved so unworthy, both in their Second Beacon-fired, and
likewise in their Epistle written in the Defense of it, that they are out of
the Protection of any Christian, or reasonable Apology for either.

By J. G. A Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, even they
both are an abomination unto the Lord. Pro. 17. 15. Who knowing the judgment
of God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of death, not only do
the same, but consent with them who do them. Romans 1. 32. They that forsake the
Law, praise the wicked: but such as keep the Law, contend with them. Prove. 28.
4. Nullum vitium est sine Patrocinio. Sen. Causa patrocinio non bona major
erit. Ovid. Non est in medico semper relevetur ut aeger:
Interdum docta plus valet art malum.
Idem. London, Printed for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and and are to be sold at
their Shops at the Castle in Cornhill, and in Popes-Head-Alley, near
Lumbard-Street. 1655

The six Booksellers Proctor nonsuited, and his Apology proved the
Apologists own condemnation.
GOod Reader, I shall do little in this paper, but only give thee a few Items
(with an Imprimis) of that large bed-rol of untruths and foul aspersions (as
the Apologist expresses himself) of which he has composed an Apology (or
rather, an Apologue, instead of an Apology) for his Book-men.

If there prove to be any vacant paper toward the end, I may give thee a taste
of some weak and indigested sayings of his likewise. But concerning aspersions
and untruths.

Imprimis he says, p. 3. that after search, he found the omission of one word,
such, had by a strange kind of multiplication, produced a thousand, wherein I
render them [the Book-sellers] to the world, as guilty of no less then forgery
and falsification. Here are two of those evil things, which himself calls soul
and unjust aspersions. For first, I take his book-men ^ardie, (and charge them
accordingly) with the omission of several other words, besides such, p. 16. 60.
Besides, I charge them in my book (and that most justly) with several other
falsifications, besides those committed in and about the Transcription out of
my book of Redemption, as is to be seen in my Animadversions upon every Section
of their Epistle (a very few only excepted) especially upon Sect, 1. 20. and
21. 3. I no where make his bookmen guilty of Forgery, for leaving out of the
word Such: I only say in my Letter to them, that some would call it Forgery. p.
1.

Item, he says, p. 3. that at the Booksellers mis-transcribing I cry out of
Antichristian dealing, etc. This is Book-seller-like also. I no where cry out
of Antichristian dealing because of their un-Christian handling me in their
transcribing me. I only call their request to the Parliament for the
confinement of the Press, an Antichristian request; of which I give a true,
and sober account. p. 49.

Item, p. 4. he says, that I have so far profited in the art of calumnation,
that I am not ashamed to prostitute the sentences of Calvin, Piscator, Pareus,
the Synod of Dort, etc. to the maintenance of those Arminian Doctrines, which
all the world knows their souls abhord, etc. Does the man speak truth, when he
calls it a calumniation, truly and faithfully, and without any falsification in
the least, to transcribe or report the sayings of men? He is not able to prove
that I have wronged the Authors he speaks of, nor any one of them, in the least
tittle or iota, in any thing I have cited from them. And if their souls abhorred
the Doctrines he speaks of, they are in a twofold respect, blame worthy; 1.
Because their souls abhorred such Doctrines, which are the manifest truths of
God. 2. Because they assert and affirm that in words, which upon such a
supposition, is most contrary to their sense and judgment. Besides it is much
more Presbyterian, then Orthodox, to call the citation of men's sentences for
the maintenance of what they plainly speak and avouch, a prostitution of them.

Item, p. 4. He insinuates a charge against me of oppressing the Booksellers
innocence. It seems to falsify men's writings innocence. But some of the
Booksellers themselves (I understand) are more ingenuous then their Apologist
(as clients many time are then their Proctors) and do confess they did not well
in defaceing my words, and wish it had been otherwise.

Item, (in the same page) he calls Toleration an accursed Idol, and affirms it
to be Mr. Goodwins Great Diana. If Toleration be an Idol, how come
Presbyterians to fare so well as they do, by it? Idols (the Scripture informs
us) do neither good, nor evil, Esa. 41. 23. 44. 10. Psalm. 115. 4. 5. etc. I
know no reason (nor do wiser men then I, know any) why the sect of High
Presbyterialism, should be tolerated, more then its fellows. Certain I am, it
is as ill deserving of the civil State* yea or of humane society; yea or of the
interest of Christian Religion it self, as most of them* But why he should
call, Toleration, my Great Diana, it may be his interest, or his disaffection
to me, knows; but his conscience, (I am confident) knows not, especially if
he understands what Toleration properly means. I not long since plainly
expressed my self to the chief Ruler of the land, that my sense was not to have
any Toleration granted by the Magistrate, to any sort, or sect, of erroneous
men whatsoever; yea and further, that it was not in the Magistrates power to
grant any, [id est, to grant a liberty, or permission unto any man, or sort of
men, to err.]

Item yet again (in the same page) he says, that if things be unpartially
weighed, it will evidently appear, that to deny such or such a particular kind
of unchangeablness in God, and to deny any unchangeableness in him at all,
though different in words, yet is in sense the same. But if things be never so
unpartially weighed, does it, or will it evidently appear, that to deny the
Apologist, (be he Mr. Pool, or Mr. Jenkins, or whosoever) to be such or such a
kind of animal, as suppose an Horse, Mule, or the like, and to deny him to be
any animal at all, as suppose animal rational, an animal endued with reason, is
only somewhat different in words, yet the sense the same.

Item (in the same fourth page) he says he is well assured, upon much
conference with Booksellers since, that it was not wilfully or maliciously
left out to deprave my meaning, etc. and this he alleges as his first
argument to make it evidently appear, that to deny such an unchangeableness,
and to deny any unchangeableness, though somewhat different in words is yet in
sense the same. Does it, evidently appear by the affirming of an untruth
inconsiderately, and not maliciously, that to affirm a truth, and an untruth,
is in sense the same, and only somewhat different in words? Is not this of that
kind of demonstration, which makes it evident that white is black, because it
is something?

Item (toward the foot of the same page) why the denying such an
unchangeableness, and any unchangeableness, should be in sense the same, he
adds (in the second place) this reasonless reason. The true reason (says he)
why the word such was left out, was because it was a relative term [and was not
this an offense, deserving the punishment of being banished from the sentence?]
and so if it had been expressed it would have necessitated the Transcription of
a far larger proportion of Mr. Goodwins words, etc. But first, this reason is
not at all relative to the conclusion, the apparent eviction whereof it
pretends unto. For what is there in it to prove, that to deny such an
unchangeableness, and any unchangeableness, are in sense the same? 2. It grossly
contradicts his former reason. For there he affirmed (on the behalf of his
Beacon-Firers) that the word was not wilfully left out: and here he affirms
that it was left out upon consideration and debate. Now what is wilfulness, but
the fullness of the will? and when is the will fuller, then when a thing is
willed, or resolved to be done, upon consideration, and in order to the
effecting or procuring of some beloved end? 3. (and lastly) if the nature of
their work of Beacon-firing would not permit the transcribing of such a
proportion of my words, as was sufficient to explain my sense and meaning in
that unchangeableness, which I deny unto God: they had provided better both for
their consciences, and credits, if they had left out the whole sentence out of
their book, instead of leaving out the word Such, (with others) out of the
sentence. For is it reasonable, or Christian, to represent a man's saying as
erroneous, without declaring unto the Reader, in what sense that word, wherein
the error is supposed to lie, is meant or understood by him, in case it be
ambiguous?

Item (page 5.) he says that that assureance of the unchangeableness of Gods
love, which the Beacon-Firers implici^ely assert, and with the denial whereof
they charge me, is very well known (to the Lord Protector, and Parliament, and
all intelligent men) to be that very* same which I oppose, etc. If the
Beacon-Firers do assert such an assureance of the unchangeableness of the love
of God, as I there describe and oppose, I cannot believe that either my Lord
Protector, or the Parliament, or many if any) other intelligent men, have any
knowledge of such their assertion. For how should it ever come into the mind
(much less into the steady and certain knowledge either of the Lord Protector,
Parliament, or other intelligent man, that men pretending to the true knowledge
and honor of God, as the Beacon-fires do (by the Apologists high testimony of
them) should ascribe any thing unto him, so abhorring to his nature, so
inconsistent with his holiness, so destructive to his great end and design for
the advancement of godliness amongst men, as such an unchangeableness of love
to men, which I there describe, and deny unto him? As for the unchangeableness
asserted by my adversaries, if it be such, which opposes the unchangeableness,
which I in twenty places (some of them pointed to in my Fresh Discovery) do
assert, it is more then yet I understand. If it be such which I reject, and
this with indignation and abhorrencie of soul (as I, and all intelligent men,
have good cause to do) neither the Beacon-Firers, nor their Proctor, can with
truth charge me with rejecting any other; nor consequently with rejecting all
whatsoever. Therefore the man's Dilemma is impertinently frivolous.

Item (p. 5.) he charge me, that my whole dispute is levied against the
unchangeableness of Gods love. A most horid, bold, and broadfac'd slander. For
the main design of that dispute of mine he speaks of, is to explain, vindicate
and assert the unchangeableness of Gods love: and withal to demonstrate, that
to ascribe unto him such an unchangeableness of love, as the Apologist (it
seems) and some others, very inconsiderately do, is (above all contradiction)
to render him mutable in his affection, and consequently, that unchangeableness
of love, which they ascribe unto him, is felo de se, falls foul upon, and
destroys it self. Upon this account the Reader desirous of satisfaction, may
please to peruse p. 63. 64. and p. 205. 206. 207. of my book of Redemption.
Therefore how importune and un-clerk-like is he in his Parenthesis following: I
am not ignorant (says he) he confidently tells us, that in his judgment Gods
love is unchangeable, as it is no new thing for a spirit of error to be
accompanied with a spirit of contradiction. Most true it is, that a spirit of
error is very frequently accompanied with a spirit of contradiction. And hence
it is, that the Apologist, and other Ministers and Preachers of his judgment
about the unchangeableness of the love of God, etc. seldom preach, but that
their Sermons are yea and nay; the doctrinal part, a Samaritan, and the
applicatory part, a Jew. But whereas he would insinnuate me a
self-contradictor, because I somewhere deny his unchangeableness of love in
God, and elsewhere assert such an unchangeableness of love in him, which with
the salvage of the glory and truth of all his Attributes, is competent to him,
he declares himself to be the firstborn son of disingenuity, unless to salve
this dishonor, he will be content to plead an Ignoramus. The passages he
transcribes out of my book, are palpably irrelative to his cause. They only
prove that I deny such an unchangeableness of love in God, as he (it seems)
fancyeth in him (which certainly, whilst God spares me my wits, and the use
of my reason and understanding to consult the Scriptures, I always shall deny)
but they have no face or color of proof, that I deny the unchangeableness of
Gods love simply, or of any such unchangeableness herein, which is (...), or by
the Scriptures any where ascribed unto him.

Item (p. 5.) He terms it Skepticism in me, that I am not modesty, even where I
have ground of confidence in abundance. But want of modesty, and abundance of
modesty, are alike taxable, when they do not serve high-Presbyterian turns. It
seems High-Presbyterians, pretend to a line of knowledge far higher then Paul's.
For he professed that he knew but in part, and accordingly prophesied but in
part. But they are afraid of the reproach of Skepticism, unless they profess to
know all things, and this without hesitancy, or the least regret in their
judgment, about any thing. Their manner is to lay on load and strength of
confidence on their conclusions, even where their premises are weak and
contemptible.

Item (p. 6. 7. 8.) he reasons most absurdly from the loose a two fold love in
God, a love to righteousness, a love to persons. For speaking of that love,
about which only the question sticks between the Apologist and his opponents,
viz. a love of complacency and delight in the persons of men, God loves no man's
person materially or simply considered, but only as qualified with
righteousness: as on the contrary, he hates no man's person, with an hatred
opposite to this love, simply considered (this being the workmanship of his own
hands) but only as corrupted with sin and unrighteousness. So that when God
loves a righteous person, he does not love him with a twofold love (as the
Apologist weakly supposes) with one, in respect of his righteousness, another
in respect of his person; but he loves the person, mediante justicia, or
because of that rightteousness, which he finds in him: and would not love him
(I still mean, with that kind of love mentioned) if righteousness were not
found in him. The reason is, because this love of his to righteous persons,
formally [i. e. as righteous] and concretely considered, is uniform and
unchangeable: neither is there any other object of it, but only a person, or
persons, so qualified. From hence likewise it evidently appears, how
impertinent the similitude is, upon which the Apologist, for want of better
supports, statuminates his cause. A Prince (says he) that loves a Loyal and
faithful subject, but when he proves disloyal, he hates him. Will any man deny
that the Princes affections are changed? And yet he continues to love loyalty,
and hate disloyalty. Who with half an eye, sees not, but that if this Prince
were like unto God in his love to a loyal and faithful subject [i. e. could
love no subject, but him that is faithful and Loyal, nor hate any, but him that
is contrary] it were unproper to say that his affections in this kind, either
were in the case put, or could be in any other changed. And that there is a
sense, wherein the Love of God to men, may be said in some cases, to be
changed, viz. such a sense as that wherein he is said to repent, is I suppose
the sense of all that understand themselves in these controversies. But this
sense does not suppose any change, or changeableness, in the Nature or Essence
of God, which is really the same with his love, but only a change and
changeableness in his dispensations in reference to such and such persons,
which all divines with one mouth affirm may be varyed and changed, and this in
reference to the same persons, without the least shadow of variation, or change
in his Essence. And if 1. the love of the Prince in the Apologists fable, were
his nature and essence; And 2. This essence of his simply and absolutely
unchangeable, though he should express himself according to the different
manner of love and hatred toward his subject specified, under the different
deportments of Loyalty, and disloyalty, yet could not his affections, at least
in any proper sense, be said to be changed (which is the sense wherein I
constantly deny any change of affection in God, although he should one while
love a person with a love of complacency, and afterward, (viz. upon his
turning aside from righteousness unto sin) not love him, but hate him with an
hatred contrary to his former love.

But these things are argued to the satisfaction of all ingenuous and
unprejudiced men, in the pages, and passages of my Book of Redemption, lately
directed unto. But the Apologist stands declared on the left hand: and there is
little hope of bringing him over to the right, unless his company were willing
to come along with him. How can ye believe (says Christ) who receive honor
one of another? Joh. 5. What the Apologist adds, p. 7. 8, and part of the 9.
sibi et muses canit, or however it passes my intelligence. Only this I
understand, p. 9. he cites a passage from my Letter to Mr. Ca^yl,
Book-seller-like, I mean, with the omission of these Emphatical words in it:
and I cannot but presume regularly enough.

And thus the Apologist has done his good will to cover the nakedness of his
six Friends, the Beacon-Firers. But he may cry out; H^i mi i quod nullis scelus
est medicabile verbis! He has indeed tried his skill, if it were possible to
make (with Cacus of old) Candida de nigris, et de candentibus atra, i. e.

Black things, look white, and white to look like black.

And they may do well to accept of his will for the deed. But the Black-amore
is never the whiter for his washing: only the Launderer has blacked his
fingers with handling him.

Item p. 9. He charge me with scurrilous language toward the learned and
reverend Mr. Walker, and in particular with my bitter recipe, which (he says)
I prescribe for him, as for one that is not compos sui. He falsifies
egregiously, in saying that the Recipe (bound in some of the copies of that
book, contrary unto order from me nor is it in any the copies in my hand) was
prescribed by me for him, as if, etc. It was as much prescribed for Mr. Pool,
Mr. Jenkin, or any other man: as for Mr. Walker: it was ^ather prescribed from
him, or out of his papers, then to him. But when he tells me of using
scurrilous language toward him, if he would tell me what he means by
scurrilous language (for High Presbyterians, as I somewhere take notice in my
Animadversions upon the Booksellers letter, are much given to a kind of canting
dialect) I should better know how to entertain his charge. If he understands
the words in the common and best known signification, I may reasonably suppose
he only read Mr. Walkers piece against me, and not my answer to him; and by
the far worse then scurrilous-language against me, which he found there,
presumed that somewhat scurrilous, at least, would be drawn from me thereby, in
case I should make any reply to him. But Mr. Walker (it seems) inherits the
praises of learned and reverend, notwithstanding any super-scurrility of
language in his writings: In promptu ratio est: Presbyteralis erat.

Hereof the Reason is not far:
He was a Grand High Presbiter.
Howeuer, if there were any unbeseeming word, one, or more, which in the heat
and have of writing, either in answer to him, or Mr. Jenkin, or any other (for
I think I am certain that I never began any fray with any man) may possibly
have escaped my pen, (although I know nothing at present in any of my writings,
that deserves the black brand of scurrilous.) I shall follow the copy, which
the Apologist tells me (and oh, that the tidings were true) his Friends the
Beacon-Firers have set me in an ingenuous acknowledgement of their error in
using such tartness of language in their letter to me. But it is not so much
their tartness of language that I complain of; but their numerous
falsifications, untruths, and undue suggestions against me; in which kind I am
not conscions to my self that I ever wronged any man.

Item p. 9. He further charge me with saying something (himself says not,
nor I think well knows, what in favor of all cursed and damnable Doctrines:
only he means (he says) for the toleration, and against the suppression of
them. Another most un-Christian aspersion, and scandalously untrue. I never
spoke any thing in favor of any cursed or damnable Doctrines (either known, or
suspected for such by me) but have continually upon all occasions, both in
public, and private, faithfully, and with the best of my understanding,
testified against them. Yea, I am so far from pleading for a toleration, or
against a suppression, of them all, that I never pleaded in either kind for so
much as one of them. Yea my soul is aggrieved within me, that the Ministers
both in City and country, whether it be out of consciousness of their
inability to do any thing to purpose against them, or out of an unworthy
remisness in the case, have been so little active, as they have been, in
inlightening the world with the knowledge of the truth, which is the only way
to heal the darkness of the Apologists accursed and damnable Doctrines in the
world. I confess I have labored to dissuade men from fighting the battails of
God, and of the truth, with unhallowed weapons, from plucking up the tares in
such a way; which cannot but endanger the plucking up of the Wheat also; from
applying such means for the cure, which is like to enrage and strengthen the
disease yet more. The Lord Christ himself gives this Testimony to the Church of
Ephesus, that they could not [and consequently did not] bear [or tolerate]
those that were evil, Rev. 22. But does the Apologist think that their
non-beari^g, or non-tolerating of them, consisted in their fining* confining or
imprisoning, in their burning, or slaying them with the sword? This is, not the
Christian, but the Antichristian, non-toleration? The Christian non-toleration
of vain talkers and deceivers, was taught by Paul, when he tells Titus that
their mouth must be stopped, Tit. 1. 11. And their toleration (in such a sense
as ever I pleaded for it) by the Lord Christ himself when he said, Let both
grow together until the harvest, Mat. 13. 20. But not weak and sinful men, but
the Lord Christ himself also (it seems) blessed for ever, must give place to
the High-Presbyterian interest, and be arrested for pleading for a toleration
of errors, and damnable Doctrines.

Item p. 9. He charge me, that in my (...), I set my-wits, and the Scriptures
too on the rack to maintain the monster of universal liberty of conscience,
etc. The spirit of the clients here again utters it self in the Proctor. For
1. he cannot prove (nor is it true) that I either set my wits, or the
Scriptures on the rack, for any end or purpose whatsoever. 2. Much less is it
true, that I set either on the rack, for the maintaining of any Monster. If by
liberty of conscience, he means an exemption of any man's conscience, from
subjection unto God, or Christ, or any of their laws, or sayings, I have
always been so far from maintaining this liberty, that I have still opposed it
with all my might, with my whole heart and soul. If by it he means an exemption
of the conscience, from subjection unto men, or their Doctrines, or sayings, 1.
He gives it a scurrilous nickname, in terming it a Monster. 2. The Scriptures
need not be set on the rack for maintaining it: they voluntarily, yea
zealously, and with expresness of plea, plead for it. But whereas the Apologist
makes mention of conscience here, if (in his tittle page) where he confesses
himself to be nullius nominis, instead of nominis, he had put in, conscientiae,
he had given a better and truer reason of his non-subscribing his name to his
Apology. For I verily believe that his inward thought was, not that he was a
man of no name (i. e. of no credit or esteem with men) but that he was a man of
too much credit, to adventure it in the crazy bottom of such an Apology.

Item p. 9. He confidently affirms, that Mr. Edwards did answer my (...)
satisfyingly and convincingly in the judgment of any impartial man, And then
insinuates a charge of disparagement against me, that I never replied hereunto:
and concludes my silence to be a confession that I cannot answer it, yea is
confident that this is the truth. Surely the man dreamt either all, or the
greatest part at least, of this fable. I am so far from believing that the man
he speaks of, answered the book he speaks of, either satisfyingly or
convincingly, that I cannot yet believe that ever he made any answer to it at
all. It is somewhat strange, that such a book, upon which the world should have
such an eye, as he imports, and which should be written particularly against
me, should never be so much as heard of by me, within the compass of I know not
how many years. However, how greedy of aspersing and calumniating does this man
show himself to be, who thus simply insults over me for not returning an Answer
to such a book, which he could not know that ever I had seen, or heard of.
Solomon says, He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and
shame to him, Prove. 18. 13. But this man would have the world believe, that my
not answering a matter before I hear it, is folly and shame unto me. So that
Solomon and he, are of two minds. Another book of the Author he speaks of,
entitled Antapologia, the greatest part of it written in the same argument,
which Mr. Pryn, (a man of more learning, I believe, and of a more profound
judgment, then the Booksellers Proctor) proclaimed unanswerable, I did answer,
and this satisfyingly, and convincingly in the judgment of any impartial man.
And if God stood by me to encounter and slay that Lion, I should have been able
(I question not) by the same assistance to overcome that uncircumcised
Philistine (if the Goliath be indeed in vivis, which I much question) in whom
the Apologist so much rejoices. But in imposing upon me his will and pleasure,
what books I shall, or ought to answer, and what not, (whether my health,
strength, or occasions otherwise, yea or life it self, will permit me to answer
any, or no) he acts the part of High-Presbytery to the life (as his
Booksellers phrase is.) But all books written, either by the Theologica
facultas of High-Presbytery, or in defense of the grossest
contra-remonstrantism, must be unanswerable by the verdict of this faculty. The
Answer in the Press to my Pagans Debt and Dowry, must needs be unanswerable,
because it is written indefence of the common error against the truth. But for
his two acute and learned Doctors, Doctor Owen, and Doctor Kendal, whose
labors (he says) have had the high approbation of diverse learned men, enough
of their wrirings have been answered already by men as acute and learned as
they (whom I name in my Animadversions upon his clients Epistle) whose labors
likewise (I doubt not) but have had (I am sure deserve) the high approbation of
sundry learned men. However, in case I shall not answer the writings of either
of them, shall the man, or any of his accomplices, have any more reason, upon
such an account to conclude me (...), [i. e. self-condemned] then either of his
two acute and learned Doctors, who have only set Harpocrates Harpocrates was
worshipped by the Egyptians as the God of silence.
on work to answer some of the books that are extant against them? And yet they
are, in respect of their years much more capable of the labor of study, and (I
believe) in respect of their occasions, at much more liberty, then I.

Item p. 10. He charge me, that I twit Mr. Jenkin in the teeth, with
Carolizing, Scotizing, and telling him of his bands, etc. most disingenuously
and barbarously, etc. But might not he much more ingenuously have concealed Mr.
Jenkins name here, then his own, in the Title page of his book? It seems he is
more tender over his own name, and credit, then his friends. It may be Mr.
Jenkin himself would never have owned the things, which he now applies unto
him, nor would the world have looked upon him, and them, as correlatives.
However, was I not provoked, yea, pressed upon, and challenged by the
Booksellers (I had almost said by himself) to make my exceptions against any
of their Committee? In which case, what could I have done less, then I did?
Certain I am, that I dealt more fairly and favorably by Mr. Jenkin, then the
Apologist has done. I named him not in reference to any the crimes mentioned,
but observed that known law of civility, which enjoins men to spare the persons
of men, but permits (upon occasion) to censure their vices:

Parcere Personis, dicere de vi^iis. A Law which the Apologist himself has
transgressed, dicend, de utrisque and arraigns me for his own transgression.

But it seems that so much as to mention High-Presbyterian miscarriages, though
never so unworthy, though upon occasions never so equitable and importuning,
though with never so much tenderness and respect to their persons, is
disingenuity, yea no less then barbarism.

By the way, whereas he charge me with telling Mr. Jenkin of his bands, etc.
he breaks the bands of truth, and casts them from him. I no where so much as
mention Mr. Jenkins bands, either to himself, or to any other person: neither
indeed do I know that Mr. Jenkin ever suffered bands: I only cite a few words
out of Suetonius, one of which signifies, bound. But in case Mr. Jenkin has
suffered bands, and it be Barbarism to mention them, it seems there was a
marvelous great difference between the Apostle Paul's bonds, and his: For Paul
often mentions his bands as matter of honor unto him; yea and commends other
Christians unto their fellows upon the account of their bands, Heb. 13. 3. When
the mention of a man's bands is matter of disgrace, or disparagement unto him,
it argues, not only the cause of his sufferings to be very unworthy and foul,
but to be such in the general opinion of men also.

Item p. 12. (toward the parting) he charge me with imputing unto God,
ignorance of future contingencies, more Sociniano; Well said the Apostle that
evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 4. The truth is, that
this is the basest and broadest calumny in the whole piece: nor can I imagine
what word, phrase, saying or passage in all my writings, should imbolden the
conscience of the man of no name, to act this splenetique part in the end.
Certain I am that I do as plainly as any other man, and with as much strength
of understanding, as God has given me, upon all occasions, assert the knowledge
of all future contingencies, yea of all things whatsoever unto God. The Reader
(if he please) may satisfy himself by repairing to p. 9. to p. 39. 40. to p.
481. (besides many other places) of my book of Redemption.

What he cavils, p. 10. 11. against my Answer to Sir Francis Nethersole, as if
it were unsatisfactory; and his charge of I know not how many greek
misdemeanor, (...), in relating the testimony of another concerning my treatise
of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures (where also without any reason, or
color of reason, he insinuates against me, as if I thought my self to good to
vail the bonnet to Mornay, Grotius, Cameron, in their writings about the same
subject) being altogether eccentrical, as well to his business (unless this
were absolutely and universally to asperse, as much as to vindicate his
clients) as mine own, I pass over; only taking notice by the way, how lamely
and by halfs, he presents my Answer to Sir Francis Nethersole, opposing my
justification of the design of putting the King to death, to a passage in my
Anti-Cavaelarism: 2. How either weakly, or proposterously and perversely he
understands that part of my Answer, which he describes. For there is an high
and extraordinary interposure and appearance of God in stirring up the spirits,
and strengthening the hand of Rulers and Magistrates, to proceed in judgment
against Kings degenerated into Tyrants; in respect whereof the process is
emphatically attributable unto God, whereas the ordinary proceedings at Law by
a single Judge against the Apologists Rogues, are matters of course, and common
providence. Nor shall I stand now to reason the man into his senses about
proper, and improper, Attributions unto God, nor to cause him to see, that what
is properly, must needs be formally, and what is formally, cannot be eminently
attributed unto him, etc. I consess I thought that such a Meraphysical
pretender, as Doctor Kendal, had understood these things better then I perceive
he does. His pen strikes another false stroke, in saying that the having of a
man's senses sodden into Trapezuntius his temper, is my OWN phrase. For where I
use this phrase, I plainly signify that I borrow it, and declare from whom. I
shall further only take notice of this passage, p. 12. If he Answer me, as he
has answered Sir Francis Nethersole, or Mr. Jenkins, I shall not trouble
either him, or the world with any reply; but that which is his constant refuge
in arduous cases, he means, silence. Does he not here plainly grant that it was
no arduous case [or matter of difficult undertaking] for me to answer either
Sir Francis Nethersole, or Mr. Jenkins, inasmuch as I made not silence my
Refuge, when I answered them? Yea, and that it is no arduous case to answer his
Apology, since I have not made silence my Refuge from the face of it? Yet I
confess there is a strain of prudence in the saying. For in case I should
answer him, as I have done either Sir Francis Nethersole, or Mr. Jenkin (as
perhaps I now have done) it is his wisdom to arm himself with a resolution
against troubling himself with a reply, because in such a case, it is like to
be a trouble indeed to him, and this to little purpose.

A Postscript*
BEcause the man of no name charge me (page 9.) with speaking in favor of
all cursed and damnable Doctrines, meaning (as he says) for the toleration,
and against the suppression of them, (besides what I have already answered to
this charge) that He, and His, may understand, that long before either his
days, or mine, there were men, both wiser, and learneder (and I fear more
conscientious and pious, then either of us) that speak as much, or more, then
ever I did for a toleration (in such a sense as ever I pleaded for any) of such
Doctrines, which he (I doubt not) will call (as well he may) accursed and
damnable, I shall supply part of the vacant paper with some passages, which he
may read, as I have done, in Hugo Grotius, De Jure Belli. Lib. 2. cap. 20.. 50,
etc. First he transcribes out of Salvianus Bishop of Marseilles, these words
(declaring his tenderness about the punishing, or rather for the
non-punishing, even of Arrian Heretics.)

Haeretici sunt, sed non scientes: denique apud nos sunt haeretici, apud se non
sunt: nam in tantum se Catholicos esse judicant, ut nos ipsos titulo haereticae
pravitatis infament. Quod ergo illi nobis, sunt and hoc nos illis. Nos illos
injuriam divinae generationi facere certi sumus, quod minorem. Patri filium
dicunt. Illi nos injuriosos Patri existimant, quod aequales esse credamus.
Veritas apud nos est, sed illi apud se esse pr sumunt. Hono^ Dei apud nos est:
sed illi hoc arbitrantur honorem Divinitatis quod credunt. In officiosi sunt,
sed illis hoc est summum Religionis officium. Impij sunt, sed hoc putant summam
esse pietatem. Errant ergo, sed bono animo errant, non odio, sed affectu 'Dei,
honorare se Dominum, atque amare creden^es. Quamvis non habeant rectam fidem,
illi tamen hoc perfectam Dei aestimant charitatem: Et qualiter pro hoc ipso
falsae opinion^^ errore in die judicij puniendi sunt, nemo potest scire, nisi
judex. Interim idcirco eis, ut reor patientiam Deus commodat, quia videt evs,
etsi non recte credere, affectu tamen piae opinionis errare, i. e.

They are Heretics, but against their knowledge, they are so in our opinion,
but not in their own, for they think themselves so far to be Catholic [or,
Orthodox] that they defame us with the title of Heresy. Therefore what they
are in our opinion, we are in theirs. We are sure they do wrong to the divine
generation, in saying, The Son is less then the Father. They believe that we
do wrong unto God the Father, in holding that the Son is equal to him. The
truth is with us, but they presume it is with them. The honor of God is with
us; but they are of opinion that by their belief they honor the Godhead. They
are officious amiss, but what they do, they judge to be the chief duty of
Religion. They are impious, but they think it to be true piety. They err, but
they err with a good mind, not out of hatred, but out of affection unto God,
believing that by this they honor and love their Lord. Though they have not
the right Faith, yet they think this is the perfect love of God: and how they
are to be punished at the day of judgment for this error of a false opinion,
none knows but the judge himself. In the mean time, as I think, God lends
them his patience, because he sees, that though they do not believe aright, yet
they err out of an affection to a pious opinion.

By the way; the Christian equanimity of this man, being a Bishop, toward poor
creatures, who in the simplicity of their minds shall turn aside into by-waies
of error, though very dangerous, in things appertaining unto God, may make Mr.
Anonymus his cheeks to change color (as his own phrase is) when he breaths out
fines, imprisonment, banishment, fire, sword, gibbet, and what not, against
poor, weak, and foolish men, only for not being as quick-sighted to discern
the truth from error, as he presumes himself to be, or for not having
(possibly) obtained from God the like grace and means for his coming to the
knowledge of the truth, which himself has done.

The forementioned Author rehearses likewise (in the place directed unto)
these words out of Austin, Tom. 6. Cnntra Epistolam Manichaei, cap. 2. (though
he names not the place) where this worthy Father disclaimeth all severity of
proceedings against the Manichees, though a most vile and pernicious sect of
Heretics.

Illi in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt cum quo labor verum in veniatur, and qua
difficile caveantur errores. Illi in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt quam rarum and
arduum est carnalia phantasmata piaementis serenitate superare. Illi in vos
saeviant, qui nesciunt cum quanta difficultate sanetur oculus interioris
hominis, ut possit intueri solemn summum, non istum, quem vos collitis coelesti
corpore, oculis carreis and hominum, et pecorum fulgentem atque radiantem, sed
illum de quo scriptum est per Prophetam, Ortus est mihi justitiae Sol, et de
quo dictum est in Evangelio, Erat lumen verum quod illuminat omnem hominem
venientem in hunc mundum. Illi in vos saeviant, qui nesciunt quantis suspirijs
and gemitibus fiat, ut ex quantulacumque part possit intelligi Deus. Postremo
illi in vos saeviant, qui nullo tali errore decepti sunt, quali vos deceptos
vident. Ego autem -- saevire in vos omnino non possum, quos, sicut me ipsum
illo tempore, ita nunc debeo sustinere, and tanta patientia vobiscum agere,
quanta mecum egerunt proximi mei, cum in vestro dogmate rabiosus and caecus
errarem, i. e.

Let those be fierce [or cruel] to you, that know not with what labor truth is
to be found, and with how great difficulty errors are avoided. Let those be
cruel to you, who know not how rare and of how difficult an attainment it is to
overcome carnal phantasms [and conceits] by the serenity [and clearnesse] of a
pious mind. Let those [again] deal cruelly with you, who are ignorant with how
great difficulty the eye of the inner man is healed, that it may [look uponand]
behold the highest Sun, not that which you worship, as subsisting with an
heavenly body, and which shines with his beams in the fleshly eyes both of men
and beasts, but that Sun, of whom it is written by the Prophet, The son of
righteousness has risen unto [or upon] us; and of whom it is said in the
Gospel, He was the true light, which inlighteneth every man that comes into
the world. Let those [yet again] cruelly handle you, who know not with what
deep sighings and groanings [of soul] even a little [true] understanding of
God, is obtained. Lastly, let those exercise cruelty toward you, who never
were themselves deceived with any such error, as now they perceive you deluded
with. But as for me, I can at no hand be [fierce, or] cruel toward you, whom I
ought now to bear with patiently, as I did with my selfthen [when I was one of
you] yea and to entreat you with as much patience, as my neighbors [Orthodox
Christians] showed to me, when I wandered like a mad and blind man, in your
opinion.

The forenamed Author (in the place specified) to these two large
transcriptions out of the two renowned Fathers mentioned, subjoyneth (upon the
same argument) as follows.

In Arrianam haeresin acriter invehitur Athanasius (Epist ad soli^ari^s) quod
prima in contradicentes usa esset judicum potestate, and quos non potuisset
verbis inducere, eos vi, plagis, carceribusque ad se pertrahere amniteretur.
Atque ita inquit, seiqsam quam non sit pia, nec Dei cultrix, manifestat;
respiciens, in fallor, ad illud, quod legi ur, Gal. 4. 29. Similia habet
Hilarious ad Constantium. In Gallia jam olim damnati sunt Ecclesiae judicio
Episcopi, qui ut Priscillianistas gladio animadvertere^ur curaverant: and in
Orient damnata Synodus, quae in Bogomili exustionem consenserat. Sapienter
dixit Plato, errantis paenam esse, doceri, i. e.

Athana^us sharply inveigheth against the Arrian Heresy (in his Epistle to the
Solitarians) because they made use of the chief power of the [civil] Judges,
against those who contradicted their opinion, and endeavored by force, stripes
and prisonsto draw them over unto them, whom they could not induce [or
perswade] by arguments. And so (says he) it manifests it self, not to be
[truly] pious, nor reverential of God; herein respecting, if I mistake not,
that which is written, Gal. 4. 29. [But as then, he that was born after the
flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, etc.] Hilary has the
like writing to Constantius. In France those Bishops were long since condemned
by the judgment of the Church, who procured the Priscillian Heretics to be
punished with the sword. And that Synod was likewise damned in the East, which
had consented to the burning of Bogomilus. It was wisely said by Plato; that he
that erreth, is to be punished by being taught.

ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 25. r. with the, l. 26. r. High-Presbyterian. p. 6. l. ult. after
knowledge, insert,) p. 10. l. 21. r. musis. p. 14. l. 1. r. shows. p. 16. l.
28. r. wisdemeanors.

FINIS.

