Geography Anatomized: Or, The Complete Geographical Grammar.

Being a Short and Exact ANALYSIS Of the whole Body of Modern Geography, after
a New and Curious Method.

COMPREHENDING

I. A General View of the Terraqueous Globe. Being a Compendious System of the
true Fundamentals of Geography; Digested into various Definitions, Problems,
Theorems, and Paradoxes: With a Transient Survey of the whole Surface of the
Earthly Ball, as it consists of Land and Water.

II. A Particular View of the Terraqueous Globe. Being a clear and pleasant
Prospect of all remarkable Countries upon the Face of the whole Earth; Showing
their Situation, Extent, Division, Subdivision, Cities, Chief Towns, Name, Air,
Soil, Commodities, Rarities, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities,
Manners, Language, Government, Arms, Religion.

Collected from the best Authors, and Illustrated with diverse Maps.

The Second Edition much Improved and Enlarged.

By PAT. GORDON, M. A. And Fellow of the Royal Society.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Hor.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Morden and Thomas Cockerill; at the Atlas in
Cornhill, and in Amen-Corner. 1699.

THE Geographical Grammar.

IMPRIMATUR, Liber cui Titulus, Geography Anatomized, etc.

John Hoskyns, V. P. R. S.

TO The Right Honorable THOMAS Lord Viscount Deerhurst, Eldest Son and Heir
Apparent of The Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of COVENTRY,
THIS New Edition of the following Tract of MODERN GEOGRAPHY is (with the
profoundest Respect) Dedicated by

Your Lordship's Most Humbly Devoted Servant, PAT. GORDON.

THE PREFACE.
MY principal Design in publishing the following Treatise, is to present the
younger Sort of our Nobility and Gentry, with a Compendious Pleasant and
Methodical Tract of MODERN GEOGRAPHY, that most useful Science, which highly
deserves their Regard in a peculiar manner. If it be alleged, That the World
is already overstockt with Composures of this Nature. I freely grant the
Charge; but withal, I Will be bold to say, That there is none as yet published,
which is not palpably faulty, in one or more of these three respects. Either
they are too Voluminous, and thereby fright the Young Student from so much as
ever attempting that Study. Or, Secondly, too Compendious, and thereby give him
only a bare Superficial Knowledge of Things. Or finally Confused (being writ
without any due Order or Method) and so confound him before he is aware. But
all these are carefully avoided in the following Treatise; for in framing of
it, I Have industriously endeavored, to make it observe a just Mean, between the
two Extremes of a large Volume and a narrow Compend. And as to the Method in
which it now appears, the same is (I presume) so Plain and Natural, that I may
safely refer the trial thereof, to the Impartial Judgment of the Severest
Critic.

To descend to Particulars. The whole consists now of Two Parts, whereof the
first gives a General; and the second a Particular View of the Terraqueous
Globe.

Part I. In giving a General View of the said Globe, I Have performed these five
Things, viz. (1.) I Have illustrated (by way either of a Definition, Description,
or Derivation) all those Terms that are any ways necessary for the right
understanding of the aforesaid Globle, as also the Analytical Tables of the
following Treatise. (2.) I Have set down all those pleasant Problems performable
by the Terrestrial Globe, together with the manner of their performance. (3.)
I Have subjoined diverse plain Geographical Theorems [or self-evident Truths]
clearly deducible from the foregoing Problems. (4.) I Have advanced some
Paradoxical Positions in Matters of Geography, which mainly depend on a
thorough Knowledge of the Globe, and are equally certain with the aforesaid
Theorems, though many of them, may possibly appear to some as the greatest of
Fables. Lastly, I Have taken a Transient Survey of the whole Surface of the
Terraqueous Globe, as it consists of Land and Water, as its sole constituent
Parts.

This is the Substance of the first Part; and before I proceed to the Second, I
must here desire the Reader may be pleased to observe these two Things, viz.
(1.) That in defining the various Geographical Terms [mention'd Sect. I.] I
have not strictly tied my self to the Logical Rules of a Definition; for if the
Term proposed be only explained, that is all required here. (2.) In advancing
those Geographical Paradoxes (mentioned Sect. iv.) which will probably so
startle the Reader at first [being a mere Novelty in Tracts of this kind] as
that he cannot readily comprehend either their Meaning or Design; let him
therefore be pleased to know, that the main Drift of such an uncommon Essay,
is, in short, To whet the Appetite of our Geographical Student for a complete
Understanding of the Globe, [upon a thorough Knowledge of which, these seeming
Mysteries do mainly depend] or more briefly, it is to set our young Student a
thinking. Although the Soul of Man is a cogitating Being, and its Thoughts so
nimble as to surround the Universe it self in a trice; yet so unthoughtful and
strangely immured in Sense is the generality of Persons, that they need some
startling Noise (like a sudden Clap of Thunder) to rouse and awake them. Now,
as a strange and unheardoff Phenomenon, suddenly appearing in the Natural
World, does attract the Eyes of all Men, and raises a Curiosity in some to
enquire into the Reason of it; even so is the Proposal of a Paradoxical Truth
to the Intellectual: for it immediately summons all the Powers of the Soul
together, and sets the Understanding a-work to search into, and Scan the
Matter. To awaken the Mind of Man to its Natural Act of Thought and
Consideration, may be justly reckoned no trivial Business; if we consider, that
it is to the want thereof (or a stupid Inconsideration) that we may chiefly
impute all the Enormities of Mankind, whether in Judgment or Practice. If
therefore those Paradoxes abovementioned shall obtain the End proposed, (the
rousing of the Mind to think) it matters the less, if some of them, upon strict
enquiry, should be found, to consist of Equivocal Terms, or perhaps prove
little more than a Quibble at the Bottom. Proceed we now to

Part II. Giving a Particular View of the Terraqueous Globe. By such a View, I
understand a clear and exact Prospect of all remarkable Countries, and their
Inhabitants, on the Face of the whole Earth; and that in these following
Particulars: viz. Their Situation, Extent, Division, Subdivision, Chief Towns,
Name, Air, Soil, Commodities, Rarities, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Universities, Manners, Language, Government, Arms, Religion.


What is said upon each of those Heads, will best appear by the following Table.

Concerning Situation -- are briefly declared The Degr. of Long. between which
any Country lies. Latit. Extent. -- Its due Dimentions from E. to. W. in
English Miles. S. to N. Division -- 2 Things, viz. The general Parts or Classes
to which any Country is reducible. How those Parts or Classes are most readily
found. Subdivision -- 2 Things, viz. The particular Provinces which any Country
contains. How those Provinces are most readily found. Chief Towns -- 2 Things,
viz. The Modern Names of those Towns. How such Towns are most readily found.
Name -- 3 Things, viz. How termed by the Ancients. The various Modern
Appellations. The Etymology of the English Name. Air -- 2 Things, viz. Its
Nature as to Heat and Cold, etc. The Antipodes of that part of the Globe. Soil.
-- 3 Things, viz. The proper Climate thereof. Its natural Product. The Extent
of Days and Nights. Commodities -- Those in particular which the Country
produces. Rarities -- 2 Things, viz. Those of Nature where certain. Those of
Art, especially Monuments of Antiquity. Archbishopricks 2 Things, viz. their
Number. Bishoprics -- 2 Things, Universities -- 2 Things, Names. Manners -- 2
Things, viz. The Natural Temper of the People The most noted Customs Language
-- 2 Things, viz. Its Composition and Propriety. Paternoster as a Specimen
thereof. Government -- 2 Things, viz. Its Nature or Real Constitution. The
Public Courts of Judicatory. Arms. -- 2 Things, viz. The true Coat quartered.
The proper Motto. Religion -- 2 Things, viz. The chief Tenets thereof. When and
by whom Christianity was planted, if ever.

The Reader cannot here exspect a very large Account of all these several Heads,
it being impossible in so little room, as the narrow Compass of a Compend
allows, to say the half of what might be said upon many of them; however he may
here find all those things that are most essential: These few Sheets being an
Abstract of what is more largely expressed in the greatest Volums. Several of
those Heads abovementioned, being Subjects that don't much admit of new
Relations, I reckon my self no Plagiary, to grant, that I Have taken the
assistance of others; esteeming it needless sometimes to alter the Character
either of a People or Country, when I found it succinctly worded by a credible
Pen. Here the Reader may be pleased to know, That in treating of all Countries,
I Have made their Situation my only Rule, beginning still with those toward the
North, excepting North America, where I thought good to end at the Pole. But as
touching the Analytical Tables of this Treatise, (the main Business of the
Book) their Design and Use in short, is, To present to the Eye at one view, a
complete Prospect of a Country in all its remarkable Divisions, Subdivisions,
and Chief Towns, with the manner how all these are most readily found. The
Letters of N. S. W. E. [signifying the four Cardinal, and N. W. N. E. S W. S.
E. the four Intermediate Points of the Compass] being affixt to the outside of
the various Braces in the aforesaid Tables, do express the Situation of the
Parts of any Country there mentioned; as (page 44.) where the Divisions of
Africa are said to be found from N. to S. If only Cities and Towns, and no
Divisions of a Country are set down, then these Letters have the same Relation
to them, showing their Situation in respect of one another. If a little Brace
fall within a greater, [as page 44. where Egypt and Barbary have their peculiar
Brace] this is to show, that those two Countries are taken together, and
considered as one Division, when reckoned with the following Countries, in
respect of their Situation, expressed on the backside of the outmost Brace; the
same is to be said of Cities and Towns, if only such are set down. But finally,
if neither Divisions nor Towns can be so ordered, as to have their Situation
expressed in a conjunct manner; then the respective Distance of such Towns from
some remarkable City, is particularly declared in English Miles, as (page 144.)
where those in the Circle of Suabia are so set down. If it be objected, that
not all, but only the Chief Towns of every Country are mentioned in these
Tables. To this I answer, That to mention all were needless; for I presume,
that he who knows the true Situation of the fifty two Counties of England, and
can readily point at the Chief Town in each of 'em, may easily find any other
in the same County if expressed in the Map. Besides, the business of a
Geographical Tract, is not so much to heap up a vast multitude of Names, as to
show the Divisions, and Subdivisions of every Country, with the Principal Town
in each of 'em, and how all such are most readily found. If it be farther
objected, that neither the Analytical Tables of this Treatise, nor the various
Descriptions of Countries annexed to them, are any thing of a new Discovery in
the Science of Geography, but only the bare Crambe recocta of those who have
gone before us. To this I answer, That the Tables are indeed materially the
same with others [and otherways it cannot be, unless we of this Age were so
extremely fortunate, as to make a complete Discovery of all the Countries and
Towns as yet unknown; or so absurdly ridiculous, as to Coin new Names for those
we know already] yet notwithstanding of this, they are highly preferable to all
others whatsoever. For such Tables, hitherto published, (whether English,
French, or Dutch) being only a bare Catalogue of Names, confusedly set down
without any due Order and Method, are of so little use to the Reader, that his
Pains are still the same as before, to find out those Names in the Map: Whereas
the Tables of the following Treatise are so contrived, by particular Directions
on the outside of their respective Braces, that he may point at those various
Countries and Towns in the Map (almost) as fast as he can read their Names in
the Table. And as touching the Descriptions of those Countries and their
Inhabitants; 'twere indeed most unreasonable to exspect a Narrative of them
compleately new, unless it be in those Countries, which have undergone such
wonderful Changes, that the very face of Things is completely New; or some
remote Parts of the World, where latter Intelligence has rectified former
Mistakes. Besides, it is not so much my present Design in the following Tract,
to present the Reader with perfectly new Relations, (except in such Cases
abovementioned) as to Abridge and Methodize those already known. And this
sufficiently answers the proposed End of the Treatise, being calculated (as I
already binted) for those, who are mere Strangers to Geography, or [at least]
but young Proficients in that excellent Science; I mean the generality of them,
who either attend our Public Schools, or Study under the Care and Conduct of
private Tutors. And so much for the Second Part.

To these Two Parts is annexed an Appendix, comprehending the European
Plantations [whether Countries, Towns, or Factories] in Asia, Africa, and
America. As also some Proposals (I hope very reasonable, and I wish acceptable)
concerning the Propagation of the Blessed Gospel in all Pagan Countries.

This, in short, is the Sum and Method of the following Geographical Treatise,
which (as I said) is principally designed for the use and benefit of the
younger Sort of our Nobility and Gentry. And did such Persons apply their
Minds, in their younger Years, to this most useful and diverting Science; it is
more than probable, that they might thereby avoid these many and gross
Immoralities which abound among us. For if we strictly enquire into the source
of these foul and loathsome Streams, (especially in those whom Fortune has
raised above the common level) we may readily find, that they mainly flow from
that detestable Habit of Idleness, in which the generality of such Persons are
bred up, during their youthful Days, and to which they wholly give up
themselves, when arrived to more riper Years. By which means they are exposed to
a thousand Temptations, and continually lie open to the grand Adversary of
Souls. For the remeding of this great Evil, it is highly to be wished, that such
Persons would daily employ a few of their many spare Hours (that now lie heavy
upon their Hands) in some proper diverting Study, which carries along with it
both Profit and Pleasure, as its constant Attendants. Now, such a Study is
undoubtedly that of History, a Study that is particularly proper for a
Gentleman, and adorns him with the best Accomplishments; a Study that begets
Experience without Gray Hairs, and makes a Man wise at the Toil and Charge of
others. If it be objected, that many have made attempts at the same, and that
without Success. Most certain it is, I own, and the reason is ready at hand,
namely, their Omission of a needful Preliminary Study, viz. That of GEOGRAPHY,
which, with some small taste of Chronology, may be deservedly termed, The Eyes
and Feet of History, and ought to be acquired by our Historian, either in his
younger Days, or (at least) in the first place. On which account, I Have drawn up
the following Treatise, adapting it chiefly to the younger Sort of our Nobility
and Gentry; by the help of which, they may quickly acquire such an Idea of all
remarkable Countries, as to fit 'em sufficiently for turning over any Modern
History whatsoever. This one stepped in Education of Youth, were preferable
[methinks] to a Seven Years Drudgery in the dry Study of bare Words; and a
Second Apprenticeship that is usually spent in a Fantastic Improvement of the
Mind, with many useless Speculations. And I may be bold to say, That to
exercise the Thoughts in such a manner as this, or to be but tollerably
accomplished in these diverting Studies, would vastly transcend most of those
other Accomplishments and Diversions, so much in Vogue among our Gentry at
present. And it is highly probable, that such a Method as this, might more
effectually check the Growth of Vice among 'em, than the most elaborate Moral
Discourse that can be framed; [the very Title of such Composures being enough
many times to fright them from the perusal] whereas a moderate Application of
Mind to the aforesaid Studies, would insensibly wean the Thoughts of some, from
the reigning Impieties of the Age; and in others, it might even happily prevent
an early acquaintance with Vice in general.

And thus you see the Design, Method, and Substance of the whole Treatise; one
Word now, concerning this Edition, and I have done. The kind Reception of my
first Essay, and its ready Admittance into many of our Public Schools, gave me
fresh Encouragement to send it abroad again; and that in a much better Dress
than formerly, being now as Complete as the Nature of the Subject, and Bigness
of the Volume will permit. So considerable indeed are those Improvements made
in this Impression, that the Book is in effect New. I have cast it in another
Mould, and it is now above twice as big as the former; the First Part (except
the last Section) being entirely added, and above two Thirds of the Second. I
have not indeed augmented the number of Maps, because the Analytical Tables of
this Tract are designed for particular Sheet Maps, whether English, French, or
Dutch; and are not to be read with those here inserted, which (though very good
of their kind) yet being of so small a Scale, they are more for Ornament than
Use. How far this Treatise in the whole does answer its proposed End; and how
much this Impression is preferable to the former, I entirely leave to the
Reader's Judgment to determine. This being all I think necessary to premise
concerning the following Composure, I shall no longer detain the Reader by way
of Preface, concluding the same with the Words of the Poet,

Vive, vale: Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti: si non, his utere
mecum. Q. Hor. Epist. Lib. 1. The CONTENTS.
THE following Treatise being divided into Two Parts; whereof

The First gives a General View of the Terraqueous Globe. Second a Particular
View

PART. I. Giving a General View.
Comprehend Sect. I. Containing 38 Georaphical Definitions. From Page 1 to 15
Sect. II. Containing 48 Geographical Problems -- 15 to 32 Sect. III. Containing
41 Geographical Theorems -- 32 to 37 Sect. IV. Containing 39 Geographical
Paradoxes -- 37 to 43 Sect. V. Concerning Land and Water. -- 43 to 59

PART II. Giving a Particular View. Comprehends
CHAP. I. Of EUROPE.
Sect. I. Concerning Scandinavia Sweden 63 Denmark 67 Norway 70 Sect. II.
Moscovia 73 Sect. III. France 79 Sect. IV. Germany Upper Holland 108 Flanders
112 Upper Germany 114 Sect. V. Poland 125 Sect. VI. Spain and Portugal 133
Sect. VII. Italy 145 Sect. VIII. Turkey in Europe, partilarly Hungary 170 Greece
172 Tartary 177 Danubian Provinces 178 Sect IX. European Islands, particularly
Britain Scotland 186 England 197 Wales 208 Ireland 211

CHAP. II. Of ASIA.
Sect. I. Concerning Tartary -- Page 238 Sect. II. China -- 241 Sect. III.
India -- 247 Sect. IV. Persia -- 256 Sect. V. Turkey in Asia -- 260 Sect. VI.
The Asiatick Islands -- 282

CHAP. III. Of AFRICA.
Sect. I. Concerning Egypt -- 294 Sect. II. Barbary -- 298 Sect. III.
Bildulgerid -- 303 Sect. IV. Zaara or the Desert -- 305 Sect. V. Negroeland --
307 Sect. VI. Guinea -- 310 Sect. VII. Nubia -- 313 Sect. VIII. Ethiopia -- 315
Sect. IX. African Islands -- 325

CHAP. IV. Of AMERICA.
Sect. I. Concerning New Spain -- 334 Sect. II. Nova Granada -- 338 Sect. III.
Florida -- 340 Sect. IV. Terra Canadensis -- 342 Sect. V. Terra Arctica -- 357
Sect. VI. Terra Firma -- 358 Sect. VII. Peru -- 361 Sect. VIII Amazonia -- 365
Sect. IX. Brasil -- 367 Sect. X. Chili -- 371 Sect. XI. Paraguay -- 373 Sect.
XII. Terra Mageilanica -- 375 Sect. XIII. Terra Antarctica -- Ibid. Sect. XIV.
The American Islands -- 376 APPENDIX -- 391

A NEW MAP of yc WORLD by Robt Morden


Modern Geography. PART 1. Comprehending a GENERAL VIEW OF THE Terraqueous
GLOBE.
INTRODUCTION.
IN taking a General View of the Terraqueous Globe, we shall observe the
following Method:

1. We shall Illustrate (by way either of Definition, Description, or
Derivation) all those Terms that are any ways necessary for the right
understanding of the aforesaid Globe, as also the Analytical Tables of the
following Treatise.

2. We shall set down in due Order and Method all those pleasant Problems, or
delightful Operations performable by the Artificial Globe, together with the
manner of their performance.

3. We shall subjoin diverse plain Geographical Theorems, or self-evident Truths
clearly deducible from the foregoing Problems.

4. We shall advance some Paradoxical Positions in Matters of Geography, (or a
few infallible Truths in Masquerade) which mainly depend upon a thorough
Knowledge of the Globe, and are equally certain with the aforesaid Theorems,
though many of them may possibly appear to some, as the greatest of Fables.

Lastly, We shall take a Transient Survey of the whole Surface of the
Terraqueous Globe, as it consists of Land and Water, as its sole constituent
Parts.

Of these five General Heads separately, and in their order. Therefore

SECT. I. Containing some necessary Geographical Definitions.
Def. 1. GEography [a Science both pleasant and profitable] does mainly consist
in giving a true Description of the exterior Part or Surface of the Earthly
Globe, as it is composed of Land and Water, especially the former.
That Geography does merit the Title of Science in several Respects, and that
the knowledge thereof is attended both with Pleasure and Profit, is so
universally granted by all who make any considerable Progress therein, that to
enter upon a Probation of it, would be every whit as superfluous, as if one
should go about to evince that the Sun is risen at Noonday. It derives its
compound Name from the two Greek Primitives of (...), Terra, and (...), scribo
vel describo, and differs from Cosmography, [quasi (...) vel (...), i. e.
Mundi Descriptio] as a part does from the whole; as also from Chorography and
Topography [quasi (...), i. e. Regionis ac Loci Descriptio] as the Whole from
its Parts. By a true Description of the Exterior Part of the Globe of the
Earth, we understand purely an Account of the Situation, Extent, Divisions, and
Subdivisions, of all remarkable Countries on the Surface of the said Globe,
together with the Names of their Cities and Chief Towns, and that accordingly
as those Countries are already projected to our Hands upon particular
Geographical Maps, and not an actual Survey or Mensuration of them, which the
Science of Geography presupposes, and which properly belongs to Geodaesia, or
the Art of Surveying Land. In giving such a Description of Countries (as
aforesaid) does the Science of Geography properly consist; as for other
Narratives relating either to Countries themselves, or their Inhabitants, and
which commonly swell up Geographical Tracts, we reckon them (though the more
pleasant part of this Study) rather the Fringes of Geography, than its real or
essential Parts. In the foregoing Definition we entirely restrict the Science
of Geography to the exterior Part or Surface of the Earthly Globe, and that as
it is composed of Land and Water, as its sole constituent Parts, designing
thereby to distinguish it from Natural Philosophy, which (in its curious and
pleasant Enquiries) reaches not only the said Surface in all its constituent
Parts, but also the whole Globe of the Earth, with the whole Body of the
Atmosphere surrounding the same, yea, and even the outmost imaginable Expanse
of the Firmament it self. We again restrict that Science mainly to one Part of
the aforesaid Surface (viz. the Dry Land) thereby to distinguish it from
Hydrography, which particularly treats of the other, namely Water. The Object
therefore of Geography in a large Sense, is the whole Surface of the Ball of
the Earth consisting of Land and Water as its sole constituent Parts, or (in a
strict and more proper Sense) only One of those Parts, to wit, the Firm Land.
For the more distinctly viewing of which Parts, and the better comprehending of
the Science of Modern Geography in the true Fundamentals thereof, we shall
begin with that Artificial Representation of the Earthly Ball, commonly called
the Terraqueous Globe.

Def. 2. The Terraqueous Globe is an Artificial Spherical Body, on whose Unequal
Part is truly represented the whole Surface of the Ball of the Earth, as it
consists of Land and Water.
That this Globe is termed Terraqueous from Terra and Aqua, (the two
constituent Parts of its Surface) or Terrestrial to distinguish it from the
Celestial; or finally, the Artificial Globe as a differencing Mark from the
Natural or Real Globe of the Earth, are all so notoriously known, that the
least Illustration were wholly superfluous. We reckon it also superfluous, to
show that there is a true Resemblance in Figure, between the Artificial and
Natural Globe, or that the Body of the Earth is truly Spherical: This being now
beyond all dispute, and never (at least very rarely) called in question, except
it be only by Women and Children But here note, That in the following Treatise,
we entirely restrict our selves to this Globe, so that wheresoever the Name of
Globe is indefinitely mentioned, we are never to understand the Celestial.
Note, also that wheresoever we are upon the Surface of the Natural Globe, that
the Point in the Heavens exactly Vertical to us, is termed our Zenith, and that
Point diametrically opposite thereto, is styled our Nadir, which are two
corrupted Arabian Terms in Astronomy, importing what is here asserted of them.
The first observables that present themselves to our view in treating of the
Globe, are its Axis and Poles.

Def. 3. The Axis is an imaginary Line passing through the Center of the real
Globe of the Earth, upon which the whole Frame thereof is supposed to turn
round.
Its termed Axis from (...), quod circa illam agatur Terra. As this Axis in the
Natural Globe, is an imaginary Line, so in Artificial Globes its a real one, it
being a straight piece of Iron, or solid Wood, passing through the middle of
the Globe, as the Axle-tree of a Wheel.

Def. 4. The Poles are the two Extremities of the Axis, one whereof is termed
the North or Arctick, and the other the South or Antarctick.
They are called Poles from (...), verto, because upon them the whole Frame of
the Globe turns round. The North is termed Arctick from (...), signifying a
Bear, because the real North Pole in the Heavens is commonly taken for a
certain noted Star in that Constellation which bears the Name of the Little
Bear: And the South is styled Antarctick from (...), [contra] and (...), [Ursa]
because of its Diametrical Opposition to the other The Terraqueous Globe being
a Spherical Body (as aforesaid) turning round upon its own Axis: For the better
understanding of that Globe in all its exterior Parts, and the various
Operations performed by the same; we are to conceive it, not only as a bare
Spherical Body, but also as such a Body surrounded with many imaginary Circles;
the chief of which are Eight, divided into Five Parallel, viz.
The Equator. The two Tropicks. The two Polar Circles.
Three not Parallel, viz.
The Horizon. The Meridian. The Zodiac.


Otherwise divided into Four Greater, viz.
The Horizon: The Meridian. The Equator. The Zodiac.
Four Lesser, viz.
The two Tropicks. The two Polar Circles.


Def. 5. The Horizon is that great Circle which divides the Globe into two
equal Parts, termed the Upper and the Lower Hemispheres.
It Is so called from (...), Terminans vel siniens, quia nostrum terminat
prospectum, it being the outmost bounds or limits of our Sight, when situated
in any Plain, or at Sea. This Circle is twofold, viz. The Sensible, and the
Rational Horizon: The Sensible is that already described, bounding the outmost
prospect of the Eye, when viewing the Heavens round from any part of the
Surface of the Earth; but the other is purely formed in the Mind, and supposes
the Eye to be placed in the very Center of the Earth, beholding the entire
Upper Hemisphere of the Firmament: The Circle terminating such a prospect is
reckoned the true Rational Horizon, which is duly represented by that broad
wooden Circle, usually fitted for all Globes. Upon which are inscribed several
other Circles, particularly those two containing the Names of the Months, and
Number of their Days, according to the Julian and Gregorian Account; as also
that other divided into the Thirty two Points of the Compass.

Def. 6. The Meridian is that great Circle, which passing through the Two
Poles, divides the Globe into two equal Parts, termed the Eastern and Western
Hemispheres.
It Is so called from Meridies vel medius dies, because the Sun coming to the
Meridian of any Place, is due South, or makes Midday in the said place. The
Meridian here defined is that great brazen Circle, in which the Globe turns
round upon the two Extremities of its Axis passing through the said Circle; but
the Meridians inscribed on the Globe it self, are those Thirty six Semi-circles
terminating in both the Poles; besides which, we may imagine as many as we
please; only note, That one of those Meridians is always reckoned the first;
however it is matter of indifference, which of them we take for such.

Def. 7. The Equator or Equinoctial, is that great Circle which divides the
Globe into two equal Parts, called the Southern and Northern Hemispheres.
It Is called Equator, because the Sun coming to this Circle, tune aequantur
noctes and dies, or Equinoctial for the same reason, viz. aequalitas noctium
cum diebus. By others it is simply termed the Line, (...), and that chiefly by
Navigators, as being of singular use in their Operations. It Is divided into 360
degrees, which are reckoned round the Globe, beginning at the first Meridian,
and proceeding Eastward.

Def. 8. The Zodiac is that great broad Circle, which cutteth the Equinoctial
Line obliquely, one side thereof extending it self exactly so far North, as the
other does to the South of the said Line.
It Is so called from (...), (Animal) because it is adorned with Twelve
Asterisms, (commonly termed the Twelve Signs) being most of them
Representations of diverse Animals. The Names and Characters of which Signs are
these following,

Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittarius.
Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.

Of all Circles inscribed on either of the Globes, this alone admits of
Latitude, and is divided in the middle by a Concentrick Circle, termed the
Ecliptic, which properly is that Circle set upon the Globe comprehending the
Characters of the Twelve Signs abovementioned, each of which Signs is 1/12
part of that Circle, and contains 30 degrees.

Def. 9. The Tropicks are the two biggest of the four lesser Circles, which run
parallel to the Equator, and are equidistant therefrom.
They Are termed Tropicks from (...), (verto) because the Sun in his Annual
Course arriving at one of those Circles, does return toward the other. They
derive their respective Denominations of Cancer and Capricorn from touching the
Zodiac at the two Signs of that Name, and each of them is distant from the
Equator, exactly 23 degr. 1/2.

Def. 10. The Polar Circles are the two least of the four Lesser Circles
running parallel to the Equator, and at the same distance from the Poles, as
the Tropicks are from the Equator.
They Are termed Polar, because of their Vicinity to the Poles. That Circle
nearest the North, is called the Arctick; and the other, next to the South
Pole, the Antarctick Polar Circle, and that for the same reason already given,
(Def. 4.) when treating of the Poles themselves.

These are the eight necessary Circles abovementioned; but to complete the
Furniture of the Globe, there remain as yet three Particulars, viz. the Horary
Circle, the Quadrant of Altitude, and Semicircle of Position.

Def. 11. The Horary Circle is a small Circle of Brass, and so affixt to the
Brazen Meridian, that the Pole (or end of the Axis) proves its Center.
Upon this Circle are inscribed the Twenty four Hours of the Natural Day at
equal distance from one another; the Twelfth for Midday being in the upper
part toward the Zenith, and the other Twelfth for Midnight in the lower
toward the Horizon; so that the Hours before Noon are in the Eastern, and
those for the Afternoon in the Western Semicircle: As for an Index to this
Horary Circle, the same is fixed upon the end of the Axis, and turns round
with the Globe. The Use of this Circle and Index will sufficiently appear in
many pleasant Problems hereafter mentioned.

Def. 12. The Quadrant of Altitude is a narrow thin Plate of pliable Brass,
exactly answerable to a fourth part of the Equinoctial.
Upon this Quadrant, are inscribed 90 Degrees, each of them being according to
the same Scale with those upon the Equator. How useful this Quadrant is, will
also appear in the Solution of several Problems hereafter mentioned.

Def. 13. The Semicircle of Position is a narrow solid Plate of Brass exactly
answerable to one half of the Equinoctial.
Upon this Semicircle are inscribed 180 Degrees, exactly the same with those
upon the Equinoctial. We may term it a double Quadrant of Altitude in some
respect, and its of considerable Use in several delightful Problems.

To these I might add the Mariners Compass, that most necessary Instrument,
commonly used by Navigators, which being duly touched with the Lodestone, and
horizontally fixed upon the Pedestal of the Globe, is frequently needful for the
right Solution of several Problems.

The necessary Circles of the Globe being Eight (as aforesaid); Of them, and
some others, hereafter mentioned are formed the Latitude and Longitude of
Places, as also Zones and Climates.

Def. 14. Latitude is the distance from the Equator to either of the Poles, and
measured upon the brazen or first Meridian.
No Term is more frequently used in Geography than that of Latitude, which is
twofold, viz. North and South. In reckoning of the Northern Latitude, you are
to begin at the Equinoctial Line, and proceed to the Arctick; and the Southern
from the Equinoctial to the Antarctick Pole, still numbering the Degrees of
Latitude, either upon the brazen or first Meridian. The many Circles inscribed
on the Globe, at the distance of 10 Degrees from one another, and parallel to
the Equator, are termed Parallels of Latitude. But besides those actually
inscribed, we are to conceive the Globe as furnished with a vast multitude of
such Circles, for every degree of Latitude, yea, and every sixtieth part of
each degree is supposed to have an imaginary Parallel Circle passing through
the same. But since Latitude (as aforesaid) is the Distance from the Equator to
either of the Poles; it from hence follows, that the greatest Latitude
consists of 90 Degrees. Now correspondent to each of those Degrees (or the
1/360 of a great Circle in the Heavens) is a certain Space of the Surface of
the Earth, which is every where of the same Extent in it self, but different in
its number of Parts, according to the different reckoning of various Countries.
To know the said different number of Parts, (of what sort soever, whether they
be Miles, Leagues, or other Measures) corresponding to one Degree in the
Heavens, is absolutely necessary for the right understanding of the true
Distance of Places in different Countries; we shall therefore illustrate the
same, and that by the following Table,

answerable to one Degree, are Common Italian, English, and Turkish Miles. --
60 Ordinary French Leagues -- 20 Spanish Miles according to Vulgar reckoning.
-- 17 German, Dutch, Danish, and Great Poland Miles. -- 15 Miles usual in
Swedeland. -- 12 Miles usual in Hungary. -- 10 The Versts of Muscovy. -- 80
Persian, Arabtan, and Egyptian Parasanga. -- 20 The Indian Cos. -- 24 The
Stades of China. -- 250 The Inks of Japan. -- 400

But here note, That though these are the most remarkable Measures of Distance
throughout the inhabited World, with their respective Proportion to one Degree
in the Heavens; yet, we are not to imagine that these Measures are of the same
Extent in the various Provinces of the same Country, as is evident from the
different length of Leagues in different Parts of France; as also the diversity
of Miles in the South and North of England.

Def. 15. Longitude is the Distance from the first Meridian, and measured upon
the Equator.
In reckoning the various Degrees of Longitude (which are 360 in all) you are
to begin at the first Meridian wherever it is, and to proceed upon the
Equator quite round the Globe. Correspondent to each of those Degrees in the
Equator, [as to Degrees of Latitude on the Meridian] are sixty Italian Miles,
or twenty French Leagues, according to Vulgar Calculation: But this is to be
understood only of Places exactly under the Equator; for the true Distance
between two Places lying due East and West in any considerable Latitude is far
less in Miles than between other two Places lying exactly under the Equator,
and likewise under the same Meridians; The Reason of which is most evident,
namely, the approaching of the Meridians nearer and nearer to one another, till
at last they unite all in the Pole. But that you may readily find the true
Distance in Miles from East to West between any two Places in any Parallel of
Latitude, we shall here subjoin the following Table, in which is set down, to
every Degree of Latitude, the exact number of Miles, and sixtieth Part of a
Mile, that are answerable to one Degree in the Equator, still allowing sixty
Italian Miles to such a Degree.

Lat. m. s Lat. m s Lat m. s. Lat. m. s 0 60 00 23 55 12 46 41 40 69 21 32 1 59
56 24 54 48 47 41 00 70 20 32 2 59 54 25 54 24 48 40 08 71 19 32 3 59 52 26 54
00 49 39 20 72 18 32 4 59 50 27 53 28 50 38 32 73 17 32 5 59 46 28 53 00 51 37
44 74 16 32 6 59 40 29 52 28 52 37 00 75 15 32 7 59 37 30 51 56 53 36 08 76 14
32 8 59 24 31 51 24 54 35 26 77 13 32 9 59 10 32 50 52 55 34 24 78 12 32 10 59
00 33 50 20 56 33 32 79 11 28 11 58 52 34 49 44 57 32 40 80 10 24 12 58 40 35
49 08 58 31 48 81 9 20 13 58 28 36 48 32 59 31 00 82 8 20 14 58 12 37 47 56 60
30 00 83 7 20 15 58 00 38 47 16 61 29 04 84 6 12 16 57 40 39 46 36 62 28 08 85
5 12 17 57 20 40 46 00 63 27 12 86 4 12 18 57 04 41 45 16 64 26 16 87 3 12 19
56 44 42 44 36 65 25 20 88 2 04 20 56 24 43 43 52 66 24 24 89 1 04 21 56 00 44
43 08 67 23 28 90 0 00 22 55 36 45 42 24 68 22 32

Def 16. Zones are large Tracts of the Surface of the Earth, lying Parallel to
the Equator, and distinguished by the four lesser Circles of the Globe.
They Are termed Zones from (...), [Zona vel Cingulum] because they encompass
the Globe of the Earth in some manner, as a Girdle does surround the Body of a
Man; and are in number Five,

Viz. Two Frigid comprehended between The Polar Circles, and the Poles. Two
Temperate The Polar Circles, and the Tropicks. One Torrid The Two Tropicks, and
divided by the Equator.

Of these the Ancients imagined only the Two Temperate to be habitable;
esteeming the scorching Heat of the Torrid, and pinching Cold of the two Frigid
to be equally intolerable; according to that of the Poet,

Quarum quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu: Nix tegit alta duas: --
Ovid. Metam. 1. Def. 17. Climates are those Tracts of the Surface of the Earth,
bounded by imaginary Circles, running Parallel to the Equator, and of such a
breadth from South to North, that the length of the Artificial Day in one
surpasses that in the other, by half an Hour.
They Are termed Climates from (...), [Declino vel Inclino] because in numbering
of them they decline from the Equator, and incline to either Pole. Not to
mention what the Ancients taught of Climates, either as to their number, or
manner of reckoning them; It Is sufficient for our present purpose to consider
that Modern Geographers have advanced the Number of them to 60. From the
Equator to each of the Polar Circles, are 24 arising from the difference of
Hour in the longest Day; and from the Polar Circles to the Poles themselves,
are Six arising from the difference of an entire Month, the Sun being seen in
the first of these a whole Month without setting, in the second two, and in the
third three Months, etc. How all these Climates are framed, viz. the true
Parallel of Latitude in which they end, (that being likewise the beginning of
the following) with the respective breadth of each of them, you may clearly see
by the following Tables.

Climat Climates between the Equator and Polar Circles. d. m. d. m Clim d. m.
d. m. Par. of Lat. Breadth Par. of Lat. Breadth 1 08 25 8 25 13 59 58 1 29 2 16
25 8 00 14 61 18 1 20 3 23 50 7 25 15 62 25 1 07 4 30 20 6 30 16 63 22 0 57 5
36 28 6 08 17 64 6 0 44 6 41 22 4 54 18 64 49 0 43 7 45 29 4 07 19 65 2^ 0 32 8
49 01 3 32 20 65 47 0 26 9 51 58 2 57 21 66 6 0 19 10 54 27 2 29 22 66 20 0 14
11 56 37 2 10 23 66 28 0 08 12 58 29 1 52 24 66 31 0 03

Climates between the Polar Circles and the Poles. d. m. d. m. d. m. d. m d. m.
d. m. Par. Lat. Par. Lat. Par. Lat. Par. Lat. Par. Lat. Par. Lat. 67 30 69 30
73 20 78 20 84 00 90 00 Breadth Breadth Breadth Breadth Breadth Breadth 01 00
02 00 03 50 05 00 05 40 06 00 1 Month 2 Month 3 Month 4 Month 5 Month 6 Month

Having thus taken a view of the chief Circles belonging to the Terrestrial
Globe, as also the manner how Latitude and Longitude with Zones and Climates
are framed; proceed we next to the various Positions of the Globe, commonly
termed Spheres, which are three in Number, viz. Parallel, Right, and Oblique.

Def. 18. A Parallel Sphere is that Position of the Globe, which has these
three Properties, viz. (1.) The Poles in the Zenith and Nadir: (2.) The Equator
in the Horizon: (3.) The Parallel Circles parallel to the Horizon.
The Inhabitants of this Sphere, are those (if any) who live under the two
Poles.

Def. 19. A Right Sphere is that Position of the Globe, which has these three
Properties, viz. (1.) Both the Poles in the Horizon. (2.) The Equator passing
through the Zenith and Nadir. (3.) The Parallel Circles perpendicular to the
Horizon.
The Inhabitants of this Sphere, are they who live under the Equinoctial Line.

Def. 20. An Oblique Sphere is that Position of the Globe, which has these
three Properties, viz. (1.) One of the Poles above, and the other under the
Horizon. (2.) The Equator partly above, and partly under the Horizon. (3.) The
Parallel Circles cutting the Horizon obliquely.
The Inhabitants of this Sphere are they, who live on all Parts of the Globe of
the Earth, except those exactly under the Poles and Equinoctial Line.

But having no regard to these Positions of the Globe; The various Inhabitants
of the Earth are likewise considered with respect to the several Meridians and
Parallels peculiar to their Habitations, and that under these three Titles,
viz. Antaeci, Periaci, and Antipodes.

Def. 21. The Antaeci are those People of the Earth, who live under the same
Meridian, but opposite Parallels.
Peculiar to such People are these following Particulars, viz. (1.) They have
both the same Elevation of the Pole, but not the same Pole. (2.) They are
equally distant from the Equator, but on different sides. (3) They have both
Noon and Midnight at the same time. (4) The Days of one are equal to the Nights
of the other, and vice versa. (5.) Their Seasons of the Year are contrary, it
being Winter to one, when Summer to the other, etc.

Def. 22 The Perlaeci are those People of the Earth, who live under the same
Parallels, but opposite Meridians.
Peculiar to such People are these following Particulars, viz. (1.) One of the
Poles is equally elevated to both, and the other equally depressed. (2.) They
are equally distant from the Equator, and both on the same side. (3.) When it is
Noon to one, it is Midnight to the other, and econtra. (4) The length of the Day
to one, is the Compliment of the other's Night, and vice versa. (5.) They both
agree in the four Seasons of the Year, etc.

Def. 23. The Antipodes are those People of the Earth, who live under opposite
Parallels and Meridians.
Peculiar to such People are these following Particulars, viz. (1.) They have
both the same Elevation of the Pole. (2) They are both equally distant from the
Equator, but on different sides, and in opposite Haemispheres. (3.) When it is
Noon to one, it is Midnight to the other, and vice versa. (4.) The longest Day
or Night to the one, is the shortest to the other. (5.) Their Seasons of the
Year are contrary, etc.

The Inhabitants of the Earth were likewise considered by the Ancients with
respect to the Diversity of their Shadows, and accordingly reduced to three
Classes, viz. Amphiscii, Periscii, and Heteroscii.

Def. 24. Amphiscii were those People of the Earth, who lived in the Torrid
Zone, or between the two Tropicks.
They Are so termed from (...), [utrinque] and (...) [Umbra] because they cast
their Shadows on both sides of them, viz. North and South, according to the
Nature of the Sun's Declination.

Def. 25. Periscii were those People of the Earth, who lived in the Frigid
Zones, or between the Polar Circles and the Poles.
They Are so called from (...), [Circa] and (...) [Umbra] because they cast
their Shadows round about them, toward all Points of the Compass.

Def. 26. Heteroscii were those People of the Earth, who lived in the two
Temperate Zones, or between the Tropicks and the Polar Circles.
They Are so called from (...), [Alto] and (...) [Umbra] because they cast their
Shadows only one way, viz. North, if in the North temperate; or South, if in
the South temperate Zone

But leaving the various Inhabitants of the Earth, and to come closer to our
main Design, let us return to the Globe of the Earth it self, considered simply
as a Spherical Body, whose Surface we are to view as composed of Land and
Water, as its sole constituent Parts, and those two Parts, thus subdivided as
follows, to wit, Land into
Continents, Isthmus, Islands Promontories, Peninsula's, Mountains.
Water into
Oceans, Straits, Seas, Lakes, Gulfs, Rivers.


Def. 27. A Continent [Lat. Continens a Contineo] is a large and spacious Space
of dry Land, comprehending diverse Countries, Kingdoms, and States, all joined
together without any entire Separation of its Parts by Water.

Def. 28. An Island [Lat. Insula, quasi in salo] is a part of dry Land
environed round with Water.

Def. 29. A Peninsula [quasi pene Insula, otherwise Chersonesus from (...),
Terra, and (...), Insula] is a part of the dry Land every where enclosed with
Water, save one narrow Neck adjoining the same to the Continent.

Def. 30. An Isthmus [ab (...) vel (...), Ingredior] is that narrow Neck of
Land annexing the Peninsula to the Continent, by which People may enter into
one from the other.

Def. 31. A Promontory [quasi Mons in mare prominens] is a high part of Land
stretching it self out in the Sea, the Extremity whereof is commonly termed a
Cape or Head-Land.

Def. 32. A Mountain [a moneo vel emineo] is a rising part of the dry Land,
over-topping the adjacent Country, and appearing the first at a distance.

Def. 33. The Ocean [Gr. (...) quasi ex (...), cito, and (...), Fluo] is a
mighty Rendesvouz, or large Collection of Waters environing a considerable Part
of the Main Continent.

Def. 34. The Sea [Lat. Salum a sale quia salsum] is a smaller Collection of
Waters intermingled with Islands, and entirely (or mostly) environed with Land.

Def. 35. A Gulf [Lat. Sinus, quasi sinu suo mare complectens] is a part of the
Sea every where environed with Land, except one Passage whereby it communicates
with the neighboring Sea, or main Ocean.

Def. 36. A Strait [Lat. Fretum a ferveo, quod ibi ferveat mare propter
angustiam] is a narrow Passage, either joining a Gulf to the neighboring Sea
or Ocean, or one part of the Sea or Ocean to another.

Def. 37. A Lake [Lat. Lacus, a Gr. (...), Fossa vel Fovea] is a small
Collection of deep standing Water, entirely surrounded with Land, and having no
visible or immediate Communication with the Sea.

Def. 38. A River [Lat. Flumen vel Fluvius a fluo] is a considerable Stream of
fresh Water issuing out of one, or various Fountains, and continually gliding
along in one or more Channels, till it disgorgeth it self at last into the
gaping Mouth of the thirsty Ocean.

These being all the necessary Terms commonly used in Modern Geography; and
particularly those, that either need or can well admit of a Definition,
Description, or Derivation: We proceed in the next place to

SECT. II. Containing some pleasant Geographical Problems.
Prob. 1. THE Diameter of the Artificial Globe being given, to find its Surface
in Square, and its Solidity in Cubick Measure.
Multiply the Diameter by the Circumference (or a great Circle dividing the
Globe into two equal Parts) and the Product will give the first: Then Multiply
the said Product by of the Diameter, and the Product of that will give the
second. After the same manner we may find the Surface and Solidity of the
Natural Globe, as also the whole Body of the Atmosphere surrounding the same,
providing it be always and every where of the same height; for having found the
perpendicular height thereof by that common Experiment of the ascent of Mercury
at the foot and top of a Mountain; double the said Height, and add the same to
the Diameter of the Earth; then Multiply the whole (as a new Diameter) by its
proper Circumference, and from the Product substract the Solidity of the Earth,
the Remainder will give the Solidity of the Atmosphere.

Prob. 2. To Rectify the Globe,
The Globe being set upon a true Plain, raise the Pole according to the given
Latitude; then fix the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, and (if any
Mariner's Compass upon the Pedestal) let the Globe be so situated, as that the
brazen Meridian may stand due South and North, according to the two Extremities
of the Needle.

Prob. 3. To find the Longitude and Latitude of any place.
By Longitude we do not here understand that Opprobrium Navigatorum of Easting
and Westing, but simply the distance between the given place and the first
Meridian inscribed on the Surface of the Globe. For the finding of which, bring
the given place to the East Side of the brazen Meridian, and observe what
Degree of the Equator is just under the said Meridian, for that is the Degree
of Longitude peculiar to the given place; and the Degree of the Meridian
exactly above that place is its proper Latitude, which is either Southern or
Northern, according as the place is South or North of the Equinoctial Line.

Prob. 4. The Longitude and Latitude of any place being given, to find that
place on the Globe.
Bring the given Degree of Longitude to the brazen Meridian; reckon upon the
same Meridian the Degree of given Latitude, whether South or North, and make a
mark with Chalk where the reckoning ends; the Point exactly under that Chalk is
the place desired.

Prob. 5. The Latitude of any place being given, to find all those places that
have the same Latitude.
The Globe being rectified Prob. 2.
according to the Latitude of the given place, and that place being brought to
the brazen Meridian, make a mark exactly above the same, and turning the Globe
round, all those places passing under the said mark, have the same Latitude
with the given place

Prob. 6. To find the Sun 's place in the Ecliptic at any time.
The Month and Day being given, look for the same upon the wooden Horizon, and
over against the Day you will find the particular Sign and Degree in which the
Sun is at that time (observing withal the difference between the Julian and
Gregorian Calendar) which Sign and Degree being noted in the Ecliptic, the
same is the Sun's place (or pretty near it) at the time desired.

Prob. 7. The Month and Day being given, as also the particular time of that
Day, to find those places of the Globe, to which the Sun is in their Meridian
at that particular time.
The Pole being elevated Prob. 2.
according to the Latitude of the place in which you are, and the Sun's Place
found Prob. 6.
in the Ecliptic at the time given; bring the same to the brazen Meridian, and
setting the Index of the Horary Circle at the upper Figure of XII. turn the
Globe till the said Index point at the given Hour of the Day. Which done, fix
the Globe in that Situation, and observe all those places exactly under the
brazen Meridian, for those are the places desired.

Prob. 8. To know the Length of the Day and Night in any place of the Earth at
any time.
Elevate the Pole Prob. 2.
according to the Latitude of the given place; find the Sun's place in the
Ecliptic Prob. 6.
at that time, which being brought to the East side of the Horizon, set the
Index of the Horary Circle at Noon, (or the upper Figure of 12.) and turning
the Globe about till the aforesaid place of the Ecliptic touch the Western
side of the Horizon, look upon the Horary Circle, and wheresoever the Index
points, reckon the Number of Hours between the same and the upper Figure of
12. for that is the Length of the Day at the time desired, the Complement
whereof is the Length of the Night.

Note, There is a Mistake in working the 7th Problem, for the same ought to be
performed thus: The Pole being elevated according to the Latitude of the given
Place, bring the said Place to the brazen Meridian, and setting the Index of
the Horary Circle at the Hour of the Day in the given Place, turn the Globe
till the Index point at the upper Figure of XII. which done, fix the Globe in
that Situation, and observe what places are exactly under the upper Hemisphere
of the brazen Meridian, for those are the Places desired.

Prob. 9. To find by the Globe the Antaeci, Periaeci, and Antipodes, of any
given place.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and finding Prob. 3.
its true Latitude, count upon the Equator the same number of Degrees toward
the opposite Pole and observe where the reckoning ends, for that is the place
of the Antaeci. The given Place continuing under the brazen Meridian, set the
Index of the Horary Circle at Noon, and turning the Globe about till the same
Point at Midnight, (or the lower 12.) the place which then comes to the
Meridian, (having the same Latitude with the former) is that of the Perioeci.
As for the Antipodes of the given Place, reckon from the said place upon the
brazen Meridian 180 Degrees, either South or North, or as many Degrees beyond
the farthest Pole as you are to the nearest; and observe exactly where the
reckoning ends, for that is the place desired.

Prob. 10. To know what a Clock it is by the Globe in any place of the World,
and at any time, providing you know the Hour of the Day where you are at the
same time.
Bring the place in which you are, to the brazen Meridian (the Pole being
raised Prob. 3.
according to the Latitude thereof) and set the Index of the Horary Circle at
the Hour of the Day at that time. Then bring the desired Place to the brazen
Meridian, and the Index will point out the present Hour at that place where
ever it is.

Prob. 11. To know by the Globe when the Great Mogul of India, and Czar of
Moscovia, sit down to Dinner.
This being only to know when its Noon at Agra and Moscow, (the Imperial Seats
of those Mighty Monarchs) which we may very easily do, at what time soever it
be, or wheresoever we are: For finding (by the foregoing Problem) the present
Hour of the Day in the Cities abovementioned, supposing withal that Midday in
the aforesaid Cities is Dining-time, we may readily determine how near it is to
the time desired,

Prob. 12. To find the Hour of the Day by the Globe at any time when the Sun
shines.
Divide your Ecliptic Line in Twenty four equal Parts, and in small Figures
set down the Hours of the Natural Day after the following manner. At the
Intersections of the Ecliptic and Equator place the Figure 6; and bring both
those Figures to the brazen Meridian, one being in the upper, and the other in
the lower Hemisphere. Which done, place the twelve Figures in the Western
Hemisphere in this order following, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Beginning then at the same Figure of 6, and proceeding Eastward, set down the
other twelve Figures thus, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6. The
Equinoctial being thus divided and marked, elevate the Globe Prob. 3.
according to the Latitude of the place where you are, and bring the
Intersection of the Vernal Equinox to the upper Part of the brazen Meridian;
and situating the Globe Prob. 2.
duly South and North, observe exactly that half of the Globe upon which the
Sun does actually shine; for the last part of the enlightened Hemisphere does
always show the Hour of the Day upon the Equinoctial Line.

Prob. 13. The Latitude of the Place, and Height of the Sun being given at any
time, to find thereby the Hour of the Day.
The Globe being rectified Prob. 2.
according to the Latitude of the given Place, and the Height of the Sun at
that time being found by an exact Quadrant; mark his place in the Ecliptic
Prob. 6.
for the given Day, and bring the same to the brazen Meridian. After this, fix
the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, and mark in the said Quadrant the
particular Degree of the Sun's Altitude, and placing the Index of the Horary
Circle at Noon, move the Globe together with the Quadrant of Altitude, till the
Sun's place marked in the Ecliptic, and his Degree of Altitude marked upon the
said Quadrant do come both in one. Which done, observe what Hour the Index does
point at, for that is the Hour desired.

Prob. 14. The Latitude of the Place being given, as also the true bearing of
the Sun in the said Place at any time, to find thereby the Hour of the Day.
The Globe being Prob. 2.
rectified, and the Sun's Place Prob. 6.
marked in the Ecliptic, fix the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, and by the
Mariners Compass observe the true bearing of the Sun; then bring the Quadrant
of Altitude to the observed Point of the Compass upon the wooden Horizon, and
move the Globe till the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic coincide with the said
Quadrant: Which done, and the Globe continuing in that Position, the Index of
the Horary Circle will point at the Hour of the Day, at the time desired.

Prob. 15. The Latitude of the Place, and Sun 's Place in the Ecliptic being
given, to find thereby the Hour of the Day.
Elevate the Pole according to the given Latitude, and situate the Globe duly
South and North Prob. 2.
by the Mariners Compass; then fix a small Needle perpendicularly in the Sun's
Place in the Ecliptic, and bringing the same to the brazen Meridian, set the
Index of the Horary Circle at Noon: Which done turn the Globe till the Needle
cast no Shadow at all, and then observe the Index, for it will then point at
the true Hour of the Day.

Prob. 16. Any Place being given, to move the Globe so as that the wooden
Horizon shall be the Horizon of the same.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and reckon from it upon the said
Meridian the number of 90 Degrees toward either of the Poles, and where the
reckoning ends, place that part of the Meridian in the Notch of the wooden
Horizon, and it will prove the Horizon of the given Place.

Prob. 17. To find the Meridian-Line by the Globe in any place, and at any time
of the Day.
The Latitude of the Place being known, and the Globe Prob. 2.
elevated accordingly; observe the height of the Sun above the Horizon at that
time, and draw upon a true Plain a straight Line in, or Parallel to the Shadow
of a Style perpendicularly erected upon that Plain: In which describe a Circle
at any opening of the Compasses, and find Prob. 6.
the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic, and mark his observed height in the Quadrant
of Altitude. Then move the Globe together with the said Quadrant, till that
Mark in the Quadrant, and the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic, come both in one;
which done, count upon the wooden Horizon the number of Degrees between the
Quadrant of Altitude, and the brazen Meridian, and set off the same number of
Degrees upon the aforesaid Circle drawn upon the Plain, by making a visible
Point in the Circumference where the reckoning ends (beginning still at the
side toward the Sun, and proceeding East or West according to the time of the
Day) Then draw a Line from that Point in the Circumference through the Center
of the said Circle, and the same will prove the true Meridian-Line of that
Place, at what time soever the Observation is made.

Prob. 18. A Place being given in the Torrid Zone, to find those Days in which
the Sun shall be vertical to the same.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and mark what Degree of Latitude
is exactly above it. Move the Globe round, and observe the two Points of the
Ecliptic that pass through the said Degree of Latitude. Search upon the wooden
Horizon (or by proper Tables of the Sun's Annual Motion) on what Days he
passes through the aforesaid Points of the Ecliptic, for those are the Days
required, in which the Sun is vertical to the given Place.

Prob. 19. The Month and Day being given, to find by the Globe those places of
the North Frigid Zone, where the Sun begins then to shine constantly without
setting; as also those places of the South Frigid Zone, in which he then
begins to be totally absent.
The Day given, (which must always be one of those, either between the Vernal
Equinox and Summer Solstice, or between the Autumnal Equinox and Winter
Solstice) find Prob. 6.
the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic, and marking the same, bring it to the brazen
Meridian, and reckon the like number of Degrees from the North Pole toward the
Equator, as there is betwixt the Equator and the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic,
and set a mark with Chalk where the reckoning ends. Which done, turn the Globe
round, and all the Places passing under the said Chalk are those in which the
Sun begins to shine constantly without setting upon the given Day. For Solution
of the latter part of the Problem; set off the same distance from the South
Pole upon the brazen Meridian toward the Equator, as was formerly set off from
the North, and making a mark with Chalk, and turning the Globe round, all
Places passing under the said mark are those desired, viz. them in which the
Sun begins his total Absence, or Disappearance from the given Day.

Prob. 20. A Place being given in the North Frigid Zone, to find by the Globe
what number of Days the Sun does constantly shine upon the said Place, and what
Days he is absent; as also the first and last Day of his appearance.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and observing its Latitude,
Prob. 2.
elevate the Globe accordingly, then turn the Globe about till the first Degree
of Cancer come under the Meridian, and count the same number of Degrees upon
the Meridian from each side of the Equator, as the Place is distant from the
Pole; and making a mark where the reckoning ends, turn the Globe round, and
carefully observe what two Degrees of the Ecliptic pass exactly under the two
Points marked in the Meridian, for the Northern Arch of the Circle (viz. that
comprehended between the two marked Degrees) being reduced to time, will give
the number of Days that the Sun does constantly shine above the Horizon of the
given Place, and the opposite Arch of the said Circle will give the number of
Days in which he is absent. The Pole continuing in the same Elevation, bring
the beginning of Cancer to the brazen Meridian, and observe the two Degrees of
the Ecliptic which in the mean time coincide with the Horizon; then search
upon the wooden Horizon for those Days that the Sun does enter into the
aforesaid Degrees of the Ecliptic, for those are the Days of his first and
last appearance in the given Place.

Prob. 21. The Month and Day being given, to find that place on the Globe to
which the Sun (when in its Meridian) shall be vertical on that Day.
The Sun's Place in the Ecliptic being Prob. 6.
found, bring the same to the brazen Meridian, in which make a small mark with
Chalk, exactly above the Sun's Place. Which done, find Prob. 7.
those places that have the Sun in the Meridian at the time given; and bringing
them to the brazen Meridian, observe that part of the Globe exactly under the
aforesaid mark in the Meridian, for that is the place desired.

Prob. 22. The Month and Day being given, to find upon what Point of the
Compass the Sun rises and sets in any place at the time given.
Elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the desired Place, and finding
the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic at the given Time, bring the same to the
Eastern side of the Horizon, and you may clearly see the Point of the Compass
upon which he then rises. By turning the Globe about till his place coincide
with the Western side of the Horizon, you may also see upon the said Circle the
exact Point of his setting.

Prob. 23. To know by the Globe the Length of the longest and shortest Days and
Nights in any place of the World.
Elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and bring the
first Degree of Cancer (if in the Northern, or Capricorn, if in the Southern
Hemisphere) to the East Side of the Horizon; and setting the Index of the
Horary Circle at Noon, turn the Globe about till the Sign of Cancer touch the
Western-side of the Horizon, and then observe upon the Horary Circle the number
of Hours between the Index and the upper Figure of XII. (reckoning them
according to the Motion of the Index) for that is the Length of the longest
Day, the Complement whereof is the Extent of the shortest Night. As for the
shortest Day and longest Night, they are only the reverse of the former.

Prob. 24. To know the Climates of any given Place.
Find Prob. 23.
the Length of the longest Day in the given Place, and whatever be the number
of Hours whereby it surpasses Twelve, double that number, and the Product will
give the true Climate of the Place desired. But here note, That this is to be
understood of Places within the Latitude of 66. As for those of a greater
Latitude, (where the Climates increase by entire Months, enter the second Table
of Climates (page 10) with the Latitude of the given Place, and opposite
thereto you will find the proper Climate of a place in the said Latitude.

Prob. 25. The Length of the longest Day in any place being known, to find
thereby the Latitude of that place.
Having the Length of the longest Day you may know thereby Prob. 24.
the proper Climate of that Place, and by the Table of Climates (page 10.) you
may see what Degree of Latitude corresponds to that Climate, which Degree is
the Latitude of the Place desired.

Prob. 26. The Latitude of the Place being given, as also the Sun 's Place in
the Ecliptic, to find thereby the beginning of the Morning, and end of the
Evening Twilight.
The Globe being rectified, and the Sun's Place brought to the brazen Meridian,
set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon; then bring that Degree of the
Ecliptic (which is opposite to the Sun's Place) to the Western Quarter, and so
move the Globe together with the Quadrant of Altitude, till the Degree opposite
to the Sun's Place, and the 18 Degree of the said Quadrant come both in one;
Which done, observe what Hour the Index then points at, for at that Hour does
the Morning Twilight begin. As for the Evening Twilight, bring the Degree of
the Ecliptic, opposite to the Sun's Place at that time to the Eastern Quarter,
and so move the Globe till the same and the 18th Degree of the Quadrant come
both in one, and the Index will point at the Hour when the Evening Twilight
does end.

Prob. 27. The Length of the longest day being given, to find thereby those
places of the Earth in which the longest Day is of that Extent.
By the given Length of the longest Day Prob. 25.
find the true Degree of Latitude, where the Day is of that Extent, and making
a mark upon that Degree in the brazen Meridian, turn the Globe round, and
observe what Places pass exactly under the said Mark, for they are the Places
desired.

Prob. 28. A certain number of Days, not surpassing 182. being given, to find
thereby that Parallel of Latitude on the Globe, where the Sun sets not
during those Days.
Take half of the given Number of Days, and whatever it is, count so many
Degrees upon the Ecliptic, beginning at the first of Cancer, and make a mark
where the reckoning ends; only observe, that if your number of Days surpass
thirty, then your number of Degrees ought to be less than it by one. Bring then
the marked Point of the Ecliptic to the brazen Meridian, and observe exactly
how many Degrees are intercepted between the aforesaid Point and the Pole, for
the same is equal to the desired Parallel of Latitude. If the desired Parallel
of Latitude be South of the Line, the Operation is the same, bringing only the
first Degree of Capricorn to the Meridian in lieu of Cancer.

Prob. 29. The Hour of the Day being given, according to our way of reckoning
in England, to find thereby the Babylonick Hour at any time.
The Babylonick Hour is the number of Hours from Sun rising, it being the
manner of the Babylonians of old, and the Inhabitants of Norimberg at this Day,
to commence their Hours from the appearance of the Sun in the Eastern Horizon.
For the finding of this Hour at any time, and in any place, First elevate the
Pole Prob. 2.
according to the Latitude of the given Place, and Prob. 6.
noting the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic at that time, bring the same to the
brazen Meridian, and set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon; after this,
roll the Globe either Eastward or Westward according to the time of the Day,
till the Index point at the given Hour. Then fix the Globe in that Position,
and bring back the Index again to Noon, and move the Globe from West to East,
till the Sun's Place marked in the Ecliptic, coincide with the Eastern
Horizon; which done, reckon upon the Horary Circle the number of Hours between
the Index and Noon (or the upper Figure of 12.) for that is the number of Hours
from Sun rising for that Day in the given Place, or the true Babylonick Hour
desired.

Prob. 30. The Babylonick Hour being given, to find the Hour of the Day at any
time, according to our way of reckoning in England.
Elevate the Pole according to the given Latitude of the Place, and marking the
Sun's Place in the Ecliptic, bring the same to the brazen Meridian, and set
the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon. Then Roll the Globe Westward till the
Index point at the given Hour from Sun rising, and fixing the Globe in that
Situation, bring the Index back again to Noon, and turn the Globe backwards
till the Sun's Place marked in the Ecliptic return to the same Semicircle of
the brazen Meridian from whence it came; which done, observe what Hour the
Index of the Horary Circle points at, for the same is the Hour desired.

Prob. 31. The Hour of the Day being given according to our way of reckoning in
England, to find thereby the Italick Hour at any time.
The Italick Hour is the number of Hours from Sun setting at all times of the
Year, to Sun setting the next following Day. For the ready finding of such
Hours, Prob. 2.
elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the Place, and Prob. 6.
noting the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic upon the given Day, bring the same to
the brazen Meridian, and set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon. Then turn
the Globe either East or West according to the time of the Day, till the Index
point at the given Hour, and fixing the Globe in that Situation, bring the
Index back to Noon. Which done, turn the Globe about Eastwards till the mark of
the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic coincide with the Western Horizon, and observe
how many Hours there are between the upper Figure of 12. and the Index
(reckoning them Eastward as the Globe moved) for these are the Hours from
Sunset, or the Italick Hour desired.

Prob. 32. The Italick Hour being given, to find thereby the Hour of the Day at
any time according to our way of reckoning in England.
This being the Reverse of the former Problem, Prob. 2.
elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and noting the
Sun's Place in the Ecliptic, bring the same to the Western Horizon, and
setting the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon, turn the Globe Westward till
the Index point at Prob. 31.
the Italick Hour given; then fixing the Globe in that Position, bring the
Index back to Noon, and move the Globe backward till the Mark of the Sun's
Place return to the same Semicircle of the brazen Meridian from whence it
came. Which done, observe how many Hours are between Noon and the Index,
(reckoning them from West to East) for those are the Hours desired according to
our way of reckoning in England.

Prob. 33. The Hour of the Day being exactly given according to our way of
reckoning in England, to find thereby the Judaical Hour at any time.
By the Judaical Hour we understand the exact Time of the Day according to the
Ancient Jews, who in reckoning their time, divided the Artificial Day into
twelve Hours, and the Night into as many, which Hours proved every Day unequal
in extent (unless in Places exactly under the Equator) they still decreasing or
increasing according to the Seasons of the Year, or the various Declination of
the Sun. For the finding of which Hours, observe the following Method, Prob. 2.
Elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and Prob. 6.
marking the Sun's Place in the Ecliptic at that time, bring it to the Eastern
Horizon, and set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon; then turn the Globe
about till that place marked in the Ecliptic come to the Western Horizon, and
observe the number of Hours between Noon and the Index, these being the Hours
of which the given Day does consist, which number you are to Note down, and
Prob. 29, 31.
to find what Hour from Sunrising corresponds with the given Hour, or from
Sunsetting, if the given Hour be after Sunsetting. Which done, work by the
following Proportion. As the number of Hours, whereof the given Day consists,
(viz. those noted down) is to 12; so is the number of Hours from Sunrising,
(if it be an Hour of the Day) or from Sunsetting (if an Hour of the Night) to
a fourth proportional, which is the number desired, viz. the Judaical Hour at
the time given.

Prob. 34. The Judaical Hour being given, to find thereby the Hour of the Day
at any time, according to our way of reckoning in England.
Elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and finding the
Sun's Place in the Ecliptic at the time given, bring the same to the Eastern
Horizon, and set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon, then Roll the Globe
Westward, till the Sun's Place coincide with the Western Horizon, and the Index
will point at the number of equal Hours. whereof that Day consists. Which
Number you are to note down, and bring the Sun's Place to the brazen Meridian,
and setting the Index again at Noon, turn the Globe about till the Sun's Place
coincide with the Eastern Horizon, and the Index will point at the Hour when
the Sun rises in the given Place. Which done, work by the following
Proportion. As 12 is to the given Number of Judaical Hours, so is the Length of
the Day in equal Hours (formerly found out) to a fourth proportional, which is
the Number desired, viz. the Hour of the Day according to our way of reckoning
in England. Only note, That if the fourth proportional be less than 12, you are
to add the same to the Hour of Sunrising, and the Product will give the Number
of Hours before Noon for that Day; but if it be more than 12, then Substract it
from 12, and the Remainder will give the Hour of the Day for the Afternoon.

Prob. 35. To find the true Area of the five Zones in square Measure, allowing
60 Miles to one Degree in the Equator.
The Breadth of the Torrid Zone being 47 Degrees which reduced to Miles, make
2820; each of the Temperate 43 Degrees, which make 2580; and each of the Frigid
23 Degrees, which make 1410 Miles. The true Area of each of those Zones may be
found in Square Measure by the following Proportion. (1.) For the Torrid. The
Area of the whole Globe being found, (per Prob. 1.) say as Rad. to the Sine of
47; so is the the Area of the Globe, to the Area of the Torrid Zone. (2.) For
each of the Temperate Zones; say as Rad. to the difference of the Sines of 23
and 66; so is Arch of the Globe to the Area of one of the Temperate Zones.
Lastly, For the Frigid Zones, add Area of the Torrid to the whole Area of one
of the Temperate, and Substract the Product from Area of the Globe, and the
Remainder will give the true Area of either of the Frigid Zones.

Prob. 36. A Place being given on the Globe; to find those which have the same
Hour of the Day with that in the given Place, as also that have the contrary
Hours, i. e. Midnight in the one, when it is Midday in the other.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and observe what Places are then
exactly under that Semicircle of the said Meridian, for the People in them
have the same Hour with that they have in the given Place. The Globe continuing
in that Position, set the Index of the Horary Circle at Noon, and turn the
Globe till the Index point at Midnight, and observe that Places are then in
that Semicircle of the Meridian, for the Inhabitants of those Places do reckon
their Hours contrary to these in the given Place.

Prob. 37. The Hour of the Day being given in any place, to find those places
of the Earth where it is either Noon or Midnight, or any other particular Hour
at the same time.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and set the Index of the Horary
Circle at the Hour of the Day in that place. Then turn about the Globe till the
Index point at the upper Figure of XII, and observe what Places are exactly
under the upper Semicircle of the brazen Meridian, for in them its Midday at
the time given. Which done, turn the Globe about till the Index point at the
lower Figure of XII, and what Places are then in the lower Semicircle of the
Meridian, in them its Midnight at the given Time. After the same manner we may
find those Places that have any other particular Hour at the Time given, by
moving the Globe till the Index point at the Hour desired, and observing the
Places that are then under the brazen Meridian.

Prob. 38. The Day and Hour being given, to find by the Globe that particular
Place of the Earth, to which the Sun is vertical at that very time.
The Sun's Place in the Ecliptic Prob 6.
being found, and brought to the brazen Meridian, make a Mark above the same
with Chalk; then Prob. 37.
find those Places of the Earth, in whose Meridian the Sun is at that instant,
and bring them to the brazen Meridian. Which done, observe narrowly that
individual Part of the Earth which falls exactly under the aforesaid Mark in
the brazen Meridian, for that is the particular Place, to which the Sun is
vertical at that very time.

Prob. 39. The Day and Hour of the Day being given, to find those Places on the
Globe, in which the. Sun then rises. 2dly, Those in which he then sets.
3dly, Those to whom its Midday. And Lastly, Those Places that are actually
enlightened, and those that are not.
Find that Place of the Prob. 38.
Globe, to which the Sun is vertical at the given Time, and bringing the same
to the brazen Meridian, Prob. 2.
elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the said Place. The Globe being
fixed in that Position, observe what Places are in the Western Semicircle of
the Horizon, for in them the Sun rises at that time. 2dly, Those in the
Eastern Semicircle, for in them the Sun sets. 3dly, Those that are exactly
under the brazen Meridian, for in them it is Mid day. And Lastly, All those upon
the upper Hemisphere of the Globe, for they are actually enlightened, and those
upon the lower are then in darkness, or deprived of the Sun at that very time.

Prob. 40. The Month and Day being given, as also the Place of the Moon in the
Zodiac, and her true Latitude, to find thereby the exact Hour when she shall
rise and set, together with her Southing (or coming to the Meridian) of the
given Place.
The Moon's Place in the Zodiac may be found ready enough at any time by an
ordinary Almanac, and her Latitude (which is her distance from the Ecliptic)
by applying the Semicircle of Position to her Place in the Zodiac. For the
Solution of the Problem, Prob. 2.
elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and the Sun's
Place in the Ecliptic at that time being Prob. 6.
found, and marked with Chalk, as also the Moon's Place at the same time: Bring
the Sun's Place to the brazen Meridian, and set the Index of the Horary Circle
at Noon, and turn the Globe till the Moon's Place successively coincide with
the Eastern and Western-side of the Horizon, as also the brazen Meridian, and
the Index will point, at those various times, the particular Hour of her
Rising, Setting, and Southing.

Prob. 41. The Day and Hour of either a Solar or Lunar Eclipse being known, to
find by the Globe all those Places in which the same will be visible.
Mark the Sun's Place in the Prob. 6.
Ecliptic for the given Day, as also the opposite Point thereto, which is the
Place of the Moon at that time. Then find Prob. 38.
that Place of the Globe to which the Sun is vertical at the given Hour, and
bring the same to the Pole (or vertical Point) of the wooden Horizon, and
fixing the Globe in that Situation, observe what Places are in the upper
Hemisphere, for in most of them will the Sun be visible during his Eclipse. As
for the Lunar Eclipse, you are to find Prob. 9.
the Antipodes of that place which has the Sun vertical at the given Hour, and
bringing the same to the Pole of the wooden Horizon, observe (as formerly) what
Places are in the upper Hemisphere of the Globe, for in such will the Moon be
visible during her Eclipse, except those that are very near unto, or actually
in the Horizon.

Prob. 42. A Place being given on the Globe, to find the true Situation thereof
from all other Places desired, or how it bears in respect of such Places.
The various Places desired [which are supposed to be some of those that lie
upon the intermediate Points of the Compass] being pitched upon, bring the
given Place to the brazen Meridian, and elevate the Pole according to it is
Latitude, and fixing the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, apply the same
successively to the Places desired, and the lower Part of the said Quadrant
will intersect the wooden Horizon at those various Points of the Compass
(inscribed upon the said Circle) according to the true bearing of the given
Place, in respect of the Places desired.

Prob. 43. A Place being given on the Globe, to find all other Places that are
situated from the same, upon any desired Point of the Compass.
Elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the given Place, and bring the
said Place to the brazen Meridian, and fixing the Quadrant of Altitude in the
Zenith, apply the lower Part thereof to the desired Point of the Compass upon
the wooden Horizon; and observe what Places are exactly under the Edge of the
said Quadrant, for those are the Places that are situated from, or bear off,
the given Place according to the desired Point of the Compass.

Prob. 44. Two Places being given on the Globe, to find the true distance
between them.
The two Places given must of necessity lie under either the same Meridian, the
same Parallel of Latitude, or else differ both in Longitude and Latitude. (1.)
If they lie under the same Meridian, then bring them both to the brazen
Meridian, and observe the number of Degrees of Latitude comprehended between
them, which being reduced into Leagues or Miles, will give the Distance
required. (2.) If they lie under the same Parallel of Latitude, then bring them
separately to the brazen Meridian, and observe the Number of Degrees between
them upon the Equator; which done, enter the Table [page 9.] with the Latitude
of the given Places, and seeing thereby how many Miles in that Parallel are
answerable to one Degree in the Equator, multiply those Miles by the aforesaid
number of Degrees upon the Equator, and the Product will give the Distance
required. But, Lastly, if the two Places given do differ both in Longitude and
Latitude, then bring one of them to the vertical Point of the brazen Meridian,
and extending the Quadrant of Altitude to the other, observe upon the said
Quadrant the number of Degrees between them, which being reduced into Leagues
or Miles, will give the distance required. This third Case of the Problem being
most considerable and occurring more frequently than the other two, we shall
here annex another way of performing the same besides the Globe, and that is by
resolving a Spherical Triangle, two Sides whereof (viz. the Complements of the
different Latitudes, or the distance of the given Places from the Poles) are
not only given, but also the Angle comprehended between them, (it being equal
to the difference of their Longitude) by which Sides and Angle given, we may
very easily find the third Side by the noted Rules in Trigonometry, which third
Side is the distance required.

Prob. 45. A Place being given on the Globe, and its true Distance from a
second place, to find thereby all other Places of the Earth that are of the
same distance from the given Place.
Bring the given Place to the brazen Meridian, and elevate the Pole according
to the Latitude of the said Place; then fix the Quadrant of Altitude in the
Zenith, and reckon upon the said Quadrant, the given Distance between the first
and second Place (providing the same be under 90 Degrees, otherwise you must
use the Semicircle of Position) and making a Mark where the reckoning ends,
and moving the said Quadrant or Semicircle quite round upon the Surface of the
Globe, all Places passing under that Mark, are those desired.

Prob. 46. The Latitude of two Places being given, and how one of them bears
off the other, to find thereby the true Distance between them.
For the Solution of this Problem. Suppose the first Meridian to be the true
Meridian of one of the given Places, particularly that whose bearing is
unknown. Upon the upper Semicircle of that Meridian, mark the Latitude of the
said Place; then elevate the Pole according to the Latitude of the other place,
and fixing the Quadrant of Altitude in the Zenith, extend the same to the given
Point of the Compass upon the wooden Horizon, and turn the Globe about till the
Point marked in the aforesaid Meridian coincide with the said Quadrant. Which
done, reckon upon that Quadrant the number of Degrees between that Point marked
in the first Meridian and the vertical Point; which Degrees being converted
into Leagues or Miles, will give the Distance required.

Prob. 47. The Longitude of two Places being given, as also the Latitude of one
of them, and its Bearing from the other, to find thereby the true Distance
between them.
For the Solution of this Problem, suppose the first Meridian to be the true
Meridian of the Place, whose Latitude is unknown. Reckon from that Meridian
upon the Equator the number of Degrees equal to the difference of Longitude of
the two Places, and make a Mark where the reckoning ends, and bringing the same
to the brazen Meridian, (which represents the Meridian of the second Place)
reckon upon it the Degrees of the given Latitude; and fixing the Globe in that
Situation, raise the Pole according to that Latitude, and fix the Quadrant of
Altitude in the Zenith, extending the other extremity thereof to the given
Point of the Compass upon the wooden Horizon. The Globe continuing in this
Position, observe that Point of the Surface, where the Quadrant of Altitude
intersects the first Meridian, for the same represents the second Place, and
that Arch of the Quadrant between the said Point and the Zenith, being
converted into Leagues or Miles, will give the Distance required.

Prob. 48. The Distance between two Places lying under the same Meridian, being
given, as also their respective bearing from a third Place, to find thereby
that Place with its true Distance from the other two.
The given Distance being reckoned any where upon the brazen Meridian, and
those places of the Globe exactly under the beginning and end of that Reckoning
being marked, raise the Pole according to the Latitude of one of them, (which
for Distinctions sake we'll term the first Place) and fixing the Quadrant of
Altitude in the Zenith, extend the other extremity thereof to the given Point
of the Compass upon the wooden Horizon, according as the said first Place
bears off the third unknown, and make a small Tract with Chalk upon the
Globe, where the Edge of the Quadrant passes along. Which done, elevate the
Pole according to the Latitude of the second Place, and fixing the Quadrant of
Altitude in the Zenith, extend the same (as formerly) to the given Point of the
Compass upon the wooden Horizon, and observe where the said Quadrant intersects
the aforesaid Tract of Chalk made upon the Surface of the Globe, for that is
the third Place desired, whose Distance from the other two may be found by the
foregoing Problem.

These are the Chief Problems performable by the Terrestrial Globe, as also the
manner of their Performance. But if the Reader desire more, let him Consult
Varenius, (his Geographia Generalis) from whom we have borrowed several of
those abovementioned. Now follows according to our proposed Method

SECT. III.
Containing some plain Geographical Theorems.

Theor. 1. THE Latitude of any Place is always equal to the Elevation of the
Pole in the same Place. and econtra.

Theor. 2. The Elevation of the Equator in any Place is always equal to the
Complement of the Latitude in the same place, and vice versa.

Theor. 3. Those Places that lie under the Equinoctial Line, have nothing of
Latitude, it being there that the Calculation of Latitude begins.

Theor. 4. Those Places that lie exactly under the two Poles have the greatest
Latitude, it being there that the Calculation of Latitude does end.

Theor. 5. Those Places that lie exactly under the first Meridian, have nothing
of Longitude, it being there that the Calculation of Longitude begins.

Theor. 6. Those Places that are immediately adjacent to the Western -side of
the first Meridian have the greatest Longitude, it being there that the
Calculation of Longitude does end.

Theor. 7. All Places lying upon either side of the Equator, have the greater
or lesser Latitude, according to their respective Distance therefrom.

Theor. 8. All Places lying upon either side of the Equator, and exactly under
the same, have the greater or lesser Longitude, according to their respective
Distance from the first Meridian.

Theor. 9. That particular Place of the Earth lying exactly under the
Intersection of the first Meridian and Equinoctail Line, has neither Longitude
nor Latitude.

Theor. 10. No place of the Earth is distant from another above 10800 Italian
Miles, allowing 60 to one Degree in the Equator.

Theor. 11. No Place of the Earth is distant from its proper Antipodes
(diametrically taken) above 7200 Italian Miles, still allowing 60 to one Degree
in the Equator.

Theor. 12. The sensible Horizon of every Place does as often change, as we
happen to change the Place it self.

Theor. 13. The apparent Semediameter of the sensible Horizon in most Places,
does frequently vary according to the Refraction of the Sun -beams.

Theor. 14. All Countries upon the Face of the whole Earth do equally enjoy the
Light of the Sun (in respect of Time) and are equally deprived of the benefit
thereof.

Theor. 15. In all Places on the Globe of the Earth, (save exactly under the
two Poles) the Days and Nights are of an equal Length (viz. twelve Hours each)
when the Sun comes to the Equinoctial. Line.

Theor. 16. In all Places between the Equinoctial and the two Poles, the Days
and Nights are never equal to one another, save only those two times of the
Year, when the Sun enters the Signs of Aries and Libra.

Theor. 17. The nearer any Place is to the Line, the lesser is the difference
between the Length of the Artificial Days and Nights in the said Place; and on
the contrary, the farther removed, the greater.

Theor. 18. In all Places lying under the same Parallel of Latitude, the Days
and Nights are of the same extent, and that at all times of the Year.

Theor. 19. Three or more Places being given on the Globe that lie between the
Equator and either of the Poles, and equidistant from one another; the Extent
of the longest Day in those Places does not increase proportionably to the
distance of the Places themselves.

Theor. 20. Three or more Places being given on the Globe that lie between the
Equator and the Poles, in which the Length of the longest Day does equally
increase; the distance between the Paralles of those Places is not equal to one
another.

Theor. 21. Three or more Places being given on the Globe, whose distance from
the Equator to either Pole exceeds one another in Arithmetical Proportion: The
Length of the longest Day in one does not keep the same Analogy to that in the
other, according to the Proportion of their distance.

Theor. 22. In all Places of the Torrid Zone, the Morning and Evening Twilight
is least; in the Frigid, greatest; and in the Temperate it is a Medium between
the two.

Theor. 23. To all Places lying within the Torrid Zone, the Sun is duly
Vertical twice a Year; to those under the Tropicks, once; but to them in the
Temperate and Frigid, never.

Theor. 24. In all Places of the two Frigid Zones, the Sun appears every Year
without setting for a certain number of Days, and disappeareth for the same
space of time. And the nearer unto, or the farther from the Pole those places
are, the longer or shorter is his continued Presence in, or Absence from the
same.

Theor. 25. In all places exactly under the Arctick and Antarctick Circles, the
Sun (at his greatest Declination) appears every Year for one Day completely
without setting, and entirely disappeareth another, but daily rises and
sets in those Places at all other times, as elsewhere.

Theor. 26. In all places between the Equator and the North Pole, the longest
Day and shortest Night, is always when the Sun has the greatest Northern
Declination; and the shortest Day and longest Night, when he has the greatest
Southern.

Theor. 27. In all places between the Equator and the South Pole, the longest
Day and shortest Night is always when the Sun has the greatest Southern
Declination; and the shortest Day and longest Night, when the greatest Northern

Theor. 28. In all places situated under the Equinoctial Line, the Meridian
Shadow of the Sun does cast it self toward the North for one half of the Year,
and toward the South during the other.

Theor. 29. In all places lying under the Equinoctial Line, there is no
Meridian Shadow on those two Days of the Year, that the Sun does enter the
Signs of Aries and Libra.

Theor. 30. The nearer that places are unto, or the farther removed from the
Equator, the shorter or longer accordingly is the Meridian Shadow of a Style
perpendicularly erected in such places.

Theor. 31. The farther that places are removed from the Equator (yet not
surpassing 66 Degrees of Latitude) the greater is the Sun 's Amplitude, or that
Arch of the Horizon between the Points of due East and West, and those in which
the Sun rises and sets on the Days of the Summer and Winter Solstice.

Theor. 32. In all places lying under the same Semi Circle of the Meridian, the
Hours both of the Day and Night are always the same in one, as in the other.

Theor. 33. In all places both of the North and Southern Hemispheres, that lie
under opposite Parallels of Latitude, the Seasons of the Year are always the
same in one, as in the other.

Theor. 34. In all places situated in a Parallel Sphere, the Circle of the Sun
's Diurnal Motion runs always Parallel (or very near it) to the respective
Horizon of such places.

Theor. 35. In all places situated in a Right Sphere, the Circle of the Sun 's
Diurnal Motion is still perpendicular (or very near it) to the respective
Horizon of such places.

Theor. 36. In all places situated in an Oblique Sphere, the Circle of the Sun
's Diurnal Motion is always Oblique unto, or cutteth the Horizon of such places
at unequal Angles.

Theor. 37. If the difference of Longitude in two places be exactly 15 Degrees.
The People residing in the Eastmost of them will reckon the time of the Day
sooner by one Hour, than those in the other. If the difference be 30 Degrees,
then they will reckon their Hours sooner by 2. If 45 Degrees, by 3. and if 60,
then by 4, etc.

Theor. 38. If People residing in two distinct places do differ exactly one
Hour in reckoning their time (it being only Noon to one, when one Afternoon to
the other) the true distance between the respective Meridians of those places
is exactly 15 Degrees upon the Equator. If they differ 2 Hours, the distance is
30 Degrees. If 3, its 45. and if 4, its completely 60, etc.

Theor. 39. If a Ship set out from any Port, and steering Eastward does
entirely surround the Globe of the Earth, the People of the said Ship in
reckoning their time, will gain one Day completely at their return, or count
one more than those residing at the said Port. If Westward, then they will lose
one, or reckon one less.

Theor. 40. If two Ships set out from the same Port at the same time, and both
surround the Globe of the Earth, one steering East, and the other Westward,
they will differ from one another in reckoning their time two Days completely at
their return, even suppose they happen to arrive on the same Day. If they
surround the Earth twice (steering as aforesaid) they will differ 4 Days; if
thrice, then 6, etc.

Theor. 41. If several Ships set out from the same Port, either at the same, or
different times, and do all surround the Globe of the Earth, some steering due
South, and others due North, and arrive again at the same Port; the respective
People of those different Ships at their return will not differ from one
another in reckoning their time, nor from those who reside at the said Port.

These are the chief Geographical Theorems, or self-evident Truths clearly
deduclble from the foregoing Problems, and to these we might add a great many
more; but leaving such Truths, we pass to some others (in pursuance of our
proposed Method) and such as are equally certain with the aforesaid Theorems,
though not so apparent, yet probably more diverting. Therefore follows

SECT. IV. Containing some amazing Geographical Paradoxes.
Par. 1. THERE are two remarkable Places on the Globe of the Earth, in which
there is only one Day and one Night throughout the whole Year.

Par. 2. There are also some Places on the Earth, in which it is neither Day
nor Night at a certain time of the Year, for the space of twenty four Hours.

Par. 3. There is a certain Place of the Earth, at which if two Men should
chance to meet, one would stand upright upon the Soles of the others Feet, and
neither of them should feel the others weight, and yet both should retain their
Natural Posture.

Par. 4. There is also a certain Place of the Earth, where a Fire being made,
neither Flame nor Smoke would ascend, but move circularly about the Fire.
Moreover, if in that Place one should fix a smooth or plain Table without any
Ledges whatsoever, and pour thereon a large Quantity of Water, not one Drop
thereof could run over the said Table, but would raise it self up in a large
heap.

Par. 5. There is a certain Place on the Globe, of a considerable Southern
Latitude, that has both the greatest and least Degree of Longitude.

Par. 6. There are three remarkable Places on the Globe, that differ both in
Longitude and Latitude, and yet all lie under one and the same Meridian.

Par. 7. There are three remarkable Places on the Continent of Europe, that lie
under three different Meridians, and yet all agree both in Longitude and
Latitude.

Par. 8. There is a certain Island in the Aegaean Sea, upon which, if two
Children were brought forth at the same instant of time, and living together
for many Years, should both expire on the same Day, yea, at the same Hour and
Minute of that Day, yet the Life of one would surpass the Life of the other by
diverse Months.

Par. 9. There are two observable Places belonging to Asia, that lie under the
same Meridian, and of a small distance from one another, and yet the respective
Inhabitants of them in reckoning their time, do differ an entire Natural Day
every Week.

Par. 10. There is a particular Place of the Earth, where the Winds (though
frequently veering round the Compass) do always blow from the North Point.

Par. 11. There is a certain Hill in the South of Bohemia, on whose Top, if an
Equinoctial Sun-Dial be duly erected, a Man that is Stone-blind may know the
Hour of the Day by the same, if the Sun shines.

Par. 12. There is a considerable number of places lying within the Torrid
Zone, in any of which, if a certain kind of Sun-Dial be duly erected, the
Shadow will go back several Degrees upon the same, at a certain time of the
Year, and that twice every Day for the space of diverse Weeks, yet no ways
derogating from that miraculous returning of the Shadow upon the Dial of Ahaz
in the Days of King Hezekiah.

Par. 13. There is a certain Island in the vast Atlantic Ocean, which being
descried by a Ship at Sea, and bearing due East of the said Ship, at twelve
Leagues distance per Estimation; The truest Course for hitting of the said
Island is to steer six Leagues due East, and just as many due West.

Par. 14. There is a remarkable Place on the Globe of the Earth, of a very pure
and wholesome Air to breath in, yet of such a strange and detestable Quality,
that it is absolutely impossible for two of the intirest Friends that ever
breathed, to continue in the same, in Mutual Love and Friendship for the space
of two Minutes of time.

Par. 15. There is a certain Island in the Baltic Sea, to whose Inhabitants
the Body of the Sun is clearly visible in the Morning before he arises, and
likewise in the Evening after he is set.

Par. 16. There is a certain Village in the Kingdom of Naples, situated in a
very low Valley, and yet the Sun is nearer to the Inhabitants thereof every
Noon by 3000 Miles, and upwards, than when he either rises or sets to those
of the said Village.

Par. 17. There is a certain Village in the South of Great Britain, to whose
Inhabitants the Body of the Sun is less visible about the Winter Solstice, than
to those who reside upon the Island of Ice-land.

Par. 18. There is a vast Country in Ethiopia Superior, to whose Inhabitants
the Body of the Moon does always appear to be most enlightened when she is least
enlightened; and to be least when most.

Par. 19. There is a certain Island, (whereof mention is made by several of our
latest Geographers) whose Inhabitants cannot properly be reckoned either Male
or Female, nor altogether Hermaphrodites; yet such is their peculiar Quality,
that they are seldom liable unto either Hunger or Thirst, Cold or Heat, Joy or
Sorrow, Hopes or Fears, or any such of the common Attendants of Human Life.

Par. 20. There is a remarkable Place of the Earth of a considerable Southern
Latitude, from whose Meridian the Sun removes not for several Days at a
certain time of the Year.

Par. 21. There is a certain Place of the Earth of a considerable Northern
Latitude, where though the Days and Nights (even when shortest) do consist of
several Hours; yet in that place it is Midday or Noon every Quarter of an Hour.

Par. 22. There are diverse Places on the Globe of the Earth, where the Sun and
Moon, yea, and all the Planets, do actually rise and set according to their
various Motions, but never any of the fixed Stars.

Par. 23. There is a large and famous Country on the Continent of Africa, many
of whose Inhabitants are born perfectly Deaf, and others Stone-blind, and
continue so during their whole Lives; and yet such is the amazing Faculty of
those Persons, that the Deaf are as capable to judge of Sounds as those that
hear, and the Blind of Colors as they who see.

Par. 24. There is a certain People in South America, who are properly
furnished with only one of the five Senses, viz. that of Touching, and yet they
can both Hear and See, Taste and Smell, and that as nicely as we Europeans, who
have all the Five.

Par. 25. There is a certain Country in South America, many of whose Savage
Inhabitants are such unheard-off Canibals, that they not only feed upon Human
Flesh; but also some of them do actually eat themselves, and yet they commonly
survive that strange Repast.

Par. 26. There is a remarkable River on the Continent of Europe, over which
there is a Bridge of such a breadth, that above three thousand Men abreast may
pass along upon the same, and that without crouding one another in the least.

Par. 27. There is a large and spacious Plain in a certain Country of Asia,
able to contain six hundred thousand Men drawn up in Battle Array; which number
of Men being actually brought thither, and there drawn up, it were absolutely
impossible for any more, than one single Person, to stand upright upon the said
Plain.

Par. 28. There is a certain European City, whose Buildings being generally of
firm Stone, are (for the most part) of a prodigious height, and exceeding
strong; and yet it is most certain that the Walls of those Buildings are not
parallel to one another, nor perpendicular to the Plain on which they are built.

Par. 29. There is a certain City in the Southern Part of China, whose
Inhabitants (both Male and Female) do observe almost the same Posture and Gate
in Walking, as we Europeans; and yet they frequently appear to Strangers, as if
they walked on their Heads.

Par. 30. There are ten Places of the Earth, distant from one another three
hundred Miles and upwards, and yet none of them has either Longitude or
Latitude.

Par. 31. There are two distinct Places of the Earth lying under the same
Meridian, whose Difference of Latitude is sixty Degrees completely; and yet the
true Distance between those two Places, does not really surpass sixty Italian
Miles.

Par. 32. There are also two distinct Places of the Earth, lying under the
Equinoctial Line, whose difference of Longitude is completely 86 Degrees, and
yet the true Distance between those two Places, is not full eighty six Italian
Miles.

Par. 33. There are three distinct Places of the Earth, all differing both in
Longitude and Latitude, and distant from one another two thousand Miles
completely, and yet they do all bear upon one and the same Point of the Compass.

Par. 34. There are three distinct Places on the Continent of Europe,
equidistant from one another (they making a true Equilateral Triangle, each of
whose sides does consist of a thousand Miles) and yet there is a fourth Place
so situated in respect of the other three, that a Man may travel on Foot from
it to any of the other three, in the space of one Artificial Day at a certain
time of the Year; and that without the least hurry or fatigue whatsoever.

Par. 35. There are three distinct Places on the Continent of Europe lying
under the same Meridian, and at such a distance, that the Latitude of the third
surpasses that of the second by so many Degrees and Minutes exactly, as the
second surpasses the first; and yet the true Distance of the first and third
from the second (or Intermediat Place) is not the same by a great many Miles.

Par. 36. There are two distinct Places on the Continent of Europe, so situated
in respect of one another, that though the first does lie East from the second,
yet the second is not West from the first, and yet both of them are under the
same Parallel of Latitude.

Par. 37. There is a certain European Island, the Northmost Part whereof does
frequently alter both its Longitude and Latitude.

Par. 38. There is a certain Place in the Island of Great Britain, where the
Stars are always visible at any time of the Day, if the Horizon be not
over-cast with Clouds.

Par. 39. It may be clearly demonstrated by the Terrestrial Globe, That it is
not above Twenty four hours Sailing from the River of Thames in England to the
City of Messina in Sicily, at a certain time of the Year, providing there be a
brisk North Wind, a light Frigate, and an Azimuth Compass.

These are the chief Paradoxical Positions in matters of Geography, which
mainly depend on a thorough Knowledge of the Globe; and though it is highly
probable, that they will appear to some as the greatest of Fables; yet we may
boldly affirm, That they are not only equally certain with the aforesaid
Theorems, but also we are wellassur'd that there is no Mathematical
Demonstration of Euclid, more infallibly true in its self, than is every one of
them. However we think it not fit to pull off the Vizor, or expose those masked
Truths to public View, since to endeavor the unmasking of them may prove a
private Diversion, both pleasant and profitable to the Ingenious Reader at his
more vacant Hours; we hastening in the mean time to the last Thing proposed, viz.

SECT. V. Concerning Land and Water.
THE Surface of the Terraqueous Globe [to which we entirely restrict our selves
both here, and in the following Part of this Treatise] being always considered
by Geographers as a Supersicies composed of Land and Water, as its sole
constituent Parts; and these Parts being subdivided (page 13.) as follows,
viz. Land into
Continents, Isthmus, Islands, Promontories, Peninsula's, Mountains.
Water into
Oceans, Straits, Seas, Lakes, Gulfs, Rivers.


Of all these separately, and in their Order. Therefore

. 1. Of CONTINENTS.
Commonly reckoned Four, viz. those of
Europe, Africa, Asia, America.


Europe North Scandinavia -- found from W. to E. Muscovia [or Russia] -- Middle
France -- found from W. to E. Germany -- Poland -- South Spain -- found from W.
to E. Italy -- Turkey in Europe -- Asia North, comprehending the vast Body of
Tartary. South China -- found from E. to W. India -- Persia -- Turkey in Asia --

Africa Egypt -- found from N. to S. Barbary Bildulgerid -- Zaara or the Desert
-- Land of the Negroes -- Guinea -- Nubia -- Ethiopia Interior -- Exterior --
America North Mexico or New Spain -- from S. to N. New Mexico or Nova Granada
-- Florida -- Terra Canadensis -- Terra Arctica -- South Terra Firma -- from N.
to S. Peru -- Land of the Amazons -- Brasil -- Chyli -- Paraguay -- Terra
Magellanica -- Terra Antarctica --

. 2. Of ISLANDS.
They belong either

to
Europe, Africa, Asia, America.
Europe. The Scandinavian Islands -- Lying in the N. and Baltick-Sea. The
Island of Ice-land -- W. of Scandinavia. The Britannick Islands -- N. of
France. The Azores -- W. of Spain. The Mediterranean Islands -- S. of Europe.
Asia. The Japan Islands -- E. of China. The Philippin -- S. W. of Japan The
Isles des Larrons -- E. of the Philippin. The Moloccoes -- S. of the Philippin.
The Islands of the Sund -- W. of the Moluccoes. Ceylon and the Maldives -- W.
of the Isles of Sund. Africa. more Remarkable Madagascar -- E. of Ethiopia. The
Isles of Cape Verde W. of Negroland. The Canary Islands W. of Bildulgerid. The
Madera -- W. of Barbary. Less Remarkable The Isles of Comore N. W. of
Madagascar. St. Thomas's Island -- W. of Ethiopia. Lat. 00 The Princess Island
W. of Ethiopia. Lat. 3. St. Helena -- S. W. of St. Thomas. Isle of Ascension --
N. E. of St. Helena. America North are California -- W. of Nova Granada.
Newfoundland -- E. of Terra Canadensis. Middle are the Antilles Greater Cuba --
E. of New Spain. Jamaica Hispaniola Port-rito Lesser Caribees -- S. E. of the
greater Antilles. Lucayes -- S. E. of Florida. Sotovento -- N. of Terra Firma.
Bermudas -- E. of Florida. South is Terra del Fuogo -- S. of Terra Magellanica.

. 3. Of PENINSULA's.
Europe. Juitland -- adjacent to Germany. Morea -- Greece. Taurica Chersonesus
-- Little Tartary. Asia Peninsula Indiae intra Gangem the Continent of Asia
extra Gangem the Continent Mallaca [or Chersonese d'or] -- Peninsula Indiae
intra Gangem. In Africa is none but Africa it self the W. of Asia. America
Mexico or North America -- South America. Peru or South America -- North

. 4. Of ISTHMUS.
In Europe are the Isthmus of Corinth -- joining Morea to Greece. Taurica
Chersonesus Taurica Chersonesus to Little Tartary. In Asia is the Isthmus of
Malacca Malacca to Penins. Indiae intra Gangem. In Africa is the Isthmus of
Swez -- Africa to Asia. In America is the Isthmus of Panama Mexico and Peru.

. 5. Of PROMONTORIES or CAPES.
In Europe Cape Nord -- Extending from The Northmost part of Norway. Cape la
Hogue -- The N. of France. The Lands-End -- The S. W. of England. The Lizard --
The S. The Start -- The S. Cape de Finisterra -- The W. of Spain. Cape de Rocca
-- The W. Cape St. Vincent -- The W. Asia Cape Ningpo -- The E. of China. Cape
Comorin -- Penins. Indiae inter Gangem. Cape Razalgate -- S. E. part of Arabia.
Africa Cape Spartel -- The W. of Barbary. Cape Verde -- The W. of Negroeland.
Cape of Good Hope -- The S. of Ethiopia exterior. Cape of Guardifeu -- The N.
E. part of Ethiopia exterior America Cape de Florida -- The S. of Florida. Cape
de Coriente -- The W. of New Spain. Cape Froward -- The S. of Terra
Magellanica. Cape Hoorn -- The S. of Terra del Fuogo. Cape de S. Augustine --
The E. of Brasil.

. 6. Of MOUNTAINS.
Remarkable Mountains in Europe The Dolfrine Hills -- To be seen Between Sweden
and Norway. Boglowy -- In the Souther. part of Moscovia. Hyperborean Mountains
-- In the Norther. part The Sevennes -- In the South part of France. Auvergne
-- The Vauge -- In Lorraine. Fitshtelberge -- In circulating Bohemia.
Schwartzwaldin -- In the S. of Germany, viz. Suabia. The Carpathean Mount. In
the South parts of Poland. The Pyrenaean Hills -- Between Spain and France. The
Alps -- Between Italy and France. Germany. The Appenine Hills -- Dividing Italy
into East. West. Vesuvius [a Vulcano] -- In the Kingdom of Naples. Balkan -- In
the N. of Macedon. The Holy Mount -- In the E. of Macedon. Lacha -- Between
Thessaly and Macedon. The Grampion Hills -- In Scotland, viz. S. of the River
Dee. The Cheviot Hills -- Between Scotland and England. Malvern Hills -- In
England, viz. Worcestershire. The Peake -- In England, viz. Darbyshire. Snowdon
-- In Wales, viz. Carnarvenshire. Plinlimmon -- In Wales, viz. Cardiganshire.
Knock Patrick -- In Ireland, viz. in the C. Limerick. Stromboli [a Vulcano] In
a little Island W. of Naples. Aetna [a Vulcano] -- In the Island of Sicily.
Remarkable Mountains in Asia Imaus -- To be seen In Tartary: Caucasus --
Between Tartary. Mogul's Empire. Sardonix -- On the N. of Penin intra Gangem.
Guaco -- In Peninsula Indiae intra Gangem. Taurus -- reaching from E. to W. of
all Asia. Adam's Pike -- In the Island of Ceylon. Africa Montes Lybici --
Between Zaara and Egypt -- Atlas -- In the W. of Barbary. Bildulgerid. Basili
-- In the N. of the Abyssine Empire. Amara -- Under the Eq. in the same Empire
Montes Lunae -- Between Abyssine Empire. Monomotapa. Tenerife -- In the Island
of Tenerife. America The Apalachin Hills Between Florida. Terra Canadensis. The
Andes -- In S. America running from S. to N

. 7. Of OCEANS.
Europ The Hyperborean Ocean Enclosing Europe in the North. The vast Western
West. Asia Tartarean Ocean. -- Asia on the North. China -- East. Indian --
South. Persian -- Arabic Africa Oriental Ocean -- Africa on the East.
Ethiepick South. Atlantic West. Amer. Vast Eastern Ocean -- America on the
East. The Pacifick West.

. 8. Of SEAS.
Europe Baltic Sea -- Enclosed with Swedeland on the W. Poland in part E.
Germany in part S. German Sea -- with Scandinavia on the E. Britain -- W. Irish
Sea -- with Britain -- on the E. Ireland -- W. Mediterranean Sea with Europe --
on the N. Barbary -- S. Euxine Sea -- with part of Europe on the N. and W. part
of Asia. S. and E.

The Seas in the other three Parts of the world, are different Parts of the
Ocean [except Mare Caspium in Asia] variously named according as they lie
adjacent to different Countries.

. 9. Of GULFS.
Europe Sinus Botnicas Bending up Northward into Swedeland. Sinus Finnicus
Eastward Sinus Adriaticus N. W. between Italy. Turkey in Europe. Gulf of Lions
N. into the S. of France. Gulf of Tarentum N. W. into the S. of Italy. Gulf of
Lepanto E. N. E between Greece: Morca. Asia Persian Gulf -- N. W. between
Persia. Arabia Gulf of Bengal N. bet. Penins. Indiae intra Gangem. Penins.
Indiae extra In Africa is the Arabian Gulf. -- N. W. between Asia. Africa.
America Gulf of Mexico W. Between Florida. Terra Firma. Button's Bay S. W.
between Terra Canadensis. Terra Arctica. Baffiu's Bay N. W. into Terra Arctica.

. 10. Of STRAITS.
Europe Straits of Dover Joining The Germ. Ocean to the Engl. Channel. Straits
of the Sound The Danish to the Baltic Sea. Straits of Gibralter The Medit to
the Western Ocean. Straits of Caffa Palus Meotis to Pontus Euxinus. Thracian
Bosphorus Pontus Euxinus to the Propontis. The Hell^spont -- Propontis to the
Archipelagus. Veer of Messina One part of Mediter. to another. Book of Corsica
One part of Mediter. to another. Asia Straits of the Sund The Indian and East
Ocean. Straits of Ormus The Persian Gulf to the S. Ocean. In Africa is
Babelmandel The Red Sea to the E. Ocean. America Hudson's Straits. -- Button's
Bay to the E Ocean. Fretum Davis Baffin's Bay to the E. Ocean. Magellanick
Straits The vast E. and W. Ocean.

. 11. Of LAKES.
Most remarkable Lakes in Europe, are Ladoga -- Found toward the Eastern part
of Swedeland. Jend -- Ula -- Peipus -- Wener -- Western part of Swedeland.
Veter -- Meler -- Onega -- Western part of Moscovia. Ilment -- Constance --
Geneva -- Southern part of Germany. Lucern -- Winander-mere North of England,
viz. Lancashire. Wittles-mere Middle of England, viz. Huntingtonshire. Lough
Ness -- Northern part of Scotland. Lomond Southern Foyl -- Northern part of
Ireland. Neagh -- Northern Earn Northern Derge Middle Asia Corus -- North part
of Tartary. Kithack -- North Kithay -- Middle Piex -- Eastern part of China.
Tai -- Chiamy -- Northern part of India. Astamar -- Northern part of Persia.
Babaconbar Northern Burgian -- Middle Asphaltis -- South part of Palestine.
Africa Elbuciara -- Western part of Egypt. Lybia -- Middle part of Zaara. Guard
-- Middle part of Negroeland. Borno -- Eastern Niger -- North of Ethiopia
Interior. Aquili^^ia -- Middle Sachaf -- South Zaire -- South parts of Ethiopia
Exterior. Zambre -- Zaflan -- America Nicaragua South of New Spain. Mexico --
Middle Parime -- East part of Terra Firma. Titicaca -- South part of Peru.

. 12. Of RIVERS.
Those of Europe.
Scandinavia Swedeland are Dalcarle Anciently Unknown -- Running Eastward. Kimi
Unknown -- Southw. Torno Unknown -- Elfe Unknown -- Denmark None remarkable
Norway Moscovi. Volga -- Rha -- E. turning S Don -- Tanais -- E. turn. W. Dwina
-- Unknown -- N. W. France Sein -- Sequana -- N. W. Loir -- Ligeris -- W. Rhone
-- Rhodanus -- S. Garonne -- Garumna -- N. W. Germany Danube -- Danubius or
Ister E. Scheld -- Scaldis -- N. turn W Maes -- Mosa -- Rhine -- Rhenus -- N.
W. Elm -- Amasius -- Weser -- Visurgis -- Elbe -- Albus -- Oder -- Odera or
Viadrus N. Poland Nieper -- Boristhenes -- S. E. Niester -- Tyras -- Bogg --
Hypanis -- Vistule -- Unknown -- N. W. Niemen -- Unknown -- Duna -- Unknown --

Spain Ebre -- Anciently Iberus -- Running S. E. Xucar -- Suero -- Guadalquivir
-- Batis -- S. W. Gualiana -- Anas -- Tago -- Tagus -- Douro -- Durius -- W. in
its main Body. Italy Po -- Eridanus or Padus E. Adige -- Athesis -- Arno --
Arnus -- S. W. Tiber -- Tibris -- Volturno -- Uulturnus -- W. In European
Turkey is the Danube Danubius or Ister E. Scotland Tay -- Taus -- E. Clyde --
Glotta -- N. W. Spey -- Speia -- N. Dee -- Dea, Diva, Ocasa E. Don -- Dona --
England Thames -- Tamesis -- E. Severn -- Sabrina -- S. W. Humber Ouse Abus Ure
E. S. E. Trent Triginta N. in main Body. Tine -- Tina -- E. Twede -- Tuesis --
E. Medway -- Vaga -- N. turning E. Came -- Camus -- N. Ireland Shannon -- Sinus
-- S. W. Lee -- Sauranus -- E. Blackwater -- Avenmoore -- E. turning S, Barrow
-- Birgus -- S. Lift -- Libnius -- N. E. Boyne -- Buvinda, Boina

A New Map of HISFANIA and PORTUGALLIA By Robt. Morden


Those of Asia.
Tartary Oby -- Anciently Margus -- Running W. turningN Ochardus Unkonwn -- N.
Tartar -- Unknown -- Palisanga Unknown -- E. Chesel -- Laxartus -- W. China
Croceus -- Unknown -- E. various turnings. Kiang -- Unknown -- E. India Ganges
-- Idem -- S. Guenga -- Not remarkable -- E. Indus -- Idem -- S. W. Persia
Abiamus -- Oxus -- W. Palimalon -- Not remarkable -- E. Ilment -- Arabs -- S.
Bendimur -- Bagradas. Agradatus. S. W. Tiriti -- Euletis. Choaspes Hidaspes
Syri -- Araxes. Arases. -- Asiatick Turkey Tegil -- Tygris -- S. E. Prat --
Euphrates --

Those of Africa.
In Egypt is the Nile -- Anciently Nilus -- Running N. Barbary Guadilbarbara --
Bagradas, Macra N. Major -- Rubricatus -- Bildulgerid Origin of Guadilbarbara
Not remarkable N. W Major -- Not remarkable Branches of Gir -- Giras -- S. E.
In Zaara is the Body of Gir -- Giras -- S. E. In Negroeland is the (...) Idem
W. Gulma Guinea Sweria de Costa -- Not remarkable S. Rivere de Volta -- Not
remarkable In Nubia is the River Nuba -- Not remarkable N. E. Exterior Zaire --
Unknown W. Coanza -- Unknown W. Ethiopia R. de Infanto -- Unknown S. E. Zambre
-- Unknown S. E. R. de Spiritu S. -- Unknown S. E. Interior is Nile its main
Body Nilus -- N.

Those of America.
In New Spain none remarkable Anciently Running In N. Granada is Rio del Nort.
-- Unknown S. W. Florida is R. del Spiritu S. -- Unknown S. Terra Canadensis
The great River Canada Unknown E. Branch of the Canada The Connecticut Unknown
S. Hudson's River Unknown Rivere de la Ware Unknown The Sesquahana Unknown The
Patomeck Unknown In Terra Arctica none -- Terra Firma R. de Paria or Orinoque
Unknown N. R. de Madeline -- Unknown S. Martha -- Unknown Brafil Miary --
Unknown N. E. Siope -- Unknown N. S. Francis -- Unknown E. Parama -- Unknown S.
W. In Amazonia is the Amazone with its Branches -- Unknown N. E. In Peru none
remarkable -- Unknown Paraguay is Rio de la Plata S. E. Chili none considerable
-- Terra Magellanica none Terra Antarctica

These are the most Remarkable Rivers in the World, as also their old Names,
and how they run; which Rivers will be found very necessary for the better
understanding of the Second Part of this Treatise, wherein we design to view
all Remarkable Countries in their Situation, Extent, Division, and
Subdivisions, and more, especially those of Europe. But since most of those
Rivers abovementioned belonging to the Continent of Europe do consist of
several considerable Branches very necessary to be known; we shall rehearse
such Rivers, and annex to each of them their Principal Branches, all which may
be readily found by traveling from the Mouth of the Rivers toward their
Heads. Therefore

Remarkable Branches of the Dwina are Wayma -- Running S. W. Juga -- W. Volga
are Sosowoia -- S. Occareca -- N. E. Seine are L'Oyse -- S. W. Marn -- Yonne --
N. W. Loir are Mayenne -- S. Le Sarte -- S. W. Le Loir -- Vienne -- N. W. Indre
-- le Chere -- Allier -- Rhone are Durance -- S. W. Isere -- Saene -- S.
Garrone are Dardonne -- W. Lot -- Tarne -- Danube are Pruth -- S. Misone -- S.
E. Alouta -- S. Morawa -- N. Teyssa -- S. Drove -- E. Save -- Inn -- N. E. Iser
-- Lech -- N. Iler -- Scheld are Ruppel [running W.] augmented by Senne N. Dyle
Demer W. Dender -- N. Lis -- N. E. Scarpe -- Haisne -- W. Elm are Sost -- W.
Haise -- Rhine are Lip -- W Roer -- Moselle -- N. E. Lahn -- S. W. Maine -- W
Neckar -- Maese are Dommel -- N. Niers -- N. W. Roer -- Ourt -- Sambre -- N. E.
Semoy -- W Chiers -- Wiser are Aller [W.] augmented by Leine N. Ocker Fuld --
Elbe are Ilmenow -- N. W. Havel -- Saaldre -- N. Muldaw -- Oder are Warta -- W.
Bober -- N. Westritz -- N. E. Nieper are Dizna -- S. W. Przypiecz, or Pereptus
-- N. E. Vistul is the Bugg -- N. turn W Niemen is the Vilna -- W. Ebro are
Segre -- S. W. Cinca -- S. E. Gallega -- S. W. Xalo -- N. E. Guadalquivir Xenil
-- W. Guardamena -- S. W. Guadiana are none remarkable -- Tago are Zatas -- W.
Zezer -- S. Guadarran -- Xaruma -- Douro are Tonroes -- N. W. Tormes -- Arlanza
-- S. W. Po are Oglio -- S E. Adda -- Tesine -- Tanero [running E. turning N.]
augmented by Bormida Stura -- N E. Sesia -- S. E. Dora Baltea -- Adige is
Bachiglione -- S. Arno are Elsa -- N. W. Sieve -- E. turning S. Tiber are
Quartitio -- W. Nera -- S. W. Chiane -- S. E. Volturno, its chief Branch is
Sabate -- W.

These are all the Remarkable Branches of the Chief Rivers on the Continent of
Europe. And thus we are come to a Period, not only of this Section, but also of
the First Part of this Treatise, having now performed those five Things at
first proposed, which was to entertain the Reader with some Geographical
Definitions, Problems, Theorems, and Paradoxes; as also a Transient Survey of
the whole Surface of the Terraqueous Globe, as it consists of Land and Water.
And so much for a General View thereof, Now follows,



Modern Geography. PART II. Comprehending a PARTICULAR VIEW OF THE Terraqueous
GLOBE.
BY a Particular View of the Terraqueous Globe, we understand a clear and exact
Prospect of all remarkable Countries on the Face of the whole Earth, according
as they are represented by particular Geographical Maps; as also a true and
compendious Narrative of the chief. Observables relating either to them or
their Inhabitants: All which may be briefly reduced to these following Heads;
viz. their Situation, Extent, Division, Subdivision, Chief Towns, Name, Air,
Soil, Commodities, Rarities, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities,
Manners, Language, Government, Arms, Religion.


In taking such a Prospect of all remarkable Countries, we shall begin with
Europe, and travel through the various Divisions thereof in the same order as
they are set down (page 43.) Therefore

CHAP. I. Of EUROPE.
The Continent of Europe being divided (Page 43.) into VIII. great Parts.

Viz Scandinavia Swedeland Capital City Stockholm. Denmark Copenhagen. Norway
Bergen. Moscovia or Russia -- Moscow. France. -- Paris. Germany -- Vienna.
Poland -- Cracow. Spain -- Madrid. Italy -- Rome. Turkey in Europe --
Constantinople.

To these add the European Islands. The Chief of which

are Great Britain. -- Cap. C. Those of London. Edinburgh. Ireland. -- That of
Dublin.

Of all these in their proper Places.

SWEDEN and NORWAY


SECT. I. Concerning Scandinavia.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 26 20 of Long. Its greatest Length is about
1030. 53 10 between 54 10 of Lat. Breadth is about 840. 71 06 Divided into the
Kingdoms of Swedeland Chapter T. Stockholm. Denmark Copenhagen. Norway Bergen.
Swedeland comprehends Scania -- Chief Town Lunden -- from S. to N. Gothland --
Calmar -- Swedeland prop. Stockholm -- Lapland -- Tornia -- Finland -- Abo --
from N. to S. Ingria -- Notteborg or Oresca -- (...) -- Riga -- Denmark
^^^tland -- Sleswick -- from W. to E. (...) Islands Copenhagen --

Norway comprehends five Governments. Of which hereafter.

More Particularly,

. 1. SWEDELAND.
Scania contains the Provinces of Halland -- Chapter Town Helmstat -- W. to E.
Bleking -- Christianstat Schonen -- Lunden, Southward. Gothland contains the
Provinces of Vermelandia -- Chief Town Carolstadt N. to S. in the West part.
Dallia -- Daleburge Westrogoth -- Gottenburge Ostrogothia -- Norkoping N. to S.
in th E. part Swedeland Smalandia -- Calmar -- Swedeland [properly so call'd]
contains the Provinces of Sudermania -- Nikoping -- from S. to N. Nericia --
Orebro -- Westmania -- Arosen -- Uplandia -- those of Opsal and Stockolm
Gestricia -- Geval -- Dalcarlia -- Hedemore -- Helsingia -- Hadswickwalt --
Medelpandia -- Selanger -- Jemptia -- Ressundt -- Angermannia Hernosand --
Lapland contains the Provinces of Uma Lapmark Uma -- from S. to N.
Pitha-Lapmark Pitha -- Lula-Lapmark Lula -- Tornia-Lapmark Tornia --
Kimi-Lapmark Kimi -- Finland contains the Provinces of Cajania -- Cajaneburgh
upon the Ula. N. Finland -- Biorneberge W. to E. Tavastia -- Tavastus --
Savolaxia -- Nyslot -- Kexholmia -- Kexholm -- Carelia -- Wiborg -- E. to W.
Nylandia -- Borgo -- S. Finland -- Abo -- Ingria contains the Provinces of
Ingria propria Orcsca, or Notteborg N. to S. W. Ingermania -- Caporio --
Solouski -- Juanagorod Livonia contains the Provinces of Lettenland -- Riga --
S. to N. Estland -- Narva --

. 2. DENMARK.
Being divided into The Peninsula of Juitland. The Danish Islands. The
Peninsula of Juitland comprehends North Juitland Chapter Town Wiborg. South
Juitland Sleswick. D. of Holstein [of which in Lower Saxony.

Juitland divided into North comprehends the Diocesses of Aalborg -- Chief Town
Idem -- from N. to S. Wiborg -- Idem -- Arhusen -- Aarhus -- Ripen -- Idem --
South comprehends the Praefectures of Hedersleve Idem -- from N. to S. upon the
Baltic Sea. Appenrade Idem -- Flemborge Idem -- Gottorpe Sleswick Tonderen
Idem -- N. to S. upon the Germany Sea. Husum Idem -- Eyderstede Tonningen --

The chief of the Danish Islands are Zeland, Funen, etc. Of which hereafter
when we come to treat of Islands.

. 3. NORWAY.
Divided into the Governments of Bahus -- Chief Town Idem -- S. to N. E.
Aggerus -- Agger -- Bergenus -- Bergen -- Dronthemus Dronthem Wardus -- Idem --

This vast Continent of Scandinavia comprehending (as aforesaid) three distinct
Kingdoms, viz. those of Swedeland, Denmark, and Norway. Of each of these
seperately, and in their Order. Therefore

. I. SWEDELAND.
THIS Country (formerly Succia, a Part of Ancient Scandinavia) is termed by the
Italians, Suezia; Name.
by the Spaniards, Suedia; by the French, Suede; by the Germans, Schweden; and
by the English, Sueden or Swethland; so called from its Ancient Inhabitants the
Sueones, Suevi, or Suethidi, with the Addition of Land for Termination.

The Air of this Country is generally very Cold, but (if not too nigh some Lake
or Marish) very pure and Air.
wholesome; yea, so healthful to breath in, that many of its Inhabitants do
frequently live to an hundred years, especially they who abstain from excessive
drinking, a thing too much practiced by many of them. The Antipodes to this
People, or the opposite Place of the Globe to Swedeland, is that Part of the
vast Pacifick Ocean, comprehended between the 220th and 230th Degree of
Longitude, with 50 and 70 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th Northern
Climates) is not very fruitful, Soil.
but yet where less fertile in Corn, that disadvantage is recompensed with
tolerable Pasturage. Its numerous Lakes are very well stored with various
kinds of Fishes. Its Mountains are generally covered over with Trees, and
several of them lined with considerable Mines of Silver, Tin, Brass, and Iron.
The longest Day in the Northmost part of this Country is about two Months (the
Sun being so long without setting when near the Summer Solstice). The shortest
in the Southmost, is about 6 Hours 1/^, and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country, are Metals, Ox-hides, Goat Skins,
Buck-skins, and costly Furs, Commodities.
Pine trees, Fir-trees, Oales, Tallow, Tar, Honey, and such like.

The Chief Rarities of this Country may be reckoned two Public Clocks of
admirable Workmanship; one Rarities.
belonging to the Cathedral Church of Upsal; the other to that of St. Laurence
in Lunden, especially the latter, which (supposed to be the Work of Casper
Bartholinus) shows not only the Day, Hour, and Minute, but also all the
remarkable Motions of the Celestial Bodies, with all Festivals, both fixed and
moveable, and several other pleasant Curiosities. To these add that famous
Slimy Lake in the Southern Part of Gothland, which burns such things as are put
into it. As also a certain Stone found in several Parts of Sueden, which being
of a Yellow Color, intermixed with several Streaks of white, (as if composed of
Gold and Silver) affords both Sulphur, Vitriol, Alium, and Minium. Some write
of a Lake in Lapland, which has as many Islands in it, as there are Days in
the Year.

Archbishopricks belonging to Sueden, are Two, viz. those of Archbishopricks.
Upsal, Riga.


Bishoprics in this Kingdom are Eight, viz. those of Bishoprics.
W^steras, Strergnes, Wexioc, Lunden, Lindkaeping, Scaren, Abo. Wiburg.


Universities established here, are Two, viz. those of. Universities.
Upsal. Abo.


The Swedes (for the most part) are Men of big and strong Bodies; Men whose
very Constitution does fit Manners.
them to be Soldiers, but generally they weaken Nature by extravagant excess in
Drinking. Their Gentry are much given to Hospitality, very Affable and Civil to
Strangers, and many of them become considerable Proficients in several Arts and
Sciences. The Commons are generally esteemed good Mechanics, but looked upon by
all, as too much addicted to Laziness in point of improving their Country, by
not cutting down many unnecessary Forests, and improving that Ground to better
advantage.

The Swedes speak a Dialect of the Teutonic, which is somewhat different from
that used in Denmark and Upper Language.
Germany. Persons of Quality understand and speak the High-German Language in
its Native purity. The Finlanders have a peculiar Gibberish of their own, For a
Specimen of the Swedish Tongue, we shall here subjoin the Lord's Prayer in that
Language, intending to observe the same Method in treating of all other
Languages in Europe. Their Paternoster runs thus, Fadher war some est i himlem;
helghat ward tiett namyn, till komme titt ricke, skee tin wily sa comi
himmelen, sa ock pa jordenne, wart dagliha brod giffosz i dagh; och forlat osz
wara skuld, sa some ock wforlate them osz skyldighe aro; Och in leedh osz ickei
frestelse uthan frels oszi fra ondo. Amen.

The Kingdom of Swedeland having suffered various turns of Fortune, being
frequently disturbed by the Government.
Adjacent Nations, at last got rid of them all, and becoming terrible to
others, spread it self over a considerable Part of its Neighbors Territories.
At present it is subject unto, and governed by its own Monarch, who, since the
last Age, is not only Hereditary, but by the late turn of Affairs in his
Country, has also attained unto, and now exercises such a Power over the
Subject, that the same is really astonishing to any considering Person, who
looks back unto the State of that Kingdom, only a few Years ago. He is styled
King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals; Grand Prince of Finland, Duke of
Estonia and Carelia, and Lord of Ingria, etc. The different Orders in this
Realm are Six, viz. Princes of the Blood, the Nobility, Clergy, Soldiery,
Merchantry, and Commonalty. These by their Representatives being assembled in
Parliament, make four different Houses, viz. that of the Nobility, where the
Grand Marshal presides. 2. That of the Clergy, where the Archbishop of Upsal
presides. 3. That of the Burgesses, where one of the Consuls of Stockholm
presides. And lastly, That of the Knights of the Shir^, where one of their own
Number elected by themselves presides. Chief Courts established in this Kingdom,
are these Five, viz. (1) That commonly called the King's Chamber, designed for
the Decision of all Cases happening between the Nobility, Senators, or any of
the Public Officers, and here the King is (at least, ought to sit as)
President. (2) The Court -Martial, in which all Matters relating to War are
determined, and here the Grand Marshal of the Army is President. (3.) The Court
of Chancery, in which Edicts, Mandates, Commissions, and such like, are made
out in the King's Name, and here the Chancellor of the Kingdom is President.
(4) The Court of Admiralty, in which all business relating to Maritime Affairs
are transacted, and here the High Admiral is President. Lastly, The Court of
Exchequer, in which all Matters concerning the Public Revenue are managed, and
here the Grand Treasurer is President.

The King of Sweden bears quarterly. In the First and fourth, Azure, three
Crowns, Or, two in Chief, and Arms.
one in Base, for Swedeland. In the second and third, Barry, Argent and Azure,
a Lion, Or, Crowned Gules, for Finland. Over all quatterly, in the first and
fourth, Sable, a Lion, Or, crowned, armed and langued, Gules, for the
Palatinate of the Rhine. In the second and third, Lozenges, Bendwise of twenty
one pieces Argent and Azure, for Bavaria. For the Crest, a Crown Royal, adorned
with eight Flowers, and closed by as many Demi-Circles terminating in a Mond,
Or. The Supporters are two Lions, Or, Crowned of the same. And his Motto is in
these words, Dominus Protector Meus.

Lutheranism is the established Religion of this Country, being universally
professed by all Orders and Degrees Religion.
of Men, (except in Livonia, where is a considerable Number of Papists
intermixed; and Lapland, many of whose Inhabitants are mear Heathens, usually
worshipping the Sun, Fire, Serpents, and the like) and that ever since the Days
of the Reformation, which was happily effected in this Kingdom by Gustavus the
First, upon his Accession to the Swedish Crown, since which time their Religion
has not been disturbed from abroad but once, and since that Disturbance, never
distracted at home by Nonconformity; for Persons of all Ranks adhering to the
Tenets of Luther, give constant attendance on Divine Service, and join in the
same manner of Worship. Christianity was first planted in this Kingdom by the
care and diligence of Ansgarius, Archbishop of Breme, the Apostle General of
the North.

. 2. DENMARK.
THis Country, especially Juitland (formerly Cimbrica Chersonesus, a part of
Ancient Scandinavia) is Name.
termed by the Italians, Dania; by the Spaniards, Dinmarca; by the French,
Danemarc; by the High Germans, Dennemark; and by the English, Denmark; so
called from the Bounds and Mar^es of its Inhabitants the Danes, whose Country
bordering on the Ancient Batavi and Saxons, was thereupon called Dane-march,
which Name in process of time did turn into that of Denmark.

The Air of this Country is much the same with that in the Southern Part of
Swedeland, it being extremely Air.
Cold, but in most places, very wholesome. The opposite place of the Globe to
Denmark, is that part of the Pacifick Ocean lying between 210 and 220 Degrees
of Longitude, with 50 and 60 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 10th and 11th North Climates) is
very good for Grain and Pasturage. Soil.
Here is abundance of Fish, especially Herrings, as also many wild Fowls, and
most kinds of wild Beasts. The longest Day in the Northmost part is 17 Hours,
the shortest in the Southmost is 8 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country are Fish, Tallow, Furniture for Ships,
Armor, Ox-hides, Commodities
Buck-skins, Fir-wood, and Wainscot, etc.

Near to Sleswick (Southward) are yet to be seen the Remains of that famous
Wall and Trench, made above Rarities.
880 Years ago by Gotricius (then King of Denmark) to hinder the Incursions of
the Saxons, resembling somewhat the Pict's Wall in Great Britain (2.) Between
Flensburg and Sleswick is a small Village, which goes by the Name of Anglen,
remarkable in so far, that from the said Village and Country adjacent, came our
Ancestors, the Ancient Angles into Great Britain. (3.) In Gottorp is an
admirable Globe of Copper, 10 Foot in Diameter, so contrived by one of the
Dukes of Holstein, that (by certain Wheels turned about by Water) it represents
exactly the Motions of the Celestial Bodies. As also another in the Arsenal at
Copenhagen of 6 Foot Diameter, framed by Tycho Brahe, that famous Danish
Astronomer. (4.) In the Island Ween are the Ruins of the Tower of Uraniburge,
renowned for the Observations made thereon, by the aforesaid Tycho Braye. As
also the Dungeon, called Stelliburg, beset with Looking-Glasses, where he was
wont to sit and observe the Stars in all Seasons. (5.) The Island Ween is
likewise remarkable in that, it will harbor no Dormice; (none such being able
to live when imported thither) as also a Spring whose Waters never freez, even,
in the extremest Cold of Winter. To these we may add, (as a singular Curiosity
of this Country) That magnificent Throne framed of prodigious long Horns of a
certain Sea Animal, which the Vulgar are willing to take for the Unicorn. Vid.
Dr. Brown 's Travels.

As for Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, there is only one, viz. that of
Archbishopricks.


Copenhagen.

Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are those of Bishoprics.
Sleswick, Arhusen, Alburg, Ripen, Wiburg.


Universities in this Kingdom, are those at Universities.
Copenhagen, Kiel.


The Danes (a very warlike People of old, having constrained many of the
Northern Nations to submit Manners.
to the force of their Arms at some time or other) are now almost of the same
Temper with their Neighbors the Swedes and Germans; but that they are
generally esteemed a People more given to Pride and Cunning, than either of the
former. They are Industrious and Frugal enough: as also considerable Lovers of
Learning, but generally greater Lovers of Excess, whether in Drinking or
Eating, especially the former, and that ever since the Juice of the Grape was
recommended to them by the High Germans, whom they now equal (if not exceed) in
all manner of Carousing.

The Modern Language of Denmark, is originally a Dialect of the Teutonit. The
Court, Gentry, and Language.
Chief Burgers, commonly use the High German in ordinary Discourse, and French
when they talk with Strangers. How the Danish Tongue differs from the High
German, and the Modern Language in Swedeland will best appear from their
Paternoster, which runs thus, Fader vor du some est himmelen; helligt vorde die
naffu tilkomme dit rige, vorde din vilie s^^ pa^ jorden, some hander i himmelen.
Gift osz ^ dagh vort daglige brod; oc forlad osz vor skyld, some wi forlade vare
skyldener; ock lead osz ickudi fristelse: Men frele osz fra ont. Amen.

This Kingdom was formerly Elective (although they usually advanced the next
Heir to the Crown) until Government.
the Year 1659. that Frederick the Ill having bravely repulsed the Swedes,
besieging the Capital City, Copenhagen, it was then rendered Hereditary to his
Family. The Nobility here had hitherto a considerable Stroke until these our
own Days, that this Kingdom is so strangely Frenchifi'd in Point of Government,
that the Danish and French Monarchy's are now almost of the same Mould. The
King assumes to himself the Power of disposing of all Heirs and Heiresses, of
any Note, as it is practiced in France. The Danish Law is highly to be prized in
that it is short and perspicuous surpassing the like of all other Nations in
that respect. It Is wholly founded upon Equity, and Comprised in one Quarto
Volume in the Danish Tongue, and that so plain, that any Man may understand and
plead his own Cause without the Aid of either Counsel or Attorney; and no Suit
is to hang in suspense beyond one Year and a Month. This is indeed a mighty
Advantage, and a singular Property of the Danish Law upon one hand, but the
same is attended with a vast Inconvenience on the other; for the first and
principal Article thereof runs thus, That the King has the Privilege reserved
to himself to explain, nay, to alter and change the same as he shall think
good. Chief Courts for Administration of Justice, both in Civil and Criminal
Affairs, are four; viz. Byfoght's, Heredsfought's, Lanstag, and High-Right. The
first is peculiar for deciding Matters which happen in Cities and Towns. The
second for those of the Country. The third is the High-Court of the Province,
to which Appeals are made from the two former. And the fourth is the Supreme of
all the rest, held commonly at Copenhagen, and consisting of the Principal
Nobility, in which Court the King himself sometimes sits in Person. Beside
these, there is the Court of Admiralty for Maritime Affairs; as also a Rent
Chamber (resembling our Court of Exchequer) for managing all Matters relating
to the Public Revenue.

The King of Denmark bears Party of three, and Arms.
Coupe of two, which makes twelve Quarters. In the first Or, Seem of Hearts
Gules, three Lions passant, guardant Azure, crowned Langu'd and Armed of the
first, for Denmark. 2 Gules, a Lion Rampant Or, Crowned and Armed of the first,
in his Paws a Battle-Ax Argent, hilted of the second, for Norway. 3. Gules, a
Lion Passant-guardant Or, on Nine Hearts of the same in Fesse, for Gothland. 4.
Gules, a Dragon crowned, Or, for Schonen. 5. Azure, three Crowns Or; for
Sweden. 6. Gules a Paschal Lamb, Argent, supporting a Flag of the same, marked
with a Cross Gules, for Juitland. 7. Or, two Lions Passant-guardant, Azure, for
Sleswick. 8. Gules, a Fish crowned Argent, for Ice land. Over these eight
Quartors, a great Cross Argent (which is the ancient Devise of the Kingdom) on
the Center of which are placed the Arms of Dithmarsh, viz. Gules, a Cavalier
Armed Argent. 9. Gules, a Nettle-leaf open, and charged in the middle with a
little Escucheon, the whole Argent for Holstein. 10. Gules, a Cygnet Argent;
gorged with a Crown Or, for Stormarsh. 11. Gules, two Fesses Or, for
Delmenhorst. 12. Gules, a Cross Pattree-fitchree Argent, for Oldenburgh. The
Shield surrounded with the Collar of the Order of the Elephant. The Crest is a
Crown Or, flowr'd, raised with eight Diadems, terminating in a Mond of the
same. For the Motto are these words, Pietas and Justitia coronant.

The Errors and Practices of the Roman Church being grown at length so
intolerable, that an Universal Reformation Religion.
became expedient, this Kingdom, among the other Northern Crowns, threw off
that insupportable Yoke, and cordially embraced the Doctrine of Luther, which
being allowed off by Frederick the First, about the middle of the last Century,
was so firmly and universally established in Denmark, that in all the Danish
Dominions there is no other Religion but Lutheranism professed, except some
French Refugees, who are allowed a Church at Copenhagen; and a few Popish
Families, who were lately permitted to perform their Worship in a Chapel at
Gluckstat. The Danish Clergy do still retain the Practice of Confession, which
all Persons are obliged unto before they participate of the Blessed Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper; they likewise retain Crucifixes, and several Ceremonies
of the Roman Church. Christianity was fully Established in this Country about
the middle of the XII. Century, and that by the means of Pope Adrian the IV.
(an Englishman) who before his Assumption of the Popedom, was termed Nicholaus
Breakspear.

. 3. NORWAY.
THis Country (formerly Norvegia, a Part of Ancient Scandinavia) is termed by
the Italians, Neruegia; Name.
by the Spaniards, Noruega; by the French, Norwegue; by the Germans, Norwegen;
and by the English, Norway; so called from its Northern Situation (Nort being
for North, and weg, way,) seeing it is the way to and from the North in respect
of the rest of Europe.

The Air of this Country is so extremely Cold, especially toward the North
parts of the Kingdom, Air.
that it is but thinly inhabited, and that by the meanest of People. The
opposite Place of the Globe to Norway, is part of the Pacifick Ocean between
200 and 230 Degrees of Longitude, with 60 and 70 Degrees of South Latitude.

By reason of the excessive Coldness of the Country (it lying in the 11th,
12th, and 13th North Climate) Soil.
the Soil is very barren, not having force enough to produce the very
necessaries of Life, the Common People being forced to use dry Fish instead of
Bread. In short, this Country is overspread either with vast Forests, barren
Mountains, or formidable Rocks: In the Northmost parts of it, the longest Day
is above two Months, the Sun not setting for that time; the shortest in the
Southmost about 6 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country, are Stockfish, Rich Furs, Train-Oyl,
Pitch, and Tackling for Commodities.
Ships, as Masts, Cables, Deal-boards, and the like, which the Inhabitants
exchange for Corn, Wine, Fruits, Beer, and other Necessaries of Life.

What chiefly deserves the Name of Rarity in this Country, is that remarkable
Lake near Drontheim, Rarities.
whose Waters never freeze even in the dead of Winter, notwithstanding of the
excessive Cold at that Season. Near to the Isle of Hiteren is that wonderful
and dangerous Whirly-pool, commonly called Maelstroom (and by Navigators, The
Navel of the Sea) which swallows up Ships with their whole Cargo, if they
unhappily approach too nigh.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, only one, viz. that of Archbishopricks.


Drontheim.

Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are those of Bishoprics.
Anslo, Bergen, Staffanger.


Universities in this Kingdom. None. Universities.


The Norvegians (being notorious Pirates of old, became very formidable to
several of the Northern Nations) Manners.
are now looked upon as a very mean, simple, and ignorant sort of People; a
People however that is very hardy, much given to Toiling and Labor, very Just
in their Dealings, and abundantly Civil (after their own Manner) to the few
Strangers who come among them. In the Northmost Parts of the Kingdom they have
no Towns, but generally live in Tents, and Travel in great Companies from one
place to another in Hunting.

The Language now spoken in this Country, (especicially in all the civilized
Parts thereof) is little different Language.
from that used in the Kingdom of Denmark, a Specimen of which is already given
in the foregoing Paragraph.

This Kingdom was formerly a distinct Body by it self, and independent of any
other, but (being incorporated Government.
with Denmark, Anno 1387.) is now subject to his Danish Majesty, who, besides
particular Governors in the five Castles of Bahus, Aggerus, etc.
abovementioned, does ordinarily keep a Viceroy there for the better
Administration of the Public Affairs of that Kingdom; his Place of Residence
is commonly at Bergen, and his Power is extraordinary great.

See Denmark. Arms.


The established Religion in Norway, is the same as in Denmark, only that in the
Northmost Parts of the Religion.
Kingdom, the knowledge of Christiany (which was at first planted in this
Country much about the same time with the two other Northern Crowns) is so
decayed, that on the Borders of Lapland they differ but little from mere
Heathens.

MOSCO VIE or RVSSIE


SECT. II. Concerning Moscovia.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 46 00 of Long. Its greatest Length is about
1630. 105 00 between 45 10 of Lat. Breadth is about 1500. 71 00 Divided into
North Chief Town St. Michael Archangel. South Moscow, Capital City.

More Particularly,

North contains many Provinces, but chiefly these of

Trines -- Chief Town -- -- W. to E. Kargapolia -- Kargapol. -- Dwina -- St.
Michael Archangel -- Condora -- Wirgatouria -- Sibiria -- Tobol -- -- Obdora
-- Berezow -- Vologda -- Idem, upon the upper part of the Dwina.

South containing many Provinces, but chiefly these of

Casan -- Chief Town Idem -- from E. to W. upon the Volga. Mordowitz -- None
remarkable Nisi Novogrod -- Idem -- Volodimir -- Idem -- Moscow -- Idem --
Astracan -- Idem, at the Mouth of the Volga. Novogrod Weleki Idem -- Between
the Lake Ilmins and Peipus. Pleskow -- Idem -- Severia -- Novogrod-Sewarski S.
W. of Moscow.

. 2. MOSCOVIA.
THIS Country (containing much of Sarmatia Europaea, and part of Sarmatia
Asiatica, being also Name.
named Russia from the Ancient People of that Country, called Rossi or Russi)
is termed by the Italians, Moscouia; by the Spaniards, Moscovia; by the French,
Moscovie or Russie Blanch; by the Germans, Moscau; and by the English,
Moscovia or Moscovy; so called from its chief Province of that Name, whose
Denomination is derived from Moschi or Mosci, an Ancient People first
inhabiting that Part of the Country.

The Air of this Country is very Cold, particularly toward the North, where
Snow and Ice are usual for Air.
three Quarters of the Year; but in the Southmost Provinces they have very
scorching Heats in the Summer for the Space of six Weeks. The opposite Place of
the Globe to Moscovia, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 220 and
290 Degrees of Longitude, with 45 and 71 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. Northern
Climate) is very different, Soil.
according to the different Situation of its Parts. Here are many Plains, but
generally full of Marshes. Toward the North are vast Forests; and even where
the Ground is cleared of Wood it is (for the most part) very Barren, and so
extremely Cold, that what they sow does seldom come to due Perfection. In the
Southwest parts toward Poland, the Soil is tolerably good, the Ground there
producing several sorts of Grain in great abundance; and it is reported by many,
that their Corn is ready for reaping about two Months after it is sown. The
longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country is above two Months, the Sun
not setting for that time when near the Summer Solstice; the shortest in the
Southmost is about 9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country, are Furs, Sables, Martins, Wax, Honey,
Tallow, Train-Oyl, Commodities.
Caviere, Hemp, Flax, Slad, Iron, etc.

As one of the Chief Rarities of this Country, we may reckon that strange sort
of Melon, found in or Rarities.
near to Astracan, Casan and Samara. Some of the Natives term it Boranetz, (i.
e. The Little Lamb) others Zoophyton, which signifies the Animal Plant. The
first Title would seem most proper, because in Figure it resembles a Lamb, and
such is its vegetable Heat, that (according to the vulgar manner of expression)
it Consumes and Eats up all the Grass, or other Herbs, within its reach. As the
Fruit does ripen, the Stalk decays, and is covered with a downy Substance,
which being carefully taken off and dressed, is used by some instead of Furs
for Lining of Vests. To this we may add that Church in Moscow, called
Jerusalem, which seemed to John Basilides 1. (then Czar) such a stately Pile
of Building, that he caused put out the Eyes of the Architect, that he might
never contrive, (at least) behold its fellow.

Ecclesiastics in Moscovia are, One Patriach, Four Metropolitans, Seven
Archbishops, and several Bishops.

The Patriarch is he of Moscow, residing in the same City.

Metropolitans are those of Novogorodskoi and Welikoluskoi. Rostoufskoi and
Harostauskoi. Casanskoi and Sunatskoi. Sarskoi and Pondoskoi. Archbishopricks
are those of Wolodgskoi and Weliko Premskoi. Archbishopricks.
Resanskoi and Moromskoi. Susdalskoi and Turruskoi. Twerskoi and Cassinskoi.
Sibirskoi and Tobolskoi. Astrachansckoi and Terskoi. Pleskouskoi and Sborskoi.

As to the exact Number and Names of Bishoprics in this Country; the same is
but uncertain at Bishoprics.
best.

Here we can hardly expect the Seats of the Muses where the Liberal Arts and
Sciences have been so long Universities.
banished, and the Studying of them inhibited by Public Authority.

The Moscovites (Men of a vigorous and healthful Constitution) are generally
reckoned a rude, deceitful Manners.
and ignorant sort of People; much addicted to excessive Drinking, as also
unlawful and beastly Pleasures. And so fond of Ignorance have they hitherto
been, that 'twas looked upon as (almost) a piacular Crime for any of them to
apply himself to a search after Knowledge. But things are now mightily altered
in this Point, and that by the Encouragement of his present Czarish Majesty,
who gives leave to his Nobility to acquire the Liberal Arts and Sciences,
particularly the Mathematics; and to acquaint themselves with Foreign
Countries and Languages. And that the Learned Languages (Greek and Latin) may
be no longer strangers in this Country, he has already erected Public Schools
in Moscow for the teaching of them. By which means it is to be hoped, That the
Brutish Temper and Stupidity of this People, may be much reformed in some time.
And whereas the present Emperor has already visited some of the best Nations
of Europe. purposely to improve himself in Warlike Affairs, both by Sea and
Land, (especially the former) and since this Undertaking is so uncommon, that
the Mascovitish Story cannot afford a Parallel; it is also to be hoped, that the
Effects thereof will be equally astonishing, and that in humbling (if not
crushing) both Turks and Tertars his disturbing Neighbors, and professed
Enemies to the Cross of Christ.

The Language used in this Country, is a Dialect of the Sclavonian, but so
corrupted and blended with Language.
other Languages, that it is hardly understood by those who speak the pure
Sclavonian, which nevertheless is still used by the Russians in their Divine
Service. Pater Noster (which I find only in a corrupt Dialect of their Tongue)
runs thus, Aisameidhen joke oleah tainahissa; Pyhetta olkon siun wakakuta; si
olkohon siun tharosi kwin^ tainahissa ayn man palla. Meidhen jokopai wen leipa
anna m^h^llen tanapaiw^na, ja anna meidem syndia: Kwin more annama meidin
vostachan rickoillen; ja ale sata meita kin sauxen mutta paasta (...) paasta.

This great Body is under its own Prince, who assumeth the Title of Cear,
(which in the Russian Language Government.
signifies Emperor) yet more commonly he is termed the Great Duke. He Is an
Hereditary Monarch, and his Government truly Desuotical. The Lives and Fortunes
of his Subjects are wholly at his disposal; and the greatest Knez: or Lord
within his Dominions, does acknowledge himself his Galop or Slave. Yea, be not
only exercises an uncontrollable Power over his slavish Subjects, but also
pretends to a kind of Omniscience among them, and has so succeeded in this
bold Pretense, that the main Body of the People does really believe that their
Great Duke knows all things. To support which Opinion, The Moscovitish
Emperors have industriously endeavored to keep their People in gross
Ignorance, and for that end have hitherto banished out of their Domions the
Liberal Arts and Sciences, and forbid the studying of them under the severest
Penalties. But the present Czar by his proceedings (already hinted at) would
seem to rectify that gross Abuse. He suffers none of his Nobles to retire from
Court without his Special Permission, and seldom, or never, to visit Foreign
Countries, till these our own Days; no, nor so much as to talk with Foreigners
at home. The Public Affairs are chiefly managed by his Great Council, (called
Dumnoy Boyaren) consisting of the Principal Noblemen of the Empire. Here also
are diverse other Councils, or rather Chambers and Courts of Judicatory, to
which belong their respective Business, and each of these has its peculiar
President; they are in number Six, whereof the first is appointed for
Ambassadors and Foreign Negotiations. The second for managing of Military
Affairs. The third for the Public Revenues of the Empire. The fourth for
encouraging of Trade and Merchandising. And the two others for hearing and
determining of all Causes, both Civil and Criminal.

The Arms of Moscovia are, Or an Eagle displayed Sable, (...) on its Breast a
Shield Gules, charged with Arms.
a Cavalier A^^^t fighting a Dragon; on and between the Heads of the Eagle are
three Crowns for Moscovy, Cazan, and Astracan. According to others, the Arms
are Sable, a Portel open of two Leaves, and ^s (...) degrees Or.

The Muscovia's (...) that they profess Christianity, according to the Doctrine
of the Greek Church in its Religion.
Ancient Purity; but indeed they have mixed with the same, a great (...)
ridiculous Ceremonies and foolish Superstitions of their own. They ^ender
Divine Worship to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints as also to Crosses, and
never Commerce any thing of Moment unless they first Sign themselves with the
Sign of the Crossed. In Baptism they use Exorcism, and always Confession to the
Priest before they receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. All above seven
Years of Age receive that Sacrament in both kinds, and they give it i^ one kind
to Children under that age. They usually Administer the same (as also Extreme
Unction) to Persons past all hopes of Recovery; but they neither adore the
Sacrament. nor believe the strange Doctrine of Transubstantiation. They observe
fifteen great Festivals, besides a great many Days dedicated to particular
Saints. Sermons they never use, but only read some Portions of Holy Scripture,
with St. Basil's Liturgy, and diverse Homilies of St. Chrysostom. The Christian
Faith was first planted in this Country toward the latter Part of the Tenth
Century, and that by the Preaching of some Greeks, sent thither by the then
Patriarch of Constantinople.

FRANCE


SECT. III. Concerning France.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 12 10 of Long. its greatest Length is about 520
26 30 between 42 30 of Latit. Breadth is about 450 51 10

Being divided into Three Classes, viz. North. Middle. South.


North comprehends the Governments of Picardy -- Chief Town Amiens, Northward.
Normandy -- Roven -- from W. to E. The Isle of France Paris -- Champaigne --
Troy -- Middle comprehends the Governments of Bretaigne -- Rennes. -- W. to E.
Orleanoise -- Orleans -- Bourgoigne -- Dyon -- Lionois -- Lion South
comprehends the Governments of Guienne and Gascony Bourdemix -- W. to E.
Languedoc -- Toulouse -- Dauphiny -- Grenoble -- Provence -- Aix --

Of all these in Order.

. 1. PICARDY.
Divided into Higher, toward the East -- Chapter Town Guise. Lower, toward the
West -- Abbeville.

But more particularly,

Higher contains Tierasche -- Chief Town Guise -- E. to W. Vermandois -- S.
Quinten -- Santerre -- Peronne -- Amienois -- Amiens -- Lower contains Pais
Reconquis- Calais -- N. to S. Ardres -- Idem -- Boulognois -- Boulogne --
Ponthieu -- Abbeville --

To Picardy we subjoin the Archbishopric of Cambray, lying N. of Peronne.
Chief Town Cambry.

. 2. NORMANDY.
Divided into Higher, toward the East -- Chief Town Rouen. Lower, toward the
West -- Caen.

More particularly,

Higher contains Pais Caux -- Chief Town Caudebeck -- N. to S. E. Roven -- Idem
-- Gisors -- Idem -- Eureux -- Idem, S. of Roven. Lower contains Coutantine --
Coutance -- W. to E. Gaen -- Idem -- Alencon -- Idem, S. E. of Caen.

. 2. Isle of FRANCE.
Divided into North, the Seine -- Chief Town Soissons. South, the Seine --
Melun.

More particularly,

North the Seine contains Laonois -- Chief Town Laon -- E. to W. Soissonois --
Soissons -- Beauvoises -- Beauvais -- Vexin Francois Pont-Oyse -- W. to E. D.
of Valois -- Senle^ -- Isle of France -- Paris -- W. to E. Brie -- Meaux --
South the Seine contains Hurepoix -- Melun -- N. to S. Gastenois -- Montargi --

. 4. CHAMPAIGNE.
Divided into Higher, on the North -- Chief Town Rheims. Lower, on the South --
Troy.

More particularly,

Higher contains Rethelnois -- Chief Town Rethel -- N. to S. W. D. of Rheims --
Rheims -- High Champaigne S. Dizier Challonois -- Chalon on the River Marn^.
Lower contains Sennois -- Sens -- W. to E. Low Champaigne Troyes -- Bassigny --
Langres --

. 5. BRETAIGNE.
Divided into Higher, Eastward -- Chief Town Rennes. Lower, Westward -- Breast.

More particularly,

Higher contains the Territories of Dole -- Chief Town Idem -- E. to W. S.
Malc^ -- Idem -- Brieux -- Idem -- Rennes -- Idem -- N. to S. Nantes -- Idem --
Lower contains St. Polde Leon Breast -- W. to N. E. Trigvier -- Idem --
Cornoaile -- Idem -- W. to E. Vannet -- Idem --

. 2. ORLEANOIS
Divided into North the River Loir, chief Town Chartres. upon Orleans. South
Poictiers.

More particularly,

North contains Maine -- Chief Town Man's -- W. to E. Perch -- Nogent -- Beauce
-- Chartres -- Vendosmois -- Vendosme -- Middle, or upon the Loir. Anjou --
Angers -- W. to E. Tourraine -- Tours -- Blais^^ -- Blois -- Orleanois --
Orleans -- Nivernois -- Nevers -- South contains Aunis -- Rochelle -- W. to E.
Angoumois Angoulesme Poictou -- Poictiers -- Berry -- Bourges --

. 7. BURGOINE.
Divided into Higher, Northward Chief Town Dijon. Lower, Southward Bourge-en
Bresse.

More particularly,

Higher, [viz. Burgoigne properly so call'd] contains the Towns of Auxerre --
W. to S. E. Semur -- Dijon -- Challon -- N. to S. Mascon -- Autun -- N. to S.
Charolles -- Lower, [viz. la Bresse] contains the Towns of Bourge-en-Bresse --
N. to S. E. Belly -- Trevoux -- Westward.

. 8. LIONOIS.
Divided into East -- Chief Town Lions. West -- Clermont.

More particularly,

East comprehends Lionois [properly so called -- -- Chief Town Lions -- S. to
N. Baujolois -- Beaujeu -- Forez -- -- Feurs -- Westward. West comprehends
Auvergue higher Clermont -- S. to lower S. Flour Bourbonnoi -- -- Bourbon [or
Moulins March -- -- Gueret -- Westward.

. 9. GUIENNE and GASCOIGNE.
Divided into Guienne [Northward] C. T. Bourdeaux. Gascoigne [Southward] Air,
viz. the chief of Gascoigne, properly so called.

More Particularly,

Guienne in 8 Provinces. South Guienne [properly so called -- Chief Town
Bourdeaux -- W. to E. Bazadois -- Bazas -- Agenois -- Again -- Revergue -- Rodes
-- 4 North Saintoigne -- Saints -- W. to E. Pertgort -- Perigueux -- Limosin
-- Limoges -- Quercy -- Cahors -- Gascoigne into 3 parts North the Adour Les
Lands -- Dax -- W. to E. Albert -- Idem -- Condomois -- Condom -- Armagnac --
Aux -- Gaure -- Verdun -- Uponthe Adour Labor -- Bayonne -- W to E. Gascoigne
prop. Air -- Estarac -- Mirande -- Comminges -- Lombes -- South the Adour
Lower Navarr S. Palais -- W. to E. C. of Soul -- Maulleon -- Bearn -- Pau --
Bigorre -- Tarbe -- Conserans -- S. Bertrand

. 10. LANGUEDOC.
Divided into Higher, toward the West Chief Town Toulouse. Lower, toward the
East Nismes.

More particularly,

Higher contains the Territories of Foix -- Chief Town Idem S. to N. on the
Garonne. Rieux -- Idem Tholonse Idem Alby -- Idem 42 m. N. E. of Toulouse. S.
Papoul Idem 36 m. S. E. Lower contains the Territories of Narl^ne Idem -- W. to
E. Beziers Idem -- Mompelier Idem -- Nismes -- Idem -- Country of Sevennes
divided into Givaudan Mende Velay -- Le Puy W. to E. Vivarez Viviers

. 11. DAUPHINY.
Divided into Higher, toward the East -- Chief Town Grenoble Lower, toward
the West -- Vienne.

More particularly,

Higher contains several Towns, the chief of which are Grenoble upon the Isere.
Gap -- Nigh unto or upon the Durance. Embrun -- Briancon or Brianson --
Pignerol, S. E. of Brianson. Lower contains several Towns, the chief of which
are Vienne -- N. to S. Valence -- S. Paul de Tricasten -- Dye, S. E. of
Valence.

. 12. PROVENCE.
Divided into Higher, Northward -- Chief Town Sisteron. Middle part -- Aix.
Lower, Southward -- Marseilles:

More particularly,

Higher, whose chief Towns are Orange -- W. to E. on the North of Durance
River. Avignion -- Apt -- Forcalquier -- Sisteron -- Middle part, whose chief
Towns are Arles -- W. to E. on the S. of the Durance. Salon -- Aix -- Riez --
Senez -- Glandeves -- Lower, whose chief Towns are Marseilles -- W. to E. nigh
unto, or upon the Seacoast. Toulon -- Hyeres -- Frejuls -- Grace -- Vence --
Anti^e --

After these Twelve Governments we may here subjoin two other Countries
adjacent to the East part of France.

Namely, Loraine. French County.


LORAINE.
Divided into Loraine properly so called Chapter Town Nancy. Duchy of Bar
[Westward] Bar le Duc.

More particularly,

Loraine properly so called Chief Town Nancy toward the middle. D. of Bar --
Bar le Duc, Westward. Principality of Phaltzbourge Idem, Eastward. The
Territor. of Toule -- Idem S. to N. Metz Idem Verdun Idem Also those of
Clermont -- Idem, 15 Miles W. of Verdun. Bitch -- Idem -- N. to S. upon the E.
part of Loraine. Sarward -- Idem -- Sarbruck -- Idem -- Salme -- Idem --
Vaudemont Idem, 18 Miles S. E. of Toul.

FRENCH COUNTY.
Divided into Higher, Northward -- Chief Town Montbeliart. Middle part --
Besanson. Lower, Southward -- Salins.

More particularly,

Higher, its chief Towns are Montbeliart -- E. to W. Vesoul -- Middle, its
chief Towns are Besancon or Besanson E. to W. upon the Doux. Dole -- Lower, its
chief Towns are Salins -- N. to S. S. Claude --

THis Country (formerly Gallia from its Ancient Inhabitants the Gauls,
otherwise the Celta) is Name.
termed by the Italians and Spaniards, Francia; by its Natives, la France; by
the Germans, Franckreich; and by the English, France, so called (as most
Authors agree) from the Franks, a German Nation, inhabiting that Part of
Germany still called Franconia; who invading Gaul, and by degrees subduing a
great Part of it, gave it a New Name from its New Masters, who (in the Opinion
of some Judicious Writers) had theirs from certain Franchises granted them by
the Roman Emperors beyond what the Neighboring Nations enjoyed; or (according
to others) from the German words, Fra^n and Ausen, the former signifying Free,
and the other an Hero.

The Air of this Country is very Temperate, Pleasant, and Healthful, being in a
good Medium between Air.
the great Excess of Heat and Cold, which ordinarily attend those Countries of
a more Northern and Southern Situation; yea, so healthful is it, that this
Kingdom is generally observed to be less subject to Plagues and Sickness, than
most other Nations of Europe, and the Air about Mompelier, in particular, is
universally esteemed Medicinal for Consumptions. The opposite Place of the
Globe to France, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 190 and 207
Degrees of Longitude, with 42 and 51 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 6, 7, and 8. North Climate) is
extraordinary fruitful, particularly Soil.
in Corn, Wine, Fruits, Hemp, etc. The Fields being here both large and open,
are generally intermingl'd with Vines and Corn; as also bordered and interlin'd
with variety of Fruits: Here are many and vasts Forests, and these well-stor'd
with most sorts of wild Beasts fit for Hunting; several Mountains, and these
covered over with numerous Flocks, and some of them lined with rich and
valuable Mines. Here also are diverse excellent Pits of Coals, and Quarries of
Stones. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country, is about 16
Hours. The shortest in the Southmost, is 9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country, are Salt, Fish, Corn, Wine, Almonds,
Coral, Canvas, Oade, Linen, Commodities.
Paper, Wood, Skins, Alamodes, Lusting, and rich flowered Silks, Verdigris,
Cremor Tartaris, etc.

Among the chief Rarities of France, we may reckon some remarkable Remains of
the Roman Antiquities as Rarities.
yet to be seen in that Country. And they are reducible to these following
Heads, viz. (1.) Triumphal Arches, particularly that in the City of Rheims as
yet entire, composed of Three Arches, and adorned with many Figures and
Trophies, but uncertain for whom erected: There are also the Ruins of several
others near Autun in Burgundy; one at Saints in Guienne; another almost entire
at the City of Orange, erected by Caius Marius and Luctatius Catulus, upon
their Victory obtained over the Cimbres and Teutones; (where are likewise the
Ruins of a Roman Circus) To these we may add that stately. Bridge, twelve Miles
off Nismes, consisting of three Stories of Arches one above another, the last
of which was an Aqueduct. (2.) Amphitheaters; as the Ruins of a stately one at
Chalons in Burgundy; another at Perigueux in Guienne; another at Toulouse in
Langaedoc; another at Arles in Provence; another at Vienne in Dauphine; but the
chief of all is that at Nismes of an extraordinary bigness, and as yet adorned
with several Pillars, and diverse Roman Eagles, as also the Fable of Romulus and
Romus sucking the She-wolf. (3.) The Remains of some Heathen Temples;
particularly those of Templum Jani (now called the Jenetoye) at Autun in
Burgundy; those of the Goddess Venus at Perigueux in Guienne; and that of Diana
near Nismes in Languedoc. (4.) The Ruins of some Ancient Aqueducts, as those
near Coutance in Burgundy; those at Dole in Britaign; some at Autun in
Burgundy; and those at Toulouse in Languedoc. (5.) Remarkable Pillars,
particularly those Ancient Columes and Pyramids near Autun in Burgundy; but
more especially is that famous Roman Obelisk of Oriental Granat at Arles in
Provence, which is much admired by the Curious, being fifty two Foot high,
seven Foot Diameter at the Base, and yet all but one Stone. Among the Monuments
of Antiquity, we may mention that large Passage cut through the middle of a
Rock about two Leagues from Brianson in Dauphine, which being a stupendous
piece of Work, gives occasion to various Conjectures, some Persons imputing it
to J. Caesar, and others rather to Hannjbal. To these we may add that large and
round Buckler of Massy Silver fished out of the Rhone near Avignion, 1665.
being twenty Inches in Diamiter, and weighing twenty one pounds; it is 1900
Years old, and is charged with Scipio Africanus half Mantled grasping his Pike,
and Roman Officers attending with the Spaniards supplicating for a fair Virgin;
the same being consecrated to that Virtuous General upon his restoring a
beautiful Captive to Allucius, Prince of Celtiberia, who had espoused her.

These being the principal Remains of Reverend Antiquity observable in this
Country; next to such Curiosities, we may subjoin some Rarities of Nature, the
most noted of which are these following. (1) Waters of remarkable Qualities;
particularly, Those nigh to Dax or D'Acque in Gascoign, so reputed of old for
Bathing, that from them the whole Province of Aquitaine did derive its Name. As
also the Mineral Waters of Bourbon much resorted unto, even in time of the
Romans, together with that famous Fountain near to Grenoble, which appears as
if covered with Flames, and boileth up in great Bubbles and yet is never hot.
Likewise another boiling Fountain about a League from Montpellier, much
observed by Travelers; and finally, that Oily-spring near Gabian, in the Road
from Montpellier to Beziers. Add to these a Spring near Loches in Orleanois,
and that at Clermont in Auvergne, whose Waters are of a Petrifying Nature; and
likewise another nigh to the City of Man's, which makes Silver look exactly
like Gold. (2) Observable Mountains, particularly those nigh to Rhodes in
Guienne, called the Mountains of Cansac, which burn whenever it Rains. (3.)
Some hideous Subterranean Holes or Passages, as that in the Forest of S. Aubin
du Cormier in Bretaign, through which flows a mighty Torrent of Water; and
another near Nions in Dauphine, from which proceeds a violent Wind. These are
the chief Rarities in France, both Natural and Artificial, especially the
latter. As for Artificial ones of a modern date, this Country affords
several, particularly that famous Canal of Languedoc, and splendid Palace of
Versailles, with diverse magnificent Buildings, (especially Churches) but these
are either too well known to need, or too numerous to admit of any particular
Relation here.

The Archbishopricks of France are these following, viz. Archbishopricks.


Lions whose Archbishop is Count and Primate of France. Sens Primate of France
and Germany. Paris Duke and Peer of the Realm. Reims Duke and Peer, and Legate
of the Holy See. Rouen Primate of Normandy.

As also those, Yours, Bourdeaux, Narbonne, Vienne. Burges, Auch, Arles,
Bezancon, Alby, Toulouse, Aix. Embrun.


The respective Suffragans of these Archbishops, are as follows, Bishoprics.
Lions.
Autun Langres Wacon Chasion
Sens.
Trois Auxerre Nevers
Paris.
Chartres Orleans Meaux
Reims.
Soissont Laon Chaalons Noijon Beauvais Amiens Senlis Boulogn
Alby.
Castres Mende Rodez Cahors Vahors
Narbonne
Carcass^nr Ale^ Beziers Agde Lodove Montpellier Nismes Usetz S. Pons Perpignan
Rouen.
Bayeux Eu^eux Auranchet Seez Lis^ux Coutances
Bourdeauz
Poictiers Saints Angoulesm Perigueux Again Condom Sarlat Rochelle Lucon
Arles
Marseilles Orange S. Paul de 3. Chateaux Toulon
Tours.
Man's Angers Rennes Nantes Cournouaille Vannes S. Malo S. Brieu Treguier S. Pol
de Leon Dole
Auch
Acquis Air Bazas Bayonne Comminges Conserans Lectoure Mescar Oleron Tarbes
Aix
Apt Riez Frejus Gap Sisteron
Vienne
Valence Die Grenoble Viviers Maurienne
Bourges.
Clermont Limoges S. Flour le Puy Tulle
Toulouse
Pamiers Mirepoix Montauban Lavour S. Papaul Lombez Rieux
Bezanc.
Belley Basil in Switz. Lausanne in Switz.
Embrun
Digne Glandeve Vence Senez Grace Nice in Savoy.


Universities belonging to this Kingdom, are established at these Cities
following, Universities.
Paris, Angers, Reims, Perpignan, Bourdeaux, Caen, Valence, Douay, Poictiers,
Montpellier, Aix, Dole, Orleans, Cahors, Avignon, Friburge, Bourges, Nantes,
Pont a'mauson, Orange,


The French are generally a Civil, Quick and Active sort of People; but
extremely given to Talking, especially Manners.
those of the Female Sex, who nevertheless are not only very pleasing in
discourse, but also of a graceful and winning deportment. This People is thus
uncharacterized by some; That they are Aerie, Amorous, full of Action, and above
all things Contentious, being so universally given to Law-fuits, and that even
among nearest Relations, that Lawyers, Judges, and other Officers of Justice,
are observed to be the richest Body of the Kingdom, excepting the Churchmen.
Many of this Country in matters of Learning, are blessed with a clear
Conception, and ready Expression; and of late, they have advanced the Republic
of Letters to a very considerable height; this Age having produced several of
that Nation (and even some of the Female Sex) who are now famous through all
the Learned World for their singular Parts.

The French Language (composed chiefly of the Latin, together with several
German and Gothic words intermixed) Language.
being lately much refined by the Royal Academy at Paris, is so admired for its
elegancy and sweetness, that it has wonderfully spread it self abroad in the
world; and is now become the chief Tongue that is commonly used in most Princes
Courts of Europe. Paternoster in the same, runs thus, Notre pere qui es aux
Cieux, Ton Nom soit sanctify; Ton Regne vienne; Ta Volonte soit faite en Ia
Terre, comme a^ Ciel; Done nous aujourdhuy notre pain quotidien; Pardonne nous
nos offenses, comme nous pardonnons a' ceux qui nous ont offencez; Et ne nous
induit point en tentation; mais delivre nous du mal. Amen.

This Kingdom, being formerly a part of the Roman Empire, was in process of
time overrun by Franks, Government.
Goths and Burgundians, especially the first, by whom was raised a Monarchy,
which continuing in the Succession of Kings of three several Races, (viz. the
Morovignian, Carlovinian and Capetine) is now as great as any in Christendom;
and at present subject to one Sovereign [entitl'd the Most Christian King, and
eldest Son of the Church] whose Government is Monarchical, and Crown hereditary
in his Heirs Male, all Females being excluded by the Salique Law. The whole
Kingdom being divided into 12 Governments; over each of them is set a Governor,
styled the King's Licutenant-General or Super-Intendant, having the like Power
as the Lords Lieutenants of England formerly had in their several Counties. For
the better management of the public Affairs and Administration of Justice in
all parts of this Kingdom, here are established a great many Courts of
Judicatory, particularly these following, viz. Parliaments; Chambers of
Accounts; Courts of Aides; Presidial Courts; Generalities; Elections, etc. I.
Parliaments (the highest and supreme Courts of the Nation) were Fifteen in
number, reckoning the late Conquests, and held at the Cities of Paris,
Toulouse, Rouen, Grenoble, Bourdeaux, Dijon, Aix, Vannes, Pau, Mets, Besancon,
Tourney, Perpignan, Arras and Brisac. These Parliaments (according to their
respective business) are divided into several Chambers, especially that of
Paris, which has no less than Ten. viz. (1.) The Grand Chamber, where the
Peers of the Realm being accused of any Crime, are usually Tried. (2.) The
Tournelle Civil; where they take cognizance of such Civil Causes as exceed a
thousand Livres in value. (3.) The Tournelle Criminelle; where Appeals from
Inferior Courts in Criminal Matters are heard and discussed. Besides these
three, there are five Chambers of Inquest; where Depositions of Witnesses are
set down, and Causes thereupon determined; being almost the same with our Bill
and Answer in Chancery and Exchequer. And lastly, There are two Chambers of
Request; where Causes of Priviledg'd Persons are heard and discussed. II.
Chambers of Accounts; where Accounts of the Treasury are examined, and Homage
and Vassalage due from the Royal Feifs are received, Treaties of Peace, and
Grants made by the King, and such like, are recorded. These Chambers are 12 in
number, and held at the Cities of Paris, Rouen, Dijon, Nantes, Montpelier,
Grenoble, Aix, Pau, Blois, List, Air, and Dole. III. Courts of Aides, where
all Causes relating to the King's Revenue (particularly Aides, Tailles,
Gabells) are determined, and that without any appeal to a higher Judicatory.
These Courts are in number Eight, and held at these 8 Cities of Paris,
Montpelier, Rouen, Clermont, Montferrand, Bourdeaux, Aix, Grenoble and Dijon.
IV. Presidial Courts (composed of several Judges) where Civil Causes in matters
of smaller importance, as also Appeals made from Subaltern Justices in
Villages, are heard and determined. V. Generalities, whose Office (they being
the Treasurers general of France) is to take care of assessing the Taxes
proportionably in their respective Districts, according to the Sum proposed by
the King and Council to be levied. These Courts are 23 in number (each
consisting of twenty three Persons) and these conveniently situated in several
parts of the Kingdom. They do also judge Matters relating to the Crown Lands,
the King's Revenue, and such like. Lastly, Elections; which are small Courts
subordinate to the Generalities, and their Office is to cast up how much every
Parish in their respective Division must raise of the Sum proposed by the
Generality; and accordingly they issue out their Orders to every Parish;
whereupon one of the Inhabitants being chosen Collector, he proportions every
one's Quota; and collecting the same, returns it to the Generalities, and they
again to the public Exchequer. Besides these, there is a vast number of
inferior Courts for smaller Matters, whether Civil or Criminal: And a great
many public Officers, as Provosts, Seneschals, Bailiffs, as also Intendants de
la Justice, Police, and Finance, etc. But our intended brevity will not admit
of a farther Relation.

The King of France, for Arms bears Azure, three Flower de Luces Or, two in
chief, and one in base; Arms.
the Escutcheon is environed with the Collars of the Orders of S. Michael and
the Holy Ghost. For Crest, an Helmet Or, entirely open, thereon a Crown closed,
after the manner of an Imperial Crown, with eight inarched Rays, topt with a
double Flower de Luce. The Supporters are, two Angels habited as Levites; the
whole under a Pavilion Royal, seem of France, lined Ermines, with these words,
Ex omnibus Floribus elegi mihi Lilium. Lilia neque laborant neque nent.

The only Established Religion in France, is that of the Church of Rome; for
all the Decisions of the Council Religion.
of Trent in Matters of Faith are there received; but those that relate to
Points of Discipline, and infringe the Rights of the Crown, with the Liberties
of the Gallican Church, are rejected. The Protestants (commonly called
Hugonots) were formerly allowed the public profession of their Religion by
several Edicts granted by the French Kings; particularly that of Nantes, An.
1598. by Henry IV. and confirmed by all his Successors ever since. But the
present King, by his Declaration of October 1685. abolished the said Edict, and
inhibited the Exercise of the Reformed Religion, enjoining the profession of
the Roman, and that under the severest Penalties. Whereupon followed the
Destruction of their Churches, and a violent Persecution which forced great
Droves to leave the Kingdom, and seek for shelter in Foreign Countries. As to
the Romanists themselves; There are great Divisions among them at present,
notwithstanding of their so much boasted Unity: For besides the hot Disputes
between the Molinists and Jansenists about Predestination and Grace (in which
the pretended Infallible Judge at Rome dares not interpose his Decisive
Authority for fear of disobliging one or the other Party) we find that the Sect
of Quietism has lately crept in among them; as appears from the late Book of
the Archbishop of Cambray concerning the Internal Life, which has been censured
by the Archbishop of Paris, and the Bishops of Meaux and Chartres, and
complained off by the French King in his Letter to the Pope, though the Author
profers to maintain his Doctrine before his Holiness, if permitted to go to
Rome. The Christian Faith was first planted in this Country by some of St.
Peter's Disciples (as is most probably thought) sent thither by him at his
first coming to Rome.

A New Map of GERMANY By Robt. Morden.


SECT. IV. Concerning Germany.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 24 10 of Long. Its greatest Length is about 540.
37 12 between 45 30 of Lat. Breadth is about 510. 54 30 Being divided into
three Classes, viz. North. Middle. South.

North. The Circle of Belgium. Chief Towns are Amsterdam W. to E. Bruxelles The
Circle of Westphalia Munster -- The Circle of Lower Saxony. Hamburg -- The
Circle of Upper Saxony. Wittenburg -- Middle. The Circle of the Lower Rhine
Heidelberg -- W. to E. The Circle of the Upper Rhine Francfort -- The Circle of
Franconio. Nurenburg -- South. The Circle of Suabia. Ausburg -- W. to E. The
Circle of Bavaria. Munick -- The Circle of Austria. Vienna --

Of all these in Order.

. 1. The Circle of Belglum.
Divided into North, viz. Holland -- Chief Town Amsterdam. South, viz. Flanders
-- Bruxelles.

Holland contains Seven Provinces.

Viz. 4 toward the South Holland properly so called Chief Town Amsterdam.
Zeland -- Middleburgh Utretcht -- Idem. Zutphen, and a part of Gelderland.
Zutphen. 3 toward the North Over Issel -- Deventer. Friesland -- Leuarden.
Groningen -- Idem.

Flanders contains Ten Provinces.

Viz. 4 Dutchies Gelderland -- Chief Town Gelders. Brabant -- Bruxelles.
Luxembourge -- Idem. Limbourge -- Idem. 4 Counties Flanders properly so called
-- Bruges. Artesia -- Arras. Hannonia -- Mons. Namur -- Idem. The Marquisate of
the Empire Antwerp. The Seignory of Malines. Idem.

The Chief of these (...) Holland and Flanders properly (...) particularly
consider them, (...) the most remarkable Towns in each of them. (...)

Holland properly so called, being divided into North. South.


Chief Towns North are Goree in the Island Goree. (...) -- Nigh unto, or upon
the Mues from W. to E. (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- -- In the
Western part from S. W. to N. E. (...) -- (...) -- South are Amsterdam upon the
Channel Amstel. (...) -- In the Western part from S. to N. (...) -- (...) --
(...) -- Upon the Zuyder-zee, or South Sea, from N. to S. (...) -- (...) --
(...) -- (...) -- Naerden --

Flanders properly so called, being divided into East. West.


Chief Towns in East are Dendermonde -- Upon the Dendre, from N. to S. (...) --
(...) -- Gramont -- Gh^ut -- Upon the Soheld. all found from N. to S. W.
O^denard -- Tournay -- St. Amand -- Upon the Scarpe. Doway -- Deynse -- Nigh
unto, or upon the Lys, all found from N. to S. W. Courtray -- Armenthiers --
Lisle -- West are Graveling -- Five remarkable Ports from S. to N. E. Dunkirk
-- Neuport -- Osiend -- la^ys -- Bruges -- found from W. to E. Axel -- Hulst --
Rupelmond upon the Scheld, 5 Miles S. of Antwerp. Farne -- found from W. to E.
Dixmude -- Thyelt -- Berge S. Winoc -- from W. to E. Ypres -- Cassel, farthest
South.

The Duchy of Brabant being divided into North. South.


Chief Towns in North are Bosleduc -- found from E. to W. Breda -- Steenbergen
-- Bergenopzoom -- Antwerp upon the Scheld. Mechelin upon the Dender. South are
Aersschot -- Upon the Demer from W. to E. Sichem -- Die -- Brussels -- found
from W. to E. Louvain -- Tilmont -- Judoigne about 12 Miles S. E. of Louvain.
Gemblours -- found from E. to W. Genape -- Nivelle --

. 2. The Circle of Westphalia.
Divided into North-East, between the Weser and Elm Chapter T. Osnaburge. Middle,
between the Elm and the Rhine Munster. South-West, betw. the Rhine and Cir.
Belg. Liege.

More particularly,

North-East comprehends The County of Oldenburg -- Chief Town Idem -- On the
Wefer from N. to S. Hoya -- are Idem Diepholt -- Idem Schomberg -- Idem -- The
Principal of Minden Idem -- The County of Embden or Emdent Nigh unto, or upon
the Elm, from N. to S. E. ^^^^^seland Linge -- Idem The Bishop of Osnaburg.
Idem The County of Tecklenburg Idem Ravensburg Idem Middle comprehends The
County of Ben^hem -- Idem from N. W to S. E. The Bishopric of Munster Idem The
County of Lip -- Idem The Bishopric of Paderborne Idem The Durchy of
Westphalia Arensberge from E. to W. The County of Mark -- Ham -- Berge --
Dusseldorp. South West comprehends The Succession of the Dutchies of Cleves
Cleves N. to S. Juliers Juliers The Bishopric of Liege -- Liege W. of Juliers.

. 3. The Circle of Lower Saxony.
Divided into North -- Chief Town Hamburge. Middle -- Lunenburge. South --
Magdeburge.

More particularly, North the D of Holstein comprehending the D of Ditmarsh --
Chief Town Meldorp -- Hamburg -- From W. to E. Holstein prop Kiel -- Stormaria
Geluckstat Wagerland Lubeck -- Lawenburg -- are those of Lawenburg. Mecklenburg
-- Wismar Middle the D of Bremen -- -- are those of Eremen -- W. to E. Ferden
-- Ferden -- Lunenburg -- Lunenburg South Hildersheim, a Bishopric Is that of
Hildersheim -- W. to E. Brunswick, a Duchy -- Brunswick and Wolfenbuttle
Halberstat, a Principality Is that of Halberstat -- Megdeburg, an Archbish Is
that of Megdeburg --

Besides these are, The D. of Hanover -- Chief Town Idem, 16 m. N. W. of
Hildersheim. Gruppenhagen Idem, 37 m. S. Gottingen -- Idem, 14 m. S. of
Gruppenhagen. The C. of Reinstein -- Blackenberg, 10 m. S. W. of Halberstat.
Weringen -- Elbingeroda, 12 m.

. 10. The Circle of Upper Saxony.
Divided into South -- Chief Town Wittenberg. North -- Stetin.

More particularly,

South contains the D. of Saxony, properly so called -- Chapter T. Wittenberg -- N.
to S. Marq of Misnia -- Dresden -- Lantgr. of Thuring -- Erfurt, Westward North
contains the Mar. of Brandenburg Alt-mark, West. Chief Town Stendal Berlin from
S. to N. Middlemark -- Berlin Newmark, East. Custrin D. of Pomerania Ducal,
East. Camin Stetin Royal, West. Stetin

Besides these, are many little Princes of the House of Saxony scattered up and
down (or nigh unto) the Landtgrave of Thurin, particularly these following;

The Princip. of Anhalt, [South to Magdeburg] Chapter Town Bernburg. The D. of
Weimar -- Chief Town Idem, 13 miles E. of Erfurd. Gotha -- Idem, 14 miles W.
Eisenach -- Idem, 26 miles W. The E. of Schwartsberg -- Idem, 24 miles S.
Beichlingen -- Idem, 20 mil. N. E. Mansfield -- Idem, 55 m. S. W. of
Wittenberg. The Bishopric of Hall -- Idem, 36 m. S W.

. 5. The Circle of the Lower Rhine.
Divided into East -- Chief Town Heidelberg. West -- Cologne.

More particularly,

It comprehends Bishopric of Cologne -- Chief Town Cologne between Juliers.
The Rhine. The Palate. of the Rhine- Heidelberg upon the Neckar. Archbishopric
of Triers- Idem upon the Moselle. Mentz- Idem upon the Rhine. Bishopric of
Worms -- Idem upon the Rhine. D. of Simmeron -- Idem 33 m. W. of Mentz.
Rhinegravc -- Kirn ij m. S. of Simmeren. Counties of Meurs -- Idem 28 m. S. E.
of Cleves in Westp. Sponheim. Creutznach 20 m. S. W. of Mentz. Veldentz- Idem
17 m. N E. of Triers. Leyningen Idem 12 m. S. W. of Worms.

. 6. The Circle of the Upper Rhine.
Divided into North -- Chief Town Cassel. South -- Francfort.

More particularly,

It contains D. of Zueybruck, or Deux Ponts -- Chief Town Idem, 44 m. all W. of
Worms. Landtgr. of Hesse Cassel -- Cassel farthest North. Darmstat -- Idem
betw. the Rhine and Maine. Territories of Francfort -- Idem upon the Matne.
Counties of Waldeck -- Idem from N. to S. on the W. of the Landtgr. Hesse
Cassel. Solms -- Idem Isenlurg -- Idem from W. to S. E. on the North of the
Rhine. Nassan -- Idem Catzenclbogen Idem Hanan -- Idem Erpacl: -- Idem

. 7. The Circle of Franconia.
Divided into South -- Chief Town Nurenburg. North -- Coburg.

More particularly,

It contains The Territ. of Nurenburg Chief Town Idem on a branch of the Maine.
Marq. of Onspach -- Idem, 23 m. W. of Nurenburg. Culenbach -- Idem from E. to
W. Bishopr. of Bamberg -- Idem Wartzburg Idem Aichstat -- Idem, 34 m. S. of
Nurenburg.

Besides these are

The State of the great Master of the Teutonick Order, chief Town Margentheim,
57 Miles W. of Nurenburg.

As also several Counties, but chiefly those of

Reineck -- Chief Town Idem -- from N. to S. in the W. part of this Circle.
Wertheim -- Idem -- Holach -- Oringen -- Papenheim -- Idem 12 m. W. of the
Bishopric of Aichstat. Schwartzenberg -- Idem 32 m. N. W. of Nurenberg. Castle
-- Idem 23 m. S. W. of Bamberg.

. 8. The Circle of Suabia.
Divided into East -- Chief Town Ausburg. West -- Stugart.

More particularly, Suabia comprehends the D. of Wirtenberg -- Chief Town are
Stugart -- Nigh or upon the Neckar. Tubingen -- Bishopr. of Constance. Idem
upon the Lake Constance. Ausburg -- Idem upon the Lech. Marq. of Baden -- Idem
38 m. W. from Stugart. Burg^^ -- Idem 10 m. W. from Ausburg. Ortnaw --
Offenburg 20 m. S. from Baden. Princ. of Fu^stenberg Idem 36 m. N. W. from
Constance. Hoenzolern -- Idem ij m. S. from Tubingen. Count of Otting -- Idem
38 m N. W. from Ausburg. Reckbery -- Gemund 43 m. W. from Otting. Koniseck --
Idem 18 m. N. from Constance. Baron of Waiburg -- Idem, or Waldsee, 30m. N. E.
fr. Consta. Limpurg -- Idem 37 m. W. from Otting. Justingen -- Idem 28 m. S. E.
from Stugart. Territ. of Fuggers -- Babenhausen 30 m. S. W. fr. Ausburg. Ulm --
Idem 38 m. W. from Ausburg. Abacy of Kempten -- Idem 50 m. S. W. from Ausburg.

To the Circle of Suabia we add Alsatia, chief Town is Strasburg.

It Is divided into Higher, Southward. Lower, Northward.


Higher contains the Towns of Freiburg -- From E. to W. Brisach -- Colmar --
Lower contains the Towns of Strasburg -- S. to N. Hageno^ -- Zabern, Westward.

. 9. The Circle of Bavaria.
Divided into North -- Chief Town Leutchenberge. South -- Munick or Munchen.

More particularly,

North contains Nortgow, or the Palatinate of Bavaria,

Comprehending Landtgr. of Leutchenberge Chief Town Idem N. to S. W. Territor.
of Sultzbach -- Idem Amberge -- Idem Abacy of Walthausen -- Idem N. to S.
County of Chambe -- Idem South contains D. and Elect. of Bavaria Higher,
Southw. Chapter T. Munick or Munchen. Lower, Northw. Ratisb. or Regensp.
Archbishopric of Saltzburge Idem, Southward.

Besides these are several other Dominions, as particularly

The Duchy of Neuburge, [Ch. Town, Idem] 10 miles S. of the Bishopric of
Aichstat in Franconia. The Bishopr. of Passaw -- Chapter To. Idem 68 m. E. of
Ratisbonne. Freisengen Idem 10 m. N. of Munick.

. 10. The Circle of Austria.
Divided into Lower, Eastward -- Chief Town Vienna. Higher, Westward --
Inspruck.

More particularly,

Lower contains Arch D. of Austria East Chief Town Vienna Vienna, chief of the
whole. West Lintz D. of Stiria higher, W. Judenburg Judenburg from N. to S.
lower, E. Gratz -- Carinthia higher, W. Willach -- Clagenfurt lower, E.
Clagenfurt Carniola higher, N. Laubach -- Laubach -- lower, S. Loes -- Higher
contains the County of Tyrol -- Inspruck -- from N. to S. Bishopr. of Brixen
Idem --

Besides these are some other petty Soveraignties, especially these two
following*

The D. of Goritia -- in Carniola 40 miles W. of Laubech. Gilley -- 36 miles E.

Under this Circle is ordinarily comprehended Bohemia, containing

The K. of Bohemia, prop. so called Chief Town Prague -- S. to N. Lusatia
higher, Northward -- Soraw (...) lower, Southward -- Pantzen Moravia Eastern --
Weiskirk Olmutz Western -- Olmutz D. of Silesia higher, Southward Troppaw
Breslaw lower, Northward Breslaw

After the 10 Circles of Germany follows Switzerland, comprehending 13
Cantons, with several Confederate Cities and Proefectures.

(1.) The thirteen Cantons are those of Zurick, Switz, Glaris, Solothurn, Bern,
Underwald, Basil, Schafhousen, Lucern, Zug, Friburg, Apenzel.


These Cantons are set down according to their Votes in the general Diets; each
of them has a capital City of its own Name except Uri (chief Town Altorf) and
Underwald (chief Town Stant) and are reduced to three Classes.

Viz. West comprehending Basil -- from N. to S. Soloturn -- Bern -- Freiburg --
Middle comprehending Schafhouse -- from N. to S. Zurich -- Zug -- Lucern --
Switz -- Underwald -- Uri -- East comprehending Apenzil -- from N. to S. Glaris
-- (2.) The chief Confederates of the Switzers are the Grisons, chapter T. Coire W.
of the County of Tirol. City of Geneva -- Lake of Geneva. (3.) The chief
Praefectures of the Switzers are Baden -- on the W. N. W. of Zurick. Bremgarten
Mellingen -- Sargans* N. of the Grisons.

To the German Empire we might here annex the Kingdom of Hungary, it being now
almost entirely under the Emperor; But of it when we come to Turkey in Europe.

THIS great Body being divided (as aforesaid) into Ten Circles; and the first
of these (viz. Belgium or the Netherlands) being most observable upon several
accounts; we shall take a particular View of the same, as it consists of
Holland and Flanders, and then treat of all the rest conjunctly, under the
general Title of Upper Germany. Therefore,

. 1. HOLLAND.
THis Country (of old Batavia, a part of Ancient Belgium) is (...) by the
Italians and Spaniards, Holanda; by Name.
the French, Hollande; by the Germans and English, Holland; so called (as many
imagine) from Hol and land, two Teutonic words, signifying a low or hollow sort
of Land: But others choose rather to d^^ive the Name from Oeland (an Island in
the Baltic Sea) whose Inhabitants, being great Pirates, and frequently ranging
these Seas, at (...) did seize upon, and settle themselves in this part of the
(...)

The Air of this Country is generally thick and moist, by reason of the
frequent Fogs which arise from the many Lakes and Channels with which this
Country abounds; And to Moistness of the Air it is, that we may impute the
Cause of the ^ency of Agues, to which the Inhabitants are so subject. The ^site
Place of the Globe to Holland is that part of the vast Paci^^^ Ocean, between
205 and 210 Degrees of Longitude, with 51 and 54 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Country lying very low, and in the Tenth North Climate; Its Soil is
Naturally wet and fenny, but the industrious Soil.
Inhabitants do so drain it by a vast Multitude of Artificial Channels, that
the Ground is made very fit both for Pasture and Tillage especially the former,
they employing the greatest part of their Land in Grazing vast Herds of Kine.
The Length of the Days and Nights is the same as in England, South of the
Humber.

Although the Commodities of this Country, proceeding from its natural Growth,
may (strictly speaking) Commodities.
be reckoned only Butter and Cheese; yet by reason of the many useful
Manufactures which this People encourage at home, (the very Materials of which
are brought from other Nations) and that wonderful Trade which they manage
abroad in most Parts of the known World, we may reckon it as a Public
Warehouse of the richest and best Commodities of all Nations.

The chief Remarkables in Holland are these following; viz. (1.) The vast
Multitude of Artificial Rarities.
Sluices and Canals, being a Work of prodigious Expense and great Convenience
both for Traffic and Traveling. (2.) The Burg in Leyden (being reckoned a
notable Piece of Antiquity) with the many rare Curiosities to be seen in the
famous University there. (3.) The Curious Fountains (especially that called The
Basin of Venus) and the two great Cascades or Water-falls in the pleasant
Gardens belonging to Loo. (4.) The brazen Font in St. Peter's Church in
Zutphen, Remarkable for its admirable Workmanship. (5.) The two brazen Dishes
in the Village of Losdun, in which were Baptized (Anno 1276.) by Don William,
Suffragan Bishop of Treves, 365 Children born at one Birth by the Countess of
Heneberg, Daughter to Florent the 4th Earl of Holland. (6.) The Remarkable
Stone Quarry near Maestricht, which looks like a vast Subterraneous Palace, it
reaching under a large Hill, supported by some Thousands of square Pillars
[commonly 20 Foot high] between which are spacious Walks and many private
Retirements of great Use in time of War, they serving as a sure Refuge to the
neighboring Country People, who commonly resort thither with their Goods when
alarmed by an approaching Enemy. (7.). The Room where the Synod of Dort was
held Anno 1619, with the Seats as they then stood, is shown to Strangers as
another Curiosity of this Country. To these we may add the stately brazen
Statue of the famous Desid. Erasmus in the City of Rotterdam, as also the
little obscure House where that Great and Eminent Man was born, which is
likewise shown to Strangers, having this Distich over its Door.

Aedibus his ortus, Mundum decor avit Erasmus
Artibus ingenuis, Relligione, Fide.
Here is but one Archbishopric in this Country, (viz. Utricht) and that only
Titulary. Archbishopricks.


Under the Archbishop of Utrecht are Five Titular Suffragans; viz. Bishoprics.


Those of Deventer, Groningen, Harlem, Leuwarden, Middleburgh.


Universities in this Country are those of Universities.
Leyden, Utrecht, Franeker, Groningen, Harderwick.


The Natives of this Country are reckoned none of the Politest sort of People
either in Thought or Behavior, Manners.
especially the latter, in which they so little endeavor to follow the various
Modes and nice Punctilio's of Ceremony in Use among their Neighbors the
French, that they choose rather to run to the other extreme. The chief, if not
only Quality of this People, (besides the singular Neatness of their Houses) is
that wonderful Genius to a laudable Industry, wherewith they seem to be
Universally inspired; Persons of all Ages, Sexes and Stations, being some way
or other usefully employed. By which industrious Hand, in carrying on several
profitable Manufactures at home, and managing a prodigious Trade abroad, they
have of late advanced themselves to such a height of Power and Treasure, as to
become even terrible to crowned Heads.

The Language here spoken is the Low Dutch (a Dialect of the German) having
several corrupted French and Latin Language.
words intermixed: a Language that has nothing to recommend it to Strangers.
How it differs from the High German, will best appear by their Pater Noster,
which runs thus; Onse Vader die in de hemelen [Ziit] Uwen Naem werde
geheylight. Uw' koninckritche home. Uwen will geschiede geliick in den hemel
[alsoo] oock op der atrden. Ons' dagelicks broot geef ons heden. End vergeeft
ons onse schulden geliick oock wy vergeven onse schuldenaren. End en lept ons
niet in versoeckinge ^naer verlost ons van den boosen. Amen.

The seven Provinces of Holland, being under a Democratical Government, are (as
it were) several Commonwealths, Government.
each Province being a distinct State, yea and every City, having an
independent Power within it self to judge of all causes, whether Civil or
Criminal, and to inflict even Capital Punishments: But all joining together,
make up one Republic the most considerable in the World; which Republic is
governed by the Assembly of the States General, consisting of Seven Voices,
each Province having One To this Assembly (whose place of Meeting is ordinarily
at the Hague) belongs the Power of making War or Peace; receiving and
dispatching of Ambassadors; inspecting into the Condition of Frontier Towns,
and Assigning what Sums of Money must be levied for the public Service.
Matters are not determined here in this Assembly by Plurality of Voices, but
all the Provinces must come to an unanimous Consent; and each Representative
returning to his respective Province, must propose the Matter in a Provincial
Assembly, consisting of Deputies from all Cities of that Province; which
Deputies must also return, and receive the Consent of their Principals,
otherways nothing can be concluded. In this Assembly of the States General, the
seven Provinces have still given their Voices in order following; viz. Guelders
and Zutphen first, (because Guelders is the eldest, and her Plenipotentiaries
did first propose the Union) then Holland; 3dly, Zeland; 4thly, Utrecht; 5thly,
Friesland; 6thly, Over-Yssel, and lastly, Groningen. Assistant to this Assembly
is the Council of State, composed of twelve Persons, (whereof Guelderland
sends, 2; Holland, 3; Zealand, 2; Utrecht, 2; Friexland, 1; Over-Yssel, 1; and
Groningen, 1;) whose business is to deliberate Previously upon those Matters
which are to be brought before the States General; as also to state the Expense
for the succeeding Year, and to propose Ways and Means how to Levy the same.
Subservient to this Council is the Chamber of Accounts (composed of two
Deputies from each Province) whose Office it is to examine the public Accounts,
and dispose of the Finances. And whenever the States do Order the fitting out
a Fleet, the Care of the same, and Ordering of all Marine Affairs do rely upon
the Council of the Admiralty, to which are Subordinate five Colleges in the
three Maritime Provinces, viz. Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, who take Care
to execute all Orders of that Council according as they are sent to them from
time to time.

The Ensigns Armorial of the Seven United Provinces or States of Holland are
Or, a Lion Gules, holding with Artns.
one Paw a Cutleas, and with the other a Bundle of seven Arrows closely bound
together, in allusion to the seven Confederate Provinces, with the following
Motto, Concordia res parvae crescunt.

No Country in Europe can boast of more Religions, and yet perhaps no part of
Christendom may be truly said to Religion.
be less Religious than this is. Here indeed we may see all Sects and Parties
in the open Profession of their respective Tenets (all Professions being
tolerated for Tradings sake) and yet that which the Apostle St. James (chap. 1.
v. 27.) calls the pure and undefiled Religion before God and the Father, is as
little (if not less) known here than in any Christian Country whatsoever. That
publicly professed and generally received is the Reformed Religion according
to the Tenets of Judicious Calvin. Christianity was first planted in this
Country about the same time with Upper Germany; of which afterward.

. 2. FLANDERS.
THis Country (the ancient Gallia Belgica) it termed by the Italians, Flandra;
by the Spaniards, Flandes; by the Name.
French, Flandres; by the Germans, Flandern; and by the English Flanders, so
called (as some imagine) from Flamdebert, Nephew to Clodion the 2d King of
France, who flourisht about the beginning of the fifth Century. But others are
willing rather to derive it from Flandrina, Wife to Liderick the 2d, who was
Prince of Bun, and Grand Forester of Flanders, and governed it according to the
Orders of Charlemaigne and Lewis Debonnaire.

The Air of these various Provinces is generally esteemed indifferent
healthful, yet the Moistness of the Soil does frequently Air.
occasion thick Fogs in the Winter, which would prove very prejudicial to the
Inhabitants, did not dry Easterly Winds from the main Continent purify the Air,
and occasion hard Frosts for several Months. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Flanders, is that Part of the vast Pacifick Ocean between 205 and 210 Degrees
of Longitude, with 49 and 51 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 9th Northern Climate) is not the
same in all Parts, being in some considerably Soil.
better than others, but yet good in all; So fertile is it in Grain, Roots, and
many sorts of Fruits, that it is hardly to be paralleled by any Spot of Ground
in the same Climate. In the Counties of Hannonia and Namur, as likewise in the
Bishopric of Liege, are found some Mines of Iron and Lead, with Quarties of
Marble, and several Pits of excellent Coal. The Length of the Days and Nights
is the same, as in the North of France and South of England.

The chief Commodities of this Country, being the Product of their
Manufactures, are Tapestries, Commodities.
Worsted-Stuffs, Linen Cloth, Wrought Silks, Camblets, Lace, etc.

Near to St. Omers is a large Lake, in which are diverse floating Islands, most
of them inhabited, and moveable Rarities.
by Ropes tied to strong Poles fixed fast in the Ground; and in one of them is a
Church with a Monastery of the Order of St. Bernard. At Tongres (10 Miles
North-West from Liege) are to be seen some Monuments of ancient Temples, and
other Buildings, erected by the Romans. In the stately Cathedral of Antwerp
(dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) are no less than 66 different Chapels. At
Ghent is a Tower called Belfart, in which hangs a Bell named Roland, which
weighs 11000 Pounds. Remarkable is the Sounding-Gallery in Brussels, which
repeats an Echo 15 times; and Spaa or Spaw (a Village in the B. of Liege) is
famous, all the World over, for its curious Springs of Medicinal Waters.

Arch-Bishopricks in this Country are those of A. Bishoprics.
Malines, Cambray.


Bishoprics in this Country are those of Bishoprics.
Liege, Antwerp, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, Ruremond, Bois le Duc. Arras, Tournay,
S. Omers, Namur.


Universities in this Country are those of Universities.
Louvaine, Doway, Liege.


The Inhabitants of these various Provinces being (for the most part) a mixture
of Spanish, French and Dutch; Manners.
their Character in general will be best learned by considering the respective
Characters of these three Nations (which may be seen in their proper places)
and comparing them one with another.

The Language vulgarly used in Flanders is that called the Waloon, (excepting
those Provinces which border on Language.
Holland, where the Dutch prevails) which is a corrupt French, with an
intermixture of several Dutch, and many Spanish words. How it differs from
the pure French, will best appear by their Pater Noster, which runs thus: Nos
peer qui et au Cieux; sanctify soi te Nom, Adveen ton Rejam; ta Volonte se
fait en terre comme es Cieux; Done noy ajord 'huy no pain quotidien: and
pardonne no det comme no pardonnon a nos detteux; and ne no indu en tentation;
mais delivre nos des maux. Ansi soit il.

This Country (viz. all those Provinces belonging to the Spaniard before the
late War, and now restored) does Government.
acknowledge his Catholic Majesty as Supreme Lord, who Rules the same by his
Substitute, styled Governour-General of the Netherlands. Which Post is at
present enjoyed by his Electoral Highness Duke of Bavaria, and now made
Hereditary to him since Anno 1692. For his Assistance he is allowed three
Councils, viz. (1.) The Council of State, in which are transacted the
weightiest Affairs; such as relate to Peace and War; Leagues and Alliances,
etc. (2.) The Privy Council, which determines the Limits of Provinces,
publishes Edicts, and decideth Matters brought thither by Appeal from other
Courts of Judicature. (3.) The Council of Finances, to whom belongs the Care
and Management of the Royal Revenue and Taxes, supervising the Accounts of
Receivers, and proportioning the Expense or Charge of the War. To Levy Money,
and to Enact new Laws, is the Business of the Convention of the Estates,
(consisting of the Nobility, principal Persons of the Clergy, and Deputies of
the chief Cities) who ordinarily Assemble at Bruxels when called by the
Governour-General. For the better maintaining the Peace through all the
Provinces, and taking due Care of the Standing Forces, each Province has a
particular Governor appointed in Subordination to the Governour-General. And
for an Universal Administration of Justice, every Province has its peculiar
Provost, and over all is appointed one Grand Provost, whose Power in Criminal
Matters is reckoned very great.

See Spain. Arms.


The Religion predominant in all the Provinces of the Netherlands, before the
dawning of that happy day of our Religion.
Reformation, was entirely the Doctrine of the Roman Church: But the Errors and
Absurdities of that Doctrine being openly exposed to the World by our wise
Reformers; the King of Spain (to hinder a farther Progress in that matter) set
up the most severe and barbarous Court of Inquisition, which occasioned no
small Disturbance, and at last a bloody War, that ended in a total Alienation
of the Seven United Provinces, the other Ten still remaining in the Profession
of the Romish Religion (as at this day) and that in its grossest Errors.
Christianity was planted in this Country about the same time with the United
Provinces.

. 3. UPPER GERMANY.
THis Country (containing only a part of Ancient Name.
Germany as also a little of Gaul, Illyricum, with some of Old Italy) is termed
by the Italians Alta Allemagna; by the Spaniards, Ale^^nia al^a; by the French,
Haute Allemagne; by the Germans, Overteutschland; and by the English, Germany:
Why so called, is much Controverted by our Modern Critics, some German Authors
being willing to derive its Etymology from words in their own Language as
^^or-mannen, i. e. very much Men. Others from Geren signifying to Gather,
because the Germans seemed to be an (...) of many Nations; others from Gar and
Man, to denote that they were a Warlike People. Some (though with little ground)
would fain allow it an Hebrew Derivation: But the most probable Opinion of all
is, that the Inhabitants of this Country were called Germani by the Romans,
either because they were a sincere and honest sort of People, or thereby to
denote that they were Brothers to their Neighbors the Gauls.

The Air of this Country differs considerably according to the Situation of
the various Parts of this large Continent. Air.
Toward the North, it is generally very Cold; but in the Southmost Provinces
it is of the same Temper as in those places of France which lie under the same
Parallels. The opposite Place of the Globe to Germany, is that part of the vast
Pacifick Ocean between 215 and 225 Degrees of Longitude, with 45 and 55 Degrees
of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 8th, 9th, 10th, and 11th North
Climate) is very different according Soil.
to the Situation of its different Parts. In the Southern Circles, as also
those in the middle part of the Continent, particularly the Upper and Lower
Rhine, there is hardly any Country in the World can excel them for plenty of
Fruits, Corn and Wine: but toward the North, namely the two Saxonies and
Westphalia, the Soil is not near so fertile, especially in Wine (Grapes never
coming to full perfection there;) however as for Corn and Pasturage, they are
abundantly furnished with them; and the whole Country in the main is tollerably
pleasant, healthful and profitable, abounding not only with all things
necessary, but also with many of the Comforts of human Life. The longest Day in
the North-most Part is about 17 Hours. The shortest in the South-most, 8 Hours,
and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country are Corn, Metals, Allom, Salt, Wine,
Flesh, Linen, Quicksilver, Commodities.
Armours, and Iron Works, etc.

What Things do mostly merit the Epithet of Rare and Curious in this vast
Country, are reducible to these Rarities.
following Heads; viz. (1.) Some very observable Springs; as That near Geesbach
in Alsace, whose Top is covered with a foul fat Oily substance, ordinarily used
by the Peasants thereabouts, as common Wheel Grease; Another near Paterborn in
Westphalia, called Methorn, which has three Streams very different from one
another, both in Color, Taste, and Qualities; and a Third in the Diocese of
Paterborn, observable in that it loses it self twice every 24 Hours, returning
always back at the Interval of 6 Hours, and that with such Violence as to drive
three Mills not far from its Source. Here also are many Salt Springs;
particularly That near Lunenburg, in the D. of Lunenburg; another at Hall in
Upper Saxony, and a third at Saltzwedel in the Marquisate of Brandenburg. To
these we may add a vast multitude of Springs, whose Waters are highly prized
both for Purging and Bathing, especially the latter; as particularly Those at
Stugart in Wirtenburg; Those at Aix le Chapelle in Westphalia; and those in the
Marquisate of Baden, from whence the whole Country derives its Name. (2.) Some
strange kind of Lakes; particularly that in Carniola, called the
Zirchnitzer-Sea, in length about two German miles, and one broad; Observable
for its many subterraneous Caves and Passages, into which both the Water and
Fishes of the Lake do yearly retire in the month of June, and return again
about September. As also another in Suabia; the Nature of whose Waters is such,
that they actually singe Fishing-Nets, when sunk to the bottom. (3.) Remarkable
Caves, particularly that near Blackenburg in Lower Saxony, commonly called
Buman's Hole; of which none has yet found the End, though many have traveled a
vast way into it on purpose to come at the same. Another called
Grotto-Popetschio, with many other subterraneous Caverns in Carniola, near the
Zirchnitzer-Sea abovementioned And finally that near Hamelen (about 30 miles
from Hanover) at whose mouth stands a Monument expressing the Loss of 130
Children, who were swallowed up alive in that very place above 400 Years ago.
(4.) Stately Edifices, especially some famous Cathedrals, as particularly those
of Strasburg and Magdeburg, (in the latter of which are 49 Altars) as also that
of Ulm, Remarkable for its curious Organ so much talked off, it being 93 Foot
high, and 28 broad; being likewise furnished with 16 pair of Bellows, and
having Pipes of such a prodigious Bigness, that the largest of them is 13
Inches Diameter. (5.) Some Observable Rocks and Stones, particularly those two
Rocks nigh to Blackenburg (abovementioned) which naturally represent two Monks
in their proper Habits, and that as exactly as if designed for such; and near
to Blackenburg, are several Stones dug out of the Ground, having on them the
Representation of diverse Animals, especially Fishes in a neighboring Lake; and
sometimes the Resemblance of a Man. In another Lake, in the Earldom of
Mansfeild, are Stones exactly shaped like Frogs and various sorts of Fishes.
Add to these the Remarkable Stones commonly found upon Count Calenberg (about
two German miles from Vienna) having the lively Impression of Trees and Leaves
of Trees upon them: As also a Quarry in those Parts, out of which are dug some
Stones equally transparent with refined Sugar Candy. (6.) Many choice Cabinets
of Rarities, especially That in the Palace of Inspruck, with another at
Dresden; but the chief of all is that in the Emperor's Palace at Vienna, whose
Curiosities are so vastly numerous, that a bare Catalogue of them makes a
complete Volume in Folio. To all these add that modern Curiosity kept at Mentz,
and commonly shown to Strangers, viz. a Leaf of Parchment, on which are fairly
written twelve different sorts of Hands, with variety of Minatures and
Draughts, curiously done with a Pen, and that by one Thomas Schuveiker, who was
Born without Hands, and performed the same with his Feet. As for the famous Tun
of Heidelberg (being 31 Foot long and 21 high) it is so notoriously known, that
we need say nothing of it.

Arch-Bishopricks in this Country are those of A. Bishoprics.
Mentz, Magdeburg, Triers, Saltzburg, Cologn, Bremen. Prague.


Bishoprics in this Country are those of Bishoprics.
Metz, Brandenburg, Paderborn, Brixen, Toul, Havelberg, Constance Gurk, Verdun,
Spire, Halberstadt Vienna, Liege, Worms, Bamburg Newstadt, Munster, Strasburg,
Freisenghen Lubeck, Minden, Wirtzburg, Ratisbon Ratzburg, Osnaburg, Aichstat,
Passaw Scheweirin, Meissen, Verden, Chiemse Olmutz, Maesburg, Ghur, Seckaw,
Leutmeritz, Maumburg, Heldesheim, Lavant, Koningsgratz.


Universities in this Country are those of Universities.
Vienna, Leipsick, Francfort on Oder, Helmstadt, Prague, Erfurt, Marpurg,
Sigen, Mentz, Friburg, Strasburg, Paderborn, Cologn, Ingoldstadt, Gipswald,
Altorfe, Triers, Tubingen, Dillinghen, Olmutz, Liege, Rostock, Jena, Kiel,
Heidelberg, Wittenberg, Lewenghen, Gratz.


This People has a mighty Genius for Mechanical sort of Learning; and several
of them are famous for Manners.
some singular Inventions, particularly that of the fatal Instrument the Gun,
accidentally discovered by one Bartholdus Swart a Friar, when making a Chimical
Experiment with a Crucible set over the Fire, having Saltpetre and Sulphur, and
other such like Ingredients, intermixed. They are also said to have found out
that most useful Art of Printing; but the Hollanders do eagerly deny them the
honor of that Invention, ascribing the same to one Laurence Coster of Harlem;
and upon strict enquiry, it appears that the Germans had indeed the first hint
of this Art from Holland, and that they only improved and perfected the same at
Mentz. The most noted of the many mechanical Operations of this People of late,
is that curious Watch of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, set in the Jewel of
his Ring; as also that Clock of the Elector of Saxony's fixed in the Pommel of
his Saddle. As for the Iron Fly and Wooden Eagle of Regiomontanus, they are so
well known, that it is superfluous even to name them.

The Language here used is that called the High Dutch; a Language very Ancient,
and generally esteemed both Language.
Noble and Manly in the Pronunciation, more becoming a General than a Courtier.
None of the Western European Tongues has less Affinity with the Latin than it
has. The Maternal Languages of several Kingdoms and different States in Europe,
are Originally from the German. It Is now divided into a great many Dialects,
very different from one another; The purest of which is generally esteemed that
spoken in Misuia. Paternoster in the High German runs thus: Unser Vatter der
du bist in himmel, geheyliget werde dein Nahim. Zukomm uns dein Rich; dein
Will geschene uf erden, wte im himmel. Unser taeglich brodt gibbuns heut: und
vergibuns unser schuldt, als wir vergoben unsern schuldigern; und fuchr uns
nicht in Versuchung; sonder erlaese uns vom ubel. Amen.

This great Body comprehends above three hundred different Soveraignties, but
all (or most of them) are Homagers to one Head, owned as Supreme, viz. the
Government.
Emperor of Germany. The Empire is Elective, and Governed by Dyets, almost
like the General Estates of France. The standing Law of the Empire (which
binds all the several States as the various members of one Body) is the Civil
or Roman mixed with the Canon; to which add the ancient Customs of the Germans,
and the various Statutes of the Dyets made from time to time. The several
States have their peculiar Laws obligatory within themselves. The whole Empire
being divided into Ten Circles, each of them (excepting Belgium, or the Circle
of Burgundy, which now is allowed no Vote in the Diet) has one or more
Directors who preside at their Assemblies; viz. For Westphalia, the Bishop of
Munster and Duke of Neuburg are Directors. For Lower Saxony, are the Marquess
of Brandenburg and Duke of Brunswick by turns. For Upper Saxony is the Elector
of Saxony. For the Lower Rhine are the Elector Palatine and Bishop of Worms.
For Franconia, are the Bishop of Bamberg and Marquess of Gulemback. For Suabia,
are the Duke of Wirtenberg, and Bishop of Constance. For Bavaria, are the
Elector of Bavaria, and Archbishop of Saltzburg. And lastly Austria, its
Director is the Archduke of Austria, or his Imperial Majesty. Two or three
Circles may meet when one of them is attackt from without, or in any Confusion
within. The General Dyets consist of three Bodies, viz. Electoral Princes,
other Princes, and Imperial Cities. But more particularly; In this great Body
we may reduce all Soveraignties to these Five; namely, The Emperor, The
Ecclesiastic Princes, The Electors, The Secular Princes, The Free Cities.


I. The Emperor, who (being of the House of Austria) does claim three sorts of
Dominion, viz. that of Austria as Hereditary; Bohemia, as his Right; and
Hungary by Election. In his Lifetime he causes his own Son or Brother, or
(failing of these) one of his nearest Kinsmen to be Crowned King of Hungary,
afterward King of Bohemia, and then (if the Electors are willing) he is also
Chosen King of the Romans, whereby he is Successor Presumptive to the Empire.
The Power of the Emperor is much impar'd by several Capitulations betwixt him
and the Princes of the Empire. It Is true, that only he can confer Honors,
create Princes, affranchize Cities, institute Universities, and suchlike: Yet
as to the Legislative Power, and that of Levying Taxes upon the whole Empire,
that is wholly lodged in the General Diet conjunctly with him; and by a late
Capitulation, he is not to enter into Alliance, or make War with any Foreign
Prince without Consent of the Electors. However, if we consider only his own
Hereditary Dominions, he is a Powerful Prince; and to support the Grandeur of
the Imperial Dignity, he is served by the greatest Princes of the Empire; is
addressed unto by the August Title of Caesar, and the Ambassadors of all
Crowned Heads and Free States in Europe, give place to those sent by him, at
what Foreign Court soever it be.

II. Electors, who are now Nine in Number, viz. these following: (1.) The
Archbishop of Mentz, who is Great Chancellor of the Empire in Germany; sits on
the Emperor's right hand in the Diet, and did formerly Crown the King of
Bohemia. (2.) The Archbishop of Triers or Treves, who is Great Chancellor of
the Empire in France; claims the first Vote in Electing the Emperor; and sits
over against him in the Diet. (3.) The Arch Bishop of Cologn, who is Great
Chancellor of the Empire in Italy; claims the first Vote in choosing the King
of the Romans; setting the Crown on his Head; and sits next the Emperor. (4.)
The King of Bohemia (who has only a Seat in the Election) is Cup Bearer, and
in the public Procession, walks next the Emperor or King of the Romans. (5.)
The Duke of Bavaria, who is Great Steward, and in time of the public
Procession carries the Globe before the Emperor. (6) The Duke of Saxony, who
is Great Marshal of the Empire, and at the public Procession carries the
naked Sword before the Emperor. (7.) The Marquess of Brandenburg, who is great
Chamberlain, and at the public Procession, carries the Scepter before the
Emperor. (8) The Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who is Great Treasurer, and in
the Procession at Coronations scatters Medals among the People. (9.) The
Ninth Elector is Ernestus Augustus Duke of Brunswick, Lunenburg, Hanover, who
was added to the Electoral College in the Year 1693. These Princes have much
greater Authority, and enjoy, more ample Privileges than the other Princes of
the Empire. To them belongs not only a Right of electing the Emperor and
King of the Romans (as aforesaid) but also some allow them even a Deposing
Power. When the Emperor calls a Diet, he is obliged to ask their advice; and
during an Interreign, two of them (viz. the Elector of Saxony and Prince
Palatine of the Rhine) have Power to govern the Empire; the Jurisdiction of the
former extending over the Northern, and that of the others over the Southern
Circles of the Empire: but this Right of the Count Palatins is now disputable
by the Elector of Bavaria, who upon the Death of the last Emperor did actually
undertake and exercise the same.

III. Ecclesiastic Princes who (besides the first three Electors) are chiefly
these following, viz. Archbishop of Saltzburagt [Great Master of the Teutonick
Order] the Bishops of Liege, Munster, Spire, Worms, Wurtzburg, Strasburg,
Osnaburg, Bamberg, Paderborn, etc. and many Abbots and Abesses who are Absolute
over the Temporality of their Benefices; The Election to their various
Dignities belong wholly to their several Chapters, and they govern the People
in subjection to them as Sovereign Princes, without any cognizance of a higher
Power.

IV. Secular Princes, who are chiefly the Dukes of Lunenburg, Wurtemburg,
Mechlenburg, Sax-Lauenburg, etc. Marquess of Baden, Culembach, etc. The
Landgrave of Hess, Princes of East-Friezland, Nassau, Anhalt, etc. Counts of
Solms, Aversburg, etc. and many other Dukes, Marquesses and Landgraves; as also
some Earls and Barons who exercise a Sovereign Power over those in their own
Dominions.

V. Free Cities, which are either Imperial or Hans-Towns. Imperial Cities are
those who bear the Eagle of the Empire in their Arms, and have Right to send
their Deputies to the Diet of the Empire. Hans-Towns are those which about the
End of the 13th Century entered into a firm League of mutually assisting one
another in time of Distress, as also in carrying on such a Regular Commerce as
might universally tend to their advantage, and the public good of the Empire;
which Society increased to the Number of eighty Cities, who enjoyed great
Privileges, and exercised a peculiar Jurisdiction among themselves. For the
better Administration of which, they were divided into four Circles,
distinguished by the Names of four principal Cities, in which were established
their Courts of Judicatory, viz. Lubeck, Cologn, Brunswick, and Dantzick. But
this Society has been on the declining hand almost two hundred Years, and is
now become very inconsiderable.

Chief Courts in Germany for hearing and determining the great Causes of the
Empire, are two, viz. The Imperial Chamber, and Chamber of Vienna. (1.) The
Imperial Chamber (consisting of fifty Judges, called Assessors, whereof the
Emperor appoints the President, and four of the Principal Officers, each of
the Electors choosing One, and the rest being nominated by the other Princes and
States of the Empire) whose business is to determine all Disputes which arise
from time to time between the Princes, as also other Causes brought thither by
Appeal from Inferior Courts. The Seat of this Judicatory was formerly at
Spires, but now at Wetslar in Hesse. (2.) The Chamber of Vienna, whose Office
it is also to decide all Causes brought to it by Appeals from Inferior Courts,
and claims the same Authority with the Chamber of Spires. The Seat of this
Court is the Emperor's Palace, and either he himself, or his Deputy sits as
Chief, being assisted by a competent number of Judges, whereof several are
Professors of the Protestant Religion. In both those Courts the Emperor as
Sovereign, Judge, and President, pronounces Sentence when there in Person; and
in his Absence, those deputed by him, who representing himself are allowed to
carry the Imperial Scepter as a Mark of their Dignity. In particular Courts
they follow the Laws of the Empire, which consist in many Ancient
Constitutions; the Golden-Bull; the Pacification of Passaw; as also the
Treaties of Westphalia in the Saxon-Law established by Charlemain; and the
Roman by the Emperor Justinian; which last they observe wheresoever the Saxon
has not been received. All Princes, States, and Members of the Empire have (and
actually exercise) a Sovereign Power within their own Territories, except in
some particular Cases, wherein People may Appeal either to the Imperial Chamber
of Spires, or that at Vienna, commonly called the Aulic Council.

After the Government of Germany, we may add that of Switzerland. Geneva.


I. Switzerland (a large Commonwealth, consisting of several little ones, viz.
Thirteen Cantons, every one of them being absolute within their own
Jurisdiction) is under a Popular Government in the main, yet not strictly so in
respect of every particular Canton, those of Bern, Zurich, and Lucern, being
more properly under an Aristocracy than any other, since the Authority of the
Gentry does most prevail in them. However, the whole Body of the State,
considered as one Complex Republic, consists of three distinct Parts, viz.
The Switzers themselves distributed (as aforesaid) into Thirteen Cantons.
Secondly, Those States Confederate with them for their Common Liberty and
Protection. And Thirdly, The Prefectures subject to them, whether by Gift,
Purchase, or Chance. (1.) The Body of the Cantons, is governed by each Canton
having its particular Magistrate of their own choosing; by whom (with a standing
Council consisting of Persons elected out of the People) all particular
Controversies of the Canton are heard and dertermin'd. But when any Public
Cause occurs, which relates to all the Cantons, then each of them sends its
Commissioner to the General Diet, (which ordinarily meets at Baden) where every
Canton has one Vote, and Matters are determined by the major part. (2.)
Confederate States; The Chief of which (besides Geneva) are the Grisons, an
adjacent Commonwealth, governed in like manner as the Switzers. Of all the
Allies of the Switzers, there is none more Potent than these. They entered first
into a League one with another, Anno 1471. and afterward with the Switzers in
1491. Their Country lies among inaccessible Mountains, and hideous Precipices,
and they divide themselves into six Parts, viz. The Gray League. The League of
the House of God. The League of the Ten Jurisdictions. The Valteline. And
lastly, the Countries of Chiavana and Bormio. Some believe they derived the
Title of Grisons from the Custom of wearing Gray Scarfs, when first they entered
into the League together. (3.) Prefectures of the Switzers, particularly those
Countries and Cities of Baden and Sargans, with many other Towns and Villages
situated nigh unto, or among the Alps.

II. Geneva being a Free Republic, is governed by its own Magistrates, and is
in Confederacy with the Cantons of Switzerland, whom it resembles very much in
the Constitution of its Government. The Sovereignty of the State is lodged in a
Council of Two hundred, out of which a lesser Council consisting of Twenty five
is chosen (both which being for Life, serve for Checks one to another) and
finally out of these Twenty five, are elected four Principal Officers, whom
they call the Syndicks, who have the sole Management of the Commonwealth,
except it be in some great Matter, as making of Peace or War, Offensive or
Defensive Leagues, hearing Appeals, and such like General Concerns, which is
the Business of the Great Council to consider and determine.

The Emperor of Germany for Armorial Ensigns bears Quarterly. 1. Barwise,
Argent and Gules of eight Arms.
Pieces, for Hungary. 2. Argent, a Lion, Gules, the Tail noved, and passed in
Saltier, Crowned, Langed, and Armed, Or, for Bohemia. 3. Gules, a Fesse Argent,
for Austria. Party and bendwise, Argent and Azure, a border Gules, for Ancient
Burgundy. 4. Quarterly in the first and last Gules a Castle triple towered Or,
pur^led Sable, for Castile. In the second and third Argent, a Lion purple, for
Leon. The Shield crested with an Imperial Crown, closed and raised in shape of
a Miter, having betwixt the two Points a Diadem surmounted with a Globe and
Cross, Or. This Shield environed with a Collar of the Order of the Golden
Fleece, is placed on the Breast of an Eagle, displayed Sable in a Field, Or,
Diadem'd, membred and beck'd Gules, holding a naked Sword in the right Talon,
and a Scepter in the left. The two Heads signify the Eastern and Western
Empire; and for the Motto are these words, Uno avulso non deficit alter. But
the Emperor's peculiar devise is, Pax and salus Europae.

The Laws of the Empire give free Toleration to the public Exercise of three
Religions, viz. the Lutheran, Religion.
Calvinist, and Popish; and in some Places all three Parties celebrate Divine
Worship in one and the same Church, at different times of the Day, as among
others, at Manheim in the Palatinate, before it was ruined by the French. The
Reformation of Religion was begun here by Martin Luther about 1517. and
embraced by the Electors of Saxony, Brandenburg, Prince Palatine of the Rhine,
Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Brunswick, and most of the Free Cities.
Whereupon followed continual Wars and Troubles about Religion, and the Lands of
the Church, which the Protestants had possessed themselves of, till at last, by
the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648. 'twas concluded, That they of the Confession
of Ausburg should not be molested in any manner whatsoever; but to be secured
from all Prosecutions of Law and Violence. In this Posture things continued,
till of late, that the French King broke in upon the Empire, and took so many
Towns and Cities of it: In all which he dispossessed the Protestants of their
Rights, and established the Exercise of the Roman Religion. And this he has
endeavored to confirm by the last Treaty at Reswick, where his
Plenipotentiaries in Conjunction with the Emperor's, prevailed to insert into
the said Treaty a Clause, whereby it is agreed, That the Roman Catholic
Religion shall remain within the Places restored by France to the Emperor and
Empire, in the same Condition as it is exercised at present. And though the
Protestants long contested, and at last signed the Treaty, with a Protestation,
that the Clause in dispute should not be drawn into precedent for the future;
yet there is too great Reason to fear that the Popish Party has gained a
considerable Advantage in this Point. The various Parts of this Country
received the Light of the blessed Gospel at various times, and that by the
preaching of various Apostles, especially St. Thomas, Surnamed Didymus, one of
the Twelve,

POLAND by Robt. Morden*


SECT. V. Concerning Poland.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 34 30 of Long. its greatest Length is about 780.
53 30 between 48 00 of Latit. Breadth is about 600. 58 20 Being divided into
Three Classes, viz. East. Middle. West. East Class comprehends Lithuania --
Chief Town Vilna -- N. to S. Volinia -- Kiou -- Podolia -- Camenick -- Middle
Class comprehends Curland -- Mittaw -- N. to S. Samogitia -- Ros^^ie --
Polaquia -- Bie^^ko -- Little Russia Lemberge -- West Class comprehends --
Prussia -- Dantzick -- N. to S. (...) (...) -- Polonia prop. Cracovia --

Of all these in Order.

. 1. Lithuania, a Dukedom.
Palatinate of Troki -- Chief Town Idem -- W. to E. Wilna -- Idem -- Braslawen
-- Braslaw -- Poloczkien -- Poloczk -- Contains the Witepskien -- Witepsk --
Novogrodeck Idem -- W. to E. Minskien -- Minski -- Mscislawen Mscislaw -- D. of
Sluczk -- Idem -- W. to E Territory of Rohaczow -- Idem -- Rzeczica -- Idem --
Southward.

. 2. Volinia, a Province.
Contains the Palatinate of Luck, W. Chief Town Idem W. to E. Territory of
Kiow, E. Idem

. 3. Podolia, a Province.
Contains the Palatinate of Kamienieck Chief Town Idem W. to E. Braclaw -- Idem

. 4. Curland, a Dukedom.
Contains D. of Curland -- Chief Town Goldingen W. to E. Seineg^llen -- Mittaw

. 5. Samogitia, a Dukedom.
Contains the Territ of Ros^enne Chief Town Idem S. to N. Midnick Idem Schwnden
Idem

. 6. Poloquia, a Province.
Contains the Palatinate of Bressiti -- Chief Town Bresste S. to N. Beilskien
Bielsk

. 7. Little Russia, a Province.
Contains the Palatinate of Chelm Chapter T. Idem -- N. to S. Belz -- Idem --
Lemberg Idem, or Lwow, or Leopolis

. 8. Prussia, a Dukedom.
Divided into Royal, Westward Chief Town Dantzick W. to E. Ducal, Eastward
Koningsberg

. 9. Warsovia, a Dukedom not divided.
Its Chief Town is Warsaw, upon the Weisel.

. 10. Polonia, properly so called.
Divided into Lower, Northward. Upper, Southward.


Palate. of Posua -- Chief Town Idem -- W. to N. E. Kaliskic -- Gnesna --
Debrizin Idem -- Lower conttains the Plokskein Ploczko -- Siradia -- Idem -- W.
to E. Lancicia Idem -- Rava -- Idem -- Provin, of Cujava -- Uladislaw N. of
Lancicia. Upper contains the Palatinate of Lublin -- Idem -- N. to S. on the
Weissel. Sandomiria Sandomirz Cracovia Cracow --

THIS Country (being a considerable Part of the Ancient Sarmatia Europaea) is
termed by the Italians Name.
and Spaniards, Polonia; by the French, Pologne; by the Germans, Polen; and by
the English, Poland; so called (according to the best conjectures) from Polu or
Pole, which in the Sclavonic Language, signify a Plain or Champagne Country fit
for Hunting, there being none of old more esteemed for that than it was.

The Air of this Country is of a different Nature, according to the Nature and
Situation of the different Air.
Parts of that Kingdom; for in the Provinces toward the North-West it is very
Cold, yet withal very pure and wholesome; but toward the North-East,
particularly Lithuania, it is not only cold, but also very gross and
unwholesome, which chiefly arises from the vast number of Lakes in that part
of the Country, whose standing Waters send up Infectious Vapors, which
intermixing with the Air, do easily corrupt the whole Mass thereof. The
opposite Place of the Globe to Poland, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean
lying between 215 and 234 Degrees of Longitude, with 48 and 58 Degrees of South
Latitude.

The Nature of the Air having still a great Influence on the Soil: The
North-West Provinces of this Kingdom Soil.
(it lying in the 9th, 10, and 11th North Climate) are abundantly fertile,
affording many sorts of Grain and Fruits, not only enough for the Inhabitants,
but also to supply the wants of their Neighbors. In the middle part of this
Kingdom are some Mountains, and those well stored with several Mines of Silver,
Copper, Iron, and Lead. The Provinces toward the North and North-East are very
barren i^ Fruits and Corn, being full of Woods, Lakes, and Rivers. The longest
Day in the North most Parts of this Kingdom is 17 Hours; the shortest in the
Southmost is 8 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Wax, Linen, Boards, Masts for
Ships, Pitch, rich Furs, Commodities.
Salt, Amber, Potashes, Soap, Corn, Butter, Cheese, Rozin, Flax, Cordage,
Brimstone, etc.

In the Cathedral of Gnesna is kept an inestimable Treasure of Gold, Silver,
and enamelled Vessels given Rarities.
by diverse Kings of Poland, and Prelates of that See. Under the Mountains
adjacent to Kiow are diverse Grotto's, wherein are preserved, a great number of
Humane Bodies, still entire, although buried many Years ago; ^^^ing neither so
black, nor hard as the Egyptian Mummies; among these are two Princes arrayed in
the same Habit they usually wore when alive, who are shown to Travelers by the
Russian Monks. The place where those Bodies are preserved is a dry sandy
Ground, much of the same Nature with the Catacombs at Rome. In the Southern
parts of Poland are diverse Mountains, out of which is dug Salt in large Masses
as Stones out of a Quarry; and out of others they dig natural Earthen Cups,
which being exposed for some time in the open Air, become as hard as a Stone. In
the Deserts of Podolia, is a Lake, whose Waters do condense into solid Salt,
and that purely by the Heat of the Sun. Near to Cracovia are the Mines of
Sal-Gemme, which being two hundred Fathoms deep, do constantly employ above a
thousand Men, and yield a vast Revenue to the King. Near to Culm, in D. of
Prussia is a Fountain which constantly sends forth a mighty Sulphurous Steem,
and yet its Waters are never hot.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom are two, viz. those of Archbishopricks.
Gnesna, Leopol.


Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are these following, Bishoprics.
Cracow, Colmensee, Camieniec, Kranostaw, Posna, Vilna, Window, Mednick.
Ploczkow, Culm, Lutzko, Faussemberg, Premislaw, Kiow,


Universities in this Kingdom, are those of Universities.
Cracow, Koninsberg, Posna, Vilna.


The Polanders are generally Men of handsome, tall, and well-proportion'd
Bodies: Men of a good and Manners.
durable Complexion, and of so strong and vigorous Constitutions, that many of
them prove the best of Soldiers, being able to endure all the Fatigues of a
Military Life. The Nobility and Gentry do mightily affect the greatest Pomp and
Grandeur they can, whether in Diet, Apparel, or Equipage. They are generally
reckoned very Affable and Courteous to Strangers, extremely Jealous of their
Liberties and Privileges, but most Tyrannical toward the meaner sort of their
own People, treating the Peasants no better than mere Slaves; and in some
Places they exercise a Power of Life and Death upon their Domestic Servants:
Which absolute Power and severe Usage of the Nobles toward the Commonality,
together with the many Feuds between one another, have produced not only many
lamentable Disorders in this Kingdom, but also occasioned the final Revolt of
the Cossacks. One remarkable Quality of this People, is their singular Care in
Instructing of Youth in the Latin Tongue, which Persons of most Ranks do
usually speak very fluently; yea, and even many of the Female Sex are also good
Proficients therein.

The Poles being Originally descended from the Sclavi, do still speak a Dialect
of the Sclavonian Language.
Tongue; but the Poverty and Barrenness of their Language has obliged them to
borrow many Words from the Germans, especially Terms of Art. It is hard for
Strangers to learn the same to perfection, the Pronounciation being extremely
harsh by reason of the vast multitude of Consonants they use. The Lithuanians
have a particular Language of their own, which mightily abounds with corrupted
Latin words. In Livonia they have a Language peculiar to themselves, which is a
Dialect of the Lithuanian, however the German Tongue does mostly prevail in
several Cities, and the Russian in others. Paternoster in the Polish Tongue,
runs thus: Oyeza nasz ktory testes w niebissich swieczszie imie twoie: Przydz
krolistwo twoie, badz wola two jake w nibie, tak y waziemi. Chleba naszego pows
reduie day nam dzisziay. Vodpusc nam nasze winy, jackoymy odpuszezamy naszym
winowayzem. Ynie wwodz nas na pokuszenie: a le nas zabw ode zlego. Amen.

The large Body of Poland is subject unto, and governed by its own King, who is
Elective, and that by Government.
the Clergy and Nobility alone, the Commons having no hand in it. His
Government is termed Monarchical, but (if rightly considered) we may reckon it
rather a Real Aristocracy, the Nobility in their Elections having so limited
the King's Power, that without the Consent of the States General, he may
neither make War nor Peace, nor do any thing of Importance that concerns the
Public. Considering the true Nature and Constitution of this Government, we
may easily imagine that it is frequently liable to Inter-reigns, whether by
Death, Deposition, or Resignation, as also Intestine Broils and Commotions
(witness the late Election) when the Parties electing do jarr in their choice.
During an Inter-reign, or when the King is absent from his Kingdom, (as
sometimes in the Field against the Turks) the Archbishop of Gnesna does
ordinarily officiate as King; but if no Archbishop of Gnesna, then the Bishop
of Ploczko exercises that Power; and in case that that See be also Vacant,
then the Bishop of Posna undertakes the same. The whole State is commonly
considered, as divided into two principal Parts, viz. the Kingdom of Poland,
and Grand Duchy of Lithuanta. The Great Wheels of Government in both of these,
are the Senate and General Dyets. The Senate is composed of Archbishops,
Bishpos, Palatines, Principal Castellans, and Chief Officers of the Kingdom.
The General Dyer consists of the same Members, together with Delegates from
each Province and City, both of the Kingdom and Duchy; which Diet is either
Ordinary, as when summoned (according to Law) once every two Years; or
Extraordinary, as when called by the King upon some emergent Occasion. The
Calling of this Diet is always performed by the Chancellor's Letters, termed
Literae Instructionis to the Palatines, acquainting them with what the King
designs to propose to them, and the time he would have them come to Court.
Having received the King's Proposal, each of them has full Liberty to examine
the same in its own Nature and Consequences, and to return their Thoughts about
it with all the freedom they can desire. The King's Letters are likeways sent
to the Gentry of each Palatinate to choose a Nuncio to be their Representative
in the Diet; in which Election the Candidate must be unanimously pitched upon,
for if the Suffrage of only one private Gentleman be wanting, the Election is
void, and the Province is deprived of its Vote in the approaching Diet. The
Elections being over, and the various Senators and Nuncio's come to Court, the
King arrayed in his Royal Robes, and attended by the Chancellor, renews the
Proposal in their Public Assembly. The Proposal having been duly weighed by
each of them aforehand, they come to a speedy Resolution in the Matter, either
Pro or Con. As the aforesaid Election of the various Nuncio's requires an
unanimous Assent in all Persons electing, or else the Election is void; even so
the thing proposed by the King in the General Diet must be assented unto by
all, otherways the Proposal was made in vain; for if they differ, (which
frequently happens) then the Diet breaks up without doing any thing, and each
Member returns to his own Home. Subordinate to the Senate and Diet, are a great
many Courts of Judicatory, whether Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, for
determining all Causes in the various Parts of the Kingdom; which Courts are
much the same with the like Subordinate Judicatories in other civilized
Countries of Europe, particularly those here in England.

The Arms of the Crown of Poland, are Quarterly, in the first and fourth Gules,
an Eagle Argent, crowned Arms.
and armed, Or, for Poland. In the second and third Gules, a Cavalier armed
Cap-a-pe Argent, in the Dexter, a naked Sword of the same; in the Sinister, a
Shield Azure, charged with a double barred Cross Or, mounted on a Courser of
the second, barbed of the third, and nailed of the fourth, for Lithuania. For
the Crest, a Crown, heightened with eight Fleurets, and closed with four
Demy-Circles, ending in a Monde, Or, which is the Crest of Poland. For the
Motto are these Words, Habent sua sidera Reges.

The Inhabitants of this Country are (for the most part) Professors of the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome; Religion.
yet all Religions being tolerated, here are many of the Greek Church, as also
Armenians, Lutherans, Socinians, Calvinists, Jews, Quakers, etc. Those of the
Church of Rome are dispersed over all Parts of the Kingdom but most numerous in
the Provinces of Cujavia and Warsovia: The Lutherans are mostly to be found in
Prussia; The Armenians in Russia, and all the rest appear in greatest Droves
through the various Parts of Lithuania. Besides, in Samogitia is a sort of
People, who differ little or nothing from mere Heathens The Reformation of
Religion began in this Country, Anno 1535 but did not meet with due
encouragement. The Christian Faith was planted in the various Parts of Poland
at several times, and by several Persons; it being established in Poland,
properly so called, Anno 963. in the time of their Prince Miecislaus, Son of
Memomislus. In Livonia, Anno 1200. by the Preaching of one Meinardu^^^ In
Lithuania, not until the Year 1386. at the Admission of (...) to the Crown of
Poland, and then done (as some affirm) by Thomas Waldensis, an Englishman. In
Samogitia and Volhinia, at the same time with Livonia. In the rest, at other
times, and upon other occasions.

SECT. VI. Concerning Spain with Portugal.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 08 05 of Long. its greatest Length is about 620.
21 30 between 36 15 of Latit. Breadth is about 480. 44 30

It being divided into 3 Classes, viz. 1. Toward the N. and W. Ocean. 2.
Toward the Mediterran Sea. 3. Toward the middle part.


1. Class comprehends Biscay Chief Town Bilbo, or Bilboa E. to W. Asturia
Oviedo Gallicia Compostella N. to S. Portugal Lisbon Andalousia Sevilla W. to
E. 2. Class comprehends Grenada Idem Mur^^^ Idem (...) Idem Catalonia Barcelona
E. to N. W. 3. Class comprehends Arragon Caragoca Navar Pamplona Old Castile
Burg^ N. to S. New Castile Madrid Leon Idem S. of Asturia.

Of all these in Order*

. 1. Biscay, a Lordship.
Contains Ipusco Chapter T. Tholoss E. to W. Biscay properly so called Bilbo ^^lava
Vitoria, Southward.

. 2. Asturia, a Principality.
Contains Asturia (...) viedo Chief Town Oviedo, Westward. Asturia de
Santillana Santillana, Eastward.

. 3. Gallicia, a Kingdom.
Contains the Archbishopr. of Compostella Chief Town Idem S. W. to N. E.
Bishopr. of Mondonedo -- Idem Lugo -- Idem N. E. to S. W. upon the Minho.
Orense -- Idem Territory of Tuy -- Idem

. 4. Portugal, a Kingdom
Contains The Provin. of Eutre Minho Douro Chief Town Braga -- W. to E. Tralos
Montes -- Miranda Beira -- Coimbra N. to S. Estrema dura -- Lisbone Enter Ta^o
Gu^^ian^ Evora The Kingdom of Alg^ave -- Tavira

5. Andalousia, a Province.
Contains the Bishopric of Jaen -- Chief Town Idem -- E. to S. W. upon the
Guadalquivir, or nigh to it. Cordova -- Idem -- Archbishopric of Sevilla --
Idem -- Bishopric of Cadiz -- Idem -- D. of Medina Sidonia -- Idem, Southward.

. 6. Granada, a Kingdom.
Cont. the Bishopric of Almeria -- Chapter Town Idem, Southward upon the
(Seacoast. Guadix -- Idem E. to S. W. Archbishopric of Granada Idem
Bishopric of Malaga -- Idem

. 7. Murcia, a Kingdom.
Contain Murcia, properly so called Chapter T. Murcia E. to W. Territory of Lorca
-- Idem Cartagena Idem, Southward upon the Seacoast.

. 8. Valencia, a Kingdom.
Contains the Provinces of Millares Chief Town Villa Hermosa. N. to S. Xucar
Valencia -- Segura (...) --

. 9. Catalonia, a Principality.
Contains the Territ. of Puigcerda -- Chief Town Idem -- N. E. to S. W. upon
the Ebro. La seu d' Urgel -- Idem -- Balaguer -- Idem -- Lerida -- Idem --
Tortosa -- Idem -- Girona -- Idem -- E. to W. nigh unto, or upon the Seacoast.
Barcelona -- Idem -- Villa Franca de Panades Idem -- Terragona -- Idem --

To these add the Country of Rousillon (Chief Town Perpignan) S. of Narbone in
Lower Languedoc.

. 10. Arragon, a Kingdom.
Contains the Bishoprics of Jaca -- Chief Town Idem -- N. W. to S. E. Huesca
-- Idem -- Balbastro Idem -- Archbishopr. of Saragosa or Caragoca -- Idem, upon
the Ebro. Bishoprics of Taracona Idem -- N. to S. Alborazin Idem -- Tervel
Idem --

. 11. Navarr, a Kingdom.
Contains the Majorships of Pampelona Chief Town Idem N. to S. Olita -- Idem
Tudela -- Idem Estella -- Idem W. to E. Sanguesa Idem

. 12. Old Castile, a Province.
Contains the Territories of ^^rgos -- Chief Town Idem -- W. to S. E. Rioja --
Logronno Calahorra Idem -- Soria -- Idem E. to W. on the Douro. Osma -- Idem
Valladolid Idem Segovia -- Idem, 56 m. S. E. of Valladolid. Avila -- Idem, 63
m. S.

. 13. New Castile, comprehending Extrema Dura.
Being divided into North, the Tago. Middle, between the Tago and Guadiana,
South, of Guadiana.


North contains the Towns of Coria -- W. to E. Placentia -- Toledo -- Madrid --
All 3 N. E. of Toledo. Alcala de Henares Guadalaxara -- Middle contains the
Towns of Alcantara upon the Tago. Merida upon the Guadiana. Truxille, 36 miles
N. E. of Merida. Cuensa upon the Xucar. South contains the Towns of Badajos. --
From W. to E. Ellenera. -- Cividad Rea -- Alcaraz --

. 14. Leon, a Kingdom.
Being divided into North the Douro C. T. in N. are Palencia -- E. to S. W. on
the Douro. Toro -- Zamora -- Leon -- N. to S. W. Astorga -- South C. T. in S.
are Salamanca -- N. to S. E. S. W. of Alva -- Cividad Rodrigo, S. W. of
Salamanca.

THIS large Continent being now Subject to two distinct Sovereigns, viz His
Catholic Majesty, and the King of Portugal, I shall separately consider these
two Sovereignities. Therefore

SPAIN.
THIS Country (formerly Iberia, Hesperia, and by some Spania) is termed by the
Italians, Spagna; Name.
by its Natives, Espa^na; by the French, Espagne; by the Germans, Spamen; and
by the English, Spain; so called (as some fancy) from a certain King named
Hispanus; others from (...), (raritas, vel penuria) because of its scarcity of
Inhabitants. But the most received Opinion is, That it came from Hispalis (now
Seville) the chief City of the whole Country in former times.

The Air of this Country is generally very pure and calm, being seldom infested
with Mists and Vapors; Air.
but in the Summer so extremely hot, especially in the Southmost Provinces,
that it is both dangerous' and inconvenient for the Inhabitants to stir abroad
about Noon, from the middle of May to the last of August. The opposite Place of
the Globe to Spain, is that part of Zelandia nova, (or some of the ill known
Continent) lying between 190 and 202 Degrees of Longitude, with 36 and 44
Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 6th and 7th North Climate) is in
many places very Dry and Barren, Soil.
several of the Inland Provinces being either overgrown with Woods, or cumbered
with Sandy and Rocky Mountains, and others (whose Soil is naturally fertile) are
for the most part wholly neglected, lying waste and uncultivated for many
Years, and that by reason of the fewness, (or rather) the detestable Laziness
of its Inhabitants. But this defect of Corn, and other Grain, (which arises
partly from the Nature of the Country, but more from the Temper of the People)
is sufficiently supplied by various sorts of excellent Fruits and Wines, which
with little Art and Labor are here produced in great plenty. The longest Day
in the Northmost part of this Country, is about 15 Hours; the shortest in the
South, is 9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Wines, Oils, Sugar, Metals, Rice,
Silk, Liquorish, Honey, Commodities.
Flax, Saffrom, Annifeed, Raisins, Almonds, Oranges, Lemons, Cork, Soap,
Anchovies, Sumack, Wool, Lamb-Skins, and Tobacco, etc.

Nigh to the City of Cadiz, is an old ruinous Building (now converted into a
Watchtower) which some Rarities.
would fain persuade themselves to be the Remains of Hercules his Pillars, so
much talked off by the Ancients. In the City Granada is the large Sumptuous
Palace of the Moorish Kings, whose inside is beautified with Jasper and
Porphery, and adorned with diverse Arabic and Mosaic Inscriptions. At
Terragona in Catalonia, are to be seen the Ruins of an Ancient Circus in the
Street, called la Placa de la Fuente; and at Segovia in Old Castile, are the
Remains of a Noble Aqueduct, built by the Emperor Trajan, and supported by an
Hundred and Seventy seven Arches in double Rows, reaching from one Hill to
another. Without the Walls of Toledo was an ancient large Theater, some part
whereof is yet standing. Here also is an admirable Modern Aqueduct, contrived
by Joanniltus Turrianus (a Frenchman) according to the Order of Philip II. At
Orense in Gallicia, are several Springs of Medicinal hot Waters, wonderfully
esteemed off by the ablest Physicians. At the City of Toledo is a Fountain,
whose Waters near the Bottom are of an Acid Taste, but toward the Surface
extremely Sweet. Near Guadalaxara in New Castile, is a Lake which never fails
to send forth dreadful Howlings before a Storm. The Cathedral Church of Murcia
(containing above four hundred Chapels) is remarkable for its curious Steeple,
which is so built that a Chariot may easily ascend to the Top thereof. Many
talk of a Ship of Stone, with Masts, Sails, and Tackling, to be seen in the
Port of Mongia in Gallicia. As to the River Guadiana, its diving under Ground,
(from whence 'twas formerly called Anas) the same i^ so notorious, that we need
say nothing of it.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, are those of Archbishopricks.
Compostella, Granada, Tarragona, Burgos, Sevil, Valentia, Saragossa, Toledo.


Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are those of Bishoprics.
Oviedo, Malaga, Jacca, Segovia, Lugo, Cartagena, Balbatro, Cuenza, Mondonedo,
Segorve, Terver, Cividad Reale Corunna, Origuella, Albarazin, Siguenza, Tuy,
Barcelona, Pamplona, Leon, Orense, Tortosa, Valladolid, Salamanca, Cordova,
Lerida, Calahorra, Toro, Cadiz, Solsona, Placentia, Astorga, Jaen, Vich, Coria,
Palencia, Guadix, Tarazona, Avila, Zamora. Almeria, Huesca,


Universities in this Kingdom, are those of Universities.
Sevil, Alcala de Henares. Huesca, Gaudia, Granada, Saragossa, Barcelona,
Compostella, Siguenza, Tudela, Murcia, Toledo, Valencia, Ossuna, Tarragona,
Valladolid, Lerida, Ona, Baeza. Salamanca,


The truest Character of the Spaniard, I any where find, is that of Dr.
Heylin's, which in the main, runs Manners.
thus: The Spaniards are a sort of People of a swarthy Complexion, black Hair,
and of good Proportion, of a Majestic Gate and Deportment, grave and serious
in their Carriages in Offices of Piety very Devout, not to say Superstitious;
Obedient and Faithful to their King, Patient in Adversity, not prone to alter
their Resolutions nor Apparel, in War too deliberate; Arts they esteem
dishonorable, universally given to Laziness, much addicted to Women,
unreasonably Jealous of their Wives, and by Nature extremely Proud.

Of all the living Tongues that are derived from the Latin, the Spanish comes
nearest to the Original, though Language.
no Country has been more harrast by the Irruption of Barbarous Nations. Yet
they have borrowed several Words from the Goths and Mores, especially the
latter. The best Spanish is generally esteemed that spoken in New-Castile; and
in Valentia and Catalonia it is most corrupted. Their Pater Noster runs thus;
Padre nuestro, que estas en los Gielos, Santificado sea tu Nembre; Venza a nos
tu Regno; hagase tu Volantad, assi en la tierra, como en el Cielo. El pan
nuestro de cadadia da nos lo oy; y perdona nos nuestras deudas, assi como nos
otros perdonamos a nuestros deudores; y no nos dexes caer en tentation; mas
libra nos del mal. Amen.

This great Body did formerly comprehend no less than fourteen different
Kingdoms which being at Government.
length reduced to three; viz. Those of Arragon, Castile, and Portugal; the two
former were united. Anno 1474. by Marriage of Ferdinand of Arragon with Isabel
Heiress of Castile; and Portugal afterward added by Conquest, Anno 1578. But
it Revolting, (of which afterward) the whole Continent of Spain, excluding
Portugal, is at present subjected to one Sovereign, termed his Catholic
Majesty, whose Government is Monarchical and Crown Hereditary. The Dominions of
which Prince are so far extended, that the Sun never sets upon them all; and as
his Territories are very numerous, so also are the Titles which he commonly
assumeth, being styled, King of Castile, Leon, Arragen, Sicily, Naples,
Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarr, Granada, Toledo, Valle^ia Gall^ia, Majorca,
Seville, Sardignia, Gordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, Algarve, Alg^^ire.
Gibralter. The Canaries, East and West Indies; Arch Duke of Austria; Duke of
Burgundy, Brabant, and Milan; Count of Flanders, Tirol, and Barcelona; Lord of
Biscay and Mechelin etc. The numerous Cities and Provinces of Spain are ruled
by particular Governors appointed by his Catholic Majesty, as also the Duchy
of Milan, the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, Sardignia, etc and the various Parts
of his vast Possessions in the East and West Indies, are governed by their
respective Vice Roys, who are generally very severe in exacting of the Subject
what possibly they can during their short Regency, which is commonly limited to
three Years; the King appointing others in their room, that he may gratify as
many of his Grandees, as may be with all convenience, there being still a great
number of them at Court, as Candidates for a Government. For the better
management of Public Affairs in all the Spanish Dominions, there are
established in this Kingdom, no less than fifteen different Councils, viz. that
called The Council of State. (2) The Council Royal, or that of Castile. (3)
That of War. (4.) The Council of Arragon. (5) That of Italy (6) The Council of
the Indies. (7.) That of the Orders. (8) The Council of the Treasury. (9.) That
of the Chamber. (10) The Council of the Crosade. (11) That of Discharges. (12)
The Council of Inquisition. (13.) That of Navarr. (14) The Council of
Conscience. And lastly, that called, The Council of Policy.

The King of Spain bears Quarterly; The first Quarter Counter-quarter'd; in the
first and fourth Gules, a Castle Arms.
tripple-tower'd, Azure, each with three Battlements Or pur^led Sable, for
Castile. In the second and third Argent, a Lion passant Gules, Crowned,
Langued, and Armed Or, for Leon. In the second great Quarter Or four Pallets,
Gules, for Arragon. Party Or, four Pallets also Gules, betwixt two Flanches
Argent, charged with as many Eagles Sable, member'd, beak'd, and crowned Azure,
for Sicily. These two great Quarters grafted in Base Argent, a Pomegranete
Verte, stalked and leaved of the same, open d and seeded Gules, for Granada.
Over all Argent, five Escucheons Azure, placed cross-wise, each charged with as
many Baeants in Saltier, of the first for Portugal. The Shield bordered, Gules,
with seven Towers Or, for Algarve. In the third Quarter, Gules, a Fesse Argent,
for Austria, Coupie and supported by Ancient Burgundy, which is Bendy of six
Pieces Or and Azure, bordered Gules. In the fourth great Quarter Azure, Seem of
Flower de Luces Or, with a border Compony Argent and Gules, for Modern
Burgundy; coupe Or, supported Sable a Lion Or, for Brabant. These two great
Quarters charged with an Escucheon Or, a Lion Sable and langued Gules, for
Flanders. Partly Or an Eagle Sable, for Antwerp, the Capital City of the
Marquisate of the Holy Empire. For Crest, a Crown Or raised with eight Diadems,
or Semi-circles terminating in a Mond Or. The Collar of the Order of the Golden
Fleece encompasses the Shield, on the sides of which stand the two Pillars of
Hercules, on each side one with this Morto, Plus ultra.

The Spaniards are very punctual followers of, and close adherers to the Church
of Rome, and that in her Religion.
grossest Errors and Corruptions, ^^^ing up their Religion on the Pope's
Authority; and are therein so tenacious, that the King suffers none to live in
his Dominions, who profess not their belief of the Doctrine of the Roman
Church. For whose Care (or rather Bigottry) in this matter, the Pope has
conferred upon him, the Title of his Catholic Majesty. All other Professions
are expelled by that Antichristian Tyranny of the Bloody Inquisition, at first
devised, and set up by P^d^e Goasales de Mendeza. Archbishop of Toledo, and
that against such Converted Jews and Moors, as returned again to their
Superstition; but of late it has been chiefly turned upon those (and others)
of the Protestant Communion. So industrious are the Ecclesiastics in this
Country to keep up the whole Body of the People in the thickest Mist of
Ignorance, and so little is this Nation inclined of themselves to make any
enquiries after Knowledge; that considering these things upon one hand, and the
Terror of the Inquisition on the other, in case of such Enquiries, (especially
if they have the least tendency to Innovation in Points of Faith) we cannot
reasonably expect a Reformation of Religion in this Country, unless the Hand of
Providence shall interpose in a wonderful manner. Christianity was planted here
(according to the old Spanish Tradition) by St. James the Apostle, within four
Years after the Crucifixon of our Blessed Redeemer.

PORTUGAL.
THIS Country (containing a great part of Old Lusitania, with some of Ancient
Galleria and Boetica) Name.
is termed by the Italians, Porto Gallo; by the Spaniards, French, Germans, and
English, Portugal; so called by some from Porto and Cale, (the first a Haven
Town, and the other a small Village at the Mouth of the Douro) but by others
from Portus Gallorum, that Haven (now O Porto) being the Place where the Gauls
usually landed, when most of the Seaport Towns in Spain were in the Hands of
the Moors.

The Air of this Country is much more temperate, especially in the Maritime
Places, than in those Provinces Air.
of Spain, which lie under the same Parallel, it being frequently qualified by
Westerly Winds, and cool Breezes from the Sea. The opposite Place of the Globe
to Portugal, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 188 and 194
Degrees of Longitude, with 36 and 42 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 5th and 6th North Climate) is none
of the best for Grain, it being Soil.
very Dry and Mountainous, but yet very plentiful of Grapes, Oranges, Citrons,
Almonds, Pomgranates, Olives, and such like. The longest Day in the Northmost
Parts of this Kingdom is about 15 Hours, the shortest in the Southmost is about
9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Wine, Honey, Oil, Allom, White
Marble, Salt, as also Commodities.
variety of Fruits, as Oranges, Almonds, Citrons, Pomgranates, etc.

In a Lake on the Top of the Hill Stella, in Portugal, are found pieces of
Ships, though it be distant from Rarities.
the Sea more than twelve Leagues. Near to Reja, is a Lake observable for its
hideous rumbling Noise, which is ordinarily heard before a Storm, and that at
the distance of five or six Leagues. About eight Leagues from Coimbra, is a
remarkable Fountain which swallows up, or draws in whatsoever thing only
touches the Surface of its Waters; an Experiment of which is frequently made
with Trunks of Trees. The Town of Bethlem (nigh to Lisbon) is noted for the
Sumptuous Tombs of the Kings of Portugal.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, are those of Archbishopricks,
Lisbon, Braga, Evora.


Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are those of Bishoprics.
Miranda, Leiria, O Porto, Coimbra, Lamego, Viseu; Elvas, Portalegre, Faro.


Universities in this Kingdom, are those of Universities.
Lisbon, Evora, Coimbra.


The Portugueses (formerly much noted for their Skill in Navigation, and vast
Discoveries which the World Manners.
owes to them) are wonderfully degenerated from their Forefathers, being now a
People, whom some are pleased to Characterize thus; That take one of their own
Neighbors (a Native Spaniard) and strip of him of all his good Qualities,
(which may be quickly done) that Person then remaining will make a complete
Portuguize. They are generally esteemed a People very Treacherous to one
another, but more especially to Strangers; extraordinary Cunning in their
Dealings, and the meaner sort are universally given to Thieving.

The Language used in this Kingdom is a Compound of French and Spanish,
especially the latter. The difference Language.
between it and the true Spanish, will best appear by the Pater Noster in that
Tongue, which runs thus: Padre nosso que estas nos Ceos, Sanoifioado seia o teu
nome: venha a nos o teu reyno: seia felta a tua vontade, assi nos ceos, como na
terra. O paonosso de cada^ia (...) n'estodia. E perdoa nos fenhor as nossas
di^^das, assi como nos pendoamos a os nossos devedores. E nao nos dexes cahir
em tentacio, mas libra nos do mal. Amen.

This Kingdom after many Revolutions of Fortune, was unjustly seized upon by
Philip II. of Spain, and detained Government.
by him and his two Successors from the Dukes of Braganza the lawful Heir, till
the Year 1640. that the Portuguezes being unable to bear up any longer under
the Tyrannical Sovereignty of the Spaniards, threw off that intolerable Yoke;
and set the Crown upon the Head of John VI. Duke of Braganza (afterward John
IV. Surnamed the Fortunate) notwithstanding of all that Philip IV. could do to
the contrary Which Enterprise of theirs was happily brought about by the
Assistance of some French Forces sent into this Country: and it is very
remarkable how closely this their Design of Revolting was carried on, though
known to above three hundred ^^rsons at once, and in Agitation for the space of
a whole Year. Ever since which Revolt of Portugal, it has continued an
Independent Kingdom, subject unto, and governed by its own King (being of the
Family of Braganza) whose Government is truly Monarchical and Crown Hereditary.

He bears Argent, five Escutcheons Azure, placed cross wise, each charged with
as many Besants of the Arms.
first, placed in Saltier, and pointed Sable, for Portugal. The Shield bordered
Gules, charged with Seven Towers Or, three in chief, and two in each Flanch.
The Crest is a Crown Or. Under the two Flanches, and the Base of the Shield
appear at the ends of two Crosses, the first Flower-de-luc'd Verte, which is
for the Order of Avis, and the second Pattes Gules, which is for the Order of
Christ. The Motto is very changeable, each King assuming a new one, but
frequently these Words, Pro Rege and Grege.

What was said of Religion in Spain, the same almost may be affirmed of that in
this Kingdom; the Tenets Religion.
of the Church of Rome being here universally embraced by the Portugucze, only
with this difference, that they tolerate Jews, and allow several Strangers the
public Exercise of their Religion, particularly the English Factory at Lisbon.
This Country received the Blessed Gospel much about the same time with Spain.

ITALY by Rob. Mordon


SECT. VI. Concerning Italy.
d. m. Situated between 25 30 of Long. its greatest Length from N. W. to S. E.
is about 760 Miles. 39 00 between 38 15 of Latit. Breadth from S. W. to N. E.
is about 134 Miles. 46 30

Being divided into three Classes, viz. Upper. Middle. Lower.


The Upper [or Lombardy] contains the Dukedom of Savoy Chief Town Chambery W.
to E. Princip. of Piedmont Turin -- D. of Montferrat Casal -- Milan -- Idem --
Parma -- Idem -- Modena -- Idem -- Mantua -- Idem, N. to Modena. Rep. of Venice
-- Idem, on the bot. of the Adriatic Gulf. Genoua -- Idem, S. to Milan.
Bishopric of Trent Id. S. to Tyrol in Austria. The Middle contains the Land of
the Church Rome -- S. to N. Duked. of Tuscany Florence -- Rep. of Luca -- Idem,
S. to Modena. S. Marino Idem. The Lower contains the Kingdom of Naples Idem,
Southward.

Of all these in Order.

. 1. In the Upper Part, or Lombardy.
SAVOY.
Containing several remarkable Towns situated upon, or nigh unto four small
Rivers that water this Country.

Viz. The Isere -- running Westward in the main. The Arc -- W. turning N. W.
The Seran -- N. W. in the main. The Arve -- N. W. Nigh unto, or upon the Isere
are those of S. Maurice -- from E. to W. Monstiers -- Beaufort -- Constans --
M. Melian -- Chambery -- Arc are those of S. Michael -- from E. to W. S. Jaen
de Maurienne Seran are those of Rumilly -- from S. to N. Annacy -- Arve are
those of Salanches -- from E. to W. Cluse -- Bonne Ville -- la Roche --

PIEDMONT.
Comprehends the Dukedom of Aouste Chief Town Aouste 44 m. N. of Turin.
Marquisate of Jurea Jurea 22 m. N. Susa Susa 24 m. N. W. County of Asti Asti 26
m. E. Seignory of Vercelli Idem 12 m. N. of ^^sal. Territories of Nizza. Idem
upon the Seacoast. Princip of Piedinont properly so called Turin upon the
River Po.

Piedmont, properly so called.

Comprehends the Territories of Turino -- Chief Town Idem -- N. to S. upon the
Po. Chieri -- Idem -- Carignan -- Idem -- Carmagnola -- Idem -- Salutzo -- Idem
-- Cavigliano -- Idem -- Lucerna -- Idem 5 m. S. of Pignerol. Cherasco -- Idem
-- N. to S. upon the Tanaro. Mindovi -- Idem -- Ceva -- Idem -- Tossano -- Idem
-- N. to S. upon the Stura. Coni -- Idem --

MONTFERRAT.
Comprehends the Territories of Trino -- Chief Town Idem -- N. to S. Casal --
Idem -- Alba -- Idem -- Acqui -- Idem -- Spin -- Idem 8 m. S. W. of Acqui.

MILAN.
Comprehends the Territories of Angiera -- Chief Town Idem -- from W. to S. E.
Novarese -- Novara -- Vigevanasco -- Vigevano -- Pavese -- Pavia -- Lodegiano
-- Lodi -- Cremonese -- Cremona -- Milaneze -- Milan -- S. to N. Comese -- Como
-- Allessandrinese -- Allessandria -- W. to E. Laumelline -- Valenza --
Tortonese -- Tortona -- Bobbiese -- Bobbio --

PARMA.
Comprehends the D. of (...) so called (...) Idem (...) E to W. (...) -- Idem
(...) (...). of (...) -- (...). -- N. to S. (...) -- (...)

MODENA.
Comprehends the D. of Modena prop. so called Chief Town Idem Eastward. Regto
-- Idem Westward. Mirandula -- Idem Northward. Corregie -- Idem 11 m. N. E. of
Regio. Principality of Carpi -- Idem 14 m.

MANTOVA.
Comprehends the D. of Montoua prop. so called Chief Town Mantoua, Northward.
Sabionetta -- Id. 18 m. S. W. of Mantoua. (...) -- Idem 18 m. S. Principality
of Bozzolo -- Id. 18 m. S. W. Marquisate of Castiglon -- Castillan-de-Silver,
6m. (N. E. of Mantua.

VENICE.
Comprehends the Territories of Dogado -- Chief Town Venice -- from E. to W.
Paduano -- Padua -- Vicentino -- Vicenza -- Veronese -- Verona -- Bresc^ano --
Brescia -- Bergamasco -- Bergamo -- Frluli -- Uddine -- W. to E. Istria -- Cabo
d'Istria Aquileija -- Idem in Friuli 22 m. S E. of (Uddin. Cremasco -- Crema 24
m. S. of Bergamo. Pol^sin-de-Rovigo Rovigo 22 m. S. of Padua. Marca Trevigiano
Trevigio 17 m. N. W. of Venice. Trevigiano contains the Territories of
Trevigiano prop. Trevigie -- S. to N. Feltrino -- Feltri -- Bellunese --
Belluno -- Cadrino -- Codore --

GENOVA.
Comprehends the Principality of (...) -- Chief Town Idem -- W. to E. Territory
of (...) -- Idem -- Principality of (...) -- Idem -- Marquisate of (...) --
Idem -- Territory of (...) Idem -- (...) Idem -- (...) Idem -- (...) Idem --

TRENT.
Comprehends only the Bishopric of Trent Chief Town Idem upon the A. dige.

. 2. In the Middle Part.
The Land of the Church of Papacy.

Comprehends the D. of Ferrara -- Chief Town Ferrara -- N. W. to S. E.
Bolognese -- Bologna -- Prove. of Romagna -- Ravenn (...) D. of Urbine -- Urbino
-- Marq. of Ancona -- Ancona -- C. of Citta de Castello -- Citta de Castello.
N. to S. Terr. of Perugiano -- Perugia -- Orvietano -- Orvieto -- D. of Castro
-- Castro -- St. Peter's Patrimony -- Viterbo 14 m. S. E. of Orvieto. Campagnia
(...) -- Rome -- S. to N. Sabino -- Magliano 20 m. N. of Rome D. of Spoleto --
Spoleto --

TUSCANY.
Comprehends the Terr. of Florence -- Chief Town Idem -- N. E. to S. W. Pisa --
Idem -- Sienna -- Idem -- N. E. to S. W. Princip of Piombino -- Idem -- Isle of
Elbai -- Cosmopoli -- D. of Carrara and Massa Massa 24 m. N. W. of Pisa. State
of Presidii -- Orbitello 55 m. E. of Cosmopoli

The Republics of Luca, S. Marino.


Comprehend only the Territories of these two free Cities of. Luca -- Sltuated
8 m. N. E. of Pisa. S. Marino 17 m. N. W. of Urbine.

. 3. In the Lower Part.
The Kingdom of NAPLES.
Comprehends the Provinces of Abruzzo the (...) -- Chief Town Aquila -- From N.
W. to S. E. upon the Adriatic Gulf. Abruzzo the nigher -- Civitta di Chie
Molissa -- Bojano -- Capitinate or Puglia -- Mandfredonia -- Terra di Bari --
Bari -- Terra di Otranto -- Otranto -- Terra di Lavoro -- Naples -- From N. W.
to S. E. upon the Tyrrhenean Sea. Further Principate -- Benevento -- Nigher
Principate -- Salerno -- Basilicate -- Cirenza -- Calabria the nigher --
Cosenze -- Calabria the farther -- Regie --

THIS Country (known of old by the Names of Hesperia, Saturnia, Latium,
Ausonia, Oenotria, and Name.
Janicula) is termed by its Natives and Spaniards, Italia; by the French,
Italy; by the Germans, Italien; and by the English, Italy; so called (as most
Authors conjecture) from Italus, an Ancient King of the Siculi, who leaving
their Island came into this Country, and possessing themselves of the middle
part thereof, called the whole Italia, from the Name of their Prince.

The Air of this Country is generally Pure, Temperate, and Healthful to breathe
in, except the Land of Air.
the Church, where it is ordinarily reckoned more gross and unwholesome, as also
the Southern Parts of Naples, where for several Months in the Summer it is
scorching Hot, being of the like Quality with the Air of those Provinces in
Spain which lie under the same Parallels of Latitude. The opposite Place of the
Globe to Italy, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, lying between 205 and
220 Degrees of Longitude, with 38 and 48 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 6th and 7th North Climate) is very
fertile, generally yielding in Soil.
great abundance the choicest of Corn, Wines, and Fruit. Its Woods are (for the
most part) continually green, and wellstor'd with the best of wild and tame
Beasts. Its Mountains do afford several kinds of Metal, particularly those in
Tuscany and Naples, which are said to yield some rich Mines of Silver and Gold.
Here is also a great quantity of true Albaster, and the purest of Marble. In
short, this Country is generally esteemed the Garden of Europe; and so stately
and magnificent are its numerous Cities, that I cannot omit the following
Epithets commonly bestowed on diverse of them; as Rome, the Sacred; Naples, the
Noble; Florence, the Fair; Venice, the Rich; Genoa, the Stately; Milan, the
Great; Ravenna, the Ancient; Padua, the Learned; Bononia, the Fat; Leghorn, the
Merchandising; Verona, the Charming; Luca, the Jolly; and Casal, the Strong.

The chief Commodities of this Country are Wines, Corn, Rice, Silks, Velvets,
Taffaties, Sattins, Grograins, Commodities.
Fustians, Gold-wire, Allom, Armor, Glasses, and such like.

To reckon up all those things in Italy, that truly deserve the Epithet of Rare
and Curious, would far surpass Rarities.
our designed brevity; I shall therefore confine my self to one sort of
Rarities, namely, The most noted Remains or Monuments of Reverend Antiquity,
which in effect are most worthy of our regard, they being very useful in giving
some Light to several parts of the Roman History. In viewing of which
Antiquities, I shall reduce them all to Three Classes; viz. Those that are to
be seen in the City of Rome it self. Secondly, In the Kingdom of Naples. And
lastly, In all other Parts of Italy besides.

The most remarkable Monuments of Antiquity in Rome it self, are these
following. (1.) Amphitheatres, particularly that, called the Old Amphitheatre,
(now termed the Coliseo, because of a Colossean Statue that stood therein)
begun by Vespasian, and finished by Domitian. (2.) Triumphal Arches, as that of
Constantine the Great (nigh to the old Amphitheatre) erected to him in Memory
of his Victory obtained over the Tyrant Maxentius, with this Inscription,
Liberatori Urbis, Fundatori Pacis. That of T. Vespasian (the ancientest of all
the Triumphal Arches in Rome) erected to him upon his taking the City, and
spoiling the Temple of Jerusalem. That of Septimius Severus, to be seen nigh
the Church of St. Martinas. Add to these, the Triumphal Bridge, (whose Ruins
are still visible nigh Pont Angelo) so much reputed of old, that by a Decree of
the Senate, none of the meaner sort of People were suffered to tread upon the
same. (3.) Thermae or Baths; as those of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, which
where of a prodigious bigness, according to that of Ammianus Marcellinus, who
(speaking of 'em) says, Lavacra in modum Provinciarum exstructa. Those of
Alexander Severus, the goodly Ruins whereof are to be seen nigh the Church of
St. Eustachio^t and lastly, the Ruins of Thermae Constantinianae, still visible
in Monte Cavallo, formerly Mons Quirinalis. (4.) Several remarkable Pillars,
particularly, that called Colonna d' Antonino, erected by M. Aurelius
Antoninus, the Emperor, in Honor of his Father, Antoninus Pius, and still to
be seen in the Corso, being as yet 175 Foot high. That called Colonna Trajana,
set up in Honor of Trajan, and now to be found in Monte Cavallo. That called
Colonna Rostrata, (still extant in the Capitol) erected in Honor of Dulius,
and decked with Stems of Ships, upon his Victory over the Carthaginians, the
same being the first Naval Victory obtained by the Romans. To these we may add
the two great Obelisks (one before Porta del Populo, and the other before the
Church of S. John de Lateran) formerly belonging to, and now the chief
Remainders of the famous Circus Maximus, which was begun by Tarquinius Priscus,
augmented by J. Caesar and Augustus, and at last adorned with Pillars and
Statues by Trajan and Heliogabalus. We may also add those Three Pillars of
admirable Structure (now to be seen in Campo Vaccino) which formerly belonged
to the Temple of Jupiter Stator, built by Romulus, upon his Victory over the
Sabines; together with Six others on the side of the Hill mounting up to the
Capitol, three of which belonged once to the Temple of Concord, built by
Camillus; and the other three to the Temple of Jupiter Tonans, built by
Augustus upon a narrow escape from a Thunderbolt. And finally, In the rank of
Pillars we may place the famous Milliarium, (still reserved in the Capitol)
which is a little Pillar of Stone with a round Brazen Ball on its top, erected
at first by Augustus Caesar in Foro Romano, from whence the Romans reckoned
their Miles to all parts of Italy. Other no^ed Pieces of Antiquity in Rome, and
not reducible to any of the former Classes, are chiefly these, (1.) The stately
Ruins of Pal^^^ Magiore, or the great Palace of the Roman Emperors once (...)
over the greatest part of the Palatine Hill. (2.) The Ruins o^ Templum Pacis
(which are nigh the Church of St. (...) in Campo Vaccino) built by T.
Vespasian, who adorned the same with some of the Spoils of the Temple of
Jerusalem. (3.) The Ro^unda or Pantheon, built by Agrippa, and dedicated to all
Gods; many of whose Statues are still extant in the Palace of Justiniani,
reserved there as a Palladium of that Family. (4.) The Mausoleum Augusti, near
S. Rock's Church, but nowextreamly decayed. And lastly, The very Plate of Brass
on which the Laws of the Ten Tables were written, ^^ still to be seen in the
Capitol.

Remarkable Monuments of Antiquity in the Kingdom of Naples, are these
following, (1) The Grotte of Pausilipus, being a large Cart-way about a Mile
long, cut under ground, quite thro^^ Mountain, near the City of Naples, made
(as some imagine) by Lucullus; but according to others, Cocceius Nerva. (2.)
Some Remains of a fair Amphitheatre, and Cicero's Accademy, nigh Puzzuolo; as
also the Arches and Ruins of that prodigious Bridge, (being three Miles long)
built by Caligula between Puzzuolo and Baiae; to which Building Suetonius, the
Historian, seems to allude when he taxes that Emperor with his Substructiones
insan^. (3.) The Foundation of Baiae it self, and some Arches with the Pavement
of the very Streets, all visible under Water in a clear Sun shine day. (4.) The
Elisian Fields, so famous among the Poets, and extremely beholden to them for
their Fame, being only an ordinary Plat of Ground still to be seen nigh the
place where the City of Baiae stood. (5.) The Piscina Mirabilis, which is a
vast Subterranean Building nigh the Elesian Fields, designed to keep fresh
Water for the Roman Galleys, who used to harbor thereabouts. (6) The Ruins of
Nero's Palace, with the Tomb of Agrippa, his Mother, nigh to the aforesaid
Piscina; as also the Baths of Cicero and Tritola, and the Lacus Avernus, so
noted of old for its infectious Air. (7.) The Grotte of the famous Stbylla
Cumaea, nigh to the place where Cumoe stood; as also the Sulphurous Grotta
de'l Cane, nigh to the Grotte of Pausilipus abovementioned. Lastly, The obscure
Tomb of that well known Poet, P. Virg^itus Maro, in the Gardens of S. Severino,
nigh to the entrance of the Grotte of Paustlipus. To all these we may here
subjoin that noted and most remarkable Prodigy of Nature, the terrible Vulcano
Vesuvius about seven Miles from the City of Naples.

Remarkable Monuments of Antiquity in all other Parts of Italy, are chiefly
these, (1.) The Via Appia, a prodigious long Causway of five days Journey
reaching from Rome to Brundusium, and made at the sole Charges of Appius
Claudius during his Consulate. (2.) Via Flaminia, another Causway of the same
length, reaching from Rome to Rimini, and made by the Consul Flaminius, who
employed the Soldiers therein during the time of Peace. (3.) Via Aemilia,
reaching from Rimini to Bologna, and paved by Aemilius Lepidus, Colleague of
Flaminius. (4.) The old Temple and House of Sybilla Tyburtina, to be seen at
Tivoli, a Town about fifteen Miles from Rome. (5.) An Ancient Triumphal Arch
yet standing near Fano, a Town in the Duchy of Urbine. (6.) The very Stone
upon which Julius Caesar stood when he made an Oration to his Men, persuading
'em to pass the Rub^con, and advance straight to Rome: The same is to be seen
upon a Pedestal in the Marketplace of Rimini. (7.) A rare Amphitheatre in
Verona, erected at first by the Consul Flaminius, and repaired since by the
Citizens, and now the intirest of any in Europe; as also another entire at Pola
in Istria, being of two Orders of Tuscan Pillars placed one above another. (8)
The Ruins of an Amphitheatre in Padua, part of whose Court (being of an Oval
Form) does still retain the Name of Arena. (9.) Many stately Tombs of famous
Men, particularly That of Antenor's in Padua; St. Peter's in Rome; St.
Augustin's and Severinus Boethius, both in Pavia, with that of St. Ambrose in
Milan, and many others, together with vast multitudes of Statues both of Brass
and Marble in most parts of Italy.

These are the most remarkable Remains of the Roman Antiquities that are now
extant throughout all this Country. As for Modern Curiosities, and other sorts
of Rarities (which are obvious to the Eye of every ordinary Traveller) a bare
Catalogue of 'em would swell up to a considerable Volume. It were endless to
Discourse of magnificent Buildings, (particularly Churches) Ancient
Inscriptions, rare Waterworks, and many bold Pieces of Painting and Statuary,
to be seen almost in every Corner of Italy. Every one is apt to talk of the
bending Tower of Pisa, the Whispering Chamber of Caprarola, the renowned House
of Loretto, with the rich Treasury of S. Mark in Venice; not to mention the
famous Vatican Palace and Library, with the glorious and splendid Furniture of
the Roman Churches. To these I may add the several Magazines, or large
Collections of all sorts of Rarities kept in several Parts of Italy;
particularly those in Villa Ludovisia, belonging to Prince Ludovisio: As also
those in the famous Gallery of Canonico Setali in Milan; but above all, are
diverse Rooms and Cabinets of exotic Curiosities and precious Stones, (among
which is the famous Diamond that weighs 138 Carats) all belonging to the
Great Duke of Tuscany, and much admired and talked off in all Parts of the
Civilized World.

Ecclesiastics of the higest Order in this Country, are his Holiness the Pope,
and the Patriarchs of Venice, Aquileia.


Next to these are the Archbishops of Archbishopricks.
Milan, Fermo, Benevento, Frani, Turin, Ravenna, Thieti, Tarento, Tarentaise,
Naples, Lanciano, Brindisi, Bologne, Capua, Manfredonia, Otranto, Genoa,
Salerno, Bari, Rossano, Florence, Amalfi, Cirenza, Consenza, Pisa, Sorento,
Nazareth or Barletta. Sanseverino, Urbin, Conza, Reggio.


The respective Suffragans of these Ecclesiastics, are as follows,

. 1. Immediately subject to the Pope, are the Bishops of Bishoprics.
Ostia, Alatro, Perusa, Foligni. Porto, Ferentino, Citta di Castello, Assisi.
Sabius, Velitri, Citta di Sieve, Ancona Palestrina, Sutri, Castro, Humana,
Frascati, Nepi, Arezzo, Loretto, Albano, Citta Castellana, Spoleto, Recanali,
Tivoli, Horta, Norcia, Ascoli, Anagni, Viterbi, Ferni, Jesi, Veroli,
Tuscanella, Narni, Osmo, Terracina, Civita-Vecchia, Amelia, Camerin, Sezza,
Bagnarea, Todi. Cometo, Segni, Orvieto, Rieti. Monte Fiascone.


As also these following being exempt from the Jurisdiction of their respective
Metropolitans. Mantua, Cortona, Atella, Rapolla, Trent, Sarzana, Cava,
Monte-Pelozo, Pavia, Fano, Scala and Ravello, Trivento, Salusses, Ferrara,
Aquila, Mon-Pulician, Aversa, Melfi, Marsico, Faramo, Cassano, San-Marco,
Montellone. Bisiguano,


2. Suffragans to the Patriarch of Venice, are only those of Torzello, Chioza.


. 3. To the Patriarch of Aquileia, are those of, Terviso, Trieste, Petin,
Vicenza, Feltri, Cabo d' Istria, Citta Nuova, Verona, Belluno. Pola, Padua,
Como. Concord. Parenzo,


. 4. To the Archbishop of Milan, are those of, Cremona, Tortona, VerITEMes,
Acqui, Novara, Vighenano, Alba, Savona, Lodi, Bergamo, Ast, Vintemiglia.
Alexandria, Brescia, Casal,


. 5. To the Archbishop of Turin, are those of Yoree, Mondovi, Fossano,


6. To the Archbishop of Tarentaise, are those of Aoste, Sion.


. 7. To the Archbishop of Bologne, are those of Parma, Rheggio, Carpi, Borgo,
Placenza, Modena, Crema, S. Domino.


. 8. To the Archbishop of Genoa, are those of Albegna, Brugnato, Mariana,
Nebio. Noli, Bobio, Accia,


. 9. To the Archbishop of Florence, are those of Pistoya, Colle, Borgo san
Sepulchro; Fiesoli, Volterra, Citta di Sole.


. 10. To the Archbishop of Pisa, are those of Soana, Piombino, Mont-Alcino,
Aiazzo, Chiusi, Massa, Livorno, Sagona, Grossete, Pienza, Luca, Alerta.


. 11. To the Archbishop of Urbine, are those of Senigaglia, Engubio, Pesaro,
Fossombrona, Cagli, S. Leon.


. 12. To the Archbishop of Fermo, are those of San-Severino, Macerati, Montalt,
Tolentin, Ripa Transona.


. 13. To the Archbishop of Ravenna, are those of Rovigo, Britinoro, Sarsina,
Cervia, Comachio, Forli, Rimini, ^^nestria. Faenza, Cosena, Imola,


. 14. To the Archbishop of Naples, are those of Nola, Pozzuolo, Cerra, Ischia.


. 15. To the Archbishop of Capua, are those of Tiano, Caiazzo, Sessa,
Mont-cassin, Calvi, Carniola, Venafro, Fondi, Caserta, Isernia, Aquin, Gaieta.


. 16. To the Archbishop of Salerno, are those of Campagna, Policastro, Sarno,
Nocera di pagni. Capaccio, Nusco, Marsico nuovo, Acerno.


. 17. To the Archbishop of Amalfi, are those of Letteri, Capri, Minori.


. 18. To the Archbishop of Sorento, are those of Vico, Massa, Castle a Mare di
Stabbia.


. 19. To the Archbishop of Conza, are those of Muro, Satriano, Cedogna,
Cangiano, Bisaccia.


. 20. To the Archbishop of Benevento, are those of Ascol, Monte Marano, Bovino,
Tremoli, Fiorenzuola, Avellino, Toribolenza, Lesnia, Telezi, Fricenti,
Dragonara, Guardia, S. Agatha di Gothi, Ariano, Volturata, D'alsieres. Boiano,
Larina,


. 21. To the Archbishop of Thieti, are those of Ortona di Mare, Civita di
Penna, Sermona, Campti, Cali.


. 22. To the Archbishop of Lanciano, are none.

. 23. To the Archbishop of Manfredonia, are those of Troia, Vieste, San-Severa.


. 24. To the Archbishop of Bari, are those of Canosa, Conversano, Bitteta,
Giovenazzo, Poligano, Labiello, Bitonto, Monervino, Ravo, Molfetta.


. 25. To the Archbishop of Cirenza, are those of Malerano, Turfi, Gravina,
Venosa, Potenza, Tricarico.


. 26. To the Archbishop of Nazareth, none:

. 27. To the Archbishop of Frani, are those of Salpi, Andria, Biseglia.


. 28. To the Archbishop of Tarento, are those of Montula, Castellanetta.


. 29. To the Archbishop of Brindisi, are those of Ostuni, Oria.


. 30. To the Archbishop of Otranto, are those of Gallipoli, Castro. Alessano,
Leeche, Nardo, S. Maria di Leuca. Ugento,


. 31. To the Archbishop of Rossano, none.

. 32. To the Archbishop of Consenza, are those of Montallo, Mortorano.


. 33. To the Archbishop of Sanseverino, are those of Belcastro, Strongoli,
Cariati, Umbriatico, Isola, Cerenza.


. 34. To the Archbishop of Reggio, are those of Amantea, Cortona, Squillace,
Bova, Nicastro, Oppido, Nicotera, Taverna, Tropea, Gieraci,


Universities in this Country, are those established at the Cities following,
Universities.
Rome, Florence, Mantua, Venice, Bononia, Pisa, Pavia, Padua, Ferrara, Sienna,
Naples, Verona, Perusia, Milan, Salerno, Parma.


The Natives of this Country (once the Triumphant Lords and Conquerors of the
World) are now less given Manners.
to the Art of War, and Military Exploits, than most other Nations of Europe.
However the Modern Italians are generally reputed a Grave, Respectful, and
Ingenious sort of People; especially in those things to which they chiefly
apply themselves nowadays, viz. Statuary Works, Architecture, and the Art of
Painting. They Are also reckoned Obedient to their Superiors, Courteous to
Inferiors, Civil to Equals, and very Affable to Strangers. They Are likewaies in
Apparel very modest, in Furniture of Houses, sumptuous; and at their Tables
extraordinary neat and decent. But these good Qualities of this People are
mightily stained by many notorious Vices which reign among them, particularly
those of Revenge and Lust, Jealousy and Swearing, to all of which they are so
excessively given, that even a modest Narrative would seem incredible. As for
the Female Sex, a vulgar Saying goes of them, that they are Magpies at the
Doors, Saints in the Church, Goats in the Garden, Devils in the House, Angels
in the Streets, and Syrenes at the Windows.

The present Language of Italy is a Dialect of the Latin, which was the Ancient
Language of this Country: Language.
Almost every Province and City has its peculiar Idiom, but that of Tuscany is
reckoned the purest and best polisht of all others, and is that which Persons
of Quality and Learning usually speak. Paternoster in Italian runs thus; Padre
nostro, che sci ne Cielo, sia sanctificato il tuo nome: venga il tuo Regno: sia
fatta la tua volonta, st come in ciclo, cosi encora in terra. Dacci hogli il
nostro pane cotidiano; e rimetti^i i nostri debiti, si come encor noigli
remettiano a i nostri d^bitori. E non ci indurre in tentatione ma liberaci dal
male. Amen.

The Government of Italy cannot be duly considered without looking back unto the
Chief Divisions of Government.
that Country abovementioned; there being so many different Sovereignties
therein, independent on one another, and not subjected to one Head. The whole
being therefore divided into Upper, Middle, and Lower, according to the
aforesaid Analysis.

I. The Upper (or Lombardy) being again divided into one Principality, five
Dutchies, two Republics, and one Bishopric. That one Principality, viz
Piedmont, is under the Duke of Savoy. The five Dutchies, viz. those of
Montferrat, Milan, Parma, Modena, and Mantua, are under several Sovereigns: For
Montferrat is partly under the Duke of Savoy, and partly under the French King.
Milan is under the King of Spain, for which he is dependent on the Emperor.
Parma is mostly under its own Duke, who is feudatary to the Pope, paying yearly
ten thousand Crowns. Modena is under its own Duke, who is dependent on the
Emperor. And Mantua is mostly under its own Duke, who is feudatary to the
Emperor. The two Republics being those of Venice and Genoa, (of whom
particularly afterward) are governed by their Senare and Magigistrates. The
one Bishopric being that of Trent, is subject to the House of Austria.

II. The Middle Part being divided into the Land of the Church, the Dukedom of
Tuscany, and the Republics of Luca and St. Marino. The Land of the Church (or
St. Peter's Patrimony) is for the most part in the Hands of the Pope, and ruled
by several Governors set over its various Divisions, who are generally not a
little severe upon the Subject. His Holiness, the Pope, (by Virtue of the
Jurisdiction of the Roman See) is both Temporal and Spiritual Sovereign
thereof, and is commonly styled by Roman Catholics, the Chief Ecclesiastic of
all Christendom; the Patriarch of Rome, and the West; the Primate and Supreme
Governor of Italy; the Metrapolitan of those Bishops Suffragan to the Sea of
Rome, and Bishop of the most famous St. John of Lateran. The Dukedom of Tuscany
is, for the most part, under its own Duke, except the Towns of Siena, (for
which he is Tributary to Spain) and Orbitellio, which belongs also to the
Spaniard. This Duke is esteemed the Richest and most Powerful of all the
Italian Princes, but his manner of Government is generally reckoned too
pressing and uneasy to the Subject. The Towns and Republics of Luca and St.
Marino, are governed by their own Magistrates as free States. But of them
afterward.

III. The Lower Part of Italy being the Kingdom of Naples, is subject to the
Spaniard, for which he is Homager to the Pope, and accordingly sends his
Holiness yearly, a White Horse and 7000 Ducats by way of acknowledgment. It is
governed by a Viceroy, appointed and sent thither by his Catholic Majesty,
who is usually one of the Chief Grandees of Spain, and is commonly renewed
every third Year. These Viceroys (as in most other of the Spanish Governments)
during their short Regency, do industriously endeavor to lose no time in
filling their own Coffers, and that by most grievous Exactions on the poor
Subject. So severe indeed are the Spaniards upon the Neapolitans, that the
King's Officers are commonly said to suck in the Duchy of Milan, and to Fleece
in the Island of Sicily, but to Fley off the very Skin in the Kingdom of
Naples; so that the People of this Country (which is one of the best in Europe)
are most miserably harrass'd by these hungry and rapacious Vultures. Besides
these Princes in Italy abovementioned, there are several others who are under
the Protection of some higher Power, particular that of the Emperor, the Pope,
or the King of Spain.

To the Government of Italy, we may add the four following Republics, viz.
those of Venice. Genoua. Luca. St. Marino.


I. Venice, This Republic is under an Aristocratical Government, the
Sovereignty of the State being lodged in the Nobility, or certain number of
Families enrolled in the Golden Book, called the Register of the Venetian
Nobles. Their Chief Officer is the Duke, or Doge, whose Authority is a mere
Chimera, and he no better than a Sovereign Shadow, Precedence being all he can
justly claim above the other Magistrates. Here are established Five Principal
Councils, viz. (1) That termed the Grand Council, comprehending the whole Body
of the Nobility, by whom are elected all Magistrates, and enacted all Laws
which they judge convenient for the Public Good. (2) That termed the Pregadi,
(commonly called the Senate of Venice) consisting of above an hundred Persons,
who determine Matters of the highest Importance, as those relating to Peace or
War, Leagues and Alliances. (3) The College consisting of Twenty four Lords,
whose Office is to give Audience to Ambassadors, and to report their Demands to
the Senate, which alone has Power to return Answers. (4) The Council of Ten,
(consisting of Ten Noblemen) whose Office it is to hear and decide all Criminal
Matters: This Court (whose Jurisdiction is extraordinary great) is yearly
renewed, and Three of these Noblemen, called the Capi, or Inquisitors of State,
are chosen Monthly; to which Triumvirate is assigned such a Power in judging of
Criminals, that their definitive Sentence teaches the chiefest Nobleman of the
State, as well as the meanest Artificer, if they are unanimous in their Voices,
otherways all the Ten are consulted with.

II Genoua is under an Aristocratical Government, very like to that of Venice;
for its Principal Magistrate has the Name or Title of Duke. (but continues
only for two Years) to whom there are Assistant, eight Principal Officers, who
with the Duke, are called the Seigniory, which in Matters of the greatest
Importance, is also subordinate to the Grand Council consisting of Four hundred
Persons, all Gentlemen of the City; which Council, with the Seigniory do
constitute the whole Body of the Commonwealth. This State is much more famous
for what it has been, than for what it is being now on the decaying hand. At
present it is subject unto several Sovereigns, various Places within its
Territories belonging to the Dukes of Savoy and Tuscany, some free, and others
lately taken by the French.

III. Luca (being a small Free Commonwealth, enclosed within the Territories of
the Grand Duke of Tuscany) is under the Government of one Principal Magistrate,
called the Gonfalonier, changeable every second Month, assisted by nine
Counselors, named Anziani, whom they also change every six Months, during
which time they live in the Palace or Common Hall; and Superior to them is the
Grand Council, which consists of about Two hundred and forty Noblemen, who
being equally divided into two Bodies, take their turns every half Year. This
State is under the Protection of the Emperor of Germany, and pays him yearly
Homage accordingly.

IV. St. Marino, a little (but flourishing) Republic in the Dukedom of Urbine,
which still maintains its Previleges, and is governed by its own Magistrates,
who are under the Protection of the Pope, The whole Territory of this small
Commonwealth, is but one Mountain about three Miles long, and ten round,
consisting of about five thousand Inhabitants, who boast of their State being a
Free Republic about a thousand Years.

It being too tedious to express the Ensigns Armorial of all the Sovereign
Princes and States in this Country Arms.
and too superficial to mention those of one only; we shall therefore (as a ^he
Medium) nominate the Chief Sovereignties of Italy, [viz. the Pop^^^om, the
Dukedom of Tuscany, and the Republics of Venice and Genoua] and affix to each
of these their peculiar Arms. Therefore (1.) His Holiness the Pope, (as
Sovereign Prince over the Land of the Church or Papal Dominions) bears for his
Escutcheon, Gules, consisting of a long Cape, or Headpiece Or, surmounted with
a Cross pearl'd and garnished with three Royal Crowns, together with the two
Keys of St. Peter placed in Saltier. (2.) The Arms of Tuscany are, Or, five
Roundles, Gules, two, two, and one, and one in Chief Azure, charged with three
Flower-de-Luces Or. (3.) Those of Venice are, Azure, a Lion winged, Sejant Or,
holding under one of his Paws, a Book covered, Argent. Lastly, Those of Genoua
are, Argent, a Cross Gules, with a Crown closed by reason of the Island of
Corsica belonging to it which bears the Title of Kingdom, and for Supporters
are two Griffins Or.

My unavoidable Prolixity in handling the various Heads contained in the
foregoing Paragraphs, does call Religion.
upon me to atone for the same by a desirable Brevity in treating of this Head
now before us. All therefore I shall say upon it, is, That the Italians (as to
their Religion) are Zealous Professors of the Doctrine of the Roman Church,
even in her grossest Errors and Superstitions; and that either out of Fear of
the Barbarous Inquisition: or in Reference to their Ghostly Father, the Pope:
or chiefly, by being industriously kept in woeful Ignorance of the Protestant
Doctrine, of which they are taught many false and monstiuous things. The Jews
are here tolerated the Public Exercise of their Religion, and at Rome there is
a Weekly Sermon for their Conversion, at which one of each Family is bound to
be present. The Christian Faith was first preached here by St. Peter, who went
thither in, or about the beginning of the Reign of the Emperor Claudius, as is
generally testified by some Ancient Writers of good Account.

TURKEY in EUROPE by R. Morden


SECT. VIII. Concerning Turkey in Europe.
d. m. Miles. Situated between 36 00 of Long. its greatest Length is about 770.
53 00 between 36 30 of Latit. Breadth is about 660. 49 20 Turkey in Europe being
divided into two Classes North the Danuube. South North comprehends Hungary --
Chief Town Buda -- W. to E. Transylvania -- Hermanstat -- Valachia -- Tergowick
-- Moldavia -- Saczow -- Little Tartary -- Crim -- South comprehends Romania --
Constantinople E. to W. Bulgaria -- Sophia -- Servia -- Belgrade -- Bosnia --
Bosna Seraio Sclavonia -- Possega -- Croatia -- Wihitz -- W. to S. E. Dalmatia
-- Spalatro -- Greece -- Saloniki --

Of all these in Order.

Hungary divided into
Upper North Chief Towns in Upper are Praesburge -- W. to S. E. upon the
Danuube. Newhawsel -- Pest -- Colocza -- Esperies -- N. to S. upon the Teyssa.
Caschaw. -- Tokay -- Agria -- Zolnock -- Segedin -- Zatmar -- N. to S. on the
E. of Teyssa. Debreczen -- Great Waradin -- Gyulla -- Timesware -- Lower South
in Lower are Raab -- W. to S. E. on the Danuube. Gran -- Buda -- Kanischa -- W.
to E. upon the Drove. Siget -- Quinque Ecclesiae Stul Weissenburge, aliter Alba
Regalis upon Zarwiza.

In Transylvania.
The Chief Towns are Clausenburge -- S. to N. upon the Samos. Burgles --
Newmark -- N. to S. upon the Maresh. Wissenburge. -- Hermanstat upon the
Alauta.

In Valachia.
The Chief Towns are Tergvoick -- From N. to S. Buchorest --

In Moldavia.
The Chief Towns are Soczow -- From W. to E. Jazy -- Romani Wiwar, Southward.

In Little Tartary.
The Chief Towns are Nigropoli -- From N. to S. Kaffa --

In Romania.
The Chief Towns are Constantinople -- From E. to W. Adrinople -- Philippipoli,
aliter Philiba --

In Bulgaria.
The Chief Towns are Sophia -- From S. to N. Silistria -- Nigopoli --

In Servia.
The Chief Towns are Scopia -- From S. to N. Guistandil -- Viddin -- Nissa --
From S. to N. W. upon the Mar^wa. Jagodna -- Belgrade. -- From N. to S. Bracco
-- Prisren --

In Bosnia.
The Chief Towns are Bosna-Seraio -- From E. to W. Jaycza -- Bomiahich,
Southward.

In Sclavonia.
The Chief Towns are Possega -- From W. to E. Peter-Waradin -- Esseck upon the
Drove.

In Croatia.
The Chief Towns are Wihitsch -- From S. to N. Dubiza -- Car^lstat, Westward.

In Dalmatia.
The Chief Towns are Nona -- From W. to S. E. Zara -- Sebenico -- Spalatro --
Narenza -- Ragusi -- Scodrant -- Cattaro --

Lastly, Greece [by the Turk's Rumelia] comprehends the following Divisions.
Viz. Macedonia -- By the Moderns Idem -- Northward. Albania -- Arnaut --
Thessalia -- Janna -- In the Middle. Epirus -- Idem -- Achaia -- Livadia --
Peloponesus -- Morea lying Southward of all.

The Chief Towns of Macedonia are Contessa -- N. E. to S. W. Saloniki --
Zeucria -- Florina -- Cogni -- Albania are Scutari -- N. to S. Alessio -- Croia
-- Durazzo -- Vallona -- Thessalia are Larissa -- E. to W. Tricala -- ^anna --
Epirus are -- Canina -- N. to S. Chimera -- Butrinto -- Prevesa -- Larta --
Achaia are Lepanto -- W. to E. Castri [olim Delphi] -- Att^es [olim Athenae]
Maraton -- Stives [olim Thebae] Morea are -- Corinto -- Nigh the Seacoast, all
round the Peninsula. Napoli-di-Romania -- Maluasia -- Colochina -- Coron --
Navarino -- Chiarenza -- Patrasso --

THIS vast Complex Body comprehending these various Countries abovementioned,
and the most remarkable of 'em being Hungary, Greece, and Little Tartary. We
shall first treat of these Three separately, and then conjunctly of all the
rest under the General Title of the The Danubian Provinces. Therefore

. 1. HUNGARY.
THIS Country (containing a Part of Pannonia, with some of Ancient Germany and
Dacia) is Name.
termed by the Italians, Ungharia; by the Spaniards, Hungria; by the French,
Hungry; by the Germans, Ungern; and by the English, Hungary; so called from
the Ancient Inhabitants, the Hunni or Huns.

The Air of this Country is generally esteemed very unwholesome to Breath in;
which is chiefly occasioned Air.
from much Marish Ground and many Lakes, wherewith this Country abounds. The
opposite Place of the Globe to Hungary, is that part of the vast Pacifick
Ocean, between 218 and 233 Degrees of Longitude, with 43 and 49 Degrees of
South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 7th and 8th North Climate) is very
fruitful in Corn and Roots, and Soil.
various sorts of pleasant Fruit, affording also excellent Pasturage; and
several of its Mountains produce some valuable Mines of Copper, Iron,
Quicksilver, Antimony, and Salt. Yea, so noted is this Country for Mines, that
no less than Seven Remarkable Towns go by the Name of Mine Towns, the Chief of
which is Chremnuz, whose Mine has been wrought in about 900 Years. The Length
of the Days and Nights in Hungary, is much the same as in the Southern Circles
of Germany.

This being an Inland Country, and thereby having no settled Trade with Foreign
Parts, we may reckon Commodities.
the Product of the Soil the Chief Commodities, with which the Inhabitants deal
with their Neighbors.

Here are many Natural Baths, especially those at Buda, which are reckoned the
noblest in Europe, not Rarities.
only for their variety of Hot Springs, but also the magnificency of their
Buildings. There are likeways two Hot Bagnio's near Transchin, upon the
Confines of Moravia; and others at Schemnitz in Upper Hungary. Besides which,
there are Waters in several Parts of this Country of a pettifying Nature, and
others that corrode Iron to such a degree, that they will consume a Horseshoe in
twenty four Hours. Near Esperies in Upper Hungary, are two deadly Fountains,
whose Waters send forth such an infectious Steam, that it kills either Beast or
Bird approaching the same; for the preventing of which, they are walled round,
and kept always covered.

Archbishopricks in this Country, are those of Archbishopricks.
Gran, Colocza.


Bishoprics in this Country, are those of Bishoprics.
Angria, Quinque Ecclesiae, Vesprin, Neytracht, Raab, Great Waradin.


What Universities are established in this Country, since the retaking of it
from the Infidels, is uncertain. Universities.


The Hungarians (more addicted to Mars than Minerva) are generally looked upon
as good Soldiers; being Manners.
Men, for the most part, of a strong and well proportioned Body, valiant and
daring in their Undertakings, but reputed Cruel and Insulting when Conquerors.

The Hungarians have a peculiar Language of their own, which has little or no
Affinity with those of Languages
the Neighboring Nations, save only the Sclavonic, from which it has borrowed
several Words, and which is also spoken in some Parts of this Country, as the
German is in others. Paternoster in the Hungarian Tongue, runs thus: My atyanc
ki vagy az mennyekben, szenteltessec mega te neved: jojon el az te orszagod;
legven mega te akaratod, mint az menyben, ugy itt ez foldonois; az mimindennapi
kenyirunket add meg nekunc ma: es boczasd meg mine cunc az mi vet keinket,
mikeppem miis megboczatunc azoknac, az kic mi ellenunc vet keztenec: es ne vigi
minket az kisertetbe, de szabadits meg minket az gonosztol. Amen.

This Kingdom at present is Elective; and being almost wholly recovered from
the Ottoman Slavery by Government
the late successful Progress of the Imperial Arms, is now dependent on the
Jurisdiction of the Emperor, who is styled King thereof. The Assembly of the
States consists of the Clergy, Barons, Noblemen, and Free Cities, who usually
meet once every three Years; which Assembly has Power to elect a Palatin, who
(by the Constitutions of the Realm) ought to be a Native of Hungary; and to him
belongs the management of all Military Concerns, as also the Administration of
Justice in Affairs both Civil and Criminal.

See Germany. Arms.


The prevailing Religion in this Country, is that of the Church of Rome,
especially since the late Conquests Religion.
made by the Imperial Arms Next to it is the Doctrine of Luther and Calvin,
which is zealously maintained by great Multitudes of People, and many of 'em
are Persons of considerable Note. Besides these, are to be found most Sorts and
Sects of Christians, as also many Jews; and Mahometans, not a few. This Kingdom
received the Knowledge of the Blessed Gospel in the beginning of the Eleventh
Century, and that by the Industrious Preaching of Albert, Archbishop of Prague.

. 2. GREECE.
THIS Country (formerly Graecia and Hellis) is termed by the Italians and
Spaniards, Grecia; by Name.
the French, la Greece; by the Germans, Griechenland; and by the English,
Greece; why so called, is variously conjectured of all, by our Modern Critics;
but the most received Opinion is, that the Name derives its Original from an
Ancient Prince of that Country, called Graecus.

The Air of this Country being generally Pure and Temperate, is reckoned by all
to be very pleasant and Air.
healthful to ^^eathe in The opposite Place of the Globe to Greece, is that
Part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 225 and 232 Degrees of Longitude, with
36 and 42 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying under the 6th North Climate) is not only
very fit for Pasture, (there Scil.
being much fertile Champaign Ground) but also it affords good slo^ of Grain,
where duly Manured; and abounds with excellent (...), and other delicious
Fruits. The longest Day in the No^^ most part of Greece is about 15 Hours; the
shortest in the Southmost, 9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

(...) Commodities of this Country, are reckoned (...), Oil, Turkey-Leather,
Coke. Commodities.
Soap. Honey, Wax, etc.

At (...) (a little Village on the South of M. (...) now (...), by the (...))
are some Inscriptions, (...)
which ^vince it to have been the Ancient Delphi, so famous all the World over
for the Oracle of Apollo. (2) On the aforesaid Mountain is a pleasant Spring,
which having several Marble Seeps descending ^o it, and many Niches made in the
Rock for Statues, give (...) to think that this was the renowned ^ons Castchue,
or Caballinus, which inspired (as People then imagined) the Ancient Poets. (3.)
In Livadia (the Ancient Achaia) is a hideous Cavern in a Hill which was very
famous of old for the Oracles of Trophonius. (4.) Between the large Lake of
Livadia and the Eubaean Sea, (whose shortest distance is four Miles) are
upwards of forty wonderful Subterraneous Passages hewn out of the firm Rock,
and that quite under a huge Mountain, to let the Water have a Vent, otherways
the Lake being surrounded with Hills, and constantly supplied by several
Rivulets from these Hills, would still overflow the Adjacent Country. (5.) On
M. Oneius, in the Isthmus of Corinth, are the Remains of the Isthmian Theater,
being the Place where the Isthmian Games were formerly celebrated. (6.) Here
are also some Vestigia of that Wall built by the Lacedaemonians, from one Sea to
the other, for securing the Peninsula from the Incursions of the Enemy. (7.)
Through most Parts of Greece, are still extant the Ruins of many Heathen
Temples, especially that of the Goddess Ceres, at Eleusis (about four Hours
from Athens) a part of whose Statue is yet to be seen. And at Salonichi are
several stately Christian Churches, (particularly those of S. Sophia, Gabriel,
and the Virgin Mary) now converted into Mohammedan Mosques, the last of which is
a Noble Structure, environed on each side with Twelve Pillars of Jasper Stone,
and as many Crosses upon their Chapiters remaining as yet undefac'd by the
Turks. But the Chief Rarities of Greece may be reckoned those various Monuments
of Antiquity to be seen at Athens: The Chief of which are these following, (1.)
The Acropolis or Citadel, the most Ancient and Eminent Part of the City. (2.)
The Foundations of the Walls round the City, supposed to be those erected by
Theseus, who enlarged the same. (3.) The Temple of Minerva (now a Turkish
Mosque) as entire as yet as the Rotonda at Rome, and is one of the most
beautiful Pieces of Antiquity that is extent this Day in the World. (4) The
Panagia Spiliotissa, or Church of our Lady of the Grotto. (5.) Some magnificent
Pillars, particularly those commonly reckoned the Remains of Adrian's Palace,
of which there were formerly six Rows, and twenty in each Row, but now only
seventeen stand upright, and are fifty two Foot high, and seventeen in
Circumference at the Base. Here likeways is a Gate and an Aqueduct of the said
Emperor. (6.) The Stadium, or Place where the Citizens used to run Races.
encounter Wild Beasts, and celebrated the famous Games, termed (...). (7.) The
Hill, Musaeum, (now called To Seggio by the Inhabitants) so (...) from the
Poet, Musaevs, the Disciple of Orphens, who was wont there to recite his
Verses. (8.) Some Remains conjectured to be those of the Ar^opagus and Od^um,
or Theater of Music. (9) The Ruins of many Temples, especially that of
Augustus, whose Front is still entire, consisting of four Dorick Pillars; as
also those of Theseus, Hercules, Jupiter Olympius, Castor and Pollux, etc.
(10.) The Tower of Andronicus Cyrrhastes, or Temple of the Eight Winds still
entire. (11.) The Phanari, or Lanthorn of Demosthenes, being a little Edifice
of White Marble, in Form of a Lanthorn, which is also entire. For a particular
Description of all these Rarities, both at Athens, and other Parts of Greece,
with many remarkable Inscriptions, both in Greek and Latin. Vid. Wheeler's
Travels.

Archbishopricks in this Country, are chiefly those of Archbishopricks.
Amphipoli, Malvasia, Saloniki, Larissa, Patras, Adrianople. Tarsa, Napoli di
Romania, Janna. Athens, Corinth,


Bishoprics in this Country, are chiefly those of Bishoprics.
Scotusa, Misitra, Glykaeon, Granitza, Modon, Argiro Castro, Salona, Thalanta,
Caminitza, Delvino, Livadia, Amphissa. Arges, Butrinto,


No Universities in this Country, though once the Seat of the Muses; but in
lieu of them are Twenty Universities.
four Monastries of Caloyers or Greek Monks, of the Order of St. Basil, who
live in a Collegiate manner on the famous M. Athos, (now termed (...), or the
Holy Mountain) where the younger Sort are instructed in the Holy Scriptures,
and the various Rites of the Greek Church; and out of these Colleges are
usually chosen those Bishops who are subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Greeks (most famous of old, both for Arms and Arts, and every thing else
that is truly valuable) are so Manners.
wonderfully degenerated from their Forefathers, that instead of those
excellent Qualities which did shine in them, particularly Knowledge, Prudence,
and Valor, There Is nothing now to be seen among them, but the very Reverse or
Contrary of these, and that in the highest degree. Such is the Pressure of the
Ottoman Yoke, under which they groan at present, that their Spirits are quite
sunk within 'em, and their very Aspect does plainly declare a disconsolate and
dejected Mind. However, the unthinking Part of them do so little consider their
present Slavish Subjection, that there is no People more Jovial and merrily
disposed, being so much given to Singing and Dancing, that it is now become a
Proverbial Saying, As merry as a Greek. The Trading Part of them are generally
very Cunning, and so inclined to overreach (if they can) in their Dealings,
that Strangers do not only meet with much more Candor among the Turks; but if
one Turk seem in the least to discredit another Word or Promise, his Reply is
still at hand, I hope you don't take me for a Christian: Such is that Blot,
which these Imprudent Professors of Christianity have cast upon our most Holy
Religion, in the Eyes of its Numerous and Implacable Adversaries.

The Languages here in use, are the Turkish and Vulgar Greek, (the first being
peculiar to the Turks, and the Language.
other to the Christians) a Specimen of the former shall be given in the last
Paragraph of this Section. As for the other, I cannot omit to mention the mighty
difference there is betwixt it and the Ancient Greek, not only in respect of
the many Turkish Words now intermixed, but also in the very Pronounciation of
those which yet remain unaltered, as I particularly observed by conversing with
several of the Greek Clergy, and being present at some of their Public
Prayers. Yea, the knowledge of the Ancient Greek in its former Purity, is not
only lost among the Vulgar Sort of People, but also almost extinguished even
among those of the highest Rank, few or none of their Ecclesiastics themselves
pretending to be Masters of it. Paternoster in the best Dialect of the modern
Greek, runs thus: Pater hemas, opios ise ces tos Ouranous hagiasthito to Onoma
sou; na erti he basilia sou; to thelema sou na ginetez itzon en te Ge, os is
ton Ouranon: To psomi hemas dose hemas simeron. Kae-sichorase hemos ta crimata
hemon itzon, kae hemas sichorasomen ekinous opou, mas adikounkae men ternes
hemas is to pirasmo, alla soson hemas apo to kako. Amen.

So many brave and valiant Generals did Greece formerly breed, that Strangers
usually resorted thither to Government
learn the Art of War; and such were the Military Achievements of this People,
both at home and abroad, and so far did the force of their Arms extend, that
under their Great Alexander was erected the third Potent Monarchy of the World.
But alas! such has been the sad Catastrophe of Affairs in this Country, and so
low and lamentable is its Condition at present, that nothing of its former
Glory and Grandeur is now to be seen. For its poor and miserable Natives, are
now strangely cowed and dispirited; its (once) numerous and flourishing Cities,
are now depopulated and mere heaps of Ruins; its large and fertile Provinces are
now laid waste, and lie uncultivated. And lately, the whole, and still a great
Part of the Country, does now groan under the heavy Burden of the Turkish Yoke;
and its various Divisions are ruled by their respective Sangiacs in
Subordination to the Grand Signier.

See the last Paragraph of this Section. Arms.


The established Religion in this Country, is that of Mahometanism; but
Christianity (for its number of Professors) Religion.
does far more prevail. The chief Tenets of the Mohammedan Religion may be seen.
4. of this Section (to which I remit the Reader) As for Christianity, it is
professed in this Country, according to the Doctrine of the Greek Church, the
Principal Points of which, as it differs from the Western Christian Churches
(whether Protestant or Roman) are these following, viz (1.) The Greeks deny the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, asserting that it proceeds only
from the Father through the Son. (2.) They also deny the Doctrine of Purgatory,
yet usually pray for the Dead. (3.) They believe that the Souls of the Faithful
departed this Life, are not admitted unto the Beatifick Vision till after the
Resurrection. (4.) They celebrate the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist in
both Kinds, but make the Communicant take three Morsels of Leavened Bread, and
three Sips of Wine, in Honor of the Three Persons of the Adorable Trinity.
(5.) They admit Children to participate of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
when only seven Years of Age, because then it is (say they) that they begin to
Sin. (6.) They allow not of Extreme Unction and Confirmation, and disapprove of
fourth Marriages. (7) They admit none into Holy Orders but such as are married,
and inhibit all second Marriages, being once in Orders. (8.) They reject all
Carved Images, but admit of Pictures, wherewith they adorn their Churches.
Lastly, They observe four Lents in the Year, and esteem it unlawful to Fast
upon Saturdays. In their Public Worship they use four Liturgies, viz. That
commonly called, St. James's, St. Chrysostom's, St. Basil's, and St. Gregory
the Great's, together with Lessons out of the Lives of their Saints, which
makes their Service to be of such a tedious and indiscreet length, that it
commonly lasts five or six Hours together. The Fasts and Festivals that are
yearly observed in the Greek Church are very numerous; and were it not for
them, it is probable that Christianity had been quite extirpated out of this
Country ere now: For by means of these Solemnities (which yet are celebrated
with a multitude of Ridiculous and Superstitious Ceremonies) they still
preserve a Face of Religion under a Patriarch, [who resides at Constantinople]
and several Archbishops and Bishops, particularly those abovementioned. But did
we view those Ecclesiastics in their Intellectuals, as also the lamentable
State of all Persons committed to their Charge, we should find both Priest and
People laboring under such gross and woeful Ignorance, that we could not
refrain from wishing, that the Western Churches of Christendom [by their
Divisions, Impieties, and Abuse of Knowledge] may not provoke the Almighty at
last to plague them likeways with the same Darkness and Desolation. This
Country was watered with the Blessed Gospel in the very Infancy of
Christianity, and that by the powerful Preaching of St. Paul, the Apostle of
the Gentiles.

. 3. Little Tartary.
THIS Country (anciently Taurica Chersonesus, or Tartaria Procopensis, being
the Lesser Scythia, and Name.
a Part of old Sarmatia) is termed by the Italians, Tartaria Minor; by the
Spaniards, Tartaria Menor; by the French, La Petite Tartarie; by the Germans,
Kleine Tartarey; and by the English, Little Tartary; so called to distinguish
it from Great Tartary in Asia; as also Crim-Tartary from Crim, the principal
City of the Country.

The Air of this Country is generally granted to be of a very temperate Nature,
but yet unhealthful to Air.
breath in. The opposite Place of the Globe to Little Tartary, is that part of
Terra Australis incognita, between 240 and 250 Degrees of Longitude, with 48
and 52 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 8th North Climate) is very different
in different Parts, some Soil.
Places abounding with Grain and Fruits, and others pestered with undrainable
Marshes, and barren Mountains. The Length of the Days and Nights here, is the
same as in the Northern Parts of France.

The Commodities of this Country are reckoned Slaves, Leather, Chalcal-Skins,
and several sorts of Furs, Commodities.
which they exchange with the Adjacent Turks for other Commodities they want.

Some Travelers relate of this wild and barbarous Part of the World, that few,
or no, ravenous Beasts Rarities.
are found therein: And others tell us, That many of its Fens and Marshes
abound mightily with Salt, which is naturally there produced in prodigious
Quantities.

Archbishopricks in this Country. None. Archbishopricks.


Bishoprics in this Country, are those of Bishoprics.
Caffa, Gothia,


Universities in this Country. None. Universities.


The Crim-Tartars are generally Men of vigorous and robust Bodies, able to
endure all the Hardships of Manners.
a Military Life; and many of them (being endu'd with Courage and Vigor of
Mind, conform to their Strength of Body) prove the best of Soldiers. They are
reputed to be very just in their Dealings with one another, but far otherways
with Strangers. Many of 'em are much addicted to Pillage, and they usually feed
upon Horse flesh.

The Language of the Crim-Tartars is the Scythian, or pure Tartaresque, which
has such a resemblance to the Language.
Turkish, as the Spanish to the Italian; these Tartars and Turks understanding
one another, as those of Italy and Spain. The Arabic is here learned at
School, as in most Parts of Turkey. Paternoster in the Tartaresque, runs thus;
Atscha wyzom Chy hokta sen algusch, ludor senug adougkel suom, chauluchong bell
sun senung arkchneg aleigier da vkarhtaver visum gundoluch ot make chu musen
vougou kai visum jasuchen, den bisdacha hajelberin bisum jasoch namasin, datcha
koima visu sumanacha, illa gar^a visenu, gemandam. Amen.

This Country is governed by its own Prince, commonly termed the Cham of
Tartary, who is under the Government.
Protection of the Great Turk, whose Sovereignty he acknowledges by the usual
Ceremony of receiving a Standard. The Grana Signior actually possesses some
Part of this Country, and maintains one Beglierbeg, and two Sangiacks, in the
Places of greatest Importance: As also, he detains as Hostage, the apparent
Successor of the Cham, who is ordinarily either his Son or Brother. To all
which, the Tartars readily yield, upon the Account of an Ancient Compact,
whereby the Turkish Empire is said to descend to them, whenever the Heirs Male
of the Ottoman Line shall fail.

The Cham of Tartary bears for his Ensigns Armorial, Or, three Griffins Sable,
armed Gules. Arms.


The Crim Tartars (for the most part) are zealous Professors of the Mohammedan
Doctrine, except some Religion.
who continue still Pagan; and intermixed with them are many Christians,
especially Greeks and Armenians, besides a considerable number of Roman
Catholics. When this Country was first watered with the Blessed Gospel, is not
very certain.

. 4. Danubian Provinces.
THE remaining Part of Turkey here considered under Name.
the Title of Danubian Provinces, is so called from the Situation of these
Provinces, they being near unto, or upon the Banks of the Danuube. But since
each of 'em requires a peculiar Etymology, take the same as follows: (1)
Transylvania (the Ancient Dacia Mediterranea) so called by the Romans, Quasi
trans sylvas, it being encompassed with vast mighty Forests. (2) Valachia,
(part of Old Dacia) corruptedly so called for Flaccia' which Title came from
one Flaccus, an Ancient General, who made that part of the Country a Roman
Colony. (3.) Moldavia, (the Seat of the Ancient Getae) so called from a Little
River of the same Name. (4.) Romania, (the chiefest Part of Old Thrace) so
called from Roma Nova, viz. Constantinople. (5.) Bulgaria, or rather Wolgaria,
(the Old Moesia Inferior) so called from Volga, it being formerly subdued and
possessed by a People which came from the Banks of that River. (6.) Servia, (of
Old Moesia Superior) why so called, is not very certain. (7.) Bosnia, (Part of
the Ancient Pannonia) so called from a River of the same Name. (8.) Sclavonia,
(another Part of Pannonia) so called from its Ancient Inhabitants, the Sclavi.
(9) Croatia, (heretofore known by the Name of Liburnia) so called from its
Inhabitants, the Creates. Lastly, Dalmatia, (much of the Ancient Illyricum) but
as for the Etymology of that Name, it is not yet agreed upon among Critics.

The Air of these various Provinces does mightily vary according to their
Situation and Nature of the Soil. Air.
The opposite Place of the Globe to them, is that Part of the vast Pacifick
Ocean, between 220 and 235 Degrees of Longitude, with 42 and 48 Degrees of
South Latitude.

The Soil of these various Provinces (they lying in the 7th and 8th North
Climate) cannot reasonably be Soil.
expected to be the same in all. Croatia is Cold and Mountainous, yet producing
all Necessaries for the Life of Man, Servia much more Pleasant and Fertile.
Bulgaria Unpleasant and Barren, being full of Deserts, and ill inhabited.
Moldavia more Temperate and Fertile, but the greatest Fate of it uncultivated.
Romania affords great Quantity of Corn and Fruits, and several of its Mountains
produce some Mines of Silver, Lead, and Alum. The longest Day in the Northmost
Part is about 16 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost is 9 Hours, and the
Nights proportionably.

Most of these Provinces being Inland (...) Countries, (except Romania) and
therefore little frequented Commodities.
by Strangers; the Number of their Commodities cannot be very great; save only
those ^^ported from Stamboul which are chiefly Grograins, Camblets, (...),
Carpets, ^uni^eeds, Cottons, Galls, and most other rich Turkish Commodities.

In one of the Mines of (...), viz. that at Rimili Dominurdiz, are found
sometimes large Lumps Rarities.
of Virgin Gold, fit for the Miat without any purifying. Other Parts of this
Country afford such vast Quantities of Stone-Salt, as to supply all the
Neighboring Nations with that useful Mineral. Near to Enguedine, in the same
Principality, (the Ancient Annium) are several Monuments of Antiquity,
especially the Remains of a large Military Way, or long Cawsway made by one
Annius, a Captain of a Roman Cohort. At Spalatro in Dalmatia, are the Ruins of
Dioclesian's Palace, in which he took up his Residence when he retired from the
Empire. Here is also an entire Temple consecrated to Jupiter, which is of an
Octogonal Form, and adorned with several stately Pillars of Porphyry. At Zara
in the same Province are many Ruins of Roman Architecture, and several Heathen
Altars, still to be seen. But what mostly deserves our regard, are those
Monuments of Antiquity, as yet extant, in or near to Constantinople, the chief
of which are these following, viz. (1.) The Hippodrome (now called Atmidan, a
word of like signification) in which remain some stately Hietoglyphical
Pillars, particularly one of Egyptian Granite, fifty Foot long, and yet but one
Stone; and another of Brass, only fourteen Foot high, and in form of three
Serpents wreathed together up to the Top, where their heads separate, and look
three different ways. (2.) South of the Hippodrome, is that Column commonly
called the Historical Pillar, curiously carved from Top to Bottom, expressing
variety of warlike Actions (3.) West of the Hippodrome, is another Column of
Porphyry, brought hither from Rome by Constantine the Great, which having
suffered much Damage by Fire, is now called the Burnt Pillar. (4.) Nigh the
Mouth of the Black-Sea, is a Pillar of the Corinthian Order, about ten Foot
high, with an imperfect Inscription on its Base, vulgarly called Pompy's
Pillar, which has been probably erected for a Sea-mark by Day, as the Lanthorn
at Fanari is by Night. (5.) From the Black-Sea to the City of Constantinople,
reaches that Noble Aqueduct, made by the Emperor Valentinian, (whose Name it
retains) and repaired by Solomon the Great. To these we may add, that noble
Pile of Building, Sancta Sophia, formerly a Christian Temple, but now a
Mohammedan Mosque; for a particular Description of which, with the other
Remarkables above mentioned, see Sandy's, Wheeler, Spon, with other Modern
Travelers.

Here is one Patriarchate, viz. that of Constantinople, as also several
Archbishopricks, especially those of Archbishopricks.
Calcedon, Sophia, Trasanopoli, Antivari, Rugusa or Ragusi.


Chief Bishoprics in these Provinces, are those of Bishoprics.
Posega, Zagrabe, Narenza, Belgrade, Scardona, Cattaro.


Universities in these Provinces. None. Universities.


These various Provinces are inhabited by various sorts of People, particularly
the Sclavonians, who are Manners.
generally Men of a robust and strong Constitution, and very fit to be
Soldiers. Next, the Croats, who are esteemed to be Persons so Valiant and
Faithful, that they are entertained by many German Princes as their Guards.
Lastly, The Servians and Bulgarians, who are reckoned very Cruel, and
universally given to Robbery. But as for the Natural Turks, they are thus
Uncharacterized, viz. Men of a swarthy Complexion, robust Bodies, of a good
Stature, and proportionably compact'd: Men who (though generally addicted to
some horrid Vices not to be named among Christians) are yet Persons of great
Integrity in their Dealings, strict Observers of their Word; abundantly Civil
to Strangers, extraordinary Charitable after their own way, and so zealous
Observers of the various Duties enjoined by their Religion (especially that of
Prayer) that their frequency in the same may justly reproach the general
Practice of Christians now adays. In their ordinary Salutations they lay their
Hands on their Bosoms, and a little incline their Bodies, but accosting a
Person of Quality, they how almost to the Ground, and kiss the Hem of his
Garment. They account it an opprobrious thing to uncover their Heads; and as
they walk in the Streets, they prefer the Left Hand before the Right, as being
thereby Master of his Cymitar, with whom they walk. Walking up and down they
never use, and much wonder at that Custom of Christians. Their chief
Recreations are Shooting with the Bow, and throwing of Lances, at both of which
they are very dexterous.

The Sclavonian Language (being of a vast Extent) is used not only in all these
Provinces, though with Language.
some variation of Dialect but also in a great Part of Europe besides; The
purest Dialect of which Tongue is generally esteemed, that peculiar to
Dalmatia. As for the Turkish (which is originally Sclavonian, and now the
prevailing Language of these Provinces) Paternoster in the same, runs thus;
Babamuz hanghe guiglesson: chuduss olssum ssenungh adun; Gelson ssenung
memlechetun. Olsum ssenung istegunh nyesse gugthaule gyrde, cchame gumozi
hergunon vere bize bugun, hem bassa bize borslygomozi, nyese bizde baslaruz
borsetigleremosi, hem yedm^ bize ge heneme, de churtule bizy jaramazdan. Amen.

These various Countries considered under the Title of Danubian Provinces do
acknowledge Subjection to Government.
several Sovereigns, particularly as follows; Transylvania is subject to its
own Prince or Waywode, formerly Tributary to the Turks, but now under the
Protection of the Emperor since the Year 1690. Valachia being subject to its
Waywode, (sometimes styled Hospadar, signifying Chief General of the Militia)
is Tributary to the Turk. Moldavia is subject to its Waywode, who is under the
Protection of the Emperor since Anno 1688. Romania, Bulgaria, and Servia, are
wholly under the Turk, and governed by their respective Beglierbegs. Sclavonia
and Bosnia do own the Emperor. And lastly, Dalmatia, is partly under the
Venetians, and partly under the Turk. To the Government of these Provinces we
may subjoin the Republic of Ragusi, whose Inhabitants are so afraid of losing
their Rights and Liberty, that every Month they change their Rector or Supreme
Magistrate, and every Night the Governor of their Castle, who enters into his
Command blindfolded, and all Military Officers whatsoever are not to keep the
same Posts above six Weeks, lest if long continued they should either gradually
or tracherously bereave them of their Privileges, or make the Republic it
self a Prey, either to the Turks or Venetians, whom they equally dread; however
it pays Tribute to both of 'em at present, as also a certain Acknowledment to
the Emperor, his Catholic Magisty, and the Pope, by Virtue of a mutual Compact
ratified between them.

The Grand Signior (as Supreme Sovereign over all the Turkish Dominions, and
Absolute Emperor of the Arms.
Ottoman Empire) bears Verte, a Crescent Argent, Crested with a Turbant,
charged with three Black Plumes of Herons Quills, with this Morto, Donec totum
impleat Orbem. As for the Ancient Arms of the Eastern Emperors before the rise
of the Ottoman Family, They were, Mars, a Cross Sol betwixt four Greek Beta's,
of the second: The four Beta's signifying, (...), (...), i. e. Rex Regum,
Regnans Regibus.

The Inhabitants of these different Provinces, are very different in Point of
Religion, but reducible to Religion.
Three Classes, viz. Christians, Jews, and Mahometans. The Christians, for the
greatest part, adhere to the Tenets of the Greek Church, (already mentioned.
2.) some to the Church of Rome, and others profess the Reformed Religion, both
according to the Doctrine of Luther and Calvin. The Jews (as in all other
Countries) are Zealous Maintainers of the Mosaic Law; and the Mahometans stick
close to their Alcoran; by which they are taught the acknowledgment of One God,
and that Mahomet is his Great Prophet. It also commands Children to be
Obedient to their Parents, and approves of Love to our Neighbor. It enjoins
Abstinence from Swines Flesh and Blood, and such Animals as dye of themselves.
It promises to Mussulmen (or True Believers) all manner of sensual Pleasures
in a Future State. It allows of an unavoidable Fatality in every Thing, and
favors the Opinion of Tutelary Angels. But to be more particular, The
Followers of Mahomet do readily grant, That the Writings both of the Prophets
and Apostles were divinely Inspired, but allege that they are so corrupted by
Jews and Christians, that they cannot be admitted for the Rule of Faith. They
further believe and assert, That of all Revealed Institutions in the World,
those in the Alcoran are only Divine and Perfect. That God is both Essentially
and Personally One; and that the Son of God was a mere Creature, yet without
Sin, and miraculously Born of a Virgin. That Jesus Christ was a Great Prophet,
and that having ended his Prophetical Office upon Earth, he acquainted his
Followers of the coming of Mahomet. That Christ ascended into Heaven without
suffering Death, another being substituted in his place to Die. That Man is not
justified by Faith in Christ, but by Works enjoined in the Mosaic Law and the
Alcoran. That Poligamy (according to the Example of the Ancient Patriarchs) is
still to be allowed of; as also to Divorce the Wife upon any occasion. In
short, Mahometanism is a Medly of Paganism, Judaism, and Christianity; by which
means, the Grand Imposture (its Founder) did cunningly imagine to gain
Proselytes of all Professions. But whereas the Alcoran is the Turkish Rule of
Faith and Manners, let us more particularly consider its Precepts, and that
chiefly as they relate to the Principal Heads thereof, viz. Circumcision,
Fasting, Prayer, Alms, Pilgrimage, and Abstinence from Wine. (1.) Circumcision,
Of the various Sacraments in the Old and New Testament, they admit only of
Circumcision. This they reckon absolutely necessary to every Mussulman,
esteeming it impossible to obtain Salvation without it; whereupon they are very
careful to perform the same, and do celebrate the performance thereof with
great Solemnity. (2.) Fasting, particularly that extraordinary Fast, or yearly
Lent, called Ramadan, observed every ninth Month, and of a whole Months
continuance; during which time, they neither Eat nor Drink till the Sun goes
down; they also abstain from all worldly Business, and from smoking their
beloved Tobacco, yea, even from Innocent Recreations; and living reserved
austere Lives, do spend most of the time in their Mosques, frequenting them
both Day and Night. They believe that during this Month, the Gates of Heaven
stand open, and that those of Hell are shut. (3.) Prayer, This Duty is of
mighty request among them, their Prophet having termed the same the Key of
Paradise, and the very Pillar of Religion; whereupon they are frequent and
servent at their Devotions. They Are obliged to pray five times every Day, and
never fail of that number, let their worldly Business be never so urgent. (4)
Alms, Every Turk is bound to contribute the hundredth Part of his Wealth
toward the Zagat or Alms, for maintenance of the Poor. Besides which, they
frequently make large voluntary Contributions; yea, their Charity does not only
extend it self toward their Fellow-Rational Creatures, but even the
Irrational, as Dogs, Horses, Camels, etc. whom they carefully maintain in kind
of Public Hospitals, when through Age they become useless to their Masters.
(5.) Pilgrimage, viz. That to Mecca, which every Mussulman is bound to perform
once in his Lifetime, or, at least, to send Deputies for him. Thither they
resort in vast Multitudes, being commonly 40 or 50000 in Number, over whom the
Sultan appoints a Commander in Chief to redress Disorders that may happen on
the Road. This Officer is followed by a Camel carrying the Alcoran covered with
Cloth of Gold, which sanctified Animal upon its return, is adorned with
Garlands of Flowers, and exempt from any farther Labor during the remaining
part of its Life. The Turks do likeways visit the City of Jerusalem, but that
more out of Curiosity than Devotion: They have also a great Veneration for the
Valley of Jehosaphat, believing it shall be the particular Place of the General
Judgment. Lastly, Abstinence from Wine is likewise a Precept of the Alcoran.
But of this they are less observant than of any of the former, for many of the
richest sort of Turks are great Admirers of the Juice of the Grape, and will
liberally taste of the same in their private Cabals. These various Provinces
were at first instructed in the Christian Faith at different Times, and upon
different Occasions.

SECT. IX. Concerning the European Islands.
HAving hitherto Traveled through the various Countries on the Continent of
Europe; let us now leave the Continent, and set Sail for its Islands. And
whereas the Chief of such Islands, are those termed the Britannick; let us
first take a Particular Survey of them, and then a more General View of all the
rest. Therefore,

I. Of the Britannick Islands.
THESE Islands being always considered as divided into Greater [viz. those of
Great Britain and Ireland] and Lesser (namely those many little ones
surrounding Britain) I shall begin with the former comprehending in them. Three
distinct Kingdoms, and One Principality. And since our manner of Traveling
through the various Countries on the Continent of Europe, has been still to
proceed from North to South, I shall therefore continue the before said Method
in Surveying the Isle of Great Britain, having no other Regard to the Two Grand
Sovereignties therein, than the bare Situation of them: Begin we therefore with
the Northern Part of the Island, viz.

SCOTIAE Nova Descriptiorer. Robert Morden*


SCOTLAND.
d. m. Situated between 10 00 of Long. its greatest Length from N. to S. is
about 240 Miles. 17 30 between 55 00 of Latit. Breadth from E to W. is about
180 Miles. 59 00 Being divided into two Classes, viz. South, the Frith C T.
Edinburgh. North, the Frith Aberdeen. South Class comprehends Gatloway -- Chief
Town Kirkudbright -- W. to E. Nithisdale. -- Dumfreis -- Anandale -- Annand --
Eshdale with Eusdale -- -- Lidisdale -- Hermitage -- Tiviotdale -- Jedburgh --
The Mers -- Duns -- E. to W. Lawderdale -- Lauder -- Tweedale -- Peeblis --
Clydisdale -- Glascow. -- Kyle -- Air -- Garrick -- Bargenny -- Lothian --
Edinburgh -- E. to W. Sterling -- Idem -- Renfrew -- Idem -- Cunningham --
Irvin -- Isles of Boot -- Rothesay -- Arren. -- -- Peninsula of Cantyre --
Kilkeran -- North Class comprehends Fife. -- St. Andrews -- E. to W. Menteith
-- Dumblain -- Lennox -- (...) -- Argile -- Innerara -- Perth -- Idem -- E. to
W. Strath^^^ -- (...) -- (...) -- -- Lorn -- (...). -- Merns -- Bervey -- E. to
W. Angus -- Dundee -- Gaury -- -- Athol -- Blair -- Mar -- Aberdeen -- E. to
W. Badenech -- Riven -- I^chabar -- Innerlochy -- Buchan -- Peterhead -- E. to
W. (...) -- Idem -- (...) -- Elgin -- (...) -- Taine -- S. to N. S^th^rland --
D^rnock -- Strathnaver -- Strathy -- Catchness -- Wick lying N. E. of
Strathnaver.

These are the various Divisions of Scotland, according to the best Maps, and
the manner how they are found. But since that Kingdom is ordinarily divided into
Sheriffdoms. Stewarties, Balliaries, and one Constabulary, we shall also
consider it in that respect; and seeing each of those Sheriffdoms and
Stewarties, etc. comprehend either a part, or one, or more of the aforesaid
Divisions, we shall here subjoin all the Sheriffdoms and Stewarties, etc. of
the whole Kingdom, and annex to each of them their whole Content, whether more
or less. Therefore,

Sheriffdoms of Scotland, are those of Edinburgh -- Containing Middle Lothian.
Barwick -- The Mers and Bailliary of Lauderdale. Peeblis -- Tw^edale. Shelkirk
-- The Forest of Etterick. Wig^on -- The N. and W. Parts of Galloway. Renfrew
-- The Barony of Renfrew. Lanerick -- Clidisdale. Dumbritton -- Lenox. Bute --
Isles of Bute. Arren. Striveling -- Striveling, on both sides the River Forth.
Linlithgow -- West Lothian. Glackmannan -- A little of the E. parts of
Strivelingshire Kinross -- A little of the W. parts of Fife. Couper -- The rest
of Fife. Forfar -- Anguis, with its Pertinents. Kinkardin -- Mernis. Elgin --
The Eastern parts of Murray. Nairn -- The Western parts Weik -- Caithness.
Orkney -- Isles of Orkney. Schetland.

Sheriffdoms of Scotland, are those of Aberdcen containing Mar with its
Pertinents. Buchan comprehending Forumart^n. Strathbogie. Perth containing
Perth -- as also Gleushee. Athol -- Strathandel. Gawry -- Ramach. Broad-Albin
Balhider. Menteith -- Glenurghay. Strathyern Strormont. Innerara containing
Argile. Lorn. Kantire. Isles W. of Lorn. Kantire. Bamfe containing Bamfe.
Strathdovern. Beyn. Enzy. Strathawin. Balveny. Inverness containing Bad^noch.
Lochabyr. The South Part of Ross. A Part of Murray beyond Nairn, Westw. Tayne
containing Southerland. Strathnaver. Roxburgh containing Tiviotdale. Lidisdale.
Eshdale with Eus^ale. Air containing Kyle. Carrick. Cunningham. Dumfreis
containing all Nithisdale. Cromarty a little of Ross, S. of Cormarty.

Besides these Sheriffdoms, there are Stewarties. Bayliaries. one Constabulary.


Stewarties are Strathern -- contain. Strathern. Menteith -- Menteith.
Annandale -- Annandale. Kirkudbright. -- E. and S. parts of Galloway. As also S
Andrews in Fife. Killemure Anguis. Abernethy Perth. Bayliaries are Kyle --
contain. Kyle. Carrick -- Carrick. Cunningham -- Cunningham. Lauderdale --
Lauderdale.

The One Constabulaty is that of Haddington, containing East-Lothian.

THIS Country (the famous Ancient Caledonia) is termed by the Italians, Scotia;
by the Spaniards, Name.
Escocia; by the French, Escosse; by the Germans, Schotland; by the English and
its own Natives, Scotland; so called, as some fondly imagine, from Scota,
(Daughter to an Egyptian Pharaoh) but more probably from Scoti, Schytti, or
Scythi, a People of Germany, (over the Northern Parts of which the Name of
Scythia did once prevail) who seized on a Part of Spain, next on Ireland, and
from thence came into the Western Parts of this Country.

The Air of this Country is generally very pure, and so extraordinary wholesome
to breath in, that several Air.
Persons in the Northmost Parts of that Kingdom do frequently arrive to greater
Ages, than is usual in other Nations of Europe. The opposite Place of the Globe
to Scotland, is that Part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 190 and 196
Degrees of Longitude, with 56 and 60 Degrees of South Latitude.

Notwithstanding this Country is of a Situation considerably Northern, (it
lying in the 11th, 12th, and Soil.
beginning of the 13th North Climate) yet it produces all Necessaries, and
many of the Comforts of Humane Life. Its Seas are wonderfully stored with most
kinds of excellent Fish; Its Rivers do mightily abound with the choicest of
Salmons; Its Plains do sufficiently produce most kinds of Grain, Herbs, and
Fruits; and many of its Mountains are not only lined with valuable Mines, and
the best of Coals, but also several of them are so covered over with numerous
Flocks, that great Droves of Cattle do yearly pass into the North of England.
The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country is about 18 Hours, the
shortest in the Southmost 6 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The Chief Commodities of this Country, are most sorts of Fish in great
abundance, much Linnen-Cloath Commodities.
and Tallow, vast numbers of Cattle and Hides; as also excellent Honey,
Lead-Oar, Iron, Train-Oyl, Course Clothes, Frizes, etc.

In Clydsdale are yet to be seen, for several Miles, the Remains of a large
Roman Cawsway, or Military-way, Rarities.
which commonly goes now by the Name of Watlingstreet. And in Teviotdale, are
some Vestigia of Roman Encampments, and another Military-way, vulgarly termed
the Ruggid Cawsway. (2.) In the Stewarty of Strathern, are visible Tracts of
several Roman Camps, especially that at Ardoch. (3) In Sterlingshire are diverse
Marks of the famous Roman Wall, (now commonly called Graham's Dyke) which was
extended over the Isthmus, between the Rivers of Forth and Clyde: Its Form and
Manner of Building will best appear by a Draught thereof; for which, Vid.
Camden's Britainnia late Edition, page 959. (4.) In Sterlingshire, were
likeways found some Inscriptions upon Stones relating to the Roman Wall;
particularly Two; one whereof is now at Calder, and informs us that the Legio
secunda Augusta, built the said Wall upwards of three Miles; and another in the
E. Marshal's House at Dunnotyr, which hints that a Party of the Legio vicesima
victrix, continued it for three Miles more. As for the Inscriptions themselves,
Vid. Cambd. page 920, and 1101. (5.) Hard by the Tract of the aforesaid Wall in
Sterlingshire, are yet to be seen two pretty Mounts, termed by the Ancients,
Duni pacis; as also the Remains of an Ancient Building in form of a Pyramide
(now called by the Vulgar Arthur's Oven) which many reckon to have been a
Temple of the God Terminus. (6.) Near Pasley and Renfrew, are the Vestigia of a
large Roman Camp; the Fosses and Dykes about the Praetorium, being still
visible. Here is also to be seen a remarkable Spring which regularly Ebbs and
Flows with the Sea. (7.) Nigh to the City of Edinburgh, is a noted Spring,
commonly called the Oily-Well, the Surface of its Waters being covered with a
kind of Oil or Bitumen, which is frequently used, with good Success, in curing
Scabs and Pains proceeding from Cold. (8.) Near the same City is another
Fountain, which goes by the Name of the Routing-Well, because it usually makes
a Noise before a Storm. (9.) Near Brechin in Aagus, (where the Danes received a
mighty overthrow) is a high Stone erected over their General's Grave, called
Camus-Cross; with another about ten Miles distance, both of 'em having antique
Letters and Figures upon them. (10.) At Slains in Aberdeenshire, is a
remarkable petrifying Cave, commonly called the Dropping Cave, where Water
ouzing through a spungy porous Rock on the Top, does quickly consolidate after
it falls in drops to the bottom. (11.) Near Kilross in Murray, is to be seen an
Obelisk of one Stone, set up as a Monument of a Fight between King Malcolm, Son
of Keneth, and Sueno the Dane. (12.) On the Lord Lovet's Lands in Straherrich,
is a Lake which never freezeth all over before the Month of February; but after
that time, one Nights Frost will do it. There Is also another, called
Lough-Monar, (belonging to the late Sir George Mackenzy) just of the same
Nature with the former; and a third at Glencanigh in Strathglash, which never
wants Ice upon the middle Part of it, even in the hottest Day of Summer. (13.)
Toward the Northwest Part of Murray, is the famous Lough-Ness which never
freezeth; but retains its natural Heat, even in the extremest Cold of
Winter. (14.) In Lennox is Lough Lomond, which is every whit as famous among
the Vulgar, not only for its Floating-Island, but also as having Fish without
Fins, and being frequenly Tempestuous in a Calm. (15.) In diverse Parts of
Scotland are some noted Mineral Springs, particularly those at Kinghorn and
Balgrigy in Fife: as also Aberdeen and Peterhead in Aberdeenshire; several of
which come little short of the famous Spaw-Water in the Bishopric of Liege.
Lastly, In most Counties of this Kingdom, are many Circular Stone Monuments,
(being a company of prodigious long Stones set on end in the Ground, and that
commonly in form of a Circle) which are probably conjectured to have been
either Funeral Monuments, or Places of Public Worship in times of the Ancient
Druides, or both.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, are Two, viz. those of Archbishopricks.
St. Andrews, Glascow.


Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are Twelve, viz. those of Bishoprics.
Edinburgh, Murray, Ross, Galloway, Dunkeld, Brichen, Cathness, Argile,
Aberdeen, Dumblain, Orkney, The Isles.


Universities of this Kingdom, are Four, viz. those of Universities.
St. Adrews, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Glascow.


The Scots (for the most part) are an Active, Prudent, and Religious sort of
People. Many abominable Manners.
Vices, too common in other Countries, are not so much as speculatively known
among them. They generally abhor all kinds of Excess in Drinking, and
effeminate Delicacy in Diet, choosing rather to improve the Mind, than pamper
the Body. Many of them make as great Advances in all Parts of ingenious and
solid Learning, as any Nation in Europe. And as for their singular Fidelity
(although slanderously spoken of by some) it is abundantly well-known, and
experienced abroad; for an undoubted Demonstration thereof, is publicly given
to the whole World, in that a Neighboring Prince, and his Predecessors (for
almost three hundred Years) have committed the immediate Care of their Royal
Persons to them, without ever having the least Cause to repent, or real Ground
to change.

The Language commonly spoken in the North and North-West of this Country, is a
Dialect of the Irish, Language.
corruptedly called Erse (a Specimen of which shall be given when we come to
Ireland). In all other Parts of the Kingdom they use the English Tongue; but
that with considerable difference of Pronounciation in different Counties, and
all disagreeing with that in England, except the Town of Inverness, whose
Inhabitants are the only People who come nearest to the true English; however
the Gentry and Persons of good Education, usually speak English, (though not
with the same Accent as in England) yet according to its true Propriety, and
their manner of Writing is much the same. The vulgar Language (commonly called
Broad Scotch) is indeed a very corrupt sort of English, and has a great
Tincture of several Foreign Tongues, particularly the High German, Low Dutch,
and French, especially the last, a great many words still in use among the
Commonality, being Originally from that Language. For a Specimen of which
Tongue, Paternoster in it runs thus: Ure Fader whilk art in Heven; hallued be
thy Neme; thy Kingdoom cumm, thy Wull be done inn Earth az its done inn Heven.
Gee uss this day ure daily Breed, an forgee uss, ure Sins, az we forgee them
that Sin against uss; and leed uss nae intoo temtacion, batt delyver uss frae
evil. Ameen.

This Kingdom has hitherto had the good fortune to enjoy an Hereditary limited
Monarchy; though Government.
many times the immediate Heir, or next in Blood, has been set a side, and
another more remote has mounted the Throne. Since its Union with England, both
Kingdoms are under one King, who is styled the Monarch of Great Britain. The
Government of this Kingdom is chiefly managed by a Council of State, or Privy
Council, consisting of those called properly Officers of State, and others of
the Nobility and Gentry, whom the King pleases to appoint. The Officers of
State are eight in number, viz. the Lord High-Chancellor, Lord High-Treasurer,
Lord-President of the Council, Lord Secretary of State, Lord Treasurer-Deputy,
Lord Register, Lord-Advocate, and Lord Justice Clerk. The Administration of
Justice in Civil Affairs is lodged in the Lords of the Session, who are Fifteen
in number, whereof One is President, and to those are joined some Noblemen,
under the Name of extraordinary Lords of the Session. This Court is esteemed
one of the most August and Learned Judicatories in Europe: From it there lies
no Appeal but to the Parliament, which is now made up of the Peers, the
Commissioners of Counties, and those of Free Buroughs. The King's Person is
always represented in Parliament by some Nobleman, who bears the Title of Lord
High-Commissioner. The Distribution of Justice in Criminal Matters is committed
to the Court of Justice, which is composed of the Lord Justice General, the
Lord Justice Clerk, and five or six other Lords of the Session, who in this
Bench are called Commissioners of Justiciary. Over and above these two Supreme
Courts of Justice, there are a great many Subordinate Judicatories, both for
Civil and Criminal Affairs through the Kingdom, as Sheriff Courts, Courts of
Regality, and the like.

The Royal Arms of this Kingdom, together with those of England and Ireland,
(as they compose the Ensigns Arms.
Armorial of the Monarch of Great Britain) shall be particularly expressed when
we come to England.

The Inhabitants of this Country (excepting a few, who still adhere to the
Church of Rome, and an inconsiderable Religion.
number of Quakers) are all of the Reformed Religion, yet with considerable
Variation among themselves in some private Opinions and various Points of
Church Discipline: However the numerous Professors thereof are very sincere in
their Principles, and do generally practice conformable to their Professions.
No Christian Society in the World does excel them for their exact Observation
of the Sabbath day, and few can equal them for their singular Strictness and
Impartiality in punishing Scandals: But lamentable are their Distractions of
late in Matters relating to Ecclesiastical Polity, and how fatal such Heats and
Divisions, both in this and the Neighboring Kingdom may prove at last, is
alas! but too well known to all thinking Persons among us. The smallest
Privateer belonging either to Breast or S. Malo's may easily Attack, Board, and
Sink the Royal Britannia her self, if she chance only to Spring a Leak under
Water, when her whole Crew are at Blows between Decks. The Christian Faith
(according to the best Accounts) was planted in this Country, during the Reign
of Dioclesian; for by reason of that violent Persecution he raised in the
Church, many Christians are said to have fled from the Continent into the Isle
of Great Britain, and particularly (as an Ancient Author expressly testifies)
into that Part thereof, In quam Romana Arma nunquam penetrarunt; which (without
all doubt) is Scotland; especially the Northern Parts of that Country, they
being still possessed by the Scots, and never subject to the Roman Power. St
Rule, or Regulus, is said to have brought over with him the Arm, or (as some
affirm) the Lig of St. Andrew the Apostle, and to have buried it in that place
where now the City of St. Andrews stands. These first Propagators of
Christianity seem to have been a kind of Monks, who afterward, by the
beneficence of the first Christian Kings of Scotland, came into the Seats and
Possessions of the Pagan Druides, (a sort of Religious Votaries to the Heathen
Gods) and had their principal Residence, or rather Monasteries, in the Islands
of Man and Jona, and passed under the Name of Culdees.

ENGLAND bu Robt. Morden.


ENGLAND.
d. m. Situated between 12 00 of Long. its greatest Length from N. to S. is
about 320 Miles. 20 00 between 50 00 of Latit. Breadth from E. to W. is about
290 Miles. 55 50 Being divided into Six Circuits, viz. Western Circuit Chief
Town Salisbury. Oxford Circuit Oxford. Home Circuit Canterbury. Northfolk
Circuit Norwich. Midland Circuit Lincoln. North Circuit York. Western-Circuit
contains Cornwall -- Chief Town Launceston -- W. to E. Devonshire -- Exeter --
Dorsetshire -- Dorchester -- Hampshire -- Winchester -- Somm^rsetshire Bristol
-- N. of Dorsetshire. Wiltshire -- Salisbury -- Oxford.Circuit contains
Barkshire -- Redding N. of Hampshire. Oxfordshire -- Oxford -- E. to W.
Glocestershire -- Gloucester -- Monmouthshire Monmouth -- Herefordshire --
Hereford -- S. to N. E. Worcestershire -- Worcester -- Staffordshire --
Stafford -- Shropshire -- Shrewsbury W. of Staffordshire. Home-Circuit contains
Essex -- Colchester -- E. to W. Hartfordshire -- Hartford -- Kent -- Canterbury
-- E. to W. Surry -- Southwark -- Sussex -- Chichester South of Surry. (...).
Norfolk-Circuit contains Norfolk -- Norwich -- E. to S. W. Suffolk -- Ipswich
-- Cambridgeshire -- Cambridge -- Huntingtonshire Huntington -- Bedfordshire --
Bedford -- Buckinghamshire Buckingham --

Midland Circuit contains Lincolnshire -- Chief Town Lincoln -- E. to W.
Nottinghamshire Nottingham -- Derbyshire -- Derby -- Rutlandshire -- Okeham --
E. to W. Leicestershire -- Leicester -- Warwickshire -- Warwick --
Northamptonshire Northampton S. of Leicestershire. Warwickshire. North. Circuit
contains Yorkshire -- York -- S. to N. Durham -- Idem -- Northumberland.
Newcastle -- Lancashire -- Lancaster -- S. to N. Westmorland -- Appleby --
Cumberland -- Carlisle --

To England we here subjoin the Principality of Wales, divided into Four
Circuits; each Circuit comprehending Three Counties, vix.

1. Those of Denbighshire -- Chief Town Denbigh N. to S. Flintshire -- St.
Asaph Montgomeryshire Montgomery -- 2. Those of Anglesey -- Beaumaris -- N. to
S. E. Carnarvenshire Carnarven -- M^rionethshire Harlech -- 3. Those of
Cardiganshire Cardigan -- N. to S. Carmarthenshire Carmarthen Pembrokeshire
Pembrook -- 4. Those of Radnorshire -- Radnor -- N. to S. W. Brecknokshire --
Brecknock -- Glamorganshire Cardiff --

Besides the Six Circuits of England, (containing Thirty eight Counties) and
these Four of Wales, comprehending Twelve; there remain as yet two Counties
unmentioned, and which are not ordinarily reduced to any of these Circuits,
viz. Middlesex and Cheshire; the first because of its Vicinity to London, and
the other as being a County-Palatine, having its own Judges and Counselors
peculiar to it self. These Two Counties, with the Thirty eight abovementioned
in England, and Twelve in Wales, make Fifty two in all. But since England and
Wales are Two distinct Sovereignties [one being a Kingdom, and the other a
Principality] we shall seperately Treat of them both. Therefore,

ENGLAND.
THIS Country (the Ancient Anglia, which with the rest of the Island, made up
the Renowned Name.
Britannia or Albion) is termed by the Italians, Inghilterra; by the Spaniards,
Inglatierra; by the French, Angleterre; by the Germans, Engel-land; and by the
Natives, England; which Name is derived from the Angles, a People of Lower
Saxony, who Conquered the greatest Part of this Country, and divided the same
into Seven different Kingdoms: But Egbert (descended from the Angles) having
united this divided Nation, and being the first Monarch of England after the
Saxon Heptarchy, ordered (by special Edict, above 800 Years after the
Incarnation) that the whole Kingdom should be termed Engle-lond, which Title in
process of time, has turned into the present Name of England.

The Air of this Country is far more Mild, Sweet, and Temperate, than in any
Part of the Continent under Air.
the same Parallel. The Cold during the Winter is not so piercing; nor the Heat
in the Summer so scorching, as to recommend (much less to enforce) the use of
Stoves in the one, or Grotto's in the other. The opposite Place of the Globe to
England, is that part of the Pacifick Ocean, between 200 and 210 Degrees of
Longitude, with 50 and 56 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Country (lying in the 9th, 10th, and 11th North Climate) is generally so
Fertile, and produces Soil.
such plenty of Grain, Fruits, Roots, Herbs, etc. that the excellency of its
Soil, is best declared by those Transcendent Elogies deservedly bestowed on
her, both by Ancient and Modern Writers, who call England the Granary of the
Western World, the Seat of Ceres, etc. that her Valleys are like Eden, her
Hills like Lebanon, her Springs as Pisgah, and her Rivers as Jordan; that she is
a Paradise of Pleasure, and the Garden of God. The longest Day in the Northmost
Parts is about 17 Hours, the shortest in the Southmost is almost 8 Hours; and
the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Corn, Cattle, Tyn, Copper, Lead,
Iron, Timber, Coals, Commodities.
abundance of Wool, Cloth, Stufts, Linen, Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese,
Beer, etc.

In most Counties of this Kingdom are still extant, some noted Circular Stone
Monuments, (like those in Rarities.
Scotland abovementioned, page 193) particularly, The Seventy seven Stones at
Saleeds in Cumberland, commonly termed Long Meg, and her Daughters; Those
called Rolle-rich Stones in Oxfordshire; Those near Enisham in Northumberland;
Those upon the River Loder in Westmorland; Those near Burrow-Bridge in
Yorkshire; Those near Exmore in Devonshire; and finally the Hurlers, and those
at Biscaw-woun in Cornwall, etc. But most observable of all, is Stonehenge (the
Chorea Gigantum of the Ancients) on Salisbury-Plain. Which Monuments are
thought by some to consist of Natural Stones; by others, of Stones artificially
compounded of pure Sand, Lime, Vitriol, and other unctious Matter. But if the
Reader desires to see the various Conjectures of the Curious, concerning the
Nature and Design of all such Monuments, together with the Draught of
Stone-henge in particular, let him consult the late Edition of Camden's
Britannia, page 23, 95, 108, 269. (2.) In many Parts of England are yet to be
seen the Vestigia, and Remains of diverse Roman Military Ways; the principal of
which is that mentioned in Leland's M. S. beginning at Dover, and passing
through Kent to London, from thence to St. Albans, Dunstable, Stratford,
Toucester, Littlebourn, St. Gilbert's Hill near Shrewsbury, then by Stratton,
and so through the middle of Wales to Cardigan. (3.) In this Country are
abundance of Medicinal Waters; whether for Bathing, as those especially in
Somersetshire, (called the Baths, (...)) or Purging; particularly those of the
Spaws in Yorkshire; Tunbridge in Kent; Ebisham and Dulledge in Surry;
North-hall, Acton, and Islington in Middlesex. Here also are many other very
remarkable Springs; whereof some are mightily impregnorated either with Salt,
as that at Durtwich in Worcestershire; or Sulphur, as the famous Well at
Wiggin in Lancashire, (of which afterward) or Bituminous Matter, as that at
Pitchford in Shropshire. Others have a Petrifying Quality, as particularly that
near Lutterworth in Leicestershire; and the remarkable Droping-Well in the
West Riding of Yorkshire. And finally some Ebb and Flow, but that generally in
a very irregular manner, as those of Peak-Forrest in Derbyshire, and Lay-Well
near Torbuy, whose Waters rise and fall several times in one Hour. To these we
may add that remarkable Fountain near Richard's Castle in Herefordshire,
commonly called Bone-Well, which is always full of small Fish-bones, (or such
resemblances) though frequently empti'd and cleared of them. (4) Many are the
Roman Altars, which from time to time are dug up in this Kingdom, especially
the Northern Parts thereof. As for their particular Shapes, and remarkable
Inscriptions, with the places where now to be seen, Vid. Cambden, (late
Edition) page 568, 570, 734, 782, 783, 826, 836, 844. and from 848 to 852.
inclusively. (5.) In several places between Carlisle and Newcastle, are some
Remains of the famous Picts Wall, (so much talked off by our English Historians)
which did run through Cumberland and Northumberland, beginning at Tinmouth Bar,
and ending at Solway-Frith, (6) In Cambridgeshire are Tracts of those large
Ditches thrown up by the East Angles, to prevent the Incursions of the
Mercians, who frequently ruined all before them. And nigh to the Town of
Cambridge, are some Vestigia of two spacious Camps; one Roman at Arborough, (a
mile North of Cambridge) and the other at Gogmagog-Hills, on the other side of
the Town. (7.) Near Wiggin in Lancashire, is the remarkable Well
abovementioned, which being empti'd, there presently breaks out a sulphurous
Vapor, which makes the Water bubble up as if it boiled; and a Candle being put
thereto, it instantly takes Fire and burns like Brandy. During a Calm, the
Flame will continue a whole Day, and by its Heat they can boil Eggs, Meat, etc.
and yet the Water it self is cold. (8.) In Whin^ield Park in Westmorland, is
the Three-Brother-Tree, (so called because there were Three of 'em, the least
whereof is this) which a good way from the Root is thirteen Yards and a half in
Circumference. (9.) At Brosely, Bently, and Pitchford, with other Places
adjacent in Shropshire, is found over most of the Coal-pits, a Stratum of
blackish porous Stone, much impregnorated with bituminous Matter; which Stone
being pulverized and boiled in Water, the bituminous Substance rises to the
top, and being gathered off, it comes to the Consistency of Pitch, and is used
for such with good Effect. (10.) In Derbyshire is the famous Peak, and some
hideous Cavities, as those called Pool's -Hole, Elden Hole, and another, which
goes by the indecent Name of the Devil's Arse. In the first of these is
dropping Water of a petrifying Nature; and at a small distance from it, a
little clear Brook remarkable for consisting both of hot and cold Water, so
joined in the same Stream, that a Man may at once put the Finger and Thumb of
the same Hand, one into hot, and the other into cold. (11.) Near Whitby in the
North Riding of Yorkshire, are found certain Stones resembling the Folds and
Wreaths of a Serpent. And at Huntly-Nabb in the same Riding, are other Stones
of several sizes, and so exactly round, as if artificially made for Cannon
Balls, which being broken, do commonly contain diverse stony Serpents wreathed
up in Circles, but generally without Heads. (12) Near Alderly in
Glocestcrshire, and on the tops of Mountains not far from Richmond, with
several other parts of England, are Stones resembling Cokles, Oysters, and
diverse other Water Animals; which if once living Creatures, or the ludicrous
Fancy of Nature, is not now my business to enquire. (13.) In Mendippe-hills in
Somersetshire, is a prodigious Cave, called Ochy-Hole, which being of a
considerable length, in it are discovered some Wells and Rivulets. (14.) At
Glassenbury in Somersetshire, are several ancient Pyramids, mentioned by
William of Malmsbury, with imperfect Inscriptions; but why, when, and by whom
erected, is merely conjectural. (15.) In the Cathedral of Exeter is an Organ,
which is reckoned the largest of any in England, the greatest Pipe belonging to
it being fifteen Inches Diameter, which is more by two, than the celebrated
Organ of Ulm. (16.) In Dover-Castle is an old Table hung up, which imports that
Julius Caesar landed upon that Part of the English Coast. Lastly, In the County
of Surry is the English Anas, or the River Mole, which loses it self under
Ground, and arises again at some considerable distance; as does also Recall in
the North Riding of Yorkshire. Cambden, page 155 and 754. To these Rarities
abovementioned, I might here add some Stupendous Fabrics in this Kingdom,
which may be fitly termed Art's Masterpieces: But to descend to particulars,
would swell this Paragraph to a disproportionable bigness.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, are Two, viz. those of Archbishopricks.


Canterbury and York.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has the Precedence of York, and is styled
Primate of all England, the other being also Primate of England, but not of all
England. A Controversy hotly debated between these two Archiepiscopal Sees, but
at last determined in favor of the former.

Bishoprics in this Kingdom, (including Wales) are those of Bishoprics.
London, Chichester, Carlisle, Durham, Salisbury, Exeter, Winchester,
Worcester, Chester, Bath and Wells, Lincoln, Bristol, Oxford, St. Asaph,
Norwich, Bangor, St. David's, Gloucester, Rochester, Peterborough, Hereford, Eli,
Landaff, Litchfield and Coventry.


In point of Place, after the two Archbishops, follows the Bishop of London;
next to him, the Bishop of Durham; 3dly, the Bishop of Winchester, and then all
the rest according to the Seniority of their Consecration.

Universities of this Kingdom, are those famous Seats of the Muses, or two Eyes
of England, termed Oxford Universities.
and Cambridge; which for magnificent Buildings, rich Endowments ample
Privileges, as also number of Students, Libraries, and learned Men are
inferior to none, or rather not to be paralleled by any in the World. The Names
of the respective Colleges and Halls in each of these Universities, (the most
of which do surpass many of our Foreign Universities) are as follows, In
Oxford are In Cambridge are University, Magdalen, Peterhouse, Baliol,
Brazen-Nose, Clare-Hall, Merton, Corpus Christi, Bennet, or Corpus Christi,
Oriel, Christ-Church, Pembroke-Hall, Exeter, Trinity, Trinity-Hall, Queen's,
St. John's, Gonvil and Caius, New-College, Jesus, King's College, Lincoln,
Wadham, Queen's College, All Souls, Pembroke. Catherine-Hall, Jesus-College,
Halls are Seven, viz. Christ-College, St. John's College, Gloucester, Alban,
Magdalen-College, St. Edmund, St. Mary, Trinity-College. Magdalen, New-Inn.
Emanuel-College, Heart, Sidney-Sussex.


The English being originally a mixture of diverse Northern and Southern
Nations, do still retain in their Manners.
Humor, a just Mean, betwixt those two Extremes; for the dull Saturnine Genius
of the one, and the hot Mercurial Temper of the other, meeting in their
Constitutions, render them Ingenious and Active, yet Solid and Persovering;
which nourisht under a suitable Liberty, inspires a Courage both generous and
lasting. This happy temperament of Spirit, wherewith this People is endu'd,
does eminently appear to the World, by that mighty Inclination they always had
and still have, both to Arms and Arts, and that wonderful Progress they have
hitherto made in each of them: For the matchless Valor and Bravery, the
singular Prudence and Conduct of the English Nation both by Sea and Land, is so
universally known, and has been so frequently manifested in most Parts of the
World, that many Potent States and Kingdoms have felt the Dint of their Sword,
and been constrained to yield to the Force of their Arms. They have also so
effectually applied themselves to all sorts of Ingenious Literature since the
happy Days of our Reformation, and are advanced to such a Pitch of True and
Solid Learning; that they may justly claim a true Title to the Empire of Human
Knowledge. Finally, their manner of Writing (whether for Solidity of Matter,
Force of Argument, or Elegancy of Style) is indeed so transcendently Excellent,
that no Nation has yet surpassed the English, and none can justly pretend to
equal them.

The English Language being a mixture of the old Saxon and Norman, (one a
Dialect of the Teutonic, and Language.
the other of the French) having also some Tincture of the Ancient British,
Roman, and Danish Tongues, is much refined of late and now deservedly reckoned
as Copious, Expressive, and Manly a Tongue as any in Europe. Harangues in this
Language are capable of all the delightful Flowers of Rhetoric, and lively
Strains of the truest Eloquence, nothing inferior to the most fluent Orations
pronounced of old by the best of the Roman Orators: In a word, it is a Language
that is rightly calculated for the Masculine Genius of those who own it.
Paternoster in the English Tongue, runs thus: Our Father, which art in Heaven,
etc.

The Kingdom of England is a famous Ancient and Hereditary Monarchy; a Monarchy
which can seldom Government.
admit of any Inter-regnum, and therefore is free from many Misfortunes, to
which Elective Kingdoms are subject; yea, such a Monarchy (in the Words of that
Worthy Gentlemen, Dr. Chamberlain, Author of the Present State of England) as
that by the necessary subordinate Concurrence of the Lords and Commons in
making and repealing of Statutes or Acts of Parliament, it has the main
Advantages of an Aristocracy and Democracy, and yet free from the Disadvantages
and Evils of either. In short, it is a Monarchy (continues the aforesaid Author)
as by most admirable Temperament, affords very much to the Industry, Liberty,
and Happiness of the Subject, and reserves enough for the Majesty and
Prerogative of any King, who will own his People as Subjects, not as Slaves.
Chief Persons of this Realm, after the King and Princes of the Blood, are the
Great Officers of the Crown, who are commonly reckoned Nine in number, viz.
(1.) Lord High-Steward of England, an Officer indeed so great, or whose Power
was esteemed so exorbitant, that it has been discontinued ever since the Days
of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, (his Son Henry of Bullingbrook, being the
last who had a State of Inheritance in that High Office) and is now confert'd
by the King upon some of the Chief Peers only, pro illa vice, as upon occasion
of the Crowning of a New King, or the Arraignment of a Peer of the Realm for
Treason, Felony, or such like. (2) The Lord High-Chancellor, whose Office is to
keep the King's Great Seal, to moderate the Rigor of the Law in judging
according to Equity and not according to the Common Law. He also disposes of
all Ecclesiastical Benesices in the King's Gift, if valued under 20 l. a Year
in the King's Book. In case there be no Chancellor, then the Lord Keeper is the
same in Authority, Power, Precedence, only different in Patent. (3) The Lord
High Treasurer, whose Office (as being Praefectus Aerarii) is to take charge of
all the King's Revenue kept in the Exchequer; as also to check all Officers
imploi'd in collecting the same, and such like. This Office is frequently
executed by several Persons conjunctly in Commission, (termed Lords of the
Treasury) as at present. (4.) The Lord President of the Council, whose Office
is to attend upon the King, and Summons the Council, to propose business at
Council Table, and Report the several Transactions of the Board. (5.) The Lord
Privy Seal, whose Office is to pass all Charters and Grants of the King, and
Pardons signed by the King before they come to the Great Seal of England; as
also diverse other Matters of smaller moment which do not pass the Great Seal.
But this Seal is never to be affixt to any Grant without good warrant under the
King's Privy-Signet, nor even with such Warrant, if the thing granted be
against Law or Custom, until the King be first acquinted therewith. (6.) The
Lord Great Chamberlain of England, whose Office is to bring the King's Shirt,
Coif, and Wearing Clothes, on the Coronation-day; to put on the King's Apparel
that Morning, to carry at the Coronation the Coif, Gloves, and Linen, which
are to be used by the King on that Occasion; likeways the Sword and Scabard, as
also the Gold (to be offered by the King) together with the Robe Royal and
Crown; to Undress and Attire the King with his Royal Robes; to serve the King
that Day with Water for to wash his Hands before and after Dinner. (7.) The
Lord High Constable of England, an Officer, whose Power is so great, that 'twas
thought inconvenient to lodge the same in any Subject since the Year 1521. and
is now conferred on some of the chiefest Peers, pro re nata; as upon occasion
of Coronations, or Solemn Trials by Combat. (8.) The Earl Marshal of England,
whose Office is to take cognizance of all Matters of War and Arms; to determine
Contracts concerning Deeds of Arms out of the Realm upon Land, and Matters
touching Wars within the Realm, which the Common Law cannot determine. (9.) The
Lord High admiral of England, whose Trust and Honor is so great, that this
Office has been usually given either to some of the King's younger Sons, near
Kinsmen, or one of the chiefest Peers of the Realm: To him is committed the
Management of all Maritime Affairs, the Government of the King's Navy; a
decisive Power in all Causes Maritime, as well Civil as Criminal. He also
Commissionates Vice-Admirals, Reer-Admirals, Sea-Captains, etc. and enjoys a
number of Privileges, too many here to be mentioned. This Office is commonly
executed by several Persons conjunctly in Commission, (termed Lords of the
Admiralty) as at present.

After the Officers of the Crown, we might here subjoin the various Courts of
Judicatory established in this Kingdom, especially the High Court of Parliament,
which is Supreme to all others, and to whom all last Appeals are made. I might
here likeways mention all the Subordinate Courts of this Realm, particularly
that of the King's-B^nch, the Court of Common Pleas, the High Court of
Chancery, the Exchequer, and the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, etc. as also
the Ecclesiastical Courts in Subordination to the Archbishop of Canterbury; as
the Court of Arches, the Court of Audience, the Prerogative Court, the Court of
Faculties, and that of Peculiars. But to declare the Nature and Constitution,
the ample Privileges and manner of Procedure in each of them, would far exceed
the narrow Bounds of an Abstract. I shall not therefore descend to particulars,
only adding to this Paragraph, that besides these various Courts
abovementioned, the King consulting the ease and welfare of the Subject,
Administers Justice by his Itinerate Judges, and that in their yearly Circuits
through the Kingdom; and for the better governing of, and keeping the King's
Peace in particular Counties, Hundreds, Cities, Buroughs, and Villiages of
this Realm. Counties have their respective Lord Lieutenants, Sheriffs, and
Justices of the Peace; Hundreds, their Bailiffs, High-Constables, and
Petty-Constables. Cities, their Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, etc. Buroughs and
Towns incorporate, have either a Mayor, or two Bailiffs, or a Portrive, who in
Power are the same with Mayor and Sheriffs; and during their Offices, are
Justices of the Peace within their own Liberties. And lastly, Villiages are in
Subjection to the Lord of the Manor, under whom is the Constable or
Headborough to keep the Peace, apprehend Offenders, and bring them before the
Justice. Of such an admirable Constitution is the English Government, that no
Nation whatsoever can justly pretend to such a Model, and no People in the
World may live more happy if they please; so that it may be justly affirmed of
them, what the Poet says in another Case, only with change of Persons,

O fortunatos nimium sua si bona norint
Anglicanos! --
The Ensigns Imperial of the Monarch of Great Britain, are in the first place
Azure, Three Flower-de-Luces, Arms.
Or; the Royal Arms of France quartered with the Imperial Ensings of England,
which are Gules, Three Lions passant Gardant in Pale, Or. In the second place,
within a double tressure Counter flowr'd de lys Or, a Lion Rampant, Gules, for
the Royal Arms of Scotland. In the third place Azure, and Irish Harp, Or,
string'd, Argent, for the Royal Ensigns of Ireland. In the fourth place as in
the first. These Ensigns Armoral are quartered after a new manner since the
late Revolution, the English Arms being put before the French, and the whole
charged with an Escutcheon of the House of Nassau, which is Azure Semi-billets,
a Lion Rampant, Or, Languid and Armed, Gules; all within the Garter, the chief
Ensign of that most Noble Order; above the same, an Helmet answerable to King
William's Sovereign Jurisdiction; upon the same, a rich Mantle of Cloth of
Gold, doubled Ermin, adorned with an Imperial Crown, and surmounted for a Crest
by a Lion passant Gardent, Or, Crowned, as the former, and an Unicorn Argent
Gorged with a Crown, thereto a Chain affixt, passing between his Forelegs, and
reflex'd over his Back, Or; both standing upon a Compartment placed underneath;
and in the Table of that Compartment is expressed the King of England's Motto,
which is, Dieu and mon Droit; but of late, J^ Maintiendray.

The Inhabitants of this Country are (for the most part) of the true) Reformed
Religion publicly professed, Religion.
and carefully taught in its choicest Purity. In Reforming of which, they were
not so hurried by popular Fury and Faction, (as in other Nations) but proceeded
in a more Prudent, Regular, and Christian Method; resolving to separate no
farther from the Church of Rome, than she had separated from the Truth,
embracing that excellent Advice of the Prophet, (Jer. 6. 16.) Stand ye in the
ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein. So that the Reformed Church of England, is a true Mean or middle Way
betwixt those two Extremes of Supperstition and Phanaticism, both equally to be
avoided. The Doctrine of which Church thus refined, is briefly summed up in the
39 Articles, and Book of Homilies; and her Discipline and Worship are to be
seen in the Liturgy, and Book of Canons. All which being seriously weighed and
considered by a judicious and impartial Mind, it may be found that this
National Church is for certain, the exactest of all the Reformed Churches, and
comes nearest to the Primitive Pattern of any in Christendom. For her Doctrine
is entirely built upon the Prophets and Apostles, according to the Explication
of the Ancient Fathers; her Government (rightly considered) is truly
Apostolical; her Liturgy is a notable extract of the best of the Primitive
Forms; her Ceremonies are few in number, but such as tend to Decency and true
Devotion. In a word, The Church of England does firmly hold and maintain the
whole Body of the truly Catholic Faith, (and none other) according to Holy
Scripture, and the Four first General Councils, so that her Sons may truly say,
(in the Words of an Eminent Luminary of the Ancient Church) In ea Regula
incedimus quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, and Christus a Deo
accepit. At present all Sects and Parties are tolerated; and it is truly as
Melancholy to consider, as it is hard to determine, whether our Heats and
Divisions on one hand, or Open Profaneness and Irreligion on the other, be
most predominant. In the mean time this is most certain, that they are both
equally to be lamented; the necessary Consequence of them both, being most
dismal and dangerous in the end. But that it may please the Almighty to grant
to all Nations, Unity, Peace, and Concord, is the daily and fervent Prayer of
the Church of Christ; and the hearty wish and desire of every true Son thereof
The Christian Faith is thought to have been planted in England, tempore (ut
scimus) summo Tiberii Caesaris, according to Ancient Gildas; but afterward
more universally received, Anno 180. it being then openly professed by Public
Authority, under King Lucius, who is said to have been the first Christian King
in the World; yet several doubt whether there was ever such a Man in the World.
In general, this is certain that Christianity was propagated here in the
earliest Ages of the Church.

WALES.
THIS Country, (the Seat of the Ancient Britains) termed by the Italians,
Wallia; by the Spaniards, Name.
Gales; by the French, Galls; by the Germans, Walls; and by the English,
Wales; so called (as some imagine) from Idwallo Son to Cadwallader, who retired
into this Country with the remaining Britains. But others do rather think that
as the Britains derive their Pedigree from the Gauls, so they also retain the
Name, this Country being still termed by the French, Galls, which using W for
G, (according to the Saxon Custom) agrees pretty well with the present Title.

The Air of this Country is much the same as in those Counties of England,
which lie under the same Air.
Parallel of Latitude. The opposite Place of the Globe to Wales, is that Part
of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 190 and 200 Degrees of Longitude, with 56
and 60 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 9th North Climate) is generally very
Mountainous, yet some of Soil.
its Valleys are abundantly fertile, producing great plenty of Corn, and others
are very fit for Pasturage. It Is likeways well stored with large Quarries of
Free Stone, as also several Mines of Lead-Oar and Coals. The longest Day in the
Northmost Parts, is about 16 Hours, the shortest in the Southmost 7 Hours, and
the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Cattle, Butter, Cheese, Welsh
Friezes, Cottons, Bays, Herrings, Commodities.
Hides, Calve-Skins, Honey, Wax, and such like.

In several Parts of this Principality, especially Denbighshire, are still to
be seen the Remains of that famous Rarities.
Wall, commonly called King Offa's Duke, made by Offa the Mercian, as a
Boundary between the Saxons and Britains. (2.) At a small Village, called
Newton in Glamorganshire, is a remarkable Spring nigh the Sea, which Ebbs and
Flows contrary to the Sea. (3.) In the same County, as also C^ermard^nshire are
several Ancient Sepulchral Monuments, and diverse noted Stone Pillars, with
observable Inscriptions upon them. (3.) In Brecknockshire are some other
remarkable Pillars; particularly that called Maen y Morynui^n, (or the
Maiden-stone) near the Town of Brecknock: Another at Pentre Yskythrog in Lhan
St. Ae^ed Parish: And a third in Form of a Cross, in Vaenor Parish. (4.) In
Glamorganshire are the Remains of Kaer Phyli Castle, (taken by some for the
Buliaeum Silurum) which are generally reckoned the noblest Ruins of Ancient
Architecture of any in Britain. (5) In Monmouthshire are many Roman Aitars dug
up with variety of Inscriptions upon 'em. For all these Inscripons
abovementiond, Vid. Camden 's Britannia, late Edition, from page 613 to 620. as
also from 623 to 628 with page 593, 594, 600, 601, 605. But if the curious
Reader would see the chief Rarities of Wales at one view, let him consult the
aforesaid Author, (page 697.) where he will find the Remarkables of this
Principality represented in Sculpture; particularly these following, viz. a
curious carved Pillar, called Maen-y-Chwyan, on Mostyn Mountain in Flintshire.
Two remarkable Pillars at Kaer Phyli Castle in Glamorganshire. An Alabaster
Statue found near Porth-Shini-Kran in Mon^^outhshire. And finally, some Roman
Armor and Medals, with variety of Coins, both Roman and British, dug up at
several times in several Parts of Wales

Archbishopricks in this Principality. None. Archbishopricks.


Bishoprics, 4. viz. those of Bangor, Landaff, S. Asaph, S. David's,
already mentioned. Bishoprics, etc.


Universities. None. Universities.


The Welsh are a People generally reputed very faithful and loving to one
another in a strange Country, Manners.
as also to Strangers in their own. The Commons (for the most part) are
extraordinary Simple and Ignorant, but their Gentry are esteemed both Brave and
Hospitable. They Are universally inclined to a Choleric Temper, and
extravagantly value themselves on their Pedigrees and Families.

The Welsh (being the Offspring of the Ancient Britains) do still retain their
Primitive Language, which Language.
yet remains freer from a mixture of exotic Words than any Modern Tongue in
Europe; a Language which has nothing to recommend it to Strangers, it being
both hard to pronounce, and unpleasant to the Ear, by reason of its vast
multitude of Consonants. Their Paternoster runs thus: Ein Tad yr hwn wit in y
nefoedd, sancteidier die enw: Deued die deyrmas; bid die ewyll s ar ydd^iar megis
y mac in y nefoedd dyro i ni heddyw ein bara beunyddiol: a maddeu i ni ein
dyledion, fell y maddewn ni i'n dyledwyr: ac nar arwain mi brofe diageth, either
gwared in rhag drwg. Amen.

This Principality was anciently governed by its own King or Kings (there being
frequently one for Government.
South, and another for North Wales, and sometimes no less than five did claim
a Regal Power) but was fully Conquered, Anno 1282. by Edward I. who having then
a Son brought forth by his Queen at Caernarven Castle in Wales, and finding the
Welsh extremely averse against a Foreign Governor, proferr'd them the young
Child (a Native of their own) to be their Lord and Master, to which they
readily yielded, and accordingly swore Obedience to him; since which time, the
King of England's Eldest Son is styled Prince of Wales, and all Writs in that
Principality are issued out in his Name.

The Arms of the Prince of Wales differ from those of England, only by the
Addition of a Label of three Arms.
Points. But the proper and peculiar Divice, commonly (though corruptedly) call
d, the Princes Arms; is a Coronet beautified with three Ostrich Feathers, with
this Inscription round, Ich dien, i. e. I serve; alluding to that of the
Apostle, The Heir while he is a Child, differs not from a Servant.

The Inhabitans of this Country (at least the most Intelligent of 'em) are of
the Reformed Religion, according Religion.
to the Platform of the Church of England; but many of the meaner sort are so
grossly ignorant in Religious Matters, that they differ nothing from mere
Heathens. For the remedying of which, the late incomparable Mr Gouge was at no
small Pains and Charge, in Preaching the Blessed Gospel to them, and procuring
and distributing among them some considerable number of Bibles, and Books of
Devotion in their Language; which noble Design was afterward revived and
furthered by the famous Robert Boil, Esquire;, and several other well disposs'd
Persons, (particularly that much lamented Eminent Divine, Dr. Anthony Horneck)
and we are willing to hope that the same will be kept still on foot, and
happily promoted by the Aid and Encouragement of some serious Christians
amongst us. The Christian Faith is said to have been planted in this Country
toward the end of the Second Century.

IRELAND. By Rob. Morden.


IRELAND.
d. m. Situated between ^^ ^0 of Long. its greatest Length from S. to N. is
about 265 Miles. 12 10 between 51 00 of Latit. Breadth from E. to W. is about
150 Miles. 55 25 Divided into the Provinces of Leinster -- Chapter Town Dublin.
Ulster -- Londonderry. Connaught -- Galloway. Munster -- Limerick. Leinster
contains Louth County -- Chief Town Drogheda -- from N. to S. Dublin -- Idem --
Wicklow -- Idem -- Wexford -- Idem -- Longford -- Idem -- from N. to S. Mead
County -- Molingar -- King's County -- Philipstone -- Queen's County --
Mari-burrow -- Kilkenny -- Idem -- Kildare -- Idem -- E. of K. County.
Caterlagh -- Idem -- Kilkenny. Ulster contains Down-County -- Down -- from E.
to S. W. Armagh -- Armagh -- Monogon -- Idem -- Caven -- Idem -- Antrim --
Carrickfergus from E. to S. W. Londonderry -- Idem -- Tirone County --
Duagannon Fermanath -- Inniskilling Dunnagal -- Idem, W. of Londonderry. Conn.
cont. Letrim -- Idem -- from N. to S. Roscomon -- Athlon -- Galloway -- Idem --
Maio County -- Maio -- Westward. Slego -- Idem --

Munster cont. Tipperary -- Clonmel -- N. to S. Waterford -- Idem -- Clare
County -- Idem -- N. to S. Limerick -- Idem -- Cork County -- Idem -- Kerry --
Dingle, Westward.

THIS Country (the Britannia Parva of Ptolomy, mentioned by other Ancient
Writers under the Name.
Names of Jertia, Juverna, Iris, etc and by Modern Authors, Hibernia) is termed
by the Italians, Irlanda; by the Spaniards, Irlanda; by the French, Irlande; by
the Germans, Yrland; and by the English, Ireland; so called, (as some imagine)
ab hiberno aere, from the Winter-like Air: but rather (according to others)
from Erinland, which in the Irish Tongue signifies a Western Land.

The Air of this Country is almost of the same Nature with that of those Parts
of Britain, which lie Air.
under the same Parallel, only different in this, that in several places of
this Kingdom it is of a more gross and impure Temper, by reason of the many
Lakes and Marshes which send up such a quantity of Vapors, and thereby so
corrupt the whole Mass of Air, as to occasion Fluxes, Rheums, and such like
Distempers, to which the Inhabitants are frequently subject. The opposite Place
of the Globe to Ireland is that part of the Pacifick Ocean lying between 180
and 200 Degrees of Longitude, with 53 and 56 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 9th and 10th North Climate) is
abundantly fertile, but naturally Soil.
more fit for Grass and Pasturage, than Tillage. Much of this Kingdom is still
overgrown with Woods, or encumbered with vast Bogs and unwholesome Marshes,
yiedling neither Profit nor Pleasure to the Inhabitants, but not near so much
as formerly, there being a great deal of Wood cut down, and many large Marshes
drained in this Age, and the Ground employed for various sorts of Grain, which
it produces in great plenty. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this
Country is about 17 Hours ^/4, ^he (...) in the Southmost 7 Hours, and the
Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Butter,
Cheese, Honey, Wax, Salt, (...)
Hem^, Linen Cloth, Pipe-Staves, Wool, Friezes, etc.

About eight Miles North-East from Colrain, in the County of Antrim, is that
Miracle, (whether of Art Rarities.
or Nature, I shall not dispute) commonly called the Giants Cawsway, which runs
from the bottom of a high Hill into the Sea, none can tell how far. Its length,
at Low Water, is about 600 Feet; the breadth, where broadest, 240, and 120 in
the narrowest; it is very unequal in height, being in some places 36 Feet from
the level of the Strand, and in others only 15. It consists of many thousands
of Pillars perpendicular to the Plain of the Horizon, and all of different
Shapes and Sizes, but most of 'em Pentagonal or Hex^gonal, yet all irregularly
placed. A particular Draught and Description of this wonderful Cawsway, with an
Essay proving the same to be rather the Work of Nature than Art, Vid.
Philosoph. Transact. N. 212 and 222. (2) In the Province of Ulster is the
famous Lough Neagh, hitherto noted for its rare petrifying Quality; but upon
due Examination, it is found that the said Quality ought to be ascribed to the
Soil of the Ground adjacent to that Lake, rather than to the Water of the Lake
it self. (3) In several Parts of this Kingdom are sometimes dug up Horns of a
prodigious bigness, (one Pair lately found being ten Feet and ten Inches from
the Tip of the right Horn to the Tip of the left) which gives occasion to
apprehend that the great American Deer, (called the Moose) was formerly common
in this Island. As for that excellent Quality of Ireland in nourishing no
Venomous Creature, the same is so notoriously known, that I need say nothing of
it.

Archbishopricks in this Kingdom, are Four, viz those of Armagh, Dublin,
Cassil, and Tuam. The Archbishopricks.
Archbishop of Armagh being Primate of all Ireland.

Bishoprics in this Kingdom, are those of Bishoprics.
Mead, Limerick, Ardfert, and Aghado, Clonfert, Kildare, Elphin, Ossory,
Waterford, Rapho, Leighlin and Ferns, Cork and Ross, Derry, Kilaloe. Cloyne,
Kilmore and Ardagh, Killala, Clogher, Drommore. Down and Conner,


Here is only one University, viz. That of Dublin. Universities.


The Irish (according to the best Character I find of 'em, viz. that of Dr.
Heylin's) are a People that is generally Manners.
strong and nimble of Body, haughty of Spirit, careless of their Lives, patient
in Cold and Hunger, implacable in Enmity, constant in Love, light of Belief,
greedy of Glory. In a word, if they are bad, you shall no where find worse; if
they be good, you can hardly meet with better.

The Language here used by the Natives being the Irish seems to be of a British
Extraction, by comparing Language.
the same with the Welsh. The English and Scots here residing retain their own.
Paternoster in the Irish Tongue runs thus: Air nathir ataigh air nin, nabz far
haminiti; tigiuh da riatiatche: deantur da hoilam hicoil air nimh agis air
thalamhi. Air naran laidhthuil tabhair dhuin a' niomh; agis math duin dair
shiaca ammil agis mathum viddar fentchunnim; agis na trilaic astoch say
anausen; ac sarsino ole Amen.

The Government of this Country is by one Supreme Officer, who is commonly
termed the Lord Lieutenant Government.
or Lord Deputy of Ireland. No Viceroy in Europe is invested with greater
Power, nor comes nearer the Majesty of a King in his Train and State than he.
For his Assistance he is allowed a Privy Council to advise with upon all
Occasions. As for the Laws of the Kingdom, (which are the standing Rule of all
Civil Government) they owe their Beginning and Original to the English
Parliament and Council, and must first pass the Great Seal of England. In
absence of the Lieutenant, the Supreme Power is lodged in Lords Justices, who
have the same Authority with a Lieutenant. The various Courts of Judicatory,
both for Civil and Criminal Affairs, and their manner of proceeding in each of
'em, are much the same as here in England.

See England, page 206. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Country are partly Protestants, partly Papists. The
best civilized Parts of the Religion.
Kingdom are of the Reformed Religion, according to the Platform of the Church
of England. But the far greater Part of the old Native Irish do still adhere to
Popish Superstitions, and are as credulous of many Ridiculous Legends as in
former times. The Christian Faith was first preached in this Country by St.
Patrick, (Anno 435.) who is generally affirmed to be the Nephew of St. Martin
of Thurs.

And thus having traveled through Britain and Ireland, [the Greater of the
Britannick Islands] proceed we next to the Lesser, which in respect of Great
Britain, are situated on the East, West, North, and South.

On the East are The Holy Island -- Remarkable Places are The Old Fort All E of
Northumberland. Fearn Islands -- The Old Tower Coket Island -- -- Sheppy Island
-- Quinborough On the Kentish Coast. Thanet Island -- -- On the West are The
Jews -- Sowardil -- found from N. to S. Wiist -- Kilfadrick Sky -- Kilvorie
Mu^ -- Dowart-Castle Jura -- Kilardil -- Ila -- Kilconan Arren -- Arren Man --
Russin -- Anglesey -- Newburgh -- Scilly Islands -- Castle Hugh -- On the North
are The Orkneys of which the chief are Hoy -- None -- from S. to N. N. E.
Mainland Kirkwall -- Sapinsha Elwick -- Westra -- Periwa -- The Shetland of
which the chief are Mainland Ylesburg -- Yell -- Gravelland -- On the South are
Portland Island -- Portland Castle S. of Dorsetshire. Isle of Wight -- Newport
-- S. of Hampshire. Port-Sea Island -- Portsmouth -- Isles of Jersey -- St.
Hillary -- W. of Normandy. Garnsey -- St. Peter's Town Alderney -- Alderney --

The chief of which Lesser Islands being these following, viz.

The Oreades, The Isle of Man, The Isles of Jersey, The Schetland, Anglesey,
Garnsey, The Hebrides, Wight, Alderney.

Somewhat of all these, and in their Order. Therefore,

. 1. The Orcades or Orknay Islands.
THE number of these Islands is indeed very great, and of 'em Twenty six are
actually inhabited; the rest being called Holms, are used only for Pasturage.
Most of 'em are blessed with a very pure and healthful Air to breath in, but
their Soil is very different, being in some extremely Dry and Sandy, in others
Wet and Marish; however they are indifferently fruitful in Oats and Barley, but
destitute of Wheat, Rye, and Pease. Many useful Commodities are yearly exported
from them to diverse Foreign Parts. South-West of Swinna (one of those Islands)
are two dreadful Whirl-pools in the Sea, [commonly termed the Wells of Swinna]
very terrible to Passengers, and probably occasioned by some Subterranean
Hiatus. In these Islands are several Footsteps of the Pictish Nation, from whom
Pictland-Frith is commonly thought to derive its Name. The Inhabitants do still
retain many Gothic and Teutonick Terms in their Language; and some Ancient
German Sirnames (as yet in use) do plainly evince their Extraction. These
Islands have been visited by the Romans, possessed by the Picts, and subject to
the Danes; but Christiern IV. of Denmark having quitted all his Pretensions to
them in favor of King James VI. upon the Marriage of that Prince with his
Sister, they have ever since acknowledged Allegiance to the Scottish Crown, and
are immediately governed by the Stewart of Orknay, or his Deputy.

. 2. The Shetland.
UNDER the Name of Shetland, are commonly comprehended no less than Forty six
Islands, with Forty Holms, besides many Rocks. Of these Islands, about Twenty
six are inhabited, the rest being used only for feeding of Cattle. They enjoy a
very healthful Air, and the Inhabitants do generally arrive to a great Age. In
several of them are some Obelisks still standing, with diverse old Fabrics,
made (as is commonly believed) by the Picts. The Gentry, who removed hither
from the Continent, usually speak as in the North of Scotland; but the Common
Sort of People (who are descended from the Norvegians) do still retain a
corrupt Norse Tongue, called Norn. All these Islands belong now to the Crown of
Scotland, and are reckoned a part of the Stewarty of Orknay.

. 3. The Hebrides.
THIS mighty Cluster of Islands (the Ebudes of Ptolomy, Solinus, and Pliny,)
are commonly termed the Western Isles from their Situation in respect of
Scotland, to which Crown they belong. In Soil they are very different, but
generally blessed with a pure and healthful Air. They surpass Three hundred in
number, though reckoned by some but Forty four. Their Inhabitants use the Irish
Tongue, yet with difference of Dialect from that in Ireland; and are much the
same with the Highlanders on the Continent of Scotland, both in Habit, Customs,
and Manner of Living. The most remarkable of all these Islands, are Two, viz.
Jona and St. Kilda. The former (now called Columbkill, nigh the Isle of Mull)
is noted for being of old the burying Place of the Kings of Scotland, and the
chief Residence of the Ancient Culdees. The other (termed by the Islanders,
Hirt; by Buchanan, Hirta; and afterward St. Kilda or Kildir) is the remotest
of all the Hebrides, and so observable for some Remarkables therein, and
several uncommon Customs peculiar to its Inhabitants, that a Description
thereof was of late thought worthy of a particular Treatise, entitled, A
Voyage to St. Kilda, to which I remit the Reader,

. 4. The Isle of Man.
THIS Island (called Monoeda, by Ptolomy; and by Pliny, Mondbia.) enjoys a very
cold and sharp Air, being exposed on every side to the bleak piercing Winds
from the Sea. Its Soil owes much of its Fertility to the Care and Industry of
the Husbandman. The Inhabitants (a mixture of English, Scots, and Irish,
commonly called Mank^-men,) have in general a very good Character. The ordinary
sort of People retain much of the Irish in their Language and way of Living;
but those of better Rank strive to imitate the English. In this they are
peculiarly happy, that all litigious Proceedings are banished from among 'em,
all Differences being speedily determined by certain Judges, called Deemsters,
and that without Writings or Fees: If the Case be found very intricate, then
it is referred to twelve Men, whom they term the Keys of the Island. This
Island with the Advowson of the Bishopric, belongs to the Earls of Derby, who
are commonly styled Lords of Man, though Kings in effect, they having all kind
of Civil Power and Jurisdiction over the Inhabitants, but still under the Fief
and Sovereignty of the Crown of England.

. 5. Anglesey.
THIS Island (the celebrated Mona of the Romans, and Ancient Seat of the
Druides) is blessed with a very fruitful Soil, producing most sorts of Grain
(especially Wheat) in such abundance, that the Welsh commonly term it, Mon mam
Gymry, i. e. Mon, the Nursery of Wales, because that Principality is frequently
supplied from thence in unseasonable Years. It Is commonly reckoned as one of
the Counties of North Wales, and acknowledges Subjection to the Crown of
England.

. 6. The Isle of Wight.
THIS Island (termed by Ptolomy, (...); and by the Romans, Vecta, Vectis, or
Victesis;) enjoys a pure healthful Air; and is generally reckoned a very
pleasant and fruitful Spot of Ground. 'Twas once honored (as the Isle of Man)
with the Title of Kingdom, for Henry Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, was Crowned
King of Wight by Henry VI. Anno 1445. but that Title died with himself about
two Years after; and it is now reckoned only a Part of Hampshire, and is
governed in like manner, as other of the Lesser Islands.

. 7. Jersey, Garnsey, and Alderney.
THESE Islands are all of William the Conqueror's Inheritance, and Dukedom of
Normandy, that now remains in Possession of the English Crown. Their Soil is
sufficiently rich, producing in great abundance both Corn and Fruits,
especially Apples, of which they make plenty of Syder; and the Air is so
healthful to breath in, that the Inhabitants have little or no use for
Physicians among 'em. They chiefly employ themselves in Agriculture, and
Knitting of Stockings; and during War with France, they are much given to
Privateering. It Is observable of Garnsey, that no venomous Creature can live in
it; and that the Natives generally look younger by ten Years than they really
are. These Islands being annexed to the English Crown, Anno 1108. by Henry I
have (to their great Honor) continued firm in their Allegiance to England ever
since that time; notwithstanding of several attempts made upon them by the
French. And so much for the Lesser Britannick Islands: But if the Reader
desires a larger Account of 'em, let him consult the late Edition of Cambden's
Britannia, from page 1049 to 1116. inclusively.

Having thus particularly surveyed the Britannick Islands, both Greater and
Lesser, proceed we now (according to our proposed Method) to the Second Part of
this Section, which is to take a View of all other Islands belonging to Europe,
whether they lie on the North, West, or South of the main Continent. Therefore,

II. Of all other European Islands.
European Islands being situated on the North of Europe. West South On the
North, are the Scandinavian Islands. West are The Isle of Ice-land. The
Britannick, [of which already.] The Azores. South are those in the
Mediterranean Sea.

Of which in their Order.

. 1. The Scandinavian Islands.
Such Islands are those belonging to Sweden. Denmark. Norway.


To Sweden are chiefly those of Rugen -- Chief Town Bergen -- W: to N. E.
Bornholn -- Rottomby -- Oeland -- Borkholm -- Gothland -- Wishby -- Oesal --
Arnsberg -- Dago -- Dageroot -- Aland -- Castleholm, Northward.

To Denmark are chiefly those of Zealand -- Chief Town Copenhagen Capital of
all. Funen -- Odensee -- W. to E. Langland -- Ruthkoping Laland -- Naxkow --
Falster -- Nykoping Mina -- Steg^ -- F^meren -- Borge -- S. W. of Laland. Ais^n
-- Sonderborg Funen. To Norway are chiefly those of Carmen -- Lying W. of
S^avanger -- S. to N. Hiteren -- W. of Dronthem -- Sanien -- Adjacent to
Wardhus -- Suroy -- Adjacent

Of all these Islands, Zealand is the most remarkable, and that only for the
City of Copenhagen, as being the Seat Royal of the Kings of Denmark.

2. The Isle of Ice-land.
THIS Island (taken by some for the much controverted Thule of the Ancients) is
termed by the Name.
Italians, Islanda; by the Spaniards, Tierra elada; by the French, Islande; by
the Germans, Island; and by the English, Ice-land, so called from the abundance
of Ice, wherewith it is environed for the greatest part of the Year.

By reason of the frozen Ocean surrounding this Island, and the great quantity
of Snow wherewith it is Air.
mostly covered, the Air must of necessity be very sharp and piercing, yet
abundantly healthful to breath in, especially to those who are accustomed with
that cold Climate. The opposite Place of the Globe to Ice-land, is that part of
the vast Antarctick Ocean, lying between 180 and 190 Degrees of Longitude, with
60 and 70 Degrees of South Latitude.

Considering only the Situation of Ice-land, (it lying in the 18th, 19th, 20th,
and 21st North Climate) we Soil.
may easily imagine the Soil is none of the best. In some Parts where the
Ground is level, there are indeed several Meadows very good for Pasture, but
elsewhere the Island is encumbred either with vast Deserts, barren Mountains,
or formidable Rocks. So destitute of Grain is it, that the poor Inhabitants
grind and make Bread of dried Fish-bones. In the Northern Parts they have the
Sun for one Month without Setting, and want him entirely another, according as
he approaches the Two Tropicks.

From this cold and barren Island, are yearly exported Fish, Whale-Oyl, Tallow,
Hides, Brimstone, and Commodities.
White Foxes Skins, which the Natives barter with Strangers for Necessaries of
Humane Life.

Notwithstanding this Island do^^ lie in so cold a Climate, yet in it are
diverse hot and scalding Fountains, Rarities.
with Hecla a terrible Valcano, which (though always covered with Snow up to
the very Top) does frequently Vomit forth Fire and Sulphurous Matter in great
abundance; and that sometimes with such a terrible roaring, that the loudest
Claps of Thunder are hardly so formidable. In the Western Parts of the Island
is a Lake of a petrifying Nature, and toward the middle, another which
commonly sends up such a pestilentious Vapor, as frequently kills Birds that
endeavor to fly over it. Some also write of Lakes on the Tops of Mountains,
and those well-stor'd with Salmons.

In this Island are two Danish Bishoprics, viz. Archbishopricks, etc.
those of Schalholt and Hola. Archbishopricks and Universities, none.

The Ice-landers (being Persons of a middle Stature, but of great Strength) are
generally reckoned a very Manners.
ignorant and superstitious Sort of People. They commonly live to a great Age,
and many value themselves not a little for their Strength of Body. Both Sexes
are much the same in Habit, and their chief Employment is Fishing.

The Danes here residing, do usually speak as in Denmark. As for the Natives,
they still retain the old Language.
Gothic Tongue.

This Island being subject to the Danish Crown, is governed by a particular
Viceroy, sent thither by the Government
King of Denmark, whose place of Residence is ordinarily in Bestode-Castle.

For Arms. Vid. Denmark, page 69. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Island, who own Allegiance to the Danish Crown, are
generally the same in Religion Religion.
with that professed in Denmark; as for the uncivilized Natives, who commonly
abscond in Dens and Caves, they still adhere to their Ancient Idolatry as in
former times. When Christianity was first introduced into this Island, is not
very certain.

. 3. The Azores.
They are in Number 9. viz. St. Michael -- -- Found from E. to W. Chief Town of
all, is Angra in Tercera. St. Maria -- Tercera -- Gratiosa -- St. George -- --
Pico -- Fyal -- Flores -- -- Cuervo --

THESE Islands (taken by some for the Cathiterides of Ptolomy) are termed by
the Italians, Flandrice Name.
Isola; by the Spaniards, Los Azores; by the French, Les Azores; by the
Germans, Flandersche Insuln; and by the English, The Azores; so called by their
Discoverers, (the Portugueze) from the abundance of Hawks found in them. By
others, they are termed the Terceres from the Island Tercera, being chief of all
the rest.

The Air of these Islands inclining much to Heat, is tollerably good, and very
agreeable to the Portugueze. Air.
The oposite Place of the Globe to the Azores, is that Part of Terra Australis
Incognita, lying between the 165 and 175 Degrees of Longitude, with 35 and 41
Degrees of South Latitude.

These Islands are blessed with a very fertile Soil, producing abundance of
Grain, Wine, and Fruit, besides Soil.
great plenty of Wood. The length of the Days and Nights in the Azores, is the
same as in the middle Provinces of Spain, lying under the same Parallels of
Latitude.

The chief thing exported from these Islands, is Oad for Diers, and that in
great abundance, together Commodities.
with variety of choice Singing Birds.

Here are several Fountains of hot Water, and one in Tercera of a petrifying
Nature. The Island Tercera Rarities.
is also remarkable for being the place of the first Meridian, according to
some Modern Geographers.

Here is one Bishopric, viz. That of Angra, under Archbishopricks, etc.
the Archbishop of Lisbone.

The Inhabitants of these Islands being Portugueze, are much the same in
Manners with those on the Manners.
Contient.

The Portugueze here residing, do still retain and Language.
speak their own Language.

These Islands being inhabited and possessed by the Portugueze, are subject to
the Crown of Portugal, and Government.
ruled by a particular Governor sent thither from that Court, who ordinarily
refides at Angra in Tercera. Arms.


The Inhabitants of these Islands being Portugueze, (as aforesaid) stick close
to the Roman Religion, and Religion.
that in its grossest Errors, as universally professed, and by Law established
in the Kindom of Portugal.

. 4. Mediterranean Islands.
ON the South of Europe are the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea: The chief of
which are these following,

Viz. Majorca -- Chief Town Idem -- Lying E. of Valencia. Minorca -- Citadella
-- Yvica -- Idem -- Corsica -- Bastia -- Lying S. of Genoua. Sardignia --
Cagliari -- Sicily -- Palermo -- Lying S. W. of Naples. Malta -- Idem -- Candia
-- Idem -- lying S. of The Archipelago. Cyprus -- Nicosia -- Anatolia.

Of all which in Order, beginning with

Majorca, Minorca, and Yvica.
EACH of these Islands has almost the same Modern Appellation among the
Italians, Spaniards, Name.
French, Germans, and English; and were all known of old by the Name of
Baleares, which is derived from (...) signifying to Dart or Throw, because
their Inhabitants were famous for their Dexterity in throwing the Dart.

The Air of these Islands is much more temperate to breath in, than any where
on the Adjacent Continent, Air.
being daily fanned by cool Breezes from the Sea. The opposite Place of the
Globe to the Baleares, is that part of the Pacifick Ocean, between 200 and 205
Degrees of Longitude, with 35 and 40 Degrees of South Latitude.

The two former of these Islands are somewhat Mountainous and Woody, but the
last is more plain, Soil.
and extremely fertile, both in Corn, Wine, and diverse sort of Fruits: It
likeways so abounds with Salt, that diverse Neighboring Countries are
supplied from thence.

From these Islands are exported to several Parts of Europe, Salt, Wine,
Brandy, Coral, with variety of Commodities.
Fruits, etc.

On the Coasts of Majorca is found abundance of excellent Coral, for which the
Inhabitants frequently Rarities.
fish with good success. Yvica is said to nourish no noxious Animal, and yet
Formentera (an Adjacent Island, and one of the Baleares) is so infested with
Serpents, that the same is uninhabited.

In these Islands is one Bishoptick, viz. that of Majorca, (under the
Archbishop of Terragon) where is Archbishopric,
also a famous University.

The Inhabitants of these Islands being Spaniards, are much the same in Manners
with those on the Continent. Manners.


What was just now said of the Spaniards on these Islands, in respect of
Manners, the same may be affirmed Language.
of 'em in Point of Language.

These Islands being annexed to the Crown of Spain, are ruled by one or more
Governors, sent thither by Government.
his Catholic Majesty, and generally renewed every third Year. Arms.


The Inhabitants of these Islands being Spaniards, are all of the Roman
Communion, and as bigoted Religion.
Zealots for the Popish Doctrine, as elsewhere on the Continent. They received
the Light of the Blessed Gospel much about the same time with Spain.

Corsica and Sardignia.
THE former of these Islands (called first by the Greeks Tercepne, and
afterward Cyrne from Cyrnus, Name.
reckoned by some a Son of Hercules) is now termed Corsica from Corsa Bubulca,
a certain Woman of Liguria, who is said to have led a Colony out of that
Country hither. And the other (according to the Opinion of its Inhabitants) is
called Sardignia from Sardus, another Son of Hercules, who they say was the
first that settled a Colony therein, and gave it this Name in Memory of himself.

The Air of these Islands is universally reckoned to be very unhealthful,
especially that of Corsica, which is Air.
the reason of its being so thinly inhabited. The opposite Place of the Globe
to them, is that part of Nova Zelandia, or Adjcent Ocean, between 210 and 215
Degrees of Longitude, with 37 and 43 Degrees of South Latitude.

These Islands differ mightily in Soil, the former being (for the most part)
very Stony, full of Woods, Soil.
and lying uncultivated; but the other very fertile, affording abundance of
Corn, Wine, and Oil, etc. The length of the Days and Nights in these Islands,
is the same as in the Middle and Southern Parts of Spain.

The chief Commodities exported from these Islands, are Corn, Wine, Oil, Salt,
Iron, and several sorts of Commodities.
Fruits, especially Figs, Almonds, Chestnuts, etc.

In several Parts of Corsica is found a Stone, (commonly called Catochite)
which being handled sticks to Rarities.
the Fingers like Glue. Sardignia is said to harbor no venomous Creature, no,
nor any noxious Animal, save Foxes, and a little Creature, (named Solifuga)
which resembles a Frog. Those Animals, called Mafrones, or Mastriones, are
peculiar to this Island.

Archbishopricks, are Cagliari, Gassari, and Oristagni, all in Sardignia.
Archbishopricks, etc.


Bishoprics are those of Nebbio, Ajazzo, Mariana, Alteria, Sagona, and Accia,
all in Corsica, (whereof the Bishoprics.
four last are now ruined) together with Villa d'Iglesia, Bosa, and Algheri, in
Sardignia.

Here is only one University, viz. that of Cagliart. Universities.


The Inhabitants of Corsica are reputed (for the generality of 'em) a cruel,
rude, and revengeful Sort Manners.
of People; a People so given to Piracy in former times, that many think the
Name of Corsaires is derived from them. As for the Inhabitants of Sardignia,
they being mostly Spaniards, are much the same with those in Spain.

Languages here in use are the Spanish and Italian, the former in Sardignia,
and the latter in Corsica, but Language.
mightily blended one with another.

The Isle of Corsica, being subject to the Genoeses, is ruled by a particular
Governor, (who has for his Government.
Assistance, one Lieutenant, and several Commissaries) sent thither by the
Republic of Genoua, and renewed once in two Years; and Sardignia (being in the
Possession of the Spaniard) is governed by a Viceroy appointed by his
Catholic Majesty, and renewed every third Year.

The Inhabitants of both these Islands adhere to the Arms.
Roman Church in her grossest Errors, and receive Riligion.
with an implicit Faith whatever she teaches; and correspondent to their
Principles is their Practice, especially in Sardignia; where the People are so
grossly Immoral, as usually to dance and sing profane Songs in their Churches
immediately after Divine Worship. The Christian Faith was planted here much
about the same time with the Northern Parts of Italy.

SICILY.
THIS Island (of old Sicania, Trinacria, and Triquetra) is termed by the
Italians and Spaniards, Name.
Sicilia; by the French, Sicile; by the Germans, Sicilien; and by the English,
Sicily. Its Name is derived from Siculi, (an Ancient People in Latium) who
being driven from their Country by the Aborigines, were forced to seek for new
Habitations, and accordingly came over to Sicania, (headed, as some allege, by
one Siculus) which from them acquired a new Name, viz. that of Sicily.

No Island in these Parts of the World enjoys a purer and more healthful Air
than this does. The opposite Air.
Place of the Globe to Sicily, is that Part of Nova Zelandia, between 215 and
220 Degrees of Longitude, with 34 and 38 Degrees of South Latitude.

Fully answerable to the healthfulness of the Air, is the Fertility of the
Soil, several of its Mountains Soil.
being incredibly fruitful, even to the very Tops. The length of the Days and
Nights here is the same; as in the Southern Provinces of Spain, they both lying
under the same Parrallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Silks, Wine, Honey, Sugar, Wax, Oil,
Saffron, and many Medicinal Commodities.
Drugs, etc.

Near to Ancient Syracuse, are some Subterranean Cavities, where Dionysius the
Tyrant, shut up his Slaves. Rarities.
Over these Cavities was his Palace, and being anxious to over-hear what his
Slaves spoke among themselves, here is still to be seen a Communication between
the aforesaid Cavities and his Palace, cut out of the firm Rock, and resembling
the interior Frame of a Man's Ear, which makes such a curious Echo, that the
least Noise, yea, articulate Words and Sentences, when only whispered, are
clearly heard. Here also is a large Theater of the same Tyrant, cut out of the
firm Rock. Known all the World over, is that hideous Vulcano of this Island,
the famous Mount Aetna, (now Gibell) whose sudden Conflagrations and
sulphurious Eruptions are sometimes most terrible and destructive; witness
those which happned in the Year 1669. and more lately. Anno 1693. For a
particular Description of this remarkable Mountain, and all other noted
Vulcano's in the World. Vid. Bottoni Leontini, his Pyrologia Typographica.

In this Island are Three Archbishopricks, viz. those of Archbishopricks.
Palermo, Messina, Mont-Real.


Here likeways are Seven Bishoprics, viz those of Bishoprics.
Syracuse, Cefaledi, St. Marco, Mazara. Catana, Pati, Gergenti,


Here is only one University, viz. that of Catana. Universities.


The Sicilians being mostly Spaniards, are much the same in Manners with those
in Spain, only with this Manners.
difference, that they merit (according to some) a blacker Character than a
Native Spaniard.

The ordinary Language of the Sicilians is Spanish, which is commonly used, not
only by the Native opaniards, Language.
but also Persons of all other Nations, residing in the Island.

This Island belonging to the Spaniard, (for which he does homage to the Pope)
is ruled by a particular Government.
Viceroy, appointed and sent thither by his Catholic Majesty, whose
Government (as are most other of the Spanish Viceroys) is Triennial, and place
of Residence, Palermo.

For Arms. Vid. Spain, page 141 Arms.


The Religion here established and publicly professed, is the same as in Italy
and Spain. This Island received the Religion.
Light of the Blessed Gospel in the earliest Ages of the Church.

MALTA.
THIS Island (known formerly by the same Name, or Melita) is termed by the
French, Malte; by Name.
the High Germans, Maltha; by the Italians, Spaniards; and English, Malta; why
so called, is not fully agreed upon among Critics; yet most affirm, that its
Name of Melita came from the plenty of Honey in this Island.

The Air of this Island is extremely hot and stifling, the many high Rocks
toward the Sea obstructing the Air.
benefit of cool Breezes from the surrounding Ocean. The opposite Place of the
Globe to Malta, is that part of Nova Zelandia, between 215 and 220 Degrees of
Longitude, with 32 and 34 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Island can lay no just Claim to an Excellency of Soil, it being extremely
Dry and Barren, and Soil.
much encumbred with Rocks. It affords little Corn or Wine, but is supplied
from Sicily of both. The length of Days and Nights in Malta, is the same as in
the Southmost Part of Spain.

Malta being a place no ways remarkable for Trade, its Commodities are very
few; the chief Product of Commodities.
the Island being only Cuminseed, Anniseed, and Cottonwooll.

Worthy of Obervation, is St. John's Church, with its rich and magnificent
Vestry, as also the Observatory, Rarities.
Treasury, and Palace of the Grand Master. The Inhabitants pretend that Malta
has entertained no venomous Creature since the Days of St. Paul, who (they
say) blessed this Island upon the shaking off the Viper from his Hand into the
Fire.

Here are Two Bishoprics, viz those of Malta and Citta, or Civitta Vecchia.
Archbishopricks and Archbishopricks,
Universities, none.

The Inhabitants of this Island (not reckoning the Slaves) are for the most
part very Civil and Courteous Manners.
to Strangers; and follow the Mode of the Sicilians in Habit. They also
resemble the Sicilians in some of their worst Qualities, being extremely
Jealous, Treacherous, and Cruel.

A corrupt Arabic does here mightily prevail, being hitherto preserved by the
frequent Supplies of Turks taken Language.
and brought in from time to time. But the Knights and People of any Note,
understand and speak several European Languages, particularly the Italian,
which is authorized by the Government, and used in public Writings.

This Island after many turns of Fortune, was presented by the Emperor, Charles
V. to the Order of Government.
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, whose place of Residence it has
hitherto been since the loss of Rhodes, and is now governed by the Patron of
that Order, styled the Grand Master of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem,
and Prince of Malta, Gauls, and Goza. The Knights did formerly consist of
eight different Languages or Nations, (whereof the English was the sixth) but
now they are only seven.

For Arms, the Grand Master bears a White Cross (commonly called the Cross of
Jerusalem) with four Arms.
Points.

The established Religion in Malta, is that of the Church of Rome, which is made
essential to the Order, Religion.
no Person of a different Persuasion being capable to enter therein. This
Island received the Blessed Gospel in the Apostolic Times.

CANDIA.
THIS Island (the famous Crete of the Ancients) is termed by the French,
Candie; by the Germans, Name.
Candien; by the Italians, Spaniards, and English, Candia; so called from its
chief Town Candie, built by the Saracens, who from their new Town, gave the
Island a new Name.

The Air of this Island is generally reckoned to be very Temperate and
Healthful to breath in; but the Air.
South-winds are sometimes so boisterous, that they much annoy the Inhabitants.
The opposite Place of the Globe to Candia, is that part of the vast Pacifick
Ocean, between 231 and 236 Degrees of Longitude, with 34 and 37 Degrees of
South Latitude.

This Island is blessed with a very rich and fertile Soil, producing in great
abundance, both Corn, Wine, Soil.
Oil, and most sorts of excellent Fruits. The length of the Days and Nights in
Candia, is the same as in the Northmost Parts of Barbary. Of which afterward.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Muscadel-Wine, Malmsey, Sugar,
Sugar Candy, Honey, Wax, Commodities.
Gum, Olives, Dates, Rasins, etc.

North of Mount Psilorili, (the famous M. Ida) is a remarkable Grotto dug out
of the firm Rock, which diverse Rarities.
of our Modern Travelers would fain persuade 'emselves to be some Remains of
King Minos's Labyrinth, so much talked off by the Ancients.

Before the Turkish Conquest of this Island, there was one Archbishop, who had
Nine Suffragans; but since Bishoprics, etc.
they changed their Masters, the number of such Ecclesiastics is neither sixth
nor certain.

The Inhabitants of this Island were formerly given to Piracy, Debauchery, and
Lying, especially the Manners.
last; and so noted were they for the same, that a notorious Lie was commonly
termed Mendacium Cretense. For this detestable Vice were they reproached by one
of their own Poets, Epimenides, out of whose Writings the Apostle cites these
words, K (...), Tit. 1. 12. Their Experience in Maritime Affairs was indeed
very great, and they are represented as a very considerable People among the
Ancients for their Skill in Navigation. The present Inhabitants being Turks and
Greeks, their respective Characters are already given, page 174, 181.

Languages here in use, are the Vulgar Greek and Turkish, especially the
former, the number of Greeks on Language.
the Island, being far greater than that of the Turks. For a Specimen of which
Languages. Vid. page 175 and 181.

This Island, after a bloody and tedious War of Twenty four Years, between the
Turks and Venetians, Government.
was at last constrained to submit to the Ottoman Yoke, Anno 1669. under which
it has ever since groaned, and is now governed by a Turkish Sangiack, whose
place of Residence is usually at Candie, the Capital City of the whole Island.

See the Danuubian Provinces, page 182. Arms.


Christianity according to the Greek Church, is here professed by Tolleration,
but Mahometanism is the Religion.
Religion established by Authority. This Island received the Light of the
Blessed Gospel in the Apostolic Age.

CYPRUS.
THIS Island (known anciently by diverse Names, besides the present, particular
those of Acamantis, Name.
Amathusa, Aspelia, Cryptos, Cerastis, Macaria, and Aerosa) is termed by the
Italians, Isola di Cypro; by the Spaniards, Chypre; by the French, Cypre; and
by the Germans and English, Cyprus; so called (as most imagine) from K (...),
[i. e. Cypress] wherewith this Island did mightily abound in former times.

There being several Lakes, and some Natural Saltpits in Cyprus, from which
abundance of noxious Air.
Vapors daily arise; these intermixing 'emselves with the Body of the
Atmosphere, do render the Air very gross and unhealthful to breath in,
especially during the sultry Heat of Summer. The opposite Place of the Globe to
this Island, is that part of the Pacifick Ocean, between 235 and 240 Degrees of
Longitu with 33 and 35 Degrees of South Latitude.

Cyprus was formerly blessed with so rich and fruitful a Soil, that from its
Fertility, and several Mines Soil.
found therein, the Greeks bestowed upon this Island the desirable Epithet of
(...), i. e. Beata. But now it is remarkable for neither of these, especially
the former, being in most Parts extremely Barren, though commonly represented
otherways. The length of the Days and Nights in Cyprus, is the same as in the
Northmost Parts of Barbary, (of which afterward) they both lying under the
same Parallel of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island are Silk, Cotton, Oil, Honey, Saffron,
Rubarb, Colliquintida, Commodities.
Scammony, Turpentine, Black and White Alum, etc.

On the Eastern Part of this Island stands the famous Famagousta, remarkable at
present for its Mordern Fortifications; Rarities.
and Eternized in Fame for the unfortunate Valor of the Venetians, Anno 1571.
under the Command of Signior Bragadino, against the furious Assaults of Selymus
the Second, with his numerous Army, conducted by Piuli and Mustapha. (2.) Not
far from the present Famagousta, are the Ruins of an Ancient City, generally
esteemed to have been that called formerly Salamina, and afterward Constantia;
which was ransacked by the Jews, in the time of the Emperor Trajan, and finally
destroyed by the Saracens, in the Reign of Heraclius. (3.) Nigh that
Promontory, commonly called, The Cape of Cats (but formerly Curias) are the
Ruins of a Monastry of Greek Caloyers, which gave the Cape its Name from a
remarkable Custom to which these Monks were obliged, viz. Their keeping a
certain number of Cats, for the hunting and destroying of many Serpents that
infested those Parts of the Island; to which Exercise those Creatures are said
to have been so nicely bred, that at the first Sound of the Bell they would
give over their Game, and immediately return to the Convent. (4.) In the
Maritime Village of Salines, is a ruinous Greek Church, where Strangers are led
into a little obscure Tomb, which the Modern Greeks affirm to be the place of
Lazarus's second Interment. (5.) Adjacent to Salines is a remarkable Lake, or
Natural Salt-pit of a considerable extent, whose Water congeals into solid
white Salt by the Power of the Sunbeams. Lastly, In this Island is a high
Hill, (the Ancient Olympus of Cyprus) called by the Franks, The Mountain of the
Holy Cross, remarkable for nothing at present save several Monastries of Greek
Caloyers, of the Order of St. Basil.

Here is one Greek Archbishop, who commonly resideth nigh to Nicosia; and three
Bishops, Archbishopricks, etc.
whose places of Residence, are Paphos, Larnica, and Cerines.

This Island being inhabited by Greeks and Mahometans, especially the former,
(they being far superior Manners.
in number to the Turks) their respective Characters are already given, [page
174 and 181.] to which I remit the Reader.

Languages here in use, are the Turkish and Vulgar Greek, especially the
latter; but Lingua Franca is the Language.
Tongue they commonly speak with Strangers, it being understood and used by all
trading People in the Levant.

This Island has been subject at different times to a great many different
Sovereigns, particularly the Government.
Grecians, Egyptians, Romans, once the English, (when Conquered by Richard I.)
and lastly, the Venetians, from whom 'twas wrested by the Turks, Anno 1571.
under whose heavy Yoke it now groaneth, and is ruled by its particular Bassa,
who ordinarily resideth at Nicosia.

See the Danuubian Provinces, page 182. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Island being Greeks and Turks, (as aforesaid) the
former profess Christianity Religion.
according to the Tenets of the Greek Church, [which may be seen, page 176.]
and the latter Mahometanism according to their Alcoran; for the principal
Articles of which, Vid. page 182. As for the Franks here residing, they make
Profession of the respective Religions of the Country from whence they came.
This Island received the Light of the Blessed Gospel in the Apostolic Age.

Other observable Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, are Those of Negropont --
Chief Town Idem, Adjacent to the E. of Greece. Stalimene Idem -- In the
Archipelago, from N. to S. Tenedo -- Metelino -- Idem -- Scio -- Idem -- Sdelle
-- -- Samo -- Idem -- Lango -- -- Rhodes -- Idem -- Cerigo -- Idem, lying
between Candia and the Morea, Zant -- Idem -- In the Ionian Sea, from S. to N.
W. Cephalonia -- Argostoli -- Corfu -- Idem --

Somewhat of each of these, and in their Order. Therefore,

I. Negropont (formerly Eubaea and Chalcis) is generally thought to have been
annexed to the main Continent, and separated therefrom by an Earthquake. Its
Soil is very fruitful, and M. Caristo is noted for excellent Morble, and the
famous Stone Amianios or Asbestos. The whole Island is subject at present to
the Turks, and ruled by a particular Bassa, who has also the Command of Achaia,
and is Admiral of the Turkish Fleet.

II. Stalimene (the Ancient Lemnos, so famous among the Poets) is also subject
to the Great Turk; and observable only for a kind of Medicinal Earth, called
formerly Terra Lemnia, but now Terra Sigillata, because yearly gathered, and
put up in little Sacks, which are sealed with the Grand Signior's Seal,
otherways not vendible to the Merchant.

III. Tenedo or Tenedos, an Island much noted of old, as being dedicated to
Apollo, and the place where the Grecians hid themselves when they feigned to
have lost all hopes of taking Troy. It Is now in Possession of the Turks, and
remarkable for nothing at present, except its excellent Muscadine Wine.

IV. Metellino, [now scarcely observable for any thing, save its Ancient Name
of Lesbos,] which was the Birth place of Sappho, the Inventress of Sapphick
Verse. 'Twas for some time under the Venetians, but now the Turks, to whom it
pays yearly the Sum of 18000 Piasters.

V. Scio (alias Chios) is an Island of much request among the Turks, for its
great plenty of Mastick, which is yearly gathered by the Sultan's Bostangi's,
or Gardeners, for the use of the Seraglio; 'twas lately taken by the Venetians,
who possessed it but a short time.

VI. Sdelle is also in the Hands of the Turk, and famous for nothing at
present, save only its ancient (now corrupted) Name of Delos, and some stately
Ruins of Apollo's Temple still visible, with those of a large Theater, and a
Marble Portico.

VII. Samo. There Is scarce any Island in the Archipelago more frequently
mentioned by the Ancients, than this of Samo, formerly Samos. It went also by
the Names of Parthenia, Anthemosa, Melamphylos, Dryusa, Cyparissa, and several
others. It Is now subject to the Turk, and has reason to boast of nothing so
much, as having been the Birthplace of that famous Philosopher, Pythagoras.

VIII. Lango, formerly known by the Name of Co, Coa, or Cos, and remarkable of
old for the Temple of Aesculapius, and being the Birthplace of the renowned
Hippocrates and Ap^lles. It belonged to the Knights of Rhodes, but now to the
Turks.

IX Rhodes. This Island is famous all the World over, for that huge brazen
Colossus of the Sun, formerly here erected, and deservedly reckoned one of the
World's Wonders. The Inhabitants were likways so famous for their skill in
Navigation, that for some Ages they were Sovereigns of these Seas, and made so
just and excellent Laws in Maritime Affairs, as were afterward esteemed worthy
of being incorporated in the Roman Pandects. This Island (after the loss of
Jerusalem and St. John d' Acre) was taken from the Saracans by the
Hospitallers, or Knights of St. John, Anno 1309. who continued Masters of it
till 1522. when Solomon II. Conquered it by the Treachery of Amurath, a
Portuguize. Since which time it has owned the Grand Signior for its Sovereign,
and is now ruled by a particular Bassa, sent thither from the Ottoman Port.

X. Cerigo (the Cythera of the Ancients) being a considerable Island, inhabited
by Greeks, and subject to the Republic of Venice, is governed by a Noble
Venetian, in Quality of a Providitor, who is renewed every two Years. This Isle
produces some exceilent Wine, but in no great Quantity. It Is also stockt with
store of good Venison, and a competency of Corn and Oil, sufficient for its
number of Inhabitants. The Greeks here residing, have the greater Veneration
for this place, upon the account of a Vulgar Opinion now current among 'em,
which is, that St. John the Divine began here to write his Apocalypse.

XI. Zant (formerly Zacynthus) is another Island belonging to the Venetians,
and one of the richest in the Streights, abounding with Wine and Oil, but
mostly noted for Currants, of which there is such plenty that many Ships are
yearly fraughted with them for diverse Ports of Europe. And such Advantage is
that Currant-Trade to the Republic of Venice, that the Profits redounding from
thence, do serve (according to the Testimony of a late Traveller) to defray the
Charges of the Venetian Fleet. In this Island are several remarkable Fountains,
out of which there bubbles up a pitchy Substance in great quantities. In the
Monastry of Sancta Maria de la Croce, is the Tomb of M. T. Cicero and Terentia,
his Wise, with two several Inscriptions (one for him, and the other for her)
found upon a Stone, which, some time ago, was dug out of the Ground, nigh the
place of the aforesaid Tomb. The Inhabitants (reckoning both Greeks and Jews)
amount to about 20 or 25000, and are governed by a Noble Venetian, sent thither
with full Power from the Senate.

XII. Cephalonia (or old Melaena, Taphos, or Teleboa,) is likeways under the
State of Venice, and chiefly abounds in dry Raisins, (which the Venetians turn
to good Advantage) and excellent Wines, especially Red Muscadels, which many
call by the Name of Luke Sherry. It has its particular Providitor, whose
Government lasts Thirty two Months. This Island was bestowed upon the
Republic of Venice, Anno 1224. by Gaio, then Lord thereof, but mastered by the
Turks in 1479. and possessed by them till 1499 when driven thence by the
Venetians, who re-peopl'd it with Christians, and afterward fortifying the
same against future Invasions, have hitherto continued Masters thereof.

Lastly, Corfu (formerly Corcyra) is blessed with a veary healthful Air, and
fruitful Soil for Wine and Oil, but not for Corn, of which the Inhabitants are
supplied from the Continent. It belongs to the Republic of Venice, and is
deservedly termed, The Port of the Gulf, and Barrier of Italy. The Government
thereof is lodged in six Noble Venetians, whose Power lasts for the space of
two Years. The first of these Noble Men has the Title of Baily. The second, of
Providitor and Captain. The third and fourth, of Counselors. The fifth, of
Great Captain. And the sixth, of Castelan, or Governor of the Castle de la
Campana in the old Town. The Greeks are very numerous in this Island, and have
a Vicar General whom they style Proto-papa. In the time of Solomon II. no less
than 25000 Turks did Land in Corfu, under the Command of the Famous Barbarossa;
yet such was the Conduct of the wise Venitians, that they forced him to make a
shameful Retreat

To speak more particularly of each of these Islands, and many others,
reducible to the two Classes of Cyclades and Sporades, would far surpass our
designed Brevity. Conclude we therefore this tedious Section with the following
Advertisement. That, whereas in treating of Islands, (after we took leave of
the Continent of Europe) I esteemed it most methodical, to bring all those in
the Mediterranean Sea, under the Title of European Islands; yet the Reader is
hereby desired to take notice, that all of 'em are not usually reckoned as
such; the Isle of Malta being generally accounted an African; and Cyprus with
Rhodes among the Asiatick; as are also several others on the Coast of Natolia.

And so much for Europe and the European Islands. Now follows,

ASIA a New Description by Robt. Morden


CHAP. II. Of ASIA.
Divided (page 43.) into Tartary Capital City Chambalu. China Pekin or Xuntien.
India Agra. Persia Ispahan. Turkey in Asia Aleppo.

To these add the Asiatick Islands.

Of all which in Order. Therefore,

SECT. I. Concerning Tartary.
d. m. Situated between 77 10 of Long. its greatest Length from E to W. is
about 3000 Miles. 163 00 between 37 00 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about
2250 Miles. 75 04

Tartary comprehends five great Parts.

Viz. 3 South Kathay -- Chief Town Chambalu -- From E. to W. Turkhestan --
Ihibet -- Zagathay -- Samarchand- 2 North Tartaria propria Mongul, or Tenduc
From E. to W. Tartary the Desert Cumbalich --

THIS Country (the greatest Part thereof being reckoned the Scythia Asiatica of
the Ancients) is Name.
termed by the Italians and Spaniards, Tartaria; by the French, la Tartarie; by
the Germans, Tartarijen; and by the English, Tartary; so called from Tartar or
Tatar, a River of that Country, which is said to empty it self into the vast
Northern Ocean. But others choose rather to derive the Name from Tatar or Totar,
which in the Syriack Language signifies a Remnant, imagining that the Tartars
are the remainders of those Israelites, who where carried by Salmanasser into
Media. It Is termed Tartary the Great, to distinguish it from the Lesser in
Europe.

The Air of this Country is very different, by reason of its vast Extent from
South to North; the Southmost Air.
Parts thereof having the same Latitude with the middle Provinces of Spain, and
the Northmost reaching beyond the Arctick Polar Circle. What its real Extent
from East to West may be, is not certainly known as yet; only this we will
affirm in general, that it is much less than commonly supposed, if the Relations
of some late Travelers in these Parts of the World be found afterward to hold
true. The opposite Place of the Globe to Tartary, is part of the vast Pacifick
Ocean, as also the Countries of Chili, Paraguay, and Terra Magellanica.

This vast Country toward the North (it lying in the 6th, 7th, 8th 9th, 10th,
11th, 12th, etc. North Climate) Soil.
is extremely Barren, being every where encumbered with unwholesome Marshes,
and uninhabited Mountains; but in the Southern Parts, the Soil is indifferently
good for Tillage and Grazing, especially the latter; and toward the East it is
reported to be abundantly fertile in Corn, (where duly manured) and several
sorts of Herbs, especially Rhubarb. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is
about two Months (the Sun not Setting for that time when near the Summer
Solstice) the shortest in the Southmost, is about 9 Hours, and the Nights
proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Sable, Martins, Silks, Comlets,
Flax, Musk, Cinnamon, and Commodities.
vast Quantities of Rhubarb, etc.

In lieu of the Rarities of this barbarous and little frequented Country, we
may mention that prodigious Rarities.
Wall dividing Tartary from China, erected by the Chinese, to hinder the
frequent Incursions of their unwelcome Neighbors, the Tartars; 'twas commonly
reckoned Three hundred German Leagues in length, Thirty Cubits high in most
places, and Twelve in breadth. The time of its building is computed to be about
Two hundred Years before the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior. By our latest
Relations of the State and Nature of this Country, we find that some remarkable
Vulcano's are to be seen in the North and Eastern Parts thereof.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities, in this Archbishopricks, etc.
Country; none.

The Tartars are a People of a swarthy Complexion, strong Bodies, and middle
Stature. The generality of Manners.
'em are Persons of broad Faces, hollow Eyes, thin Beards, thick Lips, slat
Noses, and ugly Countenances. In Behavior they are very Rude and Barbarous,
commonly devouring the Flesh of their Enemies, and drinking their Blood, so
soon as they are in their Power. Their ordinary Food is Horseflesh, which they
greedily tear and eat up like so many Ravenous Vultures. Their manner of
Living, is commonly in Tents in the open Fields, which they remove from place
to place, according to the time of the Year, and convenience of Grazing. Many
of 'em make excellent Soldiers, being not only willing and able to endure great
Fatigues, but also very dexterous and daring in time of Engagement. When they
seem many times to fly before their Enemies, they will unexpectedly send back a
dreadful Shower of Arrows in the Faces of their Pursuers, and frequently
turning about, do give them a violent Charge, and all without the least
disorder. When their great Cham dies, it is reportd, That many of his chief
Officers are immediately killed, and interred with him, that they may also
attend him (as they imagine) in the other World, according to their respective
Posts here.

The Language used by the Asiatick Tartars, is not much different from the
Tartaresque, spoken by those of Language.
Crim Tartary, (a Specimen of which is already given in Europe) and both have a
great Affinity with the Turkish.

The vast Body of Tartary is said to be subject to several Princes, who are
wholly accountable (in their Government.
Government) to one Sovereign, who is commonly termed the Great Cham, whose
Government is most Tyrannical, and Crown hereditary. The Lives and Goods of his
People are altogether in his Power. His Subjects style him the Sun and Shadow
of the Immortal God, and render him a kind of Adoration, never speaking unto
him Face to Face, but falling down upon their Knees with their Faces toward
the Ground. He looks upon himself as the Monarch of the whole World; and from
that vain Opinion, is reported to cause his Trumpets to sound every Day after
Dinner, pretending thereby to give leave to all other Kings and Princes of the
Earth to Dine. For the better management of Public Affairs, he is said to
appoint two Councils, each consisting of twelve Persons, (the wisest and best
experienced of any that he can pitch upon) of which one does constantly attend
the Affairs of State, and the other those which relate to the War. Yet after
all, this mighty Cham is looked upon by some Judicious Persons, as a mere
Chimera; and those strange Relations concerning him (though hitherto current)
are thought to have a near Affinity unto the Legenda Aurea of the Roman Church.

The most received Opinion about the Arms of the Great Cham, is, that (as
Emperor of Tartary) he bears, Arms.
Or, an Owl Sable. But what as King of China, see the following Section.

The Inhabitants of this Country are partly Pagan, partly Mohammedan, and partly
Christian. Paganism does Religion.
chiefly prevail in the Northmost Parts, the People being generally gross
Idolaters in those places. In the Southern Provinces they are (for the most
part) followers of Mahomet's Doctrine, especially since the Year 1246. And
toward the Caspian Sea are found a considerable number of Jews, thought by
some to be the Offspring of the ten Tribes, led away Captive by Salmanasser.
Those of the Christian Religion (overgrown of late by Nestorianism) are
scattered up and down in several Parts of this vast Country, but most numerous
in Cathay, and the City of Cambalu. The Christian Faith was first planted in
this Country, (as is generally believed) by the Labors of St. Andrew and St.
Philip, two of the Apostles.

SECT. II. Concerning China.
d. m. Situated between 118 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. E. to S. W
is about 1380 Miles. 141 00 between 20 30 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is
about 1260 Miles. 41 10

China contains Sixteen Provinces.

Viz. 6 North Leaotung -- Chief Town Leaoyang -- -- E. to W. Xantung -- Chinan
-- Peking -- Idem aliter Xuntien Xansi -- Taiyven -- -- Honau -- Kaijung --
Xensi -- Sigan -- 10 South Nanking -- Id. alit. Kiangnan E. to W Chekiang --
Haugchew -- Kiangsi -- Nanchang -- -- Fokien -- Focheu -- Huquang -- Unchang --
-- Quantung Quancheu -- Suchuen -- Chingtu -- -- Queicheu -- Queiyang -- Quansi
-- Quilin -- Junnan -- Idem --

THIS Country (thought by most Geographers to be the Ancient Sinae, mentioned
by Ptolomy) is Name.
termed by the French, la Chine; and by the Italians, Spaniards, Germans, and
English, China; so called (according to the best Conjecture) from one of its
Ancient Monarchs, named Cina, who is said to have lived about fifty Years
before the Nativity of our Blessed Savior. Many other Names it has had since
that time; for when the Government falls from one Family to another, the first
Prince of that Name is said to give a new Name to the whole Country; the latest
of which Modern Names, are Tamin, signifying the Kingdom of Brightness; and
Chuinque, i. e. The Kingdom of the Middle; the Chinese imagining that the
Earth is Square, and that their Country is situated exactly in the middle of it.

The Air of this Country is generally very Temperate, save only toward the
North, where it is sometimes Air.
intollerably Cold, and that because of several Mountains of a prodigious
height, whose Tops are ordinarily covered with Snow. The opposite Place to
China, is the South part of Brasil, together with the East of Paraguay

This Country (it lying in the 4th, 5th, 6th North Climate) is for the most
part of a very rich and fertile Soil.
Soil, insomuch that its Inhabitants in several places, are said to have two,
and sometimes three Harvests in a Year. It abounds with Corn, Wine, and all
kinds of Fruits. Its Lakes and Rivers are very well furnished with Fish, and
some afford various kinds of Pearls and Bezoar of great value. Its Mountains
are richly lined with several Mines of Gold and Silver. Its Plains are
extraordinary fit for Pasturage. And its pleasant Forests are every where
stored with all sorts of Venison. In a word, the whole Country in general, is
esteemed one of the best in the World. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts,
is about 14 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is about 10 Hours, and the
Nights proportionable.

The Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Silver, Precious Stone,
Quicksilver, Porcelline Dishes, Silks, Commodities.
Cottons, Rhubarb, Sugar, Camphire, Musk, Ginger, China-Wood, etc.

Peculiar to this Country, is a short Tree, with a round Head, and very thick,
which in respect of its Fruit, Rarities.
may bear the Name of the Tallow Tree; for at a certain Season of the Year it is
full of Fruit containing diverse Kernels about the bigness of a small Nut, which
Kernels have all the Qualities of Tallow, (being the very same, both as to
Color, Smell, and Consistency) and by mixing a little Oil with them, do make
as good burning Candles, as Europeans usually make of pure Tallow it self. (2)
Here is a large Mountain full of terrible Caverns, in one of which is a Lake of
such a nature, that if a Stone be thrown into it, presently there is heard a
hideous noise as of a frightful Clip of Thunder, and sometimes there arises a
gross Mist which immediately dissolves into Water. (3.) In the City of Peking
is a prodigious big Bell, weighing 120000 Pounds, surpassing the noted Bell of
Erfurd in Upper Saxony, by 94600 Pounds: In Dimension it is eleven foot
Diameter, forty in Circuit, and twelve High. (4) In Nanking is another of
eleven foot High, and seven in Diamiter, and weighing 50000 Pounds, which also
surpasses the Bell of Erfurd, (weighing only 25400 Pounds, yet hitherto
supposed the greatest in the World) by almost double its weight. (5.) In China
are several Vulcano's (particularly that Mountain called Lincsung) which vomits
out Fire and Ashes so furiously, as frequently to raise some hideous Tempests
in the Air. (6.) Here are some Rivers, whose Waters are cold at the top, but
warm beneath; as also several remarkable Fountains which send forth so hot a
Steam, that People usually boil Meat over them. (7.) In this Country are
several Lakes, remarkable for changing Copper into Iron, or making it just of
the like resemblance; as also for causing Storms when any thing is thrown into
them. (8.) In the Island Haman, there is said to be Water (uncertain whether in
Lake, River, or Fountain) of such a strange quality, that it petrifies some
sort of Fishes when they unfortunately chance to enter into it. (9.) Many are
those Triumphal Arches (to be seen in most of the noted Cities of this Empire)
erected in Honor of such Persons as have either done some signal pieces of
Service to the State, or have been conspicuous in their times for their
singular Knowledge. (10.) In this Country are several remarkable Bridges,
particularly that over a a River, called S^ffruny, which reaches from one
Mountain to another, being Four hundred Cubits long, and Five hundred high, and
all but one Arch; whence it is called by Travelers Pons volans. Here likewise
is another of Six hundred and sixty Perches in length, and one and a half
broad, standing upon Three hundred Pillars without any Arches. Lastly, In China
are many very observable Plants, Animals, and Fossils, especially the last,
among which is the Asbestos. But for a particular Account of 'em. Vid.
Kircherus's China Illustrata.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities, are hardly to be expected her;
however this Country (according Archbishopricks.
to the Testimony of Popish Missionaries) is furnished with some of these,
Pekin, Nanquin and Macao, having each of 'em a particular Bishop nominated by
the King of Portugal, and the other Provinces are under the Jurisdiction of
three Apostolical Vicars. Under which Ecclesiastical Superiors, there are (by
their Relations) above Two hundred Churches or Private Chapels dedicated to
the True God.

The Chinois [Persons for the most part of a fair Complexion, short Nosed,
black Eyed, and of very Manners.
thin Beards] are great Lovers of Sciences, and generally esteemed a very
ingenious sort of People. They Are said to have had the use of Printing and Guns
long before either of 'em was known in Europe. Many of 'em are great
Proficients in several Parts of the Mathematics, especially Arithmetic,
Geometry, and Astronomy; and so conceited are they of their own Knowledge in
these things; and so mean are their Thoughts of others, that it is generally
reported of 'em, that (speaking of themselves) they commonly say, That they
have two Eyes, the Europeans one, and the rest of the World none at all. They
who wholly apply themselves to the study of Sciences, and make such proficiency
in them, as to become Doctors to others, are distinguished by their long Nails,
suffering 'em sometimes to grow as long as their Fingers, that being esteemed a
singular Characteristick of a profound Scholar, and a differencing mark between
them and Mechanics.

The Language of the Chinois is extremely difficult to be acquired by
Strangers, and differs from all Language.
others, both as to its Nature, Pronunciation, and way of Writing. (1.) Its
Nature. They use no Alphabet, as Europeans do, and are astonished to hear that
by Twenty four Letters we can express our Thoughts, and fill Libraries with
Books. In lieu of an Alphabet they formerly used Hieroglyphics, setting down
the Images of things for the things themselves; but this being extremely
tedious, and likeways defective, (there being no such Resemblances of pure
Abstracts) they then made Characters to signify Words, numbering them according
to the number of Words they needed to express their Idea's; which Characters
arise to such a prodigious multitude, that not only Strangers, but even the
Natives themselves, sind it a very difficult matter to acquire an intimate
acquaintance with them all. (2.) Its Pronounciation. Although all the Original
Terms of this Tongue are Three hundred and thirty three, yet such is their
peculiar way of pronouncing them, that the same Term admits of various, and
even contrary Significations, according to the various Accent in pronouncing of
it. And of these Accenrs, there are five applicable to every Term, which
extremely augments the difficulty of either speaking or understanding this
Tongue to perfection; besides, the Pronunciation thereof is accompanied with
such variety of Motions of the Hand, that a mute Person can speak almost
intelligibly by his Fingers. And as to the Manner of Writing, they differ from
all other Nations; for whereas Christians write from the Left hand to the
Right; and the Jews from the Right to the Left, they usually make their Lines
from the top of the Page down to the bottom.

This Great Kingdom was formerly under its own particular King or Emperor, but
of late overrun and Government.
conquered by the Tartars, to whom it is at present subject, acknowledging due
Allegiance to the Great Cham, whose Government is as Despotical as any of the
Oriental Monarchs; for he has full Power over the Lives of his Subjects, the
Princes of the Blood not excepted. His bare Word is the Law, and his Commands
admit of no delay nor neglect. He is seldom seen, and never spoke with, but
upon the Knees. Upon his Deathbed he may choose his Successor out of what
Family he pleases. For the better managing the great Affairs of this mighty
Empire, he is assisted by two Sovereign Councils; one Extraordinary, composed of
Princes of the Blood only; and the other Ordinary, which besides the Princes,
does consist of several Ministers of State, called Colaos. But over and above
these two Councils, there are at Pekin six Sovereign Courts, whose Authority
extend over all the Empire, and to each of 'em belong different Matters; viz.
(1.) Is that Court called Lupou, which presides over all the Mandarins, and
confers upon, or takes from them their Offices. (2.) Ho^pou, which looks after
the Public Treasury, and takes care of raising the Taxes. (3.) Lipou, which
inspects into Ancient Customs; and to it is committed the care of Religion,
Sciences, and Foreign Affairs. (4.) Pimpou, which has charge of the Soldiery,
and other Officers. (5.) Himpou, which enquires and passes Sentence in all
Criminal Matters. Lastly, Compou, which looks after all Public Buildings, as
the Emperor's Palaces, and such like. In each of these Courts, the Emperor has
one, who may be termed a Private Censor; it being his business to observe all
that passes, and to acquaint him faithfully therewith, which makes all Persons
very cautious in their Actions. Over each Province is appointed a Vice Roy, and
under him a great many Public Officers. To shun Oppression of the Subject by
these various Ministers, the Emperor before the Tartarian Conquest, had a
certain number of secret Spies in every Province, to have a watchful Eye upon
the Actions of every Public Officer, and upon any visible Act of Injustice in
discharge of his Office, they were to produce their Commission, and by virtue
thereof did seize such an Officer, though of the highest Station: but this is
laid aside, those Persons having mightily abused their Power. Yet in lieu
thereof, they still retain one Custom which is certainly very singular, viz.
That every Vice Roy and Public Officer, is bound to take a Note of his own
Miscarriages in the Management of Public Affairs from time to time, and humbly
acknowledging the same, is bound to find them in writing to Court. Which Task
is undoubtedly very irksome on one hand, if duly performed; but yet more
dangerous on the other, if wholly neglected. Very remarkable are three Maxims
of State carefully observed by the Chinesian Emperors, viz. (1) Never to give
any Mandarin a Public Office in his Native Province, lest being of a mean
Descent, it might contribute to his Disparagement, or being well Descended, and
beloved, he should thereby grow too powerful. (2.) To retain at Court the
Children of the Mandarins employed in Public Offices, and that under pretense
of giving them good Education, but it is in effect as Hostages, lest their
Fathers should chance to forget their Duty to the Emperor. Lastly, Never to
sell any Public Office, but to confer the same according to Person's Merits.

The Great Cham, as King of China, is said to bear for Ensigns Armorial,
Argent, three Black-a-moor's Arms.
Heads placed in the Front, their bust vested Gules, but (according to others)
two Dragons.

The prevailing Religion in China, is Paganism or gross Idolatry; and in some
Parts, the Doctrine of Mahomet Religion.
is entertained. Of the several Idols to whom the Chinese pay their Devotions,
there are two of chief Note, viz. One in form of a Dragon, whom the Emperor,
with his Mandarins do religiously Worship, prostrating themselves frequently
before it, and burning Incense unto it. The other is called Fo or Foe, set up
(as is conjectured) in favor of one of their own Nation, who is thought to
have flourished about a thousand Years before our Blessed Savior, and for his
wonderful Parts and Actions was esteemed worthy of being Deifi'd at his Death.
They look upon him as the Savior of the World, and that he was sent to teach
the Way of Salvation, and make an Atonement for the Sins of Men. They mightily
prize some Moral Precepts which they pretend he left, and which the Bonzes (or
Priests) do frequently inculcate upon the Minds of the People. To this God are
erected many Temples, and he is worshipped not only under the Shape of a Man,
but in the Person of a Real Man, who, they say, never dies, being upheld in
that vain Opinion by the Lamas, (or Tartaran Priests) who upon the Death of
that Immortal Man, take due care [as the Egyptian Priests did their Apis] to
put one of their own number in his room, and that of the same Features and
Proportion, or as near as possibly they can. The Chinese have a mighty Spur to
be cautious in all their Actions from an Opinion universally received among
them, viz. That the Souls of their deceased Friends are always (at least
frequently) present with them, and narrowly viewing their Deportment. If we may
believe the Writings of some late French Missionaries, Christianity has
obtained considerable footing of late in this Country, especially in the
Province of Nankin, and that the present Emperor has allowed of the same by a
Public Edict throughout all the Empire. The first Plantation of Christianity
in this part of the World, was undertaken (according to common belief) by St.
Thomas, or some of his Disciples. Which Opinion is confirmed by an Ancient
Breviary of the Indian Churches, containing these Words. Per D. Thomam Regnum
Caelorum volavit and ascendit ad Sinas.

SECT. III. Concerning India.
d. m. Situated between 92 00 of Long. its greatest Length from N. W. to S. E.
is about 1680 Miles. 131 06 between 08 12 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is
about 1690 Miles. 40 00

India [viz. all between China and Persia] comprehends

The Great Mogul's Empire containing many little Kingdoms, but chiefly those of
Delli -- Chief Town Idem in the main Land. Agra -- Idem Cambaia -- Idem on the
Seacoast. Bengala -- Idem Peninsula Indiae intra Gangem, containing the
Kingdoms of Decan -- Goa Northward. Golcond -- Idem Bisnagar -- Idem in the
middle. Malabar -- Calicute Southward. Peninsula Indiae extra Gangem,
containing the Kingdoms of Pegu -- Idem from N. to S. Tunqum -- Idem Cochinchin
-- Idem Siam Martaban Idem Siam -- Idem Malacca Idem

THIS vast Complex Body, considered here under the Title of India, [viz. all
between Persia and China] comprehends (as aforesaid) many distinct and
considerable Kingdoms; but all reducible to Three great Divisions
abovementioned, to wit, the Mogul's Empire, and the two Peninsula's of India,
one within, and the other without the Ganges. Of all which separately, and in
their Order. Therefore,

. 1. The Mogul 's Empire.
THIS Country is a great Part of the Modern and Ancient India, remarkable in
the History of Name.
Alexander the Great, and termed India from the River Indus, but now the
Mogul's Empire, as being subject unto that mighty Eastern Monarch, commonly
known by the Name of the Great Mogul.

In the Northern parts of this Empire, the Air is said to be extremely cold and
piercing about the time Air.
of the Sun's greatest Southern Declination; but in the Southern Provinces much
more temperate. The opposite Place of the Globe to the Mogul's Empire, is that
part of the ^ast Pacifick Ocean, between 270 and 310 Degrees of Longitude, with
25 and 39 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this vast Country (it lying in the 3d and 4th North Climate) is
extraordinary barren in several Soil.
Parts, being encumbered with formidable dry sandy Mountains, but elsewhere
very plentiful, especially in Cotton, Millet, Rice, and most sorts of Fruits.
The length of the Days and Nights in this Country, is the same as in the
Kingdom of China, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Aloes, Musk, Rhubarb, Wormseeds,
Civits, Indigo, Laique, Commodities.
Bor^x, Ogium, Amber, Myrabolans, Sal-Armoniac, Silk, Cottons, Callicoes,
Sattins, Taffaties, Carpets, Metals, Porcelline Earth, and most sorts of
Spices. etc.

In several Parts of the Mogul's Empire, particularly the Kingdom of Cambaia
are diverse noted Vulcano's, Rarities.
which usually Smoke, and sometimes break out in terrible Eruptions of Fire and
Sulphurious Matter. In and about the Imperial City of Agra, are the splendid
Sepulchers of the Royal Family of the Mogul's; particularly that glorious
Monument of the Empress to Ch^-G^han, erected nigh to the Grand Bazar, which is
reported to be a very stately Structure, and of so vast a bigness, that Twenty
thousand Artificers were employed in erecting of it for the space of Twenty two
Years. But what mostly deserves our regard, in the whole Kingdom of Indosian,
is that Rich and Glorious Throne in the Palace of Agra, on which the Great
Mogul does usually appear during the Festival of his Birth Day, where he
receives the Compliments and Presents of the Grandees, after the yearly
Ceremony of weighing his Person is over. This stately Throne (so noted among
Travelers in these Parts) is said to stand upon Feet and Bars, overlaid with
enameled Gold, and adorned with several large Diamonds, Rubies and other
precious Stones. The Canopy over the Throne is set thick with curious Diamonds,
and surrounded with a Fringe of Pearl. Above the Canopy is the lively Effigies
of a Peacock, whose Tail sparkles with blew Saphires, and other Stones of
different Colors; his Body is of enameled Gold set with Jewels, and on his
Breast is a large Ruby, from which hangs a Pearl as big as an ordinary Pear. On
both sides of the Throne are two Umbrella's of curious Red Velvet, richly
embroidred with Gold, and encompassed with a Fringe of Pearl; ^he very Sticks
whereof are also covered with Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds. Over against the
Emperor's Seat is a choice Jewel with a hole bored through it, at which hangs a
prodigious big Diamond, with many Rubies and Emeralds round about it. These and
several others not here mentioned, are the costly Ornaments of this Indian
Throne, which (if all related of it be true) cannot be matched by any other
Monarch upon the Face of the whole Earth.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of the various Parts of this vast Empire, are Persons of
various Tempers and Customs. Manners.
What those of the Inland Provinces are, is not very certain, (our Intelligence
of 'em being yet very slender) but the People of the Southern or Maritime
places of the Mogul's Dominions, are Persons (for the most part) very tall of
Stature, strong of Body, and in Complexion inclining some what to that of the
Negroes. In Behavior, Civil; in their Dealings pretty just; and many of the
Mechanical sort prove wonderful Ingenious.

Both here, and in the two Peninsula's hereafter mentioned, are various
Languages, and these again divided Language.
into different Dialects; but the Arabic is still used in their Religious
Offices. Among the several Languages spoken (...) the Mogul's Dominions, the
Gazarate Tongue is reckoned the chief, and is mostly used in the Kingdoms of
Cambaya and Bengala; but the Persian is said to be the Language of the Court.

This vast Body comprehends a great many Kingdoms, some of which are free, some
subject to Government.
others, and most of 'em Tributary to one Sovereign, namely the Great Mogul,
whose Government is most Tyrannical, for he has both the Purses and Persons of
his Subjects wholly at his disposal, and is Lord of all, being Heir to every
Man's Estate. His Imperial Seat is ordinarily at Agra, which is a very Rich and
Populous City, lying in the Province of the same Name, and the Metropolis of
the whole Empire. If he allows paternal Inheritance any where, the same is
revokable at his pleasure. His bare Will is the Law, and his Word a final
Decision of all Controversies. The Indian Diadem is not entailed by
Primogeniture on the Sons, but is either ravished by force, or carried by craft,
of such who stand in Competition for it: he generally succeeding to the Throne,
who has mostly gained the Favor and Assistance of the Omrahs and Nabobs, with
other Grandees at Court; and upon his Instalment therein, he commonly
sacrifices all his Rivals and nearest Relations, reckoning his Throne to be
but tottering, unless its Foundations be laid in the Blood of such Persons. His
Revenue is indeed so vast that a bare Relation would seem incredible, but
proportionably to the same, are his necessary ways of employing it; for to a we
the prodigious multitude of People within the vast Extent of his Dominions,
he is obliged to keep in daily pay many Legions of Soldiers, otherways 'twere
impossible to Command the turbulent Rajahs, who (as it is) do frequently make
Insurrections, and disturb his Government.

The Ensigns Armorial of the Great Mogul, are said to be Argent, Seem with
Besants, Or. As for particular Arms.
Coats of Arms, peculiar to private Persons, as in Europe, here are none, no
Man within the Mogul's Dominions being Hereditary, either to his Estate or
Honors.

The Inhabitants of this Country are mostly Pagan, and next to Paganism the
Religion of Mahomet prevails, Religion.
it being chiefly embraced according to the Comentaries of Mortis Haly. Of the
Pagans, here are various Sects and Orders among them, particularly the Banians,
the Persees, and Faquirs. (1.) The Bantans, who believe a (...), or
Transmigration of Souls, and thereupon do usually build Hospitals for Beasts,
and will upon no account deprive any Creature of Life, lest thereby they
dislodge (as they imagine) the Soul of some departed Friend. But of all living
Creatures they have the greatest Veneration for the Cow, to whom they pay a
Solemn Address every Morning, and at a certain time of the Year they drink the
Stale of that worshipful Animal, believing it has a singular Quality to purify
all their Desilements. Besides their constant Abstinence from the Food of any
Animal, they frequently refrain from all eatables till Night. Of these Bantans
there are reckoned in India about Twenty four different Casts or Sects. (2.)
Persees, (the Posterity of the Ancient Persians) who worship the Element of
Fire, for which reason they are also called Gaures, i. e. Worshippers of Fire.
Besides the Fire, they have a great Veneration for the Cock. To kill the one,
or extinguish the other, is esteemed by them a Crime unpardonable. Their High
Priest is called Destoor, and their Ordinary Priests Darcos or Harboods.
Lastly, The Faquirs, (a kind of Religious Monks) who live very austere Lives,
being much given to Fasting, and several Acts of Mortification, and some (as a
voluntary Penance) make solemn Vows of keeping their Hands claspt about their
Heads; others hold one (and some both Arms) stretched out in the Air, and a
thousand such ridiculous Postures, and all during Life. Which Vows once made,
they sacredly observe, notwithstanding the Observation of 'em is attended with
exquisite Pain. Most of the Indians believe that the River Ganges has a
sanctifying Quality; whereupon they flock thither at certain Seasons in vast
multitudes, to plunge themselves therein. Dispersed through the Mogul's
Dominions, is a considerable number of Jews, and upon the Seacoasts are many
European Christians, all upon the account of Traffic. Those Parts of India
which received the Blessed Gospel in former times, were instructed therein (as
is generally believed) by the Apostle, St. Thomas.

. 2. The Peninsula of India within the Ganges.
THIS large Country (comprehending several Kingdoms abovementioned) was termed
Peninsula Name.
Indiae intra Gangem by the Ancients, particularly the Romans, and that upon
the account of its Situation. being within, or on this side the River Ganges,
in respect of the Empire of Persia, or Western Parts of Asia.

The Air of this Country is generally very hot, yet in most of the Maritime
Places, it is frequently qualified Air.
by cold Breezes from the Sea. The opposite Place of the Globe to this
Peninsula, is that part of the Pacifick Ocean, between 230 and 245 Degrees of
Longitude, with 17 and 25 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Peninsula is (for the most part) extraordinary Fertile,
producing all desirable Fruits, Soil.
Roots, and Grain, besides vast quantities of Medicinal Herbs. The longest Day
in the Northmost Parts of this Country, is about 13 Hours; the shortest in the
Southmost is 11 Hours, and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Metals, Silks, Cottons, Pearls,
Drugs, Dates, Coco's, Rice, Commodities.
Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper, Cassia, etc.

In several places of the Kingdom of Decan, is a noted Tree, called by
Travelers the Nure-Tree, whose Nature Rarities.
is such, that every Morning it is full of stringy Red Flowers, which in the
heat of the Day fall down in Showers to the Ground; and blossoming again in the
Night, it daily appears in a new Livery. (2.) In the Island Salsete, adjacent
to Goa, are vast Recept^^les cut out of the main Rock, one above another some
of ^em being equal in bigness to a Village of Four hundred (...) and adorned
throughout with strange frightful Statues of (...) representing Elephants,
Tigers, Lions, Amazons, etc. (3) In the Island Conorein, near Bombay,
(belonging to the (...)) is a City of the same Name, having diverse large
Heathen Temples and many other Appartments, all cut out of the firm Rock; Which
stupendous Work is attributed by some to Alexander the Great, but that without
any show of probability. (4.) In another adjacent Island, (belonging also to
the Portuguese, and called Elephanco from a huge Artisicial Elephant of Stone,
bearing a young one upon its Back) is another Idolatrous Temple of a prodigious
bigness cut out of the firm Rock. It Is supported by sorty two Pillars, and open
on all sides, except the East, where stands an Image with three Heads, adorned
with strange Hieroglyphics, and the Walls are set round with monstrous Giants,
whereof some have no less than eight Heads. (5.) At a City in the Kingdom of
Decan, known to Travelers by the Name of Dungeness, is another Heathen Temple,
much the same with that abovementioned.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universittes. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of the various Provinces of this Peninsula are much the same in
Manners with those in the Manners.
Southern Parts of the Mogul's Dominions already mentioned.

The chief of the Indian Tongues in this Peninsula, are Two, viz. the Carabine
mostly in use about Goa, Language.
and the Gazarate which is spoken in Bisnagar, and the Coasts of Coromandel.

In this Peninsula are a great many Princes, who assume to themselves the Title
of Kings; the chief of Government.
them being those of Calicut, Cochin, Cananor, Crang^ner, Travancor, and Taner;
besides which, are several sorts of People in various parts of this Country,
who acknowledge Subjection to none of these, nor to any other; nor can they
accord among themselves, being commonly divided into various Parties, who
pitisully harass one another; and those on the Coast of Malabar, are much
addicted to Pyracy.

What are the true Ensigns Armotial of these Indian Princes, [or if any] is
mostly conjectural; all we find Arms.
of 'em, is, that some in Decan and Cambaia bear Verte, en^ompass'd with a
Coilar of large precious Stones.

The Inhabitants of this Peninsula are generally Mahometans, especially those
who live near the Seacoasts, Religion.
but People residing in the Inland Parts are gross Idolaters, worshipping not
only the Sun and Moon, but also many Idols of most ugly and horrible Aspects;
and in some Parts of Decan they look upon the first Creature they meet with in
the Morning, as the proper Object of their Worship for that Day, except it be a
Crow, the very sight of which will consine them to their Houses the whole Day.
In most of the Seaport Towns and Places of Trade, are Jews in considerable
numbers, and many European Christians, especially those of our English
Factories. Christianity was first planted in this Country much about the same
time with the Mogul's Empire. Of which already.

. 3. The Peninsula of India beyond the Ganges.
THIS last Division of India is termed the Peninsula beyond the Ganges, because
of its Situation, Name.
it lying beyond that famous River, in respect of the other Peninsula, or the
Western Parts of Asia in general.

The Air of this Peninsula is somewhat different, according to the Situation
and Nature of the various Air.
Parts of that Country, yet generally esteemed indifferent healthful, and
temperate enough, considering the Latitude of those places. The opposite Place
of the Globe to this Peninsula, is that part of Nova Zelandia, between 210 and
230 Degrees of Longitude, with 1 to 24 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying under the 1st, 2d, and 3d North Climate) is
extraodinary Fertile, Soil.
producing in great plenty all sorts of desirable Fruits and Grain; besides
it is well stockt with invaluable Mines, and great quantity of precious Stones;
yea, so vastly Rich is this Country, that the Southmost part thereof (viz.
Chersonese d'or) is esteemed by many to be the Land of Ophir, to which King
Solomon sent his Ships for Gold. The longest Day in the Northmost parts is
about 13 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, near about 12 Hours, and the
Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
Silks, Porcelline Earth, Aloes, Commodities.
Musk, Rhubarb, Alabaster, etc.

Among the Rarities of this Country, we may reckon the Golden House in the City
of Arracan, being Rarities.
a large Hall in the King's Palace, whose inside is entirely overlaid with
Gold, having a stately Canopy of Massy Gold, from the Edges of which hang above
an hundred Combalenghe, or large Wedges of Gold in form of Sugar-Loaves. Here
also are seven Idols of Massy Gold, of the height of an ordinary Man, whose
Foreheads, Breasts, and Arms are adorned with variety of precious Stones, as
Rubies, Emeralds, Saphires, and Diamonds. In this Hall are also kept the two
famous Caneques, i. e. two Rubies of prodigious Value, about which the
Neighboring Princes frequently contending, have drawn Seas of Blood from each
others Subjects, and all from a vain Opinion. That the Possession of those
Jewels carry along with them a just Claim of Dominion over the Neighboring
Princes.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


What was said of the Natives of the other Peninsula in point of Manners, the
same may be affirmed of Manners.
those inhabiting this. The various Europeans here residing, are much the same
in Manners with the respective People of Europe, from whence they came.

The chief of the Indian Tongues in this Peninsula, is that called the Malaye,
mostly used in Malacca; but Language.
besides the various Indian Tongues, both in the Mogul's Empire, and the two
Peninsula's, the Portugueze Language is commonly understood and spoken in all
Maritime Towns of Trade, it being the chief Language that is used in daily
Commerce between the Franks and Natives of that Country.

In this Peninsula are a great many different States and Kingdoms, particularly
that of Pegu, (a very Government.
rich Kingdom) subject to its own Monarch, whose Sovereignty is acknowledged by
diverse other considerable ^ates, as Asem, Aracan, and Tipra, besides the
Ancient Brachmans, and other People living on the West of China, as the Lays,
Timocoues, Gue^es, and Ciocangaes, all Tributary to him. Here also are the rich
and flourishing Kingdoms of Tunquin and Cochinchin, especially the former,
whose King is esteemed a mighty Potent Prince, able to bring into the Field
vast multitudes of Men upon all occasions. And lastly, The King of Siam (to
whom a great many Princes are Tributary) is esteemed one of the richest and
most Potent Monarchs of all the East, and assumes (as some allege) the Title
of the King of Heaven and Earth; and yet notwithstanding of his mighty Force
and Treasure, he is said to be Tributary to the Tartars, and to pay them yearly
a certain kind of Homage.

We find no satisfactory Account of what Ensigns Armorial are born by these
Eastern Princes; or if any Arms.
at all.

The Inhabitants of this Peninsula are generally great Idolaters. Those of Siam
are said to maintain Pythagoras's Religion.
Metempsychosis, and commonly adore the four Elements. Wheresoever Mahometanism
prevails, it is generally intermixed with many Pagan Rites and Ceremonies, as
particularly in Cambodia, on the River Menan, in which City are almost three
hundred stately Mosques, not only well furnished with excellent Bells (contrary
to the Turkish Custom elsewhere) but also with a great many Idols of all sorts.
In the Kingdom of Pegu, they have a great Opinion of the Sanctity of Apes and
Crocodiles, believing those Persons very happy who are devoured by them. They
observe yearly five Solemn Festivals, (called in their Language Sapans) and
distinguished by the Names of Giachie, Cateano-Giaimo, Segienou, Daiche, and
Donon. Their Priests are called Raulini, and are divided into three Orders,
distinguished by the Names of Pungrini, Pangiani, and Xoxom. They have also
many Hermits, whom they divided into Grepi, Manigrepi, and Taligrepi, who are
all in great esteem among the People. Christianity was planted here much about
the same time with the other Peninsula already mentioned.

SECT. IV. Concerning Persia.
d. m. Situated between 70 30 of Long. Its greatest Length from E. to W is
about 1440 Miles. 97 00 between 25 40 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about
1260 Miles. 44 30 It Is divided into many Provinces, but chiefly those toward
the North, viz. Scirvant -- Chief Town Derbent -- W. to E. Giland -- Gilan --
Cherassan -- Heret -- Middle, viz. Erach -- Ispahan -- W. to E. Sablestan --
Bost -- Sigistan -- Sitzistan South, viz. Cusistan -- Susa -- W. to E. Fars --
Schiras -- Kirman -- Gombroon Macran -- Titz --

THIS Country (known to the Ancients by the same Name, and some others, but of
a much Name.
larger Extent than at present) is termed by the Italians and Spaniards,
Persia; by the French, Perse; by the Germans, Persien; and by the English,
Persia; so called (as many allege) from one of its Ancient Provinces, named
Persis, or (according to others) from Perses, an Illustrious Lord in the
Country of Elam, who for his Merit is said to have obtained the Government of
the People, and to have called both Country and Inhabitants after his Name. But
finally others do eagerly plead for an Hebrew Etymology, deriving the Name from
the word (...), i. e. Equites. For it is reported of the Inhabitants of this
Country, that before the Reign of Cyrus the Great, they seldom used to Ride, or
knew very little how to manage a Horse; and that such was their Dexterity
afterward in managing Horses, that this Country is said to assume its Name
from that Animal. For the strengthening of which Opinion they farther observe
that the Title of Persia is not found in those Books of Holy Scripture, which
were written before the time of Cyrus.

The Air of this Country is very temperate, especially toward the North,
beyond the vast Mountain of Air.
Taurus; but in the Southern Provinces it is scorching hot for several Months.
The opposite Place of the Globe to Persia, is part of Mare del Zur, between 250
and 280 Degrees of Longitude, with 25 and 40 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 3d and 4th North Climate) is very
different; for in the Northern Soil.
Parts adjacent to Tartary, and the Caspian Sea, the Ground is very barren,
producing but little Corn, and few Fruits. But South of Mount Taurus, the Soil
is said to be extraordinary fertile, the Country pleasant, and plentiful of
Corn, Fruits, Wines, etc. affording also some rich Mines of Gold and Silver.
The longest Day in the Northmost Parts is about 14 Hours; the shortest in the
Southmost is 13 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are curious Silks, Carpets, Tissues,
Manufactures of Gold, Silk, Commodities.
and Silver, Seal-Skins, Goat Skins, Alabaster, and all sorts of Metals, Myrrh,
Fruits, etc.

This Country (among its chief Rarities) does yet boast of the very Ruins of
the once proud Palace of Rarities.
Persepolis, so famous of old, and now called by the Inhabitants Chil-manor,
signifying forty Pillars: which imports that so many were standing some Ages
ago, but at present there is only nineteen remaining, together with the Ruins of
above eighty more. Those Pillars yet standing are of excellent Marble, and
about fifteen Foot high; for a particular Draught of 'em, with the Copy of
several Inscriptions in unknown Characters, Vid. Philos. Trans. N. 201, and
210. (2.) In the City of Ispahan is a large Pillar sixty Feet high, consisting
purely of the Skulls of Beasts, erected by Shaw Abas the Great, (upon a
Sedition of his Nobles) who vowed to rear up a Column of their Heads, as a
Monument of their Obloquy to after Ages, if they persisted in Disobedience; but
they surrendering upon Discretion, he ordered each of 'em to bring the
decollated Head of some Beast, and lay at his Feet; which was accordingly done,
and of them he made the aforesaid Pillar in lieu of a Column of their own
Heads. (3.) One of the Emperor's Gardens at Ispahan is so sweet and delicate a
place, that it commonly goes by the Name of Heste Behest, i e. Paradise upon
Earth; and the Royal Sepulchers of the Persian Monarchs, are indeed so stately,
that they deserve to be mentioned here. (4.) About thirty Miles North East of
Gombroon, is a most hidious Cave, which for its formidable Aspect, is termed
Hell's Gate by our English Travelers, who have passed that way. (5.) At Genoe,
about twelve or fourteen Miles North of Gombroon, are some excellent Baths,
esteemed very good against most Chronical Distempers, and much frequented for
all inveterate Ulcers, Aches, and such like. (6.) Within five Leagues of Da^^an
is a prodigious high Pike of the same Name, from whose top (covered all over
with Sulphur, which Sparkles in the Nightime like Fire) one may clearly see
the Caspian Sea, though an hundred and eighty Miles distant; and nigh to this
Sulphurous Pike are some famous Baths, where there is a great resort of People
at certain times of the Year. Lastly, In several Parts of Persia, are Mountains
of curious black Marble, and Springs of the famous Naphtha, with variety of
other Minerals.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks. etc.


The Persians are a People [both of old, and as yet] much given to Astrology,
many of them making it Manners.
their chief Business to search after future Events by Astrological
Calculations. They are naturally great Dissemblers, Flatterers, and Swearers;
as also very Proud, Passionate, and Revengful; excessive in their Luxury,
Pastimes, and Expenses; much addicted to Tobacco, Opium, and Coffee; yet with
all, they are said to be (for the most part) very respective to their
Superiors; Just and Honest in their Dealings, and abundantly Civil to
Strangers. And most of those, who betake themselves to Trades, prove very
Ingenious in making curious Silks, Cloth of Gold, and such like.

The Persian Language (having a great Tincture of the Arabic) is reckoned not
only much more polite Language.
than the Turkish, but is also esteemed the modish Language of Asia. It Is
divided into many particular Dialects, and the Characters they use are mostly
Arabic. As for pure Arabic, that is the School-Language of the Persians, in
which not only the Mysteries of the Alcoran; but also all their Sciences are
written, and is learned by Grammar, as Europeans do Latin.

This large Country is wholly subjected to one Sovereign, namely its own
Emperor, commonly styled, Government.
The Great Sophi of Persia, whose Government is truly Despotical, and Crown
Hereditary, the Will of the King being a Law to the People, and he Master of
all their Lives and Estates; his numerous Subjects render him a kind of
Adoration, and never speak of him, but with the greatest Respect. As most of
the Asiatick Princes affect very vain and exorbitant Titles, so does the
Persian Monarch in particular, he being generally styled -- King of Persia,
P^^thia, Media, Bactria, Chorazon, Condahor, and Herl, of the (...) Tartar, of
the Kingdoms of Hyrcania, Draconia, Evergeta, Pa^^^nia, Hydaspia and Sogdiana,
of Aria, Paropaniza, Dra^g^^ta, Arachosia, Mergiana and Carmania, as far as
stately Indus. Sultan of Ormus, Larr, Arabia, Susiana, Chaldea, Mesopotamia,
Georgia, Armenia, Sarcashia, and Uan. Lord of the Imperial Mountains of Ararat,
Taurus, Cancasus, and Periardo. Commander of all Creatures from the Sea of
Chorazan to the Gulf of Persia. Of true Descent from Mortis-Ally. Prince of the
four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris, Araxis, and Indus. Governor of all the Sultans.
Emperor of Mussulmen. Bud of Honor. Mirror of Virtue. And Rose of Delight.

Many and various are the Opinions concerning the King of Persia's Arms: It
being affirmed by some, that Arms.
he bears the Sun Or in a Field Azure. By others, a Crescent (as the Turkish
Emperors) with this difference, that it has a Hand added to it. By others, Or
with a Dragon Gules. By others, Or with a Buffalo's Head Sable. But the most
received Opinion is that he bears the Rising Sun on the Back of a Lion with a
Crescent.

The Inhabitants of this Country are (for the most part) exact observers of
Mahomet's Doctrine, according Religion.
to the Explication and Commentaries made by Mortis Hali. They differ in many
considerable Points from the Turks, and both Parties are subdivided into
various Sects, between whom are tossed many Controversies with flaming Zeal on
either side. The main Point in debate between them, is concerning the immediate
Successors of Mahomet. The Turks reckoning them thus, Mahomet, Aboubekir, Omar,
Osman, and Mortis Hali. But the Persians will have their Hali to be the
immediate Successor, and some esteem him equally with Mahomet himself, and call
the People to Prayers with these words, Llala-y-lala Mortis. Aly vellilula; for
which the Turks abhor them, calling them Rafadi and Cassars, i. e.
Schismatics, and themselves Sonni and Musselmen, which is, true Believers.
They differ also in their Explication of the Alcoran; besides, the Persians
have contracted it into a lesser Volumn than the Arabians after Gunet's
Reformation, preferring the Immaman Sect before the Melchian, Anesian,
Benefian, or Xefagans, broached by Aboubekir, Omar, and Osman; from which four
are sprung above seventy several sorts of Religious Orders, as Morabites,
Abdals, Dervises, Papasi, Rafadi, etc. Here are many Nestorian Christians, as
also several Jesuits, and many Jews. The Christian Religion was first planted
in this Country by the Apostle, St. Thomas.

SECT. V. Concerning Turkey in Asia.
d. m. Situated between 48 00 of Long. its greatest Length from S. E. to N. W.
is about 2100 Miles. 82 00 between 13 30 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is
about 1740 Miles. 45 30 Comprehending six great parts, viz. Natolia -- Chief
Town Bursa lying Westward. Arabia -- Medina -- found from S. to N. Syria --
Aleppo -- Diarbeck -- Bagdat -- Turkomania -- Arzerum -- Georgia -- Teflis --

Each of the foregoing Parts comprehends several Provinces; as,

Natolia Natolia propria -- Chief Town Bursa -- Northward, W. to E. Amasia --
Idem -- Caramania -- Cogni -- Southward, W. to E. Aladuli -- Maraz -- Arabia
B^ria^a or Arabia Deserta Anna -- N. to S. Barraab or Arabia Petrea Herat --
Ayman or Arabia Faelix Medina -- Syria Syria propria -- Aleppo -- N. to S.
Phoenicia -- Demask -- Palestinc -- Jerusalem -- Diarbeck Diarbeck -- Diarbekir
-- N. to S. Arzerum -- Mosul -- Yerack -- Bagdat -- Turcomania Turcomania
propria -- Arzerum -- W. to E. Curdes -- Van -- Georgia Mengralia -- Fasso --
W. to E. Gurgestan -- Teflis --

THIS vastly extended Body being divided (as aforesaid) into six great Parts,
viz. Natolia, Arabia, Syria, Diabereck, Turcomania, and Georgia; we shall
particularly Treat of the first three, and that separately (they being most
remarkable); and then take a General View of all the rest conjunctly, and that
under the Title of the Euphratian Provinces. Therefore,

. 1. NATOLIA.
THIS Country (formerly Asia Minor, in contradistinction from Asia the Greater)
is termed by the Name.
Italians and Spaniards, Natolia; by the French, Natolie; by the Germans,
Natolien; and by the English, Natolia or Anatolia; so called at first by the
Grecians, because of its Eastern Situation in respect of Greece, (...).

The Air of this Country is very different, being in some Provinces very pure
and healthful; in others extremely Air.
gross and pestilentious. The opposite Place of the Globe to Anatolia, is that
part of the Pacisick Ocean, between 235 and 250 Degrees of Longitude, with 34
and 38 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 5th and 6th North Climate) is
extraordinary fertile, abounding Soil.
with Oil and Wine, and most sorts of Grain and Fruits: But much of the Inland
Provinces lie uncultivated, a thing too common in most Countries subject to the
Mohammedan Yoke. The length of the Days and Nights is the same here as in
Greece, they both lying-under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Raw Silks, Goats-Hair, Twisted
Cotton, Cordovants of Commodities.
several Colors, Calicuts white and blew, Wool for Matrisses, Tapistries,
Quilted Coverlets, Soap, Rhubarb, Galls, Valleneed, Scommony, Opium, etc.

Not far from Smyrna, (by the Turks Ismyr) is a certain kind of Earth, commonly
called by the Franks, Rarities.
Soap-Earth, which boileth up out of the Ground, and is always gathered before
Sunrising, and that in such prodigious Quantity, that many Camels are daily
employed in carrying Loads of it to diverse Soap-Houses at some distance, where
being mixed with Oil, and both boiled together for several Days, it becomes at
last an excellent sort of Soap. (2.) Nigh to Smyrna, are the Vestigia of a
Roman Circus and Theater; and thereabouts is frequently found variety of Roman
Medals. (3.) About two easy days Journey, East from Smyrna, are some Remains of
the Ancient Thyatira, as appears from ten or twelve remarkable Inscriptions
still to be seen, (for which, Vid. Wheeler 's Travels, from Page 230 to 236.)
and therefore Tyreth (a small Village twenty Miles South-East of Ephesus) is
falsely taken for it by the Ignorant Greeks. (4.) At Mylasa, (formerly Melasso
in Caria) are noble Remains of Antiquity; particularly a magnificent Temple of
Maible, built in Honor of Augustus Caesar, and the Goddess of Rome, as appears
from an Inscription upon the Front which is still entire. Here also is a
stately Column, called the Pillar of Menander, with a little curious Temple,
but uncertain for what, or by whom erected. (5.) At Ephesus, (now called Aj^
Salove by the Turks) are yet to be seen some Ancient Christian Churches,
particularly that of St. John, the intirest of 'em all, and now converted into
a Mohammedan Mosque; as also the Vestigia of a Roman Amphitheatre, Circus, and
Aqueduct, together with a large heap of stately Ruins, generally reckoned those
of the (once) magnificent Temple of Diana, the great Goddess of the Ephesians.
(6) At Laodicea (by the Turks Eske-hissar, which is utterly forsaken of Men,
and now the Habitation of wild Beasts) are still extant three Theaters of white
Marble, and a stately Circus, all so entire as yet, that they would seem to be
only of a Modern date. (7.) At Sardis (by the Turks, Sart or Sards, now a
little nasty beggarly Village, though once the Royal Seat of rich King Craesus)
are the Remains of some stately Ancient Architecture, with several imperfect
Inscriptions. (8.) At Pergamos (which still retains the Name of Pargamo, and is
observable for being the place where Parchment was first invented) are the
Ruins of the Palace of the Atalick Kings. Here is also the Ancient Christian
Church of Sancta Sophia, now converted into a Mohammedan Mosque. As for
Philadelphia, the last of the famous Seven Churches of Asia (now called by the
Turks, Allach Scheyr, i. e. The City of God) it is remarkable at present for
nothing so much as the considerable number of Christians dwelling in it, they
amounting to two thousand, and upwards.

The State of Christianity being very deplorable through most Parts of the
Ottoman Dominions, Archbishopricks, etc.
and not only the chief Ecclesiastics of the Christian Churches, (viz.
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops,) but also their very Sees being
frequently altered, according as their Tyrannical Master, the Turk, proposes
advantage by such Alterations; and whereas a great many Titular Bishops, yea,
Archbishops, and some Patriarchs are often created; it is equally vain to
expect, as impossible to give, an exact List of all the Ecclesiastical
Dignities in those Parts, whether Real or Nominal. Let it therefore suffice
(once for all) to subjoin in this place the most remarkable of the Christian
Ecclesiastics through all Parts of the Asiatick and African Turkey; still
referring the Reader to the same as he travelleth through the various Parts of
this vast Empire. These Ecclesiastics being Patriarchs, Archbishops, and
Bishops. The chief Patriarchs (besides him of Constantinople, already mentioned
in Europe) are those of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch; as also two
Armerian (one of which resideth at Ecmeasin, a Monastry in Georgia; and the
other at Sis in Aladuha); and lastly, one Nestorian, whose place of Residence
is commonly at Mosul in Diarbeck.

The chief Archbishopricks (together with the European) are those of Heraclea,
Adrianople, Patras, Saloniki, Corinth, Proconesus, Athens, Nicosia, Amasia,
Malvasia, Janna, Scutari, Amphipoli, Monembasia, Tyana, Napoli di Romania,
Methynna, Tire. Larissa, Phanarion, Berytus.


The chief of the many Bishoprics (besides the European) are those of Ephesus,
Trebisonde, Amasia, Ancyra, Drama, Nova Caesarea, Cyzicus, Smyrna, Cogni,
Nicomedia, Metylene, Rhodes, Nice, Serra, Chio, Calcedon, Christianepeli, S.
John D'Acre.


As for Universities in this Country, the Turks are such Enemies to Letters in
general, that they not only despise Universities.
all Humane Literature, or acquired Knowledge; but the very Art of Printing
(the most effectual means of communicating Knowledge) is expressly inhibited by
their Law; so that the Reader must not expect to find the Seats of the Muses
among them. It Is true, the Jesuits, and some other Orders of the Roman Church,
(where established in these Countries) do usually instruct the Children of
Christian Parents in some public Halls erected for that purpose; but these
small Nurseries of Learning are so inconsiderable, that they deserve not the
Name of Colleges, much less the Title of Universities.

The Inhabitants of this large Country being chiefly Turks and Greeks, a
particular Character of 'em both is Manners.
already given in Europe, when treating of Greece and the Danubian Provinces,
to which I refer the Reader.

The prevailing Languages in this Country, are the Turkish and Vulgar Greek, a
Specimen of which is already Language.
given when treating of Turkey in Europe.

This large Country being entirely subject to the heavy burden of the Ottoman
Yoke, is governed by Government.
four Beglerbegs in Subordination to the Grand Signior; the first of 'em
resideth at Cotyaeum, about thirty Leagues from Byrsa; the second at Cogni,
formerly Iconium; the third at Amasia, in the Province of the same Name; and
the last at Marat, the principal City of Aladulia.

See Turkey in Europe, page 182. Arms.


The established Religion of this Country, is that of Mahometanism; but Persons
of all Professions being Religion.
tolerated in these Parts, as elsewhere through the Turkish Dominions, here
are great multitudes of Christians (particularly Greeks) and those of all
sorts, as Armenians, Jacobites, Maronites, Nestorians, Melchites, etc. and
intermixed with these is a considerable number of Jews. Christianity was planted
betimes in this Part of the World, and that by the Preaching and Writings of
the Inspired Apostles, especially St. John the Divine, here being the Seven
famous Churches to which he wrote, viz. those of Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira,
Laodicea, Pergamus, Philadelphia, and Sardis.

. 2. ARABIA.
THIS Country (known formerly by the same Name) is termed by the Italians and
Spaniards, Name.
Arabia; by the French, Arabie; by the Germans, Arabien; and by the English,
Arabia; why so called, is not fully agreed upon among Authors; but the reason
of the various Appellations of its three Parts, [viz. Deserta, Petraea, and
Faelix] is most evident, they being so termed from the Nature of their
respective Soil.

The Air of the two Northern Arabia's is very hot during the Summer, (the
Heavens being seldom or never Air.
overcast with Clouds) but in that toward the South it is much more temperate,
being mightily qualified by refreshing Dews which fall almost every Night in
great abundance. The opposite Place of the Globe to those Countries, is that
part of the Pacifick Ocean between 245 and 275 Degrees of Longitude, with 12
and 31 Degrees of South Latitude.

The very Names of these three Arabia's (they lying in the 2d, 3d, and 4th
North Climate) do sufficiently Soil.
declare the Nature of their Soil; the Northern being extremely barren, one
encumbred with formidable Rocks, and the other overspread with vast Mountains
of Sand; but the Southern (deservedly termed Foelix) is of an excellent Soil,
being extraordinary fertile in many places. The longest Day in the Northmost
Part of these Countries, is about 14 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, 11
Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of these Countries, especially Arabia Foelix, are Coral,
Pearl, Onyx-Stones, Balm Commodities,
Myrrh, Incense, Gums, Cassia, Manna, and several other Drugs and Spices.

In Arabia Petraea, is the noted Mountain of Sinai, (now called by the
Arabians, Gibol Mousa, i. e. The Raritics.
Mountain of Moses) on which were many Chapels and Cells; possessed by the
Greek and Latin Monks; several of which are still remaining with a Garden
adjoining to each of 'em. At the foot of the Mountain is a pleasant Convent,
from whence there was formely a way up to the top by one thousand four hundred
Steps, cut out of the firm Rock, at the Charge and Direction of the Virtuous
Helena, (Mother of Constantine the Great) the Marks of which Steps are visible
to this very Day. The Religious here residing, pretend to show Pilgrims the
very place where Moses staid for forty Days, during his abode on the Mount; and
where he received the Tables of the Law, and desired to see the Face of God.
(2.) At Medina in Arabia Foelix, is a stately Mosque, supported by four hundred
Pillars, and furnished with three hundred Silver Lamps, and called by the
Turks, Mos a kiba, or Most Holy: because in it lies the Coffin of their Great
Prophet (its hanging in the Air by two Load-stones, being a mere Fable) covered
over with Cloth of Gold, under a Canopy of Cloth of Silver curiously
embroidred, which the Bassa of Egypt is bound to renew yearly by the Grand
Signior's Order. (3.) At Mecca in the same Arabia, (the Birth place of Mahomet)
is a Turkish Mosque, so glorious, that it is accounted by many, the stateliest
of any in the World. Its lofty Roof being raised in fashion of a Dome, with two
beautiful Towers of extraordinary Height and Architecture, make a splendid show
at the first appearence, and are all conspicuous at a great distance. The
Mosque is said to have above an hundred Gates, with a Window over each of 'em;
and within it is adorned with Tapstery and Guildings extraordinary rich. The
number of Pilgrims who yearly visit this place is almost incredible; every
Musselman being obliged by his Religion to come hither once in his Lifetime,
or to send a Deputy for him. (4) The Country about Zibit in Arabia Foelix,
(which many reckon to be the same with the Ancient Saba or Sabaea, Seba or
Sheba, mentioned in 1 Kings 10. and Matthew. 12.) is still famous for the best
Frankincense in the World, which grows hereabouts in great abundance; besides
good plenty of Balsom, Myrrh, Cassia, and Manna, with several other Drugs and
Spices.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. See Natolia. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Arabs (great Proficients of old in Mathematical Sciences) are now an
ignorant, treacherous, and Manners.
barbarous kind of People. The better, and more innocent sort of 'em live in
Tents, and employ their time in feeding their Flocks, removing from place to
place, according to the convenience of Grazing; but the greater part of 'em are
idle Vagabonds, and so extremely given to Robbing, that most of the Public
Roads in the Asiatick Turkey are pitifully pestered with 'em, they traveling
commonly in considerable Troops, (headed by one of their number, whom they own
as Captain) and assaulting the Caravans as they pass and repass the Mountains.
Those near Muscat in Arabia Faelix, are absolutely the best of the whole
Country, being generally uncharacterized a People of a very civil and honest
Deportment toward all sorts of Persons.

The Vulgar Language in the three Arabia's, is the Arabesque, or corrupt
Arabian, which is not only used Language.
here, but (with Variation of Dialect) is spoken over a great part of the
Eastern Countries. As for the Ancient, Pure, and Grammatical Arabian, it is now
learned at School (as Europeans do Greek and Latin) and is chiefly used by the
Mahometans in their Religious Service.

The various Parts of this vast and spacious Country, acknowledge Subjection to
various Sovereigns, Government.
and some to none at all. Diverse sorts of People in these Countries are
willingly subject unto, and ruled by several Beglerbegs residing among them by
the special Appointment of the Grand Signior; others are governed by their own
independent Kings or Princes, the chief of whom are those of Fartach, Massa,
and Amanzirisdin; and some others do yield Obedience to certain Xeriffs or
Chief Governors, (who are only Tributary to the Great Turk) the most Honorable
of them is he of Mecca, who is of the Posterity of Mahomet, but lately in
Rebellion against his Master. Besides these, here are several sorts of People
who live altogether free, denying Subjection to any; the chief of whom are, the
Bengebres, Beduins, and Gordins, who reside mostly in Mountains, and are much
employed in Robbing, especially the Beduins, they usually traveling in great
numbers near Mecca, on purpose to assault the Pilgrims in their way thither,
who are always necessitated to send valuable Presents to the Xeriff of that
Place, that he may order some of his Troops to meet the various Caravans, and
defend them against all Attempts.

For Arms. See the Ensigns Armorial of the Grand Signior, page 182. Arms.


Many of the Wild Arabs know nothing of Religion, living like so many Savage
Beasts hunting after their Religion.
Prey, and frequently devouring one another. But the more sober sort of 'em
profess the Doctrine of Mahomet, that Grand Imposture, and Native of their own
Country. The principal Points of which Doctrine may be seen, page 183. to which
I remit the Reader. This Country was formerly illuminated with the Light of the
Blessed Gospel, having received the same in the Apostolic Age.

. 3. Syria, [by the Turks] Suristan.
MOdern Syria comprehends Syria, properly so called. (2) Phoenicia or Phoenice.
(3.) Palestine or Judaea. These Divisions of Syria (especially the first and
last) being remarkable Countries; somewhat of each of 'em distinctly, and in
their order. Therefore,

Syria, properly so called.
THIS Country (known formerly by the same Name of Syria, but different in
Bounds) is Name.
termed by the Italians, Siria; by the Spaniards, Syria; by the French, Sourie;
by the Germans, Syrien; and by the English, Syria; but why so called, is much
controverted among our Modern Critics, with little show of probability for the
truth of their various Opinions on either hand.

The Air of this Country is pure and serene, (the Sky being seldom overcast
with Clouds) and in most parts Air.
very healthful to breath in; only in the Months of June, July, and August,
it is extraordinary hot, if it prove either Calm, or a gentle Wind from the
Desert; but (as a repeated Miracle of Providence) these Months are generally
attended with cool Westerly Breezes from the Mediterranean. The opposite Place
of the Globe to Syria, is that part of the vast Pacifick Ocean, between 250 and
254 Degrees of Longitude, with 33 and 38 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in part of the 5th and 6th North Climate)
is extraordinary fertile, Soil.
where duly manured, producing most sorts of Grain and Fruits in great
abundance. Here are indeed several rocky and barren Mountains, yet no Country
in the World can boast of more pleasant, large, and fertile Plains than this;
Plains of such a f^t and tender Soil, that the Peasants, in many places, do
Till 'em up with Wooden Culters, and that commonly by the assistance of one
Horse or two Bullocks, to draw the Plough. But the Beauty and Excellency of
this Country is mightily eclipsed by various sad and melancholy Objects, that
present themselves to the Eye of the Traveller, viz. many Cities, Towns, and
Villages, which were formerly well-stockt with Inhabitants, and compactly
Built; but now quite depopulated and laid in Ruins; as also many Ancient
Christian Churches, once very splendid, and magnificent Structures, but now
mere heaps of Rubbish, and the ordinary Residence of Wild Beasts.

-- Quaeque ipse miserrima vidi.
The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country, is about 14 Hours; the
shortest in the Southmost is 9 Hours, and the Nights proportionably. Here it
may not be improper to rectify a gross mistake of our Modern Geographers, who
treating of Syria, make the River of Aleppo (as they call it) to fall into the
Euphrates, and assert it to be Navigable up to the City; whereas it has no
Communication with Euphrates at all, but is (almost) of a quite contrary Course
to that in the Maps, and so far from being a Navigable River, that it is little
better than a mere Brook; or at best, but a small inconsiderable Rivulet,
having its rise a little way South-East from Aleppo, and gliding gently along
by the City, loses it self under Ground at a few Miles distance on the other
side.

The chief Commodities of this Country, especially those of Aleppo, (which is
the second City of the Commodities.
Turkish Empire, and one of the greatest Trade of any in the Levant, being the
Center of Commerce between the Mediterranean and East Indies, as also the Seat
of one of the most flourishing of all our English Factories abroad) are Silks,
Chamlets, Valaneed, Galnuts, Cotton, Mohairs, Soap, Galls, Jewels, Spices, and
Drugs of all sorts, etc.

About six days Journey, S. S. E. from Aleppa, is the famous Pabnyr a or
Tadmor, now wholly in Ruins; Rarities.
yet such Remains of many Porphyry Pillars and remarkable Inscriptions, are
still extant, as sufficiently evince its former State and Magnificence. For a
particular Draught and Description of it. Vid. Phil. Transact. N. 217, 218.
(2.) About on^ hours Riding from the aforesaid Tadmor, is a large Valley of
Salt, which is more probably thought to be that mentioned 2 Samuel 8. 13. (where
King David smote the Syrians) than the other about four hours from Aleppo,
though commonly taken for such. (3.) On the side of a Hill, nigh to Aleppo, is
a Cave or Grotto, remarkable among the Turks, for being (as they say) the
Residence of Mortis Ali for some Days; where is also the rough Impression of a
Hand in the hard Rock, which they believe was made by him. (4.) Under one of
the Gates of Aleppo, is a place for which the Turks have a great Veneration,
keeping Lamps continually burning in it, because (according to a received
Tradition among 'em) the Prophet Elisha did live there for some time. (5.) In
the Wall of a Mosque in the Suburbs of Aleppo, is a Stone of two or three Foot
square, which is wonderfully regarded by the more superstitious sort of
Christians; because in it is a natural (but obscure) Resemblance of a Chalice,
environed (as 'twere) with some faint Rays of Light. Such strange Apprehensions
do the Romanists in these Parts entertain concerning this Stone, that for the
purchase of it, vast Sums of Money have been proferr'd by them to the Turks;
but as gross Superstition in the former did hatch the Proposal, so the same in
the latter produced the refusal, the Turks being inexorable when requested to
sell or give that, which was once so Sacred as to become the constituent Part
of a Mosque. (6.) Belonging to the Jacobite Patriarch in Aleppo, are two fair
M. S. of the Gospels, written on large Parchment-sheets in Syrian Characters,
(and these either Gold or Silver) with variety of curious Miniature. (7.)
Between Aleppo and Alexandretta, (or Scanderoon) are the goodly Ruins of
several stately Christian Churches, with variety of Stone-Coffins lying above
ground in diverse places, and many Repositories for the Dead hewn out of the
firm Rock. (8.) In the large Plain of Antioch, (being fifteen Leagues long, and
three broad) is a stately Cawsey crossing almost the breadth of the Plain, and
passing over several Arches, [under which some pleasant Rivulets do gently
glide] all which was begun and finished in six Months time, by the Grand
Vizier, in the Reign of Achmet, and that for a speedy Passage of the Grand
Signior's Forces to suppress the frequent Revolts in the Eastern Parts of his
Empire. (9) Nigh to the Factory Marine at Scanderoon is a large (but
unfinished) Building, commonly called Scanderbeg's Castle, being vulgarly
supposed to have been erected by that Valiant Prince of Albania, in the carreer
of his Fortune against the Turks; but it is more probably thought to be of an
ancienter Date, having thereon the Arms of Godfrey of Bulloign. Lastly, In the
Eastmost part of Scanderoon-Bay, is a ruinous old Building, known commonly by
the Name of Jonah's Pillar, erected (as the Modern Greeks allege) in that very
place where the Whale did vomit him forth. It Is indeed much (and not
undeservedly) doubted, whether that Monument was erected there upon such an
Occasion; but it is highly probable that this individual Part of the Bay was the
very place of the Whale's delivery, it being the nearest to Nineveh of any in
the Levant. Which conjecture, I humbly suppose, is somewhat more reasonable
than that of some dreaming Ancients, who vainly imagined that the monstrous
Fish did almost surround one fourth part of the World in seventy two hours, and
that when big with Child.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. See Natolia. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of this Country are mostly Turks and Greeks, [whose respective
Characters are already Manners.
given in Turkey of Europe, pages 174 and 181.] as also many Jews and Armenians,
with other sorts of Christians intermixed, of whom the Reader may find some
Account toward the latter part of this Section, when we come to treat of
Palestine, and the Euphratian Provinces.

The chief Language of this Country, is the Turkish, (for a Specimen of which,
Vid. page 181.) the Ancient Language.
Syriac being lost among 'em. The various Europeans here residing do commonly
use the Lingua Franca.

This Country being subject unto, and successively ruled by the Seleucidae, the
Romans, the Saracens, the Government.
Christians, and Sultans of Egypt, was at last conquered by the Turks in the
time of Selimus I. Anno 1517. under whose heavy Yoke it has ever since
groaned, and is at present governed by its particular Bassa, appointed by the
Grand Signior, whose place of Residence is ordinarily at Aleppo, the principal
City of this Province, and thought to be the Aram Sobah mentioned in Holy
Scripture. But the whole Country of Syria [according to its Modern Extant] is
subject to three Bassa's; the first commonly residing (as aforesaid) at Aleppo;
the second at Damascus in Phaenice; and the third at Tripoli of Syria.
Subordinate to each of these Bassa's, both here and in other Parts of the
Ottoman Dominions, are various Cadi's or Judges, who hear and determine the
several Causes, whether Civil or Criminal, which at any time happen between Man
and Man. And here I cannot omit one particular, (which as it is a mighty
disparagment to this People, so I wish 'twere peculiar to them) viz. their
Mercenary Distribution of Justice; for not always the Equity of the Cause, but
the Liberality of the Party does ordinarily determine the Matter: As some of
our English Factories in these Parts of the World, have experienced more than
once.

See the Ensigns Armorial of the Grand Signior, page 182. Arms.


The established Religion of this Country, is that of Mahometanism; the
Essential Tenets of which are already Religion.
set down, (page 182.) to which I remit the Reader. But since one thing
enjoined by that Religion is the most excellent and necessary Duty of Prayer; I
cannot omit one laudable Practice of this People in that Point; I mean not only
their imitable frequency in performing this Duty, but also their most
commendable fervency and seriousness in the performance of it. For whenever
they set about the same, they Address themselves to the Almighty with all
profound Respect and Reverence imaginable, and in the humblest Posture they
can, sometimes standing, often kneeling, and frequently prostrating themselves
on the Ground, and kissing the same; and during the whole performance, their
very Countenance does plainly declare the inward Fervor and Devotion of their
Mind. Yea, so exact and punctual are they in observing the various Hours
appointed for Prayer, and so serious and devout in performing that Duty; that
the generality of us Christians have too good Reason (in both these Respects)
to say with the Poet, Pudet haec opprobria nobis, etc. The Muezans or
Marabounds, (being those Persons who call the People to Prayers, use commonly
these words) Allah ekber, allah ekber, allah ekber; eschadou in la illah,
illallah; hi allc salla, hi all salla, allah ekber, allah ekber, allah ekber,
la illa, illalah, i. e. God is great, God is great, God is great; give
Testimony that there is but one God: Come, yield your selves up to his Mercy,
and pray him to forgive you your Sins. God is great, God is great, God is
great, there is no other God but God. Dispersed over all this Country, and
intermixed with the Turks, are many Jews, and various sorts of Christians,
particularly Greeks, Armenians, Maronites, etc. but most lamentable is the
State of those Christians at present, not only in respect of that woeful
Ignorance under which they universally labor, and the Turkish Slavery and
Insolence to which they are exposed; but also in point of those dismal Heats and
Divisions, those numerous Factions and Parties now among 'em: For so bitterly
inveterate are they against one another, and to such a height do their
Animosities frequently come, as to give fresh Occasion to the Common Enemy to
harass them more and more. Christianity was planted very early in these parts
of the World; most of this Country being watered with the Blessed Gospel in the
Apostolic Age.

Phaenicia or Phaenice.
THIS Country (very famous of old, but now of a very sad and melancholy Aspect,
and groaning under the Turkish Yoke) has undergone such dismal Devastations by
the destroying Arabs, that there is nothing now remarkable in it, save a few
Ancient Maritime Cities, (mostly in Ruins) which yet maintain something of
Trade with Strangers, as particularly Damascus, (called by the Turks, Scham)
St. John d'Acre, (formerly Ptolemais) and lastly Sure and Said, which were the
Ancient Tire and Sydon. Leaving therefore this desolate Country, we pass on to

Palestine or Judaea.
THIS Country (most memorable in Holy Scripture, and sometimes styled Canaan
from Canaan, Name.
the Son of Cham; sometimes the Land of Promise, because promised to Abraham
and his Seed; and sometimes Judaea, from the Nation of the Jews, or People of
the Tribe of Juda) is termed by the Italians and Spaniards, Palestina; by the
French, Palestine; by the Germans, Palestinen or das Gelobte-land; by the
English, Palestine, or The Holy Land. It Is called Palestine quasi Philistim,
from the Philistines, once a mighty Nation therein; and Holy Land, because 'twas
the Scene of the Life and Sufferings of the ever Blessed and most Holy Jesus,
the glorious Redeemer of Men.

The Air of this Country, excepting those Parts adjacent to the Lake of Sodom,
(of which afterward) is Air.
so extraordinary pleasant, serene, and healthful to breath in, that many of
its present Inhabitants do frequently arrive to a considerable Age. The
opposite Place of the Globe to Palestine, is that part of the vast Pacifick
Ocean, between 245 and 250 Degrees of Longitude, with 29 and 32 Degrees of
South Latitude.

This Country (situated partly in the 4th and 5th North Climate, and not
exceeding seventy Leagues Soil.
in length from North to South, and thirty in breadth from East to West) was
blessed with an extraordinary rich and fertile Soil, producing all things in
such abundance that the Scripture terms it a Land flowing with Milk and Honey;
yea, so wonderful was the fertility thereof, and such vast multitudes of People
did it maintain, that King David numbered in his time, no less than 1300000
fighting Men, besides the Tribes of Levi and Benjamin. But alas! such were the
crying Sins of its Inhabitants, that it not only spewed them out, as it had
done those who dwelt before them. But the Almighty being highly provoked by
their many and repeated Abominations, has turned that fruitful Land into
barrenness, for the wickedness of them who dwelt therein. For such is the
dismal State of this Country at present, that (besides the Turkish Yoke, under
which it groans) the greatest part thereof is not only laid waste, but even
where duly manured, it is generally observed, that the Soil is not near so
fertile as formerly. The longest Day in the Northmost part of this Country, is
about 14 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is about 10 Hours; and the
Nights proportionably.

Such is the mean and depauperated State of this Country at present, that we
may now reckon it destitute Commodities.
of all Commodities for the Merchant; its Inhabitants, nowadays, being mere
Strangers to all manner of Commerce. In its flourishing Condition, under the
Kings of Judah and Israel, the People thereof did indeed manage a very
considerable Trade abroad, and that chiefly by the two famous Emporiums of Tire
and Sydon abovementioned, besides the Ships of Tarshish which Solomon sent
yearly to the Land of Ophir; and so noted were these two Maritime Cities of old
for Merchandising, that the Evangelical Prophet (Isaiah 23. 8.) denouncing the
overthrow of Tire, calls it The Crowning City, whose Merchants are Princes, and
whose Traffickers are the Honorable of the Earth: And (Verse 3.) he terms
Sydon, a Mart of Nations. But so fully accomplished is the Prophetical
Denounciation against 'em both, and so low and despicable is their Condition at
present, that I heartily wish all flourishing Cities of Christendom might be so
wise, as seriously to reflect on the same, and to take timely warning by them;
especially considering that most of our Populous and Trading Cities, are now
such Dens of Iniquity, that their Inhabitants may justly dread, That 'twill be
more tolerable for Tire and Sydon in the day of judgment than f^r them.

In the Southern Parts of Palestine, is Asphaltis or Asphaltites, (so termed
from (...), i. e. Bitumen) Rarities.
that noted Lake of Judaea, where the abominable Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah
formerly stood; otherways called the Dead Sea, and remarkable at present for
abundance of Sulphurous Vapors which still ascend in so great a measure, that
no Bird is able to fly from one side of the Lake to the other. It Is also
observable for good store of Apples growing near its Banks, which appear very
lovely to the Eye; but being touched and cut up, prove mere naught, being
nothing else but a heap of nauseous Matter. (2.) Nigh to the place of the
Ancient Sarepta, are many Caves and Apartments hewn out of the firm Rock,
which some vainly imagine to have been the Habitation of Men in the Golden Age,
before Cities in these Parts of the World were well-known: But others, with
greater show of probability, take 'em for the Caves of the Sidonians, mentioned
in the Book of Joshua, under the Name of Mearah. (3) Not far from the (once)
noted City of Tire, are several large square Cisterns, which still go by the
Name of Solomon's among the Christians of that Country; but why so called, they
can give no other reason than bare Tradition. (4.) At St John d' Acre (the
Ancient Ptolemais) are yet to be seen the Ruins of a Palace, which
acknowledges Richard I. King of England, for its Founder, and the Lion pissant
is still visible upon some of the Stones. (5.) On Mount Carmel are some Remains
of a Monastry of Carmelite Friars, with a Temple dedicated to the Blessed
Virgin; and under it is a private Cell or Cave, which Travelers allege to be
the ancient residing Place of the Prophet Elias. On the same Mountain are found
a great many Stones that have the lively Impression of Fishes Bones upon 'em.
As also abundance of petrifi'd Fruit, particularly Plumbs, or Stones of that
resemblance. (6.) Not far from the Brook Cedron stands a part of the Pillar of
Absalom, which he erected in his lifetime, out of an ardent desire to Eternize
his Name; and nigh to it, is a great heap of small Stones, which daily
increases, because either Jew or Mohammedan passing by, seldom fails to throw
one at the same, and that out of abhorrency of the Son's Rebellion against the
Father. (7.) In the Mountains of Judah is a remarkable Spring, where Philip is
said to have baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch; whereupon it is called by the Name
of The Ethiopian Fountain, and has a Church adjacent, erected ('it is probable)
out of Devotion in Honor of the Place, and Memory of that Fact. Yet (by the
by) 'twould seem that this were not the place of the Ethiopian's Baptism;
because those rocky and declining Mountains are hardly passable on Horseback,
much less in a Chariot. (8.) Nigh to the asoresaid Fountain is a considerable
Cave, where, it is reported, St. John the Baptist did live from the seventh Year
of his Age, till he appeared in the Wilderness of Judaea, as the promised
Elias. (9.) At Bethlehem is the goodly Temple of the Nativity, erected by St.
Helena, (Mother of Constantine the Great) who called it St. Mary's of
Bethlehem. It Is now possessed by the Franciscans of Jerusalem, and is still
entire, having many Chapels and Altars, but those little frequented, except it
be upon extraordinary Occasions. (10.) In the Mountains of Juda are the Remains
of an Ancient Church, built by St. Helena, and dedicated to St. John the
Baptist, and that in the place where Zachary the Prophet was born. And nigh to
it (where the Blessed Virgin did Visit her Cousin Elizabeth) is a Grotto, in
which it is said, that the Body of Elizabeth lies interred. (11.) Upon the left
hand in going out of the City of Jerusalem, by the Gate of Joppa, is Mount
Sion, on whose top are still to be seen the Ruins of the Tower of David, which
was once a Building of wonderful Strength and admirable Beauty. (12.) Upon
Mount Calvary is the stately Temple of the Holy Sepulcher, built by the
aforesaid Virtuous St. Helena, and hitherto visited by Multitudes of
Christians, who slock to it from all Parts of the World, either out of Devotion
or Curiosity. It Is divided into a vast multitude of Appartments, containing
many Chapels and Altars, which (for the most part) receive their Names from
some remarkable Circumstance of our Savior's Passion; besides those, peculiar
to Christians of different Nations at Jerusalem, particularly the Abyssines,
Armenians, Georgians, Cophtes, Jacobites, Maronites, etc and at the entry of
one of those Chapels is the Sepulcher of Godfrey of Boulogn on one hand, and
that of his Brother Baldwin's on the other. But Lastly, In and about Jerusalem
(besides the Observables abovementioned) are these following Particulars, viz,
a Mosque erected in the very place where once stood the Coenaculum, the Church
of St. Savior, and that of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, with her
splendid Sepulcher; all three built by the incomparable St. Helena. Add to
these the decent Tomb of Zachary, near Brook Cedron, with the Sepulcher of
Lazarus, at the Town of Bethany. Here likeways are shown to Pilgrims all other
noted Places in or about the City, which are frequently mentioned in the Sacred
Volumn; as Mount Olivet, the Garden of Gethsemene, the Valleys of Jehosophat
and Gehinnon, the Pool of Siloim, the Field of Blood, etc. They moreover show
'em the places where formerly stood the Palaces of Caiphas, Pilate, and Herod,
with the Houses of Martha, and Mary, and Annas the High Priest; as also the
particular Place where St. Peter wept upon the denial of his Master, and where
Judas the Traitor hanged himself for the betraying of him. And finally, The
Pilgrims are conducted unto, and visit the respective Place of each particular
Scene of our Savior's Sufferings, with that of his Ascension at last. All
which are fully described by G. Sandys, Thevenot, and other latter Travelers
in the Holy Land. To these Rarities of Palestine, I might also add those many
remarkable Creatures, (whether Beasts, Birds, or Fishes) frequently mentioned
in the Sacred Volumn, and formerly more plentiful than at present in this
Country. But having drawn out this Paragraph already to so great a length, I
shall not enter upon so vast a Subject, remitting the Reader to that
incomparable Work of the Learned Bochartus, De Animalibus S. Scripturae, where
he may be fully satisfied in that matter.

As for Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universitities. See Natolia.
Archbishopricks.


The mountainous Parts of this Country are mostly possessed by the Arabs, (of
whom in Arabia) the Valleys Manners.
by the Moors, of whom in Africa. Other People here residing, are a few Turks,
and many Christians, particularly Greeks, (of whom in Europe) and intermixed
with all these, are some Jews, and of them here in particular. The Modern Jews
(to say nothing of 'em in former times) are generally Uncharacterized thus, viz.
a Vagabond, Persidious, and Obstinate sort of People; a People now living as
mere Aliens, not only in most Parts of the Earth, but also in this [once] their
own Country; a People indeed universally given to Trading wherever dispersed,
but as universally addicted to Cozening and Usury wherever they find
occasion; a People so singularly stigmatized by Heaven, that (according to the
Prophet's Prediction) they are now become an Astonishment and Hissing to all
Nations. In a word, The Modern Jews (being extremely blinded in Judgment, and
perverse in Will) do not only remain most obstinate in denying the Messiah
already come, notwithstanding of the clearest Demonstration to the contrary;
but also they are a People that is universally corrupted in Morals, and that in
the highest degree, the generality of 'em being addicted to the blackest of
Vices.

This Country being under the Turkish Yoke, its Inhabitants do generally use
the Turkish Tongue. The Language.
various Christians here residing, (whether European or Asiatick) do commonly
speak those Languages, peculiar to the Countries to which they Originally
belong.

How, and by whom this Country was governed, till it became a Roman Province,
is best learned from the Government.
Historical Part of the Sacred Volumn, and the Writings of the noted Jewish
Historian, Josephus. The Land of Palestine being brought under the Roman Senate
by Pompey the Great, continued subject to that State till the beginning of the
Seventh Century, when 'twas invaded by the Persians, and afterward made a Prey
to the Saracens, yet rescued from them by the Christians, under Godfrey of
Bouillon, (Anno 1099.) whose Successors held it about eighty Years; but being
taken from them by Saladin [King of Syria and Egypt] it remained subject to the
Califes of Egypt, till conquered (Anno 1517.) by Selimus, the first Emperor of
the Turks, who subjected the same to the Ottoman Yoke, under which it groans to
this very day.

The Arms of the Christian Kings of Jerusalem were Luna, a Cross Crosset
crossed, Sol, commonly called the Arms.
Cross of Jerusalem. But this Country being now a Part (as aforesaid) of the
Ottoman Dominions, is allowed no particular Arms at present, and cart only
claim a share of the Ensigns Armorial of the Turkish Empire in general. What
these are, see Turkey in Europe, page 182.

The present Inhabitants of Palestine, are, in Point of Religion, reducible to
Three Classes, viz. Christians, Religion.
Jews, and Mahometans. The chief Tenets embraced and maintained by the first
and last of these, may be seen in their proper places, when treating of
Christendom and Turkey in Europe. As for the Jews, I think no place more proper
to Discourse of their Religion, than in this their Ancient Country. Know
therefore that the Modern Jews. both here and elsewhere, adhere still as
closely to the Mosaic Dispensation, as their present Circumstances in a
dispersed and despised Condition will allow. Their Service chiefly consists in
reading of their Law in the Synagogue, together with various Prayers, which
they perform with little or no appearance of Devotion. Sacrifices they use not
since the Destruction of their Temple at Jerusalem. The chief Articles of their
present Belief and Practice, are these following: (1.) They all agree in the
acknowledgment of a Supreme Being, both Essentially and Personally one; but
entertain some ridiculous Apprehensions concerning him, as particularly the
great Complacency they vainly imagine he takes in reading their Talmud. (2.)
They acknowledge a twofold Law of God. viz a Written and Unwritten one: The
Written is that delivered by God to the Israelites, and recorded in the Five
Books of Moses. The Unwritten was also (as they pretend) delivered by God to
Moses, and handed down from him by Oral Tradition, and now to be received pari
pietatis affectu, with the former. (3.) They assert the Perpetuity of their
Law, together with its Perfection; believing there can be nothing added to it,
or taken from it. (4.) They unanimously deny the accomplishment of the Promises
and Prophecies concerning the Messiah; obstinately alleging that he is not yet
come, and that whenever he appears, 'twill be with the greatest worldly Pomp
and Grandeur imaginable, subduing all Nations before him, and making them
acknowledge Subjection to the House of Judah. For evading the express
Predictions of the Prophets, concerning his mean Condition and Sufferings,
they, without any shadow of Divine Authority, do considently talk of a twofold
Messiah; one Ben Ephraim, whom they grant to be a Person of a mean and
afflicted Condition in this World; another, Ben David, who they believe shall
be a Victorious, Powerful Prince, and the Restorer of 'em to their former
Liberty and Possessions. (5.) They think that the Sacred Name of God cannot be
blasphemed by Man, if he only refrain from expressing the adorable (...). (6.)
They condemn all manner of Images, though only designed as a bare
Representation of Persons to after Ages. (7.) They imagine that the Sabbath Day
is to be so strictly observed, that Works, even, of Necessity and Mercy are to
be neglected. Lostly, They believe a Resurrection from the Dead at the end of
Time, and expect a General Judgment at the last Day. These we may reckon the
chief Articles of the Jewish Creed at present; but besides them, they admit of
many other things which only Use and Custom have authorized, and those are very
different, according to the different Countries in which they now reside. They
are still observant, (according to their Circumstances) not only of the various
Festivals appointed by God in the Jewish Church; but also several others of
Human Institution, particularly that which they yearly Celebrate in Memory of
their Deliverance from the projected Ruin of wicked Haman. During which
Festival, the Book of Esther is thrice read over in their Synagogues; and
whenever the Name of Human is mentioned, they all with one accord, best
furiously with Hammars upon their Desks, as showing thereby their abhorrency of
that Person who intended so bloody a Massacre of their Forefathers. The joyful
Tidings of the Blessed Gospel were proclaimed in this Country by Christ
himself, and his Apostles; but the obstinate Jews did shut their Eyes against
the Light, and still persist in their inflexible Obstinacy to this very Day.

. 4. The Euphratian Provinces.
THE remaining Parts of the Asiatick Turkey being Georgia, Turkomania, and
Diabereck. Georgia Name.
(formerly Iberia) is so called from Georgi, a People anciently inhabiting
these Parts. Turkomania (formerly Armenia Major) so called from the Turks, a
Scythian People, who broke through the Caspian Straits, and possessed
themselves of these adjacent Provinces, And Lastly, Diabereck, (formerly
Mesopotamia and Padan-Aram, of the Scriptures) but why so called, I find no
satisfactory Account. We choose to consider all these three under the assum d
Title of Euphratian Provinces, because they lie near the Body and Branches of
that [once] famous River of Euphrates.

The Air of these Countries is generally very pleasant, healthful, and
temperate, especially in the first Air.
and last. The opposite Place of the Globe to these Provinces, is that part of
the vast Pacifick Ocean, lying between 255 and 265 Degrees of Longitude, with
37 and 45 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of these various Provinces, (they lying in in the 6th and 7th North
Climate) is generally reckoned Soil.
very fit for Pasture on the Banks of the Tygris and Euphrates; and in many
places it produces abundance of Fruits, with variety of Grain. As also Georgia
is said to afford great plenty of excellent Wine. The longest Day in the
Northmost Part of these various Provinces, is about 15 Hours; the shortest in
the Southmost is 9 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

These being Inland Provinces, do not manage any brisk or considerable Trade
with Foreign Parts, and Commodities.
therefore their Commodities are not very numerous, those they Export or Barter
with their Neighbors, being chiefly Pitch, Fruits, Silk, and such like.

At Ourfa in Diarbeck, is a large Fountain well stockt with Fishes, called by
the Turks Abraham's Fountain and Rarities.
Fishes, and of so great Veneration among 'em, that the Banks of it are covered
with curious Carpets for above twenty Paces in breadth. (2) Nigh to the
aforesaid Ourfa, is a Mountain remarkable for several Grotto's, in which are to
be seen very Ancient Sepulchers of many Primitive Christians. (3.) Adjacent to
Carasara, (another Town in Diarbeck) are many little Rooms hewn out of the
firm Rock, which were probably some private Cells for Ancient Christians, who
affected such Retirements: each of 'em having as 'twere a Table and Bench, with
a Reposing Place, all artificially cut out of the hard Stone; and over each of
their Doors is a lively Impression of a Cross. (4) On the East of Tygris,
over against Mosul, are the Ruins (and those hardly discernable) of the once
great and famous City of Nineveh; the very prospect of which, may strike the
Beholder with just Apprehensions of the fading Glory of all Sublunary
Magnificence; and that the largest of Cities, are not too big a Morsel for
devouring Time to consume. (5.). About a day and half's Journey from Bagdat, is
the Sepulcher of the Prophet Ezekiel, which is yearly visited by the Jews of
Bagdat with great Devotion. (6.) About the same distance from Bagdat, but
between the Euphrates and Tygris, is a prodigious heap of Earth, intermixed with
a multitude of Bricks baked in the Sun, whereof each is thirty Inches square,
and three thick; the whole being three hundred Paces in Circuit, is called
Nemrod by the Christians and Jews in those Parts, and commonly believed by the
Vulgar sort of 'em, to be the Remains of the renowned Tower of Babel; but
others rather follow the Opinion of the Modern Arabs, who call it Agartouf, and
believe it to have been raised by an Arabian Prince, as a Beacon or Watch.
Tower to call his Subjects together upon all Occasions. (7.) Nigh to Carkliguen
(a Town of Turcomania) is a vast Rock, in which are diverse artificial private
Appartments, generally reckoned the retiring Place of St. Chrysostom during
his Exile, as the Christians of those Parts allege.

For Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. See Natolia. Archbishopricks,
etc.


The Inhabitants of these different Provinces, are very different in their
Tempers and Manners. The Manners.
Armenians (or those of Turcomania) are Persons of a good Behavior, and Just
in their Dealings; and some of them (addicted to Trassick) are disper'd through
most Parts of the Trading World. But the People of Georgia, are said to be
extremely given to Thieving, Drunkenness, and most sorts of other Vices. Those
of the Female Sex, are generally reckoned the most beautiful Women of any in
all the Oriental Countries; and so highly esteemed are they by the Grand
Signior, and King of Persia, that their respective Seraglio's are well stored
with them.

The Turkish, Persian, and Armenian Tongues, are all understood, and much used
in these Provinces, especially Language.
the Turkish. In Diaberick the Armenian Tongue is chiefly made use of in Divine
Service; and in Georgia, the corrupted Greek.

The Western Parts of these Provinces do own Subjection mostly to the Grand
Signior, and the Eastern Government.
to the King of Persia, and that purely as the necessity of their Affairs
requires. Those subject to the Grand Signior, are governed by various
Beglerbegs of his appointment; and those in Subjection to the Persian Power,
are ruled by several Princes, some bearing the Title of Kings, (as one in the
East of Georgia) who are elected by the King of Persia, and Tributary to him.
Nevertheless, there are in these Provinces several Kings and Princes, who fear
neither the Ottoman Slavery, nor the Persian Power; but eagerly maintain their
Freedom, and keep all the Passes of the Mountains, notwithstanding of many
Efforts hitherto made to the contrary.

See the Ensigns Armorial of the Grand Signior, page 182. Arms.


The prevailing Religion in many Parts of this Country, is that of the
Armenians: The principal Points Religion.
whereof are these Three: (1) They allow the Apostolic and Nicene Creeds, but
agree with the Greeks in asserting the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the
Father only. (2) They believe that Christ at his Descent into Hell, freed the
Souls of all the Damned from thence, and reprieved them till the end of the
World, when they shall be remanded to Eternal Flames. (3) They also believe
that the Souls of the Righteous are not admitted to the Beatisical Vision until
after the Resurrection; and yet they Pray to Saints departed, adore their
Pictures, and burn Lamps before them, praying likeways for the Dead in general.
They use Confession to the Priest, and of late have been taught the strange
Doctrine of Transubstantiation by Popish Emissaries, dispersed through most
Parts of this large Country; but they still give the Eucharist in both Species
to the Laity, and use unleavened Bread soaked in Wine. In administering the
Sacrament of Baptism, they plunge the Infant thrice in Water, and apply the
Chrism with consecrated Oil in Form of a Cross, to several Parts of the Body;
and then touch the Child's Lips with the Eucharist. These are the chief Tenets
and Practices of the Armenians in Religious Matters: But to these we may add
that vast multitude of Fasts and Festivals, which they punctually observe (one
fourth part of the Year, being such) and truly it is in the Observation of 'em,
that the very Face of the Christian Religion is as yet kept up among this
People. Christianity was planted in these Parts of the World in the earliest
Ages of the Church, Bartholomew the Apostle being generally reckoned the chief
(if not first) Propagator thereof.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Asiatick Islands.
Reduced (page 45.) to Six Classes, viz. The Japan Islands. The Philippin
Islands. The Isles des Larrons. The Moluccoes. The Islands of the Sund. The
Maldives and Ceylon.


The chief of the Japan are Japan -- Remarkable Towns are Meaco -- from N. E.
to S. W, Tonsa -- Sanuqui Bongo -- Idem The chief of the Philippin are Luconia
-- Idem -- from N. to S. Tandaya -- Achen Mindana -- Idem -- In the Islands des
Larrons -- None. The chief of the Moluccoes are Celebes -- Idem -- W. to E.
Gilolo -- Idem Ceram -- Cimbelo -- The chief of the Isles of the Sund, are
Borneo -- Idem -- Under the Equator. Sumatra Achem Java -- Materan S. of Borneo
Sumatra at The chief of the Maldives is Male None. In the Island of Ceylon --
Candea.

These Islands (as aforsaid) being reduced to Six Classes; of each of these
Classes seperately, and in their Order. Therefore,

. 1. The Japan Islands.
THESE Islands (thought by some to be the Jabadii of the Ancients) are termed
by the Italians, Name.
Giapone; by the Spaniards, Islas del Japon; by the French, les Isles du Japon;
by the Germans, die Japanische Insuln; and by the English, The Japan Islands;
but why so called, I find no satisfactory Account among Critics.

The Air of these Islands does much incline to Cold, but is generally esteemed
very wholesome to breath Air.
in. The opposite Place of the Globe to Japan, is that part of the Paragueyan
Ocean, lying between 340 and 350 Degrees of Longitude, with 30 and 40 Degrees
of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of these Islands is reckoned abundantly fertile in Grain, Roots, and
diverse sorts of pleasant Fruits; Soil.
as also the Ground (though much overspread with Forests, and incumbered with
vast Mountains) is very fit for Pasturage, and well stockt with multitudes of
Cattle. The length of the Days and Nights in these Islands, is much the same as
in the middle Provinces of China, they both lying under the same Parallels of
Latitude.

The chief Commodities of these Islands are Gold, Silver, Elephants Teeth,
Rice, and most sorts of Commodities.
Minerals.

There is in Japan (according to the Testimony of Varenius) a very remarkable
Fountain, whose Water Rarities.
is almost equally hot with boiling Oil; it breaks forth only twice a Day for
the space of one Hour, during which time, the Eruption is so violent, that
nothing can withstand the strength of its Current; for with such a mighty force
does the Water burst out, that it is said to raise up, and throw away the
greatest Stone they can lay over the Mouth of the Fountain, and that with such
a noise, that it frequently resembles the Report of a great Gun: (2.) In the
same Island is a prodigious high Mountain, generally supposed to equal (and by
some to surpass) the famous Pike of Tenerife, being visible almost forty
Leagues off at Sea, though eighteen distant from the Shore. (3.) In this
Cluster of Islands are commonly reckoned no less than eight different
Vulcano's, whereof some are very terrible. Here also is great variety of
Medicinal Waters, and many hot Springs, besides that most remarkable one
abovementioned. (4.) In the City of Meaco is a mighty Colossus of gilded Coper,
to which People pay their Devotions. Of such a prodigious bigness is that
Pagod, that being set in a Chair, (which is eighty Foot broad, and seventy
high) no less than fifteen Men may conveniently stand on his Head. His Thumb is
said to be fourteen Inches about, and proportionable to it is the rest of his
Body. In this City are reckoned about seventy Heathen Temples, and one of 'em
is said to be furnished with no fewer than 3333 gilded Idols.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Japanners (being People of an Olive-colour'd Complexion) are generally of
a tall Stature, strong Manners.
Constitution, and sit to be Soldiers. They Are said to have vast Memories,
nimble Fancies, and solid Judgments. They are abundantly Fair, and Just in
their Dealings, but naturally Ambitious, Cruel, and Disdainful to all
Strangers, especially those of the Christian Religion; admitting none such to
Traffic with 'em, save only the Dutch, who (to monopolize an advantageous
Trade) are so complaisant to those Pagan People, as to suspend the very
Profession of Christianity during their abode among them.

The Japonese Tongue is said to be very Polite and Copious, Language.
abounding with many Synonimous Words, which are commonly used according to the
Nature of the Subject; as also the Quality, Age, and Sex, both of the Speaker,
and the Person to whom the Discourse is directed.

These Islands are Governed by several Petty Kings and Princes, (or Tanes) who
are all subject to one Government.
Sovereign, stilled The Emperor of Japan. His Government is altogether
Despotical, and his Subjects adore him as a God, never daring to look him in
the Face, and when they speak off him, they turn their Countenances down to the
Earth. Peculiar to the Emperors of Japan, is the following Custom, viz. that
they esteem it a kind of Sacrilege to suffer either Hair or Nails to be cut
after Coronation.

The Emperor of Japan (according to the Relation of the Ambassadors of the
Dutch East India Company) Arms.
beats Or, six Stars Argent, in an Oval Shield, and hordered with little points
of Gold. But according to others, his Arms are Sables, with three Tresoils
Argent.

The Japanners are gross Idolaters, having a multitude of Idols, to whose
particular Service great numbers Religion.
both of Men and Women do consecrate themselves. The chief of those Idols are
called by the Names of Amida and Foqueux. The Votaries of the former are said
to assert the Soul's Immortality, and the Pythagorean Metempsychosis; and those
of the latter imagine, That the frequent Repetition of certain Words will
atone for all their misdoings, and procure to 'em the enjoyment of complete
Felicity at last. Great was the multitude of Converts to Christianity once in
these Islands, if we might safely credit the Testimony of our Roman
Missionaries, who, Anno 1596. reckoned no less than 600000 of the Natives, then
actually professing the Christian Religion. But how many soever were really
brought over to the Knowledge of the Truth; most certain it is, that they
quickly Apostatized from the same; and that no Person dares openly avow the
Doctrine of Christ since the Year 1614. all Europeans, (save the Dutch) and
others, professing Christianity, being then expelled those Islands, and not
like to have any more Access there for the future.

. 2. The Philippin Islands.
THESE Islands (discovered by Magellan, Anno 1520) are termed by the Italians,
Philippine; by Name.
the Spaniards, Islas de Philippe; by the French, Philippines; by the Germans,
Philippinische Insuln; and by the English, The Philippin Islands; so called
from Philip II. of Spain, in whose time they began to be inhabited by Spaniards.

The Air of these Islands is very moderate notwithstanding they lie so near the
Line The opposite Place Air.
of the Globe to them, is the Northmost part of Brasil.

The Soil of these Islands is generally very fertile, producing in great
abundance most sorts of Grain, Soil.
Herbs, and Fruits. They are also very fit for Pasturage, and several of 'em
are well furnished with some rich Mines of Gold, and other Metals. The length
of the Days and Nights in these Islands, is much the same as in the Southern
Parts of China, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Rice, Pulse, Wax, Honey,
Sugarcanes, Gold, Cotton-Wooll, etc. Commodities.


In the Sea surrounding these Islands, is frequently seen a sort of Fish or
Sea Monster, about the bigness Rarities.
of a Calf, which in Shape does much resemble the ancient Sirenes, so famous
among the Poets; whence our English Navigators term it the Woman-Fish, because
its Head, Face, Neck, and Breast, are somewhat like those of the fair Sex. In
several of the Philippins are some little Vulcano's, especially those of the
Island Tandaia.

Here is one Spanish Archbishopric, viz. that of Manilla, Archbishopricks.


And subject to him are several Suffragan Bishops, Bishoprics,
but their Number and Titles are uncertain.

Universities in these Islands. None. Universities.


The Natives of these Islands are generally a Courageous and valiant sort of
People, maintaining still their Manners.
Liberty in several places: They Are said to be Civil and Honest enough in their
Dealings with the Chinese and Europeans, but most of 'em have a great Aversion
to the Spaniards, having been extremely ill used by that Nation in diverse
respects.

The prevailing Language in these Islands, is the Spanish, which is not only in
use among the Spaniards Language.
themselves, but is also understood and spoken by many of the Natives: As for
the Language peculiar to 'em, we can give no particular Account thereof, save
only its near Affinity to the Malay Tongue

These Islands being mostly subject to the King of Spain, are ruled by a
particular Vice Roy appointed Government.
by his Catholic Majesty, whose place of Residence is in Luconia, the biggest
of 'em all. The Natives (as aforesaid) do still retain their Liberties in
several places, especially in the Isle of Mindana, where those People called
Hilanoones (i. e. Mountaineers) Sologues and Alfoores, acknowledge nothing of
Subjection to the Spanish Power. Arms.


Many of the milder sort of the Natives are instructed in, and make Profession
of the Christian Religion; Religion.
and that by the care and diligence of Roman Missionaries sent thither from
time to time. The rest being of a savage and intractable Temper, continue still
in the thick Mist of Paganism. The Spaniards here residing, are the same in
Religion with those in Spain.

. 3. Isles des Larrons.
THESE Islands were discovered by Magellan, Anno 1520. and so named by him,
from the Nature of their Inhabitants, who were excessively given to thieving.
This being all that is remarkable of 'em, we pass on to

. 4. The Molucques OF Moluccoes.
THESE Islands (unknown to the Ancients) are termed by the Italians, Molucche;
by the Spaniards, Name.
Molucco's; by the French, Isles Moluques; by the Germans, die Moluccische
Insuln; and by the English, the Molucques or Moluccoe-Islands; so called from
the word Moloc, which in the Language of the Country signifies the Head;
because the Islands properly called the Moluccoes, are situated (as 'twere) at
the Head or Entrance of the Indian Archipelago.

These Islands lying under, and on either side of the Line, the Air is
extremely hot, and generally esteemed Air.
very unwholesome. The opposite Place of the Globe to the Moluccoes, is the
Northern Part of Brasil.

The Soil of these Islands is not reckoned so fertile as that of the Philippin,
especially in Grain, but for abundance Soil.
of Spices and rich Mines of Gold, they far surpass them. The Days and Nights
do not much vary in their Extent all the Year round, these Islands being so
near unto, and partly under the Equinoctial.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Gold, Cotton, Spices of all sorts,
especially Cinnamon, Commodities.
Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, Nutmegs, Mastick, Alloes, etc.

In the Island of Timor and Solor, grows a Tree which stinketh exactly like
Human Excrements: A considerable Rarities.
part of an Arm of which Tree, is to be seen in the Public Musaeum of Gresham
College. (2.) In several of the Moluccoe's are diverse Vulcano's, particularly
that called Gounong-apy in Banda, which some Years ago made a dreadful
Eruption, not only of Fire and Sulphur, but also of such a prodigious number
of Stones, that they covered a great part of the Island, and so many dropped into
the Sea, that where 'twas formerly forty Fathom Water near the Shore, is now a
dry Beach. (3.) In Ternata (one also of the Moluccoes) is another Vulcano,
reckoned by many to be yet more terrible than the former; for a particular
Description of which, Vid. Philos. Trans. N. 216. (4.) In the Moluccoe's is a
Bird termed by the Natives Manucodiata, i. e. Avis Dei; and by the Europeans,
the Bird of Paradise. He is indeed a Creature of admirable Beauty; and being
always seen upon the Wing, 'twas currently believed, that he had no Feet. But
that Opinion is now found to be a gross Mistake, notwithstanding the same was
not only received by the unthinking Vulgar, but also embraced even by some
considering (yet therein deceived) Naturalists; among whom the great Scaliger
[Exerc. 228. S. 2] was one; and likeways Gesner [the Pliny of Germany] being
led into the same Error, has pictured that Bird accordingly. To these
Remarkables abovementioned, I may here add that rare Quality of Cloves, (one of
the chief Spices produced in these Islands) viz. their strange attractive
Virtue when laid near any Liquids, being able to drain a Hogshead of Wine or
Water in a short time; whereby some unwary Commanders of Ships have been most
unexpectedly deprived of their beloved Liquors.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of these Islands (especially such as inhabit the midland Parts)
are by most, esteemed a treacherous, Manners.
inhumane, and base kind of People, much given to beastly Pleasures, and
generally walking Naked; but those upon, or near the Seacoasts, who have
Commerce with Europeans, are pretty well civilized, and several of 'em prove
very ingenious. Their manner of Dealing is all by Bartering, they being
Strangers as yet to Money.

All we can find of the Language peculiar to, the Natives of these Islands, is,
that it is as barbarous as they Language.
who own it. The Trading Persons among 'em in their Dealings with Strangers use
the Portugueze Tongue.

These Islands are subject to many Sovereigns of their own, and some
(particularly Celebes and Gilolo) Government.
have each of 'em several petty Kings, whom they own as Sovereign Lords and
Governors. The Portugueze formerly had got considerable footing in these
Islands; but now the Dutch, who send thither many of their condemned Criminals
to be there employed as perpetual Slaves. Arms.


The Natives of the Moluccoes are, for the most part, gross Idolaters; and
intermixed with them are many Religion.
Mahometans, with some who know a little of Christianity; which Knowledge has
not been improved very briskly in those poor Creatures, ever since they
happened to change their Masters.

. 5. The Islands of the Sund.
THESE Islands (unknown to the Ancients) are termed by the Italians, Isola-di
Sunda; by the Spaniards, Name.
Islas del Sond; by the French, let Isles de la Sonde; by the Germans, die
Insuln in Sunde; by the English, The Islands of the Sonde or Sund; so called
from the Strait of the Sund, between the Isles of Java and Sumatra.

The Air of these Islands is extremely hot, (they being situated under the same
Parallels of Latitude with Air.
the Moluccoes) and in Sumatra it is mighty unwholesome, by reason of many Lakes
wherewith that Island abounds. The opposite Place of the Globe to the Isles of
the Sund, is part of Terra Firma, and the Land of the Amazons in South America.

The Soil of these Islands is generally very good, especially in Java and
Sumatra, affording great plenty Soil.
of Corn and Fruits; mightily abounding with the chiefest of Spices; well
furnished with various kinds of Fowl; and wonderfully stored with rich Mines of
Gold, Tin, Iron, Sulpher, and several other Minerals. The length of the Days
and Nights in these Islands, is much the same throughout the whole Year, their
Latitude either South or Northern being inconsiderable.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Gold in great quantities, most
sorts of Spices, plenty of Wax Commodities.
and Honey, store of Silks and Cottons, some precious Stones, and the best kind
of Brass.

In the Island of Java are Serpents of a prodigious length and bigness; one
being taken at a certain time, Rarities.
that was thirteen Yards and a half long: and so big, that they found a young
Boar in his Belly. In the same Island is a remarkable Vulcano, which sometimes
burns with great Rage. (2) Toward the middle part of Sumatra, is another
burning Mountain, called Mons Balulvanus, which vomits forth Fire and Ashes in
like manner as Mount Aetna in Sicily, or Vesuvius in Naples. (3.) In the same
Island is a very observable Tree, called Sangali by the Malayans; and by the
Portuguese, Arbor triste de dia; so termed from its remarkable property of
putting forth abundance of lovely Buds every Evening, (which look very pleasant
to the Eye, and fill the places adjacent with a most fragrant Smell) but these
fading and falling to the Ground when the Sun arises, it appears in a
melancholy and mourning Dress all day long. (4) In the Island of Borneo is a
Creature, usually known to our English Navigators, by the Name of the Savage
Man; being of all Brutes likest to Man, both in Shape, Stature, and
Countenance, walking also upright upon his two hinder Legs, and that
frequently, if not always. He Is a Creature of great Strength, and extremely
Swift in Running. Many reckon him the Ape peculiar to Borneo, and the hunting
of him is esteemed a princely Diversion.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of these Islands do considerably differ in Point of Manners; those
of Borneo being generally Manners.
esteemed Men of good Wits, and approved Integrity: those of Java very
Treacherous, Proud, and much given to Lying: And the Inhabitants of Sumatra are
affirmed to be good Artificers, cunning Merchants, and several of 'em expert
Mariners.

The Language in these various Islands, is not the same, at least it does
mightily differ in variety of Language.
Dialects. The Trading People who have frequent Dealings with the Franks, do
understand and speak the Fortugueze Tongue.

In each of these Islands are several Kings. In Borneo two, one Mohammedan, and
the other Pagan. In Government.
Sumatra and Java, are many Princes, some Mohammedan, and some Pagan. The chief
of those in Sumatra is the King of Achem, and Materan is the chief in Java. The
Hollanders and Portugueze have established several Factories in these Islands,
especially the former. Arms.


The Natives of these Islands, who reside in the Inland Parts, are generally
gross Idolaters; but those Religion.
toward the Seacoasts are (for the most part) zealous Professors of the
Doctrine of Mahomet, in several of its Fundamental Points.

. 6. The Maldives and Ceylon.
THESE Islands (unknown in former times, except Ceylon, which is thought by
some to be the Name.
Ophit of Solomon, and the Taprobane of the Ancients) are termed by the
Italians, Maldivee, Ceylon; by the Spaniards, Maldivas, Ceylon; by the French,
Isles des Maldives and Ceylon; by the Germans, die Maldivische Insuln and
Ceylon; and by the English, the Maldives and Ceylon. They are called Maldives
from Male, the chief est of 'em; and Dive, which in their Language signifies an
Island: But from whence Ceylon derives its Name is not very certain.

The Air of these Islands (notwithstanding of their nearness to the Line) is
very Temperate, there falling Air.
a kind of Dew every Night, which mightily helps to qualify the same, yet
frequently mortal to Strangers. But in Ceylon it is so pure and wholesome, that
the Indians term this Island, Temarisin, i. e. a Land of Pleasure The opposite
Place of the Globe to these Islands is part of Mare del Zur, lying between 280
and 290 Degrees of Longitude; with the Equator, and 10 Degrees of South
Latitude.

The Soil of these Islands is extraordinary fruitful, except in Corn, whereof
the Maldives are said to be Soil.
scarce. The length of the Days and Nights in them, is much the same throughout
the whole Year, the Latitude of the Northmost of 'em being inconsiderable.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Cinnamon, Gold, Silver, most sort
of Spices, Rice, Honey, Commodities.
Precious Stones, etc.

In Ceylon is that remarkable Mountain, commonly called Adam's Pike, which is
of a great height, and reported Rarities.
to send forth sometimes from its top both Smoke and Flame. In many of the
Maldive Islands grows that Tree bearing the Cacoa, or India. Nuts, which is
very remarkable for its various uses; for out of it, is yearly drained a large
Quantity of Juice, which being drawn at certain Seasons, and prepared after
different manners, do taste exactly like excellent Oil, Butter, Milk, as also
some sorts of Wine and Sugar. Of the Fruit they usually make Bread, and the
Leaves serve as Paper to write upon. And as for the Trunk of the Tree, they
employ it either in building of Houses or Ships. These Islands likeways abound
with variety of pretty white Shells, which are much admired, and pass current
as Money in many Parts of the Adjacent Continent.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of these Islands (being for the most part, Tall and Strait of
Body) are esteemed a Lazy, Manners.
Proud, and Effeminate Sort of People, yet some of 'em are reputed to be good
Artificers in Metals. Most of 'em go stark Naked, except what Natural Instinct
prompteth them to cover. To wear long Hair, is the only privilege of the King
and Soldiers.

The Inhabitants of the Maldives have a peculiar Jargon of their own. Those who
reside on the Seacoasts Language.
of Ceylon, understand a little Dutch, and something of the Portugueze Tongue.

The Maldives are mostly subject to one Sovereign, who has his ordinary
Residence in Male, the chief Government.
of all those Islands. And Ceylon is governed by its own King, residing at
Candea, to whom several little Princes are Tributary; but much of the
Seacoasts is possessed by the Dutch. The Maldive Sovereign is said to assume
the Title of Sultan, King of Thriteen Provinces, and Twelve thousand Islands,
viz. those of the Maldives, their number being generally accounted such. Arms.


The Natives of this mighty Cluster of Islands, are partly Mahometans, partly
Idolaters, especially the latter, Religion.
Paganism being the most predominant of the two.

And so much for Asia and the Asiatick Islands. Now follows,

AFRICA by R. Morden


CHAP. III. Of AFRICA.
Divided (page 44.) into Egypt -- Capital City Cairo. Barbary -- Fez.
Bildulgerid -- Dara. Zaara, or the Desert -- Zuenziga. The Land of the Negroes
-- Tombute. Guinea -- Arda. Nubia -- (...). Ethiopia Exterior or Inf. (...)
Interior or Sup. (...)

To these add the African Islands.

Of all which in Order. Therefore,

SECT. I. Concerning Egypt.
d. m. Situated between 52 06 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. E. to S. W.
is about 650 Miles. 62 40 between 21 10 of Latit. Breadth from E. to W. is
about 310 Miles. 30 00 It comprehen^^ (...), or the Lower Egypt -- Chief Town
Alexandria. Northward. Bechria, or Middle Egypt -- Cairo -- Sahid, or Upper
Egypt -- Sahid -- Southward. The Coasts of the Red Sea -- Cossir --

THIS Country (much the same with Ancient Egypt, and variously named of old, as
Misraim Name.
by the Jews; Augustanica, by the Romans; Oceana, by Peros^s; Og^g^a, by
X^uophon; Potamia, by Herodotus; and Hefostia, by Homer, etc.) is termed by the
Italians, Egitto; by the Spaniards, Egypto; by the French, Egypt; by the
Germans, Egypten; and by the English Egypt; so called [as many imagine] from
Egyptus, Son of Belus, and Brother to Danaus.

The Air of this Country is very hot, and generally esteemed extremely
unwholesome, being always infected Air.
with nauseous Vapors, ascending from the fat and s^imy Soil of the Earth.
That it never Rains in Egypt, (as some have boldly affirmed) may deservedly
claim a place among the Vulgar Errors of the World The opposite Place of the
Globe to Egypt, is part of Mare Pacificum, lying between 232 and 242 Degrees of
Longitude; with 21 and 31 Degrees of South Latitude.

Egypt (^ lying in the 4th and 5th North Climate) was, and is still accounted
as fertile a Country as any Soil.
in the World; the Soil being wonderfully fatned by the yearly overflowing of
the Nile. It Is exceeding plentiful of all sorts of Grain; and for its vast
abundance of Corn in former times, 'twas commonly termed Horreum Populi Romani.
The longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is about 14 Hours; the shortest in the
Southmost is 10 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Sugar, Flax, Rice, all sorts of
Grains and Fruits, Linnen-Cloath, Commodities.
Salt, Balfam, Senna, Cassia, Butargio, etc.

In and near to Ancient Alexandria, (now termed by the Turks, Scanderick or
Scanderie) are many considerable Rarities.
Remains of Antiquity; particularly the ruined Walls of that ancient famous
City, with a considerable number of Towers; several of which are almost entire.
Here also are diverse stately Porphyry Pillars, and several curious Obelisks of
pure Granet, (especially that which bears the Name of Pompey's Pillar) some of
'em still standing, others thrown down, and all adorned with variety of
Hieroglyphics. For a particular Account of such Pillars, with a curious
Draught of diverse of 'em representing both their true Dimensions and
Hieroglyphick Characters, Vid. Philos. Trans. N. 161. and 178. To these
Curiosities we may add the [once] proud Palace of Cleopatra, now wholly in
Ruins; being so defaced, that it is hardly discernible, if ever such a stately
Structure was in that place. (2) In the Ancient Castle of Grand Caire, are
several Remarkables worthy of Observation, which Strangers (with some
difficulty) obtain leave to see: The chief whereof are these Three. First, The
Arcane, which is a frightful dark Dungeon, and that (as they tell you) into
which the Patriarch Joseph was thrown down. Secondly, A very large Ancient Room
with about thirty Pillars of Thebaick Stone as yet standing, which still bears
the Name of Joseph's Hall. Lastly, In this Castle is a prodigious deep Pit,
with a Spring of good Water in its bottom, (a Rarity in Egypt) which the
Natives term Joseph's Well. From this Pit, some Travelers are pleased to talk
of an Artificial Communication under Ground, between the Pyramids on one hand,
and the Town of Swez on the other. For a farther account of these Particulars.
Vid. Thevenot 's Travels, Part I. c. 9. (3.) A few Miles West of Grand Caire,
are the Egyptian Pyramids, (called by the Turks, Pharaon Doglary; and by the
Arabs, Dgebel Pharaon, i. e. Pharaoh's Hills) those famous Monuments of
Antiquity, which 'twould seem devouring Time could not consume. The biggest of
'em has these Dimensions, viz. Five hundred and twenty Foot high, upon a Base
of six hundred and two Foot square; two hundred and fifty Steps from top to
bottom, each Step being two Hands broad, and almost four high; and its Top
being flat, is able to contain thirty Men. (4.) Adjacent to the biggest
Pyramid, is a monstrous Figure of a prodigious greatness, called Sphinx; and by
Herodotus, Anarosphinx: The Bust (being all of one Stone) represents the Face
and Breasts of a Woman, whose Head (according to Pliny) is a hundred and twenty
Foot in Circumference, and forty three long. It Is also a hundred sixty two from
the top of the Head to the lowest part of the Belly. But these Dimensions are
different from those of some Modern Travelers, who say, That it is but twenty
six Foot high, and fifteen from the Chin to one of the Ears, and the rest
proportionably. (5.) Near to Grand Caire, are several deep Subterranean
Cavities (hewn out of the firm Rock, and having variety of Hieroglyphics
inscribed on the Walls) in which repose several of the famous Egyptian Mummies;
and in some of those Repositories of the Dead, it is, that certain Lamps are
said to have been found, which constantly burn without consuming, till exposed
to the open Air. (6) In the famous River of Nile, is abundance of Crocodiles,
those terrible and devouring Animals; now accounted the same with that Creature
mentioned in the Book of Job, under the Name of Leviathan, commonly taken for
the Whale, but falsely; as Bochart, De Animalibus S. S. (Part 2. Cap. 16, 17,
18.) has fully demonstrated. A complete Skeleton of this Animal, about four
Yards three quarters long, may be seen in the Repository of Gresham College,
being presented to the Royal Society by that truly Worthy and Ingenious
Gentleman, the Honorable Sir Robert Southwell. To these Curiosities of Egypt,
I might here add that Supernatural (but Fictitious) Prodigy, that is reported to
be yearly seen near to old Caire, viz. The Annual Resurrection of many dead
Bones on Holy Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, (according to the old Calendar)
which both Turks and Christians in those Parts, do firmly believe; and that by
the means of some pious Frauds, of a few designing Santo's among them.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universitities. See Natolia, Archbishopricks.
etc.
page 262.

The Egytians now adays (being Persons of a low Stature, tawny Complexion, and
of spare Bodies) are Manners.
generally reckoned Cowards, Luxurious, Cruel, Cunning, and Treacherous. They
much degenerate from their Ancestors in every thing, save only a vain
Affectation of divining, which some as yet pretend unto.

The chief Language commonly used in this Country, is the Turkish and Vulgar
Arabic, or Mori^k, especially Language.
the latter. The Arabs brought in their Language with their Conquests, which
has been preserved here ever since; but the Cophti's still retain the use of
the Ancient Egyptian Tongue, (which is very different from all the Oriental
Languages) especially in their Religious Performances. In places of any
considerable Traffic, many of the European Tongues are understood and spoken.

This Country (very famous of old, both in Sacred and Profane History) being a
Province of the Turkish Government.
Empire, is governed by a particular Bassa or Beglerbeg, who commonly resideth
at Grand Cairo, which Post is generally esteemed the most Honorable Government
of any belonging to the Port; having under him no less than fifteen different
Governments; as also a powerful Militia, commonly reckoned the most
considerable of all the Ottoman Empire.

See Turkey in Europe, page 182. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Country, (being Moors, Turks, and Arabs, besides the
Natural Egyptians) are for the Religion.
most part stricter Observers of Mahomet's Doctrine, than any People elsewhere
through all the Ottoman Dominions. Here also are Jews in great numbers, as also
many Christians, called Cophti, who follow the Errors of Eutyches and
Dioscorus, yet not concurring with them in every Point. The Christian Faith was
first planted here by St. Mark, who is universally acknowledged to have been
the first Bishop of Alexandria.

SECT. II. Concerning Barbary.
d. m. Situated between 04 16 of Long. its greatest Length from W. to E. is
about 2300 Miles. 52 10 between 24 40 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S is about
380 Miles. 35 00 Barbary comprehends the Kingdoms of Morocco -- Chief Town Idem
From W. to E. Fez -- Idem Rlensen -- Idem -- Algiers -- Idem -- Tunis -- Idem
-- Tripo'i -- Idem -- Barca -- Idem --

Barbary being the most considerable (at least the best known) Country of all
Africa, I shall in particular consider its Divisions: Therefore,

Chief Towns in Morocco are Taradunt -- -- Found from S. to N. Gazula --
Morocco -- -- Tednest -- Ehn din -- -- Teszca -- Fez are -- Fez in the main
Land. From S. to N. E. upon the Seacoast. Beniz -- Saliee -- Larach -- Arzilla
-- Tanger [now demolish'd] Ceuta -- Telensin are Ora^. -- From W. to E. Ten^ --

Chief Towns in Algiers are Algier -- From W. to E. Bugia -- Gigiari -- Bona --
Tunis are Beggia. -- From W. to E upon the Seacoast. Biserta -- Tunis --
Mahometa -- Susa -- Tripoli are Tripoli -- From W. to E. Lebida. -- Misurata --
Barca are Barca -- From S. to N. Zadra --

THIS Country (comprehending Mauritiana of the Ancients, as also Africa propria
and Lybia) Name.
is termed by the Italians, Barbaria; by the Spaniards, Berberia; by the
French, Barbary; by the Germans, Barbaryen; and by the English, Barbary; so
called by the Saracens from Barbar, (which signifies a murmuring Sound)
because this People seemed at first to their Conquerors, to pronounce their
Language after a strange murmuring manner. Others do rather imagine, that the
Romans upon their Conquest of this Country, called it Barbaria, and its
Inhabitants Barbarians, because of the Rudeness and Barbarity of their Manners.

The Air of this Country is indifferently temperate, and generally esteemed
very heathful to breath in Air.
The opposite Part of the Globe to Barbary, is part of Mare de'l Zur and Mare
Pacificum, lying between 184 and 232 Degrees of Longitude, with 24 and 35
Degrees of Southern Latitude.

This Country (lying in the 4th and 5th North Climate) is very fertile in Corn,
and most kinds of Fruit, Soil.
although it is full of Mountains and Woods, especially toward the
Mediterranean Sea. It breadeth many kinds of Beasts, particularly Lions and
Leopards, with many Apes, and some Elephants, besides abundance of Cattle. The
longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is about 14 Hours; the shortest in the
Southmost, 10 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Honey, Wax, Oil, Sugar, Flax, Hemp,
Hides, Cordevants, Commodities.
Dates, Almonds, Mantles, etc.

On Mount Zagoan (about six Miles South from Tunis) are many Ruins of an old
Castle, built by the Ancient Rarities.
Romans, with several Latin Inscriptions, as yet to be seen upon diverse Marble
Stones. (2) From the aforesaid Mountain to the City of Carthage, was once a
curious Aqueduct; and upon Mount Guestet (in the same Neighborhood) are some
plain Vestigia of Roman Magnificence, still visible to this Day. (3.) In the
City of Morocco, are two magnificent Temples; one built by Ali, and the other
by Addul Mumen, which deserve the particular regard of a curious Traveller.
(4.) In the Palace Royal of the Morocco Emperors (a Building of a vast Extent,
and termed by the Natives, Alcacave or Michouart) is a stately Mosque, with a
very high Turret, on whose Top are four Apples of solid pure Gold, which all
together weigh seven hundred Pounds weight; and in another Court of the said
Palace is a prodigious high Tower, so contrived, that the Emperor can mount up
to the Top of it on Horseback. (5.) In the City of Fez, is that famous Mosque
called Caruven, which is said to be almost half a Mile in Circuit, and furnished
with thirty Gates of a prodigious bigness. It has above three hundred Cisterns
to wash in, before they go to Prayers: and in it are upwards of nine hundred
Lamps, which are commonly lighted and burn every Night. (6) Over a certain
River, called Sabu, (as it runs between two Hills, termed Beni-jasga and
Silego) is a remarkable Bridge, or rather a ready way of passing from one side
of the River to the other; and that by the help of two large Stakes fixed fast
in the Ground (on either side, one) between which are extended two strong
Ropes, and to one of them is tied a kind of a big Basket, able to contain ten
Men, into which the Passengers being entered, and pulling one of the Ropes,
(which runs by a Pulley) they waft themselves over much sooner, than we
Europeans can pass either by Bridge or Boat. Vid. Dapper 's late Description of
Africa.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Barbarians [thus Uncharacterized of old by Herodian, Mauri (inqu^t ills)
Genus sunt hominum suapte natura Manners.
coedit avidissimum, nihilque non facile audens and desperatis sin^les,
contemptu scilices mortis and periculorum] are now a People that is generally
very Inconstant, Crafty, and Unfaithful, Active of Body, Impatient of Labor,
and Covetous of Honor. Some of 'em ^re Studious in Matters of their Law; and
others are inclined to the Liberal Sciences, especially Philosophy and the
Mathematics. The Inhabitants of Sallee, Tripoli, and Algiers, are mightily
given to Pyracy; and many of the Moroccos are much addicted to Merchandising.
Dispersed through all these Countries are the Arabs, who (especially in Barca)
exercise their common Trade of robbing and molesting Travelers on the Highway.

In most of the Seaport Towns, and over all the Countries bordering on the
Sea, the prevailing Language Language.
is Arabesque, or corrupt Arabic. In the City of Morocco, and several other
Places, they still retain their Ancient Language, or rather a corrupt Dialect
of the old African. The trading People (especially in their Dealing with
Strangers) do use a certain Jargon compounded chiefly of Spanish and
Portugueze, not unlike to the Lingua Franca among the Turks.

This large Country (comprehending several Kingdoms and Provinces) is chiefly
under the Great Turk, Government.
and Emperor of Morocco: To the latter belong the Kingdoms of Morocco and Fez,
and to him are ascribed (or rather he assumeth) the following Titles, viz.
Emperor of Africa, King of Morocco, Fez, Sus, and Taffalet; Lord of Gago, Dara,
and Guinea; and Great Xeriff of Mahomet. The other Kingdoms or Provinces of
this Country, are mostly subject to the Great Turk, and are governed by his
particular Bassa's set over 'em, only Tunis and Algiers, (two considerable
Commonwealths, or rather distinct Kingdoms) though each of 'em has their
respective Bassa appointed by the Grand Signior; yet they are so eager in
maintaining their Liberties and Privileges, that those Bassa's are little more
than mere Ciphers. For in the former of these, the Inhabitants have a Power of
choosing their own Governor or Captain, termed the Dey, who Rules the Kingdom,
Constitutes Cadi's, and passes Sentence in all Affairs, whether Civil or
Criminal. The Divan of Tunis is composed of one Aga, one Chaya, twelve
Odabachi, twenty four Bouloubachi, two Secretaries, and four Chiaoux, who judge
in all Matters after they have heard the Sentiment of the Dey, who may accept
or reject their Advice, as he thinks fit. As for Aegiers, The Government
thereof is lodged in the Hands of the Army, particularly the Officers of the
Janissaries, of whom the Council of State is composed, and of it the Aga of the
Janissaries is President. It Is true, the Grand Signior keeps always in this
Place a Bassa, with the Title of Viceroy, but he is at best but a mere Shadow;
for he may not so much as enter the great Divan, unless invited by the whole
Council; and when admitted, he has but one single Voice, and can only advise
in Matters. Besides these two Potent Republics of this Country, there is
another, viz. That of Tripolt; but it is entirely subject to the Grand Signior,
who governs the same by a particular Bassa sent from the Ottoman Court, and
renewed every third Year. He is honored with the Standart of Tunis, and the
Title of Beglerbeg.

The chief Independent Potentate in these Countries being the Emperor of Fez
and Morocco, he bears for Arms.
Arms, Three Wheels, Argent. As for the rest of Barbary. Vid Turkey in Europe,
page 182.

The established Religion of this Country, is Mahometanism; but the Inhabitants
of Morocco differ from other Religion.
Mahometans in several considerable Points; particularly those maintained by
the Followers of Hamet, (the first of the present Race of the Morocco Emperors)
who was at first a kind of Monk, and quitting his Retirement, A. C. 1514. began
publicly to Preach to the People, that the Doctrine of Hali and Omar, and
other Interpreters of the Law, was only Humane Traditions; besides several
other things of that Nature, which occasioned such Animosities between other
Turks and the Morocco's, that a Turkish Slave with them, is no whit better
treated than a Christian. There are also many Persons in and about Algiers, who
likeways differ from other Mahometans in diverse Particulars. Some of 'em
maintain, that to fast seven or eight Months does merit Eternal Happiness: That
Idiots are the Elect of God: That Sins against Nature are Virtues: That the
Marabouts among 'em are inspired by the Devil, and yet they account it an
honorable thing to be defiled by one of 'em. These and many other such
ridiculous Follies do they believe and avouch. The Christian Faith was first
planted in this Country by some of the seventy Disciples, and St. Simon the
Apostle, Sirnam'd Zelotis.

SECT. III. Concerning Bildulgerid.
d. m. Situated between 02 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from W to E. is
about 2040 Miles. 55 00 between 22 30 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about
300 Miles. 32 40 Bildulgerid comprehends the Provinces of Tesset -- Chief Town
Idem -- From W. to E. Dara -- Idem -- Segelmess -- Idem -- Tegorarin -- Idem --
Zeb. -- Teulachar Bildulgerid prop. so called Caphesa -- Desert of Barca --
None considerable.

THIS Country (the Ancient Numidia) is termed by the Italians, Spaniards,
French, Germans, and Name.
English, Bildulgerid; so called from the vast numbers of Dates it produces;
the Name in the Arabic Tongue signifying a Date.

The Air of this Country is very hot, but generally esteemed abundantly
wholesome to breath in. The Air.
opposite Place of the Globe to Bildulgerid, is that part of Mare de'l Zur and
More Pacificum, lying between 182 and 235 Degrees of Longitude, with 22 and 32
Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 3d and 4th North Climate) is
somewhat Barren, the Ground, for Soil.
the most part, being very Sandy, yet in some low Valleys is found Corn, and
great Quantity of Dates. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is about 14
Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, 10 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The Commodities of this Country are very few, they chiefly consisting in Corn,
Cattle, Dates, and Commodities.
Indigo.

A certain River, (whose Origin is in Mount Atlas, but waters the Plains of
Bildulgerid in its main Body) Rarities.
passing by a Town called Teolacha, has a Current of Water extremely warm; and
is known to European Travelers, by no other Name than la Riviere Chaude, or
the Hot River. (2.) There Is another River issuing out of the Mountains of
Numidia, and passing by the four Forts of Ifran, disgorgeth it self into the
main Ocean, between Bojadore and the Town of Nun, which in the Wintertime
(when other Rivers do usually swell over their Banks) grows commonly dry, and
goes thereupon by the Frank Name of la Riviere Seche. (3.) Nigh the aforesaid
Teolacha, is a little Village, called Deusen, which is of great Antiquity,
being built by the Romans, as appears by the Remains of several Structures, and
some Roman Sepulchers; besides variety of Medals, (found frequently after a
Rain) having commonly a Head upon one side of 'em, with Latin Inscriptions, and
Trophies on the other. Vid Dapper 's late Description of Africa,

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of this Country (besides the Natives) being chiefly Arabs, are
generally Ignorant, Manners.
Cruel, Lecherous, and much given to Robbing.

All we can learn of the Language commonly used by the Natives of this Country,
is, that it is as Rude and Barbarous Language.
as they themselves. The Arabs here residing, do still retain their own Tongue.

This great Body is subject unto several little Kings or Lords, who (for the
most part) are Tributary to Government.
the Great Turk, and Emperor of Morocco. Some places are governed in Form of
Independent Commonwealths; and others are without any kind of Government or
Order among them.

The Religion professed by the Savage Inhabitants of Arms.
this Country, is that of Mahometanism; but many of Religion.
'em are sunk into the grossest Stupidity as to Religious Matters, either not
knowing what they profess, or professing as good as none at all. Here are
several Jews scattered up and down those places, best inhabited. The Christian
Faith was first planted in this Country much about the same time with Barbary.
Of which already.

SECT. IV. Concerning Zaara, or the Desert.
d. m. Situated between 02 00 of Long. Itsgreatest Length from W to E. is about
2340 Miles. 50 00 between 21 00 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about 330
Miles. 28 00 Zaara or the Desert comprehends the Provinces of Borno -- Chief
Town Idem -- From W. to E. Gaogo -- Idem -- Bardoa -- Idem -- Lempta -- Idem --
Targa -- Idem -- Zuenziga -- Idem -- Zanhaga -- Tagassa --

THIS Country (a Part of Ancient Lybia, the Seat of the Getuli and Garamantes)
is termed by the Name.
Italians, Zaara; by the Spaniards, Zaara o Desierto; by the French, Zahara ou
Desert; by the Germans, Zaara or Wijste; and by the English, Zaara or the
Desert; so called by the Arabians (the Name signifying a Desert) because it is a
Country very Barren, and thinly inhabited.

The Air of this Country is much the same as in Bildulgerid, only a little more
hot, yet very wholesome to Air.
breath in. The opposite Place of the Globe to Zaara, is that part of Mare del
Zur and Mare Pacificum, dying between 182 and 243 Degrees of Longitude, with 21
and 28 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Country (lying in the 3d and 4th North Climate) being generally very Dry
and Sandy, is not Soil.
fertile either for Corn or Fruits; yea, it is generally so barren that its
Inhabitants can hardly live. Such are those vast Deserts and terrible Mountains
of Sand in this Country, that Travelers are frequently reduced to great
Extremities, being liable either to be overwhelmed with Sand, (if a Tempest of
Wind arise) or to perish with Thirst if it chance not to Rain. To prevent the
last of these, (the first being unavoidable in case of Wind) they commonly kill
one of their Camels, and drink the Water in his Stomach; those Creatures taking
in so large a quantity at one time, as suffices Nature for fourteen or fifteen
Days together. The longest Day in the Northmost Part, is about 13 Hours; the
shortest in the Southmost, is 10 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The Commodities of this Country are very inconsiderable, they chiefly
consisting in a few Camels, Commodities.
Dates, and Cattle.

Nigh to C. Bojadore, on the West of Zahara, are certain Banks of Sand
stretching along that part of the Rarities.
Coast; toward which so strong a Current sets in, that the Water being in a
mighty Agitation, both Waves and Sand mixing together, do not only resemble a
boiling Salt-pan, but also they frequently mount up to a prodigious height.
(2.) In the Desert of Araoan, are two Tombs with Inscriptions upon 'em,
importing that the Persons there interred, were a rich Merchant, and a poor
Carrier, (who both di'd of Thirst) and that the former had given ten thousand
Ducats for one Cruise of Water. (3.) North of Gaogo, are some Vesligia of the
Ancient Cyrene, the chief City of Lybia Cyrenaica, and formerly one of the
famous Pentapolis.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universitities. None. Archbishopricks. etc.


The Inhabitants of this Country, being mostly Arabs, are an Ignorant, Brutish,
and Savage kind of Manners.
People, resembling rather Wild Beasts than Rational Creatures.

What was said of the Language spoken by the Natives of Bildulgerid, the same
may be affirmed of that Language.
commonly used in this Country, viz. that it is as Rude and Barbarous as they
who speak it.

This great Country is subject to several particular Lords, whom they term
Xeques; but many of 'em Government.
wander up and down, hunting in great Companies, accounting themselves
Independent.

This Country being stockt with Arabs, the only Arms.
Religion here professed, is that of Mahomet's; but so Religion.
Barbarous and Brutish is the generality of this People, that many of 'em live
without the least sign of Religion among them. The Christian Faith was once
planted here, but quite exterminated toward the beginning of the Eighth
Century.

SECT. V. Concerning the Land of the Negroes.
d. m. Situated between 00 10 of Long. Its greatest Length from W. to E. is
about 2280 Miles. 46 20 between 10 00 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about
600 Miles. 23 10 The Land of the Negroes comprehends the Provinces of Genohoa
-- Chief Town Idem -- From W. to E. upon the North of the Niger. Galata -- Idem
-- Tombut -- Idem -- Agades -- Idem -- Cano -- Idem -- Cassena -- Idem --
Guangara Idem -- Melli -- Idem -- From W. to E. upon the South of the Niger.
Mandinga Idem -- Gago -- Idem -- Guber -- Idem -- Zegzeg -- Idem -- Zanfara --
Idem --

Besides these is the Country of the Jalofes upon the Mouth of the Niger.

THIS Country (unknown to the Ancients) is termed by the Italians, Paese di
Mori; by the Spaniards, Name.
Yierra de los Negros; by the French, Pays des Negres; by the Germans,
Moren-land; and by the English, Negroeland, or The Land of the Negroes; so
called, either from the Color of its Inhabitants, or the River Niger.

The Air of this Country is very warm, yet generally esteemed so wholesome to
breath in, that sick Persons Air.
are reported to be brought thither from several of the Adjacent Countries; and
upon their stay in it for any considerable time, are perfectly restored to
their former Health. The opposite Place of the Globe to Negroeland, is part of
the West American Ocean, lying between 180 and 220 Degrees of Longitude, with
10 and 23 Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 2d and 3d North Climate) is very
rich, especially toward the Soil.
River Niger, which overflows a considerable part thereof, as the Nile does
Egypt. Here is great store of Corn and Cattle, and variety of Herbs. Here are
many Woods, and those well furnished with Elephants, and other Beasts, both
Wild and Tame. Here also are several Mountains, and those richly lined with
valuable Mines of Silver and Gold. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of
this Country, is about 13 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is 11 Hours;
and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Ostridge-Feathers, Gums, Amber,
Gold, Red Wood, Civer, Commodities.
and Elephants Teeth, etc.

In Juala (a little Kingdom in the Country of the Jalofes) is a small River,
called by the Franks, Rio de Rarities.
la Grace; opposite to whose Mouth is a considerable Bank of Sand, out of which
there issues, at low Water, a gentle Stream of curious fresh Water, most
pleasant to the Taste. (2) Nigh to Sanyeng (a Village in the same Country) is a
Well of ten Fathom depth, whose Water is naturally so very sweet, that in taste
it comes nothing short of ordinary Sugar. (3.) In the Province of Gago, the
Sandy Desert is of such a Nature, that Humane Bodies laid in the same, (for
many Persons parish in endeavoring to cross it) don't in the least corrupt,
but become hard like the Egyptian Mummies.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Negroes (having their Denomination from the blackness of their Complexion)
are a People very ignorant Manners.
in all Arts and Sciences. In Behavior extremely rude and barbarous, much
given to Luxury, addicted to beastly Pleasures, and universally great Idolaters
In the Maritime Places they Trade in Slaves with the Europeans, selling to them
not only what Captives they take in Wars with one another, but also (many
times) their nearest Relations, even Wives and Children not excepted.

In this vast Country there are variety of Languages, and very different from
one another. The principal Language.
of which, are the Sungai and Guber; that of Gualata, and what they ordinarily
use in Guangara. In the Country of the Jalofes, are those called by the Names
of Bolm and Timna; the first being a Language that is extremely rough in
Pronunciation, and hard to be learned; but the other is generally reckoned very
sweet and easy.

This spacious Country is subject to many Kings, who are absolute over their
own Territories; but all, Government.
or most of 'em are Tributary to one Sovereign, viz. the King of Tombute, who
is reckoned the most powerful of 'em all. Next to him are Mandingo, Gago, and
Cano. Arms.


The numerous Inhabitans of this vast Country, are either Mahometans, or gross
Idolaters; and some in the Religion.
Midland Provinces live without any sign of Religion or Worship among them. A
faint Knowledge of the Mosaical Law, was once introduced into some Parts of
Negroe-land; and the Marabouts of Cambea and Cassan, give still a confused
Account of the Historical Part of the Old Testament. They acknowledge the
Existence of One God, and never Adore him under any Corporeal Representation.
They also own our Blessed Savior as a mighty Prophet, and Worker of Miracles.
They generally use Circumcision as other Mahometans do. Christianity got once
some footing in these Parts of the World, but was wholly over-clouded by
Mahometanism, toward the middle of the Tenth Century.

SECT. VI. Concerning Guinea.
d. m. Situated between 03 00 of Long. its greatest Length from W. to E. is
about 1320 Miles. 30 00 between 04 10 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is about
360 Miles. 11 40 Guinea compreh. The Coasts of Maleguette -- Chief Town Timan
-- W. to E. Guinea prop Ivory Coast, W. Tabo -- Quaqua Coast Assin. -- Gold
Coast, E. S. George de Mina The Kingdom of Benin -- Arda --

THIS Country (unknown to the Ancients, and properly a part of Negroe-land) is
termed by the Name.
Italians and Spaniards, Guinea; by the French and Germans, Guinea; and by the
English, Guinea; so called (as most imagine) from the Nature of the Soil, and
excessive Heat of the Country, the Name signifying Hot and Dry.

The Air of this Country is extremely hot, and very unwholesome, especially to
Strangers, with whom Air.
it so disagreeth, that many live but a short time after their arrival in it.
The opposite Place of the Globe to Guinea, is that part of New Guinea, and
Adjacent Ocean, between 186 and 210 Degrees of Longitude, with 4 and 11 Degrees
of Southern Latitude.

The Soil in many places is wonderfully fertile, producing the choicest of
Grains and Fruits. This Country Soil.
is well stored with Elephants, whose Teeth bring great Gain to the
Inhabitants, when either sold or bartered for other Goods of those Merchants
who Trade with them. Here also are several inexhaustible Mines of Gold; and in
many of its Rivers are found some Pearls of great value, with abundance of
Gold-Dust. The longest Day in the Northmost Part is about 12 Hours; the
shortest in the Southmost 11 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Ivory, Hides, Wax,
Amber-Gris, Guinea-Pepper, Commodities.
Red-Wood, Sugar, Civet, etc.

So impetuous is the Current of Rio da Volta, that the Sea, for about a Mile
near the place where the River Rarities.
disgorgeth it self, appears always of a whitish Color, and is said to have a
sweetish Taste for almost ten Fathoms deep. (2.) In several Parts of Guinea
grows a certain Tree, (commonly called Mignolo) which having an Incision made
in its Body, does yield an excellent Liquor of much request among the Natives;
proving to them more pleasant, strong, and nourishing, than the choicest of
Wines. (3.) In several Inland Provinces of Guinea, and the Countries adjacent,
is sometimes seen that remarkable Creature, termed Savage by the Portugueses,
[and by the Natives, Qoja-Marrow] but most usually found in Angola, from whence
one was lately brought to England, and viewed by multitudes of People at
London. Such Creatures walk frequently upright as Men; at other times, on all
four; and so near is their resemblance to Human Shape, that many of the Negroes
either take them for Real Men, (imagining that by long continuance in the Woods
they are become Demi-Brutes) or look upon them as the spurious Issue of
unnatural Commixtures. Some of our Modern Travelers would fain persuade the
World, that such Creatures are the Genuin Offspring, either of the Ancient
Satyrs or Pygmies, so famous among the Poets, and so frequently mentioned by
Pliny, (who spoke much of them by hearsay.) But others, with more show of
probability, do reckon them specifically the same with the Apes of Borneo,
already mentioned, page 289. For a full and satisfactory Account of this
remarkable Creature, with a nice Examination of the various Conjectures about
it, I must refer the Reader to a particular Treatise on that Subject, now
preparing for the Press, by the Learned Dr. Teyson.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country are great Idolaters, very Superstitious, and much
given to Stealing. In Manners.
Complexion they are of the blakest sort, and most of 'em walk quite Naked
without the least shame. Some of 'em on the Seacoast are given to Trading, and
understand Commerce tollerably well; but generally they are a cheating, proud,
lazy, and sluttish kind of People. Remarkable is one fundamental Law (or rather
an Ancient Custom) among some People upon the Quaqua-Coast; viz. That every
Person is obliged to betake himself to the same Trade or Employment, which his
Forefathers have followed. Upon the Death of a Husband in the Kingdom of
Benin, the Widow becomes wholly subject to her own Son, (if any) and may be
reckoned among his number of Slaves; only with this difference, that she cannot
be sold without leave obtained from the immediate Prince of the Country where
they live. To kill a considerable number of Slaves at the Funeral of any great
Person, was a Custom (almost) universal through all Pagan Countries; and
particularly here, but much worn out in these latter Ages.

The chief Language in this Country, is that called Sungai, which is also
understood and spoken in several Language.
Adjacent Countries, particularly Tombut and Melli. Of the several Tongues in
use upon the Golden Coast, That of the Acanistes is most universal; being
current almost all Guinea over, except Anten, Acara, Ningo, and Sinco, which
have each their particular Dialects. The Trading Part of 'em understand and
speak Portugueze.

This Country owneth Subjection to several Sovereigns, the chief of whom is
ordinarily styled the Government.
Emperor of Guinea, to whom diverse other Kings and Princes are subject. Next to
him is the King of Benin, who is esteemed a powerful Prince, having several
States Subject and Tributary unto him.

Paganism is the Religion of this Country, the Profession Arms.
whereof is attended with many ridiculous Superstitions; Religion.
and in some places on the Golden Coast, that Diabolical Custom of offering up
Human Sacrifices is still in use, but not so current as formerly. The
Pythagorcan Opinion (embraced by a great part of the Heathen World) prevails
mightily here. Those of the Kingdom of Benin do own a Supreme Being, whom they
call by the Name of Orifa, acknowledging him as the Creator of Heaven and
Earth; but think it needless to serve him, because (say they) he being
Infinitely Good, will be sure not to hurt them. On the very contrary Account,
they are very careful in paying their Devotions, and offering Sacrifices to the
Devil, or some bad Spirit, who they think is the cause of all their Calamities.
They likeways offer up a yearly Sacrifice to the Sea, reckoning thereby to
appease the Waves, and procure calm and peaceable Weather. In several other
parts of this Country, are neither Idol nor Temple, and many of the People seem
to entertain but very slender hopes of a future State; and wholly deny the
Resurrection of the Body, except those who are killed in the Wars. Which
Exception has been undoubtedly inculcated upon 'em by some of their Princes,
and that probably out of a Political Design.

SECT. VII. Concerning Nubia.
d. m. Situated between 42 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. E. to S. W.
is about 840 Miles. 57 00 between 09 30 of Latit. Breadth from E. to W. is
about 570 Miles. 23 00 Nubia North -- the River Nuba, chief Towns are Samna.
South Nubia.

THIS Country (known formerly under the same Name) is termed by the Italians
and Spaniards, Name.
Nubia; by the French, Nubie; by the Germans, Nubien; and by the English,
Nubia; so called from its Ancient Inhabitants, the Nubi or Nubii, or (according
to others) the Nobadoe and Nobades; and finally some would derive its Name from
Nuabia, (once) the Capital City of the whole Country.

The Air of this Country is every where extremely hot, it being seldom
qualified with Showers of Rain. Air.
The opposite Place of the Globe to Nubia, is part of Mare de'l Zur, lying
between 220 and 240 Degrees of Longitude, with 9 and 23 Degrees of Southern
Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 2d and 3d North Climate) is said to
be very fertile in those Parts Soil.
adjacent to the River Nile; but elsewhere it is generally very barren, being
cumbered with many formidable Mountains of Sand. Here is good store of
Elephants, some Sugarcanes, and (as several report) a few Mines of Gold. The
longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is about 13 Hours; the shortest in the
South-most, 11 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Commodities.
Civet, Sugar, Ivory, Arms, etc.

In diverse Parts of Nubia are still extant, the Ruins of many Christian
Churches, (being reckoned one hundred Rarities.
and fifty in all) with several Pictures of our Blessed Savior, the Virgin
Mary, and many Saints. Most observable is that strange subtle Poison produced
in this Country, one Grain thereof being able to kill ten Men in a quarter of
an Hour. It Is commonly sold at an hundred Ducats an Ounce, but never to
Strangers, unless they promise by Oath not to use it in these Parts of the
World. Remarkable is this Country for being the Birthplace of the famous
Nubian Geographer.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Nubians (of a Color extraordinary Black) are said to be a strong,
courageous, and cunning sort of Manners.
People, much given to War, very Laborious, and many of 'em exceeding Wealthy,
there being established a considerable Traffic between them and the Merchants
of Grand Caire in Egypt.

The Nubians have a particular Language of their own, which has some Affinity
with the Arabic and Chaldean; Language.
as also some agreement with the old Egyptian Tongue.

This Country is governed by its own Independent King, who is said to be a very
Powerful Prince. Government.
One of his Predecessors, called Cyriacus, upon Information of the Christians
being oppressed in Egypt, is reported to have raised one hundred thousand Horse
for their relief.

This spacious Country was once Christian; but the Arms.
Ministry failing, the Inhabitants, for want of Pastors, Religion.
fell off from Christianity, and in process of time became either strict
Mahometans or Gross Idolaters. The Sound of the Blessed Gospel did reach the
Nubians, and was cordially received by them in the earliest Ages of the Church.

SECT. VIII. Concerning Ethiopia.
d. m. Situated between 35 20 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. E. to S. W.
is about 3600 Miles. 73 20 between 23 00 of. Latit. Breadth from W. to E. is
about 2180 Miles. 34 30

It being divided into Ethiopia Interior. Exterior.


Ethiopia Interior comprehends many Provinces, the chief of which are
Barnagasso -- Chief Town Barva -- N. to S. Tigremahon -- Chaxumo. -- Dobassat
-- Dobas. -- Fatigar. -- Idem Angote -- Idem Amara -- Idem S. to N. Beleguanze
-- Idem Bagamedri -- Idem Exterior comprehends the Kingdoms of Biafara -- Chief
Town Idem -- N. to S. on the W. of the Abyssins. Loango -- Idem -- Congo --
Salvador Angola -- Idem -- Empires of Monoemungi Camure -- N. to S on the South
of the Abyssines. Monomotapa Idem -- Coasts of Cafres -- Cofala -- Zangucbar
Melinda -- S to N. on the E. of the Abyssins. Ajan -- Brava -- Abex -- Erecco
--

THIS vast Complex Body being generally considered, as divided into these Two
Classes, viz. Upper and Lower; or rather Ethiopia Interior and Exterior: I
shall seperately Treat of them both. Therefore,

. 1. Ethiopia Interior, or the Land of the Abyssines.
THIS Country (but badly known to the Ancients, and much encroach'd upon of
late by Name.
Neighboring Princes) is termed by the Italians and Spaniards, Abyssinia; by
the French, l' Empire des Abyssins; by the Germans, Abyssinen; and by the
English, Ethiopia Interior, or The Land of the Abyssines. It Is called Interior,
because of its Situation, in respect of the other Ethiopia, being encompassed
by the same on three sides; and Abyssinia, either from the River Abas, or its
Inhabitants, whom the Arabians call Abassi, a People once residing in Arabia
Foelix. The Name in the Egyptian Language signifies Scattered Nations.

This Country being wholly within the Torrid Zone, its Air is generally very
hot, but yet in some Valleys Air.
extremely cool and temperate; by reason of the many and prodigious high
Mountains, so situated in diverse places, that at certain times of the Year they
intercept the Sunbeams from low Valleys lying between them. The opposite Place
of the Globe to the Land of the Abyssines, is part of Mare de'l Zur and Mare
Pacificum, lying between 215 and 252 Degrees of Longitude, with 10 and 23
Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 1st, 2d, 3d North, and 1st, 2d, 3d
South Climate) is very different; Soil.
for in some places adjacent to the numerous Branches of the Nile, the Ground
is sit to produce most sorts of Grain, Fruits, and Herbs, in great plenty; but
in those that are Mountainous and Remote from the Nile, nothing is to be seen,
but vast Deserts, sandy Mountains, and formidable Rocks. This Land is also said
to produce great store of Sugarcanes, Mines of Iron, a great quantity of Flax,
and plenty of Vines; but the Inhabitants either know not, or care not to make
use of these things to any considerable advantage. The longest Day in the
Northmost Parts, is about 13 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, 10 Hours;
and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Metals, some Gems, Corn,
Cattle, Salt, Flax, Wines, Commodities.
Sugarcanes, etc.

Many are the Natural Salt Pits of excellent Rock-Salt in this Country; and in
the Confines of Dancala Rarities.
and Tigra, (two Adjacent Kingdoms) is a large Plain, of four days Journey, one
side whereof is entirely crusted over with pure white Salt, which serves the
Inhabitants of the Country, both far and near; some hundreds of Camels, Asses,
and Mules, being daily employed in carrying of it. (2.) In the Mountains of
Gojame, is a great natural hollow Rock, opposite to which is another, so
situated, that (according to Travelers Accounts of those Parts) a Word only
whispered on its top, is heard at a considerable distance; and the joint Voices
of several Persons speaking at once, appear as loud as a great Shout of a
numerous Army. (3.) Of the many Christian Temples in this vast Empire, there
are ten stately ones hewn out of the firm Rock, which are reported to have
been all perfected in twenty four Years; and each of 'em are said to be
proportionable in all its Parts, with Gates and Windows in a most regular
manner: For the Ichnography of one of those Temples, Vid. Comment. J. Ludolphi
in Historiam suam Ethiopicam, lib. 2. cap. 5. page 235. (4.) In several Lakes
of this Country, and the River Nile, is frequently seen that amphibious
Creature, called by the Ethiopians, Bihat; and Hippopotamus by the Greeks,
because of its having some resemblance to a Horse in several Parts of the Body.
This is that Creature which goes by the Name of Behemoth in the Book of Job,
according to the Learned Bochartus [De Animalilus S. S. Part 2. cap. 15.] who
therein differs extremely from the Vulgar (and formerly received) Opinion in
this matter. (5.) In other Lakes and Rivers, is sometimes taken the Torpil
Fish, whose Nature is such, that if a Person only touch it, he is suddenly
seized with an excessive Cold and Trembling. The Natives are said to allay the
violent Heat of burning Fevers by touching the Patient therewith. (6.) Of the
many curious Birds in this Country, the Pipis is most observable, as being the
ready Conductor of Hunters to find out their Game; for having discovered any
Beast in his lu^king place, he is said to fly toward the Huntsmen, and calling
incessantly Fonton Kerre, (which imports that they should follow him) he flies
softly before them, and is sure to conduct them to their desired Prey. (7)
Great is the variety of strange Animals to be seen in various Provinces of this
vast Empire; the most noted of which are these three: First, That Creature
commonly called by the Natives, Arweharis; [and by the Arabs, Harish or
Harshan] which has one long Horn in its Forehead: Whereupon some conclude,
that this is the famous Unicorn of the Ancients. Secondly, The Cameleopard, (so
termed from having a Head and Neck like a Camel, and a spotted Body as a
Leopard) which is said to have so long Legs, that a Man mounted on an ordinary
Horse may easily pass under his Belly without so much as touching him. Lastly,
The Zecora, which is generally reckoned the most comely Creature of all
Quadrupeds whatsoever. For a particular Account of these, and many more in this
Country, Vid. Ludolphus abovementioned, Lib. 1. Cap. 10. And the Learned
Bochartus his Hierozoicon, Part 1. Lib. 3. To these Rarities of this Country, I
might here add the thrice famous Mountain of Amara, which ought indeed to lead
the Van, rather than bring up the Rear, if only a tenth part of what has been
related of it, were really true. As for the Sabbatical River, (mentioned both
by Pliny and Josephus, and which some of our Modern Jews would fain persuade
the World, were now to be found in this Country, being formerly said to be in
Judaea) it is justly looked upon as one of the many Rabbinical Fictions among
them.

Although the Abyssines allow of an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in the Alexandrian
Church, (whose Patriarch Archbishopricks, etc.
is owned as their Head) yet they don't now admit of any other Order among 'em
superior to that of a Presbyter, save only their Abbuna.

The Inhabitants of this Country (being Persons of of a tawny Color) are
generally esteemed an ignorant, Manners.
lazy, and perfidious sort of People; not to be credited unless they swear by
the Life of their Emperor. Of several ridiculous Customs among 'em, one is,
That they generally hate a Smith as the Devil. Those in and about Chaxumo, are
reckoned the best of the whole Empire; diverse of them being accounted very
Ingenious, besides many others, who betake themselves to a devout and religious
sort of living.

The Abyssine Tongue seems to have some Affinity with the Hebrew and Chaldaic.
It Is divided into a Language.
great many Dialects (the chief and most refined of which, is the Amaric) and
those so different from one another, that some reckon no fewer than eight
different Languages within the Limits of this Empire. Remarkable is the
Abyssine Tongue for one thing truly singular, and peculiar to it, viz. That
whereas the Letter A is reckoned the first of the Alphabet in all known
Languages of the World; yet wtih the Abyssines, it is commonly accounted the
thirteenth, according to Ludolphus his Grammar.

This spacious Country is subject to one Sovereign, styled in the Ethiopian
Language, Naggasi (which signifies Government.
Lord or Ruler); otherways, Neguscha Nagascht, i ^. Rex Regum: As for the
European Title of Prester or Presbyter John, that is now reckoned as one of the
many Vulgar Errors in the World. It Is generally agreed upon, That this
Ethiopian Monarch fancieth himself to be sprung from Solomon and Maqueda, (or
Nizaule, according to Josephus) Queen of the South. He Is said to assume a great
many vain and exorbitant Titles, expressing all those Provinces by Name
comprehended within the Circuit of his Dominions; and stiling himself, The
Beloved of God, sprung from the Stock of Judah: The Son of David: The Son of
Solomon: The Son of the Column of Sion: The Son of the Seed of Jacob: The Son
of the Hand of Mary: The Son of Nahu after the Flesh: The Son of St. Peter and
Paul, after the Spirit, etc. His Government is altogether Despotical, his
Subjects being treated as the worst of Slaves. He is so reverenced by the
greatest of 'em, that at his very Name they bow their Bodies, and touch the
Ground with one of their Fingers. The Empire does not descend to the Eldest
Son, but to him whom the Father upon his Deathbed shall be pleased to name.

The Abyssine Emperors, for Ensigns Armorial, bear a Lion holding a Cross, with
the following Motto, Arms.
Vicit Leo de Tribu Juda.

Within the Limits of this spacious Empire, is a great mixture of People, as
Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans, Religion.
of various Nations; but the main Body of the Natives is Christian. They hold
the written Word of God to be the only Rule of Faith; and that the Canon of
Holy Scripture consists of Eighty five Books, whereof Forty six, they say, are
in the Old, and Thirty nine in the New Testament. They Are not well acquainted
with the Apostolic Creed, but in lieu thereof do use the Nicene, or rather
Constantinopolitan. As to the grand Doctrine of the Incarnation, they are
generally Eutychians, being formerly led into that detestable Heresy, by
Dioscorus, Patriarch of Alexandria. In the Person of their Emperor, they lodge
the Supreme Authority in all Matters, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and do
thereupon wholly deny the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, allowing him indeed
to be the first Patriarch, but esteeming it Antichristian in him, to pretend to
a Jurisdiction over the whole Church of Christ. As they disown the Pope's
Supremacy, so also do they disclaim most Points of the Popish Doctrine;
particularly those of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Service in an Unknown
Tongue, Auricular Confession, Images in Churches, Celebacy of the Clergy,
Extreme Unction, etc. They make use of different Forms in Baptism, and keep
both Saturday and Sunday as Sabbath. They punctually observe Circumcision, and
abstain from eating of Swine's Flesh, not out of any regard to the Mosaic Law,
but purely as an Ancient Custom of their Country. They Are much inclined to
giving of Alms, and visiting the Sick. Their Divine Service does wholly consist
in Reading of the Holy Scriptures, Administration of the Eucharist, and hearing
some Homilies of the Fathers. They repair to Church by times, and never enter
with their Shoes on, nor sit down unless upon the bare Ground. They carfully
observe the appointed Hours for Public Prayer, and perform that Duty with
great Devotion. In a word, many of the Abyssines express in several respects, a
deep Sense of Religion. For a particular Account of this People, both as to
their Religion, and other Remarkables, Vid. J. Ludolphu^'s Ethiopick History.
The Roman Missionaries did so prevail about Seventy Years ago, that the Popish
Religion was like to have got sure footing in this Empire; for they had once
gained the Emperor and Court, and obtained a Proclamation in their Favors,
enjoining the whole Body of the People to embrace the Doctrine of the Roman
Church. But the Abyssines were so loath to part with the Religion of their
Forefathers, that the Emperor's endeavor to propagate the Roman Faith,
occasioned many dreadful Insurrections in his Empire, which could not be
quelled without shedding a Sea of Blood. Finding therefore his endeavors to be
in vain, and dreading the consequence of making any new Attempt, he wholly gave
over the Design; and not only returned to his former Belief himself, but also
gave leave to all his Subjects to do the same. And that he might regain the
[almost lost] Affection of his People, he forthwith banished out of his
Dominions all Roman Missionaries whatsoever, together with Alphonso Mendez, a
Jesuit, who having been consecrated Patriarch of Ethiopia at Lisbon, and
approved by the Pope, had been honorably received by the Abyssine Emperor
under that Character, and resided at Court in a peaceable discharge of his
Office for several Years. As for the Plantation of Christianity in this
Country, it is a constant Tradition among the Inhabitants, that the Eunuch
baptized by Philip the Deacon, was Steward to the Empress of Ethiopia; and that
upon his return, he converted the Court and whole Empire to the Christian
Faith. But (following the Opinion of the most Judicious Writers) this Country
was destitute of the Blessed Gospel till the Fourth Century; when first
instructed therein by Frumentius, (the Son of a Tyrian Merchant) who was
consecrated Bishop by St. Athanasius, and is commonly reckoned the first Abbuna
of this mighty Empire.

2 Ethiopid Exterior.
THIS Country (unknown to the Ancients) together with Abyssinia abovementioned,
is termed Name.
by the Italians and Spaniards, Ethiopia; by the French, Ethiopie; by the
Germans, Ethiopien; and by the English, Ethiopia; so called from (...), Uro,
and (...), Vultus, upon the account of its excessive Heat, the greatest part
thereof being in the Torrid Zone. This Ethiopia is styled Exterior, because of
its Situation, in respect of the other.

This vast Body comprehending several Kingdoms, Empires, and Sovereignties, and
those mightily extended Air.
from South to North, cannot reasonably be supposed to enjoy the same Nature of
Air in all its Parts. In Biafara and Congo, it is extremely hot, and would be
intolerable to the Inhabitants, were it not qualified in the first of these
Kingdoms, by daily Showers of Rain, and in the other by violent Winds, which
frequently blow from the Western Ocean. In Monomotapa and Monoemungi, as also
the Coasts of Cafres, the Air is much more temperate; in Zanguebar very
unwholesome; and in Ajan and Abex, extremely hot. The opposite Place of the
Globe to Ethiopia Exterior, is part of (...) Zu^, lying between 210 and 250
Degrees of Longitude; with 10 Degrees South, and 25 Degrees North Latitude.

The various Divisions of this great Body being situated in different Climates,
(particularly the 1st, 2d, Soil.
3d Northern, and the 1st, 2d, 3d Southern) the Soil must of necessity be very
different. Biafara is said to be less fertile than Congo. The Empires of
Monomotapa and Monoemungi do produce abundance of Grain, and are generally
esteemed very fit for Pasturage. The other Divisions on the East and South-East
of the Abyssines, are for the most part, very Barren in all sorts of Grain, yet
productive enough of some Sugarcanes, several kinds of Fruit and Spices; as
also furnished with some considerable Gold and Silver Mines, and every where
abounding with Elephants and Lions. So rich were those Mines found by the
Portugueses in Zanguebar, and several Parts of the Cafres, that the Country
about Sofala, has been looked upon by some Modern Geographers, as the much
controverted Land of Ophir. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is 13
Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, 9 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commoditities of this Country, are Gold, Silver, Amber-Gris, some
Pearls and Musk, Rice, Commodities.
Mill, Cattle, Lemons, Citrons, Ivory, and Oil, etc.

In the Kingdom of Angola is found the Quoja-Marrow, that remarkable Creature,
of whom already in Rarities.
Guinea, p. 311. (2) Most sorts of Creatures in Congo, are to be seen also in
Angola, particularly, a Serpent (called Minia by the Inhabitants of Quoja, and
Embamma by the Angolois) which is reported to be of such a prodigious bigness,
that he is said to swallow a young Deer at one Morsel. (3.) In diverse Lakes of
Angola, (particularly those of Quihaite and Angolone) are frequently seen some
Water-Monsters, termed Ambisiangulo and Pesiengoni by the Natives; but
Europeans give them the Title of Syrenes, because [when taken] they fetch heavy
Sighs, and cry with a dolorous Tone, resembling very much the mournful, yet
charming Voice of a Woman. (4) In the Island Levando, is a remarkable Tree,
called by the Inhabitants Eusada, and Arbor de Raiz (i. e. Arbor Radicum) by
the Portugueze. It derives this Name from the Nature of its Branches, which
spring forth on all sides from the Trunk, [where it is generally three Fathoms
in Diameter] and many of 'em bowing so low as to touch the Ground, take root
and spring forth anew, till by their weight they bow down again, and take Root
the second time, and so on, till they cover a thousand Paces in Circuit, and
able to lodge under its Branches three thousand armed Men, who may find Defense
not only from Heat, but also Rain; so thick and numerous are those Filaments,
and so well lined with Leaves. (5) In several Parts upon, and South of the
River Coanza, are considerable Mines of Rock-Salt. For these and several other
Remarkables of this Country, Vid. Dapper of Africa.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The various Inhabitants of these many and vastly extended Countries, are
generally a Dull, Savage, Manners.
and Swarthy kind of People, among whom a great many remarkable Customs
prevail. To instance only in a few: It Is reported of the Emperor of Monomotapa,
that when e're he Drinks in public, the whole Court does jointly put up their
Prayers in his behalf and that with a very loud Voice, which being heard in the
Neighborhood, all Persons there living are bound to do the same, as likewise
others hearing them, and so on; whereby the whole City or Country adjacent is
always sensible when the Emperor takes his Glass. In the Kingdom of Loango are
many Canabals, and in several places it is as usual to sell Human Flesh
publicly in Shambels, as other Nations do commonly Beef and Mutton. In the
same Kingdom it is established by an Ancient Custom, That when e're a Father
deceaseth, his Goods belong not to the Children, but his own Brothers or
Sisters, who are bound to take care of such of the little Ones, as they think
are not able to care for themselves. To add no more, We read of another Custom
yet more uncouth among a certain People inhabiting the Cafres, which is, That
when e're a Father deceaseth, the Children both Old and Young are obliged to
lose the little Finger of their Left Hand, and to bury it with him. For
deferring the performance of that painful Duty, they are commonly very tender of
their Parents Health, and take all care imaginable to prolong his Life; which
was probably the Original Cause of so strange a Practice. But of all the
Inhabitants of these various Countries, there is none more observable for their
manner of living than a certain People near unto, and upon the Cape, and
commonly called by the Name of Hottantots. They Are so termed from a frequent
Repetition of that, or such like word, and may be reckoned the most Nasty and
Brutish of all reasonable Creatures, having nothing save the Shape of Man, that
can lay claim to that noble Character. Their Bodies are usually besmeared with
common Grease, or some worse stinking Stuff, which occasions a very loathsome
smell. Their ordinary Habit is a Sheep-Skin just as it is pulled off from the
Carcass; and they use (as Ornaments) the Guts, cum puris Naturalibus, wrapped
about their Legs and Arms two or three Inches deep, on which they frequently
feed when scarce of fresh Provisions. Notwithstanding of the unparalled
nastiness of this People; yet some Travelers talk of a certain Inland Canibal
Nation, (termed Cobonas) who make frequent Incursions into their Neighboring
Countries, and spare none they catch, no not the Swinish Hottantots themselves,
who ('twould seem) should make but a very unsavory Repast.

There is a wonderful variety of Languages, in those various and vastly
extended Countries, which go under Language.
the Name of Ethiopia Exterior. The Inhabitants of Congo and Angola, have each
of 'em a peculiar Language of their own. In the Eastern Divisions, particularly
Ajan and Abex, the Arabian, with Variation of Dialect, does chiefly prevail;
but the Language in use among those of the Cafres, especially the Hotantots,
does seem to be only a confused and inarticulate Noise and Bellowing.

The various Divisions of this great Body, are subjected to various Sovereigns;
particularly the Kingdoms Government.
of Biafara and Congo, are ruled by their own Kings, to whom several Princes
are subject. The Empires of Monomotapa and Monoemungi, are governed by their
respective Emperors, (who are reckoned powerful Princes) and to them several
Kings are Tributary. The People inhabiting the South and South-East Coasts of
this great Body, (except those of the Cafres, who know little or nothing of
Government) are subject to several Princes, as Zanguebar is governed by some
petty Kings of its own; and many Places on the Sea Coasts are Tributary to the
Portugueses. The Coast of Abex does principally belong to the Turk. And lastly,
Ajan is partly under the Turk, and partly its own Kings.

The numerous Inhabitants of these many Countries, Arms.
are generally gross Idolaters, excepting those of Zanguebar, Religion.
Ajan, and Abex, who incline to Mahometanism; and some on the Coasts of the
Cafres (particularly the Hottantots abovementioned) do live without any sign of
Religion, being destitute both of Priest and Temple; and never show any token
of Devotion among 'em, except we reckon their Dancing at the Full and New Moon
for such. In the Kingdom of Loango, the generarality of People entertain a
certain faint Idea of God, (whom they term Sambian-Pongo) but being sunk into
the blackest Idolatry, they admit of many ridiculous Superstitions in their way
of Worship. However the Inhabitants of Malemba, in the same Kingdom, do vastly
surpass their Neighbors, and by some wonderful Marks of Natural Religion, do
publicly baffle their gross Stupidity; for of them we are credibly informed,
that they set apart every fifth Day for Public Worship; at which times, one of
reputed Integrity makes a Public Oration, deterring them from the Commission
of Murder, Stealth, Impurity, or such like; and to enforce his Exhortation, he
backs the same with the powerful Topics of Rewards and Punishments in a Future
State; affrighting their Conscience with a miserable State in the Society of
Benimbe, (i. e. the Devil) on one hand; and solacing their Minds on the other
with the hopes of enjoying Zammampoango, by which they mean God, or the Maker
of this Visible World. They likeways use Circumcision, admitting their Children
into their Religion by that Ceremony, which is performed by one of themselves
set apart for that Office.

SECT. IX. Concerning the African Islands.
The African Islands being More remarkable as Madagascar. The Isles of Cape
Verde The Canary Islands The Madera Less remarkable as Zocotora. Isles of
Comore. S. Thomas. The Princess Island. Anobon. S. Helena. The Isle of
Ascension.

Madagascar, [containing many Provinces but very uncertain] its Chief Town is
Fanshere upon the S. E. part of the Island.

Islands of Cape Verde are St. Anthony -- W. to E. Chief Town of all is S. Jago
in the Isle S. Jago. S. Vincent -- S. Lucia -- S. Nicolas -- Insula de Sal --
Bonavista -- N. E. to S. W. Mago -- Jago -- Insula del Fuego -- Brava -- The
Canary Islands are Lancerota -- From E. to W. Chief Town of all is Canaria, in
the Island Canaria. Forte ventura -- Canaria -- Teneriffe -- Gomera -- Ferro --
Palma --

Madera lying in 32 degrees. 30 min. North Latitude, Its Chief Town is Tunchal or
Tonzal.

THE most remarkable of the African Islands being here reduced to Four Classes,
viz. Madagascar, Cape Verde Islands, the Canaries, and Madera, we shall
particularly consider them, and then take a General View of all the rest.
Therefore,

. 1. Madagascar.
THIS Island (unknown to the Ancients) is termed by the Spaniards, Isla de San
Lorenzo; by Name.
the French, St Laurence, otherways Dauphine; by the Italians, Germans, and
English, Madagascar; which Name was used by the Natives, and still retained. As
to the Title of St. Laurence, the same was given to this Island by the
Portugueses, it being on St. Laurence Day that they made their first Discovery
of it.

The Air of this Island is generally very temperate, and by most affirmed to be
exceeding wholesome to Air.
breath in. The opposite Place of the Globe to Madagascar, is the South Part of
California.

The Soil of this Island is extraordinary fruitful in many Parts thereof,
affording all things necessary for Soil.
the Life of Man in great plenty. The length of the Days and Nights in
Madagascar, is the same as in Monoemungi, they both lying under the same
Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Rice, Hides, Wax, Gums, Crystal,
Steel, Copper, Ebony, Commodities.
and Wood of all sorts.

Toward the Eastern Part of this Island is a pleasant and fertile Valley,
called Ambouse, which is stockt with Rarities.
several rich Mines of Iron and Steel, and yields great store of the Oil of
Sejanum. (2.) Nigh to the aforesaid Valley is an excellent Medicinal Well of
hot Water, which proves a ready Cure for Cold Distempers in the Limbs. (3) In
the same Neighborhood is a high Mountain, on whose Top is a remarkable Spring
of very Salt Water, though upwards of thirty Leagues from the Sea. (4.) In this
Island (especially the Southern Provinces) are most sorts of Mineral Waters,
very different both in Color, Taste, and Qualities; and some places afford
large Pits of Bitumen. (5.) In this Island is also a River, whose Gravel is so
exceeding hot that there is no treading upon it, and yet the Water of that River
is extremely hot.

The Natives of Madagascar are reported to be a Lecherous, Ignorant,
Inhospitable, and Treacherous Manners.
Sort of People; they hate Polygamy, and still punish Murder by Death. Diverse
singular Customs prevail in several Parts of this Island, particularly these
two: First. If any Woman be safely delivered of a live Child, and afterward
dye in Childbed, the living Child is buried with the dead Mother; being better
(say they) that the Child should dye than live, having no Mother to look after
it. The other is, The exposing of their Children to wild Beasts if brought
forth upon an unlucky Day, (as they term it) or during some unfortunate Aspects
of the Planets, as their Ombiasses, or Priests pretend to tell them. So
numerous are those Days they reckon unlucky, that almost one half of the Year
is accounted such; and hence it is, that this Island is so thinly stockt with
Inhabitants.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Language here commonly used, is as barbarous as they who speak it. Almost
every Province has its Language.
peculiar Dialect, yet not so different but that they understand one another;
so that the Natives of this Island may be said to have but one Tongue in common
among 'em all.

This Island is subject to many particular Lords, commonly called Rohandrians,
who are continually at Government.
War among themselves about their Cattle and Slaves, yet unanimous enough to
defend themselves against the Invasion of Strangers. Some formerly reckoned six
Sovereign Princes or Kings in Madagascar, others four; but now every Province
has its particular Governor, having under him various Filoubei, (i. e.
Governors of Villages and Castles) who stand accountable to him in every thing.

Arms. None. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Island are either Pagans or Mahometans, except those
People living upon the Religion.
Eastern Coasts, between fifteen and eighteen Degrees and an half of South
Latitude, termed Zaffehibraim, [i. e. the Race of Abraham]; and others on the
Adjacent Island, called Nossi-Hibraim, [i. e. The Isle of Abraham] who differ
extremely from their Neighbors in Religious Matters. For many of 'em are said
to observe the Jewish Sabbath, and give not only a faint Account of the
Creation of the World, and Fall of Man; but also a few broken Passages of the
Sacred History concerning Noah and Abraham, Moses and David. Whence diverse
Travelers conjecture, that they are originally descended of some Jews, who
might have been droven upon that part of the Island, none knows how, nor when.

2. Cape Verde Islands.
THESE Islands (the Hesperides of the Ancients) are termed by the Italians,
Isola di Capo Verde; by Name.
the Spaniards, Islas de Cabo-verde; by the French, les Isles du Cape Verde; by
the Germans, Cape Verde Insuln; and by the English, Cape Verde Islands; so
called from the opposite Cape in Negroe-Land, which bears that Name, and that
because it is, or appears always of a Green Color.

The Air of these Islands, is generally reckoned very unwholesome, especially
in S. Jago, the biggest and Air.
chief of them all. The opposite Place of the Globe to Cape Verde Islands, is
part of the West American Ocean, lying between 170 and 180 Degrees of
Longitude, with 10 and 20 Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of these various Islands, is not the same in all, some of 'em being
very Fertile, and others extremely Soil.
Barren. The length of the Days and Nights in them, is the same as in the Land
of the Negroes, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

From these Islands, the Portugueze transport incredible quantities of Salt, as
also great numbers of Commodities.
Goat Skins (of which they make excellent Cordevants); and likeways from thence
may be brought most sorts of pleasant Fruits, particularly Lemons, Citrons,
Oranges, Coco's, Figs, and Melons.

The most remarkable of these Islands, is the Isle de Fuego or Fogo, so called
as being a noted Vulcano, continually Rarities.
sending up Sulphurious Exhalations, and sometimes the Flame breaks out (Aetna
or Vesuvius like) in such a terrible manner, and Vomits forth such a number of
Pumice-Stones, that it annoys all the Adjacent Parts. In Insula de Sell, are
many Natural Salt Pits, which yield a prodigious Quantity of Salt; from whence
the Island derives its Name.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks. etc.


The Inhabitans of these Islands being Portugueze, are much the same with those
on the Continent. Manners.


The Inhabitants of these Islands being Portugueze, (as a foresaid) do still
retain their own Language. Language.


These Islands at their first discovery being destitute of Inhabitants, were
peopled by their Discoverers Government.
the Portugueze, and at present belong to the Crown of Portugal, and are ruled
by a particular Governor, who assumeth the Title of Viceroy, and commonly
resideth in the Island St. Jago. Arms.


The Portugueze here residing, are of the same Religion with those in Portugal.
Religion.


3. The Canary Islands.
THESE Islands (the Insulae Fortunatae of the Ancients) are termed by the
Italians, Isola di Canaria; Name.
by the Spaniards, Islas Canarias; by the French, les Isles Canaries; by the
Germans, Canarische Insuln; and by the English, the Canary Islands; so called
from the chief Island Canaria, which derived its Name from Can, [i. e. Dog in
Spanish] because a vast number of Dogs were found thereon by the Spaniards at
their first discovery of it.

The Air of these Islands (inclining to heat) is generally esteemed
extraordinary wholesome. The opposite Air.
Place of the Globe to the Canary Islands, is that part of the vast Occidental
Ocean, lying between 180 and 190 Degrees of Longitude, with 25 and 35 Degrees
of South Latitude.

The Soil of most of 'em is wonderfully fertile. In the Island Canaria they have
commonly two Harvests Soil.
in the Year. Teneriffe is noted not only for its high Pike (of which
afterward) but also many Laurel and Dragon Trees, where the sweet
Singing-birds do daily warble their pleasant Notes. These Islands (besides
their great plenty of Fruits and Grain) are famous for producing the best Wine
in the World. The length of Days and Nights in them, is the same as in
Bildulgerid on the Continent, they both lying under the same Parallels of
Latitude.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Wine, Honey, Wax, Sugar, Oad,
Plantons, Dragons-blood, Commodities.
Canary-birds, etc.

Among the Rarities of these Islands, is reckoned a certain Tree in the middle
of Fero (termed Garoe by the Rarities.
Natives; and by the Spaniards, Santo) whose Top is said to be encompassed
every Night with a thick misty Cloud, which condensing into Water, does drop
from the Leaves the next Morning; and that in such quantity, as sufficiently
serves all the Inhabitants, the Island it self being destitute of Springs. As
for the Isle of Teneriffe, it is famous, all the World over, for its prodigious
Pike, which (appearing to the Eye as a large Mass of many Rocks, promiscuously
heaped up, in Form of a ruggid Pyramide) is thought by some curious
Naturalists, to have been raised on a sudden by a mighty Conslagration of much
subterraneous Sulphurous Matter, whose forcible Eruption the very Rocks
themselves could not withstand, but were thereby pil'd up in the manner they
now appear. For strengthening of this Conjecture, they allege the great
Quantity of Sulphur with which this Island does still abound, (especially nigh
the foot of the Pike) and the Color of the Rocks themselves, many of 'em
seeming to Spectators, as if long burnt in a Fire.

In these Islands is only one Bishopric, viz. that of Canaria.
Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of these Islands being mostly Spaniards, are much the same in
Manners with those on the Manners.
Continent. The few Natives yet remaining, (termed Guanchas) do mostly reside
in Mountains, Dens, and Caves.

The Spaniards here residing, do still retain their own Language. Language.


These Islands belong to the King of Spain, who for the better ordering of
Affairs in them, does always Government.
keep a Governor in Canaria, the chief Town of the chief Island. His Power
extends over all these Islands, in Affairs both Civil and Ecclesiastical.

The Inhabitants of these Islands (as aforesaid) being mostly Spaniards, are of
the same Religion with those in Spain. Religion.


. 4. Madera or Madera's.
THIS Island (not observable of old) is termed by the Italians and Spaniards,
Madera; by the Name.
French, Madre; by the Germans, Maderen; and by the English, the Madera or
Madera's; so called by the Portugucze at their first Discovery of it, Anno
1429. because wholly over grown with Trees; the word Madeira signifying a Wood.

The Air of Maderas being very Temperate, considering the Latitude of the
Island, is generally esteemed Air.
very healthful to breath in. That Place of the Globe opposite to Madera, is
part of the vast Occidental Ocean, between 180 and 182 Degrees of Longitude,
with 32 and 33 Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil of this Island is very fertile, producing in great plenty most sorts
of excellent Fruits, and a kind Soil.
of Wine that is much esteemed off, being fit to keep for a long time both by
Sea and Land. The length of the Days and Nights in this Island, is much the
same as in Zaara on the main Continent, they both lying under the same
Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are excellent Wine, and most sorts of
desirable Fruits, as also Commodities.
Honey and Wax, etc.

What mostly deserves the Epithet of Rare on this Island, is that excellent
Quality, either of its Air or Rarities.
Soil, or both, which, like our Neighboring Island, [Ireland] proves mortal to
all Venomous Animals; none such being found here, or able to live, if brought
thither from abroad. In the side of a Hill, nigh Fonzal, is a remarkable
Fountain, whose Waters do sometimes issue forth in such abundance, that the
adjacent Parts of the Island are then subject to a terrible Inundation.

Archbishopricks, None. One Bishopric, viz. that Archbishopricks, etc.
of Fonzal or Funchale, which is Suffragan to Lisbon.

The Inhabitants of this Island being Portugueze, are much the same in Manners
with those on the Continent, Manners.
but more vitiously inclined, (if that can be well supposed) being mighty
Proficients in their common Crimes of Theft and Murder.

The Portugueze here residing, do still retain their own Language Language.


This Island belonging to the Crown of Portugal, is ruled by a particular
Deputy, whose place of Residence is commonly at Tonza! Government.


The Inhabitants of this Island being Portugueze, (as aforesaid) are of the
same Religion with that publicly Religion.
professed in the Kingdom of Portugal.

Having thus considered, in particular, the most remarkable of the African
Islands; proceed we now (in pursuance of our proposed Method) to take a General
View of all the rest, or those that are less remarkable. Now, such Islands (to
be very brief) being strangely scattered up and down the Ethiopick and
Atlantic Oceans, do mightily differ in their Air and Soil, according to the
various Climates they lie in; and in none of 'em is any remarkable place,
except only the Isle of Zocotora, in which is a Town of the same Name. As for
the chief Observables relating to their Inhabitants, [particularly their
Manners, Language, and Religion,] we may sufficiently learn the same, only by
naming those several States or Sovereigns on the Continent, to whom these
Islands belong (they being generally peopled and possessed by some of them).
Their present Possessors then [in short] are as follows,

Less remarkable Islands being Zocotora -- is possessed by the Arabians. Comore
-- the Natives. St. Thomas -- the Portuguexe. The Princes Island -- the
Portugueze. Annobon -- the Portugueze. St. Helena -- the English. Ascension
Island not inhabited.

And so much for Africa and the African Islands. Now follows,



CHAP. IV. Of AMERICA.
Divided (page 44.) into North comprehending Mexico or N. Spain Capital City
Mexico. N. Mex. or Granada S. Fee. Florida -- Coca Terra Canadensis Boston.
Terra Arctica -- -- South comprehending Terra Firma -- S. Feed Bagota Peru --
Lima. Land of the Amazons -- Brasil -- S. Salvador. Chyli -- S. Jago. Paraguay
-- Assumption. Terra Magellanica -- Terra Antarctica --

To these add the American Islands.

Of all which in Order. Therefore,

SECT. I. Concerning Mexico or New Spain.
d. m. Situated between 259 00 of Long. its greatest Length from S. E to N. W.
is about 2520 Miles. 297 00 between 08 50 of Latit. Breadth from E. to W. is
about 840 Miles. 30 00 Divided into Audience of Guadalajara C. T. Idem -- N. W.
to S. E. Audience of Mexico -- Idem -- Audience of Guatimala -- S. Jago de
Guat. Guadalajara comprehends the Provinces of Cinalod -- Chief Town S. Juan --
In the Midland from N. to S. New Biscay Barbara -- Zacaticas -- Zacatecas --
Guadalajara Idem -- Chiameltan St. Sebastian On the Sea Coast from N. to S.
Xalisco -- Compostella Mexico comprehends the Provinces of Panuco -- Idem -- On
Sinus Mexicanus from N. W. to S. E. Mexico -- Idem -- Mechoacan Idem -- Los
Angelos Idem -- Antequera Idem -- Tabasco -- Port Royal Jucutan -- Merida --
Guatimala comprehends the Provinces of Soco Nusco Guevetland -- from N. W. to
S. E. on the South Sea. Guatimald S. Jago de Guat. Nicaragua Leon -- Cost a
Rica Carthago -- Veragua -- Conception -- Honduras New Valladolid From S. E. on
N. W. upon Sinus Mexic. Vera Pax Idem -- Chiapa -- Cividad real

THIS Country (discovered at first by John Grijalve, but more exactly viewed,
and at last conquered Name.
by the Valiant Ferdinando Cortez, Anno 15 18.) is termed by the Italians,
Spagna Novella; by the Spaniards, Nueva Espana; by the French, Nouvelle
Espagne; by the Germans, Neu Spanien; and by the English, Mexico or New Spain;
called Mexico from the chief City thereof, and New Spain, to distinguish it
from the Kingdom of Spain in Europe.

Notwithstanding this Country (for the most part) lies within the Torrid Zone,
yet the Air is very temperate, Air.
and generally reckoned extraordinary wholesome to breath in, being qualified
with refreshing Showers in the hottest Months, and cool Breezes from the Sea
all the Year. The opposite Place of the Globe to New Spain, is part of the
East India Ocean, lying between 80 and 117 Degrees of Longitude, with 8 and 30
Degrees of South Latitude.

This Country (lying in the 3d and 4th North Climate) is blessed with a very
fertile Soil, producing many Soil.
sorts of Grain, as Wheat, Barley, Pulse, and Maize; several kinds of Fruits,
as Pomegranats, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Malicatons, Cherries, Pears, Apples,
Figs, Cocoa-Nuts; and great plenty of Herbs, Plants, and Roots. Here also are
some rich Mines of Gold and Silver; and vast and spacious Plains, affording the
best of Pasturage. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country, is
about 13 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost 12; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Wool, Cotton, Sugar, Silk,
Cochencel, Feathers, Honey, Commodities.
Balm, Amber, Salt, Tallow, Hides, Tobacco, Ginger, and diverse Medicinal Drugs.

About three Leagues from Guayaca, is the Stump of a Hollow Tree, (called
Tlaco-Chavoya) which was of Rarities.
a prodigious bigness when entire, being then reckoned sixteen Fathoms in
compass near the Root, and somewhat higher twelve. Before 'twas Thunder struck,
(which occasioned the hollowness) no fewer than a thousand Men ['tis said]
could conveniently shelter themselves from Rain, under its wide extended
Boughs. (2) In several Parts of this Country, grows a certain Tree, (called
Maguey) which may be said to yield Water, Oil, Wine, Honey, and Vinegar. For
the Body of the Tree being big and hollow, contains a good quantity of Liquor
as limpid as the best Fountain Water, and the Surface thereof is covered with a
pure Oilysubstance. This Liquor being a little boiled, tastes like a good
palatable Wine; if much boiled, it is extremely sweet, and if long kept,
[unboil'd] no Vinegar is sowrer. (3.) In the Audience of Guatimala are several
remarkable Vulcano's, particularly that near Rea-Lejo, which towrs up like a
Sugar Loaf to a great height, and always Smokes. As also the burning Mountain
of Leon, West of the Lake Nicaragua, which frequently evacuates Fire as well as
Smoke. (4.) Nigh to Guatulco, on the Western Coast, is a great hollow Rock,
(called by the Spaniards, Buffadore) which having a large Hole in its top, make
a hideous Noise at every Surge of the Sea, and spouts up Water [as a Whale] to
a prodigious height. (5.) In some Parts of this Country, are several Springs of
Water, so impregnorated with certain Minerals, that the Current issuing from
them is of so darkish a Color, that it resembles a Stream of Ink. (6)
Remarkable is the Lake of Mexico for several particulars: As First, Its having
two sorts of Water, viz. Fresh and Salt. Secondly, That the Fresh is usually
Calm, and abounds with Fishes; whereas the Salt is, for the most part,
Boisterous, and breeds none. Thirdly, In the middle of this Lake, is a
pleasant Rock, out of which does issue a considerable Stream of hot Water, much
esteemed off for several Distempers. Lastly, Upon this Lake are several
delightful Artificial Gardens, well stockt with variety of Herbs and Flowers,
and moveable from one place to another, being supported by large Floats of
Timber. Vid. J. Acosta, his Natural and Moral History of the Indies.

Here is one Spanish Archshoprick, viz. that of Mexico. Archbishopricks.


Spanish Bishoprics erected here, are those of Bishoprics.
Merida, Chiapa, St. Jago de los Cavalleras, Mechoaca, Honduras, Leon in
Nicaragua, Guaxaca, Vera paz, Antequera. Guadalajara, Pueblo de los Angelos,


The Natives of this Country, are now esteemed a Universities.
People very Civil and Docile, and extraordinary faithful Manners.
to those they love. Some of 'em are also wonderfully Ingenious, especially in
Painting, and making most lively Pictures with various colored Feathers of
certain little Birds, called Cincons. Others are said to Play incomparably well
upon diverse Musical Instruments. In short, the generality of this People is so
civilized, that they live after the manner of the Spaniards, save a few,
commonly residing in the Mountains, who continue as Wild and Savage as ever.
The Spaniards here residing, are much the same with those in Spain.

The prevailing Language in this Country, is the Spanish, it being not only in
use among the Spaniards, but Language.
also the Natives themselves, who generally understand and speak the same. The
various Dialects of their Ancient Jargon do daily decrease, and in a few
Generations will be quite extinguished.

This large and pleasant Country, was of old subject unto, and ruled by its own
Sovereign Princes, Government.
called Kings of Mexico, and had continued (according to probable Conjectures)
a mighty and flourishing Monarchy for many Ages, before 'twas invaded by the
Spaniards. But being fully conquered by them with only a handful of Men, Anno
1521. under the Valiant Ferdinando Gortez; it has ever since remained subject
to the Crown of Spain, being governed by a Viceroy commonly residing at
Mexico; and to him is entrusted the oversight of all the Governors of the
various Provinces, belonging to his Catholic Majesty in North America.

Arms. None. Arms.


The Inhabitants of this Country are partly Christian, partly Pagan, and (as
'twere) a mixture of the two. Religion.
The Spaniards are rigid Papists according to the strict Profession of Popery
in their own Country. Of the Natives, many do still retain their heathenish
Worship, and indeed multitudes are converted to Christianity according to the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome; but (by our latest Accounts) they are hardly
persuaded as yet of the Truth of those Doctrines taught them.

SCET. II. Concerning New Mexico or Nova Granada.
This Country is of no certain Extent nor Division, its chief Town is S. Fee or
New Mexico, upon the River North.

THIS Country (discovered by the Spaniards, Anno 1540.) is termed by the
Italians, Granada Nouella; Name.
by the Spaniards, Nueva Granada; by the French, Nouelle Granada; by the
Germans, Neu Granada; and by the English, New Mexico or Nova Granada. It was
called Mexico, after the Empire of that Name, described in the foregoing
Section; and the Epithet Neuva (or New) was added by the Spaniards, to
distinguish it from the said Empire, its Discovery being posterior to that of
Mexico. The Title of Nova Granada, was also given it by the Spaniards, and that
from a Province of the same Name in their own Country.

The Air of this Country (according to the Climate) is abundantly temperate,
and generally esteemed very Air.
wholesome to breath in, but attended with the great Inconveniency of frequent
Hurricanes, besides Thunder and Lightning. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Nova Granada, is that part of the Ethiopick Ocean, lying between 70 and 90
Degrees of Longitude, with 20 and 40 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Country is but badly known, and the Soil of those Parts already
discovered; very ordinary; being Soil.
generally a dry, faudy, barren Ground, far inferior to most other Countries in
America, belonging to the Spaniards. Its Bounds being undetermined, (especially
in the Northmost Parts) we can say nothing of the true Extent of its Days and
Nights.

This Country being none of the best, and but rarely frequented by Strangers,
its Commodities are Commodities.
very few, Cattle being the chief or only thing they Trade in

What things in Nova Granada do truly merit the Epithets of Rare and Curious,
we must refer to the Rarities.
better Discovery of after Ages; our knowledge of this Country being as yet but
very slender.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universitities. None. Archbishopricks. etc.


The Inhabitants of this Country, (except those called Panches in the Southmost
Parts) are said to be of a Manners.
much less Savage Temper than most of the wild Americans. They are much given
to Hunting; and several of 'em understand Agriculture tollerably well.

The Spaniards here residing, do commonly use the Spanish Tongue. As for the
Natives of this Country, Language.
they retain their own Jargon, of which we can give no account.

The New Mexicans are still governed by certain Captains of their own, called
Caciques; but the Spaniards Government.
here residing, and those of the civilized Natives, are ruled by a particular
Governor, sent thither by the King of Spain, whose place of Residence is
ordinarily at Santa Fee, upon the River Nort.

The Natives of this Country are generally gross Idolaters, Arms.
and many of 'em have little or no Sign of Religion Religion.
at all. The Spaniards here residing, are the same in Religion with those in
Europe.

SECT. III. Concerning Florida.
d. m. Situated between 276 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from E. to W. is
about 1000 Miles. 297 00 between 26 50 of Latit. Breadth from S. to N. is about
600 Miles. 40 00

The large Country of Florida being of no certain Divisions, its chief Towns
are Coca, in the main Land. S. Augustine, in the Peninsula of Tegeste S.
Ma^hea, in the Peninsula of Tegeste.


THIS Country (first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1497. but more
particularly afterward by Name.
John D^pony, a Spaniard, who took Possession thereof in the Name of his
Catholic Majesty, Anno 1527.) is termed by the Italians and Spaniards,
Florida; by the French, Floride; by the Germans and English, Florida; so called
by the Spaniards, either because they arrived at it on Palm Sunday, (which they
term Pascha Florida) or because they found the Country full of Flowers at their
arrival.

The Air of this Country is said to be so extraordinary temperate, that
(according to our latest Accounts) Air.
the Inhabitants live to a great Age. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Florida, is that part of the East Indian Ocean, lying between 96 and 110
Degrees of Longitude, with 26 and 40 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 5th and 6th North Climate) is
wonderfully fertile, abounding Soil.
in most sorts of Grain, Herbs, and Fruit. It Is also well stored with Venison
and Fowl; enriched with considerable Mines of Gold and Silver, especially those
of the Appalachine Mountains; and here they fish vast numbers of valuable
Pearls. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country, is about 14
Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is 9 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

This Country being slenderly known in the Inland Parts, and even those next
the Sea, but little frequented Commodities.
by Strangers, its Commodities are very few, yet very costly; viz. Gold,
Silver, Pearls, and Furs.

In several Parts of Florida, grows a certain Tree, about the bigness of an
ordinary Apple Tree, the Rarities.
Juice of whose Fruit, the Natives use to squeeze out, and therewith anoint
their Arrows, being a rank sort of Poison. If there be no Fruit, then they
break off a Branch, and out of it do press a milky Substance, equally poisonous
with the Juice of the Fruit. So strong a Poison is this Tree, that if a few
handfuls of its Leaves are bruised and thrown into a large Pond of
Standing-Water, all sorts of Beasts that happen to come and drink thereof, do
suddenly swell and burst asunder. Purchase his Pilgrims. Part 4. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.
In Bahama, (an Island near C. Florida) is the famous Bahama-Spider, the biggest
of all the Species, being two Inches long, and deservedly termed Phalangium
Maximum Indicum. He has six Eyes, and those not so big as the smallest Pin's
head. Some of these remarkable Insects are to be seen in the Public Musoeum of
Gresham College, London.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Floridins are naturally White, but by anoincing themselves (both Men and
Women) with a certain Manners.
Ointment, they still appear of an Olive-colour. They are tall of Stature, well
proportioned, lovers of War. and ordinarily go quite naked, except a small
piece of Deer-S^in, which many wear about their middle.

The Language of the Natives does very much (...) in Dialect, according to
different Parts of this Country. Language.
The few Spaniards here residing, do still retain the Spanish.

The Natives of this Country are subject to several Lords of their own, (termed
Paroustes or Caciques) Government.
one of whom is said to have the Precedence, and is generally respected by the
rest, as an Emperor. The Spanish Colonies on the Seacoasts, have their
peculiar Governors appointed by his Catholic Majesty.

The Natives of this Country, are gross Idolaters, Arms.
worshipping the whole Host of Heaven, especially Religion.
the Sun, to whom they attribute the good fortune of all their Victories, and
return him thanks accordingly. They mightily respect their Priests, (who are
generally great Sorcerers) and call them by the Name of Joanas, and in some
places Jowa's. Several Missionaries were sent into this Country in the Days of
Charles the Fifth; but the Savage Inhabitants quickly destroyed them.

SECT. IV. Concerning Terra Canadensis.
d. m. Situated between 290 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from E to W. is
about 1500 Miles. 330 00 between 30 00 of Latit. Breadth from S. to N. is about
1920 Miles. 62 00 It being divided into North -- the River Canada. South --
North comprehends Terra Canadensis propria -- Chief Town -- From N. to S. Nova
Britannia -- -- Nova Francia -- Quibeck -- South comprehends Nova Scotia --
Port Royal- The English Territor. viz. Those of New England -- Boston -- From
N. E. to S. W. New York -- Idem -- N. Jersey East Elisabeth -- West Elsingburgh
Pensilvania -- Philadelphia Maryland -- Baltimore Virginia -- James Town
Carolina -- Charles Tow.

TERRA Canadensis (so called from the River Canada) being a vast Complex Body,
consisting of several large and considerable Countries, and particularly those
in which the English Nation is chiefly concerned; we shall distinctly consider
its various Divisions, (especially those of the English Empire) and that in the
same Order laid down in the foregoing Table. Therefore,

. 1. Terra Canadensis propria.
THIS Country being the Northmost of all the rest, is esteemed none of the
best. But being so slenderly known as yet, we pass on to

. 2. Nova Britannia.
WHICH Country is likeways of a very ordinary Soil, by what we find, and almost
as thinly Inhabited, and little frequented as the former. We shall therefore
make no stay therein, but proceed to

. 3. Nova Francia.
THIS Country is reckoned to be much colder than most others in the same
Latitude; however it is said to be blessed with a Soil abundantly fruitful; and
is chiefly furnished with Stags, Bears, Hares, Martins, Foxes, Conies, and great
store of Fish and Flesh. The French here residing, (about six thousand in
number) do commonly trade in Bever, Mouse Skins and Furs. This being all that is
remarkable of it, we continue our Progress to the next Division, viz.

. 4. Nova Scotia.
WHICH Country (first discovered by Sebastian Cabot, at the Charge of Henry the
Seventh) was once inhabited by a Scotch Colony, sent over Anno 1622. by Sir
William Alexander [then Lord Secretary of Scotland] to whom King James by
Letters-Patent made a Donation thereof; but that Colony failing, the French
became Masters of the Country, and settled themselves therein, calling it by
the Name of Accadie.

But leaving these Northern Parts of Terra Canadensis, as Countries little
known, and of less Note unto us: Proceed we to that which more nearly concerns
us, viz. a particular View of the various Parts of the Western English Empire;
and that according to their Order, as they lie in the foregoing Table. The
first whereof is

. 5. New England.
THIS Country (discovered first by the English, under the Conduct of the two
Cabots, Anno Name.
1497. and afterward taken Possession of for Queen Elizabeth by Sir Philip
Amadas, Anno 1458.) is termed by the Italians, Inghilterra Nouella; by the
Spaniards, Nueva Inglaterra; by the French, Nouvelle Angleterre; by the
Germans, Neu Engeland; and by the English, New England; so called by the
Discoverers after the Name of their own Country.

Notwithstanding this Country is of a Situation considerably more Southern than
Old England, yet the Air Air.
of both is much the same; the Heat thereof being allayed by cooling Breezes,
which frequently happen. The opposite Place of the Globe to New England, is
that part of the vast Atlantic Ocean, lying between 120 and 130 Degrees of
Longitude, with 41 and 45 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country is in most Parts very fertile, producing in great
plenty most sorts of English Grain, Soil,
Fruits, and Roots, besides Indian Corn. It Is very well stockt with Fish and
Fowl, as also variety of tame and wild Beasts. In short, it is not only furnished
with the Necessaries, but likeways many of the Comforts of Human Life; and the
Colony (now upward of an hundred thousand) does flourish daily more and more.
The length of the Days and Nights in New England, is much the same as in the
Northern Provinces of Spain, they both lying under the same Parallels of
Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Fish, Grain, Masts for Ships,
Deal-boards, Iron, Tar, Bever, Commodities.
Mouse-Skins, Furs, etc. And it is observable of those in New England, that they
have Annually, for some Years, imported and exported to and from Old England,
as many Commodities in value as they carried out at first.

In several Parts of New England grows a certain Fruit, (termed the Butter-Nut)
so called from the Nature Rarities.
of its Kernel, which yields a kind of sweet Oil, that has the exact taste of
ordinary Butter. (2) In Baker's Cave, about fifty Leagues East from Boston, is
found the Scarlet Muscle whose purple Vein being pricked with a Needle, yields a
Juice of a pure Purple-colour, which gives so deep a Dye, that no Water is able
to wash it our. (3) About eighty Miles North-East of Scarb^row, is a Ridge of
Mountains in length about an hundred Leagues, and known commonly by the Name of
the White Mountains, because their Tops are covered with Snow all the Year
round. Upon the highest of these Mountains is a large Plain, and at the
farthest end of it, a natural Rocky Pyramide, [vulgarly called the Sugar Loaf)
to the uppermost part of which one may easily ascend by a continued Set of
(...) Steps winding about the R^^ky Mount up to its very Top, where is another
Plain of about an Acre of Ground, and in the middle of it a deep Pond of clear
Water. (4.) Upon the Seaside, near N^w-Haven, is a large Bed of Sand of a
perfect black Color, with many Grains of Red and White intermixed. (5.) Upon
the Coast of New England, is sometimes taken that remarkable Fish, which the
English Inhabitants call by the Name of the Monk-Fish, because he has, as
'twere, a Hood much of the same fashion with a Fryer's Cowl. (6.) In diverse
Parts on the Coast of this Country, is found the Stella Marina Arborescens, or
Branched Star-Fish: A rare kind of which, taken in the Bay of Mastachuset, is
to be seen in Gresham College, and described in the Philos. Trans. [N. 57.]
under the Name of Piscis Echionostellaris Visciformis. (7.) Of many rare Birds
in New England, the most remarkable, are the Troculus, and That called the
Humming-Bird. The former of these (being about the bigness of a Swallow) is
observable for three things. First, Having very short Legs, and hardly able to
support himself; Nature has provided him with sharp pointed Feathers in his
Wings, by darting of which into the Wall of a House, he sticks fast and rests
securely. Secondly, The manner of his Nest, which he uses to build (as
Swallows) in the Tops of Chimneys, but of such a fashion that it hangs down
about a Yard long. Lastly, Such Birds are remarkable for their Ceremony at
departing; it being always observed, That when they remove, they never fail to
leave one of their Young behind in the room where they have nested, making
thereby (as 'twere) a grateful acknowledgment to the Landlord for their Summers
Lodging. As for the Humming-Bird, he is observable for being the least of all
Birds. The manner of his Nest resembles a Bottom of soft Silk, and the Egg in
which he is hatched, is not larger than a white Pease of an ordinary size. But of
him elsewhere. For these and some other such Remarkables, Vid. that small
Treatise, entitled, New England's Rarities, per J. Josselyn, Gent.

Archbishopricks and Bishoprics. None. As for Universities, here are two
Colleges erected at New Cambridge, Arbishopricks, etc.
which (in Conjuction with other such Nurseries of Learning hereafter
established) may, we hope, deserve that Title in process of time.

The English here residing, are much the same with those in Old England. As to
the Natives, they are Manners.
generally characterized thus, viz. a People that is Crafty, Timorous, as also
barbarously Cruel and Revengeful when they find opportunity. But some of 'em
are of a much milder Temper, being likeways very Ingenious and quick of
Apprehension. Their Number (especially within the English Territories) is
mightily diminished, the greatest part of 'em, being swept away by the
Smallpox, about the first Settlement of the English; others by Tumults among
themselves, and most of the rest by the late treacherous Wars with the English.

The English Inhabitants of this Country use their own Language. As to that of
the Natives, it is divided Language.
into a great many Dialects, and reckoned very difficult to be learned by
Strangers; the generality of its Words being extremely long, and of an
inarticulate Pronounciation.

The Natives of this Country, are divided into many Bodies, and are subject
unto their Sachams and Sagamores, Government.
who exercise an absolute Jurisdiction over them; the Will of their respective
Governors being all the Law they pretend to. The English here residing, are
governed by their own Laws, and have several Courts of Judicatory erected for
hearing and determining of Causes, both Civil and Criminal; as also for making
and repealing of Laws that concern the Plantation. The Management of Public
Affairs, is in the Hands of a certain number of Magistrates and Assistants,
determined by their Patent; and out of these do the People annually choose a
Governor, and Deputy Governor.

The English here residing, are Professors of the Protestant Religion in
general, but greatly divided (as too Religion.
common elsewhere) into different Parties. The Natives continue Pagan, except
those few acquainted with the Principles of Christianity, by a late Serious
Divine, Mr. John Eliot, who [by Translating the Holy Bible, and several Books
of Devotion, into a certain Dialect of the Indian Tongue, and by frequently
preaching among them in their own Language] laid some Foundation for a more
general Conversion: Did such a generous Spirit possess the Minds of Christian
Benefactors, as to extend their Charity that way (than which none can be more
extensive) or to mortify some part of their worldly Estate for that noble
Undertaking, [which might probably be less subject to Abuses, than erecting and
endowing of Hospitals, Almshouses, and such like] that in process of time,
such a stock of Money might be settled in a sure Fund, as yearly to afford a
desirable Competency to a continued Set of Men, who should be found
sussiciently able and willing to labor in that most Christian Design;

. 6. New York.
THIS Country (discovered Anno 1608. by Mr. Hudson) is termed by the Italians,
York Nouella; Name.
by the Spaniards, Nuevo York; by the French, Nouvelle York; by the Germans,
New York; and by the English, New York; so called from the then Duke of York:
for it being sold by Mr. Hudson to the Dutch, without leave from his Master,
the King of England; and they keeping Possession thereof, under the Name of New
Netherland till the Year 1664. 'twas then reduced to the English Crown;
whereupon King Charles the II. by special Writ, made his Royal Brother [the
Duke of York] Proprietor of it, from whom (as aforesaid) it derives its Name.

The Air of this Country is commonly reputed to be much the same with that of
New England. The opposite Air.
Place of the Globe to New York, is that part of the East-Indian Ocean, lying
between 120 and 130 Degrees of Longitude, with 40 and 42 Degrees of South
Latitude.

The Soil of this Country, as also Long Island, is (by general Relation) so
rich, that one Bushel of European Soil.
Wheat, does ordinarily produce an hundred in many places. It abounds
likeways with most sorts of English Grain, Herbs, and Fruits; and produces
excellent Tobacco, as also Melons, Pumpkins, etc. The length of the Days and
Nights in this Country, is the same as in the Kingdom of Naples, they both
lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Tobacco, Bever, Otter, Ratoon, Deer
and Elk-Skins, Commodities.
and other costly Furs; for which the English and Dutch trade with the Natives.

In diverse Parts of New York, (especially those nigh unto, and upon the Banks
of the River Connecticut) Rarities.
grows a sort of Snake-Weed, whose Root is much esteemed off for the Biting of
the Rattle-Snake. Being pulverized, it has an excellent Fragrant Smell, and a
good Aromatic Taste, but seems different from the Serpentaria of the Shops.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country (especially those of Long Island) are, by mortal
Diseases and frequent Wars Manners.
among themselves, reduced to a small number. Some of 'em are now serviceable
to the English; and the rest spend their time commonly in Hunting, Fowling, and
Fishing, especially the Men, who remove from place to place, and leave their
Wives for Tilling the Ground, and Planting the Corn. They Are much given of late
to Drinking, and frequently intoxicate themselves with strong European Liquors.

The Inhabitants of this Country being English, and a few Dutch, do use the
Languages peculiar to their respective Language.
Countries. The Natives speak a very unpleasant Dialect of the Indian Tongue.

The Natives of this Country are governed by their peculiar Sachems, who are
said to advise with their Government.
chief Counselors in Matters of Importance, but still to pronounce the
definitive Sentence themselves, which their People commonly receive with great
Applause. The English here residing, are subject unto, and ruled by their own
Governor, authorized and sent over by His Majesty, the King of Great Britain.

The English here residing, are much the same in Arms.
Point of Religion with those here in England: But the Religion.
Natives are still in the dark, and addicted to the blackest Idolative the
generality of 'em being said to Worship the Devil, under the Name of Monetto,
to whom they frequently address themselves, with a kind of Magical Rites, and
their Priests (called Pawaws) do act as so many Conjurers.

. 7. New Jersey.
THIS Country (discovered by the English, under the Conduct of the two Cabots,
Anno 1497. and Name.
lately divided into East and West Jersey) is termed by the Italians, Jerscia
Nouella; by the Spaniards, Nuevo Jersey; by the French, Nouvelle Jersey; by the
Germans, Neu Jerseii; and by the English, New Jersey; so called from the Island
Jersey in the British Channel; but why so termed, is somewhat dubious.

The Air of this Country is esteemed abundantly healthful to breath in, and
agreeable enough to English Air.
Constitutions, as sufficiently appears from the long Experience of many
Planters. The opposite Place of the Globe to New Jersey, is that part of the
vast Indian Ocean, lying between 120 and 130 Degrees of Longitude, with 39 and
41 Degrees of Southern Latitude.

The Soil is not every where the same, being in some Parts extraordinary good,
and in others very indifferent. Soil.
But it is generally believed to prove much better after the felling of the
Timber, and clearing the Ground, in which the Colony begins now to make a good
Progress. The length of the Days and Nights in this Country, is the same as in
the South of Italy, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities exported hence for England, are Whale-Oyl, Whale-Fins,
Bever, Monkey, Ratoon, Commodities.
and Martin-Skins: As also Beef, Pork, Corn, Butter, and Cheese, to the
adjacent Islands.

As the principal Observables of New Jersey, we may reckon some rare Plants
growing in diverse Parts of that Rarities.
Country, and easily found by the curious Botanist, if only at the pains to
make a search proportionable to his Curiosity. Here also is that huge Creature,
called the Moose, of whose Skin they make excellent Buff.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country (fewer in number than in most of the adjacent
Colonies) are generally reckoned Manners.
a very simple and innocent sort of People, and many of 'em are now become very
serviceable to the Planters. The English here residing, are much the same in
Manners with those in England.

All that can be said of the Language of the Natives of this Country, is, in
general, that it is one of the Language.
many different Dialects of the Indian Tongue. Those of the Plantation retain
and use their own Language.

This Country being divided into a certain number of Shares or Proprieties; out
of each Propriety is Annually Government.
chosen a Freeholder by the Inhabitants thereof. These Freeholders meet at a
certain time of the Year, as a General Assembly, or complete Representative
Body of the whole Colony: In that Assembly (together with the Governor, or his
Deputy) is lodged the Legislative Power, in making or repealing of Laws
relating to the whole Province; but still with this Restriction, that they no
ways infringe that Liberty of Conscience at first established; and that by an
irrevocable Fundamental Constitution, never to be altered by any subsequent Law
whatsoever. No Tax or Subsidy, Rates or Services, are to be imposed upon the
People, but by and with the Consent of their Representatives in that Assembly.

The English here residing, are of different Persuasions Arms.
in Point of Religion, there being a Liberty of Conscience Religion.
allowed to all of the Colony. But the poor Natives (to our great shame) are
still groping in the Twilight of Paganism.

. 8. Pensilvania.
THIS Country (discovered at the same time with the rest of the adjacent
Continent) is termed by Name.
the French, Pensilvanie; by the Germans, Pensilvanien; by the Italians,
Spaniards, and English, Pensilvania; so called from William Pen Esquire, whom
King Charles II. made first Proprietor thereof by Letters Patent, Anno 1680.

The Air of this Country is generally granted to be clear and sweet, the
Heavens being seldom over cast Air.
with Clouds. The length of the Days and Nights, is much the same here as in
New Jersey.

The Soil of this Country is tollerably good in many Parts, but in some Places
extremely barren. The opposite Soil.
Place of the Globe to Pensilvania, is that part of the East India Ocean, lying
between 115 and 125 Degrees of Longitude, with 40 and 45 Degrees of South
Latitude.

There being no considerable Trade as yet settled between this and Foreign
Countries; the chief Commodities Commodities.
hither to exported, are mostly Horses and Pipe-Staves, commonly sent to the
Island of Barbados.

In several Parts of Pensilvania, are Springs of good Mineral Waters,
particularly those about two Miles Rarities.
from Philadelphia, which for Operation, are accounted much the same with our
Purging Waters at Barnet.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country being Persons of tall Bodies, and swarthy
Complexions, are generally reckoned Manners.
more mild and civilly inclined, than most others of the Indian Nations. The
Europeans here residing, being mostly English, with a few Dutch and Swedes, are
much the same with those in Europe.

The Language of the Natives, being a Dialect of the Indian Tongue, is said to
be very Lofty, Sweet, Language.
and Emphatick, in respect of many others in these Parts of the World; as also
very easy to be acquired by Strangers. The Europeans here residing, retain the
respective Languages of their own Countries.

This Country being granted (as aforesaid) to William Pen, by his Majesty, King
Charles II. the Public Government.
Affairs thereof are managed by several Courts of of Justice, there established
under him as Proprietor, who (or his Deputy) Rules the same in Subordination to
the King of Great Britain.

The English here residing, are of different Sects and Arms.
Persuasions; but Enthusiasm chiefly prevails, this Country, Religion.
being stockt with Quakers by their Governor, William Pen. The Natives are said
to have a pretty clear Notion of a Supreme Being, the Immortality of the Soul,
and a Future State. Their Worship chiefly consists in Sacrifices and Songs,
intermixed with Dancing.

. 9. Maryland.
THIS Country (discovered by the English, under the Conduct of the two Cabots,
Anno 1497.) is Name.
termed by the Italians, Marylandia; by the Spaniards, Tierra de Maria; by the
French, Terre du Marie; by the Germans, Marienland; and by the English,
Maryland; so called at last in Honor of Queen Mary, Wife to King Charles I.
who gave it by Letters-Patent, under that Name, to the Right Honorable
Caecilius Colvert, Lord Baltimore, Anno 1632.

The Air of this Country is much more healthful now, and more agreeing to
English Constitutions than Air.
formerly, when the Woods were entire: and the better it still grows, the
greater Progress they make in felling the Timber. The opposite Place of the
Globe to Maryland, is that part of the East-Indian Ocean, lying between 120 and
130 Degrees of Longitude, with 37 and 40 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country is generally reckoned very fertile and rich, producing
in great plenty the same Soil.
things with New York. The length of the Days and Nights in Maryland, is much
the same as in the Southern Provinces of Spain, they both lying under the same
Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Wood, Hops,
Rape-Seed, Madder, Commodities.
Furs, Elk-Skins, etc.

Of several rare Crustaceous Animals found in this Country, That called the
Signoe or Signenoc, is most observable; Raritics.
and that particularly for the admirable contrivance of his Eyes. For they
being placed under the Covert of a thick Shell, Nature (whose Operation is
wonderful in every thing) has so ordered, that those Parts above the Eyes are
so transparent, as to convey a competency of Light, whereby the (otherways
benighted Animal) can clearly see its way. For several other remarkable
Creatures, with a Catalogue of rare Plants in Maryland. Vid. Philos. Trans. N.
246.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universitities. None. Archbishopricks. etc.


The Natives of this Country (considered in the main) are generally reckoned
the same with those of Manners.
New York, or the nearest to them in their Temper and Customs of any other of
the American Nations whatsoever. The English here residing, are much the same
with those in England.

The Language of the Natives in this Country, is said to consist of diverse
Idioms, very different from one Language.
another; and none of 'em either so pleasant to the Ear, or so easy to be
acquired by Strangers, as those in Pensilvania. The English here residing, use
their own Language.

The Right Honorable Coectlius Colvert, Lord Baltimore, his Heirs and Assigns,
being by Letters-Patent Government.
[Anno 1632] created Lords and Proprietors of Maryland, (excepting the
Sovereign Dominion and Allegiance, with a fifth part of the Gold and Silver Ore
reserved to His Majesty). The Government of the Colony, by their Lordships Care
and Prudence, is so modeled, that we may reckon it a Diminutive of that of
England. For the Supreme Court [call'd a General Assembly] resembles in some
measure our English Parliament, being divided into an Upper and Lower House.
The Upper consists of the Governor himself, with his Council, and such Lords of
Manors, and others, as his Lordship or Lieutenant shall by Writ call thither.
The Lower is made up of Delegates, elected and sent by each County of the whole
Plantation. This Assembly is conveen'd, prorogued, or dissolved at pleasure, by
his Lordship or Lieutenant; and whatever is agreed upon, and enacted by both
Houses, and assented unto by his Lordship has the Sanction of a Law, and cannot
be repealed but by the same Authority. Next to this Legislative Assembly, is
the Provincial Court, generally held at St. Mary's, to which Appeals are made
from all Inferior Courts of the whole Province.

The English here residing, are of various Persuasions Arms.
in Point of Religion, there being a Tolleration enjoined Religion.
for all Sects of Christianity. The Natives know nothing as yet of the true
God, save what they obscurely see by the glimsing Light of Nature.

. 10. Virginia.
THIS Country (discovered first by Sebastian Cabot, Anno 1497. but afterward
more perfectly by Name.
Sir Walter Rawleigh, Anno 1584. when he took Possession thereof in Queen
Elizabeth's Name) is termed by the French. Virginie; by the Germans, Virginien;
by the Italians, Spaniards, and English, Virginia; so called in Honor of Queen
Elizabeth, that Masculine Virgin Queen, of happy Memory.

The Air of this Country, as to Heat and Cold, Dryness and Moisture, is
variable according to the Winds; Air.
those from the North and North-West being universally cold and piercing; but
those from the South and South-East, do commonly bring along with them great
Heat in the Summer, which is frequently succeeded in September by Rain in such
quantity, that it has several times occasioned an Epidemical Sickness among
the People. The opposite Place of the Globe to Virginia, is that part of the
East-Indian Ocean, lying between 120 and 130 Degrees of Longitude, with 33 and
40 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country [strangely intermixed with a vast number of
Oyster-Shells] is generally Sandy, yet Soil.
abundantly fertile in Grain, where employed that way. It affords also most
sorts of Roots, and desirable Fruits, with Physical Plants and Herbs in great
plenty; but above all, it produces a wonderful quantity of Tobacco, that
bewitching Weed so accounted off all the World over. The length of the Days and
Nights in Virginia, is the same as in the Southern Provinces of Spain, they
both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Country, in which the Natives Traffic with the
English, are Skins of Commodities.
Deer, Bever, and other Wild Beasts, for which the English return them Guns,
Powder, Shot, Iron-Tools, Brandy, etc. but the chief thing exported hence for
England, is Tobacco, there being above an hundred and fifty Sail of Ships
commonly that load therewith every Year.

Such is the prodigious multitude of Oyster-Shells intermixed with the Earth in
Virginia, that in some places Rarities.
they are found three or four Yards deep in the Ground, where lying close
together, they are said to petrify, and seem to make a Vein of such a Rock. But
whether the Parts of that Rock, are really the Shells of Oysters, there left by
the Sea, (which some suppose to have overflowed this Tract of Land) or Lapides
sui Generis, sub Judice lis est. (2.) In some lesser Banks of Shells are found
Teeth, [about two or three Inches long, and one broad] supposed to be those of
Fishes; and in other Parts are dug up the Bones of Whales several Yards deep,
and that many Leagues from Sea. (3.) Near the River Patomeck is a sort of
Aluminous Earth, of an Ash Color, very soft and light, and of an
Acid-astringent Taste, almost like that of Alum. (4.) In many Parts of this
Country is found a certain kind of Squirrel, who, at his pleasure, can stretch
out the Skin of his Sides, Thighs, and Legs, about an Inch in breadth (almost
like the Wings of a Bat) by the help of which, he leaps farther, and alights
more surely than the ordinary sort, and is therefore called the Flying-Squirrel.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics. None. As for Universities, here is a
considerable Seminary of Learning Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, etc.
lately established at St. James Town, which already merits the Title of
College, and we hope it will in process of time deserve the Name of an
University.

The Natives of this Country being Persons generally of tall and slender
Bodies, black Hair, and of a Manners.
tawny Complexion, are much given to Revenge, and very exact in vindicating the
Death of a Friend, if they can by any means possible. They spend most of their
time in Hunting wild Beasts, particularly Deer and Bever, whose Skins (as
aforesaid) they interchange with the English for what Necessaries they want.
Natives of the Inland Parts, are said to burn their Dead, and lay up their
Ashes near their Cabins. Those whom they own as Priests, are looked upon as so
many Conjurers, because by their Invocations in a private Cabin, it is reported,
that they frequently cause abundance of Rain to fall. The English here
residing, are much the same with those in England.

The Language of the Natives of this Country, is remarkable for its vast
variety of Dialects, and those Language.
so different from one another, that People of twenty Miles distance (and
sometimes less) are as quite different Nations, neither of 'em being able to
comprehend the full meaning of one another Jargon, without the help of an
Interpreter. Of such People or Nations, are chiefly reckoned the Chawonocks,
Mangoags, Monacans, Mannahocks, Masawomekes, Pawhatans, etc. The English here
residing, retain and use their own Language.

The Natives (especially those in the Inland Parts of this Country) own
Subjection to certain Governors Commodities.
of their own, called Weroans. The English are subject unto, and ruled by a
particular Governor, appointed and sent thither by his Britannick Majesty. The
various Laws, which immediately relate to the Colony it self, are made by the
Governor, with the Consent of his Council, in Conjunction with the Burgesses
elected by Freeholders. But for Decision of Matters, (whether Civil or
Criminal in general) they are the very same with those here in England. The
chief Court of Judicature, being held Quarterly, is called the Quarter-Court:
In it the Governor and Council are Judges, who determine in Affairs of greatest
moment; and to it Appeals are made from Inferior Courts, Monthly kept in every
County; there being Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers
appointed for that end by the Governor.

The English here residing, are (for the most part) Arms.
Professors of the Protestant Doctrine, and Observers Religion.
of the Forms of Divine Worship, according to the Model of the Church of
England. But the Natives continue Pagan, except a few of the younger sort
already taught the Elements of Human Literature, and instructed in the
Principles of Christianity, by the Members of our lately erected Seminary of
Learning at St James Town: of whose happy and desired Progress in this matter,
we have all Reason in the World to wish, and no small Grounds to hope the best.

. 11. Carolina.
THIS Country (discovered at first about the same time with Virginia, and
afterward, Anno 1660 Name.
granted by Patent to several Noblemen as Proprietors thereof) is termed by the
French, Caroline; by the Italians, Spaniards, Germans, and English, Carolina;
so called in Honor of His Britannick Majesty, King Charles the Second.

The Air of this Country is reckoned very healthful to breath in, and so
temperate, that it is a good Medium Air.
between the extremities of Heat and Cold, that are most sensibly felt in
diverse Parts of the World. The opposite Place of the Globe to Carolina, is that
part of the East-Indian Ocean, lying between 120 and 130 Degrees of Longitude,
with 29 and 36 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Country is for the most part very fruitful, producing in
great plenty most sorts of Fruits, Soil.
Roots, Plants, Herbs, etc. besides variety of English Grain. The length of the
Days and Nights in Carolina, is much the same with those in the Southmost Part
of Spain, and Northmost of Barbary, they both lying under the same Parallels of
Latitude.

The chief Commodities exported hence, are Skins of Otters, Bears, and
Leopards; as also Oil, Olives, Commodities.
Cotton, Indico, Ginger, Tobacco, Sorsaparilla, Turmerick, Snakes-Root, etc.

What chiefly deserves the Epithet of Rare in Carolina, is a certain Herb,
which goes by the Name of the Rarities.
Country; and remarkable for its long red Root, which draws upon Paper good red
Lines, but answers not in Dying.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country, being naturally Men of good Courage, and for a
long time at Wars among Manners.
themselves, are mightily diminished in their Number, by what they were. But
those remaining, are generally Persons of a good agreeable Temper, and maintain
a firm Friendship with our Colony. The English here residing, are the same in
Manners with those here in England.

The Natives have a particular Jargon of their own, which sounds very harsh to
the Ear, and seems to Language.
Strangers extremely hard, if not impossible to be acquired. The English use
their own Language.

King Charles II. having granted Carolina by Letters-Patent, in Propriety to
George Duke of Albemarle, Government.
Edward Earl of Clarendon, etc. by those Letters, the Laws of England were to
be always in force in this Country, only the Lords Proprietors are empowered
(together with the Consent of the Inhabitants) to make or repeal such Bylaws,
as shall from time to time be thought expedient, for the better governing of
the whole Colony.

The English here residing, are of many and different Arms.
Persuasions in Matters of Religion, there being a Liberty of Conscience
allowed by the very Constitution Religion.
of their Government. The Natives have as yet no revealed Knowledge of the True
God, but follow the vain Imaginations of their own Minds; however, they are
said to acknowledge one Supreme Being, whom they Worship under the Name of
Okee, and to him their Priests do frequently Sacrifice; but they believe that
he takes no care of Human Affairs, committing them to lesser Deities. They
acknowledge also a Transmigration of Souls, and a Future State of Happiness
after this Life.

SCET. V. Concerning Terra Arctica.
UNDER the Title of Terra Arctica, we comprehend all those Northern Countries,
lying either entirely (or mostly) within the Arctick Polar Circle. The chief of
which are these following, viz. Greenland, Nova Zembla, New Denmark,
Spitsberge, Terra de Jesso, New North Wales.


Of these we know little more, as yet, than their bare Names. I am very
sensible, That in treating of them, (yea, and that individual Part of the Earth
exactly under the North Pole) some Writers are pleased to speak as
particularly, as if they were discoursing of the Fifty two Counties of England.
But leaving such Gentlemen to divert themselves with their own Chimera's; and
leaving these Countries to the better Discovery of Future Ages, I pass on to
the various Divisions of South America; choosing rather to say nothing of the
aforesaid unknown Countries, than to relate things of them that are
satisfactory neither to my self, nor the Reader; being willing to have due
regard to that excellent Saying of the Roman Orator, Quam bellum est velle
confiteri potius nescire guod Nescias, quam ista effutientem nauseare, atque
ipsum sibi displicere! Cic. de Not. Deor. Lib. 1. Now follows,

SECT. VI. Concerning Terra Firma.
d. m. Situated between 297 30 of Long. Its greatest Length from E to W. is
about 1260 Miles 330 00 between 03 20 of Latit. Breadth from S. to N. is about
480 Miles. 11 30 Being divided into East the River Orinoque, called Guiana.
West the River Orinoque, termed Castello del Oro. East comprehands the
Provinces of Caribana -- Chief Town Moreshego -- N. to S. Guiana -- Manboa --
West comprehends the Provinces of Panama, or Terra Firma Panama -- From W. to
E. Carthagena -- Idem -- St Martha -- Idem -- Rio de la hacha Idem -- Venezula
-- Idem -- Andaluzia -- Comane -- Paria -- Maluregvara -- From E. to W. Granada
-- St. Fe de Bagota -- Popayan -- St. Fe de Antiochia

THIS Country (discovered by the Spaniards, and Conquered, Anno 15 14. is
termed by the Italians, Name.
Terra Firma; by the Spaniards, Tierra Firma; by the French, Terre Ferme; by
the Germans, Het vast Land; and by the English, Terra Firma; so called by the
Discoverers thereof, as being one Part of the Firm Land, or Main Continent, at
which the Spaniards first touched in their Western Discoveries.

The Air of this Country is extremely hot, yet generally accounted very
wholesome, save in the Northmost Air.
Parts adjacent to the Isthmus of Panama, where the Ground is full of Lakes and
Marshes, which by their ascending Vapors do render the Air very gross, and
consequently less wholesome to breath in. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Terra Firma, is that part of the East-Indian Ocean, lying between 107 and 150
Degrees of Longitude, with 3 Degrees of North, and 11 Degrees of Southern
Latitude.

This Country (lying mostly in the first North Climate) is said to be blessed
with an excellent Soil, producing Soil.
great plenty of Corn and Fruits, where duly manured. It mightily abounds in
Venison, Fish, and Fowl. A great part of it is planted with Cotton, and others
are very productive of Sugars and Tobacco. Here are also very considerable
Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, etc. many precious Stones, and in several places,
good fishing of Pearls. The longest Day in the Northmost Part of this Country,
is 12 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is 12 Hours, or thereabouts; and
the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Silver, and other Metals,
Balsam, Rozin, Gums, Commodities.
Long Pepper, Emeralds, Saphires, Jasper, etc.

Upon the Coast of Terra Firma nigh Surinam, is frequently seen, and sometimes
taken that Fish, usually Rarities.
called by Mariners, the Old Wife, but otherways, the Square Acarauna; so
termed from his Figure, being almost a complete Quadratum. (2.) In several
Parts of Guiana, are certain Trees, called Totock, remarkable for their Fruit,
which is of so great a bulk, and withal so hard, that People cannot with safety
walk among 'em, when the Fruit is ripe, being in danger every moment to have
their Brains knocked out. (3.) In one of the Branches of Orenoque River, is such
a hideous Cataract, that the Water falling down, makes as loud a Noise, as if a
thousand Bells were knocked one against another. Vid. Heylin's Cosmog. last
Edition, page 1086. (4.) On the top of a high Mountain, called Cowob, is a
considerable Lake, (according to the Report of the Natives) and that wellstockt
with most sorts of Fishes. (5) In some Rivers of Guiana, is a certain little
Fish, about the bigness of a Smelt, and remarkable for having four Eyes, two on
each side, one above the other; and in Swiming, it is observed to keep the
uppermost two above, and the other two under Water. (6.) In the Island of
Trinidado, [near the Coast of Terra Firma] is a remarkable Fountain of Pitch,
which boileth out of the Earth in great abundance, and is exported thence to
various places in these Parts of the World. (7.) Near C. Brea, on the
Continent, is another Fountain of Pitchy Substance, much used in triming of
Ships with good success, and preferable to the ordinary Pitch in those hot
Countries, being able to resist the scorching Heat of the Sunbeams. Vid.
Purchase his Pilgrims, Part 4. Lib. 6.

Here is one Spanish Archbishopric, viz. that of St. Fee de Bagota.
Archbishopric.


Bishoprics.
Bishoprics four, viz. those of Popayan, Carthagena, Panama, St. Martha.


None. Universities.


The Natives of this Country, being Persons of a tawny Color, and (for the
most part) of very robust Manners.
and proper Bodies, are a People that is very healthful, and generally live to
great Ages, notwithstanding the Air they breath in is none of the best. They
spend most of their time in Hunting, and such like Diversions, as the
generality of other Americans do, and commonly they walk naked above their
Middles.

Here is a great Diversity of Languages among the Natives, and each of these
divided into several Dialects. Language.
The Europeans here settled retain the several Languages, peculiar to their
respective Countries from whence they came.

This spacious Country, is, in a great part, subject to the King of Spain, and
governed by the Viceroy Government.
of Mexico, under whom are several Deputy-Governors in diverse Parts for the
better management of the whole; and for an equal Distribution of Justice every
where, there are established many Courts of Judicatory, in which all Causes,
whether Civil or Criminal, are heard and determined. Some of the Midland
Provinces are as yet free from the Spanish Power, being still maintained by the
Natives, who acknowledge Subjection unto, and are governed by the Heads, or
Eldest of their Families.

The Natives of this Country (especially in the Midland Arms.
Provinces) are gross Idolaters. Nigh unto, and Religion.
upon the River Wiapoco, is a certain Nation, (called Marashewaccas) whose
Object of Religious Worship, is a monstrous Idol of Stone, set up in a most
frightful Posture. For it is fashioned like a very big Man sitting upon his
Heels, resting his Elbows upon his Knees, and holding forwards the Palms of his
Hands, and looking upwards, does gape with his Mouth wide open. The different
Europeans here residing, are of the same Religion with that established in the
respective Countries from whence they came.

SECT. VII. Concerning Peru.
d. m. Situated between 290 30 of Long. Itsgreatest Length from N. to S. is
about 1440 Miles. 307 10 between 25 30 of S. Latit. Breadth from W. to E. is
about 480 Miles. 01 00 of N. Lat. Peru comprehends the Province of Posto --
Chief Town Poston -- From N. to S. Los Quixos -- Baesa -- Pacamores --
Valladolid -- Qui^c -- Idem -- Peru -- Lima -- Los Carea^ -- Potosi --

THIS Country (discovered by the Spaniards, Anno 1525.) is termed Peru by the
Italians, Spaniards, Name.
French, Germans, and English; so called (according to the best of Critics)
from a certain Rivulet, which bore that Name among the Indians, at the
Spaniards first arrival.

The Air of this Country is of a very different Nature, being in some places
extremely hot, and in others Air.
extraordinary sharp and piercing. The Wind upon this Coast (according to J.
Acosta) blows always from the South and South-West, (contrary to what is usual
between the Tropicks) and is not violent, tempestuous, or unhealthful, as
elsewhere; but very moderate and agreeable. He further observes, That all along
the Coast, called Lanos, it never Rains, Thunders, Snows, nor Hails; yet very
frequently a little out at Sea: And that among the Andes, it Rains in a manner
continually. The opposite Place of the Globe to Peru, is that part of the Gulf
of Bengale, between 110 and 127 Degrees of Longitude, with 1 and 25 Degrees of
South Latitude.

This Country (lying in the 1st, 2d, and 3d South Climate) consists of many
large and pleasant Valleys, Soil.
with diverse high and lofty Mountains. The Valleys in some places, especially
toward the Seacoasts are very Sandy, and frequently subject to Earth Quakes;
in other places they are very rich, and the Air extremely sultry. The Mountains
(particularly the Andes) are, for the most part, continually Cold in their
Tops, yet exceeding fertile, and generally lined with most costly Mines beyond
any Country in the World, witness the famous lofty Hill of Potozi, in the
Province of Los Carcas. It is universally esteemed the richest of all the
Foreign Plantations belonging to the Spaniard. The longest Day in the Northmost
Part of Peru, is about 12 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is 10 Hours;
and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold and Silver in vast quantities,
costly Pearls, and abundance Commodities.
of Cotton, Tobacco, Cocheneel, Medicinal Drugs, etc.

There Is a high Mountain in Peru, (called Periacaca) to whose Top if any Person
ascend, he is suddenly Rarities.
taken with a terrible sit of Vomiting. And many Travelers endeavoring to
pass over the Desert of Punas, have been benumbed on a sudden, and fallen down
dead, which makes that way wholly neglected of late. (2.) On the Tops of the
highest Mountains in Peru, (as in other Parts of the World) are frequently
found some considerable Lakes, several of which are very hot. (3) In the Valley
of Tarapaya, near to Potozi, is a very hot Lake of a Circular Form, whose
middle part (for about twenty Foot square) continually boils up; and though the
Water is so extremely warm, yet the Soil about the Lake is extraordinary cold.
(4) At the Baths of Ingua, is a Stream of Water almost boiling hot; and hard by
it does issue forth another Stream as cold as Ice. (5.) In the Province of Loc
Carcas is another Spring of Water so very hot, that one cannot hold his Finger
in it for the short space of one Ave-Maria. And somewhere else in this County
is a Fountain, out of which there issues a considerable Current, of a Color
almost as red as Blood. (6.) Near to Cusco is a Spring, whose Waters turn into
pure white Salt, wherewith the whole Country adjacent is supplied. (7) Among
the Quicksilver Mines in Guaniavilica, is a Fountain of hot Water, whose
Current having run a considerable way, turns at last into a soft kind of Rock,
which being easily cut, and yet very lasting, is usually imploi'd for building
of Houses thereabouts. (8) Nigh C. S. Helene, and all along the Coast, are many
Fountains of Coppey, (a Substance resembling Pitch, and frequently used as
such) or Gultran Rozen, which flow in such abundance, that Ships at Sea (out of
sight of Land) can give a shrewd guess where they are, by the very smell of
such Fountains, providing there be a gentle Breeze from the Shore. (9.) In
diverse Parts of Peru, are still Extant the Ruins of many stately Indian
Temples, particularly that called the Pachamana (about four Leagues from ^^ma):
And another in the City of Dusco, which might have been formerly accounted the
American Pantheon, for the Idols of all Nations conquered by the Inguas, were
always brought thither, and there set up. (10) Among the Curiosities of this
Country, we may also reckon the Cucujus Peruvianus, or Lanthorn-Fly: An Insect
of a considerable bigness, and remarkable for its shining Property in the Dark,
(appearing as a little Lanthorn at a distance) whereupon the Natives when
obliged to Travel a Nights, do usually fasten a few of 'em to a Stick, and by
their Light can clearly see their way. We may also add those extraordinary
little Birds of this Country, called Tomineios, [of whom in Brasile] being of
so small a Bulk, that they surpass not common wild Bees in bigness. And finally
those prodigious great Birds, [nam'd Condores] who are so large and strong,
that they will set upon and devour an ordinary Calf. For all these, and several
other Remarkables of Peru, Vid. J. Acosta, his Natural and Moral History of the
Indies.

Here is one Spanish Archbishopric, viz. that of Archbishopricks.
Lima.

Bishoprics, are those of Bishoprics.
Cusco, Truxillo, Quinto. Arequipa, Guamanga,


Universities in this Country. None. Universities.


The Natives of this Country, are reported to be a People that is (for the most
part) very Simple, and Manners.
grossly Ignorant. Those toward the Equator, are generally esteemed more
Ingenious than the rest, but withal much addicted to two most detestable Vices,
viz. Dissimulation and Sodomy. The Spaniards here residing, are much the same
with those in Spain.

The Language of the Natives, did formerly consist of several quite different
Dialects (or rather so many Language.
distinct Tongues, they being unintelligible to one another) but these are much
diminished, and daily grow fewer; for the People in the lower Part of this
Country, being now (almost) entirely civilized, have left their Ancient Jargon,
and commonly use the Spanish Tongue.

This rich Country (by most probable Conjectures) was governed by its Incas, or
Hereditary Kings, Government.
above three hundred Years before the Spaniards got any footing therein; but
being fully mastered by them, Anno 1533. under the Conduct of Pizarro, it has
been ever since accounted a considerable Part of the King of Spain's American
Dominions, and is governed by his Viceroy, who ordinarily resideth at Lima. In
several places, the Natives (especially those of the Mountains) maintain as yet
their Liberties, and are ruled by some particular Caciques.

The Peruvians (except those converted to Christianity) Arms.
are gross Idolaters, worshipping the Sun, Moon, Religion.
Stars, Lightning, Thunder, etc. To each of such Deities were formerly erected
in this Country very stately Temples, whose Remains are still extant in many
places, besides one almost entire, viz. that at Cusco. This Temple was
dedicated to the Sun, but is now a part of the Monastry of St Dominick. Its
Walls were over-laid with Plates of Gold from top to bottom, and in it was set
up a glorious Representation of the Sun, being a lively Figure of that
Caelestial Body in pure Massy Gold. Near to this Temple were four others, one
whereof was dedicated to the Moon, whom they called Quilla, reckoning her
either Wife or Sister to the Sun. Another to the Planet Venus, which they
termed Chasca. A third to Thunder and Lightning, which went by the common Name
of Yllapa. And a fourth to Cuychu, i. e. Iris, or the Rainbow. All of them were
wonderfully errich'd with either Gold or Silver; and besides these, were many
others, through the various Provinces of this [once] mighty Empire; but the
most magnificent Temple of all Peru, was that spendid piece of Indian
Architecture in a certain Island of the Lake Titicaca, in which the Incas are
believed to have hid a great deal of Treasure, when the Spaniards invaded their
Country.

SCET. VIII. Concerning the Land of the Amazons.
This vast Country is of no certain Extent nor Division, neither has it any
remarkable Town.

THIS Country (discovered by the Spaniards, Anno 1541.) is termed by the
Italians, Paese di Amazona; Name.
by the Spaniards, Tierra de las Amazonas; by the French, Pais des Amazones; by
the Germans, Y land van d' Amazones; and by the English, The Land of the
Amazons; so called from the many warlike Women, (resembling the Ancient
Amazons) who appeared in Arms on the Banks of the River Amazone, at the
Europeans first entering into this Country.

The Air of this Country, in places as yet discovered, is reported to be very
Temperate, considering the Latitude Air.
of the Country. The opposite Place of the Globe to the Land of the Amazons, is
partly the Gulf of Bengal, and partly the Peninsula of Malacca.

The Soil of this Country, (it lying in the 1st, 2d, and 3d South Climate)
where yet discovered, is very Soil.
fertile, producing great variety of Fruits and Grain. Here also are abundance
of Mines, Sugarcanes, Cacoa, and Tobacco. The longest Day in the Northmost
Parts, is about 12-Hours, and a little more; the shortest in the Southmost, is
11 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The Commodities of this Country are reckoned Gold, Silver, Sugar, Cacoa,
Ebony, Tobacco, etc. but this Commodities.
Part of the World being as yet very slenderly known, and little frequented by
Strangers, these may be rather reckoned the Product than Staple Commodities of
this Country.

In the River Amazone, is a dreadful Cataract, a considerable way from the Sea;
for the Water being Rarities.
penned up between two steep Rocks (under which is a hideous Precipice) the
Stream falls down with great Violence and Noise. Yet notwithstanding of this
so terrible a Fall, there be many of the Natives, who, it is reported, are so
bold, as to descend that Stream in their little Canoos. In falling, they are
sure to turn topsy-turvy many times, and are severely plunged in the Deep when
down; yet such is their Care and Nimbleness, that they quickly recover their
Canoos, and forthwith proceed on their Voyage. J. Acosta.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


Upon the Banks of the River Amazone, (as is hinted at already) were discovered
about fifty different Nations. Manners.
who seemed generally to be a fierce and savage sort of People; all, both Men
and Women, appearing in Arms, at the first approaching of the Spaniards; and
they still continue as fierce and savage as formerly, and many of 'em are
reported to be Anthropophagi, or eaters of Human Flesh.

Our knowledge of this (as yet) ill discovered Country is so slender, and the
Commerce between Europeans Language.
and this People, so little, that we can make no Observations on the Nature and
Number of their Languages.

How this People is governed, (or if any Form of Government among them) is not
yet very certain. Government.
A further Enquiry into the sum, must be referred to the better Discovery of
Future Ages.

That the Inhabitants of this Country, are in general Arms.
gross Idolaters, is most that can be said of them as Religion.
yet. They are reported to make their Images of Wood, and to set them up in the
Corners of their Houses, (having no Temples) and do firmly believe, That those
polished Pieces of Timber are really inhabited by some Divinities descended
from Heaven, being taught the same by their Priests.

SECT. IX. Concerning Brasil.
d. m. Situated between 322 00 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. E. to S. W.
is about 1600 Miles. 346 30 between 01 00 of Latit. Breadth from N. to S. is
about 1380 Miles. 23 00 Brasil [of no certain Division] its Chief Towns are
those of S. Vincent -- Found upon the Sea Coast from S. to N. Sanctos -- Angra
dos Reyes -- S. Sebastian -- Spiritu sanctio -- Porto seguro -- S. Salvadore --
Pernambuco -- Parayba --

THIS Country (discovered by the Portugueze, Anno 1501.) is termed Brasil by
the Italians, Spaniards, Name.
French, Germans, and English; but why so called is not certain. Those, who
derive the Name from the abundance of that Wood (termed by the Europeans,
Brasile-Wood) which grows in this Country, do give [methinks] no satisfactory
Account of the matter.

The Air of this Country is generally very wholesome; and notwithstanding Brasil
is almost entirely Air.
within the Torrid Zone, yet in those Parts already discovered, it is exceeding
Temperate, being daily qualified by Sea-Breezes about Noon. Opposite on the
Globe to Brasil, are the Philippin Islands; with part of the Eastern Ocean
adjacent to them.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th South Climate) is
reported to be extraordinary Soil.
fertile, especially in those Places already discovered. The longest Day in the
Northmost Parts, is about 12 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, 10 Hours;
and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Redwood (otherways Brasil-wood,
much used for Dying) Commodities.
in great quantities; abundance of Sugar; as also Amber, Rozin, Balm, Tobacco,
Train-Oyl, Confectures, etc.

As the principal Rarities of Brasil, we make fitly reckon the considerable
number of very strange Creatures Rarities.
found in that Country: The chief of which I shall here mention, and those
reducible to Four General Classes, viz. Beasts, Serpents, Birds, and Fishes. I.
Of Beasts. The most remarkable of them are these following. (1.) Monkeys,
particularly that sort, called by Europeans, the Kings-Monkey, the biggest of
the whole Species, and observable for having a thin hollow Throttle-Bone, near
the upper end of the Larynx, by the help of which he makes a great noise. Here
also are many Monkeys (of a yellowish Color) that smell like ordinary Musk.
(2.) The Sloth [term'd by the Natives Haii, from his Voice of a like sound]
but by most Europeans, Ignavus or Pigritia; and corruptedly Percza, by the
Spaniards; so called from the Nature of that Animal, being of so flow a Motion,
that he requires three or four Days to climb up a Tree of an ordinary height,
and twenty four Hours to walk fifty Paces on plain Ground. His Fore-feet are
almost double his hinder in length; and when he climbs a Tree, his hold he
takes is so sure, that while he hangs by a Branch, he can Sleep securely. (3.)
The Tamandu^-guacu, [which is a great Bear] so termed by the Natives, but
commonly by Europeans, the Ant-Bear, because he usually feeds upon Ants, at
least destroys those Creatures wherever he finds them. His Tail is so big
that [Squirrel like] he can cover his whole Body therewith. (4.) The great
Shell'd-Hedghog, called by the Natives Tatu; and Armadillo by the Spaniards,
because he gathers himself up, Head, Feet, and Tail, within his Shell, as round
as a Ball; and that as a sure Defense, when either he goes to Sleep, or is
actually assaulted by any destructive Creature, with whom he dares not grapple.
II. Of Serpents. The most remarkable of them, are, (1.) That called by the
Natives Ibibaboca, which is about three Yards and an half long and of a
considerable bigness; his Colors are originally White, Red, and Black, of all
kinds; and his Bite is most pernicious of any, yet works the slowest. (2) The
Boigua^u, which is the biggest of the whole Species, being half a Yard in
compass about the Middle, and almost seven Yards long. (3) The Bo^cininga,
otherways the Rattle Snake, so called by Europeans from a Rattle in the end of
his Tail, composed of a number of d^y Bones, from eight to sixteen, which are
hollow, thin, hard, and very sonorous. Those Persons, whose misfortune it is,
to be bitten by him, are tormented with exquisite Pain, (their whole Body
cleaving into Chops) and frequently die within twenty four Hours in a most sad
Condition. But (as a remarkable Act of the Divine Providence) this noxious
Animal gives timely warning to Travelers to avoid him, by making a great noise
with his Rattle, how soon he hears any Person approaching toward him. III. Of
Brasile Birds, the most remarkable are, (1.) The Humming-Bird, which is so
called from the humming noise he makes with his Wings like a Be, when he
seeds, by thrusting his small Bill into Flowers. The Brasilians term him
Guanumbi, and some Writers Ourissia, i. e. the Sunbeam, because of his radiant
colored Feathers, with which the Indians adorn their Images; but the Spaniards
call him Tomineius, because so small, that one of them with its Nest weighs
only two Tomino's, a Weight in Spain consisting of twelve Grains. (2.) The
Anhima, so called by the Natives, but by Europeans the Unicorn-Bird, because he
has a kind of Horn growing out of his Forehead about two or three Inches long,
of a brittle substance, and blunt at the top; and is therefore neither
defensive nor offensive to him. (3.) That called Guara by the Brasilians, and
by Europeans the Sea-Curlew; the same with Numenius Indicus, and Arcuata
Coccinea among Latin Authors, and remarkable for its alteration of Colors:
Being at first Black, then Ash-colored, next White, afterward Scarlet, and
last of all Crimson, which grows the richer dye, the longer he lives. IV. Of
Fishes taken upon the Coast of Brasile, the most remarkable are, (1.) Orbis
Minor, or the Globe-fish, so called from his Orbicular form; and remarkable for
being armed with many long, round, hard and sharp Spikes and Needles all over
his Body, almost like those of a Hedg-hog. When he swims, it is believed, that
he draws those Needles in, depressing them to his Body, to facilitate his way
through the water; and that he advances them at any time he happens to be
pursued, bidding (as 'twere) the Enemy to come at his peril. (2.) Upon this
Coast is frequently seen the Echeneis or Remora, a Fish very famous among the
Ancients for it stupendous power in stopping a Ship (as they imagined) though
under fail, and before a brisk gale of Wind. Which strange account was
generally believed for many Ages, and not a few have labored to assign the
cause; but is now looked upon as a ridiculous Story, and deservedly exploded by
every ordinary Traveller. These are the most remarkable Creatures, whether
Beasts, Serpents, Birds or Fishes belonging to Brasile; and all (or most) of
them, are to be seen in the public Repository of Gresham College, London.

Here is one Portuguize Archbishopric, viz. that of S. Salvadore, to whose
Incumbent are subject Archbishopricks, etc.
several Suffragans, but their Number and Names are uncertain. Universities
none.

The Brasilians are reported to be generally a cruel, thievish and revengeful
sort of People; yet some on the Manners.
Seacoast being civilized, prove very ingenious. This vast Body comprehends
several different Nations, the chief of which are the Toupinambous, the
Margajas, the Tapuyes, etc. who are ordinarily distinguished from one another
by the wearing of their Hair. They generally go quite naked, and in many places
of the main Land are multitudes of Canibals. Their manner of reposing a Nights
is in a kind of Net, gathered at each end, and ti'd to two Poles fixed fast in
the ground. This Net is made of the Rind of a certain Tree called Haemac; and
hence is derived the vulgar appellation of Sea-Bedding, commonly used in the
English Fleet.

The diversity of Languages among the Natives of those Places already
discovered on the Seacoasts, does Language.
sufficiently evince, that their number must be much greater, in the Inland
parts of this vastly extended Country. The only thing observable of those
Languages upon the Seacoasts, is, that the Natives cannot pronounce the three
Letters of L. F. R. and that their manner of pronunciation is much through
their Throat. The Portugueze here residing retain and use their own Language.

The Brasilians being divided (as aforesaid) into many different Nations,
several of them choose certain Government.
Captains or Governors, by whom they are ruled; others wander up and down, and
live without any Order or Government among them. The Portugueze being Masters
of the Seacoasts since the Year 1501. and having divided them into certain
Praefectures, over each of these is set a particular Governor, which Governors
are all accountable to the Viceroy of Portugal, whose place of Residence is
ordinarily at St. Salvadore.

The Natives of Brasil are reported to entertain but a Arms.
faint notion of a Supreme Being, and a Future State; Religion.
and many are sunk even beneath Idolatry it self, having neither Idol nor
Temple to be seen among them. Others are said to believe the Soul's
Immortality; and to give some obscure hints of an Universal Deluge. Many of
those who live nigh unto, and upon the Seacoasts, are converted to
Christianity, and that by the commendable Industry of the Portugueze, who are
of the same Religion with that established in Portugal.

SECT. X. Concerning Chili.
d. m. Situated between 302 00 of Long. its greatest Length from N. to S. is
about 960 Miles. 306 00 between 25 30 of Latit. Breadth from W. to E. is about
200 Miles. 44 00 Chili comprehends the Provinces of Chili propria -- Chapter Town
St. Jago -- No. to S. upon the Seacoast. Chili Imperial -- Balvidia --
Chucuito -- Mandosa, East of Chili propria. Chili Imperial.

THIS Country (discovered by the Spaniards, Anno 1554.) is termed Chili by the
Italians, Spaniards, Name.
French, Germans, and English; so called (as most imagine) from a large and
spacious Valley of that Name.

The Air of this Country, during the Summer, is much of the same Quality as in
Spain, or rather more Air.
Temperate, being frequently fanned by Westerly Sea-Breezes: But in the Winter,
the Cold is so excessively piercing, that both Man and Beast do perish in great
numbers. The opposite Place of the Globe to Chili, is the South part of
Tartary, between 122 and 126 Degrees of Longitude, with 25 and 44 Degrees of
North Latitude.

The mountainous Parts of this Country (it lying in the 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th South
Climate) are generally Dry Soil.
and Barren; but in the large Valleys toward the Sea, the Soil is exceeding
fertile, producing great plenty of Maize, Wheat, and most sorts of other Grain;
as also variety of Herbs and Fruits; and the Vines brought hither from Spain,
do prosper extraordinary well. This Country affords likeways some rich Mines
of Gold and Silver. The longest Day in the Northmost Parts, is about 13 Hours;
the shortest in the Southmost, is 7 Hours; and the Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, are Gold, Silver, Maize, Corn, Honey,
Ostridges, and several Commodities.
Metals.

In Chili is a very remarkable Bird, called Cuntur, (corruptedly Condor by the
Spaniards) which is of a Rarities.
prodigious Size, and extremley Ravenous. He frequently sets upon a Sheep or
Calf, and comes down with such force, that his Blow is always mortal, and not
only kills, but is also able to eat up one of 'em entirely. Two of 'em will
dare to assault a Cow or Bull, and usually masster them. The Inhabitants of the
Country are not free from such Attempts; but Nature has so ordered, that this
destructive Creature is very rare, the whole Country affording only a very
small number, otherways not to be inhabited, Vid. J. Acosta, his Natural and
Moral History of the Indies.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Country, being of a white Complexion, and tall of Stature,
are a very warlike and Manners.
courageous sort of People, especially the Arauques, who are as yet unconquered
by the Spaniards. For Clothing, they use nothing else than the Skins of Wild
Beasts.

The prevailing Language of this Country, is the Spanish, which is not only in
use among the Spaniards Language.
themselves, but also is currently spoken (at least understood) by the
Plurality of the Natives. Those of 'em, who entertain little Commerce with the
Spaniard, retain still their own Jargon as in ancient Times.

The Natives (where they maintain their Freedom as yet) are ruled by certain
Captains of their own Government.
choosing: But this Country being invaded, and taken Possession of by the
Spaniard, above an hundred Years ago, is mostly subject to the Crown of Spain,
and ruled by a particular Governor, residing at Conception, in Subordination to
the Viceroy of Peru.

The Natives of this Country (excepting those converted Arms.
to Christianity) are generally reckoned the Religion.
grossest Idolaters of all the Americans, the chief Object of their Worship
being the Devil, whom they term Eponamon, which signifies Strong or Powerful.
The Spaniards here residing, are Roman Catholics, as in the Kingdom of Spain.

SECT. XI. Concerning Paraguay.
d. m. Situated between 307 10 of Long. Its greatest Length from N. to S. is
about 1560 Miles. 337 40 between 12 00 of Latit. Breadth from W. to E. is about
1500 Miles. 37 00 Paraguay divided into several Provinces, the best known of
which are Guayra -- Chief Town Cividad Real E. to W. on the Br. of Rio de Plat.
Paragaia propria Villa Rica -- Chaco -- Conception Tucoman -- St. Jago
Assumption W. to E. on the Rio de la Plata -- B. of Rio de Pl.

THIS Country (discovered first by John Dias de Solis, but more successfully,
Anno 1546 when Name.
the Spaniards took Possession thereof) is termed by the Germans, Paraguaii; by
the Italians, Spaniards, French, and English, Paraguay; so called from a River
of the same Name. It Is also called Rio de la Plata by the Spaniards, because of
the abundance of Silver they found therein.

The Air of this Country is generally reported to be very temperate, and
abundantly healthful to breath Air.
in. The opposite Place of the Globe to Paraguay, is that part of the Kingdom
of China and the Mogul's Empire, between 127 and 157 Degrees of Longitude, with
12 and 37 Degrees of North Latitude.

The Soil of this Country (it lying in the 2d, 3d, 4th, and 5th South Climate)
is esteemed to be very Soil.
fertile in most places, producing abundance of Corn, Wine, Fruits, and Herbs;
and here also are several considerable Mines. The longest Day in the Northmost
Parts, is about 13 Hours; the shortest in the Southmost, is 10 Hours; and the
Nights proportionably.

The chief Commodities of this Country, (at least the Product thereof) are
reckoned to be some Gold, Commodities.
Silver, Brass, Iron, Sugars, Amethists, etc.

Upon Rio de la Plata are frequently seen, and sometimes killed diverse kinds of
Serpents of a prodigious Rarities.
bigness. (2.) Toward the Northern Parts of Paraguay, is a certain Champaign
Country, about six Leagues square, which is all overspread with an excellent
sort of Salt, and that to a considerable height (3.) In the Western Parts of
Tucoman, is a prodigious high and large Mountain, which for its wonderful
Glistering in a clear Sun-shine-day, is called the Crystal Mountain. Under it
is extended a hideous Cave-passage, through which does glide a considerable
Current of Water, with so many windings and turnings, that from the time of its
entry under the Mountain, to its issuing forth on the other side, is almost the
space of twenty four or thirty Hours, according to the Computation of the
Portugueses, who were so adventurous, as to make the Experiment, and that by
hazarding their Persons upon a Roft made of Canes, Vid. Purchase his Pilgrims,
Part 4. Lib. 6.

Here is one Spanish Archbishopric, viz. that of Archbishopricks, etc.
Rio de la Plata.

To the Archbishopric of Rio de la Plata, are several Suffragans, viz those of

St. Jago de Lestero, Assumption, Panama, Paraguay.

As for Universities, here are none. Universities.


The Paraguayans, though Persons of very big and tall Bodies, are nevertheless
reported to be very nimble, Manners.
and much given to Running. They are said to be somewhat Laborious, and less
Savage than many others of the adjacent Nations, yet a little inclined to a
revengeful Humor against those who chance to wrong them.

All we can learn of the Language mostly in use among the Natives, is, in
general, that it is a very Language.
harsh and unpleasant Jargon, as the Plurality of the Indian Tongues are. The
Spaniards here residing, do commonly use their own Language.

The Natives of this Country (according to our latest Accounts) are in a great
part subject to their Government.
own Captains or Caciques, whom they choose among themselves, and under whose
Conduct they go out to War. A considerable Part of this Country does belong to
the King of Spain, who ordinarily keeps one Governor at St. Jago in Tucoman,
and another at Assumption in Rio de la Plata, both of 'em being answerable to
the Viceroy of Peru.

The Natives of this Country are generally gross Arms.
Idolaters, yet it is reported of 'em, that they are more Religion.
capable of learning our Arts and Religion, than most of the other Americans.
And some speak of a Tradition spread among 'em, importing that certain Priests
shall come into their Country, and instruct them of a new Religion, whereby
they shall be most happy in another World. The Spaniards here residing, are (as
in Spain) rigid Papists.

SECT. XII. Concerning Terra Magellanica.
THIS Southmost Part of the Continent of South America (called also Regio
Patagonum) derives its Title from Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguize, who made
the first Discovery thereof, Anno, 1519. as also of that famous Straight which
still bears his Name, he being the first (for ought we know) that ever passed
through the same. Many things (equally frivolous as ridiculous) are related of
this Country and its Inhabitants, with which I shall neither trouble my self,
nor the Reader, but proceed to

SECT. XIII. Concerning Terra Antarctica.
BY Terra Antarctica, we understand all those unknown and slenderly discovered
Countries toward the Southern Parts of the Globe; the chief of which do bear
the Names of New Guinea, New Zealand, New Holland, and (which may comprehend
these and all the rest) Terra Australis incognita. Which Southern Countries,
though they belong not to the Continent of America, yet we choose to mention 'em
in this place, since the Southmost Part of the Continent of South America does
extend it self farther toward the South, than any Part or Headland of the old
Continent. What was said of the Northmost Countries, [Sect. 5.] under the Title
of Terra Arctica, (viz. that our knowledge of them did reach little farther
than their bare Names) so the same may be affirmed of those that bear the Title
of Terra Antarctica. Leaving them therefore to the better Discovery of Future
Ages, we pass on to

SECT. XIV. Concerning the American Islands.
Reduced (page 45.) to three Classes. North, viz. those of California.
Newfound-Land. Middle, viz. the Antilles Greater, Cuba. Jamaica. Hispamola.
Port-rico. Lesser, Caribees. Lucayes. Sotovento. Bermudas. South, viz. the
Island of Terra del Fuogo.

Of which Islands distinctly and in their order. Therefore

. 1. California.
THIS Island was formerly esteemed a Peninsula, but now found to be entirely
surrounded with Water. Its North part was discovered by Sir Francis Drake, Anno
1577. and by him called New Albion, where erecting a Pillar, he ^^st^ed thereon
the Arms of England. The Inland parts thereof were afterward searched into,
and being found to be only a dry, barren, cold Country, Europeans were
discouraged from sending Colonies to the same, so that it still remains in the
hands of the Natives: And there being nothing remarkable relating either to
them or it, we shall proceed to

2. Newfound Land.
THIS Island (discovered first by the two Cabots, at the charge of Henry the
7th of England, Anno Name.
1497. but more particularly by Thorn and Eliot of Bristol, Anno 1527. and the
English Title thereto being renewed in the name of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1583.
a Colony was settled therein about 30 years afterward) is termed by the
Italians, Terra Novella; by the Spaniards, Tierra Nueva; by the French, Terre
Neuve; by the Germans, Newfunden Land; and by the English, Newfound Land; the
derivation of which Name is sufficiently expressed in the Name it self.

Notwithstanding this Island is situated between the Parallels that pass
through the Southern part of England, Air.
and Northern of France, yet the Air thereof does extremely differ from that in
either of these Countries; it being subject to a greater excess of heat in the
Summer, and more pinching cold in the Winter, than commonly happens in them.
The opposite place of the Globe to New found-land is that part of Terra
Australis incognita, between 140 and 150 degrees of Longitude with 45 and 53
degrees of South Latitude.

This Island, for the most part, is overspread with Woods, which are but slowly
cut down, because the Soil.
Country is very thinly inhabited. Where the Ground is already cleared, the
Soil is not altogether despicable; affording variety of Roots, and several
sorts of our English Grain: and those Parts possessed by the French, produce
some plenty of Vines. This Island is sufficiently stockt with Deer, Hares,
Otters, Foxes, etc. Here also is abundance of Land and Waterfowl; but above
all things, its Coasts are surrounded with incredible multitudes of Cod-Fish.
The length of the days and Nights in New Foundland, is the same as in the
Southmost parts of England, and Northern of France, they all lying under the
same Parallels of Latitude.

The Commodities of this Island are principally Furs, Whale-Oyl, and Cod-Fish,
especially the latter, whereof Commodities.
there is such plenty, that the Fishing and bringing of them to Europe
(particularly the Streights) is now grown to a settled and very advantageous
Trade.

Nothing here deserves the Epithet of Rare, unless we reckon that prodigious
large Bank of Sand upon the Rarities.
South-East of the Island (about 300 miles in length, and upwards of 75 in
breadth where broadest) remarkable for those vast multitudes of Bacalaos (or
Cod-Fish) and Peer John, which are taken in great numbers by diverse European
Nations, who yearly resort hither for that end. So thick do those Fishes
sometimes swarm upon this Bank, that they retard the passage of Ships sailing
over the same.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Natives of this Island are (for the Plurality of 'em) Persons of a middle
Stature, broad-face'd, and Manners.
those of the Masculine Sex are usually beardless. They generally color their
Faces with Oker, and for Clothing, use Skins of Wild Beasts. They live by ten
or twelve Families together, in poor Cabbins made of Poles, in form of our
Arbours, and covered with Skins. They ordinarily employ themselves in Hunting,
as most of the other Americans usually do. The English and French here
residing, are much the same with those in Europe.

All that can be said of the Language here commonly used among the Natives, is,
that it is a certain Language.
Dialect of the Indian Tongue, which prevails among all the Indian Inhabitants,
with little variation of Accent in the various Parts of the Island. The
Europeans here residing, do still retain the maternal Language of the
respective Countries from whence they came.

In the Year 1623. Sir George Calvert, Principal Secretary of State, having
obtained a Patent for a Government.
Part of Newfoundland, erected the same into a Province, [call'd Avalon] and
therein settled a Plantation; which after him, was enjoyed by his Son Caecilius
Lord Baltimore. This Island was set upon, and mastered by the French in the
late tedious War, but speedily retaken by the English, who are now in full
Possession of what they formerly enjoyed.

The Natives of this Island (upon its first discovery) Arms.
were found to acknowledge a Supreme Being, whom Religion.
they owned as the Creator of all things; but erred extremely in their
Apprehensions about the manner of the Creation: alleging that Men and Women
were at first made of a certain number of Arrows stuck fast in the Ground. They
generally believe the Immortality of the Soul, and that the Dead go into a far
Country, there to make merry (as they think) with their Friends.

. 3. Cuba.
THIS Island (discovered by the Spaniards, Anno 1494.) is termed by the
Italians, Spaniards, French, Name.
Germans, and English, Cuba. Which Name is the same it had when first
discovered, being so called by the Natives and neighboring Islanders; what may
be the Etymology of that Indian Appellation, we know not.

The Air of this Island (considering its small Latitude) is very temperate,
being mightily qualified by Air.
Vapors that daily ascend from the Earth. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Cuba, is that part of the East-Iudian Ocean, lying between 110 and 120 Degrees
of Longitude, with 20 and 23 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Island (lying in the same Climate with the Northern Part of New Spain) is
not so fertile in Grain Soil.
as Wood, being generally covered over with Trees, some of which do drop the
purest Rozin: Here is great plenty of Fish and Flesh; and in some Parts are
diverse kinds of excellent Fruits. The length of the Days and Nights in Cuba, is
much the same as in the North of New Spain, they both lying under the same
Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Gold, Ginger, Cassia, Mastick,
Aloes, Cinnamon, Sugar, Commodities.
etc.

The most remarkable thing in this Island, is a noted Bituminous Fountain, out
of which there flows a sort Rarities.
of Pitchy Substance, commonly used for calking of Ships. Here also is a Valley
full of Flint-Stones of different sizes, and those by nature so round, that
they may serve as Bullets for most sorts of Cannons. Vid. Heylin's Cosmog. page
1079.

In this Island is one Bishopric, viz. that of St. Jago, Suffragan to the
Archbishop of St. Domingo Archbishopricks, etc.
in Hispaniola.

The Inhabitants of this Island, being for the most part Spaniards, are the
same in Manners with those on Manners.
the Continent.

The Spaniards here residing, do still retain and commonly use the Spanish
Tongue. Language.


This Island was formerly governed by certain Caciques or Captains, but is now
wholly subject to the Government.
King of Spain, who still keeps a particular Governor in it, whose ordinary
Residence is in that Great and Populous City, Havana.

The Spaniards here residing, are of the same Religion Arms.
with that established and universally professed in Spain. Religion.


. 4. Jamaica.
THIS Island (first discovered by Columbus in his Second Voyage to America, and
brought into Name.
Possession of the English by Penn and Venables, in the time of Oliver
Cremwell) is termed Jamaica by the Italians, Spaniards, French, Germans, and
English. It was at first called St. Jago by Columbus, which Name was afterward
changed into that of Jamaica, (after King James, then Duke of York) when it had
been subjected for some time to the Crown of England.

The Air of this Island is more temperate, than in most of the neighboring
Islands, the Heat thereof Air.
being much allayed by fresh Easterly Breezes that blow in the Daytime, and
the frequent Showers that fall in the Night. Hurricanes and Earthquakes (so
frequent in the Caribbees) are seldom heard of here; whereupon we may justly
impute that terrible Earthquake [Anno 1693.] rather to a Moral than a Natural
Cause, viz. the many and horrid Abominations abounding among the Inhabitants,
whith [without doubt] did loudly call for Judgments from Heaven. The opposite
Place of the Globe to Jamaica, is part of the East-Indian Ocean, lying between
110 and 120 Degrees of Longitude, with 17 and 20 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of this Island is extraordinary rich and fertile, producing great
quantity of Corn, Herbs, and Soil.
Fruits; abounding also in Sugar, Cotton, Tobacco, various kinds of Spices,
with diverse sorts of Physical Drugs and Gums, as Sumach, Guiacum, Aloes,
Benjamin, Sarsaparilla, etc. The large and pleasant Fields appear constantly
Green and Springing, they being well stockt with variety of Trees and Plants,
which are never disrobed of their Summer-Liveries. Here likeways are several
Rivulets, and those affording many excellent Fish, especially Tortoise. The
length of the Days and Nights in Jamaica, is the same as in the middle
Provinces of New Spain, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Cocao, Sugar, Indico, Cotton,
Tobacco, Hides, Copper, Commodities.
Piemento or Jamaica-Pepper, Tortoise-Shells, Wood for Dyers, and several sorts
of Drugs, etc.

This Island is furnished with some Springs of Mineral-Waters; particularly
two, whereof one is Sulphurous, Rarities.
and the other Salt; but both approved of for the common Distempers of the
place. (2) In diverse Parts of Jamaica grows that Fruit, called the Machinel
Apple, which is very beautiful to the Eye, of a pleasant Smell and Taste, yet
Mortal if eaten, whence some term it the Eve-Apple. (3) Here are many
Shiningflies, (a king of Cantharides) appearing of a green Color in the
Daytime, but shining in the Night with such a Luster, that one may see to Read
by their light. (4.) Of all Creatures belonging to this Island, the most
remarkable is the Allegator, that destructive Animal, commonly harboring in or
near to Rivers and large Land-Ponds. Although he be a very big Creature, and
about ten, fifteen, or twenty Foot in length, yet he is hatched of an Egg not
larger than that of a Turkey. His Back being full of hard Scales is
impenetrable, whereupon it is a difficult matter to kill him, unless he receive
a Wound in the Eye or Belly. He is an Amphibious Animal, and to enable him,
either to Walk upon dry Ground, or Swim in the Water, Nature has furnished him
both with Feet and Fins. In moving on the Land, he is very swift, (providing his
Course be straight forward) but extremely slow in turning, and therefore easily
avoided. Lastly, In Jamaica are produced some rare Plants, much regarded by the
Inquisitive Botanist. But for a particular Account of them and all others,
found both in this, and several of the Caribbee Islands, I refer the Reader to
a curious Catalogue, published some Years ago by that great Promoter of Natural
Knowledge, the Ingenious Dr. Sloane.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of this Island being English, are much the same in Manners
with those in the Kingdom Manners.
of England, only with this difference, that the generality of 'em is somewhat
more vitiously inclined, a thing too common in most of our Western Plantations.

This Island being entirely inhabited by English, they retain and still use
their own Native Language. Language.


Jamaica is wholly subject to the Crown of England, and ruled by a particular
Governor, sent thither by His Government.
Majesty, the King of Great Britain. The Laws by which they are governed, are
(as near as can be) to those of England. Here they have several Courts of
Judicatory for hearing and determining of all Causes between Man and Man; and
for the better Assistance of the Governor, he is furnished with his Council to
consult with, when occasion requires.

The Inhabitants of this Island, are of the same Religion Arms.
with that publicly posess'd, and by Law established Religion.
in England; excepting the Negroe-Slaves, who, (both here, and in other Islands
of the English Plantations) are still kept in woeful Ignorance; which is
undoubtedly a grievous Scandal to our Holy Profession in general, and an
abominable Shame to their respective Masters in particular: But let such
Masters know that the time is coming, when the [now] despised Souls of those
toiling Slaves will certainly be required at their Hands.

. 5. Hispaniola.
THIS Island (discovered by Columbus, Anno 1492.) is termed by the Spaniards,
Espaniola; by the Name.
French, Espagnole; by the Italians, Germans, and English, Hispaniola; so
called by the first Planters therein, (viz. the Spaniards) as a Diminutive of
their own Country.

The Air of this Island is much inferior to that in Jamaica, being much
infested with morning Heats, Air.
which would be intolerable, were they not allayed by some cooling Breezes in
the Afternoon. The opposite Place of the Globe to Hispaniola, is that part of
the East-Indian Ocean, lying between 120 and 130 Degrees of Longitude, with 17
and 21 Degrees of South Latitude.

This Island is blessed with an extraordinary rich and fertile Soil. The Trees
and Meadows in it are still so Soil.
green, that we may truly say, it enjoys a continual Spring. Herbs and Fruits
are said to ripen in eighteen Days, and so rich and fruitful is the Native
Turf, that of several Grain the common Increase is an hundredfold. Here is
abundance of Palm Trees of a prodigious height and bigness, in whose Body an
Incision being made near the Root, from thence does flow a Liquor, usually
called Palm-Wine, which being kept for some time, fermenteth, and becomes very
strong. These Trees are also termed Cabbage-Trees, because their Tops resemble
European Cabbage, and is commonly used as such by the Spaniards. Here is also
great plenty of Sugarcanes, and some rich Mines of Gold. The length of the
Days and Nights in Hispaniola, is the same as in the middle Provinces of New
Spain, they both lying under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Cattle, Hides, Cassia, Sugar,
Ginger, Cocheneel, Guiacum, Commodities.
etc.

In this Island is some store of Genipa-Trees, whose Fruit (about the bigness
of a Man's two Fists) being Rarities.
pressed before through Ripe, affords a Juice as black as Ink, and fit to write
with all, did it not disappear entirely in nine or ten Days. (2.) Here grows
another Tree, called Mananilla or Dwarf Apple Tree, whose Fruit is of so
venomous a quality, that if any Person eat thereof, he is instantly seized with
an unquenchable Thirst, and dies raving Mad in a short time. (3.) Of the many
Insects belonging to this Island, the Glowworm (termed by the Spaniards,
Cochinillas) is most remarkable, and that chiefly for two little Specks on its
Head, which by Night give so much Light, that if a Person lay three or four of
those Creatures together, he may see to read the smallest Print. (4) In
Hispaniola are Spiders about the bigness of an ordinary Hens Egg, having Legs
as long as Sea-Crabs of a middle size. They are hairy all over, and have four
black Teeth like Rabbets, and commonly bite very sharply, but are not venomous.
(5) Most remarkable of all Creatures in this Island, is the Cayman, (commonly
reckoned the Crocodile of Hispaniola) which being an Animal of a prodigious
bigness, is much noted for his rare subtilty in catching his Prey; for lying
upon a Riverside, he so gathers his Body together, that, in form, he
resembles exactly the large Trunk of an old Tree. In which Posture he continues
till Cattle, or other Creatures, come to the River to drink, when to their
great surprise, he suddenly springs up and assaults them: And (to enhaunce the
Wonder) this strange Creature is said to use yet a more strange Stratagem to
effect his end; for Travelers generally affirm of him, That, before he lays
himself (as aforesaid) upon the Riverside, he is employed for some time in
swallowing down several hundred Weight of small Peeble-Stones. By which
additional Weight of his Body, he can keep a faster hold of his Prey, and be
the sooner able to draw it into, and dive with it under Water. Vid. Late
History of the Buchaneers in America, Part 1. Cap. 4.

Here is one Archbishopric, viz. that of St. Domingo. Suffragan to whom are
St. Jago in Cuba, Archbishopricks, etc.
St. John de Port-rico, and Coro in Terra Firma.

Universities. None. Universities.


The Inhabitants of this Island (being mostly Spaniards, with some French) are
the same in Manners with those Manners.
on the Continent.

The Inhabitants of this Island being Spaniards, and some French, (as
aforesaid) do still retain and use their Language.
respective maternal Tongues.

This Island being wholly subject to the Crown of Spain, (except the Western
Parts now possessed by Government.
the French) is ruled by a particular Governor, appointed by his Catholic
Majesty, whose Power does extend it self over all the Antillos belonging to
Spain.

The Inhabitants of this Island, whether Spaniards or Arms.
French, are of the same Religion with those on the Old Religion.
Continent.

6. Porto-Rico.
THIS Island was termed S. Johannis Insula by Columbus, at his first Discovery
thereof, and Boriquen by the Natives, but now Porto-Rico from its chief City
and Haven of that Name. The Soil is tollerably good in many Parts, and Air
abundantly temperate, except those Months immediately before and after the
Summer and Winter Solstice. From hence are exported Sugarcanes, Ginger.
Cassia, and good store of Hides. Here grow diverse remarkable Trees, and some
poisonous Shrubs upon the Seaside. The whole Island belonging to the Crown of
Spain, is ruled by a particular Governor sent thither by his Catholic Majesty;
and the Inhabitants thereof being Spaniards, are the same in Manners, Language,
and Religion, as elsewhere, either upon the Old or New Continent.

. 7. The Caribee Islands.
THE Caribees are reckoned that goodly Company of Islands, beginning at the
(...) of Porto-Rico, and reaching Southward almost to Terra Firma. They derive
their Appellation from the Nature of their Inhabitants who (when first
discovered) were generally Canibals, the name Caribees being of the same
importance. Taken all together, they come nearest (in Form) to the Segment of a
great Circle, and are in number about thirty. The chief of which [proceeding
from North to South] with their present Possessors; are as follows,

VIZ. Anguilla. -- At present possessed by The English, but little esteemed.
St. Martin -- The French and Dutch. Sancta Crux. -- The French. Barbada. -- The
English, but of small Account. St. Christophers The English and French. Nievis
or Mevis The English. Antego. -- The English. Montserrat -- The English, but
mostly inhabited by Irish Guadalupa. -- The French. Marigalant -- The French.
Dominica -- The English and Natives. Martinico -- The French. Barbado's -- The
English. St. Lucia. -- The French. St. Vincent -- The English and Dutch,
especially the latter Grenada. -- The French. Tobago. -- The English.

Of all the Caribee Islands belonging to the English, the most remarkable (upon
several accounts) is Barbado's. Of it therefore in particular,

BARBADO's.
THIS Island is termed by the Spaniards, Barbadas; by the French, Barbade or
Barboude; by the Italians, Name.
Germans, and English, Barbado's: But why so called, we can give no account,
the Name being an Indian Appellation. It was discovered in the Reign of King
James 1. by Sir William Curten, driven upon its Coast by stress of Weather.
Meeting with no Inhabitants at his arrival, and finding the Nature of its Soil
to be inviting; The English, upon his return, sent some Planters thither, who,
for want of Trade, were reduced to great extremity, till about the Year 1627,
when they began to Plant it to purpose.

The Air of this Island is very hot and moist, especially for eight Months, yet
in some measure qualified Air.
by cold Breezes of Wind, which rising with the Sun, blow commonly from
North-East by East, unless there happen a Turnado, and grow fresher as the Sun
mounteth up. The opposite Place of the Globe to Barbado's, is part of the
East-Indian Ocean, between 130 and 140 Degrees of Longitude, with 12 and 18
Degrees of South Latitude.

This Island (not above eight Leagues in length, and five in breadth, where
broadest) is blessed with a Soil Soil.
^^^derfully fertile. General; taken, it is not above one (...) thick, yet that
small depth of Earth resembles, in a (...) continued hot Bed, being almost
every where grounded with white spongy Lime-Stones, which retain and reflect
the solar Heat piercing through the over-spreading Mould. Whereupon the Island
bears Crops all the Year round, and its Trees, Plants, and Fields, appear
always green. Both in this, and the Island Jamaica, were formerly Mountain
Cabbage-Trees of a prodigious height. The length of the Days and Nights in
Barbado's, is the same as in those Parts of New Spain, lying under the same
Parallels of Latitude

The chief Commodities of this Island, are Sugars, Indico, Cotton-Wooll,
Ginger, Logwood, Fustick, Commodities.
Lignum Vitae, etc. and those in such abundance, that some hundred Sail of
Ships do yearly receive their Loadings here.

In the Island of Barbado's, are Ants of a very big size, who build their Nests
with Clay and Lome, Rarities.
against the Body of a Tree, or Wall of an House; and that to the bigness of
ordinary Bee-Hives, and those divided into a great many Cells. (2) Here are
some Snakes of a considerable length and bigness, that frequently slide up and
down the Wall of an House, and out of one Room into another with wonderful
Agility of Body. (3.) The Water of that Rivulet (commonly called Tuigh River)
has upon its Surface in many places a certain Oily Substance, which being
carefully taken off, and kept a little time, is sit to burn in Lamps like
ordinary Oil. (4.) Here are diverse large and hideous Caves, (some of which are
big enough to contain five hundred Men) and several remarkable Trees,
particularly the Calibash, Palmete, Roucou, and that which goes by the Vulgar
Name of the Poyson-Tree. (5.) Among some rare Insects to be seen upon this
Island, we may reckon those small Flies, (termed Cayouyou) most observable; and
that chiefly for their Wings, which give a mighty Luster in the Nightime
while they fly.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of this Island (excluding the Negroes) being mostly English,
are much the same in Behavior Manners.
and Manner of living, with those here in England.

What was said of the Inhabitants in respect of Manners, the same may be
assirm'd of them in Point Language.
of Language. As for the Negroes, the generality of them (if any considerable
time upon the Island) do also understand and speak English.

This Island belonging to the Crown of England, is ruled by a particular
Governor appointed, and sent Government.
thither by His Majesty, the King of Great Britain* He with his Council do
discuss all Matters of (...); and the better to quell any Insurrection (...) be
made (especially by the Slaves) he still keeps a (...), considing of two
Regiments of Horse, and (...) of Foot, always in ^^^diness upon a call. The
Laws by which this Island are governed, (except some By-Acts which immediately
concern the Plantation) are the same with those of England. The Island b^ing
divided into four Circuits, in each of them is established an Inferior Court of
Judicatory for hearing all manner of Civil Causes: From which Courts, Appeals
may be made to the Supreme Court; and for due Administration of Justice in
Criminal Matters, here are yearly held five Sessions. When there appears a real
Necessity of making new Laws, (which must never contradict those of England) or
abrogating old ones, the Governor calls an Assembly for that end. This Assembly
resembles in some manner our English Parliament; for the Governor being
reckoned Supreme, those of his Council are as so many Peers; and two Burgesses
chosen out of each Parish, represent the Body of the People.

The English here residing, make Profession of the Arms.
same Religion with that generally owned, and by Law Religion.
established in England. As for the Negroe-Slaves, their Lot has hitherto
been, and still is, to serve such Christian Masters, who sufficiently declare
what Zeal they have for their Conversion, by unkindly using a Serious Divine
some time ago, when only proposing to endeavor the same.

. 8. The Lucayes.
THE Lucayes (so called from Lucayone, the biggest of 'em all) are those
several Islands lying North of Cuba and Hispaniola: They belong mostly to the
Spaniards, and the chief of them

Are those of Bahama -- Extended from the E. of Tegesta in Florida, to the N.
of Hispaniola. Lucayone aliter New Providence Cignateo Eleutheria -- Guanahani
St. Salvador -- Yuma. -- Samana. -- Maiaguana. --

Of these Islands, Bahama may be reckoned the most remarkable, and that chiefly
for the famous rapid Channel between that Island and the Main, through which
the Spanish Fleets usually pass in their return from Mexico to Europe. A
Passage equally fatal to the Spaniard, as fortunate to the English. Fatal to
the former for some dreadful Shipwracks sustained therein; and fortunate to the
latter, for vast quantities of Plate recovered by skilful Diverse. This Island
is also observable for several uncommon Insects found upon it, particularly the
Bahama-Spider already mentioned, Pags 341.

9. The Sotovento.
THE Sotovento Islands, are those lying along the Northern Coast of Terra
Firma. They belong mostly to the Spaniards, and received the Title Sotovento
(quasi sub vento) from them, because they appear to the Leeward of their Fleet
coming down before the Wind to enter the Gulf of Mexico. The chief of such
Islands,

Are those of Trinidada -- Found from E. to W. Margarita -- Tortuga -- Orchilla
-- Rocca -- Bonayrc -- Curacao -- Oruba --

Trinidada (termed by the Natives Samsonate) is observable for being a noted
place of Bartery between the Inhabitants of New Spain, and those of Peru. And
Margarita is much frequented upon the account of Pearl Fishery, from whence it
derives its Name. The rest are not of any great moment.

10 Bermudas.
THIS little Cluster of Islands (lying about five hundred Leagues East of
Florida) is termed by Name.
the Italians, Bermuda; by the French, Bermudes; by the Spaniards, Germans, and
English, Bermudas. So called from one John Bermudas, a Spaniard, who made the
first Discovery of them. They are otherways termed the Summer Islands, from Sr.
George Summers, an Englishman, who suffered Shipwreck near to them, Anno 1609.

The Air of these Islands is reckoned extraordinary healthful to breath in, the
Sky being almost always Air.
Serene and Smiling. But when overcast at any time, then they are sure of a
terrible Tempest, attended with frightful Claps of Thunder, and Flashes of
Lightning. So healthful are these Islands to breath in, that their Inhabitants
(now in number, about four or five thousand) are seldom visited with Sickness,
and generally arrive to a good old Age. The opposite Place of the Globe to
Bermudas, is that part of the vast East-Indian Ocean, lying between 134 and 138
Degrees of Longitude, with 32 and 35 Degrees of South Latitude.

The Soil of these Islands is extraordinary fertile, yielding the Labourer two
Crops every Year, which they Soil.
commonly reap in the Months of July and December. Of so rich a Mould is the
Arable Ground in this Island, that it affords neither Sand, Flints, Peebles,
nor Stones so hard, as are fit to grind Knives. They are well furnished with
variety of Fruits, Roots, Fish, and Fowl, together with great store of Hogs,
and excellent sweet-scented Cedar. The length of the Days and Nights in
Bermudas, is the same as in the Northmost Parts of Florida, they both lying
under the same Parallels of Latitude.

The chief Commodities of these Islands, are Oranges, Cochineel, Tobacco,
Cedar-Wood, some Pearls, and Commodities.
Amber-Gris in considerable quantity, etc.

Observable are these Islands for nourishing no venomous Creature, none such
being found upon them, Rarities.
nor able to live if brought thither. Here indeed are many Spiders, but those
no ways poisonous; and very remarkable for their Webs, having the resemblance
of Raw-Silk, and woven so strong, that little Birds are sometimes entangled in
them. (2.) If Wells are dug in Bermudas above the Surface of the surrounding
Ocean, the Water is sweet and fresh; but lower, then salt or breckish; and all
of them have some sensible Flux and Reflux with the Sea. (3.) Upon the Coast of
these Islands, is sometimes taken that remarkable Fish, termed the File-Fish;
being so called from a part of his Backbone, which has the exact resemblance
of a File.

Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities. None. Archbishopricks, etc.


The Inhabitants of these Islands being English, are much the same in Manners
and Way of living, with Manners.
those here in England.

What was said of the Inhabitants of Bermudas in respect of Manners, the same
may be affirmed of them in Language.
Point of Language.

These Islands being wholly subject, and of right belonging to the Crown of
England, are ruled by a Government.
particular Governor appointed, and sent thither by the King of England.

The Religion here established, and publicly professed, Arms.
is the Protestant, according to the Reformation of the Religion.
Church of England.

. 11. Terra del Fuogo.
THIS is a large Triangular Island (or as some think, several) lying on the
South part of America, and separated from the main Continent by the Streights
of Magellan. It Is called by the Name of Terra del Fuogo, because (it seems) the
first Discoverers thereof did observe some considerable Vulcano's upon it. Out
Knowledge of this Island and its Inhabitants, is, at best, but very uncertain;
almost every new Adventurer in these Parts of the World, giving us a new
Relation of Things. Whosoever therefore desires a certain or satisfactory
Account, must defer his Enquiry to the better Discovery of Aftertimes.

And so much for America, and its Islands.

AN APPENDIX, Comprehending
A brief Account of the European Plantations in Asia, Africa, and America: As
also some Reasonable Proposals for the Propagation of the Blessed Gospel in all
Pagan Countries.

IN running over the various Divisions of Asia, Africa, and America, I have
(under the Title of Government) transiently mentioned those Principal Kingdoms
or States in Europe, who are mostly concerned in those Countries; but since a
more particular Account of the same is desired by some, I shall endeavor to do
it in these following Lines, and then (by way of Conclusion to the whole
Treatise) shall subjoin some Proposals for the Propagation of the Blessed
Gospel in all Pagan Countries. To return to the first.

The chief of the European Nations, who have any Footing in Asia, Africa, and
America, are these following, viz. The English, The French, The Spaniards, The
Dutch, The Portugueze, The Danes.


Of all these in Order.

. 1. To the English belong
In Asia. Fort St. George [aliter Madrassipatam] on Coast Cormandel. Bombay
Castle and Island, on the West Coast of Decan. A Trade or Factories at Caracal
-- On Coast Cormandel. Trimly-Watch -- Trimly-Bass -- Port Nova -- Fort St.
David's -- Cudalor -- Cunnamere -- Manyetckpatam -- Arzapore -- Pettipoli --
Massulipatam -- Madapollam -- Viceagaparam -- Bengal -- In the Gulf of Bengal.
Hugly -- Ballesore -- Cassumbezar -- Maulda -- Daca -- Tutta Nutta -- Pattana
-- Agra -- In the Mogul's Empire. Cambaya -- Surat -- Amadarad -- Baroch --
Callicus -- On the Coast of Malabar. Carnar -- Gussarat -- Combaia --
Batticullay -- Durnoforonam -- Tully Ch^rey -- Beattaer -- Bringen -- Dabul in
Decan. Muscat -- In Arabia Faelix. Mocha -- Mackulla -- Shahare -- Kisen --
Durgae -- Doffare -- Aden -- Ispahan -- In Persia. Gombroone -- Bussora --
Smyrna in Natolia. Aleppo in Syria. Achem -- In the Island. Sumatra. Indrapona
-- Bengalis -- Jambee -- Eyer Banna -- Eyer Dickets -- Tryamong -- Eppou --
Bancoula -- Silabar -- Peque -- On the Malay Coast. Tinnacore -- Cudda --
Yunqucen -- In China. Canton -- Emoy -- Hocksieu -- T^siampoo-Coast -- Siam --
In the Kingdom of Siam. Camboida -- Mindano in the Island Mindano. Borneo in
the Island Borneo. Judda upon the Red Sea. Macassar in the Isle Celebes, but
now expelled. Bantam in Java, till expelled by the Dutch, 1682.

In Africa, Tangier on the Coast of Barbary near the Straits, but now
demolished. The Island of S. Helena, West of Ethiopia, S. Lat. 16 degr. A Trade
or Factories at Charles Fort upon an Island in the River Gambia. Sterra d'Leon
upon Bence Island, Lat. 8 d. 10 m. N. L. Serbera River -- On the Coast
Malguette. Druwyn -- Rio d' S. Andro -- On the Quaqua Coast. Jeaque Jeaque --
C. St. Appolonia -- Axym in Comore-Bay. Succunde -- On the Golden Coast Cabo
Corso, chief of all -- Fredericksburg formerly Danish, but sold to the English
-- Annishan unfortifi'd -- Annamabou -- Aggau, of no defense -- Loango -- In
the Kingdom of Loango. Malemba -- Cabenda -- In America, New England --
Particularly mentioned, Page 107 and 184. New York -- Pensilvania -- New Jersey
East -- West -- Maryland -- Virginia -- Carolina -- As also they possess Port
Nelson in Hudsons Bay.

In America, Many Islands, particularly those of Newfoundland in part. Jamaica
one of the greater Antilles. Bermudas lying E of Florida. New Providence one of
the Lucajos. Long Island lying S. of New York. Anguilla -- Ten of one Caribee
Islands. Berbada -- St. Christopher -- Nevis -- Antego. -- Monserrat --
Dominica -- St. Vincent -- Barbados -- Tobago -- Some Settlements at Surinam --
On the Coast of Terra Firma. Marone --

. 2. To the Spaniards belong
In Asia, Luconia -- Six of the Philippin, and most of the rest. Tandaya --
Mindano -- S. Juan -- Mindore -- Panay -- Afric The Trade on the West Coast of
Africa. The Canary Islands particularly mentioned, Page 101. In America, New
Spain, whose Parliaments are Mexico. Guadalajara. Guatimala. A considerable
Part of New Mexico. St. Augustins -- In Florida. St. Matthews -- Terra Firma,
whose Parliaments are Panama. Granada. Peru, whose Parliaments are -- Quito.
Lima. De la Plata. Chili. A great Part of Paraguay. Several Islands,
particularly those of Cuba. Hispaniola. Port-Rico.

. 3. To the Portugu^ze belong
In Asia, Several Factories in Persia. Asterin -- upon the Ganes. Ougelli --
Chaul a considerable Town -- In Decan. Massagan a little Village -- The Forts
of Elephanta Island near that of Bombay. Morro -- Caranga -- Goa with her
Fortresses and adjacent Islands Coran. Divar. Diu Island and City near Guzarat.
Macao upon the Coast of China. The Fort Lar^ntoque in the Island Solor E. of
Flores. Much of Timor one of the Molucco Isles. The Trade or Factories it
Aracan -- In Peninsula Indiae extra Gangem. Pegu -- Tanacerm -- Ligor --
Cambodia -- Golcond -- Already mentioned. Agra -- An adabat -- Cambata -- Surat
-- Baroch -- Bengala -- In Africa, Mazagan in the Kingdom of Morocco. Some
Forts on the River S. Domingo in the Country of the Jalofes. Some Forts on the
Coasts of Guinea. Congo. Angola. A great part of The Coasts of Cafres, and
Zanguebar. The Trade of the E. Count from the Cape Good Hope to the R. Sea.
Several Islands, viz. Isles of Cape Verde. The Madera's. St. Thomas. Lat. ^0.
Isle de Prince -- N. E. of St. Thomas. J. de Ferdmando Poo

In America All the Coast of Brasil divided into many Captainships. Estero --
Toward the Mouth of the River Amazon. Conduba -- Cogemine --

. 4. To the French belong
In Asia, Bereaux -- In the Mogul's Empire. New Surrat -- The Island of St.
Maria lying South-West of Goa. Some Forts in The Kingdom of Siam. The Island of
Java. In Africa, Fort Dauphin in Madagascar. Senega (N. of Cape Verde) the
chief French Factory in Africa. A Trade upon the River Senega. Gambia. As also
at Rusisque near Cape Verde. Great Sestre -- in Guinea. Ardra -- In America,
Montreal -- in Canada. The three Rivers -- Quebeck -- Tadonsack, and some other
places on the River St. Laurence. A great Part of Nova Scotia. Bay Plasensa --
in Newfoundland. Bay Blacco -- Fort St. Louis in the Island Cayene, lying E. of
Guyana. Several Forts on the Coast of Caribana. Among the Antilles. St.
Bartholomew. Sancta Cruz. St. Martin. Guadaloupe. La Desired. Maria Galants.
Les Saints. Martinico. St. Aloisia. Granada. Domingo in part. Grenadins. La
Tortue.

. 5. To the Dutch belong
In Asia, Tuticoriu -- on the Coast Cormandel. Negapatam -- Karkall -- Fort
Gelders -- Pallecate -- Several Forts in Malacca. Ceylon. Java, And most of the
Moluccoes, though of right they belong to the English. Factories at many places
in Persia. The Mogul's Empire. Cormandel. Malabar. Siam. Malacca. Sumatra.
China. Java. Celebes. Borneo. Arabia. In Africa, Arguin -- near Cape Verde.
Gora -- Many Forts in Congo, Some near the Cape of Good Hope. St. Maurice in
Madagascar. Factories in Guinea, viz. Boutrou -- on the Golden-Coast. Commendo
formerly English -- St. George de'l Mina, chief of all -- Maurea or Fort Nassau
-- Cormantyn formerly English -- Cr^vicocur -- In America, The City of Coro in
the North of Terra Firma. Some Forts on the Coast of Guyana. Querisao -- Three
of the Sotovento Islands. Aruba -- Bon-Airy -- Saba -- Two of the Caribees near
S. Crux. Eustachio --

. 6. To the Danes belong
In Asia Frankebar -- on the Coast of Cormandel. Dansburg --

In Africa is Christianburg or S. Francisco Xavier in Cuinea.

In America is New Denmark in the North part thereof.

Having thus briefly considered the chief of the European Plantations, whether
in Asia, Africa, or America: Come we now to the latter part of the Appendix,
viz.

Some reasonable Proposals for the Propagation of the Blessed Gospel in all
Pagan Countries.
BY what has been briefly said in the forgoing Treatise, concerning the State
of Religion in all Countries of the World; it may sufficiently appear in
general, That the Christian Religion is of a very small Extent, if exactly
compared with those many and vast Countries, wholly overspread with gross
Idolaters, numerous Mahometans, and many others, who either know not, or (at
least) own not, the Blessed Messiah. But more particularly, this great and sad
Truth may farther appear by the following Calculation, ingeniously made by
some, who dividing the inhabited World into thirty Parts, do find that

Nineteen of them are possessed by Blind and gross Idolaters. Six Jews, Turks,
and Saracens. Two Those of the Greek Church. Three Those of the Church of Rome.
Protestant Communion.

Thus Christianity taken in its largest Latitude, bears no greater Proportion
to the other grossly false Religions, than five to twenty five. This melancholy
Consideration does force me to bewail that woeful neglect of the best Part of
the Christian Church, for not being so diligent, as others are, in endeavoring
to abolish Heathenish Idolatry, and that most lamentable Ignorance, which as
yet overshadoweth so great a Part of the inhabited World. It Is undoubtedly well
known, that the effectual performance of such a Work as this, would require no
inconsiderable Stock of Money (it being now impracticable to make Solemn
Missions or qualify Men for them without considerable Charges) and yet a
sufficient Fund might be so easily raised, that none could reasonably complain
of the burden should the following Proposals be so happily made, as to meet
with a due Reception.

Did every Freeholder of the Three Kingdoms, advance only for one Year the Five
hundredth part of his yearly Incomes: Did those Merchants of this great City
(who are particularly concerned in our Foreign Plantations, and daily employ
great multitudes of Pagan Slaves in their Service) allow the Two hundredth part
of one years Gain: And finally, did the Clergy of the Three Kingdoms (whose
Zeal in such a Matter would probably transcend others) appropriate to this
pious Use, One hundredth part of their yearly Revenues. I say, did Priest and
People thus unanimously combine together, in carrying on this most Christian
Design; what an easy matter were it in a short time, to raise such a Fund of
Money, that the Annual Interest thereof might sufficiently serve to send Yearly
some Pious and Able Divines into all Quarters of the World? And since Rational
Methods might be taken, to have several Pagan Tongues taught in our own Island:
a considerable part of the aforesaid Money might be likewise employed to
Educate a competent number of young Students of Theology in these Foreign
Languages; which number being still continued, would serve (as a choice
Nursery) to afford a constant Supply of able Men, who might yearly go abroad,
and be sufficiently qualified at their first arrival, to undertake that great
Work for which they were sent. But since the latter Part of the foregoing
Proposal (which imports that Europeans might learn some of the present Indian
Languages) does seem impracticable to several, by reason of the prodigious
multitude of those Pagan Tongues, and their vast variety of quite different
Dialects: Then we may follow the Example of the Ancient Romans, whose Custom
and Interest it was, to extend their own Language with their Conquests; and so
extinguish in process of time, the very Dialect of the Conquered. Did we this
in all Parts of our Western Empire, [which without doubt might be fully
accomplished in a few Generations, by duly encouraging some hundreds of
Christians to endeavor in the most alluring manner, to instruct the younger
sort of the Natives in the English Tongue.] Then in the next or following Age,
might we Address our selves to those blind Gentiles in our own Language, and so
instilling in them, by degrees, the Principles of Christianity, might thereby
in a short time bring in many thousands of Souls to the Sheepfold of the Pastor
and Bishop of our Souls. I think it needless to express how commendable such a
Design would be in it self, and how desirable the Promotion thereof should be
to all, who style themselves Christians, of what Party or Profession soever
they are. And I humbly suppose it might be a Work (if unanimously minded by
Christians) more becoming the Followers of the Prince of Peace, than to be
Abettors of the frequent Jars and Broils of Christendom. Besides, there is
certainly nothing that could prove more beneficial to the Public Good of this
Nation, and Particular Interest of the Crown of England; for did most (or many)
of the Natives understand and speak our own Language, then might we not thereby
more exactly discover the Inland Parts of these Countries? and with greater
security improve them to the greatest Advantage. Might we not thereby make
multitudes of idle wandering Indians very useful to our English Colonies? and
then chiefly employ Europeans for the Guard and Safety of the Country. Yea, did
many of the Natives but tollerably understand and speak the English Tongue;
then might we not (in all human appearance) Civilize them entirely in a short
time? and so add many thousands of new English Subjects to the English Empire.
All which are morally impossible now to be done, since the numerous Dialects of
their barbarous Jargon, together with their own Barbarity, are as so many Bars
against such Undertakings.

Great Sirs,
Pardon these Proposals here offered to the serious Consideration of those whom
they chiefly concern; and give me leave to declare unto you, how infinitely it
would tend to the Glory of God, the Good of his Church, and Honor of our
Nation; did we sincerely endeavor to extend the Limits of our Savior's
Kingdom, with those of our new Dominions; and to spread the true Reformed
Religion, as far as the English Sails have done for Traffic. With what Anxiety
of Mind, and Fatigue of Body, do we pierce into the remotest Countries of the
World? And all to heap up a little White and Yellow Earth, or to purchase some
things (called Precious by Man) which [abstracting Human Fancy] do differ
nothing from common Pibble Stones; and yet what a supine neglect does attend
us? in doing that which would bring more Honor to our Holy Religion, and prove
at last more profitable to our selves, than the actual Possession of all the
Treasures in the Universe. What a lamentable thing is it? That those very
Indians who border upon the English Pale (not to mention some thousands of
Negroes who slave in our Service) should still continue in most wretched
Ignorance? and in stead of Knowing and Worshipping the True God, should as yet
reverence not only Stocks and Stones, but also adore the Devil himself.
Christians! Shall we covet and thirst after their Talents of Gold? and yet keep
hid in a Napkin that Talent entrusted to us. Shall we greedily bereave them of
their Precious Pearls? and not declare unto them the Knowledge of the Pearl of
Price. No! no! Let us not act as others have done, in making Gold our God, and
Gain the sole design of our Trading. But let us effectually improve those
choice Opportunities (now in our hands) for the singular Glory of our Great
God, and of Jesus Christ, our Blessed Redeemer. And let our Planters duly
consider, That to extirpate Natives, is rather a supplanting than planting a
new Colony; and that it is far more honorable to overcome Paganism in one, than
to destroy a thousand Pagans. Each Convert is a Conquest.


FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
PAge 50. line 15. for Lancashire read Westmorland. p. 70. l. 1. r. Escutcheon.
p. 74. l. 2. dele. 2. p. 77. l. 7. r. Dominions. p. 111. l. 31. r. Religion. p.
112. l. 7. r. Buc. p. 116. l. 36. r. Mount. p. 120. l. 21. r. Salizburg. p.
127. l. 13. r. Cujavia. p. 143. l. 16. r. strip him. p. 153. l. 37. r.
Agrippina. p. 176. l. 11. r. He proceeds. p. 192. l. 34. r. Kinross. p. 206.
l. 15, 22. r. Villages. p. 235. l. 32. r. very. p. 265. l. 40. r. Tapestry. p.
292. l. 7. r. Thirteen. p. 330. l. 24. r. Archbishopric. Wheresoever the word
its (importing the Verb Est) is found, read it either at length, it is, or
contractedly thus, it is or it is, as p. 3. l. 37. f. its termed, r. it is, or
it is, or it is termed; and so in other places.

To the BOOK-BINDER.
Place the Maps in Order following.

The Map of The World -- Page 1 Europe -- 59 Scandinavia, or Sweden and Norway
-- 61 Moscovia -- 73 France -- 79 Germany -- 95 Poland -- 125 Spain -- 133
Italy -- 145 Turkey in Europe -- 165 Scotland -- 187 England -- 197 Ireland --
211 Asia -- 237 Africa -- 293 America -- 333

BOOKS Printed for Thomas Cockerill in Amen Corner.
THE Works of Mr. Charnock. In Two Volumes. Folio. Re-printing, Geography
Rectified: Or, a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms, Countries,
Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Ports. Their Ancient and
Present Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories, Customs, and Governments,
etc. As also their Commodities, Coins, Weights, and Measures, compared with
those of London. Illustrated with Seventy eight Maps. The whole Work performed
to the more accurate Observations and Discoveries of Modern Authors. By Robert
Morden. Quarto.

Sermons preached on Several Occasions. The Third Volume. By John Conant, D. D.
Published by John Lord Bishop of Chichester.

A Funeral Sermon occasioned by the Death of the Lady Lane, late Wife of the
Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Lane, Knight. and Alderman of the City of London, who
died November 29. School. And of John Lane, late Father of the said Sir Thomas
Lane, who died the 8th of December following. Published at the Request of the
Relations. By Nathanael Tailor. Quarto.

Familiaria Colloquia, Opera Christopheri Helvici D. etc. Professoris
Giessensis Olim Ex. Erasmo Roterodamo Ludovici Vive, etc. Scottano Hasso.
Selecta Editio Decima quarta ad pristiva Exemplaria Denuo Recognita.

English Exercises for Schoolboys to Translate into Latin: Comprizing all the
Rules of Grammar, and other necessary Observations, ascending gradually from
the meanest to higher Capacities. By J. Garretson, Schoolmaster. The Seventh
Edition. Twelves.

The School of Manners, or Rules for Childrens Behavior. By the Author of the
English Exercises. The Second Edition.

A Practical Grammar; or the easiest and shortest way to initiate Young
Children in the Latin Tongue. By the help whereof a Child of Seven Years old
may learn more of the Grounds of that Language in three Months, than is
ordinarily learnt in a Years space by those of greater Age in common
Grammar-Schools. Published for the Use of such as love not to be tedious. To
which is added Tables of Mr. Walker's Particles. By the Assistance whereof
young Scholars may be the better enabled to peruse that most Excellent and
Useful Treatise. By J. Philamoth, Master of a Free School. The Second Edition.

Memoirs of the Countess Dunois, Author of the Lady's Travels into Spain.
Written by her self before her Retirement. By way of Answer to Monsieur St.
Evremont: Containing withal a Modest Vindication of the Female Sex, more
frequently injured by Imprudence and Misconstruction, than defect of Virtue.
Made English from the Original.


