TWO DISCOURSES.

I. Of the Punishment of Sin in Hell; Demonstrating the Wrath of God to be the
immediate Cause thereof.

II. Proving a State of Glory for Just Men upon their Dissolution.

BY THO. GOODWIN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. XCIII.

To the Reader.
THo we judge it needless to speak much of this eminent Author, whose Praise is
in the Gospel throughout all the Churches; yet we could not but give some
account of the publishing of these small Tracts at this time. Many, who well
knew how mighty this Man of God was in the Scriptures, and how skilful, from
his great Abilities, and long Experience in the interpreting of them, have
impatiently desired the publishing of his Labors; but that being a Work of
time, it was thought fit to gratify them in the interim with this short
Treatise. And tho his excellency lay chiefly in wading into the great Deeps of
the Gospel, yet among many other Discourses, this of Hell was made choice of,
wherein, we think, you have the true scriptural Notion of it. We judged that
such a rousing Argument might not be unseasonable in so secure and Atheistical
an Age as this; and that the Profound Mysteries of the Gospel, excellently
discovered in his Lectures upon the Ephesians, might be the more welcome to
those who have known the Terrors of the Lord, or have their Senses exercised to
discern spiritual things. Upon the request of some, we have also added a
Discourse of the State of Glory for the Saints, immediately after this Life,
being very suitable to Times of Suffering; since it was the constant Method of
the Apostles, to keep up in the Eyes of the Primitive Saints, the Glory of
another World, as what was proper to support them under the Sufferings of this:
And 'twas one main design of the Transfiguration of Christ, in the presence of
Peter, James, and John, who were to be great Sufferers in the Times of the New
Testament, as Moses and Elias had been under the Old; intimating what the
Saints in after Ages might expect, in a Conformity to Christ, after all their
Sufferings.

We therefore judge both Treatises fitly joined together, Punishments and
Rewards being great Motives which God proposes to Obedience, and Perseverance
in Holiness, and are both necessary at this time to be urged: the one, to
awaken hardened and secure Persons; the other, to encourage Christians to go on
in a holy Course, through all the difficulties of this degenerate Age.

That both Discourses may be blessed of God, to the ends for which they were
designed; shall be the Prayer of

Thankful Owen. James Barron.

The Contents.
HEb. 10. 30, 31. 2 These. 1. 8, 9. and Romans 22. explained at large from page 1
to 5.

I.
Chap. 1. The Subject of the Discourse set out, and reduced to 2 Heads, (1.)
That God's Wrath is the immediate Cause of the Punishment of Sin in Hell. (2.)
The dreadfulness of that Punishment inferred and argued therefrom, from p. 5.
to p. 8.

Chap. 2. The first Sort of Proofs from diverse Scriptures, from p. 8. to p. 21.

Chap. 3. Romans 9. 23. explicated, only so far as concerns the Execution.
Several particulars in the words that show the power of God's Wrath to be the
immediate inflicting Cause, and immediately inflicting the Punishment. An
Explication of Romans 2. 8, 9. added for confirmation of all, p. 21, to 35.

Chap. 4. That this immediate Wrath of God, is set forth in Scripture unto us
under the similitude of Fire, and fiery Indignation. The Examples of persons
devoured by Fire in the old Testament, shadows of this Punishment by the
immediate Wrath of God. This the fire wherein the Devil and his Angels be
tormented, p. 36, to 55.

Chap. 5. A second sort of proofs. Demonstrations from Instances both of wicked
and holy Men, who have felt in this life Impressions of God's immediate Wrath:
And that such Impressions are Evidences of what in the fullness, is in Hell, p.
55. to 78.

Chap. 6. Containing the Reasons. (1.) God's Justice. (2.) Avenging Wrath,
otherwise not satisfied. A Demonstration added, p. 78, to 111.

Chap. 7. A fourth sort of additional Confirmations drawn from the Harmonies
that are between it, and other divine Truths, p. 111, to 115.


II.
The dreadfulness of the Punishment in Hell argued from all, and each of the
particulars treated of in the former section, page 115, to 117. 1. The first
head of Demonstrations from this in general, that it is a falling into the
hands of God immediately, p. 117, to 132.

2. The 2d. head of Demonstrations, from the capacity of the Soul, the subject
of this Punishment; and this that it is the destruction of the Soul, p. 132, to
140.

3. The 3d. head of Demonstration, drawn from the final causes formerly
mentioned: As (1.) The Glory of God, (2.) The manifestation of his Power, p.
141, to 156.

4. Demonstrations taken from the satisfying God's Justice, which is the 2d.
particular Attribute, p. 156, to 167.

5. Demonstrations taken from the satisfying of avenging Wrath; the 3d.
particular Attribute, p. 167, to 177.

6. A fourth head of Demonstrations, drawn from those Instances both of good
and bad Men, their having suffered those kind of Terrors in this life, p. 177,
to 191.

7. The last head of Demonstrations, that it is a falling into the hands of the
living God, and what that further superadds to the dreadfulness of the
Punishment, p. 191, to 197.


III.
Some Uses. Corollaries. Meditations.
p. 197, to 257. A SERMON, entitled. An immediate State of Glory for the
Spirits of Just Men upon dissolution demonstrated, from 2 Cor. 5. 5. page 259.
ad finem.


A DISCOURSE OF THE Punishment of Sin in HELL: DEMONSTRATING That the Wrath of
God is the immediate Cause of that PUNISHMENT.
HEB. 10. 30, 31.For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense, says the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his People.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


2 THESSALONIANS. 1. 8, 9.In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.


ROMANS 9. 22.What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endures with much long-suffering, the vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction.


WHat Hell and Destruction are, is a Mystery, as well as what Heaven is: And
the true and proper Notion or Conception of either, are a Riddle to the most of
Men. As Eye has not seen, Ear not heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of
Man (the Natural Man) what God has prepared for those that love him; so, nor
what God has prepared for them that hate him. For it is the same, and no other
punishment but that which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, as Christ
says. And what it should be that should torment them, or be the immediate
Executioner of vengeance on them, the imagination of Man confined to worldly
Agents and Instruments, cannot divine or take in.

Other Scriptures go Metaphorically to work, in setting out this Punishment by
things outwardly, sensibly dreadful. But these Scriptures (of all other) that
are my Texts, do more plainly, and without parables declare it to us, in its
immediate Causes, and from them do leave us to infer the fearfulness.

For instance, other Scriptures set it out to us as a Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
large enough, to be sure, to hold Men and Devils. [The wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17.] As also by their
being retained in Chains of Darkness; 2 Pet. 2. 4. where Men must lie till they
have paid the utmost farthing, Mat. 5. 26. where is nothing but darkness, utter
darkness, blackness of darkness; Jude 4. that is, an emptiness of all Good, not
a Beam of Light to all Eternity. Also a place of torment, Luke 6. 48. where
there is not admitted one drop to cool ones Tongue (Luke 15.) in the midst of
the most raging scorchings. Also, I find it elsewhere expressed by the most
horrid Punishments and Tortures that were found amongst the Nations, cutting
Men in pieces, dividing them in the midst, ((...), Mat. 24. 49, 51.) tearing
them in pieces, Psalm. 50. last, cutting them up to the Backbone, Heb. 4. 12,
13. See for this, The interpretation hereof in the Child of Light, etc. page
49, 50.
drowning Men in perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. and that with Milstones about their
Necks, as Christ adds, Mat. 18. 6. to make sure they never rise again: also
unto a being cast bound Hand and Foot, Mat. 22. 13. into Fire to be burnt
alive; a Furnace of Fire, twice in one Chapter, Mat. 13. 42, 49, 50. A Lake of
Fire; and so drowned over Head and Ears, for ever. A Lake fed with a Stream of
Brimstone, which (of all matter that feeds Fire) is the most fierce. Then
again, Eternal Fire, and that never to be Rev. 14. 19. Rev. 19. 20. and Chap.
20. 10. 14. 25. and chap. 21. 18. Mat. 3. 1. Mat. 18. 8. Mat. 25. 41.
slackt or extinguished. And you may with the like Analogy, go over what ever
else of torment is most exquisite to outward Sense.

But these and all else you can imagine, are but Shadows and Similitudes (as I
my self heard one upon the Rack of terror of Conscience cry out, in a like
comparison, These are but Metaphors to what I feel) and indeed unto what the
thing it self is. As to say of Heaven, there are Rivers of Pleasures: a City,
whereof the Strees are of Gold, the Gates of Pearl, and such like; they are but
metaphorical Descriptions; for it is God himself that is the Fountain of Life:
and oppositely it is said, of the Wrath to come, That God is a consuming Fire,
Heb. 12. last.

But these Scriptures which I have read, they all speak essences,
quintessences. And as Hell is said to be naked before the Lord, Job 16. 16.
and without a covering; so do these words lay Hell open nakedly (not unto our
senses, but) to the understanding of us, and then they leave us to infer how
fearful! And although these Scriptures consist of words that differ, yet they
conspire together in the same scope and matter, viz. to set out Damnation to us
in the true and proper Causes, and the real horridness thereof argued from
those Causes.

CHAP. I.
The Subject of this Discourse, set out and reduced to two Heads: The first,
That God's Wrath is the immediate Cause of the Punishment of Sin in Hell.

I Shall confine my self to these two Heads. And in handling thereof, what the
one of these Scriptures is wanting in, the other will supply; in what the one
is dark, the other explains.

The Heads themselves, I shall take as I find them in the first of these
Scriptures, Heb. 10. 31. First, that God himself, by his own Hands, that is,
the power of his Wrath, is the immediate Inflicter of that Punishment or
Destruction of Men's Souls in Hell: [It is a falling into the Hands of God.]
Secondly, the dreadfulness of that Punishment, inferred and argued therefrom;
It is a [fearful thing] to fall into the Hands of the Living God.

Which two are the Doctrinal parts of this Discourse.

For the first, That God himself is the immediate Inflicter, etc.

For Explication. We must distinguish; how that God performs two parts herein.
1. Of a Judge, to give forth the Sentence by his Authority. 2. Of an Avenger, a
party injured and provoked, and, as such, the Inflicter. My scope in this
distinction, is, that we may in reading the Scriptures that speak of this
Punishment, know how to put a difference, and not transfer the whole of God's
Agency in this matter, unto that of sentencing it as a Judge only. And besides
that many Scriptures do apart show this distinction, there are some that still
carry along with them both these Agencies, or Hand of God, in it together, and
yet as distinct; the one under the term of Wrath and Vengeance, the other under
the Notion of its being a Judgment, [the Judgment of God, and the Judgment of
Hell-Fire] Quid a justo Dei infligitur. Gerard de inferno. Sect. 30.
as Mat. 23. 33. Thus first the Text, Heb. 10. terms it some while [Vengeance
and fiery Indignation, ver. 30. 27.] then again -- Judgment, as ver. 27. a
[fearful looking for of Judgment, and ver. 30. The Lord will judge, etc.] The
like, Romans 2. 5, 8, 9. where all is reduced in like manner to these two, God's
righteous Judgment, and his Wrath and Indignation treasured up. Also, 2 Thessalonians.
1. [The righteous Judgment of God] ver. 5, 6. there is the Sentence, and
[destroyed from the glory of his Power] as the inflicting cause, ver. 9.
likewise Romans 9. as Sovereign Lord he shows, (...) Authority in this
Punishment, ver. 21. and then as the immediate Inflicter, Wrath and (...), the
Power of his Wrath. And ver. 22. that speech of our Savior, about this matter.
One Evangelist, Luke 12. 5. records it, Who is able to cast into Hell: (...).
namely, as a Judge who casts a Malefactor into Prison. The other, Mat. 10. 28.
Who is (...).
able to kill the Soul, and to destroy Body and Soul in Hell. Noting thereby
that he uses his Intrinsic Power and Force as the Inflicter.

I shall be large in handling and proving this latter, as a great Truth,
concerning which I further premise, That, I would not be understood to exclude
other Miseries as inflicted by Creatures, used as God's Instruments
accompanying this, but that which I contend for, is, that principally and
eminently above all such, it is the Wrath and Indignation of God himself,
working immediately in and upon Men's Souls and Consciences, that is intended in
these and other Scriptures. This is the Subject of the first Section of this
Discourse.

And let it be noticed now at the entrance, that the same Scriptures and
Reasons that shall be brought to prove this in this first Section, will be
found again to serve as new Arguments by way of inference to set out and infer
the latter also; that is, the dreadfulness of it, as will appear in the second
Section.

CHAP. II.
The first sort of Proofs from Scriptures: First, those three prefixed as the
Texts.

LEt us first see what the Scriptures speak more directly to this great Point.

I.
Heb. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31.
In order to the Proofs, from hence, observe the occasion of the Apostle's
mention of this Punishment, here, to be his having treated of the highest Sin
and kind of Sinners, the Sin against the Holy Ghost. By the occasion of which
he gives us to understand what for the Substance is indeed the recompense of
all manner of other actual Sins small and great: the Punishment being in
solido, one and the same to all; though with a vast difference of Degrees. And
therefore it is said unto all that are found wicked at that day, whether of
greater or lesser Proportions and Sizes of Wickedness, Go into Fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. The Devil is the greatest of Sinners, yet all go
with him into the same Torment, that is, for Substance the same. And upon the
like ground, what is here spoken by way of eminency concerning the Punishment
of these the highest sort of Sinners of the Sons of Men, is true of all others;
there being but one common Fire or Punishment, in the Substance of it, for all.

2. Observe, the manner of his setting forth the dreadfulness of that
Punishment to us. It is only by way of insinuation. For seeing he could not
express the soreness of it; he thought fit to suggest only, who is the
immediate Author and Inflicter of it: And so leaves it to our thoughts to
infer, how dreadful it is! This in General.

To argue the Point in Hand out of this Text, let us take these things along
with us.

1. You see he here brings in the great God, as an enraged Enemy, challenging
the execution hereof to himself. This Vengeance belongs to me, or, as Romans
12. 19. Vengeance is mine, I will recompense; as if he had said, Let me alone
with it.

2. In that when he would set out the severeness of this Punishment (which is
his professed aim, ver. 29.) as infinitely exceeding all those kinds of
Corporal deaths in Moses Law, he infers the soreness of this from God
himself as the Avenger: We [know him] that has thus said, Vengeance is mine;
that is, what a great and powerful God he is. The Saints only know God by Faith
in Himself, and his Greatness, as Heb. 11. and that so as no other Men in this
Life do. And by what we know of him, and the apprehensions we have of Him, we
cannot but forwarn what that Punishment must needs be, when God himself shall
thus solemnly profess himself to be the Avenger. It Is argued you see both from
what this God is, and from that knowledge the Saints have of Him. They, and they
alone know Him in his Love, and have tasted and found that his immediate
Loving Kindness is better than Life: and from the Law of Contraries, they know
that his Wrath must be more bitter than Death. They are able to measure what he
is in his Wrath, by what he is in his Love. And some of the Primitive Saints,
especially the Apostles, who had the first fruits of the Spirit, knew and had
tasted how good the Lord is in his Love, by immediate Impressions of it on
their Souls, in Communion with Himself. The like tenor of speech has that in 2
Cor. 5. 11. We knowing the Terror of the Lord: It is termed, [His Terror] as
noting out that which is proper to Him and his Greatness, in his being able to
punish and destroy Sinners.

Moses, who in the Old Testament had seen the Glory of God the most immediately
of any Man (and was therein a Type of Christ) was thereby made sensible of this
very thing, as touching this Punishment; and therefore complains in the very
like Language, Psalm. 90. Who knows the Power of thine Anger? Lamenting how the
generality of Men did not know it, because indeed they knew not God. But We
(says the Apostle) have known him, etc.

And 3. Thereupon he further calls this Punishment, [a falling into God's
Hands.] That very Phrase often notes out immediate Execution: as in ordinary
Speech it does. When a Father or a Master threaten a Child, or a young Servant,
already corrected by other Hands at their appointment, yet when either would
threaten more severely, they will say, Take heed how you fall into my hands, or
come under my fingers, when they mean to correct them themselves.

And then 4. That the Apostle thereupon, infers from this the dreadfulness
thereof, even from this, It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of God.
Reason tells us that the soreness of any Torment, the fearfulness of any Death,
arises from the Power, Force, Violence, or Efficacy of that which is the
immediate Agent or Cause inflicting it. As why do we argue burning or dying by
Fire, a more terrible Death, in respect of Torment, than drowning in Water? But
that Fire, being the immediate Agent or Instrument applied to that Execution,
has a more fierce and violent working than Water has; which dispatcheth a Man
more easily. Now therefore the fearfulness and soreness of this Punishment (and
that with difference from that by Creatures, compare for this ver. 28, 29.)
being here argued, that it is a falling into God's Hands; and we knowing this
withal, that he is in himself able to work by his fierce Wrath, more powerfully
and exquisitely upon the reasonable Soul of Man Sinful, than all created Agents
whatever; and the Soul it self being also capable of such a working upon by
him. This does strongly argue his own immediate Execution by his own Hands to
have been intended.

5. In ver. 27. he terms the immediate Cause inflicting this Punishment, A
fiery indignation devouring the Adversaries. Indignation or Wrath is of some
intelligent Nature provoked. And whom should this refer to? or whose
Indignation can it be supposed, but of this God, who himself (as the Apostle
expounds and comments upon it) has said, Vengeance is mine, says the Lord?
And this Indignation is called fiery, because it works as Fire; is in
tormenting like to Fire; or as a Flaming Sword, red hot, when it is made the
Instrument of ones Death, which wounds and kills; and does torment with a
superadded anguish. For the further opening of which, I shall, at present, only
say two things.

(1.) That God compares himself in this respect unto a devouring or consuming
Fire in this very Epistle, Heb. 12. last, Our God is a consuming Fire. There
are two Creatures which God assimulates himself unto, in contrary respects. 1.
To Light, as often. And God is Love, 1 John 4. and both these are spoken of him
in respect of what he is to the Saints in Glory. Light is of all Creatures the
most comfortable: And in his Light it is we see Light. And the State of Glory
is therefore termed the Inheritance of the Saints [in Light] Col. 1. The second
is to Fire: and this on the contrary, in relation to what he is to Men in Hell.
And the Parallel runs upon what he is immediately unto both, by Analogy of
Reason. Of all Creatures Fire is the most dreadful, the most raging, subtle,
and piercing in its Operation; and so God in his Wrath must be understood under
that Similitude to be: and therefore it is his Wrath is termed fiery
Indignation.

(2.) Those words in their coherence, are an allusion to those extraordinary
Punishments executed under the old Law. For in ver. 28. he inforceth his
Argument (the scope of which was to aggravate this Punishment as a minori) from
the instances of those Punishments that did befall Men that died for despising
Moses Law; some of them we read were destroyed by Fire, and therein he more
especially refers us to those examples of Nadab and Abihu, who perished through
Fire, Lev. 10. 1, 2. where the very words the Apostle here used to set out this
Punishment by, are used by Moses, and so more evidently show the allusion to be
made thereunto. There went out Fire from the Lord, and devoured them, says that
Text; and yet he argues from thence the surpassing soreness of this Punishment
above that, from that Fire, though it were a Fire even from Heaven it self that
killed them. But more of this hereafter.

II.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.
I come Secondly to that other Scripture, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. In flaming Fire,
taking Vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ: [Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.] Where it is to be
observed, that though he mentions [flaming Fire] and the Ministry of his mighty
Angels which accompany Christ's appearing, yet he clearly resolves the ultimate
and immediate Cause of Wicked Men's Destruction, into the immediate Presence and
Glory of Christ's Power, ver. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction [from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.]
So as herein is set forth,

1. The Punishment. 2. The Causes of that Punishment.
First, For the Punishment, there is, 1. The Nature of it, it is termed
Destruction. 2. The duration of it, [everlasting] Destruction.

Secondly, The Causes of it: From or by the Presence of the Lord, and the Glory
of his Power. That Particle (...), which we translate [From] is causal, imports
the efficient Cause, as in all those Salutations, Grace and Peace [From] the
Father, and [From] Jesus Christ, it does, Romans 1. 7. 2 Cor. 1. 2. that is, as
from the Fountain, the principal and sole Authors and Efficients of Grace and
Peace. And thus the word is used in multitudes of places else. And accordingly
we find in other Scriptures also, that God and Christ are the immediate Causes
of Peace. Thus 2 Thessalonians. 3. 16. Now the Lord of Peace [Himself] give you Peace,
etc. and Chap. 2. 16, 17. The Lord Jesus [Himself] comfort your Hearts. Now on
the contrary, when in like manner he says, everlasting Destruction [from] his
Face, Presence, and the Glory of his Power, it may, and is to be understood the
Lord Himself, personally by his own mere Presence, and by the Strength of his
own Power, inflicteth their Destruction for ever: they dye by no other Hand.
This Particle [From] (as in Speech we often use it) has led some from the true
intent of the Apostle. They thereupon supposing this the meaning, that they are
punished with Destruction [From the Presence] that is, out of the Presence of
Christ; as if this were the fufilling that Speech of Christ, Depart [from me]
into everlasting Torment. This, though it be true of this Destruction spoken of
here, in respect of Christ's local Presence, consider him as he is Man, yet, as
Slater upon the place well says; To him that attentively considers the Words,
the Causes of Destruction are held forth herein. For, 1. he says not simply or
alone that they are punished from his Presence, but further adds [from the
Glory of his Power] the same Particle (...) or [from] being therefore in common
to be applied to the one as well as the other. Now the intent of the latter,
from his glorious Power, cannot note forth that they were punished out of, or
from without his glorious Power, as in respect of Absence; but the contrary,
that the Presence and Efficacy of it is to be that which is the Author of their
Punishment, so that it imports nothing less than absence, or a withdrawment by
God, or a throwing them out of his Presence; but positively an efficiency or
energy put forth by him; and so carries with it the relation and influence of
an efficient Cause: If indeed he had added instead hereof, either [from his
Glory] or [from his Blessedness] unto that other [from his Presence] it might
have carried both unto poena Damni, the punishment of Loss; that is, to note
out what they had lost and wanted the Communication of, and so their exclusion
from the Participation of God's Face and Blessedness, (which is more ordinarily
termed his Presence) and together therewith had noted out an exclusion also of
this sense which I argue for; but his saying also [from the Glory of his Power]
manifestly notes Power put forth in Execution, and inflicting that Destruction,
and glorifying Himself, on them thereby.

And Secondly, Further know that the Word here used is not potestas, as of a
Judge, that is, Authority, whereof John 5. 27. The Father has given the Son of
Man Authority to execute Judgment: And in relation unto which in ver. 5. of
this Chapter, he had termed it, The righteous Judgment of God. But the Word is
(...), which signifies inward personal Strength, Vigor, Robur, such as a Giant
has in his own Ipsa vi^ naturae per se considerata. Illyricus.
Limbs. And therefore when their Destruction is said to be from his Power, as
thus denoting personal Strength, the intendment must needs be to denote a
putting forth of that Strength which is in himself to destory them. Parallel
with that in Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to show his Wrath, and make his
[Power] known on the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction, of which anon.

Yea, and Thirdly, even this other Phrase, [destroyed from his Presence,] does
likewise as fully close with this sense, to note the efficient Cause of their
Destruction. The Word in the Original is, [from his Face] (...), now God's
Anger or Wrath is as well, and very frequently expressed by his Face in
Scripture, as his Favor uses to be. For the Face as well holds forth Anger
and Wrath, as Favor and Grace. Thus Lev. 20. 6. I will [set my Face against]
that Soul, and will [cut him off] that is, I will put forth mine Anger to
destroy him. And Lament. 4. 26. where it is translated the Anger of the Lord,
in the Hebrew, and in your Margents, it is, The Face of the Lord. As there is
the Light of God's Countenance, in which is Life; so the rebuke of God's
Countenance, at which we perish, Psalm. 80. 16. Even as the Wax is said to melt
at the [Presence] of the Fire, Psalm. 68. 2. and often elsewhere.

So then to be destroyed [from his Face and Presence,] is all one as to say,
from his Anger and Wrath. And we have both exegetically met in one Scripture,
Rev. 6. last. They said to the Mountains, Fall on us, to hide us [from the Face
of him] that sits on the Throne, and [from the Wrath] of the Lamb; and
suitably this Destruction here in 2 Thessalonians. 1. is said to be both from God and
Christ. Even as the Happiness of Heaven is immediately from the Presence of God
and Christ, Rev. 21. 23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the
Moon to shine in it: For the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the
Light thereof. Thus on the contrary is it in Hell, and so at the day of
Judgment it is the Face of God, and the Face of the Lamb, that the Wicked most
of all do dread, as that which is the Inflicter of their Torment.

As for any Objection from those words, in flaming Fire, etc. I shall answer it
afterward.

III. Scripture.
Romans 9. 23.
CHAP. III.
This Passage explicated, only so far as concerns the Execution. Several
Particulars in the Words that show the Power of God's Wrath to be the
inflicting Cause, and immediately inflicting this Punishment. An Explication of
a fourth Scripture, Romans 2. 8, 9. added, for the confirmation of all.

I Shall insist on this Passage but so far as it respects the Execution of this
Destruction in Hell, after much Long-Suffering passed and not to touch at all;
upon any thing of that Point of Rejection from Eternity, whether intended or
not. But that the Words should respect the Execution in Hell, (which is the
Point only before us) I take that as clear, and much for granted. And the
Reason is, because it is the Glory of Heaven, which in the next Words the
Apostle joins with it, and sets by it, as Parallels illustrating each the
other: So ver. 23. And that he might make known the riches of his Glory on the
Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory; In Heaven namely. The
only thing which by the way I observe, is, That the Sin of the Creature is that
which prepares or fitteth the Creature for the execution of this Punishment.
And a difference may be observed in this (though otherwise a Parallel) as put
in cautiously by the Apostle; that God himself prepares the Saints to Glory,
ver. 23. but the other are fitted, that is, by themselves, unto Destruction,
ver. 22. ere he destroys them.

The Point before me is, that God's Wrath and his Power are to be the immediate
Inflicters of that Destruction. There are several Particulars, in the Words,
which taken singly might perhaps be sufficient to prove this, but laid all
together, will become a strong eviction thereof.

1. That God's Wrath and his Power, or the Power of his Wrath, are spoken of,
as the inflicting or executing Causes, is evident: For it is a Power of
Efficiency here spoken of, as whereby God produces this Destruction, as a
Cause does its proper Effect: and accordingly He is said to make known and show
his Power and Wrath therein; like as the force and virtue of an efficient Cause
is made known and demonstrated, in and by the Effect it produces. And so is
spoken to the same Effect, with what, in Chap. 1. 20. he had said, that his
Power and Godhead is clearly seen from the Creation of the World, and
understood by the things that are made. He that is, (...), the Mighty one, (as
the blessed Virgin there, by way of Eminency, styles him) Luke 1. 49. is said
to show strength with his Arm, Ver. 51. And here, to make known (...), (a Word
suited to that other) his (...) posse, or what is possible to be done by him.
It is then a power of Strength, and Energie, or Efficacy, with his own Hands
and Arm, and that according to the utmost of his Ability, as the word imports:
And so the Power here spoken of, is an inflicting Power, that works and effects
this Destruction; and not that of Authority only, or a Power of Liberty to do
as one pleases, as the Potter with the Clay. For that kind of Power he had
before ascribed to God in this matter, in the foregoing Verse, which this Word
here is distinct from. And this is one step: unto which add,

2. It is his Power joined with his Wrath: that is, the Power of his Wrath, or
his Wrath in the Power of it. For thus Moses, the Man of God, Psalm. 90. 11. had
long before put them together, when he speaks of this very Wrath in Hell, of
which here the Apostle does. For after he had, 1. set out the Time and
Condition of Man in this Life, The days of our years are threescore years and
ten, etc. and then, 2. We fly away: so expressing Death, and our going into
another World. Then, 3. follows, [Who knows the Power of thine Anger?] As that
which succeeds and seizes after Death upon the most of Mankind dying in
their Sins. The Apostle here mentions Power and Wrath apart, but Moses there
makes Power an Attribute of his Wrath: and so considered it has a double
meaning, and both serving our purpose; 1. That Wrath stirs up his Power, and
draws it out unto this Execution, and therefore Wrath is the first of the two
here mentioned: yea further, that it is his Power, as it becomes heated,
inflamed and intended by Wrath, that inflicteth this. And as a Man in his Anger
strikes a greater blow, so may God be supposed to do, when represented as thus
smiting in his sore displeasure. And, 2. That God's very Wrath and Anger, if
but shown and revealed by him, to Men's Souls, has such a Power in it, that
that alone is enough to destroy them. The nearest resemblance that the
Scriptures Fiery Indignation in the Text. Psalm. 22. 14.
make of this Wrath, is that of Fire, (of which anon) and that as Fire melting
Wax by the very Presence of it. As therefore when we would express the Power of
Fire, we say [the Power of the Heat] that is in Fire, that thus melts and
consumes, etc. Its heat being in it self so fierce and vehement a Quality, that
when but applied, it thus works: So here; it is the Power of his Wrath. If it
be kindled but a little, that destroys, if but made known once, or discovered.
And, as in the Text, it is a showing his Wrath, and thereby his Power in
destroying, is made known. It is but his being Angry, and showing it. And this
is the Greatness of God, that his very Wrath discovered, should have this
Power. And how receptive the Conscience is of it, I shall after show. As, in
his Favor (if Chap. 6. of this first Section.
but manifested to Men's Souls) is Life, Psalm. 30. 5. So, in his Anger, when
discovered by himself, there is Death. If the Wrath of a King be as the roaring
of a Lion; and where the Word of a King is, there is Power; then what is the
Terror and Power of the Wrath of the Great God? That alone strikes dead. And
thus understood, it is an Argument of it self alone, that the Power of his
Wrath does speak an immmediateness of God's Execution.

A second Particular is, that that which makes God willing by reason of Sin to
execute this, is thereby to obtain a Glory unto his Power, by showing his
Wrath. So as, that although he has already shown his Power in creating the
World at first, and upholding it by the Word of his Power, and other Effects,
that yet over and above, and besides all this, he takes the advantage of Sin,
to show (as the riches of his Mercy in saving from Sin, so) the Greatness of
his Power, another way, namely, in destroying for Sin. And accordingly in that
2 These. 1. 9. there is a peculiar Glory attributed unto that Power of his, from
or by which Men are destroyed; [punished from the Glory (says that Text) of his
Power] or from his Power, giving a Demonstration, or showing his Glory therein:
that is, unto that end that it might be known how great and powerful a God he
is in Himself, by the Judgment which he executes, as the Psalmist speaks.

Now then, from hence, ere we add the other two Particulars, the Argument
rises thus: That if God should execute this by Creatures only, and not
immediately by himself, he attained not the full of this his End: and that upon
a double Account.

1. Because, when all had been done, that could have been, by his powerful
arming and setting on of Creatures to punish the Sinner; yet still himself
being able to give a greater Demonstration of Power this way, if Himself would
take it in Hand; and the Soul of Man being fully capable of his immediate
workings upon it; and Sin also deserving it: and the Wrath of God being first
or last to come upon impenitent Sinners to the uttermost: 1 These. 2. 16.
Therefore until this Demonstration were given, he had not made a full proof of
his Power: Which the Apostle here professes to be his aim.

And, 2. In that after all other Instances and Demonstrations of Power given in
Creation, Miracles, in Conversion of Souls, that is, Take his creating part in
it, etc. All which He has done, immediately Himself, without the intervention
of created Influences, that he should, last of all, be willing to give forth
anew, or show forth his Power afresh in this Work also; and yet should not then
give a Demonstration of like immediate Power, but execute it only at second
Hand by Creatures alone: this would fall short, and hold no Proportion with
that Power already shown forth in those fore-past Works; and then this being
the last, or one of the last, after all his other Works ended, purposely to
show forth his Power in, it had not been such a Demonstration of Power, as in
his last Work (wherein he professes to show forth any Attribute) he uses
comparatively to give: For still his manner is, in the showing forth of any
Attribute, to give greater Demonstrations thereof in his latter Works then in
the former: Of which more afterward.

Add this to it, which heightens this Argument. That the Apostle specially
singleth forth this Attribute of Power: and by way of eminency mentions it,
in speaking of this Punishment, as that Attribute, whereof God is willing to
give fullest Demonstration, in this work, above any other Attribute, or
Attributes, in Himself, therein. In all the great works of God, some one
special Attribute has still the Honor given it, as being in a way of eminency
put forth; as in Man's Salvation, Mercy and Grace, Ephesians. 2. 9. In Man's
Glorification, Riches of Glory and Mercy, as here ver. 23. But look down into
Hell, and it is his Power, which (as here in difference from those other) is
said to be the predominant Attribute, that he would show forth, and which
appears, there. And the comparing of these two, Salvation and Damnation, as
they stand in an opposite Parallel, this in ver. 22. and the other in ver. 23.
does confirm this Observation; taking in withal that other Passage in 2 These.
1. 9. where they are said to be punished from the Glory of his Power, which
manifestly gives the Glory unto his Power, in this Work, above any Attribute.
His Sovereignty and Authority is seen in Salvation as much (if not more) as it
is in Destruction. I [Will] have Mercy on whom [I will,] etc. But his Power or
Omnipotency, that is said to be seen in destroying for Sin. Whereof perhaps one
reason is, because there is shown in this, a duplicated Power: a contrary
Stream of Power running cross and thwart, in its Effects, in this. For at the
same instant (and that lengthned out for ever,) God sets Himself by his Power
to destroy the Creature, utterly, in respect of its Well-being: Whilst yet
again, on the other Hand, as great a Power is requisite to uphold it in Being
and Sense, and to prevent its sinking into its first nothing, or from failing
before him, in respect of Being to bear it. And in that respect to continue the
Creature to be, etc. and to endure the weight of God's Power in Wrath, to be
dry Stubble in a Flame never consumed; this is more then for God to create.
This puts the great God upon a double expense of Power.

A third Particular, in this Romans 9. 22. that contributes to this, is: That, As
the Cause inflicting is termed the Power of his Wrath, so the miserable
Subjects hereof are denominated Vessels of Wrath: Even as on the other side,
those saved, are termed Vessels of Mercy. Common use of Speech tells us, that
Vessels ordained to be filled with such or such Materials, have their
Denomination, from that matter they are ordained to contain, and are filled
withal. You say this is a Vessel of Oil, that a Vessel of Wine; these here you
see are said to be Vessels of Wrath. If you demand whose Wrath? God's. What if
[God willing to make known his Wrath.] Now as touching its opposite here,
[Vessels of Mercy,] all will acknowledge that when it is spoken of as in
relation to Heaven (as here it is) that imports, Souls their being set apart
to be immediately filled with the Love and Mercy of God: that as God is Love,
so that they, as Vessels, swim in that Ocean for ever: That they dwell in God
immediately, and are filled with fullness of him. And why should not then, this
other of being Vessels of Wrath, be intended in the same Sense also, and that
Sense be urged accordingly? Especially seeing it is evident that one scope of
the Apostle here, was to make a Parallel between the eternal Glorification of
the one, and eternal Destruction of the other; and accordingly between what are
to be the Causes of them. And if so, the Law of this Parallel will also carry
it to this, that as the Saints in Heaven have an immediate Participation of
God, that likewise in Hell, there shall be oppositely, an immediate
Participation of God's Wrath. In Heaven they are not said to be Vessels of
Mercy, because God shows them Mercy, only, by created Benefits or Gifts
bestowed; or because they have God's Mercy communicated by Creatures (though it
must be affirmed that there is a confluence of these) but because God himself
appears all in Love, Mercy, and Kindness to them.

And it is not nothing, that, according to the same Analogy of Speech, unto
this Particular, in multitudes of Scriptures in the New Testament. This
Destruction is (...), by way of Singularity, Eminency, and simply styled Wrath;
and the Wrath of God. And so it bears away that Denomination from all other
Punishments by Creatures (except that by Magistrates in God's stead, and who
bear the Image of God, Romans 13. 5.) so bearing the Name of its immediate Cause.

The Baptist he began that style in the New Testament. [The Wrath to come,]
Mat. 3. by way of destinction from all that is executed in this Life. And the
whole New Testament afterward much uses that Phrase. As when the day of
Judgment is styled the day of Wrath, Romans 2. And elsewhere. It is equivalent to
say a Child of Hell, Mat. 23. 15. And a Child of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. To say,
fitted to Destruction, as Romans 9. and ordained to Wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. To say,
Damnation hasteneth, 2 Pet. 2. 3. And, the Wrath of God comes on the Children
of Disobedience, Col. 3. 6. As in like manner on the contrary, Saved from
Wrath, Romans 5. Delivered from Wrath through Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. is all
one, and, saved from Death and Hell, elsewhere. And this is usually termed the
Wrath of God, so Joel 3. ult. Col. 3. 6. and Ephesians. 5. 6. Romans 9. 22.

That which I would observe from both, is, that according to the general
Analogy of common Speech in all Languages; the punishment as the Effect,
bearing the Denomination of that, which is the immediate Instrument of the
principal Agent, in that Punishment. (Thus the torture by the Rack is called
the Rack: whipping the Rod. So in Deaths, Crucifying was termed the Cross,
Hanging the Gallows: Thus it is in the Punishments which Men execute.) That in
like Analogy of Speech this ultimate Punishment should so generally be termed
Wrath, and the Wrath of God, by way of eminency and difference from all other
fore-running effects of Wrath, executed by Creatures in this Life; this still
strengthens the former Notion, that it is indeed the Wrath of this God it self,
in a way of eminent difference from what by Creatures, he does in Wrath pour
out, that is the inflicter of that Punishment.

I shall for the close of this, cast in one Scripture-Testimony more, both to
confirm this Interpretation of Wrath given upon Romans 9. and the whole of the
Point in hand. It is

IV.
Romans 2. 8, 9.
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish unto every Soul of Man that
does evil, etc.

I observed before from the second Verse of this Chapter, how that this
Punishment was termed both the Judgment of God, ver. 2. as denoting God to be
the Judge, and also [Wrath,] as of God the Avenger. Now in these Words ver. 8,
9. the Apostle pursues the latter more fully, when he says, Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish to every Soul of Man. These are two pairs or
Conjugates of Causes, and Effects. 1. Indignation and Wrath, as the Causes. 2.
Tribulation and Anguish, as the two Effects; and that on the Souls of Men,
which are the Vessels of this Wrath and Indignation, and Subjects of that
Tribulation and Anguish thence arising. And truly his instancing in the Soul,
which (though it often signifies the whole Person, yet) here seems purposely
done, as being that in or of Man, which alone is immediately capable of this
Indignation and Wrath of God, and the Impressions or Effects of Anguish
therefrom, and is the proper seat of that Anguish and Tribulation. And that
Phrase of Wrath, its being said to be [treasured up] in the 5th verse, suits
this. For what is the Treasury or Magazine thereof, but the Heart and Bosom of
God Himself, in which it lies hid, as Treasures use to do in some secret place?
Even as the Saints Life is said to be hid in God, Col. 3. 3. compare Deuteronomy. 32.
24.

I shall but further superadd that noticed Ira Dei est infernus Diaboli and
omnium Damnatorum. Famed by Gerard in his Common Place, De inferno. Sect. 30.
out of Luther's Enarrations or Commentary upon Genesis Chap. 45. upon the 14,
and 15. ver. Also by Fabritius.
saying of Luther, (which, out of deep experience of the Wrath of God in his
Soul, at his first Humiliation and Conversion he had learned) The Wrath of God
is Hell, the Hell of Devils and all damned Spirits.

CHAP. IV.
That this immediate Wrath of God is in Scripture set forth unto us under the
Similitude of Fire, and fiery Indignation. The Examples of Persons devoured by
Fire in the Old Testament, Shadows of this Punishment by the immediate Wrath of
God. This the Fire wherein the Devil and his Angels are tormented.

THere has been nothing more divertive of the Thoughts of Men from
apprehending, or so much as imagining God's immediate Wrath to be a cause of
that Punishment in Hell; then that the Scriptures do so often make mention of
Fire, etc. as the Instrument thereof, and so Men's conceptions do terminate
therein, and go no further.

But I shall rather on the other hand, make an Argument of it. Namely, that
indeed the Scriptures do set out this immediate Wrath of God under the
Similitude, Resemblance, and Representation of Fire; and that, sometimes, when
Hellfire is spoken of, the Wrath of God is intended thereby.

Unto which I yet Preface this: That I must not, nor dare I say that there is
no material Fire in Hell ordained for Punishment to Men's Bodies: but that it is
Rational, that the Body having sinned as well as the Soul, it should have a
meet recompense of Reward suited thereto, as well as that the Soul should. But
yet so, as either of them have this meeted out to them, according to their
vastly differing share, and hand, and acting which they had in sinning; in
which the Soul is always the principal Actor, and in some Sins the sole Agent
and Subject. To be sure in Heaven there is a confluence of created
Excellencies, suited to the Bodies of Saints, made Spiritual, as well as God
Himself, the Happiness of their Souls; and sure I am that on the contrary, it
is distinctly said of each and apart, That God destroys [both Body and Soul] in
Hell, Mat. 10. 28. And accordingly, each of them, with a Punishment suited unto
each.

The Passage of Scripture, unto which the gathering will be of several others,
for the proof of this my present Assertion, (which is the subject of this
Chapter,) is that of our Apostle in the 28. ver. of this Heb. 10. a little
before my Text; he there setting forth the Judgment to come, in the Causes and
Effects of it, to be,

A fiery Indignation, devouring the Adversaries.

I did but touch upon it before, when I drew out other Arguments from this
Text, but then reserved a fuller handling of this by it self.

The Original has it, [The Indignation of Fire.] But Indignation is in, and
from the Heart of an intelligent Person provoked, which is God, as the Text
shows. Grotius therefore interprets it, The Anger of God, but adds, putting
forth it self by Fire: I suppose he means by corporeal Fire, as its Instrument.
But why not rather The Anger of God Himself, Devouring his Adversaries, as
Fire; and so to relate to the manner of his Anger its working, as represented
under the Similitude of Fire, seeing God Himself is, in this Epistle, styled a
Consuming Fire? which interprets this.

And in this Expression of [fiery Indignation which Devoureth,] He has
particular reference unto those, of all other, the most extraordinary Judgments
upon Nadah and Abihu, Lev. 10. 2. There came out [Fire] from the Lord, and
[devoured] them. They are in terminis, the very Words of the Apostle here: And
Respici videtur Historia quae est. Numb. 16. 35. Lev. 10. 2. Grotius.
we may take in also (that so we may have two Witnesses too, to confirm this
our Interpretation of the Apostles Allusion) That two hundred and fifty Princes
perished by Fire from the Lord, in the Rebellion of Corah, Numb. 16. 30. This
as for what examples is referred unto.

Now to raise up our Thoughts, unto how much a sorer Punishment, the fiery
Indignation that remained for these Gospel-Adversaries should be, he suggests
how transcendently the Gospel exceeds the Ministration of Moses Law, in these
Words that follow; He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy, under two or
three Witnesses, of how much sorer Punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood
of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite to the Spirit of Grace. Moses Law (the old Covenant, as joined with the
Law Ceremonial,) was sprinkled, or consecrated with the Blood of Beasts, Chap.
9. 19, 20, 21. But the Gospel of the New Covenant, and the Persons enlightened
thereby, have been sanctified by the Blood of the Son of God. If then such an
extraordinary fiery Judgment befell the despisers of this Moses Law, thus
sprinkled, etc. what fiery Indignation proportionably must it be that shall
befall the treaders down, both of the Book, Covenant, and sacred Blood of
Christ? And in this lies the weight and strength of the Apostle's Argument.

That Maxim of the Judicial Law which is annexed, that Despisers died without
Mercy under two or three Witnesses; is brought in for that grand Circumstance's
sake, whereby the Apostle heightneth both the Iniquity of those Persons,
destroyed by Fire, who sinned before many thousand Witnesses, the whole
Congregation of Israel: As likewise, this other far transcending guilt of these
Adversaries, who had renounced Christ and his Blood openly, before the whole
World and Christian Church. So Chap. 6. 6. It Is said they did put the Lord
Jesus to an open shame; and they are the same Persons, whom he threatens this
against here, and speaks of there.

But still, by what surpassing Proportion may we estimate, or suppose (as the
Apostle calls us to do) how much this fiery Indignation is sorer, then that
outward devouring them by Fire. It Is certain, that Moses Law and that
sprinkling with Beasts Blood, etc. which he argues from, held but the
proportion of Types, As he had expressly called them in that chap. 9. 9. and
again in this chap. 10. ver. 1.
Figures and Shadows. But the New Covenant, and Christ's Blood, etc. of the
Substance and Reality, comparatively to these. Then in like manner, his intent
in proposing these examples of Judgments by Fire, was as of those that hold the
Proportion but of a Type, a Figure of this fiery Indignation, that is to come
upon the treaders down of the Blood of Christ. For indeed a mere bodily Death
the sharpest (as those by Fire were) is but as the Shadow of Death, unto the
second Death (the thing intended here) which is utterly another kind of thing.

In Heb. 10. ver. 1. He says of the good things of the Gospel, that what the
Law held forth, were but the Shadows of those good things to come, as Canaan of
Heaven, Chap. 4, etc. the like 2 Col. 17. And why may it not be also said, that
as all the good things under the Law, the best were but shadows of those good
things to come, so that the highest and worst of outward evil things executed
then, were in like manner but shadows of those evil things which the Gospel
brings to Light, as the Punishment of Sin. And we may see in his succeeding
Discourse in this same Chapter, how he having first instanced in the Good, he
after instanceth in the highest of Evil, in these Words I am upon, ver. 27, 28,
29, 30, 31. And in like manner the like extraordinary Judgments then, are
expressly said to have happened to them as Types, (so in the Greek and Margin) 1
Cor. 10. (...), rudiores imagines perfectioris.
11. Types not merely monitory of like Events, but withal prefigurative of
Punishment of an higher kind, etc. What Death could be outwardly sorer, than
See Lucan, of the Effects of the stingings by African Serpents upon Cato's
Soldiers. Lib. 9.
to be destroyed of Serpents? ver. 9. and those fiery too, Numb. 21. 6. the
Effects of whose Stings are described to be as dolorous as being burnt alive.
But under the Gospel, Sin and the Law, and so God's Wrath, these as the
substance are set out to be the Sting of that Death to come, 1 Cor. 15. 55. As
the brazen Serpent was the shadow of Christ, John 3. So the stingings of those
fiery Serpents the like Figures of the stinging of Sin and God's Wrath.
Again, ver. 10. destroyed of the Destroyer. Who was the Destroyer then?
Angels. So Heb. 11. 28. And what Destruction or Destroyer under the Gospel is
it, that is typified out by these? even God Himself: who, as by Christ, is said
to kill the Soul, and destroy Body and Soul in Hell: So, ere the Apostle took
off his Pen from prosecuting that Argument, in the very same Chapter, he in
full effect says as much, in setting before them, how it was God's Power and
Wrath, instead of those other Destroyers, with which Sinners have now to do,
ver. 22. Do you provoke the Lord to Jealousy? are you stronger than he? I
might confirm this Notion from other Types, 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45. This fore-laid.

To approach nearer to our purpose in hand, there are two things further to be
done: 1. as touching the Type it self, what kind of Fire that was which
devoured them: And the manner of their Deaths.

The Fire was another manner of Fire, than this our Elementary common Fire.
This was Fire from Heaven, and therefore said to be a Fire [from the Lord] that
devoured them; it was such a Fire, as blasts of Lightning are, which strike,
and blast, and shrivel the Spirits of a Living Body in an instant: which is
evident by the manner of their Deaths. The Hebrew Doctors say of it, that it
was a Fire which burnt their Souls, not their Bodies; their meaning is, their
Bodies were not consumed or devoured by it: for Lev. 10. 5. it is said, They
carried their Bodies and Coats into the Tent, as untouched. It was therefore
such a Fire (as Lightning is from Heaven) which uses to strike, and lick up
Men's Spirits in an instant, when yet in the mean time, it consumes not, breaks
not so much as Skin or Flesh; which our Elementary Fire preys first and most
upon. It was therefore a far subtiller Fire then Culinary or Kitchen Fire:
which suitably served as the fittest and nearest Type of this fiery
Indignation: and of the vengeance, which it executes. And this was but the
Shadow.

The second is, What the substance answering to these Types should be? This I
shall set out by two things:

1. What is the thing, or subject devoured by this fiery Indignation? It is the
immortal Souls of Men: these are the Fuel which this Fire does prey upon. As
to the truth of the thing it self I need not insist on it: But the Analogy of
that as the Shadow; and this as typified thereby, that is the matter before me.
-- Let it be considered, that the Death and Destruction of the immortal Soul in
Man, could not any other way be more lively shadowed forth, than by such a
devouring (as Moses word is) or licking up the vital and animal Spirits that
run in the Body, when yet the Body it self remains unburnt: Thereby
demonstrating, that it was such a Fire as struck immediately at that which is
the Fountain of Life it self in the Body, and at that which is the Bond, the
Vinculum, the Tie of Union between Soul and Body: for such are those Spirits.
And yet not so much, as to singe the outward bulk or carcass of the Body. There
could have been nothing invented in the whole compass of Nature, to have born a
resemblance so near, to shadow forth the Immortal Soul, as those spirits
running in Man's Blood and Arteries, do; which, some affirm to be the very
Animal and Vital Soul in Man. Sure I am, they are as the Oil whereby Life is
preserved and fed; and in the Blood is the Life, says Moses, our best
Interpreter in this. Neither does this Shadow hold a Similitude in this
particular only, but in another like case as evidently. The pouring forth of
the Blood of the Beasts that were Sacrificed under the Old Law, was
particularly ordained to signify Christ his pouring forth his Soul unto Death,
as Esaias speaks; As well, as in general, that the Sacrifice of those Beasts did
typifie forth Christ's Sacrifice, in the whole of it. And this was as near a
Representation of that Particular, as could any way be made, by what was
corporeal in Beasts, or else in the whole Creation (for a Sacrifice of Mankind,
or the Blood of Men, God liked not to be made to him, in his Worship) could
possibly have been found to pourtray it forth.

The second thing is, that the substance shadowed forth by that Fire, was no
other than the Indignation or Wrath of the great God Himself, which is termed
Fiery Indignation here.

For Proof of which, I insist not, that some Shim thereof this Shadow it self
does cast, in Moses his saying again and again in Terminis, that a Fire [from
the Lord,] etc. which has a great Emphasis and Resemblance of this in it. But
for proof I ask,

First, Where shall we find, or how Omnes ignes hujus Mundi sunt ut ignis
Pictus ad ignem (...).
shall we imagine any created Fire so to exceed that Fire from Heaven, recorded
in that Story; and so far exceeding it as the Substance does a Shadow; or such
as should melt down Immortal Souls? You may sooner invent or imagine a Fire, so
much comparatively hotter than that of the Sun it self, (which is the contract
of Fire and Light) and so much exceeding it, as should be able to shrivel up
this Sun into a burnt black Coal: as to imagine any such created Fire, so
transcending this of Lightning from Heaven, as shall thus devour reasonable
Souls and Immortal Spirits; that in the substance of them (as being Spirits) do
bear the image of God. In what Furnace will you think to find such a Fire? No
where but in the Bosom of him, who has here said Vengeance is mine; even of
God himself.

2. To confirm this. What created Fire can be conceived more subtle or
powerful, than the Angels themselves are conceived to be? whom, as Heb. 1. 7.
out of the Psalms, the Apostle compares to Flames of Fire, that is in our
(European Language) to Lightning. Now then I ask when Christ says, Mat. 25. 41.
Go into the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, (showing that Man's
Punishment shall be from the same hand, that the Punishment of those evil
Angels is;) what Fire can be supposed such, that can work on Angelical Natures,
who themselves have Power over Fire; of Fire of Lightning from Heaven, as in
Jobs case was seen: None other, but that, which as the Apostle resolves us, (if
we will rest in it) That our God is a consuming Rev. 14.
Fire, Heb. 12. ult. So that considering the State and Condition of the Devil;
I cannot but celebrate that forecited conclusive Speech of Luthers, Ira Dei
est infernus Diaboli and omnium damnatorum, It is the Wrath of God that is the
Hell of the Devil, and of all the damned: For there can be no other Fire, in
which the Devils can be tormented. Outward washings may as soon reach
Conscience, as Heb. 9. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 21. as such created Fire to torment an
Angel.

3. Let us consider other Scriptures, which (as I said) do gather about this,
to give Testimony to this Interpretation.

First, That of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 33. 14. The Sinners in Sion are
afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites: Who among us shall dwell
with the [devouring Fire?] Who among us shall dwell with [everlasting
burnings?] I shall afterward have occasion to take notice of this Scripture by
way of Use. In the mean time, -- observe, that it is God Himself, who is meant
by this devouring Fire, here. For in a smart and quick Retortion, (and it is a
most Elegant one) the Prophet gives Answer: He that walks Righteously, and
speaks Uprightly, He shall dwell with Him (whom you that are Hypocrites so
much dread, and have cause enough to do so) with him shall an Upright Man
dwell: Who is, and will be unto you in the State you are in, A Devouring Fire.
And thus they are reproved, and taught what it is to be Hypocrites, by the
opposite condition of the Upright, and the differing Event of being such. And
further, that it is God Himself there the Prophet intends, as with whom the
Upright should dwell: The Words following do also show, ver. 16. He shall dwell
on High (namely with that High and lofty one, that dwells in the High and Holy
Place, etc. Do but punctually compare that Esaias. 57. 15. with this here)
likewise ver. 17. Thine Eye (O thou upright Soul) shall see the King in his
Beauty; that is (as Christ says) the pure in Heart shall see God. The result
is, that the same God, who appears all in Flames, and as a devouring Fire, unto
Hypocrites in Hell; is all Light and Beauty to the Upright in Heaven. Like as
unto a sound and vigorous Eye, It is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, as
Solomon speaks; but to sore Eyes it is a Terror.

Add to this Psalm. 21. 8, 9. Thine Hand shall find out all thine Enemies, thy
right Hand shall find out those that hate thee. Thou shall make them as [a
fiery Oven] in the time of thine [Anger:] The Lord shall [swallow them up] in
his [Wrath] and [the Fire] shall devour them. This the Chaldee Paraphrast
interprets of the Fire of Hell. And so you have all meet to interpret this Fire
to be meant of the Wrath of God himself. First, God a consuming Fire, Heb. 12.
ult. Then 2. God himself to be that devouring Fire, Isa. 33. 14. And 3. his
Wrath interpreted to be that Fire by the Psalmist. And lo how these all meet
in this one saying: The fiery Indignation that devours the Adversaries. Which
the Apostle himself, also interprets of God himself, afterward. We know him
that has said, Vengeance is mine. And it is a fearful thing, etc.

Particularly for that Scripture, even now cited, Isa. 33. 14. If we consult
the Context, the occasion of bringing in that horrid outcry, who among us,
etc. (as Interpreters agree) was that the Prophet had set forth, in the Verses
before, that most wonderful and prodigious slaughter of the King of Assyria's
Host, when an hundred forescore and five thousand (as 2 Kings 19. 15.) were in
one Night destroyed by an Angel. And thereupon, the Prophet in this Passage is
to be understood, either to have related what an impression of dread this so
unparalled a Judgment had made upon, and struck the Hearts of the Hypocrites
in Sion with: As that which had made them to cry out thereupon, Oh how then
shall we dwell with everlasting burnings? That is, with God Himself. For they
may well be supposed to have reasoned thus with themselves; if one Angel that
is but a ministering Spirit to God, is able to blast and consume such a
Multitude in one Night; how shall we have to do with God Himself, who is that
infinite immense devouring Fire, and all those Angels but as Sparks, and his
Ministers. And so according to this meaning, themselves are brought in,
speaking by the Prophet, as the Men of Bethshemesh did upon the like Judgment,
1 Samuel 6. 20. Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? Or else those
Words may be supposed to have been the Prophets own Meditation and use of
Instruction, deduced from that example; which he utters, as fore-warning the
Sinners in Sion to consider, That if God be so terrible in the Judgments he
executes by others, his Angels, who are Flames of Fire; how will you endure to
dwell with God Himself, and have immediately to do with him for ever, who is a
devouring Fire and everlasting Burnings? etc. And our Savior's Speech is not
remote, from this of Isaiah, when, speaking of Hell, it is the Fire prepared
for [Hypocrites] (says he) Mat. 24. 51. Even as here, Isaiah professes to
speak this of and unto the [Hypocrites in Sion] as the Persons above all other
forewarned, when Hell is threatened. Again, as in Isaiah, God himself is called
the devouring and everlasting Fire, so here in the Text, his Wrath is termed
fiery Indignation [devouring.] And the Word translated Adversaries here, falls
out also to be a Word decyphering Hypocrites or false Professors, (...)
underhand Enemies. Who are also said to look for, in their trembling
Consciences, this fiery Indignation: even as of these Hypocrites Isaiah also
speaks, as being the expectants of Hell. And again, our Apostle Chap. 12. 31.
Our God is a consuming Fire. So as upon several accounts it is, that God
himself and his Wrath is, more eminently, that Fire in Hell the Scriptures,
sometimes, speak of.

If it be objected out of my Text, Is it not said, He comes in flaming Fire
with 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.
his Mighty Angels? Will he not then use corporeal Fire, as also the might of
his Angels, and both as Instruments of his Execution, and their Destruction;
and to that very end mentions the might of his Angels?

I answer, 1. This Fire here is not mentioned, as that which is the Cause of
their everlasting Destruction: but as that which is a concomitant of Christ's
Appearing; and also a forerunner or Harbinger to that Judgment, he comes to
pronounce Sentence of, whereof the Destruction that follows is the final
Execution. Judges use for terror, and for a Demonstration of their Authority,
Work, and Office they are employed in, to have visible Instruments of Death
carried before them, as Ensigns of their Power: A company of Halberds or the
like for their Guard to go before, and environ them round; which yet are not to
be the immediate Instruments of the Execution of Malefactors it self, but
accompany their Persons at the Examination and Sentence. And in such an
equipage the Psalmist and the Prophets set forth Gods coming to judge, in
particular judgments as Psalm. 18. and else where.
And as to this or the like use, is this Guard of Angels, and of flaming Fire
mentioned, to be understood to serve: Both these referring evidently unto that
his Appearing. [Who shall be revealed from] Heaven with his mighty Angels in
flaming Fire, but not spoken of, as the Causes of the Destruction it self that
follows.

The Angels further serve to gather Men from all the four Corners of the World,
Mat. 13. 41, 42.
to hale and bring them before the Judge; and after Sentence to cast them into
the place of Torment, called there A Furnace of Fire: but not of their making,
but God's. They do but deliver them into the dreadful place, wherein Execution
is acted and performed.

2. This Fire which he appears with, is to burn up this visible World, as a
fore-running Sign, to show the fierceness of the Fire of that Wrath which shall
after prey and seize upon the invisible World; that is, Men's Souls and Devils
for ever. Not that Men's Souls are to be burnt up with no other Fire, than what
the World is burnt withal, but that which burns the visible World, is an
Example and Demonstration of that other Fire, that is kindled in his Anger,
that shall in the end Burn to the bottom of Hell. This as to Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
what may be objected out of that place.

3. I deny not from other Scriptures a created Fire in Hell: Let but that also
be allowed which some of the Ancients also speak of, that there is a double
Fire there: One inward in Men's Souls; Another outward. Gerson aptly applies
Vermis and ignis, uterque duplex, interior and exterior. Interior, qui urit and
rodit cor: exterior, qui rodit and urit corpus. Innocentius, Damnati ab intus
and extra. Erunt in acerbissimo cruciatuum genere, foris devorati ab igne, and
ab intus ut Clibanus ignis positi. Gerson Ser. 1. de Sanctis.
that place of the Psalmist forecited, Psalm. 21. 19. unto that of this inward
Fire, Thou shall make them as a fiery Oven, the Lord shall swallow them up in
his Wrath, and the Fire shall devour them: The Fire of an Oven is a fit
similitude of a Fire within, as into which Fire is put to heat it, and the heat
made more intense by the cavity or hollowness of the place. Whereas to be cast
into a Furnace of Fire, as Christ speaks, or into a Lake of Fire, as Apoc.
imports a Fire without, into which the Matter or Persons to be burnt are cast.

And thus much for bare Scripture-Testimonies: many other there are which might
be here collected to confirm this, but are scattered in several parts of this
Discourse in a duer place.

CHAP. V.
A second sort of Proofs. Demonstrations from Instances both of Wicked Men and
Holy Men, who have felt in this Life Impressions of God's immediate Wrath: And
that such Impressions are Evidences of what, in the fullness, is in Hell.

A Second sort of Proofs, are Demonstrations from Instances, in Scripture, of
Persons in this Life, who have felt Impressions of this Wrath of God in their
Souls, upon God's rebuking them for Sin. And these Instances of Experience,
upon Record, being added to those fore-gone Scripture-Testimonies, will serve
as ruled Cases, joined unto Maxims in Law, alleged both of them, for the proof
of one and the same thing; and will give yet more clear Demonstration what is
meant by Wrath, and what Hell is in the fullness of it: And being joined to the
former, do altogether, give an abundant evidence of this great Truth.

I say, 1. Of Men in this Life: And if any should deny the Truth hereof, or
that which we have been prosecuting, themselves perhaps ere they dye may be
made miserable Examples verifying of both; and out of their own woeful
Experience, live to confess and acknowledge the Truth herein. For God does in
this Life single out some, both of his Children, and others; to whom he gives a
taste what the one should for ever have undergone, but that Christ did it for
them; and of what the other must under-goe for ever, without Repentance.
Whereof those Instances that follow, are undeniable Evidences.

And 2. These Terrors are wrought by God's immediate Hand: And from immediate
Impressions and Representations of his Wrath, made by him, on their Souls, and
to their Consciences. For as God puts Joy into the Hearts of his Children in
this Life, by the immediate Light of his Countenance, as Psalm. 4. ver. 6. Lord
lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, and ver. 7. [Thou have put]
Gladness in my Heart, more than in the time that their Corn and their Wine
increased; And again, whom though we see not, yet believing [we rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and glorious] as the Apostle speaks of those Primitive Saints:
Even so when he is pleased to rebuke Man for Sin, he does the like, in a way of
Contraries, on Men both Good and Bad; correcting them, by and with Anguishments
from the like immediate Strokes of his own Anger. God is the Father of all
Spirits: and of the Spirits of his own Children upon a double Creation. And if
the Fathers of our Bodies Heb. 12. 9. See for these things more largely, The
Child of Light walking in Darkness.
corrected us, and had power to do it with bodily Punishment, by bodily
Instruments; do we think that our Souls which lie naked before God, Heb. 4. 13.
are not as immediately subject and exposed to his Correction, as a Father of
Spirits? And if so, that then he may and does sometimes choose to correct even
his own Children with no other Rods but of his own: which are the immediate
Emanations, streamings and dartings of his own Displeasure. Which when they
feel, they wax pale and wan, and wander up and down, like unto Ghosts in Hell,
as if they were cut off by his Hand. And that those Anguishments which either
of these feel, are from God's immediate Hand alone; those that have felt the
smart thereof, do readily acknowledge: for it is not in the power of any
Creature to strike so hard a stroke.

And you shall hear some of themselves, by and by, speak out so much, whilst
they were under the present sense thereof. These things premised,

There are two things to make this Demonstration complete.

First, the Instances themselves of Persons in this Life; On the evidence of
which, the main stress lies, for the proof of the Assertion.

The second is, that such immediate Impressions of Divine Wrath, are Evidences
of what kind of Torment it is, which in the fullness of it, befalls Men in
Hell; and that both proceed from the same immediate Cause.

The Instances are of two sorts: That so we still may have under two or three
Witnesses, this Word established.

1. Of Good and Holy Men. 2. Of Bad and Wicked Men.
1. For Instances of Holy Men, there are diverse of them. As of Job, see his
complaints, Chap. 6. ver. 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. The Arrows of the Almighty
are within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my spirit: The terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me. Oh that it would please God to destroy me,
that he would loose his hand and cut me off. Which with other Passages in that
Chapter, I shall after open at large. Again, Chap. 13. 24, 26. Thou hold me
for thine Enemy, thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the sins of my Youth; also Chap. 16. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15. God, He also
has taken me by my Neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark:
His Archers compass me about, he cleaves my Reins asunder, and does not spare;
He breaks me with breach upon breach, He runs upon me as a Giant. I shall
here only single out that of Heman, which is a most full one, and alone
sufficient; and reserve the explicating that of Job's Case, wholly unto the
setting forth the dreadfulness, which is the subject of the second Section.

Heman complains at the third verse of that Psalm. 88. My Soul is full of
Trouble, etc. And what was the matter of that trouble, and the inflicting cause
hereof? ver. 7. Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with
all thy Waves. Selah: those Words [Thy Wrath lies hard, etc.] others read,
sustains it self, or bears up it self upon me; which is, as if a Giant should
with his whole weight stay himself upon a Child. And thou have afflicted me
with all thy Waves. The Waves of that immense Ocean of Wrath (for unto such
Waves he again compares these Terrors in ver. 16, 17.) he says they came over
him continually; and overwhelmed his Soul, as billows of the Sea wallowing and
tumbling upon a Jonah cast into them. And ver. 14, 15, 16. he sets out his
condition such, as wherein there was not only a privation of God's Favor, and
that God seemed to reject his Soul, as if he never meant more to look upon it,
or regard it; so ver. 14. Why castest thou off my Soul? But further,
positively, ver. 15. I suffer thy Terrors. And ver. 16. Thy fierce Wrath goes
over me, Thy Terrors have cut me off. The blows which God gave his Soul were so
hard and sharp, that to his feeling they not only wounded or cut into, but cut
off his Soul at every stroke. The like follows ver. 17. And this put him into
the condition of Men in Hell. I am free among the dead, ver. 5. that is, of
that Society, Number and Company; and as one of them, that are cut off from thy
Hand, or (as the Margent renders it) [by thy Hand.] All which are, as if he had
said, they are not the strokes of Creatures I feel; or of thine Anger, as
conveyed by Creature distresses, but of thine own immediate hand; and such, as
those that are in Hell it self, do feel from thee. These are Notes and Degrees
beyond, and higher than the Ela of Dolours from or by the hands of Creatures,
though set on by God: They are Strains of another Key, the doleful Air of which
does sound another hand and stroke, (purely Divine) that did immediately strike
upon their Heart Strings that spoke these things. These are the resoundings of
blows and strokes which God's own immediate Hand gave upon the bare Spirit, of
one wounded by him; he that attentively listens to them, will soon perceive and
esteem (as they said,) this Man stricken and smitten of God himself.
Creature-distresses give a far less report.

But that it was God's own immediate hand, is more plainly by himself
expressed, ver. 16. Thy Terrors have cut me off, and ver. 15. while I suffer
thy Terrors, I am distracted, and ready to dye from my Youth up (as in the same
verse) Thy Terrors, so he terms them (he speaking to God) or the Terrors [of
Thee] that is, first, From Thee efficiently, and from thy hand setting them on.
And 2. Of Thee as arising As David styles his Thoughts of God. Psalm. 139. 17.
Thy Thoughts.
in me from and with dreadful apprehensions and thoughts of Thee (objectively,)
and of Thy sore displeasure represented to my Soul, by Thee. And so God's
Terrors, are every way, set forth in distinction, from distresses, from
Creatures, or such as are made mediately by or from Creature-afflictings;
although they also be from God. Thus in like Phrase of Speech it is appositely
said, 1 Pet. 3. 14. Be not afraid of their Terror, he speaks it of Men that
were Persecutors, and threatened the Saints. [Their Terror] objective; That is,
The Terror of them, or that Terror which the apprehension of their Power,
Greatness, Strength, Threatenings, etc. may possibly work in you. In a like
Sense thy Terror here is spoken of God. And the other great Apostle speaking of
this ultimate Punishment of Hell, he in like Phrase, terms it, The Terror of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. That is, that Terror which is peculiar and proper to
him, in and to the Souls of Men, who is the terrible God (as he styles himself
in Moses) and says Nahum, Who can abide, or, stand in the fierceness of his
Anger?

There are further, two effects, which Heman there relates, of this his having
suffered these Terrors; or that befell his Spirit whilst these Terrors were upon
him. 1. That he was continually ready to die: the Wrath that lay on him was so
heavy, as it even well-nigh thrust his Soul out, every moment, and made the
Spirit to fail: And secondly, it made him not himself (as we say) put him out
of his right Mind. Whilst I suffer thy Terrors I am distracted. For the
intention of a Soul taken up with, and extended by the Wrath of God is such;
and is wound up so high, as the String is ready to crack. You usually term
this, in such Persons deeply wounded, [trouble of Conscience,] (but that is
more common) whereas this Dispensation requires an higher Word, it is indeed
[the Wrath of God, or the Terror of God in Conscience] making it as a fiery
Oven within it self, as the Psalmist speaks. This for the instances of Good Men.

A second Instance is of Bad and Wicked Men. What was it caused Judas to hang
himself? The Prophecy of the Psalmist, and the Apostles reference to it, have
resolved us. That it was the Curse or Wrath of God entering into his Soul. The
Psalm is the hundred and ninth, which was penned on purpose about him; the
Apostle's Reference and Application is in Acts 1. 20. -- In the Psalm it is
said, ver. 18. as he loved Cursing, that is, Sin which is that accursed thing,
before God, so the Curse of God came into his Bowels (or inwards) like Water,
and like Oil into his Bones, and filled all within him full of Anguish and
Torment. And so was fulfilled that Saying, Indignation and Wrath, namely, of
God, caused Tribulation and Anguish in his Soul. The Similitudes or Allusions
there are Elegant. That as there are Spiritual Oils which Men's Bodies being
anointed withal, they soak into the Bones, etc. they cool, refresh, and repair
Spirits, and Strength, and allay fervent Heats and Pains; into which more
inward parts, other Medicines more crasse and druggish cannot soak, or come. In
the way of a contrary virtue or effect, he compares the Curse of God on his
Soul, unto a spiritual Oil of a piercing, penetrating Violence, that strikes
in, as Quicksilver, into the Bones, and Nervous Parts, and fills them with
unsufferable Torments. He compares also this Curse, and the Effects of it,
unto such painful Diseases as are caused by sharp Corroding Waters in the
Bowels; as of the Gout in the Bowels: which when it possesses those Inwards,
is mortal and intolerable. The Apostle's Allusion elsewhere is correspondent to
both these of the Psalmist, when he says, The Word of God (through the Power of
the Spirit) is a savor of Death unto Death in some Men's Hearts, as of Life
unto Life in others, 2 Cor. 2. 16. The meaning whereof is, that look as
venomous and sulphurous Vapors and Damps in Mines and Caverns arising out of
the Earth, do strike up such scents or smells, as often kill, by extinguishing
the Spirits of those that descend into them: Such exhalations of Hell and
Wrath, does the Spirit of God, by the Word preached, exhale and draw forth, and
cause to ascend in some Men's Consciences, which gives them the very scent of
Hell it self: They are the Savor or Odor of Death aforehand, [unto Death]
and Damnation, and so are Vapors of the same kind: out of the same Matter that
is laid up in the Mine or Treasury it self; as those out of the Earth use to be.

The second thing requisite to be added for the completing the Demonstration,
is, That such immediate Impressions of Divine Wrath in this Life, are sure and
certain Evidences (I say not as to what Persons, but) of what kind of Torment
it is, which in the fullness of it, befalls Men in Hell; and that both do
proceed from the same immediate Cause. This needs not much probation, for the
Instances before given, carry their own evidence with them of this thing to any
intelligent Reader. And this general Reason for it, will readily occur to any
ones Thoughts, that surely God will not punish them in Hell with a Punishment
of lesser sort or kind (for we speak not now of comparisons of Degrees) than
what his Dispensation reaches forth unto some Men, in this Life. For that is
the proper day, and time, and season of Wrath, and of the fierceness of his
Wrath; in which the Fruits of their own doings, are every way in their full
Ripeness and Maturity to be returned to them: and these inflictions in this
Life are but the Buds and the Blooms that preceed; yet both from the same Root
and Cause. Now to be punished by God's Wrath but mediately, through the force
only of created Instruments, etc. as of material Fire, or the like, (if that
were all the Punishment there); this were certainly by a lower kind or sort,
than to be punished immediately from the Wrath of God it self. As will
abundantly appear in the second Section, when I shall set out the dreadfulness
of such a Punishment.

But let us particularly weigh the Instances themselves, as we have singly, and
apart delivered them.

1. Those Dispensations to wicked and bad Men, as Judas, etc. 2. The same, as
they are exemplified in good and holy Men, as Heman, etc.
And either of them will afford an Argument for the proof of this Proposition
in Hand.

1. These direful Impressions of God's immediate Wrath, when they do befall
wicked Men, what are they to them? Not only Pledges or Forerunners of that
Punishment to come (for such all sorts of Afflictions are unto wicked Men.) But
further these are Spices and Grudgings, and lesser intermitting Fits of those
future fiery, burning, and continued Calentures and Fevers; yea,
Earnest-Penies of Hell: and so of the same kind, with what in full Men shall
there receive.

As we use to say and speak of those glorious Joys, which some Saints aforehand
have the privilege to partake of, that they are pure drops of those Rivers of
Pleasure, flowing immediately from the same Fountain of Life: So we may as
confidently say of those breakings forth of Wrath upon wicked Men's Souls here,
that they are the sippings of that Cup of Wrath without mixture (as the
Revelation Rev. 14. 10.
distinguishes it from those in this Life) whereof the Wicked must drink the
Dregs, though it be Eternity, unto the bottom. And therefore we may make a true
and warrantable measure, of what all such Men are to look for in Hell, by what
some few of them do partake of here.

And the Argument is strong every way, from the one of these unto the other.
For as Heaven and Hell are Parallel in a way of contraries, as out of Romans 9.
22, 23. has been shown: So those unspeakable glorious Joys, and these contrary
extraordinary Horrors and Anguishes, on the other hand, do hold Parallel also,
in being (in their several kinds) Prelibations and Tastes of what is to come in
the other World. And in this very posture and tendency does the Apostle set
these two Dispensations together in this Life, in a Parallel way, (as in Romans
9. he does the other) whilst in the same Scripture, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. He
compares those Joys (common in those times) in them that are saved, to the
breakings forth (at the opening of the Gospel, as of a Box of Spiknard) of a
sweet Odor or Savor of Life unto Life, (namely of the Life to come)
aforehand, sensing their Souls with some of those Perfumes that are fetched
from that Country, and only grow there: and on the contrary, such also he
declares those precursory Savours or Odours of Death in their kind to be, which
do arise from the threatenings of the same Word in Horrors upon many that
perish, which he pronounces to be the very Evaporations of that Lake of Fire
and Brimstone, Rev. 20. 14
which is the second Death, in stiling them the Odor or [Savour of] Death
[unto Death] so speaks he. These Men often smell the scent of Hell in their
Consciences, and the Spirits of it do strike up into their Souls. The very
Ashes and Smoke of that Vesuvius or Aetna of Hell, (I allude unto the last
Words of Deuteronomy. 32. 22.) do fall upon them, which lighting upon Men in this
Life, do, as those Ashes of the Furnace (Exodus 9. 8, 9, 10.) miraculously did,
they cause sores and blains upon Men's Consciences. And however if the Apostle
did therewithal intend the more common Dispensations by the Word, and so both
the ordinary and extraordinary, of which we now speak. Yet still take and
compare those extraordinary Joys in the one, as a Savor of Life, with the
extraordinary Horrors, that are the Savor of Death, unto the other; and in
their Proportion there is still the like reason of both, as to the matter in
hand; and an alike persignificancy in either of those two eternal Estates.

Again, that each of these are alike, by and from God, and by his more
immediate Hand dispensed. This I take from that Phil. 1. 28. and submit the
interpretation of it. Where exhorting Christians unto an holy courage and
confidence in their appearings (for the Cause of Christ) before their
Persecutors Tribunals: In nothing be terrified by your Adversaries, says he.
And upon such a bold undauntedness on their part, two effects he tells them do
often follow; and both from God alike, as two wonderful contrary effects.
First, in themselves, God elevateth and raises up that their confidence of
Faith into a glorious assurance and taste of Heaven and Salvation, whither they
are a going; so in these words, Which is a token to you (your selves) of
Salvation. But on the contrary, which is, an evident token (namely, in their
Persecutor's Consciences) of Perdition, if they repent not, and that (namely,
both these effects) [of God.] Two things I observe: 1. That these two contrary
Effects run parallel still, and that in order to, and of their being Tokens
either of Salvation or Perdition; as in that other place, 2 Cor. 2. And so that
as the Joys put into the hearts of these Confessors, are the first Fruits of
the Spirit, and Romans 8.
therefore of the same kind with what Fruit and Harvest they reap in Heaven;
and thereupon also a Spirit of Glory (is said) to rest upon them in such a
case; it being it self initial Glory, and the first fruits of 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Glory, in a way of Glory. Thus on the contrary, those Terrors God strikes
their Adversaries hearts withal, are like Tokens and Evidences of Hell, no
other than the Suburbs, the first fruits of Hell, and shadow of Death. And, 2.
I observe, (which is that for which I quote it) that both these extraordinary
effects are alike wrought in the hearts of either, by the same or like hand,
namely, Impressions from God. The Apostle therefore adds, (...), unto both,
[and that of God,] He being the immediate Author of the one as well as of the
other; and both unto a like, tho contrary purpose. And the reason why God thus
often takes that season and occasion to put forth his immediate power in the
consciences of either, at such a time, is, because his Glory is in no passages
of Providence in and upon Earth so highly interested and engaged, as upon such
Trials, wherein both his Truth and Children are brought to the Bar at once, and
therefore is then pleased to discover something more than ordinary (tho
secretly) in the Spirits of Men. Have they no Fear (says the Psalmist) that eat
up my People like Bread? One would think so, they look so big, and fall too so
heartily to devour them: Yes, says the Psalmist, answering it, there were they
in great fear. [There] that is, upon such an occasion, at such a time; and yet
the same Psalmist tells us, that there was no cause of fear, (compare for that,
Psalm. 14. 4. with Psalm. 54. 4.) that is, not from Creatures. What was the
matter then? or whence comes this great Fear? God is in the Generation of the
Righteous, says the Psalmist; thence was their fear: [and that of God]. So the
Apostle in that very case. God takes part with his Children, and so strikes and
terrifies their Adversaries Souls, as he comforts theirs; and this is to them
an evident Token, and as the first Baptisms, Washings or Sprinklings of that
Perdition, which their Souls will be everlastingly drowned in (as the Apostle's
allusion is in Timothy) if they turn not.

The truth and real verification of both these so immediate effects by God, and
from God, (he as with a double-edged sword striking contrary ways at once.)
Multitudes of Instances of both kinds the Story of the Martyrs does relate; and
particularly in the examples of those persecuting Emperors Galerius and
Maximinus, as Eusebius has Recorded them. Insomuch as that lamentable outcry
in the sixth Seal, Rev. 6. 16. Which the Kings of the Earth, and mighty Men
(the Persecutors) are brought in so loudly uttering, in saying to the
Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the Wrath of the Lamb. Mr. Mede and
others have applied (as the Time and Order of the Visions of that Prophecy
require) unto those Great Persecutors in the Roman Empire, whom authentic
Antiquity has related to have been terrifyed and struck with horror, by God
and the Lamb, in prodigious extraordinary ways of confusion; and those Terrors,
such, as Stories have related them, as were the liveliest representations of
that Great Day of Wrath, ver. 17. And are therefore set out under the Notion
thereof, as having been to them the very imperfect beginnings of it. This for
the Argument from the instances of wicked Men.

II. The Argument is as strong, though not so direct, from the instances of
holy Men.

For, 1. This Dispensation to them, is not only an Argument in common with
other Afflictions of this World, in their being a manifest token of the
Judgment of 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
God; and that therefore a sure and certain Judgment is to come upon the
Wicked, as he there argues. But this kind, being a Judgment of a spiritual
Nature (as immediate inflictions of Wrath are) and properly belonging unto
Souls, as they are the Subjects of the other World: It argues therefore upon a
more proper account that the Punishment to come is of the same kind therewith.
-- And such they must needs be, unless we will suppose, that God whips his own
Children in this World with Scorpions, but wicked Men in the other World, but
as with Rods in comparison of them. For it must be acknowledged, that these
God's own blows, from his own immediate hand, are sorer, and cause wounds of a
deeper blew, than what are given by him through Creatures. Surely God has not
laid up gentler Rods for the wicked in Hell, then he puts in ure toward his
Children: Have I smote them as I smote thee? Esaias. 27. 7. I will correct thee
in measure, Jer. 30. 1. not so them. The equity of those ruled Cases, (which
the Reader may consult) Jer. 25. 15, 16, 17, 28, 29. Luke 23. 31. and 1 Pet. 4.
12, 17. do hold in this, and give us warrant in like manner to argue, That if
his own Children do drink of so bitter a Cup here: then surely You, the Wicked
of the Earth, shall much more drink of the very same. And these Scriptures
alleged, and the strength of this our Inference, are all resolved into that of
Psa. 78. 8. In the hand of the Lord is a Cup, whereof the wicked of the Earth
shall (finally) drink the dregs. And the force thereof lies in this, That if
such kind of Judgments and fiery Trials as these (I allude unto that speech of
the Apostle) thus falling upon their spirits from God himself, do begin at some
of the Household of God, then where will the Ungodly and Sinners appear? For his
own People do but begin in this Cup to them, who are to drink the dregs,
whereof themselves have but the droppings.

2. This dispensation of impressions of Wrath, when it does befall either the
Godly or the Wicked, although there are differing ends and purposes from God
toward either; yet as they are one and the same in substance (as other
afflictions are) so also they meet in this one and the same issue, namely, to
be an evidence and demonstration what Hell it self in the extremity of it is.
For as in the Wicked they are imperfect Testimonies of what they shall undergo,
to the end they may repent; so in the Godly they are Evidences of what they
have deserved in common with those, and all wicked Men; and to show that they
are alike Children of Wrath, even as others; also unto them, Ephesians. 2. 1.
they are sensible Experiments of what they should have undergone, but that
Christ has saved them from the Wrath to come, that so they may be thankful,
and love much. And many other holy ends there are; yet still so, as these
contrary lines do center in this, that Hell is prelibated and tasted by the one
as well as the other.

But for a clear Eviction, that these Terrors in the Godly are no other than
the very shadow of Death, or vive and lively Resemblances of what Men feel in
Hell; Hear what themselves say of it, whilst under the sense thereof. First,
Heman for all the rest, while you find him as with his mouth put in Hell, into
the very dust of Death, bemoaning himself thus, ver. 5. I am free among the
Dead, like the Slain that lie in the Grave, whom thou remembrest Psalm. 88.
no more: and that are cut off from, or by thy hand. When he says [Slain] it is
in language, the same which Christ uses of that Execution, Luke 19. 27. Slay
them before me. And the whole of it is all one, as to say, My condition is like
unto a Man's that is in Hell; and in some respects the same. Not that it had
the same Consequents, all Effects of Despair that Wrath has upon the Damned:
but in respect it is God's hand that inflicteth it, and also the same Wrath it
self he felt; And David who had experimented them, expressly terms them the
pains and sorrows of Hell, Psalm. 18. 5. and 116. 3. and elsewhere. And Jonah
says the like, whilst he was in the Whale's belly for his Rebellion against
God. Compare for this, Heman's Speeches, Psalm. 88. 6, 7, 16, 17. with these of
Jonah, chapter 2. 2, 4. And so you have out of their own mouths this Assertion
verified; and the Consequence we have insisted on, confirmed.

CHAP. VI.
Thirdly: Reasons. 1. God's Justice. 2. Avenging Wrath, otherwise not
satisfied. A Demonstration added.

I Come now to the Reasons of it, which will show the necessity of this course,
namely, of God's taking it into his own hands. It might be wondered at, that the
great God having an Host or Army of creatures ready to be his Avengers, should
over and above what they might do, himself set his hand to this: But God and
Christ are so far from esteeming this a staining of their Glory, as earthly
Judges think it would be to execute any themselves, that this being a Trophee
of regaining Honor debased by the Creature, they account it a part of their
Glory. Thus God here challenges it to himself, Vengeance is mine, as a Glory
he would not give to any other. And Christ is so far from accounting, that he
staineth his Compare for this Interpretation, Revel. 19. with Isa. 63.
Raiment with their Blood, Isa. 63. as that he glories to tread the Wine Press
of his Father's Wrath alone. He glories in it.

There are two Reasons drawn from the final Causes of this Punishment, which
makes this Dispensation necessary: 1. It is for the Glory of his Justice. 2. It
is an Act of Avenging Wrath, retributing Vengeance. Which two do center in this
as a third, That it is to be Destruction to the Persons it falls upon, as the
issue of both. All which can never be attained but by an execution made by
God's own immediate Wrath.

I shall found these Reasons, as I did the other Proofs, upon what I find
Foundations for, in these very Texts I have chosen.

1. It is an Act of Justice; so in this Heb. 10. I will repay; and 2 Thessalonians. 1.
6. It is a righteous thing in God. (...), to repay again or recompense, and
verse. 9. (...), who shall pay or lay down a Punishment justly sentenced; which
in Heb. 2. 2. is called a just Recompense of Reward. And Romans 6. last, the
Wages or Reward of Sin. And this is the last Payment, and all that for ever,
Sin in them, or God for Sin, shall have; and therefore that whereby the Glory
of God is to be fully recovered.

2. It is an Act of avenging Wrath, as in both these places is expressed.

Let us see what evidence of Reason each of these apart do afford, much more
put together.

1. Justice. Concerning that the assertion is, That if there be a Satisfaction
made for Man's Sin unto God's Justice, but so far as it may be attained upon
the Creature to be punished in Hell, God himself will set his immediate hand to
it, and Justice requires this.

The Explication.

1. I say, A Satisfaction, so far as may be attained upon the Creature that
has sinned, and which is to be the Subject of this Punishment. I put this in,
because otherwise it must be affirmed of Christ alone, that he gave full
satisfaction unto God's Justice, in whom there was (...), a Manifestation or
Romans 3. 25
Demonstration of God's Justice for Sins that were past: yet still, as although
a full Satisfaction can never be had from or upon the Creature, (therefore in
Hell they alwas suffer) yet God does recover what can be had, and pays
himself out of them as far as it will go; as those Phrases, Paying the utmost
farthing, Mat. 5. 26. and, Selling them and all they had, to make Money
thereof, Mat. 18. 25. do show.

2. In this case, that which justice will require unto any tolerable equitable
satisfaction in this Punishment, is, that as exact a proportion be observed, as
possibly there may be, and as the Subject is capable of. The Justice of God as
it is according to Truth, so exactness and equity: and the work of God is
perfect in every kind; and performed in due Weight, Number and Measure, but
above all else, where Justice is professed. You may hear Justice speak in
Isaiah, Chap. 59. [According] to their Deeds, [Accordingly] he will repay
recompense to his Enemies. There is an [According] and an [Accordingly] to
that: So as all due Measures and Rules of Proportion every way shall be
observed. Which Measures being set out in this matter, will evidently
demonstrate that God's immediate Hand is necessarily required thereto.

1. Let the demerit of Sin be weighed: And for that in the General, I refer
unto the first of these Treatises of the heinousness of Sin. And we shall find,
that although the crasser part of Sin is an inordinate lusting after, or
enjoyment of things created, or sinful Comforts in Creatures; yet that the
great and Foundation evil of it lies in an aversion or turning off from God,
and therein and thereby there is a reflecting upon God an immediate slight or
undervalue, to an infiniteness of dishonor and contempt cast upon his
Goodness, Blessedness, that is to be had in him; as also to his Sovereignty,
Prerogative, Supremacy, Holiness, etc. which are shown forth and laid at Stake
of every of his Laws, whereof Sin is the Transgression. Now if indeed it could
have been supposed, that Sin were nothing else but that gross and crass part
spoken of, the enjoyment of Creatures, than a punishment by Creatures only,
might equivalently, have been even with that its obliquity of debasing its own
excellency unto Creatures: But it being an immediate reflection upon God
Himself, none can fill up the proportion of a meet and full Punishment, which
Justice does require for this, but God Himself. I may make use of Eli's speech,
1 Samuel 2. 25. If one Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, and
revenge it: but if against God, who shall entreat for him? Thus he. And upon
the same or like ground of Reason I infer, if one Creature wrong another, a
Creature of the same kind can revenge it. If a Man shed Man's Blood, so far as
it is wrong to the bare Creature, By Man shall his Blood be shed; so says the
Law in relation to Man's day in this World: But if Man sin against God, who
shall recompense it, when God's day comes wherein he is to be glorified? none,
so as to give satisfaction to his most exact Justice, but God Himself.

Yea further, if we retained to that opinion of many Learned Men, That Adam's
enjoyment of God for ever, in that holy Estate of Innocence, should have been
of God, but as manifested in and by Creatures, and his holy Law, and not as in
Himself, or as in Heaven, etc. yet this would not serve for a Rule whereby to
estimate, or make proportion, that therefore this Punishment should oppositely
be only from God, by and through Creatures. For whatever his enjoyment should
have been, whether of God mediately, or of God as in Himself immediately, I
dispute not: yet to be sure when God was cast off by him, or is by us
immediately and directly reflected upon, [even God as God] which is that,
whereby every Man's Sin is heightened in Romans 1. 21. the meaning whereof is,
that God as in Himself is debased by Sin. So that as the Apostle says in the
like case, Romans 5. 15. [Not as the Offense, so is the free Gift.] On the
contrary, upon the like ground, Not as was the case or merit of Adam's
Righteousness, so is the demerit of Sin; and so, nor of Punishment. Because
there is so transcendent an undueness, yea, an injury done to the great God
Himself by the Creature in Sinning, over and above the proportion of all
created Grace or Obedience. For all Obedience was due, and all Man's Reward in
obeying was from the mere goodness of God, which He, and his Obedience, and all
depended upon: and so the proportion thereof is no way to be looked at, either
as the measure of the evil of Sin, or of what is to be the Punishment thereof.
Sin we are sure is so great an Evil, as no mere Creature, but Christ God-Man,
and his Obedience or Suffering could have satisfied God for, in the behalf of
another. And why may it not also be said, that as none but He, that was
subjective God, could satisfy God for the demerit of Sin, committed against God
objective? so that Sin is such an evil, as cannot in the Sinner himself be
thoroughly punished unto the satisfaction of Justice, but by God Himself
efficiently; that is, God, to be the inflicter thereof immediately.

A second equitable rule of Proportion, that Justice (requiring the fullest
satisfaction that may be had) will exact, is that the principal Author and
Actor in the Sin should principally bear the Punishment. This not only
Vengeance (which is the second Topic) does in a more eminent manner aim at,
and affect, but Justice does call for it also; The Justice both of God, and
Men. Now the principal in Sin is known to be the Soul of Man. Which I shall
urge, when I come to show how Vengeance also seeks to wreck it self thereon.
That which serves to my present purpose (which is this, that in the point of
satisfaction, to be made unto God's Justice, it is most proper for God Himself
to punish Sin in the Soul) in order thereunto, is,

First, to enquire, What is it in Soul or Spirit of Man, which God, when he
comes to deal strictly and down-rightly, as a Judge of Men's Souls, has
principally to do withal? All must acknowledge that it is Conscience that has
to do with God as a Judge: for it must be that in Man, which is the most proper
seat of the guilt of Sin, which guilt is the obligation unto Judgment and
Punishment. And this to be Men's Consciences, the Scriptures hold forth, and
every Man's own Soul feels. Hence also to be purged from an evil Conscience, is
all one, and to be perfectly acquitted from the Guilt of Sin. And for God no
more to remember our Sins, or to be atoned with us as a Judge; is all one as to
say, that we on our parts have no more Conscience of Sins, Heb. 10. 2, 3, 10,
11, 17. verses compared. Conscience is that part of the Soul, whereby God as
the Judge arraigneth every Man. It is the Hand which a guilty Soul holds up at
God's Bar for all the rest of Man; and is God's Witness within Man against
himself, Romans 2. 15. and that in order unto Judgment, as follows in verse 16.

Again, 2. I enquire, when it shall come to the execution of the Punishment
sentenced, What is it in the Soul or Spirit of Man that is most directly and
naturally capable of Anguish and Torment, and what that part is, which God may
most properly strike a Man's Soul in, when he would rebuke him for Sin?
Certainly, still a Man's Conscience. All Beasts have one tender part above any
other, that most grieves them, if smitten: This, in guilty Man is Conscience.
We see it in Cain and Judas, God burnt them both in this Hand; in the Hand of
Conscience in this World.

Having by these two Enquiries, stated the Principal, both in Guilt, and in
being the Seat of the Execution; I shall for the Proof hereof, as also in order
to the clearer making forth the Argument before us, namely, that Justice
requires God's immediate Hand, etc. I shall in a more ample manner set together
these five ensuing Assertions.

The First, That Conscience, and the intellectual or understanding Power in
Man's Soul, are God's Engagee, and the Principal in a double respect. 1.
Conscience is responsible for the whole in Man: or if you will, principal in
the Obligation. As being that, which, by its own acknowledgment of a Judgment,
made unto God, when he shall come to judge, binds over it self, and with it
self, the whole Soul for the Payment. And upon that account is to be reckoned
the chief Obligee: and therefore the Execution is justly to be served upon it,
and through it upon the whole Soul. 2. If we take in together with Conscience,
the understanding part in Man; the Intelligentia, or the Spirit of the Mind in
the summity of it; That is really to be accounted also the Principal, in
respect of its share in the very acts of Sinning; so as justly the Guilt of
every act is refunded upon it, as the principal Actor. For it is betrusted by
God, with the steering and management of the whole Soul, with the conduct of
it, as the General. By reason of that Light, God at first seated in it, it was
appointed for ever to be the Guide and Leader of the Will and Affections. And
therefore God justly requires the account, or the defaults and miscarriages of
the whole, at its Hands. According to the equity of those Rules declared
concerning Rulers of the People, Jer. 5. 4, 5. These have known the way of the
Lord, etc. As also from that other like to it, given forth touching the
Priests, and which we find so often inculcated in Ezekiel, I will require their
Blood at the Priests Hands. And all these founded upon one and the same common
ground, common unto Conscience with these; namely, Conscience and Knowledge
there being the Guides: And yet, in that Conscience gives but an ineffectual
weak warning against Sin (which should powerfully sway the whole) and the
Spirit of the Mind, or the practick Understanding does still wickedly give
secret consent unto Sin, etc. Hence therefore that denunciation in Ezekiel
holds, that God will require the Blood of (the Soul) at its hands. Although the
Soul (the Will and Affections) do perish too, in their Iniquity as it is there
spoken. And, for this cause it becomes Justice to punish this chief Agent and
Offender, or this great Minister of State in sinning, and to make these the
Seat of the Execution above any or all other Faculties.

2. It will furthermore agree with the Rules of Justice, yea, it will be a
special Trophy unto Justice, to have Sin it self in the Guilt of it, made as
far as possibly to be it is own Tormentor, and Instrument of the highest
Punishment in and unto the Soul that has sinned. There is no Sword like unto
that, will Justice say, to slay a Sinner withal. It is of all other the most
proper and exquisite way of punishing. For the Sinner to eat (for ever) of the
Fruit of his own Ways, and Prove. 1. 31.
to be filled with their own Devices; and their Iniquity to slay them. This is
the justest and highest Doom which Wisdom it self can invent, or God's Power
execute. The very same does Jeremy also speak, Jer. 2. 19. Thine own Wickedness
shall correct thee; know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing and a
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Certainly for the Sinner to
feel in the most intimate and immediate manner that may be, the bitterness of
the Guilt of Sin; and to find that that, above all other Punishments that can
be inflicted, is the sharpest and severest: this is a transcendent strain of
Justice indeed. Now this is most exquisitely accomplished through that proper
capacity which Conscience and the intellectual part in Man have as to this very
thing: And in their being the Seat of the Guilt of Sin, they are thereby
further fitted to become the Vessel or Receptacle of this the highest
Punishment. This is in a great measure verified by that in Isa. 59. 11, 12. We
roar all like Bears: And what was it that caused this? For our Transgressions
are multiplied before thee, and our Sins testify against us: For our
Transgressions are with us, (they dwell with and possess us, and we possess
them, as Job also speaks): And as for our Iniquities, we know them. It was
their very knowing of their Sins, as set on by God, that made them thus roar,
which is the loudest and wildest Tone of Grief, and Note of insufferable
Torment. And observe, how that that Knowledge had two things in contemplation,
which caused the Roaring: 1. Sin, together with the Wrath of God. Our
Transgressions are multiplied before thee. And so they had God in their eye as a
Judge; which those words show, We look for Salvation, but it is far from us, v.
11. And, 2. They testify against us. This was the accusation of their own
Consciences themselves. So as it was Conscience which was the Seat, the
Habitation, (as it were) where these two took up their dwellings, continually
quartered upon, and possessed. Jeremy says the same, To see and know how bitter
a thing it is to sin, etc. And though these Scriptures speak not immediately of
Hell, yet they do clearly point out to us, what, and wherein the most exquisite
punishment of Sin lies, and by what effected; namely, Knowledge of Sin and
Wrath: whether it be in Men in forerunning Anguish in this Life, or hereafter
in Hell in the fullness of it.

3. It is not, nor can it be the mere Spiritual evil that is in Sin, as Sin is
Sin, and an opposite to true Holiness, and as it stands in a contrariety to the
Holiness and Goodness of God; that is not it which Men in Hell shall
spiritually know and see, so as to lay to heart the evil thereof in that
respect: No, for that is the peculiar effect of Grace, and proper to the
Saints; even as to see the Beauty that is in Holiness, as it is Holiness,
likewise is -- It is therefore Sin in the bitter effects thereof only, whereby
Souls still remaining wholly sinful, (as those in Hell do) can come to know
this bitterness of Sin.

Now to prosecute this: The evil of Sin is not sufficiently or perfectly felt,
no, not in the effects of it, by the Conscience of a Sinner, (so as it may be)
until it be felt in that which is the highest, and most transcendent, and
proper, most immediate and firstborn effect thereof, of all other. And that is
no other than the Wrath and Indignation of the All-powerful God: For that his
Wrath shall break in upon the Sinner, and so considered, it is the most proper
effect of all other of the demerit of Sin, God being stirred up and provoked
thereunto by Sin. Do you provoke the Lord to Jealousy? 1 Cor. 10. 22. The like,
Jer. 7. 19. Sins are as a heap of Charcoal, wicked Men's Consciences the Oven,
and God's Wrath the Fire: Let this Fire be put into this Coal, and let both
meet in a guilty Conscience, and it instantly becomes a fiery Oven within it
self. And as concerning all other Punishments, I may say it, That all other, of
what kind or from whomsoever, although they are all the effects and deserts of
Sin, according to that in Jeremy: [Thy way, and thy doings have procured these
things to thee,] and this is thy Wickedness; as it follows there in Jer. 4. 18.
Yet still these are all of them deficient, and fall short in representing unto
the Heart and Conscience the demerit of Sin, even so far as by the effects it
may be known, and the Soul yet further is capable to feel: But if once the
Wrath and Indignation of the Great God come into the Soul and Conscience, this
when felt does bear some answerable proportion, as an effect, unto so great an
Evil as Sin is, which it has deserved; and when revealed unto and impressed
upon the Sinner's Conscience, it has also the fullest dimensions of such an
Evil (even to the Sinner also) as Sin justly deserves, as far as any way the
Creature is capable. Then it is that the Sinner feels, and takes in the evil of
Sin, not as in secundary outward effects only, (and such all other Punishments
whatsoever are in comparison to the Wrath of God, and therefore fall short) but
in this case it feels immediately the demerit of Sin, in that which is the
Cause, the only Cause, the highest Cause of all other secundary Punishments
which Sin has also deserved, whereof it also is the cause. And this
Dispensation of immediate Wrath rises up unto the exactest demonstration of
the evil that is in Sin, which any way from Effects can be made or given unto
the Creature.

4. Of this immediate Wrath (as it is an evil of Punishment) the Conscience and
intellectual part in Man's Soul is not only capable to be made the Vessel, the
Receptacle thereof, but it lies immediately exposed unto it. It is bare and
naked unto him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. as in respect to God's
knowledge, so of God's punishing, as I have elsewhere shown. Conscience is as an
open Door or Inlet; or as an open Window is to the Sun, so it to God, for him
to come in at at any time. That when ever God will but take upon him to perform
and execute the part of a Judge and Avenger, a Conscience that is guilty lies
exposed nakedly and barely unto his Anger, to receive the strokes and
impressions of it. For I ask, What is God's Justice against Sin, but his just
Anger against Sin? (as Romans 3. 5. the Original has it.) And what is a guilty
Conscience, but that in Man that is naturally suscipient or apprehensive of it?
And these two are suited as Faculty and Object, and are (as it were) made one
for the other; there needs no third or other thing (if God but please to hold
forth his Anger, and apply the Corrosive to the Sore, so this unto the Soul) to
convey his own displeasure by; Conscience has an ear to hear what God will
speak, without any Medium to convey the Voice. Look as Faith is a Principle
peculiarly fitted to take in God's free Grace, and Christ's Righteousness; such
is Conscience (when guilty) unto God's Wrath, immediately susceptive of it. If
God will but set a Man's Sins in order before him, and withal say unto
Conscience, I am angry; yea, look but angrily, and present himself as such;
then Conscience instantly, like the sensible Plant, is struck, shrinks, and
falls down. For if God be angry but a little, as Psalm. 2. last, and rebuke us
in his Anger, Psalm. 6. 1. then, at the very rebuke of his Countenance we
perish, Psalm. 80. And it is most certain that God can reveal his Anger to the
Soul immediately, as well as his Favor. And what is this Punishment we are
speaking of, but the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, revealed, as
before others, so principally to a Man's own Soul? as verse. 9. And what is that
Judgment, but God's Judgment, expressed, as in sentencing, so in showing his
Anger and Wrath against Sin? as the whole stream of that Scripture shows. It is
therefore the Wrath and Face of God and the Lamb, when discovered, which a
guilty Conscience flies from, Rev. 6. 16. That, as Luther says, Animus sibi
male conscius potius ad Diabolum ipsum ferretur, quam ad Deum accederet: It had
rather be brought before the Devil, and see his face, than see God's. Terror of
Conscience, what is it, but all one and God's Wrath in Conscience? See it in
its contrary: Peace (which we call Peace of Conscience) which passes
Understanding, is rather denominated the [Peace of God] which passes
understanding, Phil. 4. 7. than Peace of Conscience, although Conscience be the
Subject pacified, and whose Peace and Quietus est it is. And in like manner
Terror is styled, the Terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. And these things may
perhaps afford as true a Light toward the understanding of that Maxim of the
Apostle, Romans 2. 8, 9. Indignation and Wrath, (viz. of God,) Tribulation and
Anguish upon every Soul (as the seat of their Anguish) of Man that does evil,
as any other. And withal show how it comes to pass, that this Tribulation is
executed from that Wrath, even by the reception of Conscience. For of
Conscience also the following words, verse. 15. do there speak, and that as in
order unto Judgment, verse. 16.

5. I add, as a Corollary from this, that Conscience, though it be thus naked
and open to God and his Wrath, yet it is so great a secluse, so fast and privy
a Cabinet, so intimate a Power and Principle, in and unto the Soul it self; and
so entirely reserved unto God himself, who is the Lord thereof: as it is not
immediately subjicible to, or to be broke open by Creatures: No, not those who
are superior Spirits to it, either Angels or Devils; they are not able to
terrify the Conscience, until it has been first made raw and tender by God.
God only made the Heart, and God only knows the Heart, and God only can come at
and strike at the root of the Heart. The Devils or Angels can come but into an
outward Room, the Fancy, and cast in Images thereinto; the Fancy being the
Souls Looking-glass, wherein it vieweth its own thoughts, and from which it
takes off into it self the Species that are cast in there. Also they may stir
bodily Passions (both which I have elsewhere shown) but they cannot enter into
the Closet of the Soul. God only is intimior intimo nostro, as the Ancients
express it; God only is greater than our Hearts, as the Apostle expresses it.
Conscience is a Book so fast clasped, as it is God's Prerogative alone to open
it; which he then at that day will do: and thereunto, that likewise may be
applied, He opens, and none shuts; and he shuts, and none opens. That Speech
holds as true of Conscience, as of any other thing. And as it is a Book which
he alone can open, so in which he alone can write over every Man's Sins, not
with Ink, but with Wrath, which, like Aqua fortis, every letter of it shall eat
into the Soul. According unto that in Job: Thou writest bitter things against
me, and causest me to possess the Sins of my Youth, Job 13. 26. Let no Man
therefore imagine, that Devils are the greatest Tormentors of Men, or of their
Consciences in Hell: or if any would affirm it, I would demand, Who it is that
torments the Consciences of Devils themselves? Certainly none but God. They now
believing there is a God, do tremble; but in Hell they fear him, and for ever
have to do with him. And it is as sure, that the same God, with whom those
Spirits and their Consciences have for ever to do, the Consciences of Men shall
also.

And as for all other mediate or outward ways of Judgments executed, in which
the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, but as at the second hand, take the
sorest and severest of them that ever God executed by Creatures; yea, suppose
all of the several kinds of Providential Judgments (I call them such which are
executed upon Men in this World aforehand) which God has, as Judge of all the
World, in his riding Circuit through all Ages since the Fall, revealed his
Wrath from Heaven by, against all sorts of Unrighteousness of Men, (as the
Apostle speaking of these Judgments says, in Romans 1. 18.) Suppose, I say, they
were let fly upon any one Sinner, all at once, yet would they not reach or
touch that Man's Conscience, further than as God should, over and above the
efficacy of them, strike the Conscience it self with his anger and displeasure,
revealed more or less by himself therewith. And, although in all such Judgments
his goings forth are as of a Judge, and he accompanies such Judgments more or
less, but as with some ordinary light and glimmerings of an angry Deity; yet
his coming as a Judge upon Men's Consciences, at the Day of Wrath, and Revelation
of the Righteous Judgment of God (as if he had never revealed his Wrath before)
this is another manner of coming, and showing himself a Judge indeed, rendering
Indignation and Wrath upon the Souls of Men: And of that Judgment it is, the
same Apostle in the second Chapter treats, as of that other in the former.

And I may say of all the former, in comparison to this latter, that they all
are but as the Batteries of the Outworks, and as Bullets shot against the
Walls, in a Siege, which may indeed terrify the Inhabitants, and make them
tremble; Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 2.
and so these the Soul, as by remote effects in the Suburbs of it. But the
latter is as shooting in of Grenades, which have been laid up with him in his
Treasury, carrying Fire from thence in them, the Fire of his fierce and sorest
Indignation; and these himself alone can shoot into the inwards of Men's Souls.
And this is as shooting Fire into the the very Magazine, into that which is the
most inward in the Soul, and fortified against the entrance of all created
Powers; the Magazine where all the Gun-pouder lies, that is, the guilt of a
Man's Sins: so as there needs nothing else to blow up all. If his Wrath does
but touch, it takes, and sets all on Fire.

Yea, give me leave upon the same ground, and by the like reason, further to
say, That all the material Fire in Hell, by which the Soul shall and will
suffer by way of a Compatibility (as it is termed) or suffering by and with the
Body an unspeakable Torment; and this for the Sins a Man is guilty of: yet
these Flames nor these Punishments (taken materially, and abstracted from this
Revelation of God's Wrath) would not break into Conscience; not until God did
therewithal break in with the Fire of his Wrath, and make the Conscience and
intellectual Spirit of the Mind a fiery Oven within it self, as the Psalmist
expresses it in Psalm. 21. 9. almost in these very words.

This being the state of matters between God, the Judge of all, and the Souls
and Consciences of Sinners, as touching that due and equitable Punishment for
Sin, and the execution thereof, which Men's Souls are capable of: I shall now
complete the reason, why the Justice of God should move him to be willing; yea,
and that there is in respect unto Divine Justice a kind of requisiteness (if
not necessity) for the Great God to take this course to punish the Sinner, by
the Revelation of his own immediate Wrath. And this I shall do, by gathering
together what has been said, from which the Arguments for both these two
Assertions that follow, lie fair.

1. That God for his Justice sake should be willing. For Conscience being the
principal Engagee obliged unto God as a Judge, and the understanding Power in
Man the eminent Transgressor, and both lying so naked and immediately exposed
unto God's Wrath, and capable to receive the Revelation of it. An Anguish made
thereby in the Soul, is the most proper, natural, suitable Reward unto Sin, to
pay the Sinner home in his own Coin; as also the most ready, direct, and short
way for God to take.

If therefore we suppose Justice be left to have but its free and full course;
if Justice (according to the Prophet's language, and God's own rule and
direction given unto us) run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
Stream, in its proper natural Channel, and so as to fall into that most
capacious Vessel or Receptacle that is in Man to receive it. Again, if Divine
Justice has a will to put and lay its charge and execution where principally
it is to be laid, even against the Principal, whether in the Obligation for
Sin, or in the guilt of the Act of sinning. Or if it be deemed, that Divine
Justice will take a recovery where the fullest and fairest advantage lies, and
recover his principal Debt of that which is the principal Debtor; and from that
in Man which is capable to afford the most due satisfaction and punishment, as
being that which is the Treasury of all the Guilt of Sin, and most exquisitely
capable to suffer, and thereby to make fullest payment for all. Then we may
conclude that assuredly God is willing to wreck his just Anger, and in his
Wrath to break forth upon the Conscience and Intellectual Faculty of the Sinner
in Hell, by the immediate Revelation of his Wrath, and that upon all the
accounts forementioned, thereby to punish it. -- And we may well suppose that
his Justice is willing to do this, because God is (as the Psalmist with an
Emphasis) Judge Himself, Psalm. 50. 6. And judges for Himself, Prove. 16. 4. And
for the Recovery of his own Glory, and Revelation of his Righteous Judgment.
And this Course of immediate Wrath being a way above all other so natural, so
ready, so direct, so compendious, and so suited to the demerit of Sin, (as has
been shown) we may well think that God will be rather willing to show his Wrath
(as the Apostle speaks) this way, (if we could suppose there might be another,)
because this so falls in with, and agrees unto the rules and proportions of
Justice forementioned, which are most near and sacred to him.

2. The second Assertion, That it is also requisite, yea, necessary, (I speak
it, as in relation to Justice attaining its ends.) For all mediate Punishments
executed by Creatures being deficient, as unto that wherein the very Essence of
this Punishment lies they all not reaching the Inwards of the Spirit of the
Mind and Conscience; and seeing that without God's wrath revealed therewith by
God himself, all such Punishments would not complete the Justice of God in a
Punishment in any tolerable measure suitable. Then if Justice will have its
perfect work, and bring its Suit against the Sinner unto the ultimate issue, it
is requisite God himself put his immediate hand to the execution. For otherwise
this Work of Justice will not be perfect, (as yet every of his Works in their
kind are said to be). And so he should not only fall short of satisfying his
Justice, but also by not doing that toward it which is in his power to do, and
which he is Lord of, he should not in any tolerable measure content it.
Especially, if we further consider, that when all is done that can be done,
this Punishment will not arise to a perfect satisfaction (for the Creature's
punishment will not afford it, and therefore it does for ever suffer) but only
unto what may be had out of them toward it. I shut this Point up therefore
with this, that If God be Judge Himself, he will do this work Himself, which
none else can perform for him; and without which all else would be utterly
imperfect and defective. For, upon what has been before argued, I may say of
all other Punishments and Punishers (although set by God upon a Man) what the
Apostle says of those legal Ordinances (though instituted by God for his
Worship) That they could not make the Service perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience. So, nor all outward Torments, take them alone without God's Wrath
accompanying them, they cannot make a perfect or complete Punishment as
pertaining to the Conscience.

And all this also shows one sufficient reason of Difference, why earthly Kings
and Judges leave the Execution of Traitors and Offenders wholly unto others:
Because they have no more Power, as in respect of Execution, to inflict a
condign Punishment than other Men; but others can do it as exquisitely, and
their Justice be as fully satisfied thereby: but it is not so here. And for
these causes God is so far from staining his Glory thereby (which other Judges
would esteem to be so) as that it is the only way fully to recover his Glory.
And so much for that Argument drawn from satisfying of Justice.

A second Reason is drawn from satisfying of Vengeance, or Avenging Wrath as
against Enemies; which heightens Justice. Thus in many places in the Old and
New Testament, Deuteronomy. 32. Romans 12. 19. 2 Cor. 10. 6. Rev. 6. 10. In which last
place, God is styled both a Judge and an Avenger, [Judg and Avenge] say the
Saints there. A Judge most commonly does acts of Justice in the behalf of
others: but an Avenger is one that does, or seeks Justice in his own Cause, and
in his own behalf and Interest; therefore the next Akin, seeking the Life of a
Murderer, was termed an Avenger of Blood. Now God is more nearly concerned in
this, than any Creatures can be, in what may concern Vengeance in them, for
what ever Injury. This is therefore poena vindictae, as of one enraged and
provoked; Patience having been abused, as Romans 9. 22. and so is turned into
Fury.

Now there are two properties of Vengeance, from whence I argue this, being put
together.

First, that it is the property of Revenge to vent it self upon that which is
principal in the Injury, and to make that the Vessel of its Wrath, it will
never be satisfied else. Now that is the Soul of Man, which is the chief seat
and subject of the Corruption of Sin, the chief Cause of the Act proceeding
from thence, and that in which the Guilt arising from both does principally
abide. The Body is but instrumental in what the Soul does; yea, and in some,
and the greatest Sins, the Soul has the sole and immediate Hand. This Soul
therefore which is the chiefest Vessel of Sin, must be the chief Vessel of
Wrath. Indignation and Wrath upon every [Soul] of Man that does evil, Romans 2.
8. whereof this undeniable Instance is given by God, that the Soul is it that
suffers for the whole Man until the Resurrrection, as the Instance of the Rich
Man shows. And it must be no less an immediate Sufferer, although not the alone
Sufferer; but much more, after the day of Judgment, unto Eternity.

A second thing which Vengeance affects is, that the person that wrought the
Injury dye by the hand of himself, that is, the Avenger: It loves to do that
work it self. And this especially holds good in this cause of God's, and seeing
it is to recover glory to God by showing Vengeance; He comes to be glorified,
rendering Vengeance from the glory of his Power.

I need not go about to form up any Argument from hence, for these two things,
especially the latter, do speak home unto the Point: And being added unto what
has been spoken in the former Head of Justice, may be sufficient.

There is a third thing, which, as I said, both Divine Justice and Vengeance do
conspire in; and that is, the utter Destruction of that which is the principal
Offender (which is the Soul) it is the nature of Vengeance to work the
Destruction of that it is set against. And in this case of Sin, God's Justice
also does the same: the demerit of Sin is such, as it exciteth Vengeance to it.
And therefore in both these places which are my Texts, Destruction is mentioned
as the issue and product of this Revenge, and Wrath. So in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. To
render Vengeance on them, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction,
and Romans 9. 22. to make known the power of his Wrath on those Vessels of Wrath,
fitted to Destruction. Destroyed they shall be, though not in regard of being,
for they are to be Vessels of Wrath, and therefore to be still kept whole, in
respect of being, else they could hold no Wrath: And that is another property
of Vengeance, to have the Party made sensible of its Misery, and that his Enemy
is even with him. And therefore God upholds their Being, but destroys their
Souls in regard of well being. Now that is never till it be stripped of every
Comfort, and every corner of the Soul be filled with Misery. For if any corner
be empty, it is not destroyed, it will not die.

Now this third or last thing, does of it self afford, at least a
Demonstration, ab effectis, from the event and effects of this Punishment: That
therefore it is God's immediate hand that inflicts this Punishment. Which
Demonstration is to be added, unto the former Reason, which was drawn from the
Causes of it. For I argue, asking this Question, What is able to fill the Soul
of Man, with good or evil? The Soul which was created in so large a Capacity,
as to be filled with God, and with none but God himself; He only is able to
fill the vast corners of it with either. Creatures like it self may afflict and
torment it much, especially whilst in the Body, so much, as to cause it to
desire Death, and a being out of the Body; but the Soul they are never able to
destroy. The Soul is a Castle so strong built, as it can bear the Assaults of
all its Fellow Creatures, and sustain it self, and not sink into Destruction.
Nothing can destroy the well-being of the Soul but God's Power. For it is said,
They may kill the Body, but God only can kill the Soul. And else, according to
that Argument of Christ, Fear not them that can kill the body only, etc. they
were to be feared as God himself is, if they could kill the Soul, as God can
do. For Christ says, God is therefore to be feared, and only to be feared,
because he can destroy both Body and Soul. And he redoubleth it with an
Emphasis, Fear him, yea, I say unto you, Fear him, Luke 12. 5. Indeed one
Evangelist says, Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into
Hell, which expresses no more but an act of Authority to sentence and cast
into Hell, as the Judge does into Prison. Yet the other Evangelist puts it upon
this, because he is able to kill the Soul, and that only he is able to destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell. He says not barely to cast into Hell as by way of
Authority, but adds, kills and destroys in Hell, when they are cast thither:
For God is both Judge and Avenger. And therefore if it be Destruction, it is
evident He only can, and must do the execution. And therefore, in the Text, 2
These. 1. 8, 9. their being punished with everlasting Destruction, is attributed
to the glory of his Power. These are some of the Reasons of this great Point.

CHAP. VII.
A fourth sort of additional Confirmations, drawn from the Harmonies that are
between it, and other Divine Truths.

I Shall in the last place cast in some Harmonies, or Congruities and
Correspondencies, which this holds, and makes up with other Divine Truths: And
in such Harmonies, and Concords, there is much of Reason, at least to confirm,
if not demonstrate Truths in Divinity.

1. To begin where I left. Hereby it comes to pass, that as the Souls of Men
and other Spirits were immediately made and created by God (who is therefore in
a peculiar respect, and with an opposite distinction to the Fathers of our
Bodies, said to be the Father of Spirits, and the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh) So, that their last termination or end, should be, into and by his
immediate Hands also: This makes up a congruous and suitable Dispensation. That
look, as they receive their first Being from him, likewise they should return
to him, as Ecclesiastes speaks, as to their sole and immediate Author and
Creator; and so receive from him, as a Father of Spirits their Portion at his
immediate Hands. And Man's ultimate end, either way, is called their Portion,
Psalm. 11. 6. Mat. 24. 51. whether it be, in blessedness as their Inheritance
out of his Love, or Misery as the wages of their Sin. And thus hereby God
himself is made the end, and the beginning or terminus, the Alpha and Omega of
Souls: to whom be Glory for ever.

2. Thereby also, there comes to pass an answerableness and a proportion held
between the two conditions of Heaven and Hell: Which the Apostle seems to make
the ultimate aim and determination of God's Counsels. Unto which all in this
World are but preparations, as he calls them. (Thus Romans 9. 22, 23.) for the
showing forth of his own immediate Glory. What if God willing to show his
Wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much long-suffering the
Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction: And that he might make known the riches
of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory?

And thirdly also: It is said that after that Christ the Judge of All, has
delivered up his Administration and Kingdom unto his Father, then God should
become all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. (not in respect of Being) that is, not as if
the Being of all things shall return into God again, as some have wickedly
dreamed: Or, that God's blessed Being, and the Creatures should become one:
that can never be. It Is a contradiction to say, a Creature made out of nothing
should come to be of it self: and such God in his Being is. But all in all, in
respect of immediate Dispensation. And so look as to the Vessels of Mercy, he
will then be all in all, so that they shall not need the light of the Sun and
the Moon, etc. (that is, the comfort of any Creature, though all created
Excellencies in the Spirit and quintesence of them shall be there) why should
it not be also meant that the same God (which makes up a Parallel, seeing Men's
Sins deserve it) shall be all in all, in Hell too, in a contrary way to the
other?

4. And the rather this may be thought, because when God shall have caused this
visible World to pass away, the Earth and the Heavens, we now behold (as some
judicious Divines have inclined to think from Job. 14. 12. and other
Scriptures) either by turning them into nothing, or into their first Chaos: And
so there being none (that is, of this old World) left, but pure Heaven and
Hell, (which are as two spiritual Places or Worlds) and therein these two sorts
of Creatures rational; either those who are wholly Spirits (as Angels good and
bad) or the Spirits of Men (whose Bodies are raised Spiritual, and so fitted
for that other kind of World) both of which are capable of Happiness or Woe from
him. That then these two sorts of intelligent Natures, God and they being left
thus alone (the brutish part of the World being done away) should have to do
with him for ever immediately, either in a way of Wrath or Blessedness. And so
God shall be all in all, in either Worlds, and this to be the final ending, and
Catastrophe of all. But these I urge not, but only mention.

THE PUNISHMENT OF SIN in HELL.
SECT. II.
The dreadfulness thereof, argued from all, and each of the Particulars,
treated of in the former Section.

HEB. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God.


THe second thing, at first propounded to be handled, was the dreadfulness of
this Punishment. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hand of the living God.
Which being an inference from the foregoing words, and not a simple affirmation
only, do come in with an amazing kind of implication, wherein the Apostle
leaves it to our own Thoughts, to conceive of, and is as if he had said, How
dreadful must it needs be! which I leave to your own Thoughts to conceive of, I
not being able (says he) to utter or express the Terror of it.

Hence the genuine and natural way of handling this part, is to set it forth by
way of Inference or Corollary, from that former Point, which we have
dispatched. I shall therefore accordingly draw forth Demonstrations, of the
dreadfulness thereof, from those forecited Scriptures, or Grounds already laid
in the fore-gone Section: which does afford sufficient Topics unto this Head.

SECT. I.
The first Head of Demonstrations from this in General: That it is a falling
into the Hands of God immediately.

FIrst, let us take the main Doctrine it self, as in the General it is uttered
here, That it is a falling into the Hands of God Himself, and not of Creatures
only: And a being punished from his Presence, and the Glory of his Power,
immediately, as 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. And then extend and widen your apprehensions, to
take in how fearful this must be, which I shall demonstrate, by a comparative
Gradation, raised thus.

I. If it were but a giving us up into the Hands of mere Creatures to afflict,
and they assisted by God, but with the common and ordinary concurrence of his
Power, which joins with, and upholds the Agency of all things in their
workings; whether in comforting us or in distressing of us: this is the lowest
degree of supposition. And yet consider how dreadful this Supposition would
render to our Thoughts, such a punishment to be: if God should be but as the
looker on, and withal the setter of them on: or (as in the Scripture phrase,
Mat. 18. 34.) but only deliver us up to these Tormentors. As when it is termed
a being cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, suppose it were a Lake of
material corporeal Fire only, wherein thy Body is cast; and thy Soul, no
otherwise to suffer than by what the Spirits of that Body it is united to, and
dwells in, is by that Fire made sensible of. And suppose withal, the Spirits
thereof were kept up, in their utmost sensibleness, of what torment that Fire
could inflict; and thy Body continually flaming, (as the Bush in Exodus) and
yet never burnt up, how terrible is it for Flesh and Blood to think but this of
it! Or, to use another comparison, If a Man were bound Hand and Foot with his
Mouth set open, and were cast into a Pit, wherein, as in the Apostles Sheet,
let down from Heaven, were all manner of Creeping things, Toads, Serpents of
all sorts, fiery Scorpions, Cockatrices, Vipers, Adders, Snakes, etc. Flies,
Hornets, Lice, Pismires and Frogs, etc And that these should bite and sting
thee, with exquisite Pain and Torment; also creep in at thy Mouth, down into
thy Inwards, gnaw and swell thee there. How did but one sort of these
Creatures, when sent by God, afflict Pharaoh and all the Egyptians? A Man in
this case, should endure not only the Pains mentioned, but beyond them the
torture which Antipathy, cotrariety and natural abhorrency Works, which is of
all other most exquisite, and turns nature backward (as of Jordan it is said)
into a recoyl, and wresteth it against it self, and throws it off its hinges. I
need not instance, how by this way of Antipathy, a Cock makes a Lion roar, a
Mouse the Elephant to tremble, a Serpent or a Toad, a Spider, sets the whole of
nature in Man into an inconsistency; a Man knows not how to bear up, sustain
himself, or be himself. But besides what Pains or Torments, these, or any of
these, can inflict.

II. Let us proceed in our Supposition a step further. If God should so far
further assist, as to set his Wisdom a-work, and that only to find out and
invent, what mixture of Torments from Creatures, would be most exquisite of all
others. As if a King (whose Wrath is compared to the roaring of a Lion, who yet
sets but others to Torment) should but order ten Men to invent Torments for one
poor Man (as the Sicilian Tyrants did.) Hence, Majus tormentum siculi non
invenire Tyranni. And then consider, for the exaggeration of this unto your
Thoughts.

1. That the nature of Man is so framed, as it is capable to recieve
discomfort, as well as comfort from every Creature: the least Creature has a
sting in it, as well as Honey, unto something or other, in Man's Nature, if it
be applied and turned against it. 2. God knows all the Ingredients in the
Creatures Natures; as also it is said, he knows our frame, and so there with
the suitableness of Sense in Man's Nature thereunto. Think then what Punishment
from their mixture, can he invent and temper; and put all the Venoms, (the
dregs) into one Cup, as the Psalmist speaks: And as by some lesser proportion
we may estimate this, by what those that know the secrets of Nature can effect,
above what other Men, as Solomon did. Now 3. Raise up your apprehensions from
these two steps of comparison thus first laid: If, (as the Psalmist says,) He
that made the Eye, shall not he see? speaking of that infinite Omniscience in
God Himself, above what is in the Creatures: Say I then in this case, if the
Creatures, that God has made, may thus be supposed able to work anguish to a
Man, Dolor and Misery: what then can God, the great God, that made all these
himself, immediately inflict? As the Prophet Isaiah slighteth the Egyptians
and their Assistance, Isa. 31. 3. Thus, Their Horses are Flesh, not Spirit, and
the Egyptians that ride them are Men, and not God. So we may of all these
Suppositions, and still say, these are but of what Creatures can do; who are
Creatures, and not God; Flesh and not Spirit.

III. That we may yet heighten the dreadfulness of this immediate Hand of God,
let us make a third Supposition, beyond the former; that God not only should
use his ordinary concurrence with Creatures, but (as sometimes he has done)
arm those Creatures with his own Wrath, over and above the activity of their
ordinary Sphere of Workings; heating that Sword of created Powers he strikes
with, red hot in the Furnace of his fiery Indignation: And so intending the
power of Creatures beyond their Strength; yet still so as to use them as the
sole Instruments of that anguish wrought: conveying his Anger with them but as
at second hand. And so, as the Man so afflicted, is sensible, not of the Stroke
of the Creatures only, but of God, and his Wrath accompanying and seconding it,
through them. This would be yet more dreadful than the former, and yet still
fall short of what the Doctrine has held forth, that Himself is the Avenger,
and strikes immediately.

1. This latter is more dreadful to suppose than the former; yea, is not a bare
supposition; for if God conveys his Wrath with the least Affliction, and in his
Providence fight against a Man, and the Heart is thereby made sensible of his
Wrath therein: this, as it often falls out, so it uses wonderfully to inflame
and rage in Man's Spirit: even as a poisoned Arrow uses to do the Flesh, which
it self alone would only pierce and wound, (but as it is an Arrow;) but if
further dipped in Poison, or as the Apostle's comparison is, Ephesians. 6. made a
fiery Dart, it works a further Anguish and Torment. Now there is no Creature,
but if armed with God's Wrath, or if it be but a Messenger, and a Representer
of God's Anger, but it is infinitely more dreadful than of it self otherwise it
is. What is less than the shaking of a Leaf, which seems it self to tremble?
But if God send faintness of Heart, and Terror with it, and by it, into a Man's
Heart, the very Sound of the shaking of a Leaf chaseth them, Lev. 26. 36. Every
Grass-blade, burnished with God's Wrath, strikes terror into the Heart, as that
flaming Cherub did into Adam's. This is experimented in Men troubled in Mind,
unto whom, Iratumque refert quaelibet herba Deum. Every Creature presents an
angry God, and strikes trembling of Heart into them. They fear where no fear
is. The Light, which of all Creatures is the most amiable and pleasantest, yet
to a Spirit wounded the Beams thereof are dreadful; and when it is day, he
wishes it were night, and that Darkness might for ever cover him; and why
should the Light arise, says he, to disclose my Rebellion against my Maker?
Thus Job, Job 4. 20. Wherefore is the Light given to him that is in misery?
Even as on the contrary, to a Soul God's Face shines on, every Creature strikes
up comfort and gladness into it. He hears the Thunder, (which made Caligula
tremble,) It Is my Father's Voice, says he: views the Stars; these are mine,
says he. The greatest Afflictions to such an one do turn into Joy, knowing he
has a Treasury of Love in the Bosom of his Father that sent them. The perfect
contrary is here.

2. This latter Supposal of God's arming the Creatures with his displeasure,
and conveying it by them, falls yet lower, and is less than God's immediate
Wrath from himself; even as God's Love conveyed by Ordinances and Means, is a a
far lower Dispensation than the immediate Communication thereof from himself.
God's power, tho never so great, yet in working by and through an Instrument,
is abated, lessened, stinted in working. You may have read and heard (perhaps)
the comparison between God's Power and the Creatures, in respect of Torment,
thus expressed: That the one is, but as if a Child should strike a Blow, in
comparison of a Giant: But to the case in hand, I have used to raise it thus: A
Giant that can of himself give a great Blow immediately, if he yet should take
but a Straw to strike withal, the Stroke would prove but small; and yet it
would be greater than if a Child should strike with it; Why? because his Power
is limited and enervated by the Instrument he strikes withal. Now what are all
the Creatures, though in God's hand, but as Straws in a Giant's? And yet how
terrible is his Wrath when conveyed by them? I conclude this with allusion to
that Speech of Rehoboam, 1 Kin. 12. 10. The weight of God's little Finger is
heavier than that of the whole Creation: And if they be able, or God by them,
to scourge us with Whips, then God himself immediately with Scorpions.

Having thus considered how the immediateness of God's working does
comparatively exceed that of the Creatures, or of himself by the Creatures: In
the

Fourth place, Let us go on more sadly, in a positive way, to consider, What
his immediate Power is; what the Strength of those hands is which Men must fall
into. And how may this amaze you? As it is said of God's Wisdom, There is no
end of it, no searching of his Understanding; so nor of his Power. And how can
I discover or unbare that Arm before you? I begin to do it thus: God had begun
to enter into a Contest with Job, and touched him but with his little Finger;
and Job soon felt him, and cries out: If I speak of Strength, or think that way
to grapple with him, He is strong, Job 9. 19. If but his little Finger be so
strong, as Job found it, what is his Fist, which Ezekiel next sets forth his
Strokes of his Wrath by? And what God himself there speaks, against covetous
and bloody Men, Ezekiel. 22. 13, 14. do you apply to every Sin you live and go on
in. Says God, I will strike with my Fist at thy dishonest Gain. And can thy
Heart endure, or thy Hands be made strong, in the Day in which I shall have to
do with thee? Let every one that hears or reads this, who yet go on in
their Sins, consider with themselves: Am I able to stand it out, and encounter
this God? And encounter him thou must, if thou go on in thy Sins. Or can my
Heart endure? say thou. The Apostle puts the very same consideration upon the
Corinthians Spirits, when guilty of Idolatry. (And it is the same case of
uncleanness, or any other known Sin) Do you provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are
you stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10. 22. As if he had said: Do you not consider
what a powerful God you have to do withal, and that immediately? Can you
grapple with him, think you? or make your part good with him? Hear yet further,
by what way it is that the Apostle sets forth to us the Strength of God, and
let us make a further estimate thereby, as to the matter in hand. The Apostle
in the same Epistle, though upon another occasion, Chap. 1. 25. had said, That
the Weakness of God is stronger than the Strength of Men. In which Speech, he
evidently puts our thoughts upon making of a measure of what is to be accounted
more or less, stronger or weaker in God, in respect of the putting forth his
Power by what the Scriptures do express of him, after the similitude of Man, as
in Job the comparison is of his little Finger; and in Ezekiel, of his Fist:
whereof the one is weaker (in Man) and the other stronger. Now in Man, what is
weaker than his Breath? which will scarce blow away a Straw (and his weakness
is usually expressed by this, that his Breath is in his Nostrils.) Now estimate
the Strength of God according unto what is said in the Scriptures of God, (and
that as to this point of destroying us) after the manner of Men. By the very
Breath of his Nostrils we are consumed, Job 4. 9. His Power is such, that he
needs put forth no more (as it were) to destroy us. His very Weakness is
enough. Job had in the same verse, first said, By the Blast of him we perish:
but because a Blast imports some forcibleness, the utmost might of what is in a
Man's Breath, and it is a Man's putting forth his Breath with a more than
ordinary violence; therefore by way of Diminution and Correction he adds, By
the Breath of his Nostrils; that is, (still measuring it, as spoken, after the
similitude and manner of Men) by the most ordinary and weakest putting forth of
his Power. And yet we see if he puts forth no more, he blows us to Destruction,
when his intent is to destroy: And why? For of us the Scriptures use a
comparison suitable thereto, in saying that We are but as the Dust of the
Balance, Isa. 40. 15. Yea, all the Nations (put all together) are but as the
small Dust of the Balance: As that little that is left in the Balance, when
what is weighed is taken forth, which is easily blown away with a Man's Breath.
Again, yet lower, in Man; his Nod is of less force than his Breath: and yet,
Lo, at the rebuke of his Countenance we perish, Psalm. 80. 16. He can look on
one that is proud, and abase him; and his Eye can cast about Rage and
Destruction, Job 40. 11, 12, 13. He had said before, ver. 9. Have thou an Arm
like God? He rises from the Power of his Nod, the weakness of his Power, unto
the Power of his Arm: And so may we, from his Looks to his Breath, from that to
his little Finger, from that to his Fist, from that to his Arm and Hands, in
which his Strength is said to lie, Luke 1. 51. O think how dreadful then it
must needs be, to fall into those Hands, (as here in the Text,) into those
Hands, I say, that measure the Waters in the hollow of them, that span the
Heavens, and at the same time comprehend also all the Dust of the Earth in one
grasp, as one of us does a little Pebble. And verse 15. Takes up the Isles as a
very little thing; as you would do Hazel-nut-shells out of a Pail of Water. Now
for thee, a poor Grasshopper, to be taken into those hands, and to be gripped and
crushed, and squeezed with the might thereof. But the Scripture expressions go
further yet, to have this God like a Millstone fall upon thee with his whole
weight, which is Christ's comparison, Mat. 21. 44. Thy Wrath lies hard upon me,
said Heman. You see in Summer little green Flies, creeping upon green leaves,
which if a Man does but touch, they die: such a slight Creature art thou in
comparison to this God. Or further, (as Job's comparison is) that this Great
and Mighty God should run upon thee as a Mighty Giant, with his full force, the
utmost of his Force, as a Man does upon his Enemy; yet so Job speaks of it,
Chap. 16. 14. And in another place, the same Job, that he should take thee
about the Neck, and throttle thee. O what do we, poor Potsheards of the Earth,
striving with our Maker? as Isaiah speaks, chap. 45. 9. Or, as Christ spoke
from Heaven, will Flesh think to kick and spurn against such Iron Pricks and
Pikes, which run up into the Soul, whilst it strikes upon them.

And that we may yet further have a through sensibleness of our obnoxiousness
and exposedness to this Great God, let us withal consider his absolute
Sovereignty over us, as well as his Power. What an inconsiderable portion does
any one Soul (and every one is singly to deal with him for his own particular)
bear unto this Infinity of Being and Glory; to whom not one Nation, but all
Nations; and not only all Nations that are now extant in the World, but that
ever have been, or shall be, are counted as nothing, yea, less than nothing.
What a little thing is this Island of ours, to the whole Body of Nations? And
yet all Isles are to him but a little thing, as Isaiah speaks. Lord, think
thou, what am I to Thee! or any Man! that thou should regard him! Yea, and
being sinful, why should any Man (as he is of himself) think that God should
have any stick or demurr within him, to withhold himself from destroying him
every moment? For lo, even the greatest of Men, that have been of greatest
Wisdom, Parts, (being Sinners) he has in his distance and greatness laid them
aside, and regarded them not at all, Job 38. last: He regards not the Wise in
Heart. What is all or any Excellency in thee to him?

There is therefore no way but to turn unto him, and seeing you must fall into
his hands, prevent him by putting your selves into his hands. This great Arm of
his may be held: Isa. 27. 5. Let them take hold of my Strength; Fury is not in
me. There is an Arm also of another one, that is, Christ, who can deal with God
for thee, and overcome him. [Isa. 53. 1. To whom is the Arm of the Lord (so he
terms Christ) revealed?] Thus you have seen and heard something of the
Greatness of this God, and that but in general, as he is the Author of this
Punishment, and thereby this Punishment aggrandized unto us, and yet how little
do we know of him? as Job speaks.

. II.
The second Head of Demonstrations, from the Capacity of the Soul, the Subject
of this Punishment: And from this, that it is the Destruction of the Soul.

II. SUbjoin hereunto the consideration of what is the eminent Subject of this
Punishment, the Soul of Man; and that the Issue of this Punishment is no less
than the Destruction of that Soul. And these two (which I join together) will
afford further Reflections, to help us to conceive of the fearfulness of this
Punishment. And the Consideration hereof comes in most pertinently next unto
the foregoing, wherein the Power of the Agent was spoken to; but now in this
the Capacity of the Subject or Patient, and the Receptivity thereof of
Impressions from this Worker.

That the Soul is the immediate Vessel of this Wrath, that I spoke to before,
Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them that kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
The former part of which words evidently import: 1. That the Soul alone, and
immediately in it self, and not only in respect of what it suffers with or from
the Bodies suffering, is the Subject of this Punishment, tho the Body also is:
And 2. Christ concludes, that it is the Destruction of both Body and Soul.

You know also the Rule, That the Measure of every Agent's working upon another
must be taken from the Capacity of the Subject which the Impression is made
upon, as well as from the Power of the Agent that works. Fire works more
fiercely upon Oil and Brimstone, than upon Stones, or upon Dust or Sands. You
may discern this in the parts of your own Body: Rheum falling upon the Lungs
does not torture so, as falling upon a Tooth, a Joint, or Eye. How also are the
inward parts capable of more exquisite Torment, as by the Stone, etc. bred in
them, than the outward are, by any Cuttings or Wounds?

Now the Soul of Man is capable of more exquisite Impressions from God's hand,
in that it is an intelligent Spirit, and in the substantial Faculties of it
assimulated to him, made in his Image, a Spirit as God is, that has an
Understanding, and other Faculties, to receive and take in from him what he is
pleased to pour forth into it by them; and is accordingly more sensible
thereof, than the Senses of the Body are or can be supposed to be from
Creatures. The Prophet Nahum seems to have considered this, chap. 1. v. 5, 6.
When setting out God's Wrath to Men in the effects of it, he first considers,
how it works upon inanimate Creatures, that are at such a distance (in respect
of the kind of their being) from God's: It kindles a Fire, says he, which
makes the Hills to melt, and the Eaath is burnt up at his presence: yea, the
World, and all that dwell therein, (which he will one day burn up with Fire.)
Now from these the Prophet infers and raises up our thoughts. Does he work
thus upon insensible Creatures, as the Hills, and the Earth, and the whole
World? Do the Elements melt with fervent heat? Are the Heavens shrivel'd up as
a Scrole of Parchment before him, by the violence of that Fire which he sends
forth? Consider then, O consider, ye Sons of Men, how will the Fire of his
Wrath work upon your intellectual Souls? And as unto this Scope and Coherence
with the former, I understand what follows, verse 6. Who can stand before his
Indignation? who can abide in the fierceness of his Anger? He here turns his
Speech, and applies it to Men. For the Souls of Men being in their beings and
kind nearer of kin to him, Spirits, as he is the great Spirit, and the Father
of Spirits, which were made only for God, and to be filled with God, have
accordingly a more intimate sense of his Workings on them. And it is as if he
had said, If then he sends forth such a Fire as melts and dissolves the Earth,
Mountains of Iron or Brass; how much more will it be able to melt Wax? And such
are Men's Souls to God, comparatively to other Creatures. Christ speaking of his
Soul, when he had thus to do with God, in the Day of his Anger, Psalm. 22. 14.
(that Psalm was all made of him) My Heart is melted like Wax, it is melted in
the midst of my Bowels. And toward this Sense does Sanctius seem to understand
that Complaint of Job's, uttered to his Friends concerning those Terrors of
God, which he felt within him, Job 6. 4, 11. verses compared; Is my Strength
the Strength of Stones? Or is my Flesh, my Nature or Constitution, of Brass,
that I should be able to encounter with this Indignation of the Almighty?
Stones and Brass have no sense in them, (or but a dull sense, if their Opinion
should hold true, de sensu rerum,) they have no Blood nor Spirits to make them
sensible of these Arrows of God's Anger he had spoken of, verse. 4. Ay, but Job
means to say, I have a Soul made of other Metal, suited to God, the great
Spirit, whose Arrows I feel, which is exquisitely sensible of all his Actings.
Take the Statue of a Man made of Brass, or cut out of Stone, and slash and cut
him, and he feels it not; but cut the same Limbs that answer to these in a
living Man, made of Flesh and Blood, with the same knife, and what Torture is
it? You may see this, and aggravate it to your selves, by what inferior Spirits
to this great Father of Spirits, as Angels and Devils, can work upon Man's
Soul, that is a Spirit like themselves, being yet inferior to them. When Saul
had but one evil Spirit sent from the Lord, how distracted and terrified was
he, tho in the midst of the enjoiments of a Kingdom? 1 Samuel 16. 14. Also that
great Apostle, that had his Spirit fortified, as having been newly feasted with
the Joys of Heaven, and that not as at a distance only, but as a Spectator,
that stood by, present there, 2 Cor. 12. Yet one Angel, Satan buffeting him, he
was so disturbed and put to it, as he knew not what to do, or how to bear it:
only God told him, My Grace is sufficient for thee. Well, but do Men's Souls in
Hell fight with Flesh and Blood, yea, or with Principalities and Powers
chiefly? No, that is but whilst they are the Rulers of this World, as there
it is added. And yet if these Spirits have such power over our Spirits to buffet
and terrify them; what has God the Father of them?

Again, consider how the Soul is capable of more Joys and Sorrows, than the
Bodily Senses are, and this by how much it does exceed them in its Eminency and
Capacity. The Soul is able to drink up all the Pleasures the whole Creation can
afford the Bodily Senses, or they bring in: to drink them up (I say) even at
one Draught, and yet would in the midst of it, still cry, Give, Give. Now as it
is in the Body of a Man, look whatever part is capable of more Pleasure, it is
also capable more of Pains: So the Soul proportionably; look how capable it is
of greater Joys (as it is from God) it is as much of Sorrows also, unto the
same extention and intention of them.

Add II. As to this Point, That as the Soul is thus vastly capable of more
Sorrow and Anguish; So further, that these Souls to be punished are filled with
Sin, and in that respect termed Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction, Romans 9.
22. Take a Barrel of Wood; and of it self it will burn as it is Wood: but if
withal it be Pitched within, and full of Tar and combustible Matter, it will
burn more rageingly. Of unfruitful Branches, Apostatizing from Christ, it is
said John 15. 6. That they are cast into the Fire, and they are burned, that
is, they burn to purpose; make a mighty Fire. That Clause [And they are burned]
is added by way of Auxesis or Emphasis, else it needed not. We see when Sins
were but laid upon Christ by Imputation, who in himself was separate from
Sinners, and had no Conscience of Sin, how yet the Anger of God against Sin
dealt with him, as undertaking to be a Surety for Sin. And can you drink, says
Christ, the Cup that I am to drink of, that is, so as to bear it and not be
overcome with it? Now in Luke 23. 31. you may see, how Christ infers from his
Sufferings, as being the Sufferings of one who had not been himself personally
guilty of Sin, what therefore, with difference, those in whom Sin is inherent,
must expect. Weep for your selves (says he) for if they do those things to the
green Tree, what will be done in the Dry? that is, who are fit combustible
Matter for the Fire; and as the Prophet says, are as Stubble fully dry, Nahum.
1. 10. And of the terribleness of God's Anger, he had before discoursed (as was
even now observed) in all that Chapter.

Again III. In the Soul, some Faculties are more capable of Anguish from his
Wrath than other; even as in the Body some Parts are more of Pain. If a Man
would avoid a scalding drop to be let fall upon any Part, of all other he would
fence his Eye. You see how a Mote, a Fly troubles it: a scalding drop of Oil
would much more. So it is in the Faculties of the Soul. You read there is the
Spirit of the Mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Now God will wound, even that, and aims at it,
in this Punishment. A wounded Spirit who can bear? (says Solomon) If a Man's
Flesh be torn and cut, he may yet bear up himself, but if his Bones be broken,
who can stand? Now the immediate Strokes of God are so compared by David, as
unto the breaking of the Bones, in comparison of other dealings of God with,
and Inflictions from God toward us.

The next thing which I mention but as an Appendix to this Head, is, that it is
the Destruction of the Soul. So, Christ and the Apostle again and again. They
are said to be lost: and though Men may Metaphysically dispute, that it is
better to Be, though in Hell, than not to Be: Yet Christ has said, it were
better not to have been born. I shall say no more as to this Head, than what
the Apostle expresses this by, in the 1 Timothy 6. 9. in saying, [That Men are
drowned in Perdition and Destruction] one would think, for him to have
expressed Death and Destruction, it might have been enough to have said, that a
Man were drowned, or sunk down to the bottom of Waters, or the like Materials
that would suffocate a Man: But to say he is drowned in Perdition it self, or
that Perdition and Destruction are the Pit, the Lake, he is plunged into; what
can be said beyond it? And yet here, he is not content with one single Word to
express that by neither, as to have said drowned in Perdition, but must double
it: and add another Word [Destruction] also. Destroyed, therefore over, and
over: Drowned over Head and Ears, as we say, and all that is in them, drowned
and sunk into Perdition; the whole Soul: yea, the whole Man. No part above
Water. Destroyed with a double Destruction: both for Object double, and also
for the Subject of it, both Body and Soul: So Christ says.

. III.
A third Head, of Demonstrations: drawn from the final Causes formerly
mentioned: As 1. The Glory of God. 2. The Manifestation of his Power.

THe third Head, that affords matter of Exaggeration to our Thoughts, whereby
to infer the fearfulness of this Punishment, is taken from the Ends, or Final
Causes mentioned in that first Section. The Ends, I say, which God has in, and
is provoked by, unto this Punishment. And as I then singly argued from each of
them the immediateness of God's Hand therein; so now I shall from each of the
same, The dreadfulness hereof. There were three Attributes of God in Special,
and his Glory in Common, which God aims at the Manifestation of, in this
ultimate Guerdon or Reward for Sin. 1. The Manifestation of the Glory (that is
in Common;) then particularly, 1. Of his Power. 2. The satisfying of his
Justice. 3. Of his Wrath. The Scriptures I then had recourse to, do specify all
these. I shall speak to these in this Section, and to the other in the
following.

1. In General, that he aims at his Glory in it (which is God's general aim,
and is common to these and all other Attributes) is evident. His Glory, (as it
is to be manifested to us) is but the result or shine of all or any of his
Attributes manifested. In that place of Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all
things for himself, that is, for his Glory (for that is himself: My Glory I
will not give to another) it follows, yea even the wicked for the day of evil.
The day of evil there is the day of Punishment: the Wicked themselves also
making and preparing themselves by Sin thereto; but so as thereupon God
manifests his Glory upon them, as well as upon all things else; which he has
made in their several seasons and kinds. And Solomon does mention this of
Punishment as one Eminent Instance of all things else, whatever, that are for
his Glory, and which will be ordered then by him, thereunto in a special
manner: And because (it being so great an evil) Men might think otherwise; Yea,
but says Solomon, God seeks and will have a Glory out of this Punishment, as
well as out of all things else; of which ye all acknowledge, that God made them
for himself. And so in that 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. They are said to be punished from the
Glory of his Power, that is, from his Power, glorifying himself on them, as I
before expounded it. And as, it is for the Glory of this his Power, so by the
same reason of all, or any of those other Attributes, he is pleased to put
forth therein.

I shall premise two Maxims, from whence fore-laid the Inference, for the
dreadfulness of this will more readily rise, in an infinite height, unto our
more serious and sober Apprehensiions.

The first: That all things which God does for his own Glory, he will perform
them like himself, that is, like God: and so make the utmost of every thing,
that that subject Matter, whatever it be, will afford of Glory to him. This
Rule is ascertained to us, as from the Nature of God; so from that saying of
the Apostle, Romans 1. 21. where he condemns the Gentiles, that they glorified
him not as God, that is, in such a manner as was worthy of him; they came not
up to that height of Glory, so great a God must have given unto him from
Creatures. Now if it be the Sin of Creatures, that they fall short in
glorifying God as God; then be assured that if God himself undertakes and
professes to do a thing for his Glory, he will, in the whole of it, and issue
thereof, either glorify himself as God, or never begin to essay or meddle with
it, but would have let it alone, for ever.

2. From hence, take this also along with you, to carry it in your view;
through each particular that follows: That then, if God seeks to glorify
himself in a way of Punishment, that Punishment must be answerably great and
proportioned to raise up a Glory unto God, such as shall glorify him, As God,
in that way. For it is the Punishment or the Judgment it self which he executes
(as the Psalmist says) out of which this Glory must spring. This Punishment, as
it is a Punishment, is that, wherein God will be glorified as God. That is, it
is the Soil which this Crop of his Glory is to grow up out of, and the Crop or
Harvest of Glory can be but what the fertility of that Soil, as such, affords:
These things in general fore-laid.

Now, 3. The greatness or vast comings in of that Glory, God reckons upon from
this, may rise up in your view, by these Particulars.

1. Had it not been that in comparison of other works of his, an infinitely
exceeding Revenue of Glory would have arisen unto him from this, God would
never have set his Heart or Hand to this work of all other: I say it again, He
would never have set his Hand to this work of all other. For as he is Creator,
he has a love to all, and hates nothing that he has made, he loves no such
bloody work for it self; nor would have ever embrued his Hands in the
Destruction of his Creature, had it not been for an exceeding weight of Glory;
and as being justly provoked thereto, it becomes a just Prize, on that Hand
presented to him: which he will be sure withal to manage and perform with the
utmost Righteousness. It is certain, that this is to him opus alienum, a work
strange to his Nature, as the Prophet speaks. He does not naturally, no nor
willingly (says the Lamentations) afflict, or grieve the Children of Men.
Lament. 3. 33. Men's Quarrellings and Cavils hereabout did put him long since to
his Oath, and he has cleared himself by Oath in Ezekiel, As I live, I will not
the Death of a Sinner, that is not simply, as if I delighted in it for it self,
as a God that is cruel; (which was objected) and therefore I say peremptorily
it must be an infinite mass of Glory, after much long-suffering and impenitency
of Men, that moves him to it. And if so, then according to the Principles even
now mentioned, do you that are impenitent Sinners look to it, for ex vestro
cario (I allude to Job's Speech, Skin for Skin) out of the Blood of your Souls,
and their Destruction, shall this Tribute and Tax of Glory be raised, according
unto what your sinfulness shall be found to have been. And oh then, do you
collect how fearful it is like to be! View it in a contrary, and indeed though
an Instance far transcending the Proportion of this, yet in respect of holding
some likeness to God's proceeding in this, will conduce to heighten our
Thoughts about this. It is a Consideration that helps our Faith (and it is a
great one) that for God to deliver up his own Son to Death, and for himself to
bruise him, (you have it all in a short Saying, Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him) and that this should be the Object of his good Pleasure,
there must have been some incomprehensible vast design of Glory to accrue
therefrom, to be attained by doing it; some high End and far transcending
Design that was to be the Issue and Product of it. Which as you know was the
Glory of his Mercy and Love in the Salvation of Men; Glory to God on High, Good
Will to Men. And this is as great an Evidence and Argument to our Faith, that
God is resolved to save Sinners, as can be given. For what has been thus done
to Christ is past recalling; not to be recompensed any other way than by saving
many by the Knowledge of him, as God there speaks. Now as this Instance of the
highest kind serves to evidence this thing to us, so though in a far lesser
Proportion, you may take somewhat alike Illustration, at least, in the Point in
Hand; That certainly it must be a great surpassing mass of Glory that will come
in unto him by this Punishment for Sin, which should any way gain him to be so
much as willing to it, against which, otherwise he has so much in his own
Nature; who had it withal in his absolute Power to have given effectual Grace
to all, as well as to some; which latter all acknowledge he has done. Even as
it was in his Power to have saved the World without Christ's Death, Mark 14.
36. Oh! ye Sons of Men, know and understand your God, and be moved thereby to
turn unto him: and the more by this, that it must and will prove an infinite
Punishment that is coming upon you; because were it not an immense sum of Glory
would accrue to him out of it, and that but upon your final impenitency: He
that is a God so good in himself, would never else bring it upon you. And
according to that first Maxim premised, it must be the soreness of the
Punishment from whence that Glory must arise.

2. Consider herewith, how that he has reserved this, as his last work, in
that other World: when this World shall come to be folded up as a Garment; and
a final conclusion be put to all these other Dispensations and Works of Glory
that are now on Foot. And as Solomon told us that he has made the wicked for
himself and for the day of evil; So Job also tells us, That the Wicked is
reserved to the day of Destruction, and shall be brought forth at (or to) the
day of Wrath: [Reserved] by God, till after all his other works of wonder are
ended and gone, then to be brought forth as a Trophie of his Glory. Both
themselves and all their Sins are reserved till then, and laid up amongst God's
Treasures, to be then made public. The Salvation of his Elect, and the
Destruction of the Wicked, are the last and only Works that then remain, and do
remain, and are purposely kept unto that time, when he means to show himself to
be God indeed; and to make all Men and Angels know that he is God. It is an
Argument of the fearfulness of that Punishment the Devils shall undergo, Jude
6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. That he has reserved them in everlasting Chains unto the
Judgment of the great day. It is a certain Rule, that God's latter works do
still exceed and put down the former: So far, as the former shall not in
comparison be remembered, Isa. 65. 17. Jer. 3. 16. When God would make his
Apostles (as to this World) the greatest spectacle of Misery that (excepting
what he made his own Son, who was the firstborn among many Bretbren) he ever
put upon Saints, Prophets or Martyrs, that had preceeded and were before them.
How does the Apostle express his Design in it, 1 Cor. 4. 9. I think (says he)
that God has set forth us the Apostles [last] as it were Men appointed to
Death, for we are made a Spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men.
Alluding to those Gladiators, brought up last upon the Stage, as a Spectacle to
the People. The thing I cite it for, is, that the greatest work in that kind,
he appointed to be at last: As also, was that which immediately preceded it,
the coming of his Son in the last days. And but this of punishing the Wicked is
his last, and very last, of all that he will do for ever.

Especially let us withal, 3. Consider besides, how all his Actings and Works
whereby to glorify himself for ever, shall be reduced and contracted to these
two. He gives over all other of Providence, and Spiritual Dispensations by
Ordinances, and sets down and betakes himself to these two alone. God has
nothing else to do in the other World. And he has no other revenue of
manifested Glory that remains extant; he lives and reigns eternally in or upon
these two: And yet this is then, when he is resolved, to the utmost to be
glorious. And yet all is but what comes out of these two Works, the Salvation
of the Elect, and Destruction of the Wicked.

Again, 4. Consider these two are uniform Works, and unvarying; and without
shadow of turning: In this World he makes a variety and enterchange of
Providence; which are exercised in such Works as he sometimes takes up, and
then lays down again, at Pleasure; he sets one thing against another as Solomon
speaks. Every Day and Age produces a Variety and Alteration. And this is,
because his Glory that appears but imperfectly in some one (as in this and
that particular) may have an additional perfection in some other; that so, all
that Variety, may like small pieces in Tapestry, make that piece of Work
complete. And yet we see how in this Mixture, and often, but in some one single
Work or Piece, wrought and done but once, how much of God's Glory appears to
the wonderment of Men and Angels. Whereas now this last work of punishing
Wicked Men (as likewise that other of Salvation) are but as one continued
Dispensation of one Woof, and uniform for ever, without Change, Variety or
Interruption. The whole stream of God's Activity contracts it self unto, and
runs in these two Channels and no more, in omne volubilis aevum: And how strong
must you needs suppose these two Streams, each of them to be? when as the
Manifestation of the Deity, does now run so strongly in a thousand Rivolets.
This in General, from the Manifestation of his Glory.

I named three Attributes in Particular, which God does more eminently show
forth in this great, and last Work of His. 1. His Power. 2. Justice. 3.
Avenging Wrath, to the end to gain a Glory to Himself out of all these.

1. His Power: That you have in two Places, Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to
show his Wrath, and to make his Power known? His Power you see, is mentioned
distinct from his Wrath, though indeed it will provoke to be the Power of his
Wrath; But I shall distinctly speak of it. You have it also mentioned as that
Attribute which shall be most glorified hereby, in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. Who shall be
punished with Destruction from the Glory of his Power. I before spoke some
things of the greatness of God's Power, as in relation to this Punishment, in
showing how fearful it is to fall into the Hands of God, in the first Head of
Demonstration in this Section, I shall only here add,

1. This general Rule concerning it, That the drawing forth of Power or
Activity by God in any work, is still, but what is proportionable and
answerable to the work: that is, the effect shall be answerable in greatness to
the Power that is said to be put forth. It is certain, God over-acts nothing.
Now the Effect, wherein this Power of his is put forth, is here said to be
Destruction. And therefore that Destruction must be conceived proportioned to
the Power, that is said to be exerted. There was never Work which God ever did,
wherein he professed to show forth a transcendency of Power, or of any other
Attribute, but it was wonderful and glorious in its kind. All his Attributes
are himself, and so as great as himself. This visible World, in its kind, what
a glorious Building is it? Consisting of Heaven and Earth: and to what end was
it that he professed he made it? You have it Romans 1. 20. That by the Creation
of the World, might be understood his eternal Power and Godhead. And if He that
created and raised up such Beings out of nothing, shall profess yet further, to
make his Power known, and will use that Power, and put it forth in Destroying,
to show forth the Glory of it, How great will that Destruction be? which must
bear a Proportion to such a Manifestation, That after God has in so great and
so various Works preceding this, sufficiently (as we might think) shown
himself God, in point of Power, or what a powerful God he is; that yet after
all as if in all these he had not given so full Proof or Demonstration of
Power, and as not satisfied with all the former, as not enough: he should be
after all, willing, as the Apostle says here at last, to begin a new Work,
which should make the Ears of the whole Creation tingle, on purpose to make his
Power known! This is it swallows up my Thoughts into Astonishment, knowing
both, that according to the rule before given, His last Works ordained to show
forth any Attribute, must infinitely exceed the former, that served to the
making known thereof. And that again puts a new amazement into my Thoughts, to
think how, or wherein so much a greater proportion of Power should be spent. If
it were barely to annihilate, and bring the Creature to its first Nothing,
there needs not an extension of Power; it were but withdrawing that Word of his
Power that holds up, and bears up all things, Heb. 1. 3. and these, as all,
would fall to nothing. But over and above, you read here, of such a
Destruction, as draws out his Power positively, and makes his Power known
afresh. Specially, when again I consider as to this Particular, that to destroy
the well being of any thing, is in the ordinary Experience, of us Creatures,
more easy than to give Being. A Man that cannot make alive the least of
Creatures, not the least Fly or Flea, can yet with an easy touch destroy them.
I hinted before. 1. chapter 3. p. 188.
some respects, wherein this Destruction might exceed, in respect of Power
concurring to it, that of the Creation. In the Creation there was but a single
expense of Power, namely, of or merely raising up out of Nothing: But in this a
double. For the Wrath of God exerted in the fierceness of it, has a tendency
to bring, and would if no other Power intervened, bring the Sinner unto
nothing; as that speech of Jeremy does imply, Correct Jer. 10. 24.
me not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing; as also that of Nahum,
Who can stand in the fierceness of his Anger? so as under this his pressure of
the Creature unto nothing, for God to uphold that Creature, in Being, is
equivalent unto a continual educing it out of nothing again. Oh what
Destruction must that then be in the Execution of it, in which God will
positively put forth more Power than in Creating! and thereby after all other
works of Power shown, get himself the name among the whole Creation, of being a
powerful God indeed: But of this Destruction more hereafter. Thus much for that
of Power.

. IV.
Demonstrations taken from the satisfying God's Justice: Which is the second
particular Attribute.

THe second Attribute is Justice, which he will to the utmost show forth in
this Punishment. So in the Text, The Lord shall judge his People. And 2 Thessalonians.
1. 9. (...), they shall lay down, or pay a Punishment: And v. 6. It is a
righteous thing in God to [recompence] Tribulation, etc. And indeed God's Power
herein is not put forth simply out of Sovereignty, or for it self, but is drawn
out by Justice and Wrath, to execute what they are provoked unto. I before gave
this as one reason why God himself must execute this Punishment, because else
the Punishment will not come up to satisfy his Justice. But now I make use of
the same, to infer the Dreadfulness thereof: That it is the falling into the
hands, as of a potent God, so of a just God recompencing for Sin, and extending
his mighty Power to inflict a Punishment, which should in Justice hold
proportion with the demerit of Sin, that so the exactness of his Justice might
appear.

Now to heighten our Apprehensions of the Dreadfulness of this Punishment, from
this particular: Consider,

1. The Infinite Demerit of Sin. Which is not enough known or considered by the
miserable Subjects thereof; because indeed God himself, in his Holiness, and in
his Greatness, is not known by them. Now because Men will not otherwise know,
nor be sensible of Sin, in the Spiritual evil of it, against God; therefore it
is that God is put upon it, thus to make Men know it; and what God himself is,
for Men to sin against him, by such dreadful Effects, as in Justice shall hold
proportion with their Sin, and the Desert thereof. And God professes, he will
herein be exact, Heb. 2. 2. So, As every Transgression shall receive [a just
Recompence] of Reward. Not such or such Sins, some few more eminent Sins only,
but [every Transgression] shall have a Reward proportionate. He that is the
Judge of all the World, shall not he be exact? as Abraham in another case, Genesis
17. Yes, in this ultimate Punishment he will be sure to be, as Isaiah speaks,
Chap. 28. verse. 17. To lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet. As Carpenters do, when they would fit things one to another, and make
things uniform and correspondent, and square them adequately, to an hairs
breadth, as we say. And thus will God do in Judging. He will bring his Line and
his Plummet, take measure of the hainousness of every Sin, and mete a
Punishment adequate thereto. And if so, then this Punishment how dreadful will
it be? If thou will be severe to mark what is done amiss, who will be able to
stand? says the Psalmist. The Psalm. 130. 3.
Hainousness of Sin is measured by the Greatness of that Glory whereof it is
the debasement; and that Debasement done to him, further measured by this, that
it is, by so mean things, as we Creatures are to God. And so is estimated by
the worth of that Person against whom it it is committed, which therefore could
by no other means be expiated, but by the debasement and emptying of as great a
Glory, due to the Person of the Son of God, appearing in our Nature, as one
Person therewith. Sin, the Apostle tells us, Romans 7. 13. is above measure
sinful. And hence accordingly this Punishment is estimated to be above measure
fearful. Thus Jer. 30. 11. and Isa. 27. 7, 8. God putting this very difference
between his punishing godly Men, his own Children, and his punishing wicked
Men: Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? No; for he puts
this difference in the 8th ver. He smites his own in measure. You may then take
the Compass, the Magnitude, and Depth of it by this; that therefore oppositely
his Punishing the other exceeds all measure. Sin is the Creatures proper work,
and Punishment is God's work. [Vengeance belongs unto me,] says the Text; he
challenges it as his. Now it is certain, God will show himself as perfect and
as exact in his Work, as Man and Satan have been in theirs; he will not be
exceeded or out-gone by them. The Lord is known, says the Psalmist, by the
Judgment that he executes, Psalm. 9. 16. If the Creature be so wicked, as to
bring forth so heinous an Evil (in genere moris) as Sin is, which is Malum
Catholicum [a Catholic Evil] and accordingly has the Name of all Evil given
it, as virtually and transcendently containing all that God or Man calls Evil;
then be assured, that God, who is so just, will be as sure to bring forth, by
way of return upon the Creature, a Punishment, that shall be in genere Poenae,
in it is kind, Malum Catholicum, an universal Evil also. And such Ezekiel terms
it, speaking of the Evil of Punishment: It is an Evil, and an only Evil, Ezekiel.
7. 5. That is, such an Evil as shall be nothing but evil, and that shall
contain the Spirit, the Quintessence of all Evil in it. Therefore, Psalm. 75. 8.
In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and it is full of Mixture. As if an
Artist, that knows the Nature of all Simples, should temper a Cup, that is full
of all sorts of Poisons, and which is a Compound of the bitterest, loathsomest
Ingredients this Earth puts forth. Even thus has God strained the quintessence
of all Evils into one Cup; and it follows there, The Wicked of the Earth must
drink the dregs of it. Which Phrase also argues such a Mixture as this we speak
of; the bitterest of all is at the bottom; and it is Eternity to the bottom, and
they must not, nor shall not leave a drop, but suck out the Dregs, as the
Prophet's Phrase is, Ezekiel. 23. 34. Thou have a Cup of Abomination, and when
thou have filled up thy measure, then will God take measure of thy Cup, and
fill the same proportion of Dregs and Mixture to thee, in a Cup of his
tempering.

2. Consider, that in the manifestation of this Attribute of Justice, there
must of all other (next unto that of Mercy) be a more special Glory intended
and designed by God himself, unto which this Punishment must bear an eminent
proportion, as being the Matter wherein it appears. I said before, that if God
professed to manifest any Attribute of his whatever, it still has been done in
such Effects of Wonder, as all the Creation is set admiring of. Now of all
other Attributes, these two of Justice and Mercy are the prime, which he sets
the greatest value upon the manifestation of. And therefore still look how they
are more eminent, or by how much the more eminently he intends to manifest them
above other Attributes; by so much must the Effects, in and by which he
manifests them, exceed and excel all other Works.

Now that these are the brightest Jewels in that Crown of his Glory, and which
he intends most to embelish, may be seen in this: 1. That he has chosen the
choicest and most excellent of his Creatures, as the Stuff or Materials in
which to set these forth; namely, Angels and Men, and Christ himself the Head
of all. That look as curious Engravers, when they would show their best Art,
and chiefest Workmanship, they cull out the choicest Materials, as either
precious Stones, Cedar, or Marble, to work upon; and so Embroiderers, the
finest Stuff or Cloth for the Groundwork, they would embroider Gold or Pearls
upon: Thus has God singled forth Angels and Men, the chief of, and more noble
Creatures (in the Stuff they consist of) than the rest of his whole Creation.
Power and Wisdom is seen in other Creatures, but Vindicative Justice, as also
Grace and saving Mercy, only on Men and Angels. And, 2. Although he has shown
forth more of Wisdom and Power in the Frame and Fabric of Men and Angels, than
in the whole of Heaven and Earth; yet still, comparatively, more of Justice and
Mercy in these two, than that all, or any of the other Attributes, shown forth
in and upon them, comes unto. Whereof this is sufficient evidence, that they
have the Name of Vessels of Mercy, and Vessels of Wrath, Romans 9. You read
nowhere, that they are termed Vessels of Power, or Vessels of Wisdom: which is
a Token that they are filled with these, in that they carry away the
Denomination, (which is usually a Principaliori,) as if no Attributes else in
comparison seemed to appear: and yet how much of Power and Wisdom is seen in
the Fabric of Man, David tells us, I am wonderfully or fearfully made. So
then, those that shall prove to be the miserable Vessels of this his Wrath and
Justice, shall be so filled with a Punishment, whereby this Justice is made
known, as shall deservedly bear the Name of Wrath and Judgment engraven upon
it, of all other Attributes. The Day in which he will judge the World, Acts 17.
31. is elsewhere called, the Day of Destruction, the Day of Wrath, the Day of
Judgment, etc. It bears its Denomination from this very Work we speak of.

And further, consider how he has given out aforehand, almost six thousand
years before, concerning this Work, above all Works else, and has posted it
upon Enoch's Pillars, (you know the Tradition I allude to) as you use to do
Citations, Jude 14, 15. or as you do indicere diem, set a Day for the most
solemn Works. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied hereof, saying, Behold,
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all,
etc. And further and besides, God speaks of Preparations to have been all along
made by him, during the time of this World, against that Day. The Persons are a
fitting, Romans 9. The Punishment a preparing; prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, even from their very first Fall. Now certainly God would never raise up
in us, by such words given out by himself, so great expectations, if the
Reality, the Execution, the Thing it self, should not answer to all these. Yea,
after all his other Works of Wonder finished and perfected, he professes to
come on purpose to be glorified. And in what? as well in rendering Vengeance in
the Destruction of Wicked Men, as in the glorifying his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense Tribulation
to them that trouble you: And to you that are troubled, Rest with us. When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming
Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction
from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: When he shall
come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe,
in that day. He carries on the glorifying himself, and of his Power, in the
one, as well as in the other.

Yea, and to render the Solemnity of this Work and Day yet greater, he calls a
General Assembly of all Men and Angels, that are, or have been, or of Men that
yet shall be, in either Worlds, to be present, and see the Execution.

To conclude: It is therefore called the Great Day, as that, Reserved to the
Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 6. and other Speeches. And why the Great Day?
but from this Work of that Day, that shall be done upon it; which this Day
shall then bring forth, and produce. As Days have their Style and Denomination
from the Work of the Day. Opus diei in die suo. So this (as was said) is called
the Day of Destruction, Wrath, etc. And if so, then that Style of Greatness
must be from the Greatness of the Work that shall be done thereon. And so the
Judgment of the Great Day, because great will the Judgment be that is to be
executed on that Day.

Lastly; God has in the mean time suffered his Glory to be debased, himself to
be least regarded in the World, Sin and the Devil to carry all before them, and
Sinners to have the Glory: relieving himself in the mean time, that he has a
Treasure of Glory to be broken up at that day, Romans 2. 3. When he will come on
purpose to be glorious. He has suffered an Eclipse of six thousand Years,
that in the end he may break forth with a redoubled Glory. And all that Glory
must come in this way, even from this Punishment he shall execute. And it must
be a recovery of greater Glory, than he should have had by Man's Holiness, in
that first State by Creation, or God would never have let Sin have come into
the World; he meant not to be a Loser.

. V.
Demonstrations taken from the satisfying of Avenging Wrath; The third
particular Attribute.

I Come next to argue this from the third Attribute, his Wrath: or if you will,
his Power and Justice, as intended, and heightened to extremities by Wrath: And
though he will be just in what he does; yet it is Justice put on by Wrath. He
recompenseth Sin, not only as Rector Vniversi, Judge of all the World, and so
upon the account of Public Rules given forth, to vindicate the equity and
righteousness of which, he punishes the transgressions of them; but over and
above he does it, as resenting an Injury, a personal Affront given to himself,
his Person; and this draws forth his Wrath and Vengeance on his own behalf.

As it is termed Vengeance, so Zeal, in Heb. 10. 27. and 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do you
provoke the Lord to Jealousy? In Nahum 1. 2. See what a Conglomeration there is
of Attributes and Effects. [God is jealous,] that is the first. He compares that
in God unto that in Man, which, Solomon tell us, is the Rage of Man, Prove. 6.
last. Again, 2. The Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth. That is the Effect; and
he says it twice, as speaking of one who is enflamed with Anger. Then, 3. To
show how fiercely in revenging he executes it, even with Fury, he adds, The
Lord revengeth, and is furious, who yet professes elsewhere of himself, Fury
is not in me; that is, of my self it is not, Isa. 27. 4. But as he is provoked
by Sin and Impenitency, so Fury is in him. The Lord is furious. Then, 4.
follows the Subject thereof, and what they are to him, whom his Fury waxes so
hot against, Enemies and Adversaries. [The Lord will take Vengeance on his
Adversaries, and he reserveth Wrath for his Enemies.] Which accords with this
Text: Vengeance is mine, I will recompense the Adversaries, verse 27. And, 5.
If any urge: Yea, but is not God merciful, and slow to Anger? Yes, says he, v.
3. The Lord is slow to Anger. But he brings it in to show, that in this case it
is that very Patience of his, which in the issue works up unto that Fury: Laesa
Patientia fit Furor. And then, 6. He further warns them to consider, that in
the execution of this Fury to the utmost, his Power comes to be engaged: The
Lord is great in Power. And lastly, He will not at all acquit the Wicked, that
lives and dies in his Sins: Which is a Clause or Proviso he still puts in, even
when he speaks the greatest things of his Mercy. See Exodus 34. 6, 7.

And although the very reading this Description of God, as an Avenger, shows
forth alone its own Dreadfulness, yet further to clear, and enlarge upon it,
consider,

1. How it is Justice heightened by Wrath to a Fury, and all of these whetting
on, and drawing out the Greatness of Power. And to this purpose we find, as was
observed, Power and Wrath joined, in Romans 9. 22. and Psalm. 90. Who has known
the Power of thine Anger? His Jealousy draws out his Strength, and his Power
works in a way of Wrath. Take a Man, let his Blood, his Fury be up, and thereby
all his Spirits ars intended and stirred, and he is able to strike a greater
and heavier blow than at another time. As Sampson in his Fury against the
Philistims, he pulls down the Pillars of the House. Now bring this to God, and
though his Power is the same, and not greater, when he executes Vengeance on
his Enemies, than at all other times; yet being attributed to him after the
manner of Men, it imports to us something of Analogy, (whereby the working of
his Power in such a case is set out) which it holds with what is in Men in the
like case. And so shows, 1. That if ever he did or will upon any occasion, or
can be supposed to show forth Power and Strength, it will be in this, for he is
in Fury; and in that Fury talks of the Greatness of his Power, which in Men in
their Fury uses to be at the highest, and they show forth their Strength in no
Acts so much as those which they do in Fury.

2. That comparatively therefore unto other Works of his, wherein he shows
forth Power, he is to be supposed to show forth more of Power in this. Consider
therefore, if God showed forth Power in creating the World, etc. Yet according
to this Analogy, I may say of all those kind of Works whatever, (speaking after
the manner of Men) that he did them cooly, as it were; but this he does in
Fury, and so may well be supposed to put forth more of Power in these, in that
respect, than in those other.

2. Avenging Wrath is more than simply Anger. A Man is angry with a Friend, and
so is God often with his Children. And then he stirs not up all his Wrath, as
Psalm. 78. But the Butt and Mark, which Revenge shoots its Arrows at, is an
Enemy, as both out of Nahum, and the 27th verse of this Chapter, was observed.
And not only so, but such as are irreconcilable Enemies: for that is the state
of Men in Hell, and the posture of their Spirits there toward God, to be fixed
in Malice. Now when Vengeance in God shall be extreme, who shall be able to
bear it?

3. Justice has a mixture of Pity mingled with it, but when it is a case of
Revenge, there is a Decorum put upon the extremity of Justice. It is the
revenge of an Injury. Which though in the Creature, who it self is a Subject of
God's, (who only has the Sovereignty of Power,) it is therefore in-glorious
and unworthy, yet in God, who is the Supreme, in case of wrong and injury to
himself, this has a glory in it. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord. No wonder
then if it be termed Severity, Romans 11. 23. and James 2. 13. expressly, Judgment
without Mercy. And perhaps in that respect also it is, that, Rev. 14. 10. it is
termed, Wrath without mixture, that is, pure Wrath which has no mixture; Not a
drop to cool ones Tongue. And again, Wrath to the uttermost, as 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
the Apostle speaks of that Wrath, which upon the Destruction of Jerusalem (the
Type of the day of Judgment) befell that Nation. And so it is set forth in the
Language of the Wrath at the great Day, as Grotius has observed, which is
Wrath to the uttermost. And as God is said to rest in his Love shown to his
Children; so his Wrath satisfies it self in accomplishing Vengeance, Ezekiel. 7.
8, 9. I will accomplish mine Anger upon thee: and I will Zeph. 3. 17.
judge thee according to thy Ways, and I will recompense thee for all thine
Abominations. And mine Eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will
recompense thee according to thy Ways, and thine Abominations that are in the
midst of thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smites. And Isa. 27.
11.
therefore is often called a Sacrifice, as Mark 9. 49.

And this answers an Objection may be made. Did not David expressly choose
rather to fall into the Hand of God than Man? 2 Samuel 24. 14. The answer is at
hand in the same place, for his Mercies are great. That is David's Reason for
it there. And so indeed the difference lies in chastising Anger, and avenging
Wrath. And David there speaks of God's chastising his Children in this World,
but in the World to come you see the case is altered: It is the falling into
the Hands of an Avenger, who in that execution professes to show no Mercy: He
that made them, will have no pity on them.

Lastly, consider how Wrath sets all that is in God against a Man, whets and
sharpens the whole Activity of every Attribute. What is the reason that in the
Text when this dreadful execution is spoken of, the Attribute of the [living
God] is mentioned rather than Power? etc. The Life of God speaks the whole of
his Attributes. The whole of his Nature and Godhead, as it is active and
working: this Life imports. In Hell God draws out all his Forces, all his
Attributes into the Field, whereof Wrath is the Leader and General. All his
Perfections conspire either to stir up and enkindle Wrath, or to assist him in
the Execution. How Power is drawn forth and intended I showed before. Wisdom,
that marshals all into Order, sets both thy Sins in order in the view of thy
Conscience, Psalm. 50. 21. and sets his Terrors in Battle array against thee,
it is Job's Expression, Chap. 6. 4. and the same Word in both places. And as it
marshalls all, so whets on to Vengeance, Prove. 1. 25. Ye have set at naught all
my Counsel, I will therefore laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. It Is Wisdom speaks this, ver. 20. Be not deceived (says the Apostle)
God is not mocked, Gal. 6. 7. it imports two things. 1. That Sinners think to
illude and deceive God. As what is it else to think to defer Repentance to the
last, and then to come and flatter, and look to be saved, as if they had served
him from the very first Moment of their Lives? they herein think to go beyond
God. 2. That in such cases, God's Wisdom takes it and resents it to the height.
Nothing adds unto Provocation more, in a Man that is Wise, than to perceive how
another Man thinks to go beyond him, and impose upon his Wisdom. And it is
Wisdom in a Man, that makes him he would not be mocked, deceived or trifled
withal; this Principle rises up in God's Heart, the Judge of all the World.
Again, his Holiness cries out to him against the Sinner: Thou art a pure God,
and I can endure to behold no Iniiquty, and the Eyes of my Glory have been
provoked by this Sinner continually. Then says Justice too, I must be satisfied
to the utmost Farthing, and have the last drop of Blood that is in their Souls;
and this their Punishment executed on their own Persons, is all I shall have or
can recover for all the dishonor has been done thee. For Christ through their
unbelief, has not taken off one Farthing of their Debt, but all is left and
remains upon their own Score. And I can no other way recover Glory, but by
having it out of them: And therefore it is that an Eternity is required,
because, but by an Eternity of Suffering, it is, that they can come to satisfy.
Prove. 27. 20. Hell and Destruction are never full, or [satisfied] as the next
Words show the meaning to be. Then says Truth and Righteousness, their whole
Lives have been contrary to my Love, the whole actings and the courses of them
have been but a making a Lie, a Web of Hypocrisy, continually woven and vended.
Rev. 22. 15. That love and make a Lie, and Romans 3. 13. Their Tongues are full
of falsehood and deceit; and again, Give them their Portion with Hypocrites:
whom of all else I hate, says Truth. Then boyls up Jealousy, Every Creature
has been an Idol, and made their God, and set up in God's stead, and they have
been enflamed with them (as of Idolaters the Prophet speaks.) Idols of Jealousy
have all their Lusts been: and the Glory due to me has been given to them. But
you will say, will not Mercy at last speak a good Word for them? will it not
allay and moderate all these? No, but turn as fiercely against them as any
other Attribute, and plead, I indeed did a long while restrain all these other
Attributes that were provoked every Moment, [Whom God endured with much long
suffering, says Romans 9. 22.] And that they have lived so long free from Wrath,
has been by means of me; I waiting for their Repentance, which has cost me
Millions. I have spent Riches on them, in forbearance of them: All which now is
to be reckoned to them in Wrath. You have it Romans 2. 4, 5. They have despised
the riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and long-Suffering, not knowing
that the Goodness of God leads them to Repentance. But after their hardness
and impenitent Heart, treasure up unto themselves Wrath, etc. And says Grace, I
was presumed on, and made a stale to, and defender of their Lusts; and was
turned into Wantonness, Jude 4.

And thus all in God, is set (as it were) a Fire against a Sinner, and (as I
may so speak) do turn all in him into fury. And look as to God's People all in
God is assimulated into Love toward them, and they live in and dwell in Love,
and see nothing else, as it were in God, but Love: God is Love (says the
Apostle) namely, to his own, 1 John 4. 16. Nothing else appears; or rather all
that is in him, appears in that Hue, under that Dye, with that Tincture. So
here on the contrary, all in God is turned into Fury: Laesa patientia fit
furor. Though he is not so of Himself: Fury is not in me, says he, Isa. 27. but
Sin has made him such.

. VI.
A Fourth Head of Demonstrations: drawn from those Instances both of Good and
Bad Men, their having suffered these kind of Terrors in this Life.

A Fourth Head of Demonstrations, is taken from the Instances given both of
Good and Bad Men. Which Instances, as I then alleged to prove the
immediateness of God's inflicting it: So now I shall from thence present some
Inferences of the fearfulness hereof. Do but sit down a little with Job and
Heman, who were the Instances of Good Men: Or go to that Roll which the
Scriptures have recorded of Cain and Judas, and others, or which Ecclesiastical
Stories, or present Examples of our Age have afforded, of Men in Horror: weigh
and perpend their cries and roarings, and consider what a sad Spectacle such
Instances afford.

1. Of Good Men: Heman I insisted in before, and acquainted you with his
Complaints as sad as Man can utter: I reserved that of Job, specially for this
Place, as I then professed. All the while that he had but Afflictions common to
Men; and although he was every way surrounded with them, as being visited with
a loathsome Disease, his Body filled with Dolours and Pains, his Children lost,
Servants destroyed by Fire from Heaven; his Estate quite gone unto an Extremity
of Poverty; his Wife abhorring his Breath, and tempting him to Blasphemy: All
this while the Text tells us Chap. 2. 10. That in all this did not Job sin with
his Lips, but was quiet and patient, as the Holy Ghost in the New Testament
takes notice of him, Jam. 5. You have heard of the Patience of Job. Well, but
God himself in the end came in upon him with his immediate Wrath. And now will
you hear of his Impatience too? He was not pricked to the quick till now. But
then he begins to Curse the day of his Birth, Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3. and at that
rate talks all along that Chapter. For brevity let us only consult, his
Lamentations in Chap. 6. ver. 2, 3, 4. Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed,
and my Calamity laid in the Balances together, for now it would be heavier
than the Sand, therefore my words are swallowed up. The rest that follows, I
shall add by and by. What was it caused this sudden outcry and alteration in
Job's Spirit, from that still and sedate frame we left him in before? What was
it the thoughts of his lost Estate, Children, Wife's unkindness, or the Pains
of his Bones and Body, etc. or his downfall from a petty Kingdom? Did these
begin now at length so sadly to return upon him, so as in the end, his Spirit
should begin to take them in, and lay them at length to Heart, which at first
he in an holy Gallantry had made so light of? Oh no, he had fully concocted and
digested all that had been occasioned from all or any of these, and had quieted
himself with one or two good Cordials, namely, that the Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken, and blessed be the Name of the Lord, Chap. 1. 21. And
again, shall we receive good from the hand of the Lord and not evil? Chap. 2.
10. which had carried away all that Sorrow might have been stirring in him from
these. What might be the matter then, that was the cause of these so high
disturbances? The next Words ver. 4. do enform us, For the Arrows of the
Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirits; The Terrors of
God do set themselves in Array against me. Let us go on duly to weigh and
consider these Passages of his.

Heman, he in his Horrors had complained, Psalm. 88. 7. That God's Wrath lay
hard or heavy on him, and says no more of it: But Job here, He in like manner
feeling the like weight thereof, goes about to express how heavy, and how great
the burden was of his Grief, that was caused thereby. And he calls for a
mighty Scale to weigh it in: Such a Scale as might be large enough to contain
all the Sands of the Sea. Oh that my Grief were thoroughly weighed, and my
Calamities laid in the Balance together! for now it would be heavier than the
Sand of the Sea. His meaning is, that to have his Grief and Calamity put in one
of the Scales, and the Sand of the Sea in the other, his Calamity would be
infinitely heavier. His invention was heightened by what he really felt: The
greatness of it made him Eloquent. (For as Love, so deep sense of Misery uses
so to do.) And he pitcheth, as you see, upon the weightiness of Sand, to
express it by, which is of all things the weightiest, as Solomon tells us,
Prove. 27. 3. A Stone is heavy, and the Sand is weighty. Yea, and the Sand of
the Sea: which, take both, those Sands within the Sea at the bottom of it, and
those also scattered without on the Shore, they do make an immence bulk and
body condensated, if they were gathered together into one heap: (as the Waters
were into one place, when God made the Sea.) Job had a most sublime Fancy, as
the high strains of that whole Book show: And this is in view a compaparison
vast and great enough, (one would think,) as could be used. But yet further
observe, how he breaks off that attempt of his, to express it by this or by any
such comparisons, though in appearance never so hyperbolical. Which breaking
off, his next Speech utters: My Words (says he) are swallowed up! As a small
thing is swallowed up of a greater, as a drop of the Ocean, as one small
scattered Sand would be, in the bulk of all those Sands of the Sea, when cast
in among them: So, were all these his vast expressions and comparisons he had
used, although thus great; (which yet from all Rhetoricians, would have had the
name of Hyperboles, far exceeding the reality.) But yet in his sense and
feeling were swallowed up by the thing it self. I feel my Words fall short,
says he: so Broughton paraphraseth on those Words. And therefore he cuts
himself off from using any more or higher decipherings of it, of any kind, if
any could have been found, as being all but mere Metaphors, too light, and
holding no weight with that far exceeding weight of Misery, he felt (as the
Apostle on the contrary, comparing present Afflictions and the Glory to come
together, speaks) but Job here, he gives it clean over as a thing
unexpressible. And in stead of all Essays that way, he chooses rather to speak
and show the Cause thereof the same, which I in this Treatise have endeavored
to do. And thereby he sets forth in a Reality, the dreadfulness of it indeed;
And more than by all things whatever, that his Grief could have been compared
unto. This you have in these Words. [For the Arrows of the Almighty, are within
me,] he had sores without, in his Body; and Afflictions in his outward Man or
Condition; Fears without, and Terrors within: he complains not, that you hear
of them at all. Oh but they are these Arrows that are within me, (says he) the
Arrows of the Almighty. That is, which none but an Almighty Hand could shoot,
and shoot so deep: such Arrows, as could come out of no other Forge or Quiver.
The Soul of a Man is a Spirit of a vast depth, and God, and God alone can shoot
up into it, unto the Arrow Head. And yet again, besides the strength of the Arm
that shoots them, and the forkedness of the Arrows themselves, they were all,
as Arrows that are dipped in Poison, envenomed with the guilt of his Sins (which
as Chap. 13. 23. and 26. God had now set on upon his Soul, Thou make me
possess the Sins of my Youth:) Thus it follows in the next Words, [And the
Poison thereof drinks up my Spirit.] They do not only let out the Spirits,
(which Wounds made by other Arrows use to do) but they drink them up. The
Strength and Violence of the Venom of them, had such an Efficacy on his very
Soul, and the very Spirit and Life thereof, as they drank all up. Again it
follows, [And the Terrors of God have set themselves in array against me.] God
drew forth his Wrath (as it were) into an ordered Army, into Rank and File, at
once to fall upon him. If one Man had an whole Army set against him, and each
armed Man therein were to shoot a Bullet, or an Arrow into him at once; and if
withal we could make the Supposition, that that Man should have his Life still
renewed after each Wound given, so as never to dye; and yet they still to renew
to shoot all at once every moment: how dreadful is this to any ones Thoughts
thereof? but yet these are but Men, not God, whose Arrows he says these were.
Oh that he would destroy me! (says Job) that is, kill me outright, so ver. 8,
9. Oh that I might have my Request! and that God would grant me the thing that
I long for! Even that it would please God to destroy me, and that he would let
loose his Hand, and cut me off. Well, But Job, can thou not stir up thy
Spirits and harden thy self against all these present Sorrows? The Spirit of
Man will bear its Infirmity, if it be steeled with resolution. To this Job
himself gives answer by way of preoccupation, to this effect: That if Death
indeed, or a being utterly cut off, should come upon me with all that Host of
Fears (whereof elsewhere Job tells us Death is the King) I could harden my self
against that; yea, and to endure the pains of the most exquisite Tortures any
kind of Death could inflict: if thereby God would thus cut me off. Then indeed
(if such News of Death were brought me) I should yet have comfort; yea, I would
harden my self in Sorrow. So ver. 10. And let it be the worst Death, he can put
me to, for so it follows, let him not spare. Oh but they are these Arrows of
his own within me, these I cannot bear. So ver. 12. Is my Strength the Strength
of Stones, or my Flesh Brass? that I should be able to endure, and bear up my
self against these Encounters? Oh no. Read on those his Expressions further
roared forth by him, in Chap. 16. ver. 12, 13, 14. He has broken me asunder:
he has also taken me by the Neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for
his Mark. His Archers compass me round about, he cleaves my Reins asunder, and
does not spare; He pours out my Gall upon the Ground. He breaks me with
breach upon breach; he runs upon me like a Giant. What should I instance in
more, or how to comment on them!

That which in the second place, is proper next to be done, is to provoke those
that are secure Sinners, etc. and others also that are awakened, to raise but
up their Thoughts from the Consideration hereof, to infer and gather how
dreadful this Punishment in Hell must be, above all, that these Dispensations
can represent unto us. And this is most strongly inferred from these Examples,
whether they be the Examples of Good Men, as Job was; or bad Men, as Cain and
Judas were, in both which I formerly instanced in. I shall make Inference from
each of these apart, as in the first Section, I also did, in arguing from them,
the immediateness, etc.

1. From these of good Men. If you consider that all these Terrors, which Job
and Heman endured from God, were yet all in Love, out of so solid and
substantial a Love, permanent and abiding in God's Heart, all this while
toward them; and that all these were but chastisings of them for trial, and to
make them partakers of his Holiness. And besides, what manner of Anger was it
toward them? It was but Anger, which Love stirred up: and those his
Afflictions were accompanied and joined, all with everlasting kindness and
thoughts of Peace all the while. According to that in Isa. 54. 8. In a little
Wrath I hid my Face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redemer. Yea, those two known Cordial
Recipes, so frequently made use of, and commonly taken by most Christians in
their distresses; and cited by two Apostles and Christ himself from Heaven,
Happy is the Man whom God corrects Jam. 1. 12. chap. 5. 11. Heb. 12. 5. Apoc.
3. 19.
: Therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty; were first spoken
and directed unto this our Job, whilst in the midst of these Afflictions, in
chap. 5. 17. And are particularly applied to that his Condition, in the worst
of it by the Holy Ghost, Jam. 5. 11. Yea and all this, that was upon Job, was
in it self (how great soever it seemed to his sense) but the touch of God's
little Finger, Job 1. 11. Oh think then how great will that Vengeance be, which
is pure Wrath, Rev. 14. which is out of Fury, as was shown: which is, the fiery
Indignation of Patience abused; boiled up into Fury! This that befell them, is
said to be but a little Wrath, and for a Moment. And yet (as also it is said
Psalm. 2. ult.) If God be angry but a little, who is able to abide it! then what
will this last and extreme Vengeance reserved for Hell be? These Chastisements
of Job's and Heman's were in comparison of what awaits Men in Hell, but as Rods
of Birch or Rushes, which we use to whip our Children withal, Psalm. 89. 32, 33.
Then will I visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their Iniquity with
Stripes: Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from them,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. These were all Rods of Mercies own
gathering and making, the Stripes whereof are not so deep, but they may be and
were healed again, as in the same Book you also find it, chap. 5. 18. He makes
sore, and binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole: and so was Job in
the Issue thus healed. And Heman likewise, and 1 Kings 4. 31.
made thereby one of the wisest Men in the World. Yea, but these wherewith
wicked Men in Hell are eternally lashed and cut off, are Rods of Revenges
making; Rods of Iron (as the Psalmist in that second Psalm speaks) to break
them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, never to be set together again or made
whole. Again, those strokes on the Children of God, are in measure, as Isa. 27.
7, 8. but of these in Hell, it may be, and is said, that Wrath comes upon them
without measure. Again, in the midst of these Corrections, he remembers Mercy;
but in this of Hell, there is Judgment without Mercy, Jam. 2. 13. In those
other Stripes given his Children, God himself is afflicted, and feels every
Stroke he gives them, as Jer. 31. 20. and Isa. 64. But in these in Hell,
Vengeance and Justice do satisfy themselves in their deserved Damnation. It is
styled a Sacrifice to him. Mark 9. 48, 49. compared, and elsewhere.

2. The same Inference, may be much more raised from those Instances given of
bad Men, suffering in this Life the like Terrors, to these mentioned: If we but
consider that when they fall and seize upon them in the greatest extremity,
that yet then they are in comparison to what remains to them in Hell, but as
the sippings of the top of that Cup here, the Dregs whereof are reserved for
them, there, to drink to the bottom, as Psalm. 75. 8. In the Hand of the Lord
there is a Cup, and the Wine is red: it is full of mixture, and he pours out
of the same: but the Dregs thereof all the Wicked of the Earth shall wring them
out, and drink them. Those Words he [poureth out of the same] and [but the
Dregs thereof] are an opposition each to other; showing how that in this Life,
God promiscuously pours forth the same from the upper part thereof, both upon
good and bad. And that all that, is but the overflowings of what is uppermost;
but the Dregs, the brackish bitter Stuff, is reserved for Hell. And the truth
is, Men can bear but the sippings thereof here. Should they drink but a little
deeper, their Souls would be giddy, and reel out of their Bodies in a Moment.
As the Joys of Heaven cannot be inherited by Flesh and Blood, so nor the
Torments of the fullness of this Wrath. Tam Bonorum quam Malorum intollerabilis
magnitudo est.
But in Hell their Bodies shall be nealed (as we speak of Glass) that they may
endure this Fire. All the Terrors of Conscience here, are as is said of the
Joys of the Saints, but the earnest-Pennies, Farthing-Tokens, in comparison to
that great, immensely vast Treasure of Wrath to come, you have heard the
Scriptures speak of. All here is but the Shadow of Death; and yet if that can
wither Men's Souls so, what will the blackness of darkness do? as the Apostle
speaks of this. The utmost threatened here, is, that The Anger of the Lord shall
smoke against a Man, Deuteronomy. 29. It is but Smoke: but in Hell, it breaks forth
into raging Flames Luke 16. 24.
of the fiercest Fires, that fill every Corner, and break out at all the
Windows of the Soul.

. VII.
The last Head of Demonstrations: That it is a falling into the Hands of the
Living God: and what that further super adds to the dreadfulness of this
Punishment.

THe fifth and last Head, which represents the dreadfulness of all this unto an
infinity, is, that it is a falling into the Hands [of the living God,] The
living God. The former exaggerations have been raised from falling into the
Hands of the Great, Powerful, Just and Avenging God; but this further, of the
Living God. Which of all other Attributes, the Apostle has singled forth to
set out the dreadfulness of it by, and is therefore most of all to be heeded by
us; as having as much weight in it, to the thing in Hand, as any of the other.
[The Living God] notes out, not only God's Activity, and how the whole of his
Life and Being is engaged and active in this Punishment (as was noticed) But
further, both, that, 1. He shall execute this to Eternity, and 2. That during
that whole space of Eternity, he will permanently continue, to inflict it. His
being the Living God notes out 1. Eternity, 2. With a continuation of acting
all that while: And so his being the Living God, both threatens and effects,
1. an eternal, and 2. a continual Death in those that are the Subjects thereof.
And to imply so much it is, that he has that Denomination specially and so
eminently given him here, when this Punishment is spoken of.

First, consider thy Soul is an immortal Soul, as to the duration of it: and
that this Great God is the Living God. And Sin in thee and the Injury of it to
God is an eternal Stain, which Hell Fire cannot eat out, or satisfy God for,
but in an Eternity of time. And therefore whilst God lives, and thou live, he
will inflict it on thee. That Is one meaning.

Again, God's Life, as it is in himself a continual Act, so in its being
attributed to him with respect to this Punishment, it imports his continued
acting therein without cessation or intermission. For he does it, as the Living
God. Job, whilst he endured the Terrors of the Almighty, complains they were so
uncessant, that God suffered him not to take Breath, Job 9. 18. he followed his
Strokes so thick, with one Breach (as he there speaks) upon another.

You have both these set forth in one and the same Scripture, Rev. 14. 10, 11.
He shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, and he shall be tormented with
Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb: and the smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever. And
they have no rest Day nor Night. First, they have no rest Day nor Night; That
shows they have no intermission. And then that the smoke of their Torment
ascends up for ever, shows the Eternity. Yea and further, to strike out dull
Hearts, with the sense of this Eternity, if one [ever] be not enough, another
is added, [For ever and ever.] Which Eternity as you know, our Savior is still
careful to indigitate, when he speaks of Hell, in love and warning unto Men's
Souls, that they might be moved by the moment thereof, to endeavor to escape
it.

Now it being thus, this infinitely superadds unto all the former. The former
Heads have given Demonstration to us, wherein the substance of this great
Punishment consists: And then comes in this, as the fatal and final rolling
Stone upon the Grave or Sepulcher of Souls: And with the Grave, Hell is often
parrallel'd. Or these two imports thereof, are as two Millstones hung about
the Necks of those that are plunged into this Lake, to sink them down for ever:
For these two things mentioned, do work in the Spirits of those that undergo
it, Perfect Fear: and perfect Despair. The Effects of both which make up a
perfection of Misery in such a State.

1. Perfect Despair. Hope was given to reasonable and intelligent Natures (and
in peculiar unto them) to be as a breathing hole in time of Misery, to keep up
Life in such an one, whereby to sustain it self. And the reasonable Soul being
in its duration Eternal, and having an Eternity of time to run through and sail
over, has this Privilege (denied to Beasts) to take a prospect or foresight
of time, that is yet to come, and if it can spy out any space or spot of time,
in which it shall have happiness or ease, or outlive its Misery, it will not
utterly die; yea it will harden it self against present Misery with this
Thought, that however it shall not always be thus with me. But on the contrary
here, by reason of this ability of foresight, it comes to pass, that a
wretched Soul in Hell, viewing and turning over all the Leaves of Time to
Eternity, both finds that it shall not outlive that Misery, nor yet can it
find one space or moment of Time of Freedom and Intermission, having for ever
to do with him who is the Living God. And then it dies and dies again, and
sinks into a Gulf of Despair, for the future, as well as it is swallowed up
with present sense of Wrath.

2. Perfect Fear. Which these likewise cause, and keep up within that Soul; and
that continually of all their Misery, that is yet to come. And the nature of
Fear is, to outstrip a Man's Misery; and to take them up before they come, as
Hopes use to do our Comforts: So as by reason thereof, it comes to pass that
the Soul is not only tormented by what it at present feels, but with the
thought of all that is to come; which still further strikes that Soul through
and through. So as this Thought, that it will be with me thus for ever and
ever, makes it completely miserable. Yea hereby, the Soul does come all along
in every instant to endure and be possessed in Fears and Dreadful Apprehensions
of all that Woe, that in Eternity is yet to come, as well as that at present.

THE PUNISHMENT OF SIN in HELL.
God's WRATH the immediate CAUSE.
SECT. III.
Some Uses. Corollaries. Meditations.

A COROLLARY.
IF God in his Wrath be the immediate Inflicter of that Punishment for Sin,
then certainly he is not the Lib. 1. de Praedest. ad Monymum circa medium
Author of Sin. Fulgentius, among other highly-evincing demonstrations of it,
casts in this: Iniquitatis cujus est Vltor, non est Author; God is not the
Author of Sin, whereof he is the Avenger. Which Maxim is founded upon an high
Principle of Reason and Equity. God puts the whole of this matter so far off
from himself, that he lays all, both Sin and Punishment, wholly upon Man; so as
although the Punishment it self be from his own just Wrath, that is provoked to
inflict it, yet even thereof he thus speaks, Do they provoke me to Anger? ('it is
true, they do;) but do they not provoke themselves, to the Confusion of their
own Faces? So as he ascribes his own Wrath that inflicts that Punishment
whollly to themselves, returns even that upon themselves. As if he had said, I
am angry indeed, etc. it is true, yet they are more the provoking Causes of that
Anger than my self. They spite but themselves, when they sin against me. Like
unto which is that Speech also, Romans 2. 4, 5. Thou treasurest up Wrath unto thy
self: [Thou to thy Self] although it be God's Wrath in his Breast that is
treasured up, yet the treasuring of it up is aseribed unto themselves.

God will send his Son Jesus Christ on purpose to clear all such imaginable
Suspicions and Suppositions that Men or Devils can cast upon him, for
condemning of Men, or executing this Punishment himself. Enoch, the seventh
from Adam, prophesied, saying: Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodlily committed,
and of all their hard Speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him.
His work at that Day is to convince, (yea, and to convince is named first) as
well as to execute Judgment. And it is certain, that in order thereto he will
speak all Fairness, Equity, Justice, and Reason, ('twere not Conviction else);
and he will have all his Saints and Angels about him, as Judges and Witnesses.
He will have all the World to hear it; and how equal it is for him to execute
so sore a Vengeance. And as he will convince them of their Deeds to be ungodly
and deserving it, so of their hard Speeches; and that (whatever his Decrees
were,) they themselves were ungodly, and their Deeds ungodly, and ungodlily
committed. Mark but how he does ungodly them. And he will convince them, and
stop their Mouths for ever. Christ sent him in the Parable speechless to Hell,
Mat. 22. 12. And this is one great Service the Man Christ Jesus is to do for
God at the latter day: And if he should not do this satisfyingly, and clear all
these things, he must shut up his Books, and come off the Bench, and proceed no
further, either to Sentence or Execution.

A MEDITATION.
LEt our Meditation upon what has been delivered, be what Moses has prompted
to us; and let us make the same use thereof which he also did.

The 90th Psalm was penned by Moses, (as the Title shows, A Prayer of Moses,
the Man of God,) and it was composed by him in his latter days, after he had
seen in forty years, an whole Generation in a Nation of Men removed out of this
World, and their Carcases fallen in the Wilderness; a Spectacle so sad, as
perhaps not any one Man in the World has seen, or Age afforded, (but at the
Flood) before or since, in so short a compass of time. His Song is a Funeral
Elegy, or Meditation of Death, made upon that whole Generation, verse 3. Thou
turnest Man to Destruction; and say, Return, ye Children of Men. And verses
5, 6. Thou carriest them away, as with a Flood. In the morning they are like
Grass which grows up; in the morning it flourishes and grows up, in the
evening it is cut down, and withers. And God from that time began also to
stint and limit Man's years to that measure which it has held to unto this
day. Verse. 10. The Days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by
reason of Strength they be fourscore years, yet is their Strength Labor and
Sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. Our Souls fly away like Birds
when the Shell is broke; and then Hell follows, (as the Revelation speaks) as
in reality, so in Rev. 6. 8.
Moses's Discourse. And that was it which was the matter of deepest and saddest
thoughts in this Meditation unto him of any other. Verse 11. it follows, Who
knows the Power of thine Anger? Even according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath.
-- Which he utters,

1. By way of Lamentation. He sighing forth a most doleful complaint against
the Security and Stupor he observed in that Generation of Men in his times,
both in those that had already died in their Sins, as well as of that new
Generation that had come up in their room, who still lived in their Sins. O!
says he, Who of them knows the Power of thine Anger? namely, of that Wrath
which follows after Death, and seizes upon Men's Souls for ever; that is, who
considers it, or regards it, till it take hold upon them? He utters it,

2. In a way of Astonishment, out of the apprehension he had of the greatness
of that Wrath: Who has known the Power of thine Anger! that is, who who has
or can take it in according to the greatness of it? Which he endeavors to set
forth (as applying himself to our own apprehensions) in this wise, Even
according to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. Where those words [thy Fear] are taken
objective, and so is all one, and the Fear of thee: And so the meaning is, that
according to whatever proportion our Souls can take in, in fears of thee and of
thine Anger; so great is thy Wrath it self. You have Souls that are able to
comprehend vast Fears and Terrors; they are as extensive in their Fears, as in
their Desires, which are stretched, beyond what this World or the Creatures can
afford them, to an Infinity. The Soul of Man is a dark Cell, which when it
begets Fears once, strange and fearful Apparitions rise up in it, which far
exceed the ordinary proportion of worldly Evils, (which yet also our Fears
usually make greater than they prove to be:) But here, as to that Punishment,
which is the effect of God's own immediate Wrath, let the Soul enlarge it self,
says he, and widen its apprehension to the utmost; fear what you can imagine:
yet still God's Wrath, and the Punishment it inflicts, are not only
proportionable, but infinitely exceeding all you can fear or imagine. Who
knows the Power of thine Anger? [It passes knowledge.]

Now the Use Moses makes of all this Doctrine of Death and Wrath, in the next
following verse 12. is this: So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply
our Hearts to Wisdom. This he spoke to God in behalf of that present
Generation that then survived; and by spreading before them all these
Considerations, thereby also exhorts them to that which is the only true
Wisdom, even to turn unto the Lord, so to escape that Wrath that is to come.
And he, as an holy Man, that knew the Terror of the Lord, does thus persuade
Men: And O let our Souls be persuaded by it. And to this end,

USE.
I Would first persuade you to believe, that there is this Wrath to come. We
knowing the Terror of the Lord; that is, our selves being assured by believing,
that such a Wrath is in the Heart and Breast of God against impenitent Sinners,
as also understanding what and how dreadful that Wrath is, we do persuade Men,
2 Cor. 5. 11. And for Men to apprehend and believe it, is the first most
effectual Engine to persuade them by. God did not, ere he placed these Souls of
ours in our Bodies, first carry them down to Hell, and then up to Heaven, that
so we having a fore-knowledg of either by Sight and Sense, might then be left
to act in this World accordingly: But God has left only the Revelation of both
these unto Faith, in this World, by the Word. -- Heb. 11. 7. It Is said, Noah
being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with Fear, prepared an Ark
to the saving of his House: By the which he condemned the World, and became
Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith.

You know how the Day of this great Wrath to come (the Day of Judgment) is
assimilated by Christ to the Days of Noah, Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39. And that (among
other) in respect of the Security and Unbelief that is and will be before it
comes, in the Hearts of Men about it, (which is Christ's special scope there.)
And the place in the Hebrews cited answerably, reckons that Faith of Noah,
(who being forewarned of the Flood, was moved with Fear, and prepared an Ark to
save himself and his Family,) amongst those other Instances of Saving Faith,
which that Chapter does enumerate, as that which had this Wrath to come
signified thereby in his eye. Showing withal the Foundation of the Condemnation
of that World to lie in this, That though Noah declared this Wrath to come unto
them by his Preaching and Example, (for as he was a Preacher of Righteousness,
so of this Wrath, as Enoch also had been,) yet they believed it not, because it
was unseen; as the words of that 7th Verse are. For these things then happened
in Types of what was to fall out concerning this great Wrath to come; that
Destruction of the old World being but the shadow of this, as expressly it is
interpreted to be, 1 Pet. 3. 20. The Spirits in Prison, which sometimes were
disobedient, when once the Long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the Ark was a preparing. The like Figure whereunto is Baptism, which now
also saves us. If the Ark was of Salvation, then the Flood of Damnation; and
that, then, as the word [also] now evidently shows. This Wrath, it is a thing
to come, as that of the Flood then was to them, styled therefore the Wrath to
come; and so it is a thing not seen, and so is reckoned amongst the Objects of
Faith.

Men indeed have some lesser stitches in Conscience aforehand, both from it
and about it, but little do they imagine that these will or should ever become
the matter of such torturing Aches, as they rise up to in the end: Men do as
little imagine this of these fore-running Warnings, or secret Gripings and
Twitches, as the Old World did then, that the usual Clouds of Heaven that
caused Storms, would have ever swelled to the drowning of the World. Nor indeed
does this fall out to Men's Souls, until the Curse or Wrath of God enters, like
Oil into their Bones, as the Psalmist speaks of Judas, Psalm. 109. 18.

For this Wrath is in the mean time a thing hidden in the Breast and Bosom of
the Almighty, and is therefore termed, a Treasure of Wrath: A Treasure, because
hid, so Treasures use to be; (they are termed hidden Treasures, Prove. 2. 4. and
elsewhere.) And for the same reason the coming of it upon Men is called the
Revelation of the righteous Judgment of Luke 19. 42.
God: As the things belonging to Men's Peace, so their Destruction, are hidden
from their Eyes. Though Damnation slumbers not, 2 Pet. 2. 3. but is in its
March, and proceeds in its approaches toward them, every hour nearer and
nearer; yet Men slumber in respect of the belief thereof, and not so much as
dream of it in their Slumber, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3, 6, 9. The Apostle's complaint
there, is the same in effect with that of Moses, Who knows the Power of thine
Anger, so as to apply his Heart to Wisdom?

The Baptist, who began the publishing of the Gospel, he began it with
forewarning Men of this Wrath, and styled it, the Wrath to come: And Christ,
whose office was to preach that Gospel, seconds him therein, and terms it
Hellfire, etc. Now observe, how he speaks to the Pharisees about it: O ye
Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come! Mat.
3. 7. It Is Vox admirantis; as if he had said, It Is strange, that the Preaching
of Wrath to come should any way startle yours so hardened Hearts, as to see you
here attending at my Sermons; and that the Consideration thereof should any way
arrest, or make any dint upon your Souls. The reason of his Wonder was, because
indeed Men believe it not, or very slightly. Who has demonstrated it unto you?
as his word is. And Christ uses the very same word about this matter, Luke 12.
5. I will forewarn you, (or demonstrate to you) whom you shall fear, even him
that can destroy in Hell. All this still tends to show, how hidden it is from
the most of Men. The very same Unbelief is more darkly, and in other terms,
expressed in the Old Testament: Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they would consider [their
latter end!] And, Eccles. 11. 8, 9. Remember the Days of Darkness, for they are
many: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment.

Now to help you a little in the belief of this:

Besides what the Scriptures speak hereof:

1. Consult thine own Heart. Thou have a busy Principle within thee,
Conscience, that like a Spy sent in from an adverse Party into another
Quarters, observes and takes notice of all that passes; not thy Actions or
Speeches only, but what is done in thy Privy-Chamber, or Closet of thy Soul;
and not only so, but thou may hear the noise of his Pen still a running, and
punctually writing that which it observes; and there is not a Motion, a Lust,
a Desire, a Purpose, an End, a flying Thought, but it diligently does set down,
and can give thee the Sense thereof; and thou can not stop the Course hereof.
And what is the meaning of all this? but that thy Judgment is continually a
preparing, thine Examination a taking all thy Life long. For, where there is a
Register, a Clerk of the Assize thus busy at work, there is a Judge, whose
Officer he is. Be wary therefore what thou do, Man! Thou art surprised and
undone, if thou heedest not; for all this is in order unto Judgment. And as
Letters written with Onion or Limon Juice, appear not at the present, so may
not the Impresses of these sad Lines against thee, yet bring but thy Soul to
this Fire we have been speaking of, and every Character, Tittle, yea, Accent,
or Aggravation of Sin, will be made visible and legible: And hence it is the
Books are said to be opened, Rev. 20.

2. Again, do you not hear daily the Noise of Cannon-shot from Heaven let off,
and the Bullets fly about your ears, and see them strike this Man and that Man
in your view? It is the Apostle's Conviction to the Gentiles, Romans 1. 18. That
therefore there is a Treasury of Wrath to come, which he speaks of, chap. 2. 4.
because at present even in this World, The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, that withhold the Truth in
Unrighteousness. The meaning whereof is, There is no sort or kind of
Unrighteousness or Ungodliness, but in the Instance or Example of some Man or
other, God has by some manifest Judgment shown his Wrath against it, in the
view and observation of the very Heathens themselves, of and to whom it is he
speaks this. There was never a Nation of the Heathens, but the Stories of it
would have afforded a Theater of God's Judgments against all sorts of Evils in
in one Person or other, singled out by Decimation (as it were) in this World,
to show thereby that there was an hidden Wrath to come in the other World,
which would fall upon all the rest, who yet escaped at present. Those few and
scattered Instances manifested a Treasury, a Magazine of Wrath in Heaven; his
Phrase is, from Heaven, that is, in and from God: which the Heathens also were
sensible of, witness their Sacrifices of Atonement directed unto Heaven. And
this to be the Apostle's Scope is clearly seen, in that he prosecutes this in
the following Chap. 2. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man,
whosoever thou art, that judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do the same things. But we are
sure that the Judgment of God is according to Truth against them which commit
such things. And think thou this, O Man, that judge them which do such
things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Or
despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering,
not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? But after thy
hardness, and impenitent Heart, [treasurest up unto thy self Wrath against the
Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. And unto this
account you may put the enumeration of those Instances of Judgment made by the
other Apostles, as those upon the Angels that fell, and on the Old World, on
Sodom and Gomorrah, Corah, etc. whereof though some were outward and temporal
Punishments, yet because they were Evidences of that Wrath to come upon like
impenitent Sinners, both these Apostles do to that purpose allege them, and
make use thereof to beget this Belief in us. For so expressly the one begins his
Discourse thereof: 2 Pet. 2. 3, 4, 5. Whose Judgment now of a long time
lingreth not, and their Damnation slumbreth not. For if God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains
of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment; and spared not the Old World, but
saved Noah, the eighth Person, a Preacher of Righteousness, bringing in the
Flood upon the World of the Ungodly: And turned the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha into Ashes, condemned them with an Overthrow, making them an Ensample
unto those that after should live ungodly. Then the other Apostle adds: Jude v.
7. They suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. The Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the Unjust unto the Day of
Judgment, to be punished. Consider also what his Wrath has been to whole
Nations; and how he says, he will one day turn all the Nations into Hell that
forget God, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 9. 7. He has Prisons large enough,
and Chains strong enough, to hold them all. When the Jews saw one hundred and
eighty thousand of the Assyrians Host killed in a night, before the very Walls
of Jerusalem, Fearfulness surprised the Hypocrites; their Hearts melted with
Terror to think what the Wrath of God must be for ever: Isa. 33. 14, etc.

USE.
Then learn to adore and fear the Greatness of our God, to the end to turn to
him.

Where he shows Favor, his Favor is Life, Psalm. 30. 5. yea, his
Loving Kindness is better than Life, Psalm. 63. 3. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? There needs no other there.

On the contrary, if he be provoked, there needs no other Judge or Avenger but
himself. I may say, The Weapons of his Warfare within himself, are mighty to
revenge all Disobedience. This great General needs not borrow, nor call in the
Aid of his Creatures, (though in respect of their being his Militia, he is
styled the Lord of Hosts,) to make War, and destroy. That very Face of his
gives Life, and strikes dead and kills. In thy Presence is Fullness of Joy,
Psalm. 16. ult. And from his Presence is Destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. O hide us,
say they, Rev. 6. 16. from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from
the Wrath of the Lamb. They point to the Fountain of their Anguish, and speak
what above all was it they dreaded. It is greatly observable, what and how God
talks to Job, to this very purpose: Says God to Job, chap. 40. Will thou
contend with me? So verse 2. he begins to dare him: Come, says he, let this be
among other one Trial of thy Power, (who had been a Prince, etc.) in comparison
of mine: Take upon thee, (as I mean to do) and be Judge of all the World: Put on
thy Judges Robes, and thy biggest Looks: Thus verse 10. Deck thy self with
Majesty and Excellency, and array thy self with Glory and Beauty. And
particularly try; try what thou can do or effect, when thou art most angry,
by thy mere Looks: Cast abroad the Rage of thy Wrath, v. 11. Throw Sparkles of
thy most fiery Indignation from thine Eyes. -- Can thou look a Man dead, and
cover a Man's Face for ever with Confusion? Look on every one that is proud,
and bring him low: So verse. 12. Hide them in the Dust together, be they never
so many; and bind their Faces in secret: that is, cover them with Confusion of
Face, with a Look or Rebuke of thy Face; make them run into Holes, or seek
Mountains to cover them, to avoid the Terror of thy Looks. Now all this I can
do (says God) with a mere Look, whenever I please: And I can as easily save
also, as I can thus destroy, (which thou can not do thine own Soul) as the
next Verse insinuates, Then will I confess thine own hand can save thee. You
see he resolves saving and destroying into the same Power of his, and makes
the same estimate of either; which the Apostle also does, chap. 4. 12. There is
one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy.

My Exhortation therefore in fine is, Let us not fear Creatures, but fear Him,
and make him your dread: and learn to know what a God ye walk before every day,
and have for ever to do withal, Christ that came out of his Bosom knowing him,
does (Luke 12. 4. and 5. compared with Mat. 10. 26. and 28.) upon knowledge of
this God make this same Exhortation; I say to you, (says he) and I will
forewarn you, (he says it twice, and it is as if he had said, Take it from me
that know him) Fear him that is able to destroy Body and Soul. The Apostle
succenturiates, We know him that has said, Vengeance is mine: so here, Heb.
10. And again, We knowing the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. which they
know, by an estimate taken from his Goodness, that his Wrath must be
answerable. And Moses also, that had seen his Back-parts, and his Glory; He
cries out, Who knows the power of thine Anger? Hypocrites and carnal Professors
(as those were whom God professedly takes to task Psalm. 50.) think to play with
the great God, and deal with him any how, (as we say) as with a Man that is
their Fellow. They know him not. Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou done, and
I kept silence, and thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self:
And what things they had done and were guilty of (see if thou have not been
guilty of the same or like) the 18, 19, and 20 verses show; When thou saw a
Thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with Adulterers.
Thou give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit. Thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. And God
was silent or long-suffering. (The like you have Isa. 57. 11, 12. Of whom have
thou been afraid, that thou have lied, and have not remembered me, nor laid it
to thy Heart? Have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fear me not,
etc.) But mark what is the issue of all this; in Psalm. 50. 21. it follows, But
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. They had never felt the
smart of his Anger in all their Lives, and little thought that the Lion was in
him: but it follows, Consider this ye that forget God, lest I [tear] you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver. Oh take heed and turn to him, or on the
sudden he will start up like a mighty Lion, and tear your Souls in pieces, as a
Giant might do Cobwebs, and prey upon the Blood of your very Souls, and break
the Bones thereof as a Lion could of the most silly Creature. Add to this,

MEDITATION.
Consider, What it is to die, and what the State and Condition of the other
World is. It is to have to do with God immediately, either in Wrath or Love;
and from his own hands, as well as from the immediate Sentence of his Mouth, to
receive thy Weal or Woe. -- That we come naked into this World, and go as naked
out of it, was Job's Meditation first; after that David's, Psalm. 49. 15. We
shall carry nothing away, that is, of what belongs to this World; then after
him Solomon the Son, Eccles. 5. 15. As he came forth of his Mothers Womb
(speaking of Man) naked shall he return, to go as he came, and shall take
nothing of his Labor, which he may carry away in his Hand. The Effect of which
divine Meditation comes to this, To put secure and careless Man upon the
consideration of his immortal Souls Condition, which first comes into this
World naked (as well as his Body:) And poor thing! the meaning of its first cry
(if the Soul it self could then speak out its mind) is, I am an empty thing,
and have brought nothing with me; who will show me any good? But after its
being grown up, it begins to find a World richly furnished with all things to
enjoy, as the Apostle's Phrase is, 1 Timothy 6. 17. But yet again when he goes out
of this World, he is then turned out of House and Home, as perfectly naked as
he came into it: and as Rev. 18. 14. The Fruits that thy Soul lusted after, and
all things which are dainty and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou shall
find them no more at all. Death is therefore compared unto the breaking or
failing of a Merchant or Tradesman proving Bankrupt, Luke 16. 9. That when ye
fail, etc. says Christ; of which I have elsewhere spoken.

Now if this be thy case as to this and that other World, think with thy self
what thine eternal Soul must then betake it self unto, and also unto whom in
that other World. My Doctrinal part has informed you that it is God himself,
God immediately, -- Eccl. 12. 7. The Spirit returns unto him that gave it. To
explain which, There was that evident difference put in the making man's Soul
at first from that of his Body, That God made the Body out of the Earth, but
the Soul was breathed in by God; and therefore not out of any preexistent
matter, as the Souls and Forms of all other living things are. And upon this
dissolution or separation of each from other, it is that Solomon says, Then
shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was: and the Soul to God that gave it;
that is to say, the same common Law befalls either in their kind, that to other
things in their kind; they are reduced unto their first Principles. And so look
as the Body is materially resolved into the Earth, which was the first matter
of it; so according to some kind of Analogy thereunto, (and so far as the Soul
is capable of a like return unto God,) the Soul returns to God that gave it; as
having been the immediate Original of it, not materially, as a Spark is out of
the Fire, but as the immediate Efficient. It came from God by way of Gift, God
gave it; that is, freely and voluntarily produced it by a sole, single, free
Act of his Will and Power, whereby he created it out of nothing; and so in the
whole of it, it was an entire and mere Gift of his. And therefore in the
beginning of his Exhortation, verse 1 of this Chap. he had aforehand laid this
as a Foundation for it, Remember thy Creator, or Creators, and is so styled,
because he is in a more special manner thy Creator, than of our Bodies, or of
other Creatures; and that because himself immediately gave thy Soul, in such a
manner as he produced not our Bodies, nor material Substances. -- And hence it
is it returns to him, as the immediate Judge or Arbiter of its eternal
Condition. It returns to Elohim; which, as A Lapide and Ferdinandus Ad Deum qui
dedit] Tanquam ad suum uti Factorem sic and Judicem; (hunc enim significat Heb.
Elohim:) ut illi actionum suarum per omnem vitam exercitarum rationem reddat. A
Lapide, in Eccles. 12. 7. In Hebraeo ponitur nomen Elohim, Judex, Inspector,
Testis; unde Chald. vertit [ut stet in Judicio ante Dominum.] Ferdinandus in
verba.
have observed in their Comments, signifies also a Judge as well as a Creator,
and so was chosen out here, as a word more fitly serving that his scope, than
any other Name of God's. Now then think what it is to die; it is to return to
God, so as eternally and immediately to have to do with him.

And then withal consider the different Dispensations of this Great God toward
you in this World, and that next. In this World Men's Souls having
Creature Comforts, God communicates himself unto them thereby; and by reason of
his Patience and Long-suffering to them added hereto, they hear not of, nor
from him immediately; the most of Men do not otherwise than in these mediate
ways. I was altogether silent, says God, Psalm. 50. He answers them neither good
nor bad. And thus tho he is not far off from any of us, but Men live and move
in him, in respect of his Power to uphold them, as Acts 17. 28. or, as verse
25. He gives Life and Breath unto all things; (which Clause does interpret
that other, v. 28.) Yet as to converse with, or intimate knowledge of him, he is
the unknown God, v. 23. and Men live without God (in that respect) in this
World, as Ephesians. 2. 12.

But although Men thus live without God here, they shall not live (I might say
[not die] rather, for it is a Death,) without God in the World to come. I
beseech you think with your selves, how that your Converse with this Great God
in this World is (I express it by that of Men with a Lion, comparatively,) but
as through a Grate, (as that of the Spouse's with him is said to be but through
a Lettice, Cant. 2. 9.) And he keeps to the Laws of his ordinary Providence: he
breaks not forth immediately, but lies still and quiet; and through his patience
suffers and permits Men to walk by him, and do all their Hearts desire,
and lets them alone. But, Brethren, when you come to die; it is as if one were
turned in unto that Lion with the Grate open; and those Repagula of his
Patience removed, your poor Souls, your naked Souls, are upon him immediately,
and must (in a clean contrary way to what the Saints do) dwell with him for
ever. -- The Consideration of this struck dread and horror into the Hearts of
the Sinners of Sion, (as it may well do in any Soul that has not Communion
with God.) Isa. 33. 14. The Sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites; [who among us shall dwell] with the devouring Fire?
Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? (I opened that place
before, and showed that this devouring Fire was God himself:) These speak one to
another as Men affrighted use to do, and as struck on the sudden with
apprehensions of the greatness of that God, whom their Consciences (now
awakened) told them they had to do withal for ever. And they look trembling one
on the other, and the common cry and voice among them thereupon is, Whose
Portion will this prove to be? For it will be the Portion of some: or, Who of
us, or all Creatures, is able to bear it or endure it? And upon this Conference
(as I may term it) and inquisition among themselves, God by the Prophet steps
out and answers them, but in a clean contrary way, and to their further
confusion, and tells them: There are those that shall dwell with me thus
immediately, unto whom I will be Glory and Happiness, who shall walk in the
comfort of this Fire which you thus dread; and who (like the three Children in
that fiery Furnace) shall be refreshed therein. So it follows, He that walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly, he shall dwell on high. And therefore it
further follows, 1. as a Promise to the upright and pure in Heart, ver. 17.
Thine Eyes shall see the King in his Glory. And 2. with a further threatening to
the Hypocrites, Thine Heart, who art an Hypocrite, shall meditate Terror, ver.
18.

Now then again, seeing you have thus to do with the great God alone for ever,
let every one of us prepare to meet our God. Amos 4.
This necessarily puts you upon seeking of him here in this World, and to seek
that Face and favor of his, in which alone is Life. You must therefore also
give up your Souls unto him here, to live in him, as in your chiefest Good, and
not in your Lusts; and to live to him, as your highest End and constant
Interest; and as whose Glory should act and steer you in all your ways; and not
unto your selves. And therefore you, that have neglected this great God, or
served him but in Formality and Hypocrisy, (which in Scripture has the
denomination of those that forget God) who never knew what it is to have
intimate Communion and Fellowship with him through Faith in Prayer and other
Converses, joined with hearty Love unto him, and to the Interest of his Glory:
Think, O think with your selves, when you come to die, that you must go to him,
and be with him for ever, in that sense I have given. Think with thy self thus:
My Soul will be turned naked out of this World, and there is nothing, no not a
Rag of any of the Comforts I pursue after here, which shall be carried with it
from hence; but it is the great God I must be turned naked unto, and appear
before; and if my Soul be found naked of his Image too, (which to have renewed
in me was the only Errand he sent my Soul for into this World) and if I bring
not that along with me, as my current Token, Ticket, and Pass into the other
World, there will not be a dewlling place of Bliss for me, to receive me into;
not such an one as the Apostle speaks of for the Comfort of the Saints, 2 Cor.
5. 1, 3. We know that if our earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a
Building of God; if so be we shall not be found naked, v. 3. that is, devoid of
his Image, as also of Christ's Righteousness. But instead thereof this great
God will be unto me as a Furnace, and I must dwell with those everlasting
Burnings spoken of, even for ever.

And then think with thy self again: What communion or correspondency has my
Soul kept and held with God? what acquaintance has it had with him? For
otherwise it will be strange you should commend your Souls into his hands, (as
Christ did, and the Saints use to do when they die) and that with a desire and
intention to live that Eternity with him which is to come, and yet not to have
lived at all with him or to him here. How do thou think thou can look him
in the face at thy first appearance before him? If they should take thy Soul
away from thee Luke 12. 20
this Night, as Christ's speech is, how can thou think God should then at
first look on thee, much less take thee into eternal, immediate Bosom-communion
with himself for ever? I pray, upon what acquaintance? And so may God also say
unto thee. O therefore remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; learn to
know and fear him; Acquaint thy self with him, and be at Peace: Receive Job 22.
21, 22.
the Law, I pray thee, from his Mouth, etc.

Again, think with thy self, What do I pursuing after the things of this Life
with my dearest affections, and utmost intentions? Alas! I am to live for ever
with God, and not with these. The Apostle sets forth a Manifesto upon it, 1 Timothy 6. 7. We brought nothing into this World, and it is certain (or manifest,
says he, (...),) we carry nothing out: and thereby provokes them to pursue with
might and main after Godliness, which alone is great Gain, and only current
Money in the other World. And this is the manifest coherence of those two
Sayings, following immediately one the other in those two verses, v. 6, 7. But
Godliness with Contentment is great Gain. For (says he) we brought nothing into
this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out: the latter being a
Motive to the former. And therefore also upon the same ground it follows, Trust
in the living God, and not in Riches, (so neither in Learning, Wisdom, Credit,
etc.) v. 17. For why? It is the living God whom you are to have to do withal
for ever. Although he has for the present given you, and provided all things in
this World richly to enjoy, (as it follows there) yet he has reserved himself
for you to enjoy in the other World. And it is the [living God] in my Text
likewise, Heb. 10.
into whose hands you fall as of a Judge and Avenger, if you fall short of
Godliness. And it is this living God you must be made happy in and by for ever.

The great Theme and Subject of Ecclesiastes, you know, is, that All is Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit. Now you may observe, how Solomon upon this very ground
and account I have now been pressing, does set a fresh stamp upon, and his last
Seal unto that Truth, that all is vain, Eccl. 12. 8. even from this ground,
That a Man's Spirit returns unto God that gave it, v. 7. Read and observe the
coherence of those two Verses, v. 7, 8. Then shall the Dust return unto the
Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it. Vanity of
Vanities, (says the Preacher) all is Vanity. He had in the beginning of this
Book pronounced them Vanities, chap. 1. Vanity of Vanities, etc. And he had all
along proved them vain at the best, as they are enjoyed in this World, unto
those who enjoy them most abundantly, most freely. But now when in the
conclusion he had brought Man himself, that is, the enjoyer of them, and
discoursed him into his Grave, laid him in the dust, and said thereupon that
his Soul must then immediately go to God, then he cries out anew, (having
reserved it for the conclusion of all, and that also upon an account greater
than all the former:) [Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher, all is Vanity:]
and thereupon infers, as the close, Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, v. 13. For God shall bring every
Work unto Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil. You may observe how the Apostle in a parallel manner also speaks, It
is appointed for all Men to die, and after this the Judgment, Heb. 9. ult. just
as Solomon here.

USE.
Let me next deal strictim, or at downright blows with you. I first serve every
Soul here with an Arrest, That he was once a Child of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.
Children of Wrath by Nature as well as others; let every Man clear himself of
it unto God as he can; all were born such, and continue such until now, 1 John
2. 9. if they have not become otherwise, by an escape made (from the sense of
this danger) which is termed by the Baptist a flying from the Wrath to come,
Mat. 3. 7. an escaping the Damnation of Hell, by Christ, Mat. 23. 33. As the
Murderer did when he ran to the City of Refuge from the attach of the Avenger
of Blood, (as in Heb. 6. 18. the allusion is) a flying for refuge unto Christ.
Which escape is made by a solid, and serious, and over-powring apprehension of
that estate to be such, as that a Man continuing therein, he apprehends he is
every moment obnoxious to this Wrath, which drives him unto Christ as a
Deliverer from that Wrath, joined with a giving a Man's self up to him: Both
which, through the Power of the Holy Ghost accompanying them, do work a change
of Heart and Life in him, an actual turning of the Soul unto God from all Sin
to Godliness. And until a Man be thus ingrafted into Christ, and thereby made a
new Creature in him, All this Wrath, as Christ says John 3. ult. remains or
abides upon him. Which word [remains] imports (as was said) his condition to
have been originally, and in it self, and from the beginning, and
uninterruptedly under Wrath; until saving Faith, which is accompanied with
Regeneration and true Repentance, puts the difference. So as there needs no
more to be enquired of such a Man, but what have you to say for the alteration
of your Estate? without which it is one and the same that it was at the first;
he continues under Condemnation until now: Wrath remains. As we use to say, An
Outlawry, a Sentence of Death remains upon a Man till pardoned. He says not
only that the Wrath of God is coming upon such a Man, (as the Apostle's Phrase
is) but it abides, etc. the Apostle indeed says, it comes, as in respect to the
execution John 8.
of it; but Christ says, it abides on a Man, in respect of a Man's being bound
over unto it, until the Son does make him free.

Then again think with your selves, how that this Wrath of God is declared to
be against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of any kind, continued in a way
of Disobedience. And be thy Sins small or great, yet whilst thou art in that
Estate, this Wrath is in their proportion due unto all that ungodliness and
unrighteousness in thee, and remains upon thee for them. First, against all
ungodliness, though it be but in deadness, averseness unto, and turning aside
from God unto the Creature: whereupon follow Neglects, Contempts of him,
Enmities to him, and thence Omission of Duties toward him, and not glorifying
him as God, as there ver. 21. And secondly, all unrighteousness unrepented of
and continued in; the enumeration of the Particulars of which you may have in
the same Chapter, verse. 29, 30. being filled with all Unrighteousness,
Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full of Envy, Murder,
Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, Dispiteful,
Proud, Boasters, Inventors of evil Things, Disobedient to Parents, etc. And to
strike thy Heart yet more, think what Sins the Apostle more especially singleth
out, as those for which he specially indigitates that the Wrath of God comes
upon the Children of Disobedience, Col. 3. 5, 6. Even Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry:
For which things sake the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of
Disobedience; that is, that live in them in a way of Rebellion and Disobedience
unto God.

And consider, they are not Heathens only, whom the Wrath of God is poured
forth upon; though so, Psalm. 79. 6. Pour out thy Wrath upon the Heathen that
have not known thee; and Psalm. 9. 17. All the Nations that forget God shall be
turned into Hell: But it is also those that live under and obey not the Gospel;
and those especially. In 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Subjects of this Wrath are
reduced to these two, those that know not God, they were these Heathens; and
those that obey not the Gospel, that is, who professing it, and living under
the means of it, even the Children of the Kingdom, (as they are called Mat. 8.
12. and Mat. 13. 41.) there shall be gathered out of the Kingdom (that is, the
visible Professors of Religion in the strictness of it) all things (that is,
Persons) that do offend, and do Iniquity, or are workers of it. Those first and
especially, that have given scandal by doing Iniquity openly, and repented not,
and then those that secretly [do Iniquity;] that are found workers of it in any
kind, they shall be gathered (says Christ) and cast them into a Furnace of
Fire; and Hypocrites especially, they are made the measure and standard of all
other that are cast into it, both by Christ and the Prophet Isaiah.

But not only these, but in Mat. 12. 22. He that but wants the
Wedding Garment; not the positive doers of Iniquity only, but that want true
Grace, Sincerity of Faith, and Love unto Jesus Christ; the wanting all those
Graces, Col. 3. 12. Gal. 6. 15. which as a Garment he should have put on (as in
those places) that came to such a Wedding, the Wedding of so great a Person.
And when there, he says to such an one, Friend; it is an upbraiding Speech,
such an one as Christ used to Judas, Matthew. 26. 50. because he had professed
himself to be a Friend, but is discovered to be a false and feigned one; How
come thou hither? here is no room for thee. And though Christ is said to spy
out but one such among that Company, yet it is the case of many: For, that the
conclusion of that Parable, verse. 14. imports, Many are called, few are
chosen: and so that one Person is professedly made but the Instance or Example
of what Christ will do with all others that are such; who will prove many. And
it is said that he was speechless, or strangled as with an Halter (as the
Original Word signifies) through obstupefaction of Spirit. Now of this Man, and
all other such, Christ the King says, ver. 13. Bind him Hand and Foot, (that
he may not be able to help himself or deliver himself) and cast him into outer
Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. And the true reason is,
because if Men's Estates be found unrenewed or unregenerate, (as this Man's was
through want of true Grace) then the Sins of their whole Lives do abide upon
their score, and are charged upon them. And every such an one, even the
finest-spun Hypocrite, has Sins enough (if he had no other) in those very
deficiencies and fallings short of true and spiritual Grace, which he wholly
wants. And the highest and most sublimated work of the Spirit, which a Man
remaining unregenerate is any way capable of, through heavenly enlightnings,
and tastings of the Powers of the World to come, stirring up but self only, and
the Affections thereof toward spiritual things, is capable of being
discovered, not only that it is a deficient work, and short of true Holiness at
that day: but also when all the inward Obliquities, Motives, Ends, Purposes,
Affections, that are in such Men's Hearts; that were the influencers and guides
of their Ways and Actions, are discovered, it will be found that they all are
matter of Wrath, as truly as their other Sins: And their Persons will be proved
to have continued under the Wrath of God abiding on them, as well as grosser
Sinners. And that there will be the discovery of these things in such Men, is
the genuine scope of that Passage, Heb. 4. 13, 14. The Word of God (understand
it whether of Christ, or the Word of Christ) is quick and powerful, and sharper
than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and
Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and
Intents of the Heart: Neither is there any Creature (that is, of the Heart of
Man) that is not manifest in his Sight, with whom we have to do. For unto such
Professors among the Jews, as had been enlightened, etc. as chap. 6. of whom you
also read up and down in that Epistle; and yet still remained in real and
spiritual unbelief, as verse. 11. of this very Chapter compared with Jude verse.
5. is this Passage particularly directed, and of them intended.

Consider moreover, that the longer thou go on in this Estate, or in thy
Sin, the more of Wrath thou treasurest up unto thy self, as Romans 2. Every
Moment Sins do add unto that heap. And all thy Sins are barrel'd up in thy
Conscience, as Gunpowder fully dry; and an answerable Proportion and Measure
of Wrath is laid up in God's Heart; and when these meet, and that it comes to
pass that the Fire of God's Wrath breaks forth out of his Heart into thine,
then thy Soul is blown up in an instant, and a Fire kindled that burns for ever
in Hell.

And meditate also how frail thy Life is, how thin and slight a Skreen of Flesh
there is betwixt all this Wrath and thy bare Soul; which if worn, or any way
sliced through, the Soul runs out. Nay, that venomous Spider, thy Soul, dwells
but in a Cobweb, which if broken, or any violence be done it, it instantly
flies away into the other World. -- Job, in several places, delights to compare
our Lives and Condition in this World unto a Candle or Lamp: Now let the Candle
be let alone to burn it self out fairly to its full length, yet some last but a
very little while, and those of the greatest size cannot long. Oh, but how many
intervening Casualties are there, that before do put it out? The Candle of the
Wicked shall be put out, and Destruction comes upon them, Job 21. 17. that is,
ab extrinseco, from without. How many Thieves in the Candle, or fatal Accidents
do Men meet with, that unawares consume it? Immoderate Sorrows and Cares swale
it; Intemperance, like too much Oil poured thereon to feed it, choaketh and
extinguisheth it; Too much Intention of Mind turns the Flame downwards upon it
self, and so it evaporates. Often another Man's Breath in seasons of Malignity
(which fall out more or less every year) blows and puffs it out. A Friends
Breath comes in with an infectious Vapor, and throws his Soul out who visits
him: Yea, an unskilful or else a mistaking hand of a Physician, who undertakes
to snuff and brighten it; unwarily clean snuffs the Candle out. -- Yea, Men
strong and vigorous go to the Grave in a moment, as in the same 21. chapter of
Job, ver. 13. Yea, as Psalm. 55. 15. they go quick to Hell: it is an allusion to
Corah, Dathan, etc. Numb. 16. 30, 33. of whom it is said twice, They went alive
to Hell. Many die so suddenly, that they are in Hell in a trice, and as it were
ere quite dead. And truly the most of Men live in this World like silly Sheep
in a Pasture, as David's Similitude is Psalm. 4. 9. 14. They are See Ainsw.
put into Hell like Sheep, (so some:) It notes out their Security in respect of
that slaughter which comes upon them. This Man dies, then that, then another,
and they regard it not; even as the Sheep do not, when the Butcher (as his
Pleasure is) takes out first one, then another, and carries them to the
Shambles, whilst the rest feed on; and know not that themselves are a fatting
to the day of Slaughter also.

Let us consider also, what millions of Transgressions are we guilty of in one
Day? Oh then what in thy whole Life? And what a reckoning will the Sins of thy
whole Life come to, when every Commandment shall bring in their Bills? and that
thou have to do with a God, who, 1. has all thy Sins before him, Isa. 65. 6.
Behold, it is written before me, but I will recompense, etc. 2. That will never
forget any one of them, Amos 8. 7. The Lord has sworn, Surely I will never
forget any of their Works. 3. With a God who will bate thee nothing, Every
Transgression shall receive a just recompense of reward: He spared not his own
Son. Romans 8. and will not thee, unless by regeneration thou have a Portion in
his Son. Think with thy self what a case thou art in, if thou must answer
Justice for all and every one of these.

DAVID's Meditation, Psalm. XLIX.
The most of these things hitherto by way of Use spoken by me, are no other
than what David himself spends one whole Psalm together upon; it is Psalm. 49.
and styles it The Meditation of his Heart, verse. 3. which caused me to entitle
that former about what it is to dye, a Meditation rather than an Use; as I had
done that of Moses also, Psalm. 90. This of David's I shall here add, to set the
deeper seal and weight upon all that has been treated.

He begins the Psalm, and shows the moment of these matters, though in view but
ordinary, with as solemn a Preface and Proclamation, calling upon attention and
heed hereto, as any where we find in Scriptures. 1. In the first verse he
summons all the World into a Ring about him, Hear ye this all the People; give
Ear all the Inhabitants of the World. And 2. particulariseth forth his Auditors
into all sorts of Conditions, verse. 2. Both low and high, rich and poor
together. For why? what he was to utter to them, did as much concern the one as
it did the other, and behoved them all alike to look to; as being that which
especially concerned them in respect unto their Being in the other World, how
different soever their Condition was in this. And 3. he cries up the matter it
self, as the greatest Wisdom, verse. 3. and a deep mysterious Parable and dark
saying, verse. 4. My Mouth shall speak of Wisdom, and the Meditation of my Heart
shall be of Understanding: I will incline mine Ear unto a Parable, I will open
my dark saying upon the Harp. -- Now what should this matter be! It was to
declare two things, which take up that whole Psalm.

The first, how in the style of a Be it known to all Men, (for we have seen he
publishes it to all) he aloud declares, I for my part am not afraid to die,
and go into that other World. Which confidence of his he greatens by this
Supposition superadded: That if, when he should come to die, all the Sins of
his whole Life were presented before his view, yet notwithstanding he should not
be afraid: thus ver. 5. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the
Iniquities of my heels shall compass me about? A strange confidence! which yet
he found reason for from God: For he challenges all or any thing to bring in
reason to the contrary; let them all say, [Wherefore should I fear?] And yet
his other Psalms, as well as his Story, tell us what an infinite number of Sins
were upon his score, and how sensible he was thereof. -- And that this bold
Speech of his relates specially to the day of Death, or days wherein he might
have cause to fear it, (though I will exclude no other times of Trouble, that
were yet to come before, in this Life, to be intended by him; which
Interpreters wholly carry it unto) that this is his scope, I shall make appeal
to the whole drift of what follows throughout the Psalm: which concerns the
state of wicked Men in their Death, (which I shall by and by show:) But
specially I argue it from the reference and correspondency this Speech has
with and to verse. 15. God will redeem my Soul from the Power of the Grave, for
he shall receive me. Selah. There you have the reason or ground of this his
Confidence, which he had at first uttered in ver. 5. perfectly expressed, as
that which he opposed unto all Therefore's or Wherefore's to the contrary; yea,
though they should be fetched from his very Sins, that might (if any thing)
make him afraid. But there in that resolve of his, ver. 15. he centers, and
landeth this which he had so confidently uttered in ver. 5. And all the rest of
his discourse that comes between, is apparently about the opposite condition of
wicked Men; As that they must die, and what their estate is in and after Death;
all which was but to illustrate this Confidence of his.

He plainly in this ver. 5. puts himself into the supposition, as if he were
then to die, and as if Death (the King of terrors, Job 18. 19.) were setting
down his siege about him, and that all the Iniquities of his heels or ways,
(which are Deaths strongest Forces, The Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength
of Sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 5, 6.) were as an Army formed up, encompassing
him round, (which out of Psalm. 40. 12. I have showed to have been his case, and
the very Metaphor he there also uses.) But now David was so steeled, as though
he placed himself (thus aforehand) in the full view and face of all these,
single and alone in the midst of them; he yet outdares them all, as the Apostle
did Romans 8. ult. strengthened with this, for the Lord will receive my Soul;
which Phrase of Speech to be the same that a dying Saint uses, you all know.
-- And this part of his Speech, v. 5. might have come in as comfortable an Use
as any other, of that former Doctrine, [the innumerable number of Sins;] but
that this other part that now follows does properly belong unto what has been
now last insisted on; and so I rather placed both here.

The second thing is, The opposite state of wicked Men in their Lives, and in
relation to their dying, and also at and after Death; by which he both
illustrates and expounds his meaning in ver. 5. to be to utter his own blessed
condition at his Death, v. 15. and to that purpose it is, he further dilates
upon the death of wicked Men in the rest of the Psalm: And which is indeed a
kind of Summary of what in the former Meditation I have pressed.

During their Lives, they trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their Riches, v. 6. and yet they see (as the word is, v. 10.) that
they cannot redeem their own or others precious Souls from bodily Death, or
obtain of God by a Ransom, that they should live for ever. For he sees the wise
Man die like as the Fool, and so leave their Wealth to others: Thus in v. 7, 8,
9, 10. That which therefore (miserable Wretches) they relieve themselves with
against this, is, Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for
ever, and their Dwelling-places to all Generations: They call their Lands after
their own Names, and their Posterity approve their Sayings, v. 13. Tho when he
dies, he shall carry nothing away, his Glory shall not descend after him, etc.
And whither goes he when he dies? His Soul (so it is in the Original, and varied
in the Margin,) shall go to the Generation of his Fathers, (to the Company of
those Giants of the Old World, from whom Hell has its Name so often in the
Proverbs.) And where are they all? The Spirits in Prison. So the Apostle
resolves us, speaking of the Men of the old World, 1 Pet. 3. 19. And they shall
never see Light or comfort more, says the Psalmist. But as for me (says David,
v. 15.) God shall receive me into the bosom of his Love and Bliss. -- And then
again upon their dying, They are laid as Sheep in the Grave; Death shall feed
on them, and prey upon them: The first Death upon their bodies in the Grave,
the second Death upon their Souls. And their Beauty shall consume in the Grave:
so as at the morning (as there) of the Resurrection, the greatest Personages,
that have had such a Gleam of Glory to attend them whilst they lived,
accompanied perhaps also with dominion over others, shall then rise such ugly
shabby Death-eaten and Hell-eaten Creatures, (as we use to say, Moth-eaten) all
their Beauty being preyed upon, (that is his word) and consumed: And such shall
they appear in Judgment, where the upright (whom they despised) shall have
dominion over them, ver. 14. But (says David) God shall redeem my Soul from the
power of the Grave: For he shall receive me. Selah.

And for the further illustration of all this, and how it relates unto Death, I
shall only cast in a manifest parallel between what David here had meditated
about the condition of wicked Men at Death, with what our Lord himself has
seconded it withal, in expressions fully herewith agreeing, treating of wicked
men's dying also; Luke 12. 16. unto ver. 21. It Is the Parable of that rich Man,
whose Soul was taken away that night. 1. Says David, Their inward thought is,
etc. ver. 11. And says Christ, He thought within himself, so ver. 17. 2. Whilst
he lived he blessed himself, so David ver. 18. namely, in those his inward
Thoughts about his Goods and Posterity: And the like speaks Christ, to be the
inward speech and applauding himself, of his rich Man; He says to his Soul,
Soul, thou have many Goods laid up for many years, take thine ease and be
merry. Again 3. of this Man Christ says, Thou Fool, this night, etc. ver. 20.
And David of his, This their way is their Folly, ver. 10. 4. And finally, the
reason of that their Folly, which both Christ and David give, do center in one
and the same: This Night thy Soul shall be required thee, then whose shall
these things thou have provided be? Thus Christ, ver. 20. and David
correspondently, His Soul shall go, etc. They shall never see light, ver. 19.
and he shall carry nothing away, but leave his Wealth to others, verses 10, 17.

But still withal, let us remember what David's conclusion is concerning
himself at his Death, and which he places in the midst as the center of his
Discourse, which has all this other about wicked Men round about it, to the
end to magnify the Mercy thereof to himself; But God shall redeem my Soul, and
shall receive me. Selah. The Mercy of both which the last Use of all, that next
follows, does concern; and so shuts up this Discourse.

USE.
Let all Believers from hence learn, how to set a due and full value upon that
Salvation, which they profess to expect, and which God has designed to give
them.

Our great and gracious God, the more to bind and oblige the redeemed of the
Sons of Men unto himself, has twisted their Salvation of a double Cord of
Love. 1. A privitive one, seen in what they are snatched out of, which is termed
a being saved from Wrath, Romans 5. A delivering from Wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. An
escaping the Damnation of Hell, Mat. 23. 33. A not (so much as) entering into
Condemnation, John 5. 24. 2. The other a positive part, The Glory to be
revealed; the greatness of which no Tongue can utter, or Heart conceive. That
Blessedness or Glory conferred on the elect Angels, and that favor shown them,
has not this privative part of Salvation to greaten it; further then as by way
of prevention, in that God upheld them from falling into the Merit or Desert of
it. Whereas we Men are all become guilty before God, were actually under Wrath,
Children of Wrath even as others, one as well as another, Ephesians. 2. And the
weight of this he in that Scripture would have them put into the Scale whenever
they thought of Salvation; By Grace ye are saved: so as with a Note of Remark
it follows, v. 8. -- God has thus doubled the Mercy of Salvation to us, on
purpose to make it Salvation indeed; So great Salvation! as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 2. which duplication is seen in all parts of our Salvation as well as
this, as might be largely shown.

There are many gracious Saints that have had no Impressions of Wrath, no fears
and terrors of Hell, set upon their Souls in their first Humiliation; nay, the
Consideration thereof has had but small influence into their Hearts by way of
Motive, in turning them unto God; but it has been pure free Love has taken
their Hearts, and swallowed up their thoughts. Yet mark what I shall say unto
thee in this Case, although indeed the less thou have been moved in thy turning to
God with such fears or impressions of Hell, it be in some respect the better,
for the more kindly has God's Work been in that respect upon thee; and it also
argues a special tenderness in God's Heart toward thy Soul, to have restrained
the Roughness of the East Wind from blowing on thee, as the Prophet speaks. Yet
let me withal say, That the more any one has (after Conversion) taken into
consideration this Wrath, (I do not mean by Terrors, but) by a practical
meditation of it, and his own desert thereof; the more (when joined together
with the former, of God's pure Love) it will move his Heart to Thankfulness to
God for saving him. And the more thine Heart has this way been enlarged, the
more of God's Love, which thou art either assured of, or reliest upon, must
needs be greatned to thee; yea, and prove the higher incentive of Love unto God
again from thee. Whereas on the contrary (that I may give a Caution) because
there seems to be such an Ingenuity in Grace its working in that first
respect mentioned, that Wrath has had no influence at all. Hence such Persons
are apt too much to neglect, or not to mind the Consideration of God's Wrath at
all; no not so much as in this latter way mentioned; but thinking to keep up an
Ingenuity of Love, they entertain not this at all in their Meditations. But
sure this is far more blameworthy than that other is commendable; and that by
how much there comes thereby to be a Loss, of so much and of so great a part of
God's Love purposely thereby designed to be shown: (I term it a Loss, for what
is not seen, and the Heart considers not, nor is sensible of, is as if it had
not been.) And further I add, that this valuing of God's Love herein showed, at
its own full rate in both respects, is a matter of greater moment than the
working of thy Love to him, in so ingenuous and kindly a way, (as thou
supposest) without all or any consideration of Hell or Wrath, can arise unto.
And this by how much God's Love to us, in the full latitude of it, is a thing
more precious than our Love to him. Of the two, God had rather have us
apprehend his Love toward us in the utmost extent thereof, than have our Love,
or Love from us to him, to work but in that one way of Ingenuousness: yea, and
in the issue you will all find, that if you join the Considerations of both
together, they will concur to work an higher Ingenuity of Love, than that other
way alone can do.

If we will come to comprehend with all Saints the Height, and Depth, etc. of
the Love of God and Christ, in all the dimensions of it, we must take that
course and way in our Meditations about it, which God himself has laid out and
designed on purpose to set it forth and greaten it unto us by. Which he has
done as well by so great a deliverance from so great a Wrath due to us, as by
conferring so rich an Inheritance of Glory upon us. And look as God has two
such vast Contrivances, of infinite weight each of them, the one in his right
hand, the other in his left, for the manifestation of his Love; so we should
have two Scales in the hand of our Faith to weigh each by: And of the two it
may perhaps be hard to say which is the more massy, that is, in the
apprehensions of some of those who have been deeply humbled for Sin, and under
sense of Wrath, (tho I think Glory carries it by far.)

I observe that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself, tho but made a
Surety for Sin, and tho it was impossible he should be holden of Wrath or any
thing he was to suffer, Acts 2. 24. yet he does consider, as well for his
blessing God, as also to his own Comfort, in Psalm. 16. 7. and 10. (a Psalm made
wholly of him) and magnify the delivering part of Salvation; Thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption: I say, he
considers this as well as the Joy which followed thereon: which yet also
follows there, v. 11. Thou will show me the Path of Life. In thy presence is
fullness of Joy; at thy right hand there are Pleasures for evermore. He reckons
up both, as two distinct parts of Favor shown in that Salvation of his, which
is both the Cause and Pattern of ours. And that it was to bless God for both
these, which he thus distinctly and apart mentions, his Preface to both, v. 7.
I will bless the Lord, etc. shows. Thus as Man. And there is this further
evidence of it, That look as what any one exercises Faith for, and prays for
much before it is obtained, that proportionably he is thankful for after. And
the same is seen in Christ in this very particular. For as we read in that
Psalm, that he exercised Faith for this Deliverance as well as for that Glory:
So in like manner, Heb. 5. 7. That he offered up Prayers and Supplications,
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able [to save] him from Death,
and was heard in what he feared. And hence it came to pass, that we find him
after his Deliverance so greatly blessing God for it. So you read of his
praising God for the same, in Psalm. 22. from v. 2. to the end, and in express
words, v. 25. even as well as you may read his Prayer for this Deliverance in
the former part of that Psalm.

If He, who (but for us and our sakes) needed no deliverance; then how much
more lies this upon us, the Persons saved, and unable to save our selves,
distinctly to remember both these parts of our Salvation with infinite Praise
and Blessing of God's great Name? Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is
within me bless his holy Name, and forget not all (that is, not any of) his
Benefits, says the Psalmist in his own Person, Psalm. 103. 1, 2. And what sort
of Benefits were they? it follows ver. 3, 4. Who forgiveth all thine
Iniquities; Who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction; there is Salvation from
Sin and Hell, the privative part: Who crowns thee with Loving Kindness and
tender Mercies, (over and above deliverance) and satisfies thy mouth with good
things; there you see also is the positive part. You might observe the very
same in this 49. Psalm, Thou shall redeem me, etc. and, Thou shall receive me.

By all that has been spoken (although you are saved from it, yet) look down
into Hell a little, as it has been set out to you; And think with your selves,
Has God delivered me from so great a Death, and given me such a deliverance as
this, from a death so dreadful and eternal also? How would the Devils and
Spirits in Prison prize an escape and deliverance from Wrath present and to
come, if they could be supposed capable thereof; yea, if they had no more? A
Nobleman or Favorite that has run into great and high Treasons, to have but
mere Life given him, how would he value it, though he never saw the Court more,
nor were never restored unto his Estate and Dignities, had he but wherewithal
to live? If a Man were in danger to be drowned, and a Rope were thrown him and
a Crown, and bidden take his choice; with promise, Thou shall be King of all
the World, if thou come to shore safe with the Crown on thy Head: of the two he
would in this case take hold of the Rope, and refuse the Crown. And why?
because it is Salvation and his Life. But for a Man to be both wasted safe to
shore, and then arriving there, to have this Crown besides! how great Salvation
would this be valued, stupendous Grace and Love!

These things the Saints should consider chiefly unto two ends and purposes;

1. To be thankful to God and Christ. 2. To comfort their own Souls.
I. To be thankful both to God and Christ.

1. To God the Father. It was his part to contrive the whole design of our
Salvation, to the end to set forth his Love to us. And the Scripture spreads
before us the Love of the Father herein upon this double consideration; 1. That
he appointed us not to Wrath, (which otherwise we should have in the issue and
execution, by reason of Sin fallen under.) 2. That he ordained us to Salvation.
You have an express Scripture for both these, setting forth the Love of God the
Father hereby; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. God has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain
Salvation. Here are first, two parts of the Mercy vouchsafed, 1. Deliverance
from Wrath. 2. Salvation. Then the Love of the Father in his not appointing us
to Wrath, (and so not to leave us under it) as well as appointing us to
Salvation; and both as appointments of God, the one as well as the other.

And then in the second Epistle, chap. 2. ver. 13. he provokes them unto
thankfulness for this; But we are bound to give thanks always unto God for you,
who has from the beginning chosen you unto Salvation, through Sanctification
of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth: which he speaks with reference to what
was done to others, (ver. 12. compared.) Let me speak to you then in the
Apostles Language; Oh what thanks are your selves then bound (if the Apostle
gave them for others) to give unto God for your selves, to whom God has given
Faith and Holiness, upon both these respects?

2. To Jesus Christ, for that hand which he had in this our Deliverance from
Wrath: thus expressly, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. Ye wait for his Son from Heaven, even
Jesus, who delivered us from the Wrath to come. Here again you have these two
parts of Salvation set together. 1. His coming from Heaven, which they waited
for, with hopes of his carrying them thither, as he tells them chap. 4. ver.
17. We shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall we ever be
with the Lord. Then 2. (which the Apostle adds with an Emphasis) even Jesus,
who delivered us from the Wrath to come. Take in that too, says he, and forget
it not, to endear your Jesus to you: and for ever know him by this Character,
[It is that Jesus who delivered you from the Wrath to come.] It was the
Fathers work indeed to appoint and ordain this Deliverance, and us unto the
benefit of it through Faith; but it was our Jesus, his Son's work, to effect
and accomplish it; 'twas his Soul that paid for all.

And the manner or way how he delivered us from this Wrath, heightens this his
Love yet more; for he delivered us from it by being made himself a Curse for
us, Gal. 3. 23.

The second thing I propounded was, To comfort your Souls in the consideration
of this Salvation and Deliverance. Thus Christ, Psalm. 16. 9, 10. for his
deliverance, Therefore [my Heart is glad] my Flesh also shall rest in hope; for
thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, thou will show me the path of Life, etc.
And David in the 49. Psalm, which led on to this, does comfort himself also
ver. 15. when of wicked Men he had said, Like Sheep they are put into Hell, (as
some read it) Death shall feed on them: He then for his own particular comforts
himself with this, But God shall redeem my Soul from the power of Hell, for he
shall receive me. And the Apostle to the Thessalonians, epist. 1. chap. 5.
having ver. 9. set before them (as was before opened) that God had not appointed
them to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation, he subjoins, ver. 11. Wherefore comfort
your selves together.

FINIS.
An Immediate STATE OF GLORY FOR THE Spirits of Just Men upon Dissolution,
DEMONSTRATED.

BY THO. GOODWIN, D. D.

LONDON; Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

2 COR. 5. 5. Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who
also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.


THere is no Point of more moment to All, nor of greater Comfort to Saints,
than what shall become of their Souls when they die: It Is our next Stage; and
things that are next, use more to affect us. And besides, it is the beginning,
and a taking possession of our Eternity.

That these words should aim at this self-same thing, cannot be discerned,
without consulting the foregoing part of the Apostle's Discourse: and yet I
cannot be large in bringing down the Coherence, having pitched upon what this
fifth Verse contributes unto this Argument; which alone will require more than
this time allotted, having also very largely gone through the Exposition of the
foregoing verses elsewhere: and I now go but on where I left last. But yet to
make way for the understanding the Scope of my Text, take

The Coherence in brief thus:

In the 16th Verse of the foregoing Chapter (where the Wellhead of his
Discourse is to be found) he shows the extraordinary Care God has of our
[inward Man] to renew it day by day; where Inward Man is strictly the Soul with
its Graces, set in opposition unto our Outward Man, [the Body with its
Appurtenances,] which he says daily perishes; that is, is in a mouldring and
decaying condition.

Chap. 5. ver. 1. For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a Building of God, a House not made with hands, eternal
in the Heavens. In this first verse of this fifth Chapter, he meets with this
Supposition: But what if this outward Man or earthly Tabernacle be wholly
dissolved and pulled down, what then shall become of this inner Man? And he
resolves it thus, That if it be dissolved, we have an House, a Building of God
in the Heavens. And what is the [We] but this inner Man (he had spoken of)
renewed Souls, which dwell now in the Body as in a Tabernacle, as the Inmates
that can subsist without it? And it is as if he had said, If this inward Man be
destituted of one House, we have another. God that in this Life was so careful
over this inner Man, to renew it every day, has made another more ample
provision against this great Change. It is but its removing from one House to a
better, which God has built. As your selves (to speak in your own Language) if
Wars should beset you, and your Country House were plundered and pulled down,
you would comfort your selves with this, I have yet a City-House to retire unto.

Neither is the terming the Glory of Heaven, and that as it is bestowed upon a
separate Soul, an House, alien from the Scripture Phrase, Luke 16. 9. That when
you fail, they may receive you into everlasting Habitations. Death is a
Failing, ('it is your City-Phrase also when a Man proves Bankrupt) a Statute of
Bankrupts comes forth then upon your old House, (Statutum est omnibus semel
mori) and upon all you have; and then it is a receiving or entertaining that
otherwise desolate Soul into everlasting Habitations, that is, into an House
eternal in the Heavens, as the Text.

Nor yet is the Phrase of terming Heaven a City-House, remote neither: for,
Heb. 11. 13. Abraham and the Patriarchs died in Faith, (Mark that!) In Faith or
Expectation of what? He had told us, ver. 10. He looked for a City whose
Builder is God. What is a City, but an Aggregation and Heap of Houses and
Inhabitants? Multitudes had died before Abraham, and gone to Heaven, from Adam,
Abel, Seth, downwards; and God promises him Peace at his Death, and a being
gathered to those Fathers, Genesis 15. 15. There was then a City built, and
already replenished with Inhabitants; and amongst others, an House provided for
him, that is, his Soul built of God, and ready furnished against this Removal.

Verse 2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
House which is from Heaven. In this Verse he utters the working of the
Affections of Christians toward their being clothed upon with this House; and
so in order to this enjoiment of it, their desiring even to be dissolved: which
Paul also utters of himself, Phil. 1. Now if the first Verse speaks of the
Glory of a separate Soul, when he calls it an House: this second verse must
intend the same.

Verse 3. If so be that being clothed, we shall not be found naked. In this
Verse he gives an wholesome Caution by the way, and withal insinuates, why he
used the word clothed upon, in the foregoing Verse, thus, speaking of the
Glory of such a separate Soul, even because it is absolutely necessary that all
our Souls be found clothed first, and renewed with Grace and Holiness, and not
be found naked at our Deaths, that is, not devoid of Grace, and so exposed to
Shame and Wrath, as Rev. 16. 15.

Verse 4. For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for
that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life. The fourth Verse gives a genuine and sincere Account, why
a Christian does thus groan, and that after dissolution it self, in order to
this Glory; which he sets out with an accurate distinction of their desires of
dissolution, in difference from like desires in all other Men: First,
Negatively, not for that being burdened we desire to be uncloathed, or
dissolved; that is, simply for ease of those Burdens: nor out of a despising
of our Bodies we now wear, (as their Heathen Wisemen and Philosophers did, and
others do); No. But secondly, Positively, For this, as the top-ground of that
Desire, That we would be clothed upon with that House, (spoken of Verse 1. and
that still taken in the Sense spoken of in the second Verse) to the end that
this mortal animal Life, which the Soul (tho immortal in it self) now leads in
the Body, full of Sins, clogged with a Body of Death and Miseries; (each of
which has a Death in it) and so it lives but a dying Life; that this Life may
be exchanged, yea, swallowed up by that which is Life indeed, the only true
Life, the knowing God as we are known, and enjoying him: All which, as to our
Souls, is truly performed at our Dissolution; although the final swallowing up
the Mortality of our Bodies also does yet remain to be accomplished: which will
be done at the latter day, at that Change both of Body and Soul, tho in respect
of the Body it will be completed as then more fully.

This Interpretation, and the suting of all the Phrases used in this 4th Verse,
to hold good of this Exchange at Death, I cannot, through straitness of time,
give an account of now: I have lately, and very largely done it elsewhere.

This for the Coherence: I hasten to my Text.

TEXT.
Verse 5. Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who has
also given us the earnest of the Spirit. THe Current of the four former Verses
running thus steadily along in this Chanel, the Stream in this Verse continues
still the same.

There is one word in this Verse, [(...), For this self-same thing God has
wrought us,] which serves us as a Clue of Thread drawn through the Windings of
the former Verses, to show us, that one and the same Individual Glory has been
carried on all along, and still is in this Verse also. So then we see where we
are.

What this self-same thing should be, ask the first Verse, and it will tell
you, it is that House eternal in the Heavens, a Building of God, prepared by
him against the time that this earthly House is dissolved. Ask the second
Verse, it is the same House we groan to be clothed upon with, when the other
is pulled down. Ask the fourth Verse, and more plainly: It is that Life, which
succeeds this mortal Life the Soul now lives in this Body, and swallows up all
the Infirmities thereof. And then here it follows, Even for this self-same
thing, etc. So then, if the Glory of the separate Soul be the Subject of any of
these Verses, then of all, and so of this Verse also.

And to be sure it cannot be that extraordinary way of entrance into Glory, by
such a sudden Change, both of Soul and Body into Glory at once, without
dissolution, should be the self-same thing here aimed at. For it was not the
Lot of any of those Primitive Christians, of whom the Holy Ghost here speaks
this, [He has wrought us for this thing,] that they should be in that manner
changed, and so enter into Glory: but the contrary. For they all, and all
Saints since for these 1600 years, have put off their Tabernacles by Death, as
Peter did, and speaks of himself, 2 Pet. 1. 14. and therefore the Scripture (or
Holy Ghost) foreseeing, as the Phrase is, Gal. 3. 8. this change would be their
fate, would not have uttered this of them, [God has wrought us for this] whom
he knew God had not designed thereunto.

Neither is it that those groaning desires, spoken of in the foregoing verses,
2, 3, 4. is [that self-same thing] here (as some would) for indeed as Musculus
well: If the Apostle had said, He that has wrought this thing in us, etc. that
Expression might have carried it to such a Sense: But he says, He that wrought
us for the self-same thing: And so it is not that desire of Glory in us is
spoken of: But us, our selves and Souls as wrought for that Glory.

If it be asked, what is the special proper scope of these words, as touching
this Glory of the Soul? The answer in general, It is to give the rational part
of this Point, or demonstrative Reasons to evidence to Believers, That indeed
God has thus ordained and prepared such a Glory before the Resurrection. And it
is as if the Apostle had said, Look into your own Souls, and consider God's
dealings with you hitherto, viz.

First, the operation of his hands. For He that has wrought us (that is, our
Souls) for this very thing, is God.

Besides the evidence the work gives, Who has [also] given us [the earnest] of
the Spirit.

.
We Preachers have it in use, as to allege Proofs of Scripture for the Points
or Subjects we handle: So to give Reasons or Demonstrations of them. And so
does our Apostle here of this great Point he had been treating of: and such
Reasons or Demonstrations run often upon Harmony and Congruity of one Divine
Thing or Truth kissing another. Also upon Becomingnesses or Meetnesses, that
is, what it becomes the great God to do. For instance; In giving an account,
why God in bringing many Sons to Glory, did choose to effect it by Christ's
Death, rather than any other way. It became him (says he) Heb. 2. 10. For whom
are all things, and by whom are all things, etc. And so in the point of the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 21. Since by Man came Death, by Man came also the
resurrection of the dead; that is, it was congruous, harmonious, it should thus
be; the one answering correspondently to the other. The like congruity will be
found couched here, in God's bringing Souls to Glory, before that Resurrection.

Now there are two sorts of harmonious Reasons couched in the forepart of
these Words, He that wrought us for this, is God.

I. That it is Finis operis and operantis, The End of the Work it self upon us;
and of God as an Efficient working for an End: God has wrought on us for this
very thing.

II. It is Opus Dignum Deo Authore, A Work as he is the great God, and as a
thing worthy and becoming of God as the Author of it: He that has wrought us
for this thing, is God.

There is a third point to be superadded; and that is, It is the Interest of
all three Persons: Which how clearly evidenced out of the Text, will appear,
when I have dispatched these former Doctrines.

I. Doctrine.
That it is a strong Argument, that God has provided a Glory for separate
Souls hereafter, That He has wrought us, and wrought on us a Work of Grace in
this Life.

Ere the Reason of this will appear, I must first open three things, natural to
the words: which will serve as materials, out of which to make forth that
Argument.

First, that the thing here said to be wrought, is Grace or Holiness; which is
a preparation unto Glory. (1.) Grace is the Work. And so, Phil. 1. 6. termed,
The good Work. A frame of Spirit, created to good works: Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his
Workmanship, created unto good Works. The Text here says, Who has wrought us:
There similarly, We are his Workmanship. And (2.) Secondly, this Work is a
preparation to Glory. For, for one thing to be first wrought in order to
another, is a preparation thereunto. Now says the Text, He has wrought us for
this thing; and Romans 9. 23. it is in terminis, The Vessels of Mercy, which he
had before prepared to Glory; which was by working Holiness: for it follows,
ver. 24. Even us whom he has called. Likewise, Col. 1. 12. Who has made us
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light: Meet, by making
us Saints. So then, Had prepared, Has made meet is all one with, Who has
wrought us for this thing. Here

The second, what is the principal Subject wrought upon, or prepared and made
meet for Glory. It Is certainly the Soul, in Analogy to the Phrase here. We use
to say (when we speak of our Conversion) Since my Soul was wrought on. And
though the Body is said to be sanctified, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. yet the immediate
Subject is the Soul; and that primitively, originally: the Body by derivation
from the Soul. And hence it is, the Soul (when a Man dies) carries with it all
the Grace by inherency: All Flesh is Grass which withers; that is, the Body
with all the appurtenances, says Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 24. But you, having purified
your Souls, being born again of incorruptible Seed (our Bodies are made of
corruptible Seed, which is the opposition there) by the Word of God, which
lives and abides for ever: And this is the Word (he says he means) which by the
Gospel is preached (every day) unto you, ver. 25. and by preaching is engrafted
in your Souls, purifying [your Souls] ver. 22. In no other Subject does that
Word (as preached) for ever abide. For the Body rots, and in the Grave has not
an inherent, but a relative Holiness, (such as the Episcopal Brethren would
have to be in Churches consecrated by them) because once it was the Temple of
the Holy Ghost, who dwells in us.

And that it is the Soul the Apostle has here in his Eye, in this Discourse of
his in my Text, as that which he intends the Subject here wrought upon,
appears, if we consult the Wellhead of his Discourse about the Soul, which is
the 16. ver. of the 4. Chap. Our inward Man (says he) is renewed, etc. (there
is your wrought upon here) whilst the outward (the Body) perishes. Which Soul,
in being called the inward Man, connotates at once both Grace and the Soul
conjunct together, and distinct from the Body, as well as from Sin and
Corruption. Elsewhere it is declared the subject first and originally wrought
on, Ephesians. 4. 23. Be renewed [in the Spirit of your Minds.] Look round about the
Text, and what is the [Vs] wrought on? plainly this Inward Man, by the
Coherence before and after. Ask yet 1. If our earthly Tabernacle (that is, our
Body) be dissolved, we have, etc. that is, This inner Man, our Souls, have; for
the Body is supposed dissolved. So likewise, ver. 4. [We] in this Tabernacle,
that is, our Souls in these Bodies. More expressly after, ver. 8. our very Souls
not only whilst in our Bodies, but when separated from our Bodies, have the
[We] given them; We are willing to be absent from the Body, and present with
the Lord. The We present with the Lord, and absent from the Body, is, nor can
be, no other than a separate Soul in its estate of Widowhood. And so here, ver.
5. Has wrought Us: the Soul bears the Person, carries away the Grace with it.

Add to this, the Time here specified in Observa quod non in futuro dicit,
Parabit ^s. Non demumparabitur; ubi jam induendum est, etc. Musc. in locum.
the Text, in which we are wrought upon: It is but this Life, and during the
term thereof. Has wrought us, says the Apostle; not in the future, Who shall
work us for it: That [hath wrought] referring to the work of Conversion at the
first, Who [hath made] us meet to be partakers, etc. Col. 1. 12. and who does
continue still to work us; the Peterperfect being often put by the Apostle for
the Present, God renewing the inner Man Day by Day, Chap. 4. 16. So working
upon it, in order to this self-same thing, continually. Unto which Words there,
these here have an evident aspect; yet so, as that time of working is but
during this Life: For it is whilst the outward Man is mouldring, and that by
Afflictions, which during this moment work an eternal weight of Glory, ver. 17.
and that is expressly said to be but this present time, Romans 8. So then, there
is no Parabit in that other World: But, as Solomon says of Man, There is no
work after this Life; No remembrance, Eccl. 9. 10.
says David: namely, which Psalm. 6. 5.
has any influence into a Man's Eternity. So there is no working upon us in
order thereunto, after Death: God has done his Do [hath wrought] and Man has
finished his course; as Paul of himself, and in this Chapter of my Text, ver.
10. Every Man receives the things done in his Body, be they good or evil.
Those things that are done in this Body only; therefore only what in this Life
he has wrought. And for this he has wrought us, (says the Text.)

.
These things premised, I come to the Argument to be raised out of them, to
prove the Point in hand.

First, that Grace or Holiness, because they are immediately wrought in the
Soul, that therefore when the Body dies the Soul shall be taken up into Life.
That this is a meet and congruous Ordination of God, the Scripture it self
owns, and seems so to pitch the reason of it, in Romans 8. 10, 11. And if Christ
be in you, the Body is dead, because of Sin: but the Spirit is Life, because of
Righteousness. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead
dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your
mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you. He gives an account of what
is to become hereafter, both of the Bodies and Souls of them in whom Christ is.
(1.) First, for the Body that is condemned to die, The Body is dead because of
Sin. By Body I understand the same which he in the 11th Verse terms the mortal
Body to be raised up; which (says he) is dead, that is, appointed to die; as
one sentenced to Death you term a dead Man. And this [because of Sin.] It was
meet that that first threatening of dying should have some effect to evidence
the Truth of God therein. Only God is favorable in his Ordination in this,
that he arresteth but the Body, the less principal Debtor; but that (to be
sure) shall pay for it: It is appointed to all Men once to die, even for Men
that are in Christ, as this place of the Romans has it. Then (2.) follows,
what remains the Soul of such an one when the Body dies. [But] says he,
(speaking by way of exception, and contrary fate too,) The Spirit is Life,
because of Righteousness. The Spirit is the Soul in contradistinction to the
Body; this, when the Body dies, is Life: He says not Living only, or immortal,
but is swallowed up into Life: And why? because of Righteousness, which is
Christ's Image; and so preserves, and by God's ordination upon dying, elevates
the Soul, which is the immediate and original Subject of it, (which is the
Point in hand.) For this thing it is, God has wrought it. But then because the
Query would be, Shall this Body for ever remain dead, because of (this first)
Sin, and bear this Punishment for ever? No: Therefore (3.) he adds, He that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies. So at
last, and then bringing both Body and Soul together unto complete Glory.

And the congruity of Reason that is for this appointment is observable,
something like to that, 1 Cor. 15. As by Man came Death, so by Man came also
the Resurrection from the Dead. For that Sin that condemned us to this Death,
we had from the first Adam by bodily Generation, as the channel or means of
conveying it, who was (as other) Father of our Flesh.

The Arrest therefore goes forth against the Body, which we had from that Adam,
because of that Sin, conveyed by means of our Bodies: for tho I must not say,
the Body defiles the Soul, or of it self is the immediate Subject of Sin; yet
the original Means or Channel, through which it comes down, and is derived unto
us, is the Generation of our Bodies. The Body therefore congruously pays for
this, and the Death thereof is a Means to let Sin out of the World, as the
propagating it was a means to bring Sin in: But an holy Soul or Spirit, which
is the Offspring of God, having now true Holiness and Righteousness from the
second Adam, communicated to it, and abiding in it; and being not only the
immediate Subject thereof, but further, the first and original Subject, from
and by which it is derived unto the Body; the Womb, into which that immortal
Seed was first cast, and in which the inward Man is formed, and in respect of a
constant abiding, in which it is that Seed is termed incorruptible. Hence
therefore says God of this Soul, [It is Life] It shall live when this Body
dies. There is nothing of Christ's Image, but is ordained to abide for ever.
Charity never fails. His Righteousness 1 Cor. 13. 8 2 Cor. 9. 9.
endures for ever; and therefore is ordained to conserve and elevate unto Life
the Subject it is in, and that is the Soul. This, as a Foundation of the
substantial parts of this first Reason out of this one Scripture, thus directly
and explicitly holding this forth.

.
I come (2.) to the Argumentation it self, which arises out of these things
laid together. (1.) That the Soul is the immediate Subject of Grace. (2.) The
first and primitive Susceptive thereof. (3.) And it self is alone and
immediately capable of Glory, which Grace is a preparation to. And (4.) that God
before our Deaths has wrought all of Grace he intends to work, in preparation
to Glory. Out of all these a strong Argument does arise, That such a Soul upon
Death shall be admitted unto Glory; and not be put to stay till the time of the
Resurrection, when both Soul and Body shall be joined again together. And that
this holds a just and meet convenience upon each, or at least, all these
grounds when put together.

First, consider the Soul as the immediate Subject of this working and
preparation for Glory. Hence therefore this will at least arise, That the
Inherency or Abiding of this Grace wrought in this Soul, depends not upon its
conjunction with the Body; but so as it remains as an everlasting and perpetual
Conserver of that Grace stamped on it; yea, and carries it all with it self, as
a rich Treasure innate unto it wherever it goes, when separate from the Body. I
say, it either has in it, or appertaining unto it, all that has been wrought
for it, either in it, or by it. Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead which die in
the Lord: [And their Works do follow them:] They go to Heaven with them, and
after them. And in what Subject else is it, that the Seed 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25.
of God remains incorruptible, or the Word of God abides for ever? Or how else
comes that Saying to be performed, 1 John 2. 17. He that does the Will of God,
endures for ever? Having therefore all these Riches by it, and as complete (as
here it shall be,) meet it is it should partake the benefit thereof, and live
upon them now when it is single and alone, and in its Widow's condition. And it
is an opportune season, that by a Glory given it for that Holiness, this should
now appear, That it was the Soul which was the sole intrinsic and immediate
Receptive of all this Holiness. This is the first. Add also,

Secondly; Its being the first and primitive Magis conveniens videtur, ut
animae inquibus per prius fuit culpa and meritum, prius etiam vel puniantur vel
praemientur. Aquinas cont. Gent. lib. 4. cap. 19 3.
the Appurtenance of it be united to it, but be served first, and admitted into
that Glory ordained; and by having it self first possession given of that
Inheritance, the Body might in its season be admitted derivatively thereinto
from it, after that renewed Union with it by the Resurrection. Reason good,
that look as in Priority, Grace, the preparation unto Glory, was wrought; so,
in that Order of Priority, Glory it self should be communicated. And therefore
seeing its Fate is to abide a while alone, therefore first to enjoy, and drink
both the Juice and Fruit of that Vine it is the Root of.

And (3.) it being in it self, when separate, as immediately capable of this
Glory, as when it shall be again united to the Body: For what is the Essential
of Glory, the Substance of that Life that swallows up all, but (as we said on
v. 4.) God's immediate Presence, and our knowing him face to face, as we are
known. Now of this the Apostle does in these 6, 7, and 8 Verses, expressly
inform us, That the separate Soul is not only capable thereof, but that it then
begins to enjoy it: Therefore (says he) we are always confident, knowing, that
whilst we are in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; (for we walk by Faith,
not by Sight.) We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from
the Body, and to be present with the Lord. Where to be present with the Lord,
and to live by Sight, is expressly made the Privilege of a Soul absent from the
Body; which can mean no other State, than that of the Soul between the Death of
the Body, and the Resurrection. For whilst it is present in the Body before
Death, it is absent from the Lord; and when it shall be present with the Lord,
after the Resurrection, it shall not then be any more absent from the Body.
This Conjunction therefore of absent from the Body, and present with the Lord,
falls out in no State else, but only in that Interim or space of time between.
Let us withal view this Place in the Light, (by bringing the one to the other)
which that Passage, 1 Cor. 13. 12. does cast upon it: For now we see through a
Glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then shall I know,
even as also I am known. [To see as in a Glass darkly] there, is to [walk by
Faith] here: But to see face to face, and to know God as we are known, (so
there) is all one; and to attain to sight, and be in Christ's presence (here.)
And to be sure, the Body is in no estate whatever capable of knowing God, as we
are known of him: None durst ever affirm that. For besides that, the Spiritual
Knowledge of God is proper to an intellectual Nature: Further, so to know God,
as God knows us, and so to be elevated to the Similitude of God's
Understanding, is not communicable to the Body. We may as well dare to affirm
God himself to be a Body, as that our Bodies are capable of ever being raised
up thus to know God. Hence therefore whether the Soul be out of the Body, as
after Death; or so in the Body, as it shall be after the Resurrection; yet
still it is the Soul that is immediately alone capable of that Sight and
Knowledge of God. And therefore seeing it depends not on the Body, it is as well
capable of it before the Resurrection without the Body, as after the
Resurrection in the Body.

Only this must be added, That whilst indeed the Soul is at home in this Body,
(this earthly Tabernacle) it is not capable of this Sight of the Glory of God,
i. e. as to continue in the Body, and enjoy it; for it would crack this earthen
Vessel: as 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.
And although Paul, as a Stander-by, was an Overhearer, 2 Cor. 12.
and an Eyewitness (by way of Revelation and Vision) of what the Spirits of
Just Men in Glory do enjoy: Even as on the contrary, the Angels are often
Standers-by on Earth, and Overseers of us, what is therein done, (as the Phrase
is, Zech. 3. 7.) yet he was not estated into it, or admitted a Possessor
thereof himself, no more than Angels into an earthly estate; and therefore
could not say, whether the Revelation vouchsafed him, might not be in the Body
as well as out of it: Whereas God had otherwise long since peremptorily
determined that Question, That no Man could see God, and live; that is, at once
continue in this Body, and see him face to face. And Paul here in my Text also
determines it, That whilst we are at home in the Body, (as now) we are absent
from the Lord. They are two incompatible Estates. But still when that which
thus lets, (this Body) is taken out of the way, the Soul it self is
sufficiently capable, as truly as ever it shall be.

.
But if this Argument from these be yet judged not home enough, but short: Then
let us in the fourth place add what Force the third Premise will give to it,
concerning the Time of God's working on us, to drive all closer home; namely,
That God has wrought upon the Soul in this Life, all that ever he means to
work, by way of Preparation for Glory. For this thing God [hath wrought us]
which tho it might with the Enlargements and Sub-Arguments that now shall
follow, be made an Argument alone; yet I choose to cast it into this Total, to
make the whole the more strong.

Therefore (4.) gather up the Demonstrations thus: If the Soul be the immediate
and first Subject of Grace, which is a preparation to Glory, and capable of
this Glory, when out of the body; And God, the great Agent or Worker, has
wrought all that ever he means to work in it, this way, by way of preparation
to Glory: Then, as Peter said in the case of admitting the Gentiles to Baptism,
What should hinder that these Souls should not be glorified, Act. 10 47.
instantly, when out of their bodies? If indeed, as the Papists, and corrupted
Jews and Heathens have feigned, there were any work to be after wrought, a
Purgatory, or the like; Then a Demurre or Caveat might be yet put in, to
suspend this their admission into Glory: But the contrary being the truth,
then, etc. Now the strength of the Argument from this latter, superadded to the
rest, stands upon two strong Grounds.

First, if we consider what is common to God in this with all other, but
ordinarywise Efficients or Workers, that are intent upon their Ends, which must
be given to him, the only Wise All-powerful God, (who is here said, as an
Efficient, to work us for this End.) When any ordinary Efficient has brought
his Work to a period, and done as much to such or such an End as he means to
do, he delays not to accomplish his End, and bring it to execution; unless some
over-powring impediment do lie in his way to it. If you have bestowed long and
great Cost upon any of your Children, to fit and prepare them for any
Employment; The University suppose, or other Calling; Do you then let these
your Children lie Truants, idle, and asleep at home, and not put them forth to
that which you at first designed that their Education unto? Will you suffer
them (in this case) to lose their time, Do you know how to do good to your
Children, and does not God? We see God does thus in Nature. We say, when the
Matter is as fully prepared as ever it shall be, that the forms enter without
delay: Now Grace is expressly termed a preparation to Glory. Also God does
observe this in working of Grace it self, when the Soul is as fully humbled and
emptied, and thereby prepared for the Lord by John Baptists Ministry, as he
means to prepare it; the work of justifying Faith presently follows. In all his
Dispensations of Judgments or Mercies, he observes the same. When men's sins are
at full (as of the Amorites) he stays not a moment to execute Judgment: So in
answering the Faith of his People waiting on him for Mercies. And thus it is
for Glory; I have glorified thee on earth, (the only place and condition of our
glorifying God) I have finished the work thou gave me to do: And now (what
now, and presently now remains there, follows) Glorify me etc. Thus spoke
Christ our Pattern.

Secondly, there is this further falls out, in this Case and Condition, of such
a Soul, as does indeed call for this out of a kind of necessity, and not of
congruity only. For whereas by God's Ordination there are two ways of Communion
with him, and but two, unto all Eternity; either that of Faith, which we have
at present; and of Sight, which is for hereafter. Into these two, the Apostle
resolves all God's Dispensations to us, ver. 7. of this Chapter, We walk by
faith, (namely, in this life) not by sight. And again, 1 Cor. 13. 12. [Now] we
see in a glass, [Then] face to face. These two [Now] and [Then] do divide the
Dispensations for Eternity of time to come. The like in Peter, 1 Epist. 1. 8.
In whom though [Now] you see him not, (as you one day shall) yet believing. If
therefore when the Soul goes out of the Body, that way of communion with God by
Faith utterly cease 2 Cor. 13. 8, 13.
, that door and passage will be quite shut up; God having 1 These. 1. 11. John
6. 28.
fulfilled all the work of faith (The work of God) with power, that ever he
intends: Then surely Sight must succeed according to God's Ordination, or
otherwise this would inevitably follow, That the Soul would be for that
interim, until the Resurrection, cut off from all communion with God, whatever;
having yet all its acquired holiness of Sanctification abiding in it, and
Righteousness accompanying of it all that while. Look therefore as a Child
has two, and but two ways of living, and when the one cease, the other
succeeds, or Death would follow: In the Womb it lives by nourishment from the
Navel, without so much as breathing at the mouth: but it no sooner comes into
the world, but that former means is cut off, and it lives by breath, and
taking in nourishment by the mouth, or it must instantly die. So stands the
case with the Soul here between Faith and Sight: So that we must either affirm,
That the Souls dies to all spiritual actings and communions with God until the
Resurrection, which those Scriptures so much do contradict, He that believes
has eternal life, etc. and shall never (no not for Joh. 9. 51. and 11. 26.
a moment) die; (and in those Promises it is not simply a sluggish Immortality,
but to live, and act, and enjoy God (which is our life) must needs be meant:)
Or we must on the other side affirm, That the life of Faith ceasing, and God
yet having that way wrought all that ever he intends, That then, Sight of God
face to face must come in its place: which indeed the Apostle in that 1 Cor.
13. affirms, in saying, ver. 10. When that which is perfect is come, then that
which is but in part is done away. There is not an utter ceasing of the
imperfect, and then an interval or long space of time to come between; and
then, that which is perfect is to come: but the imperfect is done away by the
very coming of that which is thus perfect. And in the 12th Verse he explains
himself, That the imperfect is this our seeing [Now] in a glass darkly, that
is, by Faith; and that perfect, to be that seeing God face to face, as that
which presently entertains us in that other world. Nay, the Apostle admits not
so much as a moment of cessation, but says, That the imperfect is done away,
(ver. 10.) and vanishes, (as ver. 8.) by the coming in of the perfect upon it:
and so the imperfect, namely, [Faith] is swallowed up of the perfect, namely,
[Sight.]

And then further, if we thus grant (as we must) this separate Soul to have
this sight, or nothing now left it, to enjoy God any way by; Then it can be no
other than Glory it is admitted unto: For, the sight of God face to face, and
to know as we are known, is the very essence of Glory, as it differs from
Faith. Neither is that ultimate Enjoyment, or happiness in God, which Souls
shall have after the Resurrection, any other (in Name or Thing) than the sight
of God, as it is thus distinguished from Faith; although it shall be then
raised and intended unto far higher degrees of Perfection.


And for a Conclusion of this first Point, that which follows in that place
lately cited out of 1 Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation
of your souls, may as fitly serve for the confirmation of all these latter
foregoing Notions, as to any other sense Interpreters have affixed.

I am aware how these words, Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of
your souls, are interpreted of that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which
the Verse before had spoken, that many Saints through believing do in this life
enjoy, as being salvation imperfect, and the earnest of it in the same kind,
and so a part of the Reward of Faith received in hand (as we say) or aforehand,
and vouchsafed over and above the ordinary way of living by Faith. This
interpretation I no way gainsay, nor will go about to exclude: for I know it
does consist with that other I am about to give, and is subordinate to it: (And
I have learned to take the most comprehensive sense the holy Ghost may be
supposed to aim at in any Scripture.) But if this sense should directly alone
obtain, yet by consequence, and at the rebound, it does strongly argue the
Point in hand. For if whilst Faith continues, God is pleased to vouchsafe the
Soul, through believing, such joys; much more when Faith cease, he will
vouchsafe the same Soul a fuller enjoyment of himself at the ending of Faith:
For why else are these present joys termed Salvation, and that as distinct from
that right to salvation, which otherwise Faith at all times estates us into,
but for this, that these joys are an entrance into, and a taking possession of
Glory, over and above what ordinarily Faith gives? And therefore they have the
name given them, as being the earnest of the same kind, unto that greater fum
is to be paid (as in all Contracts it uses to be) at the end of that
performance on one part: which end is when Faith ends. And so that is made the
set Date or time when this full payment is to begin, which this earnest
aforehand binds God unto.

And it were hard to suppose, that God would give such a part of these joys,
even whilst Faith continues, for so long a time as until the Resurrection, and
then withdraw all communication of himself both in Joy and Faith also. But I
leave the prosecution of this Argument, till I come to those words, Who has
also given us the earnest of the Spirit.

I also know, that by this phrase, The salvation of our souls, the Soul being
the eminent part of man, is often in Scripture, by a Synecdoche, put for the
whole person. And I must not deny but that ultimately it is intended here, it
extending it self to the whole of Salvation first, and last after Faith ended.
Which sense on the other hand many interpreters are for.

I only contend for this, That the salvation of the soul is intended also of
that Salvation which falls out in the midst between these joys (the earnest) in
this life, and that ultimate Salvation at the Resurrection, that is the
Salvation of the Soul, whilst separate, as being the next. It has a weight in
it, that Salvation and Damnation should so often be said to be of the soul by
Christ himself, as Mat. 26. 16. What shall it profit a Man to gain the whole
World (and so provide for his body) and lose his own Soul? And again, in
speaking of the Soul as considered apart from the Body, Mat. 10. 28. Fear not
them that are able to kill but the body, and are not able to kill the soul. But
that which is more conjunct to my purpose; it is observable, that this our
Apostle Peter should choose to use in this Epistle, more than any other
Apostle, this phrase of [Soul] in relation to Salvation, either as being the
eminent subject, and sometimes as the single subject both of Grace and
Salvation: So in this Chapter, You have purified your souls, etc. as the
immediate susceptive of the incorruptible seed (as was observed.) Then again,
in chap. 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts which war [against the Soul] and, 8.
25. Ye are returned to the Bishop of your Souls. Which he speaks as being the
eminent part, and (upon separation from the body) the special charge he has
pastoral care of. And more directly to our purpose, chapter 4. last v. he exhorts
them when they come to die, to commit their souls to God, as then being to be
separate from their bodies. Now it were hard to think that this Salvation to
come should bear the title and name of the salvation of the soul in this and
other Scriptures; and Heb. 10. v. last. Jam. 5. v. last.
that yet when this Soul shall in the other World come to subsist for a long
time single and alone, and then be properly and without figure: A mere soul
without a body, a lonesome soul: That during that state it should not be the
subject of this Salvation, and so intended here, when more properly and
literally, if ever, it is the salvation of the Soul. And it would be yet more
strange, that the phrase, salvation of the Soul, should be wholly restrained
unto that estate of the Soul, when remitted to the body at Resurrection, and
only unto that. And that word, the soul, should serve only synecdochically as
a part put to signify the whole man, as then it is to be raised up: but
especially, it were strangest of all, if it should be confined and limited in
this place of Peter, wherein this salvation of the soul is set forth, for the
comfort of such as were to lay down their tabernacles of their bodies for
Christ (as this Peter speaks of himself in the next Epistle,) and whose faith
was then to cease with their lives, whose expectations therefore he would in
this case certainly pitch upon that salvation of the soul next, which is this
of the soul separate. To confirm all which,

That which further invited me to this place, was this phrase [The end of your
Faith] especially upon the consideration that he speaks it unto such
Christians, who in these times were (as he foretells, chapter 4. ver. 4.) shortly
to be martyred, and at present were sorely tried (v. 7. of this Chapter) and in
the last verse of the fourth, he thereupon instructs and exhorts them to
commit their souls (when they die) to be kept by God: And so understood in a
proper and literal sense, this salvation of their souls is in all respects
termed, The end of their Faith.

First, in that it is the next and immediate event that Faith ends and
determines in, as Death is said to be the end of life: So noting forth, that
when Faith ends, this Salvation of the Soul begins and succeeds it. The end of
a thing signifies the immediate event, issue, period thereof. As of wicked men
it is said, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3. and Heb. 10. last v. Apostasy
and unbelief are said to be a drawing back unto perdition. And on the contrary,
there Faith is termed a believing to the salvation of the Soul: And both note
out the final event and onsequent of each, and salvation of the soul to be the
end of faith, when men continue and go on to believe, until their faith arrive
at, and attaineth this Salvation of the Soul. To this sense also, Romans 6. 22.
You have your fruit in holiness, and the [end] everlasting life. And the
Apostle Peter having in the foregoing verses celebrated the fruits and workings
of their faith in this life, as in supporting them gloriously under the sorest
trials, v. 7. and then sometimes filling their hearts with joy unspeakable and
glorious, v. 8. he here at last concludes with what will be the end or issue
of it in that other life, when faith it self shall cease; and what it is that
then they shall receive, Receiving (after all this) the end of your faith, the
salvation of your souls, (...), in the present, by a frequent and usual
Enallage of time, being put for the future: for ye shall receive (or being
about to receive) to show the certainty of it: that when Faith shall end, you
may be sure on it, even of that Salvation, (that great Salvation so spoken of by
the Prophets, v. 10.) of your souls, which as it has no end to be put unto it,
as Faith has: so no interruption or space of time to come between (during
which your souls should not be actually saved) A salvation of your souls singly
(whilst through death they shall so exist) as well as of the same souls
primarily, and more eminently, when both soul and body shall be reunited,

2. The end of your Faith, that is, of your aims and expectations in your
Faith: the end importing the aim or expectation, which is also proper and a
literal sense of that word. And upon this account also the salvation of the
soul, when they should die, that being the very next thing their eyes must
needs be upon, is therefore here intended.

And 3. The end of your faith, that is, as being that for which the great God
(who keeps us by his power through faith unto salvation, v. 5.) has wrought
this faith in you. Accordingly we find it termed the work of faith, 1 These. 1.
3. Which when God has fully wrought, and brought to that degree he aimed at in
this life; (or to use the Apostles own expression of it, 2 These. 1. 11.) when
God has fulfilled the work of faith with power, he then crowns it with this
Salvation of the Soul without end. As James speaks of Patience, when it has
had its perfect Work, chap. 1. 4. compared with verse 12. And so speaks my
Text, for this self-same thing he has wrought us. And therefore when this
Faith shall cease which he wrought for this, he will attain his end without
delay: and you (says he) shall attain your end also: and Faith thus ceasing, if
this salvation of the soul did not succenturiate and recruit it anew, the end
of this Faith were wholly and altogether present destructive loss unto the
soul in its well-being, until the Resurrection. (...) pro (...)


4. The [End] signifies the perfection and consummation of any thing, as Christ
is said to be the End of the Law, Romans 10. 4. and so the meaning is, That your
faith, which is but an imperfect knowing God, shall then, when it cease, be
swallowed up of sight, (which is all one with that salvation here) tanquam
perfectibile, a perfection, as that which is imperfect, is said to be by that
which is perfect, 1 Cor. 13. 10. Thus much for the literal and proper import of
the word [End.]

Now then, If we take the word [End] in its proper meaning, and the word [Soul]
likewise in its native proper meaning also, which sense in Reason should be
first served (when the scope will bear it) then it makes for that purpose, more
fitly, which we have had in hand.

.
That nothing may be wanting in this last place cited, to make up all the
Particulars in the foregoing Sections insisted on: So it is, that the Apostle
Peter does further plainly insinuate, That this Salvation (here) consists in
the Sight and Vision of Christ, (which was one Particular aforementioned)
accompanied with Joy unspeakable, and glorious. The Coherence (if observed)
makes this forth clearly: For whereas in the Verse immediately foregoing, he
had commended their present State of Faith by this, Whom [now] though you see
not, yet believing, rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and glorious. That [Now] you
see not, (in this Life) is set in opposition, and carries a promise with it of
a time to come, wherein they should see, even as Christ said to his Disciples,
Joh. 13. 33. and 36. compared, Whither I go, I [Now] say to you, ye cannot
come; but thou shall follow me [AFTERWARDS]. So here [NOW] believing, (which is
the Principle at the present which you live upon) you see him not; but when the
end of your faith shall come, you shall then see him; and in this it is
consists the salvation of your soul. So that still it carries on what I have
before spoken unto, That when Faith cease, Sight comes; yea, perfects and
swallows it up as was said even now, out of 1 Cor. 12, 13.

And let me add this, That the Apostle on purpose does bring the mention of
this supereminent fruit of faith, (Even now when we see not) that believing, ye
yet rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious: On purpose, I say, to make way
for the raising up their thoughts and apprehensions, how infinitely
transcending that salvation of their souls must be, when Faith ending, they
attain to Sight, to see him face to face, whom their souls have loved: It is
implicitly as if he had said unto them, Oh! think with your selves, what Joy,
what Glory that must needs be, which exceeds and surpasses this that now
accompanies your faith, in an answerable proportion, as much as sight of
Christ's presence, and face to face, must be supposed to excel the knowledge of
him by faith, which sees him but as absent, darkly!

And further, give me leave to improve this Notion: You may take this assured
evidence, That your souls shall then see, and enjoy God, when your faith shall
CEASE, which will be, when once your souls shall come to be separate from your
bodies by death: In that, even now, in this life, it is your Souls and Spirits
that are the immediate receptives, or partakers and subjects of such glorious
Joys,

The soul enjoys them (though in the body, yet) without the help or concurrence
of the body, or the phantasms of it: yea, such Raptures do pass understanding,
that is, the common way of understanding, which by the use and help of the
body, or images in the fancy, the Mind exercises in other things, and which do
concur with the understanding ordinarily in faith. But this joy falls into, and
is illapsed within the soul it self immediately; yea, the weakness of your
bodies, and bodily spirits, will not permit you to have so much of this joy, as
otherwise the soul is now capable of by faith. And therefore by this
experimental taste aforehand in your own souls, you may be ascertained, That
your souls, when separate from your bodies by death, as well as when united
again unto their bodies, shall enjoy this great Salvation.

And thus much for the first Point raised out of the words, which did undertake
an Argumentation for a separate soul's Glory and Happiness. (1.) From the
Condition of the Soul, as the immediate subject of Grace wrought in it. (2.)
From God's Ordination of the Work wrought, To raise the soul up to life, whilst
Sin should bring Dissolution upon the Body. (3.) From the Scope of the Worker,
God himself; who as an Efficient will accomplish the End, when his Work for
that end is finished. And all these, as comprehended in what the very first
view and front of the words of my Text hold out: God has wrought us for the
self-same thing.

.
But lo! a greater matter is here. It is not simply said, God has wrought us
for this; but, He that has wrought us for this thing, is God: Thereby calling
upon us to consider, How great an Hand or Efficient is here, even God, who has
discovered in a transcendent manner his Glory, in the ordaining and contriving
of this Work unto this great end. Take it not therefore as a bare Demonstration
given from God's working Us to this end, such as is common to other Agents, (as
has been said). But further, a Celebration of the Greatness and Glory of God,
in his having contrived this with so high an Hand, like unto the Great God: And
is as if he had said, There is a Design in this, worthy of God, He has shown
himself in this to be the Great God indeed. He that has wrought us for this is
God.

When God's ordinary Works are spoken of, it suffices himself to say, God did
thus, or this: But when God's Works of Wonder, then often you find such an
illustrious Note of Reflection upon, and pointing at Him, to have done as God.
And it is ordinary among Men, when you would commend the known Worth of the
Artist, to say, He that wrought this is such a Man, so to commend the
Workmanship.

And thus both when the Holy Ghost speaks of this Glory it self, (which is the
End for which here) his style is, Wbose Maker and Builder is God, Heb. 11. 10.
And in like equipage here of Preparation to that End, he says, He that has
wrought us [for this thing] is God. In this very Chapter, (2 Cor. 5. to go no
further,) when the great Work of Salvation, in the whole of it, is spoken of,
he prefaceth thus to it: All things are of God, who has reconciled us to
Himself, etc. That is, in this Transaction he has appeared like that God [of
whom all things else are] and so more eminently in this than in all, or at
least, any other Work. What there is said of Salvation in the whole, is here of
that particular Salvation of a separate Soul. You have the like Emphasis put,
Heb. 2. 10. of bringing many Sons to Glory, [It became him] says the Text. Now
put all together, and the result is:

The Second Point.
That to have provided a Glory for separate Souls of Just Men, wrought upon in
this Life, is a Dispensation becoming the Great God: yea, and that there is an
Artifice and Contrivement therein worthy of God, and like unto himself, such as
he has showed in other his Works of Wonder.

There are two Branches of this Doctrine, which I set otherwise out thus:

1. That it is a thing becoming the Great God, thus to deal with such a
separate Soul, having been wrought upon. 2. That God has designed, and brings
forth therein, a glorious Artifice and Contrivement, such as argue him a God
Wise in Counsel, and Wonderful in Working.
I. First Branch of this second Doctrine, That it becomes God.

The Account of this Becomingness is best made forth, by comparing and bringing
together into an Interview, both the inward and outward Condition of such a
Soul, and then the Relations which God bears to it, such as should thereupon
move him (through his good pleasure) thus to deal with it.

You know I at first undertook chiefly Reasons of Congruity or Becomingness,
and such always consist of two parts, and when the one answers and suiteth to
the other, then the Harmony of such a Reason is made up.

Let Us therefore consider,

1. What is on the Soul's part. 2. What is on God's part.
.
I. On the Soul's part.
Therein two things:

1. The Species, the Kind, and intrinsecal Rank of Being, which this Creature
(we call the Soul) thus wrought upon, stands in before God.

2. The outward Condition or Case this Soul is left in upon its parting with
the Body, unless God takes it up into Glory.

First; For its Rank or Kind of Being.

Therein two things:

1. This Soul was by its first Creation a Spirit, and that in the substance or
native kind thereof; and in that respect (considered apart for its Union with
the Body) is in a more special manner allied unto God, than all other Creatures
(but Angels) are.

You have the Pedigree of Man, both in respect of Body and Soul, set out, Acts
17. The Extract of our Bodies, in v. 26. He has made of one Blood all Nations
of Men. So then on that side (as we say) in respect of our Bodies, there is a
Consanguinity of all Men, being made of one Blood, between one another: But
then in respect of our Souls, we are God's Offspring, v. 28. and so on that
side there is an Alliance (not of Consanguinity) unto God, upon the account of
having been created immediately by him, and in the very substance of our Souls
made like him, and in his Image; and yet we are not begotten of his Essence or
Substance, which is only proper to his Great Son. And in a correspondency unto
this, God is styled, Heb. 12. 9. The Father of our Spirits, in distinction from
the Fathers of our Flesh or Bodies; (see the words:) Which Alliance or
Fatherhood, take it as in common with all Men's Spirits, lies in this, That he
not only created our Souls immediately out of nothing, but in his own Image, as
to the substance of them, which Image or Likeness other Creatures did not bear,
which yet were made out of nothing, as the Chaos was; both which appear, by
putting two places together, Zech. 12. 1. He frames their Spirits (speaking of
the Souls of Men) and that, [altogether] says the Psalmist, Psalm. 33. 15. (so
Ainsworth; and others read it) that is, both, each of those Spirits; and also
wholly and totally, every whit of the substance of them: Creatio est productio
totius entis; for Creation differs from Generation in this, that it is a
raising up or producing the whole of a being out of mere nothing, that is to
say, [altogether,] whereas Generation presupposes pre-existent matter; as in
the generation of our Bodies, which are not wholly and every whit of God
immediately, but the Parents afford the matter, and the formative virtue
besides, by which our Bodies are framed. So then, in respect of our first
Creation, our Souls (apart considered) are thus allied to God, to which our
Bodies are not; being Spirits in the very Being of them, that altogether do owe
that their Being to him.

But there is a taint come upon the Souls of all Men by Sin, so as this
alliance is thereby worn out, yea forfeited, until it be restored. Now
therefore these Souls (the only subject of our Discourse) being such as God
has wrought, and so are become his Workmanship by a new and far nobler
Creation, and thereby created Spirit anew, according to what Christ says, That
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. Hereupon these Souls are Spirit, upon a
double account: as you say of Sugar, it is double-refined; so this is now
become a spiritual Spirit, or Spirit spiritualized and sublimated; yea, and
thereby the inward Sanctuary, the Holy Romans 7. 22. 25.
of Holies, the seat of God's most spiritual Worship; which the Body is not,
but only as it is the outward Temple or Instrument of this new-made Spirit.

And hereupon that original Affinity to God of Spirit, is not only restored,
but endeared; for now there is both the stuff, or the groundwork, and then the
workmanship, or embroidery upon it, and both of them the Works of God; that so
look as the Gold wrought upon, commends the Enamel, and then again the Enamel
enhaunceth the value of the Gold, so as both are considered in the price; so
it is here with this Soul wrought by God in both respects.

.
Secondly, Consider we now again the Case and outward Condition of such a Soul,
that of it self would fall out to it upon the Dissolution of the Body.

1. It fails of all sorts of Comforts it had in and by its union with the Body
in this World, Luke 16. 9. When you fail, says Christ, speaking of Death, it is
your City-phrase when any of you break, and perhaps are thereby driven into
another Kingdom, as the Soul now is.

2. Then, if ever, a Man's flesh and his heart fails, Psalm. 73. 26.

3. And (which is worse) a Man's Faith fails or cease after Death, and all
his spiritual Knowledge as in this Life, it is the express phrase used 1 Cor. 13.
at the 8th verse, and which is prosecuted to the end of that Chapter. And so
all that communion it had with God in this Life is cut off: It is of all
Creatures left the most destitute and forlorn, if God provides not.

And yet fourthly, It is now upon Death (which it never was before) immediately
brought into the presence of God. Naked Soul comes before naked God. Eccles. 12.
7. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall
return unto God that gave it: it is put out of house and home, and turned upon
its Father again.

This as to the Souls Condition.

II. God's part.
.
This is a special season for God to show his Love to such a Soul, if ever
before or after, an opportunity, such as falls not out, neither before, whilst it
was in the Body; nor after, when it is united to the Body again, at the
Resurrection: if ever therefore he means to show a respect unto a poor Soul,
which is his so near Kindred and Alliance, it must be done now. We read in
Psalm. 73. 26. My Flesh and my Heart fails (as at Death to be sure it does)
but God is the strength of my Heart, both in this Life and at Death to support
me [and my portion for ever] in the Life to come without any interruption or
vacant space of time, as that [ever] imports: and that David spoke this with an
Eye unto the Glory to come, when Heart, and Flesh, and all in this World he
foresaw would fail him, is evident by what he had immediately meditated in the
words before, ver. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, so in this Life,
and afterward (that being ended) shall receive me unto Glory. The
contemplation whereof makes him cry out again, ver. 25. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? for all things else will fail me one day, when my Flesh utterly fails
me also: And There is none upon Earth (where he had at present many Comforts
and Comforters) in comparison of thee. You see God is the portion of the whole
of his time, even for ever, as ver. 26. and his Estate in Heaven and Earth
divide that time and portion between them, and no middle state between both,
but when the one cease the other begins, for between them two must be the
[for ever,] and when all fail him which he had on Earth, then God alone becomes
his Happiness in Heaven. But this only in general shows what God is and will be
to a Soul in this condition.

.
But I having undertaken to proceed by way of congruity, I must further, more
particularly show, how in a correspondency to this inward and outward state of
this Soul, he shows himself God, and how meet and becoming a thing it is for
God to receive it into Glory, upon the consideration of many Relations, which
he professedly bears to such a Soul.

1. God is a Spirit, and thereupon in a special manner (as Wisd. 11. 26.) The
Lord is a lover of Souls above all his other Creation. So it is there, Thou art
merciful to all because they are thine, O Lord thou lover of Souls [God is a
Spirit] when therefore this naked, and withal sublimated Spirit (by its being
born again by his own Spirit) and so assimulated to God himself, a pure Spark
now freed and severed from its Dust and Ashes, flying up (or is carried rather
by Spirits, the Angles, out of their like spiritual Love to Luke 26. 22. Heb.
1. ult.
it as a Spirit) unto that great Spirit, that element of Spirits, it will
surely find union and coalition with him, and be taken up unto him: for if, as
Christ speaks, John 4. 23. God being a Spirit, therefore seeks for such as
worship in Spirit and Truth, that is, he loves, delights in such, as a Man does
in a Companion or Friend, who suits him. And does God seek for such whilst they
are on Earth? Then surely when such Spirits shall come to him, and have such a
grand occasion, and (indeed) the first occasion in such an immediate way to
appear before him, in such a manner and upon such a change as this, as they
never did before; these Spirits also having been the Seat, the inner Temple of
all this spiritual Worship and sanctifying of him in this World: surely God who
sought such before, will now take them into his Bosom and Glory. We also read
Isa. 57. 16, 17. of the regard he bears to Persons of a contrite and humble
Spirit to revive them upon this superadded consideration, that they are Souls
and Spirit, and so thereby allied to him, the lofty One. Hear how in this case
he utters himself, The Spirit would fail before me, says he, and the Souls which
I have made. He speaks of their very Souls properly and respectively
considered, And [them] it is which he considering, and it moves him unto pity;
for he speaks of that in Man, whereof God is in a peculiar manner the Maker or
Creator [The Spirit which I have made] (says he) and it is one of the eminent
Titles he takes into his Coat, The framer of the Spirit of Man within him,
Zech. 1. 12. as in many other places: This is argued also in that he speaks
of that in Man which is the subject sensible of his immediate Wrath. I will not
contend for ever; nor Child of Light walking in Darkness.
will I be always Wrath. (This I have observed in what is public of mine.) Now
what moves him to remove his Wrath from such an one? The Spirit would fail
(says he.) Now does God thus profess to have a regard to them in this Life, and
that upon this account, that they are Spirits, lest they should fail, or faint;
and shall we not think that when indeed otherwise they do fail (as after Death
you have heard (even now) Christ himself expresses they would) and would upon
all these considerations beforementioned, sink into utter desolation, unless
they were received into everlasting Habitations (as Christ there also speaks)
Do we think that God will not now entertain them? The time is now come, the
full time to have pity on them.

2. God at this season, forgets not, but full well remembers his Relation of
being [Their Creatour] both by the new, and also first Creation (the new
reviving and ingratiating the remembrance of the first) [The Souls which I have
made] said he in Esa. But in St. Peter this is more express, and mentioned as
that which indeed moves God (and should be accordingly a support to our Faith)
to take care of our Souls when we come to die, even upon this account, that he
is the faithful Creator of them, 1 Pet. 4. last. Wherefore let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the Keeping of their Souls to him,
in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. He speaks this specially unto such
as were continually exposed unto persecution unto death for Christ in those
Primitive times; which therefore, v. 12. he terms the fiery trial, and ver. 17.
forewarns them of a time of judgment was begun, and going on upon the of house
God, such as they had not yet felt; who yet, Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34. had suffered
reproach and spoiling of their Goods (as Peter writes to the same Jews)
hereupon Peter pertinently instructs them to commit the keeping of their Souls
unto God. At death you know it is that when Men's bodies are destroyed, and so
the season when their Souls to be separated therefrom, should be committed to
God's care; as our Darling (as our Translation) or lovely Soul, when separate
Psalm. 22. See Ainsw.
(as others) as Christ in David speaks, Ps. 22. And Peter had in his eye
Christ's example, and pointed them thereunto, who at his death committed his
separate Soul or Spirit into the hands of God, Luke 23. 46. and the word commit
is one (...).
and the same in both these places: only there is this difference, that
whereas Christ says, Father, I commit, Peter substitutes another title of
God's (there being more than one Relation moving God, and strengthening our
Faith to this) even of faithful Creator. And I understand not the first
Creation only or chiefly here meant by Peter; but the second Creation chiefly
(which brings into repute and acceptance with God the first again together
with its own) and so God is thereupon engaged to be faithful in his care and
provision for such Souls, according to his promises: And faithfulness does
always respect and refer unto Promises; and my reason why thus I understand it,
is, because I find God's faithfulness still annexed unto his calling of us,
that is converting us which is all one with this new Creation: Faithful is he
that has called you, that is, made you new Creatures. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1 These. 5.
24. And I find that David also urges it upon God as a motive, as in other
Psalms, So Ps. 138. 8. Forsake not the works of thine own hands, that is, this
double workmanship of thine of the first, and then superadded unto that, of the
second creation, which he urges thereby to move him to perfect the work begun,
and to be merciful unto him for ever, in the former part of that verse.

3. God professes himself the Father of Spirits; which relation, though it
speaks his being the Creator of them, at the first, yet has something more of
bowels in it: it says withal something further, when it falls out that such
Spirits, as he is a Father unto by the first creation, are also the subjects of
His eternal Love, by Grace and Election unto the Adoption of Children, as Ephesians.
1. 3, 4, 5. see the words. Which Love, having accordingly taken hold of their
Souls by a work of Grace wrought upon them in this life, thereby owning them as
his, in this case, that God that is a Father of their Spirits by the Law of the
first creation, is in a more transcendent manner become the Father of the same
Spirits by Grace, and the second Creation superadded: Hence it falls out, in a
parallel way, that (as it was said) such Souls were become [Spirit] upon a
double account, that is Spirits for the substance of their being, and again
Spirit, by being born again of the [Spirit] so answerably it is that God stands
in relation unto them as a Father of their Spirits upon the like double
respect. And this is equitable upon a very great account; for his relation of
Father is more eminent to his Grace by Election, and then again by the grace of
his second Creation, than it could be any way supposed to be by the first
Creation. And therefore is set and pitched in like singularity and eminency upon
the same object, that is, their Spirits. And hence it may well, yea must be
supposed and acknowledged, That if God did make such a Darling of the Soul,
such an account of it by creation, as to entitle himself so specially the
Father thereof, then certainly this love of Grace much more has in like
equipage taken up the same gracious special relation in its kind of Father
thereunto: not only because Nature shall never be found to exceed Grace in its
favors; but that indeed the motives are far greater, that God should extend
the like and greater privileges where he meant to love by Election and Choice,
than he did where he loved only by a due and meet Law of Creation: So that when
God shall profess himself a Father to their Spirits, speaking to such as are
his Elect, he strongly insinuates thereby, That he is by Grace likewise the
Father of their Spirits in a peculiar manner. And truly that speech of our
Savior at his death confirms it, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit: It
was not barely as a Father of his Spirit by creation (as you all know) but by
everlasting Love, and so in that respect also in a peculiar manner the Father
of his Spirit; and therefore as to a Father he commends his separate Spirit
unto him. And this he did, although he was to rise again in less than three
whole days space.

Now we read Heb. 12. 12. the Apostle to hold forth this very relation of God's
being a Father of Spirits, with this promise thereunto annexed, That they
should live: which relation of Father, etc. although it be there explicitly
spoken in respect of their first Creation (which is common unto the Saints with
others) yet being uttered of and unto Men in the state of Grace (as those were
supposed whom he there exhorts, and that to move them to be subject unto him
as such, with promise, that they should live) it evidently respects not
merely the relation of Father in respect of what was past the act of creating
them, but it looks to the future, That they depended upon him (as Children do
upon Fathers for their future livelihood, so these) for to live in him and with
him as a Father to their Spirits by Grace. For I take hold of that Word [and
live]; this Life is well interpreted by ver. 14. They shall see God, that is,
be glorified, and so I conclude all thus, That if he would have them be subject
unto God in holiness, as upon that relation, as unto the Father of Spirits,
with this promise, That they should live; then surely one special aim of the
Promise is answerable, and has this Eye, That God as a Father of their Spirits
will therefore take care of their Spirits singly, and so when separate, that
they shall live. And that accordingly he will give demonstration of this
special relation born to their Spirits (when the occasion shall be) considered
apart in bestowing this Life on them: and truly when is it more proper for him
to show himself as a Father, than when their Souls after their subjection to
him in Holiness here accomplished; and when that, as naked Spirits they come to
stand in need, and stand before him in his Presence, being now turned out of
house and home, and quite cashered out of this World, and come stripped and naked
of all but Holiness unto their Father (for it is said, They return to God that
gave them) who proves to be their Father by Grace. And doubt not of it but he
will certainly then own them, and give them a Father's Blessing, and not reject
them as if they were but Bastards and no Children (as that Chapter to the
Hebrews speaks) but as Spirits, who as Sons have served him, and been subject
to him.

Add to this, Fourthly, God his being our God, which is more home to the
Demonstration of this Point than all the former. The Text says, He that wrought
us for this, is God. I add, he is your God. And this alone, if we will take the
Scriptures verdict, will carry it, and lo, as he is styled The Father of
Spirits in common, and yet withal a Father of their Spirits, out of special
Love: So in like manner, he is styled both The God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
(that is, of Man, Numb. 16. 22.
Job 12. 20.) thus in common; and also to his Elect, I am your God by Grace.
And these two Relations, God and Father, are commensurate, and exactly
parallel, whether they be applied unto all Men in common, or to the Elect in
special, he is termed, The God of the Spirits, and likewise, The Father of the
Spirits of all Men: So in common, answerably he is your God, and your Father,
by special Grace to his Elect; both which in this latter respect you find yoked
hand in hand, Joh. 20. 17. Look how far he is a God of the one, so far a Father
also extends in the other: And look how far that he is our God, so far
reaches also that he is our Father. If therefore the God of our Spirits, to
provide for them because he is our God, then answerably the Father of our
Spirits in the like peculiarness, because our Father. And so the proof of this
fourth Particular, will add further strength and confirmation to that we
presented in the former.

Now that his being our God (which is the substance of the Covenant of Grace)
does engage him to provide Glory for separate Souls, That one instance of
Abraham (The Father of the faithful, and we all his Sons personated in him) is
a sufficient evidence, God did profess himself The God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and unto Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. personally, I am thy abundant Reward,
(which respected the Life to come) and his Friend, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7.

Now the Scriptures of the New Testament do improve this relation of God's unto
us, unto two Inferences drawn from Abraham's Instance: whereof the one is the
point before us.

The first is Christ's Inference from thence, That therefore Abraham's Soul
lives, and Abraham both Soul and Body shall rise again, for God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living, Matthew. 22. 31. Thus Christ.

2. Paul's Collection from the same Promise, is, That God had provided in the
mean time for Abraham's Soul before the Resurrection, a City, and an House
therein for him. Thus Heb. 11. 16. But now they desire a better Country, that
is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he
has prepared for them a City. To give light to this, Paul had represented the
Story and Case of Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs, in the verses before,
to have been this; That God had indeed promised the Land of Canaan to him and
them, ver. 8, 9. whereupon, ver. 13. it is said, That these all died in Faith,
not having received the Promises, being Strangers in the Land; yea, not having
a foot of Land in the Land of Promise, as Stephen speaks, Acts 7. 5, 6, 7. And
also Paul, in the 9th verse of this Heb. 11. Now then, when they died, what was
it their Faith expected in stead thereof? The 10th verse tells us, He looked
for a City whose Maker and Builder is God. From which compared, observe, That
when he died, his Faith was thus pitched to look for this City, in stead of
that Land of Canaan promised. This was the expectation of their Faith on their
part. Well, but how does it appear, that this flowed from God's having
professed himself to be the God of Abraham, etc. his Reward, and his Friend?
You have this clear in the 16th verse, where you have the whole summed up as
the Conclusion of the Story, and as the proof and ground hereof; but now they
desire a better Country, that is, an heavenly: there is their faith and
expectation when they should come to die. Then it follows, Wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a City; which
spoken in full answer to that their expectation at their deaths, to show, that
God in professing himself to be their God, he had thereby engaged himself
according to his own intent in that promise, to make this provision for them at
their death: The words are express, Wherefore God is not ashamed; what should
this mean in this Coherence, but that his declaring himself to be their God,
did import and carry this with it, That he had provided this Estate for them at
their death, even an heavenly; and, that otherwise (as the Apostle glosseth
upon it) he had not come up unto the amplitude of, nor filled full this
covenanted Engagement and Profession of His being their God. Will you have it
in plain English (as we speak;) if he had not made this provision for their
Souls, he would have been ashamed to have been called their God: thus deeply
does this oblige him, That he is our God and Father, which is the point in hand.

And judge of this in the light of all that Reason we have hitherto carried
along; and again, let this inference of the Apostle mutually serve to confirm
us in all that Reason. For poor Abraham to be driven out of his own Country by
God, who called him to his foot, and said no more, but as a Master to his
Servant, Take your Cloak, and follow me (who must presently, without more ado,
trig and foot it after his Master) as Isa. 41. 2. and then to live a stranger
in the Land of Promise, upon the faith, that God would be his God: which faith
in him, was also to cease when he came to die. If this God in this case should
not have taken care to answer his faith in some greater way, in stead of the
possession of Canaan; and that after, upon his being turned out of that Country
too, which he sojourned in during this life, if God had not provided another
House, or Country, or City for his Soul, that was to live, to bring it into,
when it should be deprived of all in this World; The Apostle tell us, God (in
this case) would have been ashamed to have been called his God: which now,
having provided so abundantly for him upon dying, there is superabundant cause
to say, God is not ashamed; for that is a diminutive employing, That he
infinitely exceeds that their expectation could be supposed to be.

Let us but view the force of this inference of the Apostle's (and so of all
the reasonings hitherto read) But according to man, or what is found amongst
men, (and God will be sure infinitely to surpass men in his ways of favor.)
Take an ordinary friend, if his friend be turned out of house and home,
plundered, banished, driven out of all, as the Steward in that parable, Luke 16.
was, and comes to his Friend at midnight, as in that other Parable, Luke 11. 5,
6. will not his friends entertain him into their houses; as ver. 9, of Luke 16.
yea, and rise at midnight to do it, as ver. 5, 6. in that Parable of Luke 11.
Shall profession of friendship engage and oblige men to do this, and shall not
God's professing himself to be our God, Father, Friend, engage his heart much
more? Nay, will he not so entertain them, as shall exceed all wonderment? What
need I say more than this? Wherefore He is not ashamed to be called their God:
He will therefore give you an entertainment that shall be worthy of his being
your God.

The fifth and last Consideration is, That these separate Souls having done and
finished all their work, that in order to Glory God has appointed them for
ever to do, they now at death appear before him as a Judge and Rewarder. And
that is the fifth Relation moving God to bestow at this season such a Glory on
them. How that then the Soul returns to God, you have heard again and again out
of Eccl. 12. 7. and that it is upon the account of his being the Judge thereof
at the end of their work in this life. The Chaldee Paraphrase has long since
glossed upon it, It returns to God, that it may stand in Judgment before him. In
this life it came unto God by Faith, as the Apostle speaks, believing that God
is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently Heb. 11. 6.
seek him; and now at the end of its Faith, it comes unto God for the Reward of
its Faith, as some interpret that 1 Pet. 1. 9. (which we so largely have
insisted on.) This is certain, That in that Promise to Abraham, to be his God,
he intended and included, his being to him an exceeding great Reward. And so we
come to connect this fifth Head with the foregoing. Genesis 15. 1.
And therefore if the being his God, moved him to prepare that City against his
death (as has been said;) then surely his being his Reward, does also then
take place. I shall not omit it, because it falls in the next Chapter, Heb. 12.
23. that in that stupendous Assembly of Heaven, God the Judge of all is
mentioned between the Church of the firstborn which are written in Heaven;
this before: and the Spirits of justified Men made perfect; this after it: For
there are none of these Firstborn, or the Spirits of just Men, do come to sit
down there, but they pass the award of this Judge first, for they sit down by
him; and surely, having done all their Work in the time of that day is allotted
to each man to work in, it is a righteous thing with God to give them a Reward
in the evening of this day, (which is Christ's time set for rewarding, and it
is the twelfth and last hour succeeding the eleventh of the day, Matthew. 20. 6,
and 9. See Brugensis, Maldonat. etc. Lev. 19. 13.
compared) which is when the night of death comes. Now there is a Law given by
God, that the wages to a man hired should be given him (by him that set him
awork) in his day, that is, says the Septuagint, the very same day, so as his
Work, or the wages of his Work, abide not with thee all the night until the
morning, Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
says God, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Did God take care for hirelings, when their Work was
done not to stay any space of time, no not a night, and does he not fulfill this
himself unto his Sons that serve him? Surely yes: he defers not, nor puts them
off to the morning of the Resurrection, as the Psalmist elegantly calls it,
Psalm. 17. last. It abides not with him all that dark and longsome night, or
space after death, in which their bodies rest in the grave, which is termed
Man's long home: and, Eccles. 12. 5.
The days of darkness are many (says Solomon) No, he rewards them in the
evening of the day, besides what he will add to it in the morning. It is
observable, that Rev. 6. 9, 10. concerning the separate Souls slain for Christ,
that whilst they cry for Justice on their enemies only, And when he had opened
the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain for the
Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, and they cried with a loud
voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? that they had white robes given them
to quiet them in the mean time; ver. 11. And white Robes were given unto every
one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little
season; till they heard that vengeance also was executed on that Roman Empire
for their blood shed. And thus to deal is a righteous thing with God.

Thus you have seen the Point confirmed from all sorts of relations that God
bears unto us, by congruous Reasons, that so it becomes God, the great God to
do -- He that has wrought us for this thing, is God. And so much for this
first Branch of this second Doctrine.

.
The II. Branch of the second Doctrine.
That there is a glorious Contrivement and Workmanship carried on in this
Dispensation of his, like unto the great God indeed.

This carries on this Point yet higher. For, it is not only an Ordination
becoming God, (upon the respects mentioned) but there is an Artifice, a
Workmanship in it, such as he uses to show in his Works of Wonder, even in
this, That he should work upon Men's Souls in this life, and then bring them
into a Glory, he had in the mean space been a working also for those their
Souls. This is the great God indeed.

When God secretly bestows Cost and Curiosity in preparing matters for such or
such an end; and then again, as hiddenly, has laid out a greater Art, Skill
and Workmanship upon that end it self; and then has exactly suited and matched
the one to the other: when All comes to be finished, and both wrought and
brought together, then will an infinite surpassing Glory arise unto God out of
all, which deserves to have this Notoriety (that is here) put upon it. He that
has wrought this for that, Is GOD: and lo, this is found here, which is
demonstrated, if we view,

1. Each of these Workmanships singly and apart. 2. Jointly, as designed and
fitted each to the other.
.
1. Each singly: If there were no such ordination of the one for the other, yet
so considered, they deserve to have, each, an [He that has wrought this, is
God] to be written under it.

1. For his Artifice, in working us in this life. Learned Cameron has but one
In his Myrothecium.
Note upon this whole fifth Chapter, and and it falls to be upon this very Word
[who has wrought] and it is this: This word (says he) as used by the
Septuagint, signifies Rem expolire rudem and informem, (...).
To polish a thing that is rude, and without fashion: for which he gives
instance out of Exodus 35. 33. in Bezaleel's work (whom, as the 31, 32 verses
speak of him, God had filled with his Spirit in all Wisdom, in all Workmanship,
to devise cunning Work.) And again, the same word is used of the Temple-work
(that other was for Mose's Tabernacle) 1 King. 6. 36. by Solomon, which how
transcendent a structure it was, you have all read or heard. An infinitely
surpassing Art then has the Spirit himself (who is the immediate worker in
this) shown in the framing, and hewing, and curiously carving and engraving
those living Stones, that grow up into a Temple unto God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
especially considering the utter remoteness, indisposedness, yea crookedness
and perverseness in the matter wrought upon (our souls, filled with the
contrary form and workmanship of Satan) Ye are his workmanship, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 10. And truly, if we could enlarge upon all the varieties of
dealings God uses to each Soul to work it, the several sorts of gracious
dispositions he impresseth and carveth upon it, the manifold actings of every
Soul drawn forth by him, you may take a view of some in the very next chapter
to that of my Text, 2 Cor. 6. from the 4. ver. In much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, v. 5. In Stripes, in Imprisonments,
in Tumults, in Labors, in Watching, in Fastings; ver. 6. By Pureness, by
Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love
unfeigned; ver. 7. By the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left; ver. 8. By Honor and
dishonor, by evil Report and good Report: as deceivers, and yet true: ver. 9.
As unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live: as chastened,
and not killed: ver. 10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making
many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. ver. 11. O ye
Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. What a glorious
Embroydery upon the Soul of a poor Believer will in all these things appear,
when finished! Psalm. 45. 13, 14. The King's daughter is all glorious within,
her Clothing is of wrought Gold: she shall be brought unto the King, in
Raiment of needle work. 2. For his Art and Workmanship bestowed in the glory of
the Soul in the other World; if any work (but Christ: God-man) be his
Masterpiece, it is the framing of that House, and building, spoken of ver. 1.
of this chap. We have a building of God, a house not made with hands: And the
11. of the Hebrews v. 10. expressly uses two artificial words, (...) the
Artificer in it, and (...) the Artificer in it, and the Builder of it, that is,
who has shown his Art and Skill in building of it. So then in each, his
Workmanship appears. I do but add this toward the confirmation of the main
point in hand.

Has the Great God perfected both Works upon the Soul as much as he means to
work in Heaven? Also prepared a Building for it? And will he then (think we)
let both lie empty? of the one, says Heb. 11. 16. [He has prepared for them a
City] of the Soul, in like manner [He has wrought us for this self-same thing]
will God (think we) leave this his House to stand desolate, when he has been
at such cost in both? Does any Man or, Landlord build or repair an House, and
then let it lie empty, when he has a Tenant fit for it? God is said not to be
a foolish Builder in respect to perfecting; and he is much less a careless
Builder, to neglect to take his Tenants into it, when both are ready and fitted
each for other. This for the first, viz: the consideration of each singly.

.
Let us consider them, next, jointly, that is, as they are in such a manner
wrought apart, so as to suit and match one the other, when brought together in
that manner, as it must be said of them. [For this thing has God wrought us]
Yea, and therein it is he has appeared to be the great God.

For therein, even to wonderment, does the Glory of God in his Works appear,
and that he is wise in counsel, and wonderful in working, when he has hiddenly
contrived one thing for another, when as each are in themselves, and apart
glorious. It is said by David of himself (and it is true of all men in their
measure) Psalm. 139. 15. I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth; that is, in my Mother's Womb, as the context shows;
which are termed the Lower parts of the Earth, as when Christ is said, Ephesians. 4.
to have descended into the lower part of the Earth; that is, to be conceived in
the Womb of a Virgin; when a Child is born, a lump of flesh, animated with a
Soul, comes forth, curiously wrought, etc. but wrought, for what? in David's
person (in which this was spoken) it was for a Kingdom, the supremest condition
of enjoyments in this World. But in every other man (that is born) it is that
he was curiously wrought, in a fitness and capacity to all things that are in
this World, made and prepared exactly for it long before it came into the World;
you may see it in Adam (our first pattern) more lively. God was busy for six
days in making this World, the Angels all that while stood wondering with
themselves, to what end, or for whom all this was prepared. At Job. 36. 7.
the end of the sixth day, they saw God to set down into the World this little
thing called Man; and then they ceased their wonderment, for they saw all this
World (prepared aforehand) set in Man's heart, and all in Man curiously wrought
and fitted for all things made in in this World, richly to enjoy, as 1 Timothy 6.
17. We may apply that in the text, to this, it appeared, That he that has made
Man for this self-same thing is God; both works of wonder apart, and yet as
fitted to each other: All wonderment exceeding --. I might much more enlarge
upon the suiting of Christ the Head and Husband, and the Church his Body and
Wife, wrought and growing up to him in all ages, both apart, secretly and
hiddenly prepared, and each so glorious in themselves, and yet put together.
Let us defer our Admiration hereat until the latter day. Just thus it is in
fitting the Soul for that glory: and again, that glory in Heaven for that Soul:
God works the one for the other apart. -- The very similitude in the former
verses do import so much; He styleth Glory in Heaven a being clothed upon, and
Holiness here he compares to an under-garment, which that of Glory is to be put
over, or upon: There was never a curious Artist in making Garments that ever
took measure of the proportions of an upper and under Garment, to fit the one
to the other, as God has in proportioning his work upon us here, and his
preparation of Glory for each of us in the World to come: He has took exact
measure, and his Law is (that designed his own workings on both hands
aforehand) that every man shall receive his own reward according to his own
labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8.

Now the Artifice of God in both these lies in this, That each are hiddenly
contrived apart, and yet so gloriously matched as wrought one for the other;
which is an argument as of two Artificers, the one in the East Indies, the
other in the West; should the one make the Case, the other make the Watch,
unbeknown each to other, and both Workmanships of the highest curiosity in
their kind, and when both brought together they exquisitely fit the one the
other.

.
And what? Have I been telling you all this while an artificial pleasant Story?
Does not this Scripture tell the very same? For a close, do but now at last
take a view and prospect of our Apostle's whole Discourse. The Round and Circle
whereof begun at chap. 4. ver. 16. and ends with my Text; and do you not find
it speak (to use the Text's Language) the very self-same thing?

1. He tells us there of an inward Man renewed, whilst the outward is a
perishing, to the end it may live and subsist alone, when the body is wholly
dissolved; (there he lays his Foundation) And is not this all one with what the
Text says? God works Us (these Souls) day by day: Even as the Child is
curiously wrought in the Womb, to subsist of it self alone in this World, so
this inward Man in that other.

2. He then immediately subjoyns, v. 17. That all Afflictions (which are
nothing else but the Perishings of this outward Man) as also All things and
dispensations else that do befall us, they are secretly, at work too, all that
while; so set to work by God (who works the inner Man daily unto such a measure
of Grace) and these, to work, and by his Ordination procure a proportionable
Weight, (for God works all these things in Weight and Measure) our light
Affliction works for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, -- as
shall in a comely and in the exactest manner, answer and suit that curious
Workmanship on the inward-man; and it is observable that the same Word for
(working) is used in that verse that is used in my Text: but yet these are but
outwardly a work, as inferior Artificers or Instruments: Therefore,

3. He further declares, verse 1. of this Chapter, that God himself is at work
about this Glory, who as the Master-workman, that has the draught and platform
of all before him, drawn by his own designing, he viewing the inward work on us,
the outward work of means and dispensations; and knows aforehand what degree
of holiness to bring us ultimately unto, he according unto these, as patterns,
is a framing a Building for us in Heaven, exactly suited to the working of all
the other; which building he prepares and makes ready for this inner Man, to
entertain it when the body is dissolved: If our earthly House were dissolved,
we have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, of either Men or
Means, or of our own Graces; but of God. But every Soul has a State of Glory
proportioned to all these, ready built for it against this time; even as
Statues in Stone are framed and carved, to be set up in such a curious Arch
framed for them by the Builder. Now then,

4. Add but the Words of my Text, which is the close of this his discourse: And
it opens all the Scene, He that wrought us for this self-same thing, is God.
The Apostle's Conclusion answers his beginning; he began in chap. 4. ver. 16.
and the circle ends in my Text. And this is God, who is wise in working, and
wonderful in counsel.

.
But there is a third point yet remains.

Doctrine III.
That it is the interest and engagement of all Three Persons to see to it, that
a righteous separate Soul be brought to Glory at dissolution.

And this carries it yet higher, even to the highest, and gives the most
superabundant security and assurance of this thing that can be given, and
superadds above all the former.

But you will ask me, How I fetch this out of my Text? Thus:

1. You see here are Two Persons expressly named, God [the Father] namely, and
the Spirit. That Is a Rule, that where the name God, and then some besides other
of the Two Persons, Christ or the Spirit, are mentioned therewith, as distinct;
There God is put personally (not essentially only) to express the Father. Now
here the Spirit, or holy Ghost, is mentioned distinct from God; For it is said,
That this God has given the Spirit; which also Christ so often speaks of the
Father, as I need not insist on it.

2. It is another Rule, that in any Scripture where Two Persons are mentioned,
as concurring in any thing, or matter; There the other Third Person also must
be understood to have his special share therein also; as when he wishes Grace
and Peace from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ; It Is certain the holy
Ghost is as specially understood; as indeed we find him in that Apostolical
Blessing as distinctly spoken of, as the Father, or Christ. Thus it must be
here, Christ must be taken in, who also in John is so often said to give the
Spirit, when the Father gives him, as it is said here he has, For this same
thing.

But 3. You have even Christ also not far off interested in this self-same
thing, in the next verse, and ver. 8. Absence from the Lord, whilst in the
body, ver. 6. and present with the Lord, when separate from the body, ver. 8.
This Lord is Christ; the Phrase of the New Testament concerning Christ runs in
this style, To be with Christ, This day with me -- To be where I am, and see my
Glory: So Christ. To be with Christ is best of all, and we shall be ever with
the Lord. So Paul.

Use I.
Does God work Us for this thing ere he brings us to it? What has God wrought
hitherto upon Thee or Thee, in order to this end? It Is a blunt question, but
the Text puts it in my mouth: How many Souls are there living in the profession
of Christianity, that know not what this means, to have a work wrought on them
(anew upon them) over and above what moral Honesty (which was Nature's portion)
and the common profession of Christianity adds thereunto, by custom and mere
Education. An honest Turk professing also and observing the Principles of his
Religion, upon the ground of his Education only (and a Religon every Man must
have) will as soon go to Heaven as Thou; for all thy Religion is founded but
upon the like Foundation that his is. I tell thee, that Christian Religion is
not a thing so cheap; nor Salvation by Christ at so low a rate. Thou must have
a Work upon thy Soul suited unto all the Truths, thus professed in the power
and efficacy of them. They must enter thy Soul by a spiritual Faith and Frame,
and mould it anew to a likeness to them. Carry home therefore the Caveat our
Apostle has put in ver. 3. If so be that being clothed, we be not founded
naked of Grace and Holiness wrought, and Christ's Righteousness by spiritual
efficacious Faith applied, (Faith in earnest) bowing the Soul to be obedient
unto Christ, as heartily and as honestly, as it expects Salvation by Christ, as
without which thou will never be saved. This is our Religion; and when at death
thy Soul (thy poor lonesome Soul) being stripped of all things in this World;
even the Body and all, shall come before the great God, and Jesus Christ, what
will the enquiry be? as Mat. 22. 11. When the King came in to see the Guests,
he saw a Man had not the Wedding Garment; he spied him out: And the Man was
speechless, ver. 12. Take him and bind him, (says he) and cast him into utter
darkness, ver. 13. The other that were clothed, were admitted unto the
Marriage; and, (as the Psalmist, the words of which are here alluded unto) She
was brought unto the King (the very Title which in both these places is given
to Christ: see ver. 11.) in Raiment of Needle Work, and this clothing is of
God's working; and so my Text falls in with both: There is no admission unto
Christ without it -- This the first Use.

Use II.
Has God began to work this good work in thee? he will perfect it: whereof the
Text gives this assurance, that he has wrought it for this thing, that is, for
this end, and God will not lose his end: Besides, he says he has given earnest.

Use III.
Thou Saint, be content to live, for whilst thou live, thou art under God's
working in order unto Glory. Value life; it is a season of being wrought upon:
And to be sure, thou shall live no longer, than whilst God is some way or other
a working this. What an advantage is it, that all thy sins, occasioned by
living long, shall surely be forgiven, and nothing of thy score be uncut off
for thee, but all the Righteousness that is wrought upon thee, and wrought by
thee, (and therefore wrought by thee, because upon thee; for, being wrought
upon, we work, and all is Acti agimus
rather, God has wrought us, than that we have wrought) All thy righteousness
(I say) shall remain for ever. All the time 2 Cor. 9. 9.
thou remainest in this life, thy Soul is ripening, or maturing for Glory.

How great a comfort is that? In explicating the Doctrinal part, I gave
Instance of a Child in the Womb curiously Psalm. 139. 15.
wrought all that time, in order to its living and subsisting afterward in
this World. It Is a dark place, the Womb which the Child is wrought in; and it
lives there in a stifled condition, it cannot breath, it takes nourishment but
at the Navel, (a way invented and prepared of God merely for that season) it
lies boiling, tossing and tumbling, and sleeping away the most of its time, and
gives now and then a faint stirring, to show it is still alive; and it is a
life scarce worth the name of life: Well, but all this is a being wrought and
fitted to live another, freer, and braver life in this Word. And this is your
present case, your life is hid, it is to come; all that you find in this World,
is but [that God has wrought you for the self-like thing] And if this Child we
speak of should be forced out of the Womb before the due time, it would have the
more imperfect life in this World: So here, if you could suppose a Saint should
die before the full birth of his Soul's being wrought on -- Therefore be content
to wait God's leisure until your change shall come.

Use IV.
No matter what befalls thee, so it works toward this end; let whatever be, so
thou find God to go on with this design, that he works upon thy Soul; be it
upward, in communion with himself, or downward, in disowning thy self, thy
vileness and corruptions, so it works. Thou have afflictions that break thy
heart, (as reproach broke Christ's Heart, says the Psalmist in his name) no
matter, so they work upon thy Soul. Know then, they are set awork by the hand
that sent them, to work a far exceeding weight Phil. 3.
of Glory for thee: If by any means (says Paul) no matter what, so the work go
on. A Carver comes with his Chissels, and cuts off this piece, and cuts in to
that part of the Stone: No matter; a stately Statue bearing the Image of some
Person of Honor, is to be set up for perpetuity, and is accordingly a framing:
So though God carves his Image out of thy flesh, no matter. Comfort thy self,
and think not much at any condition, whilst (as St. Paul says) it turns to thy
Salvation. Phil. 1.
Election sent thee not into this World to have a great Name (perhaps God will
load it) nor to be rich, or to have Power, but to work thee for this self-same
thing; and if thou see that Plough a going (though it makes deep furrows on
thy back, yea heart) yet so, that this seed be sown therein, rejoice, for thou
shall bring thy sheaves with thee. For my self, so that I find Election
pursuing its design, of making me holy, and blessing me with spiritual blessing
in heavenly places, (as Ephesians. 1. 4.) I care not (I would not care) what befalls
me in this World.

FINIS.

