THE Christian Merchant Described in A SERMON.

THE Christian Merchant Described in a SERMON At First Designed for A Private
AUDIENCE, Now Humbly Dedicated to all the Merchants of the CITY.

By WILLIAM GOSTWYKE, Rector of Purley in Berks.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, M DC XC VI.

THE Christian Merchant.
St. MATTHEW. 13. 45, 46. Again, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Merchant-man seeking goodly Pearls: Who when he had found one Pearl of great
price, he went, and sold all that he had, and bought it.
THE Particle (...), again, we here first meet with, is rather an Introductor
to the Text, then an Integral part of it; yet gives us to understand, that this
is another Parable of our Savior's, added to the former, more amply, and
clearly to represent, and illustrate the Nature, and excellency of the Kingdom
of Heaven. Another, and so consequently, that there is no danger in our knowing
too much of our Duty to God, or our Interest in him. And that it is but a
Mistake of some men's, that Ignorance is the only Mother of Piety and Devotion.
Another Parable, that is Similitude, or Comparison. For so St. Mark is well
rendered, Whereunto shall we Mark 4. 30.
liken the kingdom of God: or with what Comparison shall we compare it? Of
these the Use is very frequent in the Scriptures of both Testaments. Whether it
were, that a readier Attention, a clearer Perception, a deeper Impression, a
firmer Retention, or all these at once were wrought, or won by them, especially
when explained or applied; so it was, that very often of old when a Prophet was
sent on an Important Errand, it was revealed to him in a Vision, and to be
delivered by him in a Parable. And of our Blessed Savior, the same Evangelist
aver's in a few Verses following, that in many such Parables he spoke the word
Verse 33.
to the people; and adds, as they were able to hear it; that is, as was most
intelligible, and withal most profitable for them, says the learned Dr.
Hammond on the place. Of this in the Text the two Terms, or Extremes are
differently taken, and understood. Some take them for the Kingdom of Heaven on
the one Hand, and the Pearl of Price on the other. As if it had been said, The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Pearl of great Price. By the Kingdom of Heaven
meaning the Happiness of Heaven; as the Phrase often imports, especially in
Promise, as in St. Matthew. 5. and elsewhere. And by the Merchant-Man, the good
Christian continually seeking, till he make it sure. Others take the Kingdom of
Heaven indeed for the one, but for the other extreme, the Merchant-man: Reading
the words as they run, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man. These
meaning by the Kingdom of Heaven, the whole Church of Christ Militant here on
Earth, but to be triumphant hereafter in Heaven: as the words sometimes
signify, especially in Parable, as here. Where then, the Enallage has a
favorable Aspect either to the whole Church, put for every single Member of
it: or to the single Merchant-Man, put for the whole Company, of which he is a
Member. And by the pearl of Price purchased, the Happiness of Heaven as before,
gained. By the first account, the Happiness of Heaven to a Christian is like a
Pearl of great Price to a Merchant-Man. By the Second, the Church of Christ in
gaining Heaven is like a Company of Merchantmen purchasing a Pearl of great
Price. Or more particularly, and plainly thus. The good Christian aiming
hereafter at Heaven is like a Merchant pursuing his best Interests here on
Earth. Sensus, duplex, and uterque probandus. Both Senses are sound, both good,
and not unlikely both intended by our great Master, with whom it was very usual
in One Proposition, to give us more points than one of Instruction. Of this
Comparison in this later sense, to which my occasions at present lead me, the
Ground, or Foundation is the parity or likeness between the two Persons here
compared. The Complete Christian is very like a well accomplished Merchant.
Indeed Omne simile est and dissimile: there is some odds and some advantage
too, on the Christians side, as shall be shown; but in many things they meet,
and agree. They seek alike, they find alike, alike they sell all, to make a
purse, or one grand Purchase at last; that is, contentedly part with any thing
of lower price, to get higher, till they can reach the Top, and compass the Sum
total of their Happiness once for all. This parity to make appear --, I shall
give you the best account I can of the Merchant in general; Divide it for
clearer Process into particulars; Compare the Christian with him in each
particular; and to make the Character a little fuller, touch on two or three of
his many excellent Properties; and as I may, Apply.

A Merchant then is a Virtuous, and Valuable Person, of great and uninterrupted
Dealings, abroad, and at home, with design to make himself, and to make others
happy. This I take the Merchant to be; And this with a very easy Turn is the
Christian too.

1. A Virtuous Person, our Savior here supposes him; in that he sends the
Christian, not to correct, to cull, or curtail, but transcribe him. And such,
for the present, I shall suppose the Christian to be. One that whatsoever
things are honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report; if there be any
Virtue, if any praise, as sure enough there is; the Christian is one that
(...), syllogizes, argues, and reasons himself into the Love, pursuit and
practice of these things. Now to suppose him Virtuous, is to assert him
Valuable; for Virtue is at least the Basis, if not the very Essence of all true
worth and value. But besides, as the World goes, there are some other things
add to his Stature, and set him above many others: as his Birth, and Breeding.
First his Birth. It Is not for every Block to yield a carved Head; nor every
common Stone a curious Statue. It Is not for every One to put himself upon this
Office; nor take upon himself this Honor; but He that is called, and enabled
of God, and good Friends. In other, and our own Nation too, they are the Sons
generally of the better sort that are dedicated to this generous Employ. And
they had need of something uncommon, ex traduce, and derived down to them, that
are to go through all parts, and upon the whole, make any thing considerable of
it.

The Christian too as such, is of a Noble Extract, of a Descent indeed Divine;
not born of Flesh and Blood, or of the Will of Man, but God: is originally of
the Family of Heaven, and near allied to the Ancient of Days there. (...). His
Offspring, Heir, and Joint with Christ. And has a Seed remaining in him that he
cannot Sin. A settled 1 John 3. 1.
Principle that possesses him with a just scorn of any thing base, below, or
unbecoming him. Will Not suffer him to sneak, and slave it to Sin and Satan from
day to day as others do: But as a natural Genius inspires him, with all that is
great and good; and so worthy of his Ancestors, and of himself. -- Again, His
Breeding. It has been said a Poet may be Born, an Orator must be Bred: but
without both, most certain, neither will be exquisite. The Merchant in his
Minority is grounded in Learning, and the Languages, from the best Authors, and
by the best Professors: At a hand is Curious, and in several of the
Mathematics made almost Master. And when bound Apprentice, that is, a Learner
still, He comes from Theory to Practice. He has those special Rules set before
him, that with common Care, he cannot fail in Business. His being Bound, by the
way, he takes not for a trouble, much less disparagement to him. There Is no Man
but is bound to serve his King, his Country, his Family, and Friends some way,
or other. He Is bound, but it is to One that is bound as well to him, and is to be
as just and kind on the one hand, as he is true and tractable on the other.
It Is at a time when he needs more Care took of him, than very likely he would
take of himself: And when with many others to be loose, might be to be for ever
lost. And it is but for a time, Deus dabit huic quoque finem, will have an end:
he is not to have his Ears peirc't through to perpetuate it. It Is upon terms
easy to him, his Master being more his Father, and his Service better than
many others Freedom. And Advantageous to him; at another Expense to make
himself a Man: and by the Trail of Pike to come to be the abler General. So
that in a sense, he is only bound to serve himself.

The Christian has his training up in the Nurture, and Admonition of the Lord
too. And as the Breast-Milk he first drew became good Blood, and Spirits in him
to his after-health, and ever better habit of Body: So the good Notions he then
imbibed, turned as in Timothy to Principles, and those confirmed by the
Reverend Masters of Assemblies enoble the dispositions, and Inclinations of his
Mind, and enable him to every good word and work, that is, to the whole
business of his Christian Calling. Being timely told, it is best to bear his
yoke in youth: Now is the time, he Lam. 3. 17.
sets his shoulder to it. Takes his Baptismal Vow upon himself; enters the
Lists in his own Person; engages to flee youthful Lusts, and manfully fight
under Christ's Banner. Now, it is, he is taught the Use of the Bow, and Buckler;
the Weapons, and Way of War offensive and defensive. Now it is, he resolves to
know him, whom to know is Life Eternal; and to serve him, whom to serve is
perfect Freedom. Now it is, that subacto, and puro solo, in a broken, and
contrite heart, he sowes the Seed of Grace, in hopes of a plentiful and joyful
Harvest. Now business comes thick upon him, and he becomes a Man.

2. Of great, and uninterrupted Dealings abroad, and at home. He seeks, he
finds, he veiwes, he goes, he comes, he likes, he bids, he buys, he takes
home, he books down, he lays up: meets a new man, acts a new part, and sells
to Buy: that is, to do all this over again. And this all expressed, or fairly
intimated in the very Text. The many and various Dealings, or rather Goods
dealt in and for, by the many Eminent Merchants that are, are almost endless to
instance and be particular in. Generally speaking, they are considerable either
for Bulk, and Quantity; or for Worth, and Value. Such as commend themselves to
the Uses and Necessities of the Most, or to the Exactness and Curiosity of the
greatest. Our present Merchant is for goodly Pearl: a thing well known here, in
Sickness highly Cordial; in Health, as rarely Ornamental. With what he
prudently began, he still, and steadily goes on to the last. Seeks till he
finds, then leaves not, till he buys. He neither starts aside to Novelties he
needs not, nor makes a stand in the midway as non-plust, nor of a sudden gives
off all, as if non compos, not master of his own Mind; but keeps his Course,
and keeps his Pace, till he have gained his Point. Abroad he sends as often as
the Company agrees on it; oftener, if his occasions for supplies require it. And
sometimes goes himself, to see who, and how they do, he deals with; or the
dispose, or manage of what he deals in. Hardships, and hazards may surround,
but neither can surprise him, who is prepared for the worst that can come, come
what will. At home between Exporting, and Importing, and all the many
requisites to both successively, or together; between Creditor and Debtor,
keeping accounts, and clearing them, and in Choosing the best time for all
things, he is so took up, he has no leisure to listen to the Sirens of
Temptation, or be taken with them.

The Christian likewise has his full share of business, and of as much
Importance to him. Has fundamental Principles as before, while young, to learn,
and make his own; in riper years, to make profession of, and put in practice;
and from his own Experience to Communicate at last to after-Comers, Has
Revelation to adore, and to believe; and Reason mostly in other matters, to
bring himself to be ruled by. Has Truth to vindicate, and Error to oppose. Has
Prohibitions and Threats for his Fear to work, and naked Promise now, and then,
for his Faith to live upon. Has Positive Institutions; Natural, and Moral Line
upon Line, and Precept upon Precept many, directed to him to Obey. A God in
Heaven to know, and own; to Love, and Fear; to Serve, and Honor; to Trust, and
to delight in; to Pray to, and to Praise at all times. On Earth Men: Superiors
to be Subject; Equals to be Civil to; Inferiors to succor, help, and comfort.
Has all Men to do all that for at all times, he could wish done himself at any
time in any case of need whatever. And has himself to look to, and take care
of; no small Charge, no very easy task neither. He has, naturally speaking, a
resty body to break, and keep under: a rambling Head, a wanton Eye, an itching
Ear, a lawless Tongue, an open Sepulcher of a Throat, would swallow all that is
offered, and an Heart deceitful above all things, to reduce to primitive Use,
and Institution. He has a corrupt Mind to correct, and cultivate; vain
Imaginations, vile Affections, a depraved Judgment, an obstinate Will, many an
oblique Wish, and Desire, to take to task, and set to rights. Has a pack of
Russian, and Rude Passions within him to Collar, and keep in Irons, Ne lanient
ipsum; least they pull the whole house upon his head. Has a World of
Temptations without him to escape, or overcome, or they will draw him in, and
drown him in Destruction and Perdition. Has Disappointments, Losses, and
Crosses to bear, and make the best of, that is, out of the Eater to get Meat,
and Honey from the strong. He has the numerous Appartments of a large Soul to
furnish, and the chief Repository there to Enrich and Store with all the
Virtues, and Graces of the Gospel: and to keep all as bright and safe, as he
would his Evidences for Heaven, and his Title to a blessed Eternity. Yet
hitherto his way is tolerable, his work is pretty plain, and easy, he has not
yet resisted unto blood. But now, and then he meets with knots and difficulties
extraordinary to deal with. Sometimes with Cases that want a well-read
Conscience to inform him in: Sometimes with Intricacies that require the best.
Advice, and Council, to bring him out of: Sometimes with Stones, and Rocks of
Offense, which make him need a friendly hand to help him over. Sometimes he has
a sudden descent to make, is to come down from his own Will, and seeming
Reason: to deny his own dear Self, perhaps in that, that is dearest to him, and
must stoop, and take up his Cross. But mostly his Way is Up-Hill, he is to grow
in Knowledge, and in Grace: to forget things past: to pass things got, and
press on to a perfect Stature, and then to rise from strength to strength until
he come to Zion. This is what the good Christian is to do, this is some part of
it, for in this hurry, it is not one half that I can tell you. This is what the
good Christian does, at least, he does his best to do. What escapes his Hands
he works out on his Knees: begs Pardon first, then Help of God: so doubles his
diligence, and regains his lost ground. And this he does all Enemies, and
Opposition to the Contrary notwithstanding, The Flesh flinching, the World
frowning, the Devil raging, the very Gates of Hell broke loose, and rattling
about his Ears. As one that is Deaf, he hears not; as one that is Dumb, he opens
not his Mouth. These and the like are the Goods he Merchant-like sends out.
These, or in two Words, as one from Heaven Sums up a Bill of Lading, newly
brought in thither, His Prayers, and Alms. These he Acts 10. 4.
continually casts, as bread upon the waters, and perhaps Eccles. 11. 1.
before many days, perhaps after, however, whenever he most wants it, he finds
returned, and brought home to him, in the most suitable Mercies of God upon
him. The View, he takes of the Holy Land, to which his Commerce lies, is like
that of Moses, from the top of Pisgah too; at distance, but brought near by the
Perspective of a lively Faith, that shows him things invisible to others,
things inconceivable to himself. His Timeing all things to advantage, as by
good Advice, Jam. 5. 13.
both makes the business easier he is to do, and makes the End the surer, he at
first designed. And that is

3. To make himself, and to make others happy. The Merchant's none of those,
that Closet themselves only to catch Flies; or that work only to be weary, or
worse purpose: but One that from the beginning proposed to himself an End; and
that end worthy of all his thoughts, his Cares, his Travel, and his Pains. He
seeks as readily and far forth as any man; he will find, or make a pass per Mare,
per Terras to the remotest Indies, or round the Universe, but it shall be for
goodly Pearl, or what is as good. He that says this is mean or mercenary in him,
reproaches all Mankind at once, as much as him. Who plants a Vineyard, or feeds
a Flock for nothing? Or to look higher, What Soldier 1 Cor. 9. 7.
fights? What Scholar Studies? Or Courtier waits, but has preferment in his
Eye? Nor without Reason, till a better Title to it, can be produced. It Is but
Currenti Calcar, a fresh Gale, to him, that else would make the best of's way.
The Merchant takes, or makes it so, who as he thrives makes every day a better
Figure. At last, having improved the single Talents he set up with, to five's,
or ten's, it may be, five, or ten times told, lives up to all, and full out
like himself. He might go clothed in Purple every day: nay, might wear Gold
that wins it, says our Proverb. But his Moderation in this, and all things, is
well known to all Men. However in the modern Phrase, He Lives well; he must, he
cannot be off on it. His general Acquaintance, particular Office, great Dealings
as before, his observations, judgment and experience, his Correspondence, and
Intelligence make him a public Good: Company often, and sometimes Council for
the Greatest. As such, he never wants Resort, nor the Respects of Visitants of
good Account; nor they a Welcome, and Reception suitable. Yet is it not the
Noble Necessity thus laid upon him only, that obliges him to this, but he is as
forward of himself, and free, as forced: hating with generous Job to eat his
Sweetmeats by himself alone. Nor does his Hospitality abate his Charity, but
augment it: and of his Fullness the Poor receive continually to their no small
Comfort. How amply he requites the good Offices of those that have bin
friendly, and faithful to him; especially the Pains and Prayers of the sedulous
Watchman of his Soul: To what degree, He relieves the oppressed, and helpless,
especially the persecuted for pure Conscience sake: what Sums he gives in all,
to indigent Relations, which few great Merchants are without, especially to the
Industrious, that strive to the utmost of their Strength, but against Stream,
as Cramp't with too great Families, or ill Circumstances, and must sink
irrecoverably without him: What his right hand does these ways, his left,
though else a bosom Friend, shall never know: No Eye but his, to whom all
hearts are Open, and no Secrets hid, shall ever see. Herein He is his own
Executor, while he lives: And that he may be so to all intents and purposes,
where it is of highest Import to him, that he should be so, that is, of his Last
Will and Testament: He makes it in his best Health, while he has time to think
of those old Joseph's, whom his new Successor would not know: And of the Poor,
who, he Exodus 1. 8.
Remember's are never to receive more from him, than he now bequeaths them. And
to make all clear and well, makes use in this above all of Council. And thus,
though dead, he yet speaks, and acts, disposes, and distributes as much
according to his mind, as if by his own Fireside, and amongst his old Friends
still. The superlative Love he has had ever and in all places for the Honor,
and Service of his King, and Country, make him extremely dear to both. And
this, together with the great plenty of the good things he enjoyes; and the far
greater Pleasure of doing the many good things he does, is what he made Account
at first, should make his Last days his Best: should give his old Age a writ of
Ease: his hoary Head a Bed of Honor: and Embalm his Name to all Posterity.

The good Christian has his End too, but a glorious one, and high as Heaven it
self. Could he see Virtue in its Native Beauty and Brightness, 'twould need no
Letters of Commendation to him. But since he wants those Optics, and sees, and
knows but in part, and that too imperfectly; he is allowed to have regard, as
well to the Price of his high Calling, as to the Race he is to run for it. It Is
thought no diminution to a Beauty to be a Fortune too. Nor is it to Piety that
it is profitable, and has the Promises of both Lives. Nor does the great Apostle
think our having those Promises, too mean an Argument to move the best of us,
to perfect holiness in the fear of God, much less should any think 2 Cor. 7. 1.
the Examples he gives instance in, below our Imitation: As of others, so of
Moses, who no minor, but when come to Age, refused the Crown of Egypt, and
chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God. For, he says, He had
respect to the recompense of Reward. Heb. 11. 24.
And of the blessed Jesus himself, who, he says, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, for the joy set before him. Heb. 12. 3.
With so good Reason, and in so good Company, the Christian thinks He may very
fairly have an Eye to both: not put asunder what God himself has joined
together, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof Of which vast
Kingdom He is Heir in, and through Christ; looks for it, and in some measure
lives up to it. He gets the Language of Canaan before hand; And puts on the
Habit of the Country here: being clothed with Righteousness, or rather clothed
upon, with a much better, that of the Lord of Glory. His House with respect to
God is no other than an Oratory, or Temple sanctified by the Word of God, which
dwells richly there, and Prayer. And where every thing else is as it should be,
decent, and in Order. His House with respect to Friends, is a spiritual St.
Cross A Noble Hospital near Winchester.
. Where by the means of a good Conscience, he keeps continual Feast; and where
whoever would come, for a supply of those wants, (which was the
good-old-fashion-End of Visiting, Mal. 3. 16.) who would come might meet with
ample Satisfaction. And where those few that do come, are freely entertained
with a Collation of his Travels, Trials, Conflicts and the Successes he has
had: Not to divert, so much as to direct, animate, and arm those of like
Occupation, and like enough to meet with all that he has past. He shows them,
where they will be most in danger to be imposed upon: and where to be put to it:
So, where their Skill, their Caution, their Courage, and Spiritual Armor, and
what of that, will be of most use to them. Shows them, how to deal with Men
cunning to deceive: and how to defeat the devices of the Devil, of which he has
a great many: and of which they had not need be ignorant. And shows them, how
to hold fast what they have got, that is good; that so no other take their Crown
from them. Thus out of his own Stores he brings forth new, and old to those
will come for them. As often as he has the honor to be himself invited to his
great Masters Table, he is sure to go: and there glad to see many a Brother and
Companion he has had in tribulation, in the Kingdom, and Patience of Jesus
Christ. More glad to see Him by Faith whom above all his Soul Loves. Indeed,
here it is, He chiefly tastes, and sees how good his Lord is. Is here caressed
with Cheer above that of Angels, embraced with Arms of kindness, and assured
of never, never-failing Favor: In the strength Heb. 13. 5.
of which he walks comfortably many days after. And when to take his last long
Journey, being first lightened by Confession to, and Absolution by his most
affectionate and pious Pastor; having the Recommendatory Prayers of the Church
more deeply accented by particular, and present Friends; And this Divine
Viaticum, and Preservative in store, He doubts not to come safe and well to the
end on it: and to the end withal, of all his Pains, and Patience, and be as
happy as Heaven it self can make him.

Thus have you seen the Merchant, and in him, as in a Glass the Christian in
his Rise, Progress, and End. For your better Acquaintance, Please to observe
him in some few of his Properties: not such, as no other great Dealer has any
thing of besides: but such as no Merchant is, or can be well without. As,

1. Prudence. This, like the Soul that animates, and acts him, is first,
middle, last, and all in all in him. The true Gyges Ring, that penetrates most
others Breasts, but renders him, whenever he thinks fit, invisible. This first
directs him to pitch on the most noble End: then to pursue it by the most
proper means: and lastly to secure the purchase of it. This makes him observe,
and take time always by the Forelock: not come a day after the Fair, or ever
overstand his Market. Makes him enquire how Marts, and Matters go abroad; that
he may know the better how to act at home. Makes him forecast all accidents,
and do always, what may turn to best account. Makes him to see and know
himself what he deals in, and yet upon occasion ask, and take advice too:
especially as to his Grand Purchase: where though he well examine the
Particular himself; yet for the Clearness of the Title consults the Learned in
the Law, whose Talent lies herein. The World is full of Cheats and
Counterfeits: all is not Gold that Glitters, nor true Pearl neither that
appears well. And as there is danger all along, so without this, the Merchant
may make Shipwreck in the very Port.

Nor is the Christian less a Man of Sense, or need he be. His being what he is;
and doing what he does, is upon Choice not Chance. The Religion he espoused
betimes, and likes the better upon Use and Practice; He Professes still. Not
because it is the most fashionable, easy, or advantageous: but because it is the
best evidenced, refined, and rational. Free from the Carnality of the Jew, the
Sencelesness of the Heathen, and Sensuality of the Mohammedan. The fittest to
make him sensible of the Respects he owes to his Creator, and Redeemer, his
Fellow Creatures, and himself. The fittest to exalt his Nature, perfect his
Being, and consign him to Rewards Infinite and Eternal. Nor will it let him
spend his Money for that which is not Bread; on Pomp, and Pageantry; nor on an
empty Noise, and next to Nothing: but on the real, and substantial Truths of
God, and Solid Reason, Meat indeed. This makes him enquire after, and pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, in which large Bottom his own Welfare is wound up.
Makes him foresee an Evil, and seasonably shift it, or the more bravely bear up
against it. Makes him, though not for an implicit Faith, yet for more
Satisfaction as to his Title to Heaven to call for, and consult his Spiritual
Guide, whom, as continually attending upon this very thing, he knows Able, and
in whom, upon all the many occasions he has had, to advise with him, He has
always found the Grace, to be Faithful.

2. Justice. It Is the part of this to give every one his due, and this the
Merchant makes it his Business punctually to do. To God above, in being True to
his Religion, at all times, and in all places. Coelum, non animum mutat. Not
turning like his Flags, and Pendants, with every Wind: Nor Changing the
Complexion of his Conscience, as the Cameleon, Color; with every Country he
sets his feet upon. He Is true to his Devotions at Land, as well as Sea, When
Safe, as when in Danger. No more robs God of his Honor, or Offerings, in
Filching Tithes: than Caesar of his Tribute, and Customs in Running Goods. He
will not set out without his Pastors Prayers, nor returns without Acknowledging
the Benefit of them. Is true and just, as he is timely taught, in all his
Dealings with all Men. False Weights, and Measures he abhor's: His are full out
Statute, and Standard: Nor does he buy, and sell by different, but the same. In
buying, he bids in reasonable Proportion to the Worth: in selling asks not
unreasonably out of the Way. Nor is ever so fast tied, as when left at Liberty
to set his own Price. If He know any damage, or defect, he tells it: or He
sells it so much the Cheaper: But what you have his honest Word upon, you need
no other Warrant for.

And such every way in the same Relations is the good Christian. Adores his
Maker's Greatness, and admires his Mercy: Gives His Commandments due Obedience;
his Promises Faith, and full Assurance; and in all Attributes does him right.
What no Profane Person can be, that the good Christian is to the full, that is,
a Good Subject to his Prince. The Wicked are ready to Run, before Routed, and
flee when none pursues: And their very Prayers are abominable, says the same
Solomon: So can neither Fight for the King, nor Pray for him as they ought.
Whereas the Good Christian, that has no Reason to fear Death in a good Cause,
and has a considerable Interest in the Court of Heaven, always does the one,
and is always ready to do the other. And is so free both to Associate with, and
Assist those, that do, that proves his Prince bears Rule not so much over him,
as in him. His Minister he respects, and loves both for his Master's, and his
Work's sake: Encourages by Constant Attendance, early Appearance, and Candid
Audience, and maintains him above the rate of Cummin, Mint, and Annise. In all
his Dealings with all men, he considers the Character he bears: and though he
buy of a Turk, and sell to a Jew, He remembers still, he is a Christian, and
must, and will be just, and Upright.

3. A Complacent and obliging Temper, and Demeanor. No wonder a Vessel full of
Liquor boils over with froth, and fury, when either a strong fire is round it,
or a ferment as fierce within it. Nor is it stranger, if any in uneasy
Circumstances, be, or behave themselves accordingly. In Men sensibly decaying,
in debt, in pain, or passion, disgrace, or discontent considerable of any sort,
who runs may read their Grievances, in sudden Sighs, sower Faces, snappish
Answers, and convulsive Motions. But the Merchant Indoeilis pauperiem pati,
Untaught ill Nature by any Ill Successes, or ill Usage, who flows in Wealth,
and has the World at will, that is all Serene, and calm within, and soft, and
smooth without is easy to himself, and easy to all others. Easy to be spoke
with: and easy to be spoke to. And as easily, and freely answers, assists, and
acts a friends part, on any call; on any occasion whatsoever. Takes every thing
that is offered with Epictetus, by the right handle; and in all doubtful Cases,
has a Comment of kindness always ready. He is indeed Sweetness, and Candor,
Respect, and Generosity in the very Abstract: nor is he ever more himself than
while exerting these, or most of these.

Nor is the Christians Religion an Enemy to Good Manners; Nor He any of those
that please not God; and yet in this Respect, are contrary to all other Men.
Much less an Enemy to good Nature: For it is the very design of it, to make him
all such: To sweeten his Blood and Spirits, to mollify, and meliorate his
Temper, and whole Constitution. To down with every turbulent and topping
Humor: to Up with every root of Bitterness within him: to out and overboard
with all Pride and Passion, lying and slandering; with all malice, and revenge;
To be meek, and lowly; to be clothed, or graced rather, with Humility. To be 1
Pet. 5. 5. from (...); nodus ad ornatum.
pitiful; to be courteous; to be kindly affectioned one to another in
brotherly Love; and in honor preferring one another. To be ready to
distribute; and do all good Offices for all Orders, and degrees of Men, as
opportunity is offered, especially to the Household of Faith. If Temptation, or
Loss happen, through misfortune, not his fault, he is taught to take it
patiently, not be disturbed himself, or trouble others, as if some strange
thing had happened to him, or never any sorrow were like his. If Reproach or
Slander come undeservedly upon him, He shakes it off as unconcern'dly as St.
Paul the Viper, into the same fire from whence it came. Indeed, wherever the
Christian Religion comes, and makes a Conquest over any person; in whom soever
it has its perfect work; it transforms him wholly by the Renewing of his Mind,
so that then and thenceforth he suffers long; is kind; envies not; vaunts not
himself; is not puffed up; behaves himself no ways unseemly; seeks not his own;
is not easily provoked; thinks no evil; rejoices not in Iniquity, but in the
Triumph of Truth; bears all things, believes all things; hopes all things;
endures all things. And this it never fails 1 Cor. 13. 4. to 10.
to do; nor ever therefore fails to make the Christian the best Parishioner,
Housekeeper, Husband, Father, Master, Neighbor, Friend, and Enemy (if he can
be made one) in all the World besides.

Thus runs the parallel betwixt the Merchant, and the Christian upon the
account of some of his many good Properties: it might be drawn to a much
greater Length; but that it is more than time, I drew to a Conclusion. Upon the
whole then, be we all persuaded to Consider.

1. Who we are: Christians, and Merchant-like Men. 2. Where we are: Abroad, and
far from Home. 3. What we have to do: Make sure our All.
Let the first of these induce Us to walk worthy of the vocation, whereby we
are called; at least do nothing derogatory to it. Some Merchants have bin
Princes; and some Princes are Merchants still. Alexander would not enter the
Lists at the Olympicks, because there were no Kings to enter with him. And
shall the bare thought of being of such a Sex, and not the stronger neither, be
able to secure one half the World from Indecency, and open ill? and shall not
all the Reason, and Religion in the World be able to secure the other? Our
Light should so shine, it should be seen; And men Glorify our Founder, and our
Faith too, for our Works sake. See how they Live! See how they Love! said the
old Heathens of the first Christians.

Let the second oblige us to take the Renowned Rawleighs advice to a young
Noble about to travel. A close Mouth: An open Eye: A smooth Forehead, Let not
our Tongues betray us into trouble; nor be we busy medlers in others matters,
but mind our own. Let us prevent surprise; and not think to say too late. Alas!
who would have thought it? And let them hang the head, that deserve the halter;
The Christian that is all peace, and joy within, should keep continual Jubilee;
Cheer up, and look to Jesus.

And let the third and last Consideration prevail upon us to secure our All:
our Heaven, and everlasting Happiness. The little All we are called to do, and
can do, let us up, and be doing. Walk, and not be weary, run and not faint.
Follow our works for a short time; and our works shall follow us to an endless
and blessed Eternity. Here it is, indeed, that the Christian has the Advantage
of the Merchant. In the nature, and so value of the things they deal in and
for. The Merchant is for Cedar, Ivory, and Arras; for Mettles, Spices, Jewels;
the rich Furniture of others, and his own house: The Ornament, and well-being
but of the Body at best. The Christian is for what, nor Moth, nor Rust will
touch, nor Thief can take; the Ornament of a meek, and gracious Spirit: and the
Salvation of his immortal Soul. So, In the manner of their respective dealing.
The Merchant must go, and come, must tread the Wine Press alone, do his
business himself, or 'twill go on but heavily, or not at all. The Christian has
great Assistance, and helps for his Infirmities. Has his works done in and for
him; and his strength is in a manner to sit still. But above all that is, or
might be said, in the general Issue and Event of all at last; the Merchant is
an Adventurer, the Christian on a sure Foundation: the Merchant may lose much,
lose all he has, nay lose himself after all. But the good Christian except he
will himself, can never lose his Aim. Let him be diligent and he shall thrive,
and prosper in the inner man, and add daily to his Faith, Virtue Let him commit
the keeping of his Soul to God, none shall pluck it out of his hand; it shall
be safe. Let him continue in well-doing to the End, and he shall have his long
wished End too, and be happy. Totally happy; his Body freed from all distempers,
and defects: his mind from all dissatisfaction and disease. His Body so far
spiritualized at least, as never more to need to sue for Alimony but be made
like his Saviors glorious Body. His Soul partaker of the Divine Nature; as
Angels, equal to Angels: nay according to their Model, God-like, perfectly
happy, and Eternally happy. Amplifi'd in all their Powers, and Faculties first,
and then filled over, and ever filled with Joy unspeakable, surprise, and
wonder Everlasting.

O God who declarest thy Almighty power most chiefly in showing Mercy and Pity:
Mercifully Grant unto Us, such a measure of thy Grace, that we running the way
of thy Commandments, may obtain thy gracious promises, and be made partakers of
thy heavenly Treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

