THE Epistle and Preface To the BOOK against the Blasphemous Socinian Heresy
VINDICATED; And the CHARGE therein against Socinianism, made Good. In ANSWER to
TWO LETTERS.

By J. GAILHARD, Gent.

Hinc Drances, Thersites inde.
If any teach otherwise and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness: He is
proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings: Perverse disputings of
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness: From such withdraw thy self,

1 Timothy vi. 3, 4, 5. LONDON: Printed for J. Hartley, over against
Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. School.

AN ANSWER TO Two Letters.
HAving lately published a Book against the present great grievance of the
Nation in Matters of Religion, Socinianism I mean, and knowing how the Penmen
of that Party are now fallen in a course of writing from time to time against
what comes out in Opposition to them, I indeed looked for an Answer, but
thought they would have gone about to refute my Arguments, as it is the usual
way of those who follow the School Rules; but I therein find my self
disappointed, and am apt to believe that these Men do so far depend upon what
their great Masters have done, as to think they now may sit still under the
shadow of their Works; for It is plain, say they, that the most polite and
rational Modern Sermons and other Moral Discourses, are extremely beholden to
Socinus his Works. Page 18.
Yet instead of what I expected, out comes from behind the Curtain and in
disguise, one of those Fancies which our Ideists are so fond of, under the name
of An Apology for the Parliament, etc. and this in Two Letters by different
Hands. I must need fear what will become of me! But Sirs, it is not in you the
part of generous Enemies, though to support a weak Cause, to come Two against
One; yet for what they have done, it is no matter, for Truth and I against any
two or* twenty such Hands: And the Truth now in question, though they would have
driven it into Corners, has gotten the upper-hand, and is so strongly settled,
that it has disheartened its Adversaries from making any attempt upon it; and
they have chosen to meddle with other things, and leave that untouched.

This Answer no Answer, this Apology or Two Letters, having been sent me down
into the Country, I fell on perusing of them, to see what they contained as to
Matters in question and the Cause in hand, but 'twas not to be found, and so I
concluded it to be lost among them, hardly any Steps thereof being left, only
instead of it, I lighted upon Reflections and Invectives (which that sort of
Men are full of and very free to bestow) against the Author of the Book: they
fly off from the Point and avoid coming to discuss it: What Notion of theirs,
can this way of deciding Controversies, be grounded upon? No Answer in the
least to any of my Arguments, though I had given them a large Field: They being a
People not usually Mute, may not I reasonably infer, that seeing upon things in
question they say nothing, then they have nothing to say, and so yield the
Cause, if not positively, yet by a good Consequence; thus they save me the
trouble to refute any thing, or to add to what I said upon the Matter, though
about it I have many more things to say. The Author of the First Letter gives a
convincing and short Reason, why he Answers none of my Arguments, I thought you
an unfit Writer on behalf of the Trinity, Page 15.
and therefore did not so much as read over your Book; though in another place he
says, I have dipped into it here and there, and have staged it over. This is
magisterially Page 4.
enough decided; but there is in such Decisions more Mercury than Salt: You say
I am an unfit writer upon those Matters, and yet you did not so much as read
over my Book; this is wisely and learnedly spoken, it is an unanswerable
Argument, but if you had given any for me to answer, I might well have desired
the Reader, by this Paw of yours, to have judged of the Lion, how great a
Logician you are to draw Conclusions out of Premises.

But what would ye have done if there had been no Epistle nor Preface to carp
at? Then it is likely you would have taken no notice of my Book, or else why do
ye leave the Principal for the Accessory? Such a Carriage gives me cause to
suspect, that seeing you take no notice of it, you look upon it as a Morsel of
too hard a digestion for your Stomach, therefore you meddle not with it: ye
Answer it not, but Invectives against the Author must do the work; for indeed
whilst in these Letters I was seeking for what I could not find, I found what I
was not looking for, soft Words and hard Arguments from Men who would seem to
have engrossed all Reason unto themselves, I sought for, but found very soft
Arguments, if any at all, yet hard Words: Truly Sirs, to Answer in your own
way, I could almost say, I have happened to tread upon a Nest of Wasps, so had
cause to expect some of them would come out Buzzing about my Ears, that is all
the harm they can do me, if they intend any thing more, then I hope they lost
their Point and missed their Aim.

I think that what I said to prove my Assertions, might in some degree have
been taken notice of: but seeing they have no mind to meddle with nor remove
the Weight, there let it ly for me; yet though as to the Matter they offered
nothing to Answer, rather than to be altogether silent, we must turn to what
they otherwise have started up, though not belonging to the Subject of my Book:
They act like those who shot at a Man from behind a Hedge, and so think they
may with safety to themselves wound their Enemy who cannot well close up with
them; for they, with being nameless and in their holes, have taken sufficient
care to provide against it, and none can swear against them. Ye are the Men:
However, because such Men would call one dumb, who should say nothing to their
Imputations and Misconstructions, though never so groundless, I shall by the
grace of God take notice of most things in the Letters, and therein hope to
clear my self of their Aspersions, also to demonstrate how they are guilty of
some things which they would charge me with, or of the same nature, and I shall
examine what here and there they say about Matters in question: Sometimes I
shall Answer both Letters together in those things which tend to the same
purpose, and at other times asunder and as I shall see cause: however I shall
not do it in order, but here and there according as I light upon the things in
the Letters, which I intend to examine one after another.

With an idle and ridiculous Fancy of an Apology, they would bring me under a
necessity of making my own: Fervency of Zeal for the Glory of God, is the Page
3.
first thing and in the first Line, laid to my charge; but this, Paul brings me
off when he said, It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing:
And that Gal. 4. 18.
the thing in question which I appear for, is Good, very Good, I appeal not
only to Scripture, but also to the Testimony of the whole Primitive Church, of
all Christian Protestant Churches, specially of our Church in this Kingdom; and
if according to their Principles of a private Judge I must have it within me, I
want it not; for in my Conscience I am so fully satisfied it is Good, that
thorough God's Grace strengthening me, I am ready to lay down my Life, and
that is for the same Cause for which my blessed Savior laid down his, and so
many more after him, namely that he was truly, that is in a true and proper
sense, God's own and only begotten Son: and when upon this Cause of his, Men
are neither cold nor hot, he spueth them out of his Rev. 3. 15.
mouth.

After this, out comes a volley of Trash, the product of an elevated Fancy and
inflamed Imagination, whereby things of Moment are wrested and ridiculed, though
may be, the Party takes it for a great piece of Wit: and whether I will or not,
he would make me to say that which I never so much as thought upon; and because
he would make of it a Stage Play, though very insipid and profane, he brings me
in as Postponing the Page 3.
Glory of God, as he says, to Temporal Concerns; how this can agree with what
he said just before of my fervent Zeal for that Glory, let him declare: I think
by means of the word Postpone, I may understand something of the Writers
meaning, and I believe some among them could tell News, how it came to pass
that my Book which was intended to have been published by Candlemas Term, for
all the endeavors used to hasten it out, came forth only the day before the
Prorogation: I have cause to suspect there was some tampering by a sort of Men
diligent in their Concerns and of unwearied Endeavors to promote their Cause,
for the Children of this World are in their generation Luke 16. 8.
wiser than the Children of Light: I doubt some of them plowed with my Heifer,
however let none boast before the time, for thorough God's direction that which
last Year was not done, as indeed for that reason it could not be, may happen
to be done this; however to God we leave the Success.

Yet as in my Preface I gave an account of the effectual Care which the
Parliament of Scotland had taken to put a stop to your damnable Heresies in
that Kingdom; so now I must tell that which ye know well enough, but may be
every one else does not, how in Ireland about the beginning of September last,
the Committee for Religion having examined the Carriage of one of your Gang, M.
Toland, who, no doubt, was gone over to promote the Cause, and made their
Report to the House, immediately they passed a Vote, that his Book should be
burnt by the hand of the Executioner, and his Person taken into Custody to be
proceeded against; but he finding the Place too hot for him, made a shift to
escape and come over, or else he had been laid up, but we hope here he shall
either be followed by divine Mercy, or meet with human Justice; for we have
ground to think that the Parliament of England, with as much Zeal as those of
Scotland and of Ireland, will appear for the Cause and Honor of God, and as
one of the Wolves has been unkennel'd in Ireland, so that same and others,
shall here be so too: and it is but what all obstinate Leaders of such miserable
wretches who deny the Lord that bought them, do justly deserve, to be branded
with B, that every one might know them for Blasphemers by reason of the
blasphemous, heretical, and impious Opinions, which those despisers of God,
with impunity, whereat they grow bolder, do daily publish and spread abroad,
and that in so bold and licentious a manner, as was hardly ever allowed in any
Christian State. The Emperor Theodosius left a Precedent in such cases, for by
a Law he ordered the fifteen Volumes which impious Porphiry had written against
the Christian Religion, every where to be burnt and destroyed.

And indeed it is but what the Antichristian Writings of such Miscreants as
were Celsus, Porphyrius, Julian the Apostate and the like deserve to be: their
Works were levelled against the true God in the most Holy Trinity, and against
the Person and Divinity chiefly of our blessed Lord and Savior, and are not
the Socinian Books so too? The like Crime deserves the like Punishment; this I
speak in commendation of the Zeal and Justice of the House of Commons in
Ireland: Something more I must say, and though I am sure to be disowned by
Socinians and Socinianizers, yet I hope not so by those who are really
concerned for the Honor of the glorious Trinity and for their Religion; it is
this, It were but Justice and Christian Prudence, if the Penmen of the
Antitrinitarian and Antichristian Doctrines were burnt at the Fingers end, to
disable them from dropping their Poison upon Paper: if only paring their Nails
could do it, it would be well; but I am of opinion, that alone will not do it,
nor Gospel-Arguments, but the Authority of the Law must: and this the
Parliament of Ireland in their Wisdom have found necessary, and being satisfied
how things of that nature come within the compass of their Jurisdiction, though
M. Toland in his Letter to a Member of the House of Commons there, page 32.
declares he is a perfect stranger to any such Power claimed by that Honorable
Body, though in himself, he was conscious he might not say so in the Original
Copy: and his Apologist is of the same opinion, though he more cunningly meddles
with it, and brings it in as the Judgment, as he says, of several Members of
the Committee, page 23. Which are but Reflections insinuated against the Right
of Parliaments in general, and so reaches every Parliament wheresover. But
there are several Flaws in that Apology.

Here I meet with some Apologist whom I know well by the Style, though others of
the kind make use of the same Ink; such are in jest Apologists for Parliaments,
but in earnest, against; indeed I think that to study that common place, and to
erect themselves into Apologists, consists with their own Interest; for on
their side, there is more need of Apologies than of Panegyricks. But I must
speak of other things.

Both Writers come upon me with a Charge indeed, I am a Sanguinary Man, a
Brother to Papists, a Bonner, a Persecutor, a bloody-minded Believer, and such
other words to the same purpose: I shall not say this is much Dust, but great
Thunderclaps, which shall end like crackling of Thorns under the Pot. The
ground of all this is my Humble Address to both Houses of Parliament, that they
would be pleased to take some care of the Cause of Christ, and to put a curb
upon his Enemies; such I call those who would rob him of his Divine Nature and
Attributes, and attempt to overthrow the first Article of our Faith, of One God
in Three Persons. There are some Men in the World, that if one does but look
them in the Face, they are apt to cry out, Murder, whether or not at that time
a guilty Conscience flies into their Faces, God knows; That same may happen
sometimes to disturb them so far, as to make them grossly mistake in their
Judgment as about Things so about Persons, as they are very much in me, who in
my Heart and Opinion am as much against Persecution upon account of Religion,
and for a due regard to tender Consciences, as any Man in the World. When the
Question is about indifferent and not very material things, then for Peace and
Charity's sake, Gentleness and Meekness ought to prevail, but it must be
otherwise when Fundamentals are not only shaken but overturned; and when
Religion it self is pulled up by the very root, as it is when humane Reason is
made a standing Rule whereby to judge of Revelation, when the Doctrines of the
most Holy Trinity, of the Satisfaction which the Lord Jesus has by the
Sacrifice of himself made for our Sins, with other things thereupon depending,
and what Scriptures with the received Creeds of the Primitive Church do affirm
about it, and what our Church believes; I say it ought to be otherwise when all
these lie at stake and are blown up at onc^: then or never it is high time to
speak out especially when we see, how boldly and openly these things are
carried on: We use to say, There is a difference between mad and stark staring
mad; People distempered in their Minds, are dealt withal according unto the
nature and degree of their Distemper; some confined to their Chambers, others
to their Beds, others bound and chained up: The like we observe in the
Distempers of the Politic Body; he who rashly speaks ill of the Government
deserves some Punishment, but not so great as he who violently attempts to
overthrow it, or to destroy the Persons in whose hands God has lodged the
Power; so it must be in spiritual Diseases which affect the Body of the Church;
and these several ways I mean, when I speak of a true and proper Remedy,
whereof the applying depends upon the Skill of the Physician; it is not any
effect of Cruelty, to make Incisions, and cut off dead Flesh out of a Wound to
prevent a Gangrene, nor to restrain People that have the Plague from coming
among those that are free from it, for fear of infecting them: So it is no
Persecution to take care that Heretics, (such all Orthodox Christian Churches
take Socinians to be) do not come in among those that are sound in the Faith:
This great Danger may in a due respect and humble way be represented to the
superior Power, whose Office is to prevent and remedy Inconveniences. This I
humbly conceive to be a Branch of the Right of the Subject, and it may not be
called, To prescribe them what to do; they cannot be every where, nor know
every thing, therefore stand in need of being informed: this is the usual
course of Justice; for no Redress when no Complaint is made; and I was so far
from presuming to prescribe therein, that in my Epistle, page 18. I declare
against it.

All that are no Socinians are agreed how their Tenets about the most holy
Trinity are heretical, and consequently contrary to the Doctrine of the Church,
as by Law established: Now the Laws of the Land do forbid any thing to be
published that is contrary to it; it is known to all, how Socinians do in
Print, and otherwise, daily publish their blasphemous and heretical Opinions,
whereby they break the Law, the Consequence is good to say, they deserve to be
punished, as do all Law-Breakers; and I hope they cannot pretend to come in
within the Act of Indulgence; tho they deny their Opinions to be heretical, yet
that is not enough for them to be accounted innocent; for it is very rare to see
a guilty Man, when he is liable to, and sure of Punishment, to confess his own
Guilt, yet his bare denial does not free him from it; for if to deny was enough
to clear, no Man could be found guilty.

Both Authors of the Letters are very angry, and much cry out against what I
said about a Field of Honor, which is, in relation to the Cause, to be
defended against its Enemies, and not to any capital Punishment, which had been
an imprudent thing of me, and contrato my inclination, to have suggested
against Heretics; but these Gentlemen, who often call me hot and fiery,
hastily skipp'd from the Second Page of my Epistle to the Seventeenth of the
same, to make the Field of Honor to be Smithfield: These two things are
written too far asunder, to be joined together, as indeed there was in my
thoughts nothing like Smithfield, when I was insinuating, that as God's Work is
glorious, so the occasion offered to promote it is as a Field of Honor, as
expressed in the place, and what there I mentioned of one who for Socinianism
suffered in Smithfield, was not of my own, but in consequence of a Citation out
of Sir Thomas Ridley' s View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, where he
says, Against such is provided Sentence page 59.
of Death; and there I gave two Instances, how what he said had been executed:
Let any impartial Man peruse the places, and they shall find it to be as I say,
and then may take notice how rash, hasty, and unjust are these Men, who pretend
to so much Calmness and Meekness of Spirit, in making Reflections upon others*
who, through God's Grace, have a more Christian charitable frame of Spirit than
themselves: We indeed hate abominable Blasphemies and Heresies, but neither
Blasphemers nor Heretics, for some of them, God, if he pleases, may show
Mercy, and give Repentance unto; their Conversion not their Ruin is wished for,
and also Endeavors are used to preserve others from being infected.

The true and short account of the business is this; Things being in the state
and condition as I represent in my Epistle and Preface, I looked upon it as a
Duty incumbent upon me as a Christian, with what little strength God has given
me, to lay it out in the Defense of the most just and best Cause in the World,
namely, the due Honor of the most holy and adorable Trinity, and the Divinity
of our blessed Lord and Savior, and of the Holy Ghost, which so many Legions
of Martyrs have freely shed their Blood, and gloriously laid down their Lives
for: I went not about to support it with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, or
with studied, affected, pompous Expressions, which only bad Causes stand in
need of; but as our Faith 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
does not stand in the Wisdom of men, but in the Power of God, so I endeavored
with good Arguments drawn out of his Word, which hitherto remain unanswered, to
confute Heresy and Sophistry: One must not so much mind Words and Style, when
the Question is about Things. Those Men who mind more how they say than what
they say, desire their own Glory more than the Good of others: In a Declamation
one has more Freedom of Style than in difficult and deep Points of Divinity,
Philosophy, and Mathematics; certain Matters are not adapted to a lofty Style;
they that are so fond of this more than of the other, are like those who prefer
the Shell before the Oyster, or the Stone before the Kernel. Now to come to
that which concerns me, I say, it being no evil thing to promote a good Cause
by all lawful means, for Right and Favor to countenance it, are not
incompatible, not to be wanting in any thing depending upon me; the Parliament
then sitting, and I knowing how there are several honorable and worthy Members
who lay to Heart the Glory of God, wherein the good of the Nation does consist,
with all due Respect in an Epistle Dedicatory I humbly commended and offered it
to the serious Consideration of both Houses, in hope that this might happen to
be a means, amidst their application to the great National Concerns of another
nature, to draw their Eyes toward this Cause, thereby to bring a Blessing of
God upon their Proceedings; for the greater the Emergencies and Occasions are,
the more need of God's Favor, which may be procured no better than with doing
such things as are acceptable in his sight, as is the care of his Honor and
Service.

After I had done the most, and in my Book about several Points proved the
Falsehood of Socinianism, I thought I might show the Necessity of a Remedy, and
endeavor to set to work as many Hands as I could; and as no Man may deny it to
be the Concern of a Parliament (for every new one does appoint a Committee of
Religion) to look into things belonging to it; always necessary, but specially
when the most fundamental part of the Doctrine of the Church by Law
established, is daily, publicly, and in print stricken at; so I thought I
might humbly address to both Houses, as the undisputably competent Judge of
such things, wherein I think I have done nothing contrary to the Laws of God
and of the Land, nor to the Rules of Charity, and so deserve not the hard Names
nor ill Language given me, by those who have no better Argument to defend a bad
Cause, for all their pretended good nature, and to throw Dust into Peoples
Eyes, only to shuffle off the matters in question.

The truth is, that Society of Men are against all manner of restraint in
matters of Religion, they would have every one believe and profess what seems
good in his eye; and so of the Church, which is the House of God, to make a
mere Babel and Confusion without Order and Rule, which Frame will at last rend
in in pieces and ruin it: In the Church there must be some Authority of the
Rulers of it over the Members; Christ has formed and given it a Being, and
left Rules for the preservation and well-being thereof, the Admiministration of
which he has committed to her Governors; and to what purpose should those
Laws be, if there was no Executive Power, there is an Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction with a Coercive and Expulsive Power; there are Pales and Walls to
hinder Wild Boars and ranging Bears from coming in, and Doors to turn out those
who offend, infect, dishonor, endanger and would undermine it: And
Convocations, which I see they care not for, are necessary from time to time to
promote her good, and to remedy or prevent Inconveniences, chiefly those which
relate to Doctrine; and though we attribute an Infallibility to none of them, as
there is none upon Earth, yet it is their Province for their own Members to
declare about Heresy, Blasphemy, and other things contrary to sound Doctrine
and Piety: To me there appears none more competent Judges in such things, than
those who have Christ's Commission to feed and to rule over his Flock, and in
the right administration of this Office, the Civil Powers called the Nursing
Fathers of the Church, are bound to protect and assist them against the Enemies
of the holy Trinity, and of the Person of Jesus Christ, such are Socinians.

Though according to Times and Places, Men have different Notions of divine
Truths; yet a real divine Truth is such at all times and in all places; it is
not the Opinion which Men have of it that makes it to be Truth or not Truth*
nor can the several contrary Interpretations change it; so if the 39 Articles,
specially those that relate to Faith, were true at first, they must be so at
last, and no following Convocation can make them not to be what they are, or to
be what they are not; it is not the stamp of any human Authority that may make a
divine Institution to be divine or not; and tho a new Convocation should repeal
what in Fundamentals a former one settled, yet some reasons for it ought to be
produced: About doubtful things Advice may be asked, as it was in the Dispute
about Circumcision, when Paul and Barnabas were sent to Jerusalem for Acts 15.
Counsel about it; nothing must be omitted that may lawfully contribute toward
clearing of the matter; but when after a serious Examination by the Rule of
God's Word, according to the true signification of the words in the Original,
the scope of the place, and the Analogy of Faith, Articles of Faith once are
declared, it is fit to stand to them, and the Church by which they are received,
is enabled to judge of what is or is not contrary thereunto, and to keep from
coming in those who would against her mind, and turn out her own Members, which
hold Doctrines contrary to the Truth she professes: So the Church of England
being satisfied that the Socinian Tenets are quite contrary to the 1st. and 2d.
Articles of Faith she believes, has right to turn out Socinians that are
within her Pales, and hinder those who would come in from without: And if she
wants a sufficient Power, she may very well sue for help from the Civil, which
is the legal way for Relief; and when this takes an effectual Course about it,
it is Wrong and Injury to the Right and Liberty of the Subject, no more than
it is Injustice to hinder one Fellow-Subject from hurting another: This is no
Popish Principle, nor contrary to those of Reformation: But where a National
Church is settled, to allow every Man a liberty to frame unto himself what
Notions he pleases of Religion, then to promote, vent and publish it, to the
Disturbance of what is already settled by Law, you thereby introduce Confusion
into the Church, which may soon become Anarchy in the Government, which to
prevent in my humble Address to the Parliament, I thought the Laws now in being
about such things might be executed, and, if in their Wisdom they thought fit,
new ones be enacted.

What Papists believe or do, as to Authority, about Interpretation of
Scriptures, is no Rule nor Precedent for us; there is a sad Experience in the
World of the nature of the Spirit which they are acted by, and of the Methods
they have taken to support their spiritual Tyranny over the Consciences and
Souls, yea, Lives of Men; they made themselves Parties and Judges, and would
admit or hear of no Reasons contrary to theirs, which were grounded not upon
God's Word (though in some things they pretend it) but their own Traditions and
Practice to their Church* Now among us you find no such thing, the Law is open
for you, if you take Scripture to be it, whereof you sadly wrest the Words,
contrary to their natural Sense, without giving any good Reason for it, and you
stand by your selves in defiance and opposition of the general Consent of the
Universal Church, which condemned those unsound Men, when they appeared against
the Person of our Savior and Lord. And here I must say, we, no more than you,
receive the Authority of Antiquity or of Fathers upon their own bottom; for we
agree they were fallible, when they said so and so; but whether in so saying
they spoke truth, is well worth enquiry into; I will compare them with
Scripture, and if they agree with it, I will agree with them: And this is to me
a strengthening Evidence, that I am not singular, seeing others as well as I,
could in the Word of God find those Truths which I do believe: Woe be to him
that Eccles. 4. 10.
is alone, abounds in his own Sense, and thinks he knows more than all the
World besides; for the application of Scripture Truths, it may be every ones
Right to direct himself by his own Reason enlightened by the Spirit; as to the
Explication, a very great care ought to be had, and still according to the Rule
of God's Word, with all the help he can get besides; but when they have
Opinions which they find are generally opposed, People so modest, so quiet, and
of the Character they give of themselves, not to disturb others, should keep it
within themselves, and not be so servent as ye are, to spread it abroad,
whether your Zeal be without or against Knowledge: And if every one who pretends
to be a Member of the Church be so busy as ye are to promote their Opinions,
and no Curb be put upon Interpretations, then no end of Heresy, Blasphemy, or
of all sorts of the worst Opinions.

But before I proceed, I think fit to pull down that Strong-hold of theirs, as
they take it to be, though rather Sandy Foundation of a free liberty for every
one to make what interpretations they please: and that I shall the more
willingly do, though as briefly as I can, because it is a Matter controverted
between them and us, which I had no occasion to meddle with in my Book. To
begin, I say, as there is a Right, so there is a false Interpretation of
Scripture: The Right is that which gives the true sense and meaning the False
on the contrary: Now if every private Man might Interpret Scripture, what
monstrous Interpretations would there be, as we see it too much in the World;
and this is the ground of Heresy, Blasphemy and Fanaticism; which to prevent,
the Lord Jesus, as St. Paul says in those 1 Cor. 12. 28. and Ephesians. 4. ii.
two places, where he mentions the Offices in the Church, has settled Prophets
and Teachers: Every private Man may Read but not Interpret Scripture, which in
this Case, is the first thing to be known; For, says the Apostle, knowing this
first, that no Prophecy 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation, so the Interpretation must
come from whence the Revelation came, it is but one and the same Spring;
therefore in the next Verse he clears the Matter, For Prophecy came not in old
time, by the Will of Man; but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost; which does exclude as humane private Revelation, so also humane
private Interpretation: And herein Paul joineth with Peter, when he puts this
Question, 1 Cor. 12. 30.
Do all Interpret? Which contains an Exclusive how all do not, no more than all
are no workers of Miracles,

Furthermore we must know how Scripture has a binding Power not only directive
but also decisive over the Conscience; so that thereby the Conscience, far from
having that free liberty, is tied and bound to the determination of the Word;
or else no Man that believes an Opinion contrary to sound Doctrine and never so
heretical and blasphemous, could be guilty of Sin: But we are assured of the
contrary, for they who wrest 2 Pet. 3. 16.
the Scriptures, do so unto their own destruction; though a man must be very
cautious not to go against his Conscience, yet where there is a Competition
between God and Man, the Word of God and the Judgment of Man; when each
challenge of us a Consent, we must give it the Word which certainly is true and
infallible, preferably before the Conscience, which may be seduced and
erroneous, which happens often when it is guided by humane Reason. In Scripture
is in matters of Faith a convincing and constraining Power, which in Conscience
we are bound to submit to; in Humane things, the Judge is not properly Judge,
except he Judges according to the Law; for he has no power to alter or
corrupt, but to declare the true sense of it. The Interpretation of the Divine
Law which the Question is now about, may happen to be mistaken, but the Law
never, for it is Infallible, as being the Word of the True and Infallible God;
hence is derived its Divine and Undisputable Authority, beyond that of any
thing else, and it should work upon men more than Miracles, even than raising
from the Dead, which may Luke 16. 31.
be called the greatest of all; for, they that hear not Moses and the Prophets,
will not be persuaded though one rose from the Dead. The reason is, because
therein the Spirit of God speaks, and thereby leads us into all Truth: And
indeed, if Scripture was not the end of Debates in matters of Religion, our
Conscience could never be settled nor quiet; for that same thing, no Humane
Reason, Power or Judgment, is able to effect; but we aquiesce to, rest and
depend upon the Word of the God of Truth: and if at the Bar of Conscience there
was no such binding Rule, but men were left to their own private Judgment, none
would be bound to believe Scripture, but always live amidst Doubts,
Difficulties and Conjectures, not to say, singular Notions, Fancies and Dreams;
and so we could never be at a certainty: Besides, that after this, there were
no Sin in any man to receive any sense of Scripture, though never so contrary to
the intention of God's Spirit therein; and, as said before, never so Erroneous
and Heretical, only because it is according to a man's own private Opinion and
deluded Imagination; which is to take away the Obligation whereby Conscience
and the whole Soul are bound to believe the Truth of Scripture only, and not
false Interpretations.

Besides, there is in Scripture some matters of Faith which are not so obvious
to the Soul and to Reason, as matters of Fact are to the Eye and Ear; as also
there are others not to be Interpreted according to the plain and literal sense
as they seem to be: Out of the number and variety of such afforded in the Word,
I shall bring only two Instances: Can they think that this Consequence by our
Savior, God is the God of the living, and not of the dead; therefore there
shall be Luke 20. 38.
a resurrection of the dead, is plain and obvious to any man; or that this is
true, Paul is a robber of Churches, because he said, I robbed other Churches:
Hence appears 2 Cor. ii. 8.
the danger and inconvenience of allowing of such a particular free liberty of
Interpreting Scripture, seeing it can be and is so much abused. We are taught
in the word, that we have received the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13.
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God, and which
the Holy Ghost teaches; if human Reason were a sufficient Light for a Man to
enable him to interpret Scriptures, then Paul's Prayer, that God would give the
Ephesians the spirit of wisdom and Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. Colos. 1. 9.
revelation in the knowledge of him, the eyes of their understanding being
enlightened, etc. The like for the Colossians, were in vain; for it is frivolous
to ask what one has already, and wants not at all: this Liberty which they
allow themselves every day, to search and find out new Interpretations, whereby
the Minds of Men are tossed, and never to be settled, cannot consist with the
true Faith revealed in the Word of God, which we are commanded to be steadfast
in, and to be 1 Cor. 15. 58. Coloss. 2. 7. Heb. 13. 9
rooted and built up in Christ, and stablished in the Faith: and not carried
about with diverse and strange Doctrines: Certainly that freedom of interpreting
is herein forbidden, and so are we forbidden to believe those false Glosses and
Interpretations; for says the Apostle, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they are of God; the reason is this, Because many 1
John 4. 1.
false Prophets are gone out into the world, who allow themselves a freedom of
interpreting Scrpiture according to their own humor and fancy, no ways allowed
by the Laws of God, and should not be by the Laws of Men; a Curb ought to be
put upon such wandering profane Thoughts, at least upon the publishing of them.
The Adversaries who are so fond and conceited of their human Reason, Learning,
and Wisdom, might take notice how the Apostle hits them, when he calls those
who give false interpretations of, and wrest Scriptures, both unstable and
unlearned; 2 Pet. 3. 16.
certainly those Men are unstable, who make use of a pretended Liberty, ever to
give Scripture new interpretations, as suggested by their Reason; so to day
they may give one, and the next another different from and contrary to it; and
is not this Change a Fickleness and Unstableness? These unstable Men would make
those different interpretations to be a part and proof of their Learning; but
far from that; for Peter calls them unlearned, whereby he gives a great blow to
that Diana-Idol of theirs. But as I hope hereafter by the Grace of God, to have
an occasion of enlarging upon this, I shall for the present forbear saying any
more to it

What he brings in of Bonner and Latimer, about Page 8.
the Interpretation of the Words, This is my Body, cannot answer his purpose;
that Instance indeed can show how a Text may differently be interpreted, and
that one may happen wrongfully to suffer for a good Cause; and how the
strongest side and most supported, is not always the best: But this cannot
prove, that because one has unjustly suffered, the other may not justly suffer;
that sort of Men who are always wholly bent to provide for their safety, would
infinuate how no Man should be called to account for any wresting of, or
putting false interpretations upon Scripture, tho never so false, blasphemous,
impious, and heretical, because he who does so, believes them not to be such,
which is their own case: it does not follow, that a Truth, tho made doubtful,
because to day it is supported, and to morrow shall be oppressed, must not be
owned, and a Restraint put upon those who oppose it: The Merit of the Cause is
impartially to be enquired into, and when Truth is found out, not only it must
be exalted, but also its contrary is to be kept under: Tho Queen Mary supported
a bad Cause and suppressed a good one, it does not follow but that Queen
Elizabeth did well to suppress a bad Cause and support a good one: Tho an
innocent be brought to suffer, yet the guilty must not go free for all that:
Because formerly innocent Blood was shed, must not Justice now be executed upon
Criminals? It Is not the Opinion of Men but the Truth of the Thing which makes
any one guilty or innocent; the Law is judge of it: So in Matters of Religion,
it is not the Interpretation of the Text, nor the Opinion which the Interpreter
has of the Soundness of his Interpretation that makes it Orthodox and sound,
but the Word which explains it self; for what in one place is dark, is plain in
some other; and when some Men, contrary to those Lights, will set up heretical
and blasphemous Opinions, and therein grow obstinate, only because they think
to be in the right; upon such account the Word of God authoriseth Men to enact
such penal Laws as they shall think most conducing for the glory of God, and to
have them put in execution, chiefly when the Parties against the known Laws of
the Land do publish, and in defiance of all, at the Parliament Doors, offer
their heretical Books with words to this purpose; I put a most excellent Book
into your hand, pray read it with attention, and when you are Converted
strengthen your Brethren; thus profanely abusing God's most holy Word.

They are by no means pleased with my way of Writing, but I like it the better
for their disliking it: Page 4. 16, 18.
They find fault first with the Matter, Order and Expression; secondly, with my
often using Scripture; thirdly, with my Sallying, as they call it, into sundry
Metaphors. The first of the two ironically talks of depth of Learning, height
of Fancy, etc. which is proper to Fantastical Men, who would transform Fancy,
yea all Religion into Reason. The other calls it, A World of School Cant, which
now adays goes for deep Learning: So both, though in a different way, talk of
depth of Learning; that People would have others like themselves, to build upon
no Foundation but Humane Reason, which is not allowable, chiefly in things of
the nature of those now in question: what they call Cant, is out of Scripture,
Writings of Ancient Fathers, and out of Schools; which, as I think, are the
proper Storehouses whence to draw our Materials; but with them every thing is
Cant which does not suit with their Tunes: those Men would have all Notions of
things, manner of Expression and Style, to be but one and the same; but theirs
to be the Original for others to go by; which, especially in Men who so highly
pretend to Reason, is as unreasonable, as if one would have all features in the
Face, all shapes of the Body, all humors and inclinations of the Soul, to be
alike; a thing impossible: For every man, says the 1 Cor. 7. 7.
Apostle, has his proper gift of God; one after this manner, another after
that. However, these great Masters of Wit, Learning and Reason, find fault with
the way of other Men's Writing, if it be not as they would have it, that they
call Nonsense, and what else they please; for their Tongues and Pens are their
own, wherewith they will do what they have a mind to. Their Ironical
Expressions may well be retorted upon them; yet they should know how Truth is
better when naked, and needs no painting as does Falsehood; to Paint is the part
of an Harlot, not of a virtuous Woman. I ask* Is not Gold, Gold still, and
good, though it be not Enameled, or otherwise curiously wrought? If they have
their way of Writing, I have mine, which they shall not put me out of, but will
keep to it till I see a Law enjoining others to Conform to theirs: I thank God
my ways are different from, and would not change them for theirs, though they
would set up for Censors and Reformers of other Men's Works, but by what Patent,
I cannot hear nor see; and if I could help it, I would have nothing Common with
them, because their Plague is in the Head; and to give them their due, in what
they say there is more of flashy Wit, than of solid and sound Reason; they
prefer the Bark before the Body of the Tree, and the Clothes before the Person
who wears them.

They dislike my Quotations or Fragments of Scripture, as one of the two calls
them; and good reason they have, for they are so many strong and destructive
Batteries against them; they would not see the Mouth of that Cannon which
shatters their false Opinions to pieces: If to Quote Scripture be a Fault, they
are not guilty of it; they travel not much into that Country, and when they do,
it is with a Cup of Venom in their Hand, if possible to poison the Springs.
Their Reason is the God-Idol, for whose sake they slight Revelation; but, says
he, those Fragments are ill applied: I see you had more Curiosity than your
Brother, (which of the two is Simeon and which Levi, I cannot tell, however one
calls himself a Layman) for you read the Book; but what is the reason you give
not one Instance of these Fragments of Scripture being ill applied; surely you
are apt enough to take advantage if any was offered, and I cannot believe you
would have so much Charity as to spare me; for by the sowrness and gall of
bitterness which I find in the Letters, I have cause to think so, you cannot so
soon have forgotten all those Portions of God's word ill applied; I had been
glad to have seen some named, then upon a good account I could have said
something to you; but you give me cause to think those Misapplyings to be the
Man in the Moon, I mean your Humane Reason: As for me, about Matters in
question, Scripture is my Stong-hold and the Arsenal whence I draw both
offensive and defensive Weapons which they would have us to throw away, but
they must pardon us for not complying with them; they themselves cannot and
will not do so, for therein they would find their Condemnation: We follow
better Examples, those of great Captains in this Warfare, as Paul, who Acts 17.
2.
in this same Cause reasoned out of the Scriptures, and at another time he
testified concerning Jesus Christ out of Acts 28. 23.
the Law of Moses and out of the Prophets, from morning till evening. He was
not weary of it, neither must we be, let Socinians say what they will to the
contrary: And though he was immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, yet on all
occasions he appealed to the Scriptures for a confirmation of what he said:
Thus when he affirmed 1 Cor. 15. 34.
that Christ died for our Sins, he immediately adds, according to Scripture;
and in the 11th. Verse he says, that he was buried, and that he rose again,
still according to the Scriptures. His Death, Burial and Resurrection, three
Articles of our Faith, he proves by Scriptures, which is a Rule laid before us
to prove his Divine Nature and Attributes, which we ought to follow, except we
think, we about such things know more than the Apostle. And then Apollos, whose
great Commendation is, that he was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 1^. 24, 28.
and that he mightily convinced the Jews publicly, showing by the Scriptures
that Jesus was Christ. So if we will convince Socinians that Christ is the true
Natural Son of God, we must do it out of Scripture, as out of the same Apollos
did mightily convince the Jews that Jesus was Christ: Besides, we have the
Example of a number of People, I mean of Berea, said to be more Chap. 17. 11.
Noble than those of Thessalonica, because they searched the Scriptures* daily,
whether those things preached to them, were so. Thus we obey our blessed
Saviors Command, to Search diligently the Scriptures, for they bear testimony
of him: And accordingly when he was with his Disciples, he taught them out of
the Law of Luke 24. 44.
Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms, all things written concerning him, as
after his Resurrection he put them in mind of it; then he opened their
understanding that they Ver. 45.
might understand the Scriptures, without which no knowledge of him to be had;
and in these Matters the Question is about him, his Person: Besides that, it is
usual as with Paul and the other Apostles, so with the Evengelists out of Texts
of the Old Testament, to prove what they affirmed in the New; nay, in the Old
we sometimes find one Prophet quoting some Texts of another; and upon this very
account of Sanctifying the Lord of Hosts the Messiah, the Prophet sends the
People to the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not Isa. 8. 20.
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them; without it
their natural Reason is but Darkness.

I am blamed for using Sundry Metaphors, called, A Flourish of wild Rhetoric;
but if it was transplanted into their Garden, it would be Natural enough there,
as indeed it would be in its proper center. If sometimes I make use of
Metaphors, I wonder why they dislike it; in some respect it may be called a
Creature of their own, for they are the Metaphorical Doctors of the World, who
make bold to turn almost the whole Scripture into Metaphors, even to set up a
Metaphorical God: O Sirs, first pull out the Beam out of your own Matt. 7 5.
eye, and then ye shall see clearly to cast out the Mote out of your Brother's.
Anon we shall meet with some more Cavils of theirs.

They appear at the Bar, whereto indeed they deserve to be called, and Plead
for themselves thus: The first of the 39 Articles says, There is but One
living and true Page 6, 7.
God, and in Unity of this Godhead there be Three Persons of one Substance,
Power and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. As to the latter
part, which is the main Question, they pretend to come off with mincing the
matter, and say, by some of their late Prints, meaning Socinians, I perceive
that they for Peace-sake, submit to the Phrase of the Church, and expressly own
Three Persons, though they think the word Person not so proper as another word
might be. The weight of the words of the Article lies so heavy upon them, that
under it they must either break or bend; this last they choose to do, and would
seem to yield; not because they believe it, but only for Peace-sake; Peace to
themselves, to avoid the Penalty: They think the word Person not so proper as
another might be; still they reserve a Backdoor, why do they not name the word
which is in their opinion more proper than that of Person? that word remains in
petto in their Breast, till there be a fair occasion to declare it. Their
speaking of Peace is well, if with it they join Truth, for they ought not to be
asunder; no Christian is to betray Truth for Peace-sake. Now if a Person of the
Godhead be described as it is by an incommunicable Subsistence of the Divine
Essence, the Socinian shall not be acquitted as he pretends: It is not my work,
neither is this a place to show how frivolous that Plea would prove at the Bar
of the Law; but I am sure in my Book I sufficiently demonstrated it to be a
vain Subterfuge and against the Gospel.

That trimming Spirit in them, which, because they have not the upper hand, one
may easily perceive to Rule throughout in both Letters, puts me in mind of the
Popish Methods in such Cases, as among other Instances it appears by what
passed in 1561, in that great Assembly at Poissy in France, which the then
French King Charles IX. appointed to meet, and in his Presence therein to have
free Conference about Religion, between some of the Popish Clergy and some of
the Protestant Ministers: Because as yet things were not ripe for their
Designs, they by means of those Conferences would try whether some way might be
found out to plaster things over, and for the present to compose Differences;
in order thereunto, after some discourses about the Sacraments, which between
the Cardinal of Lorrain and Theodorus Beza had happened in the K. of Navarr's
Chamber, where they met accidentally; the Popish Party being not willing to
venture their Cause upon Disputes, first by the Doctors of Sorbon, and lastly
by the Cardinal of Tournon in the name of the whole Clergy, desired the King
and Queen Mother to give the Protestants no Hearing, who by the Mouth of Beza
had already made a Speech in the Assembly, and given an account of their
Confession of Faith: So then these Public Conferences not doing the work, they
did set up Private ones; first between Two and Two, then between Five and Five*
of both Religions, and among these for the Protestants Peter Martyr was one;
the Point was about the Lord's Supper: On the Popish side the design was, not
to find out the Truth, but only such words as each side might Interpret on his
behalf: To that purpose several Formules, which here I need not to insert, were
by the Papists offered the Protestants, but being ambiguous, captious, and such
as might be understood in a double sense, Beza for Conclusion said, We must say
all or nothing, because indeed the Mystery of that Holy Sacrament must be
explained. The like was practiced in their Council of Trent, where happened
great Heats between the Dominicans and Franciscans about several Points,
wherein they differ, but to displease neither side, their Canons about those
Matters, before they were passed, they showed to both Parties, and penned them
in such Words and Expressions, as each side might favorably Interpret for his
own Opinion.

Thus Socinians would follow the same way, and admit of such words as may be
taken in their Sense and ours too; yet though we should agree about the Terms,
they know we do not in the Signification; they for Peace sake submit to the
Phrase of the Church, and own Three Persons, yet Interpret it not as the Church
does: Again, They seem desirous to wash their hands of Socinianism, yet defend
it as much as they are able: Upon the prudent Explication which has been given
of some obnoxious Terms, they weave the Dispute and come in as Brethren, yet
still believe not as the Church does; nay, if we will believe them, we are all
of a perfect Agreement; but if we examine it will be found, if by these
pretended last Concessions of theirs we agree, it is about some Words, when the
difference about Things still remains. And as then Papists were only to have
things quiet for the present, so I perceive Socinians are now content it should
be so between us, to see whether Times may happen to turn for them, then indeed
they would declare, by the word Person they mean not an Incommunicable
Subsistence of the Godhead, but only an Attribute as Wisdom, Love; that Christ
is God and Son of God by Favor not by Nature and by eternal Generation. But
all such Trimmers, to speak in Job's Words, are Physicians of no value, and
such Remedies cannot Job 13. 4.
cure the Wound but it will break out again, and this I call daubing with
untempered Mortar, it is not enough to ease of the Pain, but the cause must be
removed, which is the only way to cure for certain, and to prevent Relapses:
this I bring in to show how Socinians are not so averse from such Popish
Practices as they pretend to be; and if we narrowly inquire into it, we shall
find they are willing to join with them in the Practice of the following Maxim,
where they are the weakest, they first pretend for Moderation and Toleration,
then for an Equality, afterward struggle for Superiority, and at last destroy
any one that to a hairs Breadth would not come up to what they would have: for
as Papists brag of a Spirit of Infallibility intailed upon their Church, so
Socinians are of opinion that the Spirit of God, (if they own any such thing)
is departed from other Christian Societies only to be among them, who look upon
themselves as the only true Interpreters of God's Word, as Socinus does applaud
himself in his new fangled Expositions, therefore they despise all Ancient
Doctors of the Primitive Church, and I think, in Tertullian's Words against
Montanus, we may say it to be the Socinians opinion, Truth waited for their
Coming, without which it had been quite lost: yet according to their Principles
we must all be Scepticks and Pyrhonians always doubting of every thing and
never sure of any, then in the Word of God is no Truth that we can be certain
of: we know no Man has dominion over the Faith of another, nor ought to impose
his Opinion upon others, neither could they who went before us be Masters of
our Faith, nor we of the Faith of those who are to come after. You see I make
use of your own Expressions, but withal I must tell you that if any one would
in former or present times offer to force things of their own upon us to
believe, we would reject it, by their own, we mean any thing different from or
contrary to the Word of God, it is not their offering to us, or of us to others,
can bind the Consciences, but the things offered do, if they be the Word of
God; no human Authority does per se and of it self tie my Conscience, but God's
Word does, therefore if any thing be proposed as an Article of Faith, we must
see whether it be contained in the Word of God, which bears Record of it self,
and so stands in no need of the Testimony of Man: it is not the hand that gives
Alms which can make Gold to be Gold or Silver to be Silver, nor the Lawyers
quoting the Law that can make it to be Law, it is so in it self, so is Gospel
Gospel in it self, without any human help, or else you make the Gloss and
Interpretation more than the Text, and as according to your Principles you may
alter your Interpretation one to day and another different from it the next,
what a Confusion would you leave us in, when you are so sickle and cannot agree
with your own selves? as indeed you make an Alteration in the Questions from
what they were in Socinus's days.

By what they say of Doctrines which according to circumstance of times may be
convenient or inconvenient, I find them inclined to blame the times to excuse
themselves: but the Faults which too often are committed, the Times are not to
be accused of but the Malice or Weakness of Men, there being no Season so
troublesome as can keep a good Judge from doing Justice, or a good Divine from
giving a good Interpretation of Scripture, so Men's Faults ought to be
chastised, and not the Times, which are as Men govern themselves, to be
complained of; but good and holy Laws ought to be enacted by those whom it
belongs to, having the Glory of God, and the Good of the People before their
Eyes: new Distempers require new Remedies, and new Laws are necessary against
new Crimes, wherefore I lay hold on this new occasion, and once more make bold,
to both Houses of Parliament, humbly to commend the Cause of God, and of his
Son the Lord Jesus, (according as I formerly besought them in my Epistle) in
earnest to mind it, or else with David I say, Arise O God plead thine own
Cause. Psalm. 74. 22.


However, as to Faith and Practice, they give a good Character of themselves;
as to the first, they believe all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, but still
they reserve unto themselves to give what Interpretation they please; but sure
we are, it is not that contained in the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds: Still
there is a Jesuitical Juggling, Equivocation, and Mental Reservation. Ask them
which is the true sense of the Words in Jesus Christ his only Son, they will
not say, it is of his own Nature and Substance and from Eternity; which Creed,
say they, was heretofore thought a full and sufficient Summary of Faith, till
some Men perverted the true and Orthodox Meaning, and brought false Glosses
upon it, contrary to the plain and natural Interpretation received by the
Universal Church; then indeed to refute unsound and Anti-scriptural Expositions
and wresting of the true Sense, to explain and enlarge was found necessary:
It Is their Principle thankfully to lay hold on the Message of Redemption by
Jesus Christ: This seems fair, but is very defective; for according to them,
Christ came into the World as a bare Messenger, a mere Man, to declare the Will
of God unto us, which others, tho not so fully and plainly, had done before, to
die only for our good, but not in our stead, nor to purchase us by the Merits
of his Death: So they say the Lord Jesus is God by Favor, not by Nature,
robbing him thus of his Divinity. When we seriously come to the matter, they
are full of Quiblings and Cavils: As to the receiving the Message of
Redemption, it is according to them by strength of Reason and not of Faith, for
no true Faith in Christ, except Men believe him to be true God as well as true
Man. As to Practice, this Character they give of themselves, They fear God,
walk humbly before him, hold no Correspondence with any known Sin, etc. This is
well, but not enough; for the moral Virtues of the Heathen carried some of them
as far as this: But a sound* Knowledge in the Mind is required, and no sound
saving Knowledge of Christ, except one knows him for such as he is, that is, God
and Man, or else he is but half a Christ, an imperfect Mediator, whole Christ
is the true Object of Faith. These things are written that ye John 20. 31.
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, as well as the Son of
Man.

I am glad to find something like the Matters in question; page 6, 8
in the first Letter we are told what ground they go upon concerning their
Opinions; Scripture they own to be the Rule of Faith, but unto themselves they
reserve the Interpretation, which is as bad as what they condemn in Papists, to
depend upon the Authority of their own Interpretation, and so can turn it which
way they please; so may every Socinian, as well as every Quaker, have their
private Interpretation: but to say that Protestants for the interpretation of
Scripture do rely upon their own Reason, is without warrant and does not
consist with Truth, except by Protestants they mean Socinians: if this were a
fit place I could show that they have not the same regard as we, for
Scriptures, tho they assert it, for they dispute the Truth and Authority
thereof: but I must come to human Reason, which in one page is twice asserted
to be the only Guide God has given us in matters of Religion, for under that
head I reduce the three he there page 11.
mentions about Revelation: but this is not the Judgment of true Protestants;
if a Man has no other Guide but his own Reason, it is a blind one and very
defective, it is but one part of three and the least too; for to the end that
human Reason may be a fit Guide, it must be first subordinate to Revelation,
which is the prescribed Rule and from which it ought not to recede no more than
a Judge from the Law, (as Paul told Ananias) or else he is in danger Acts 2^. 3.
of falling into Precipices, that is the Light it must follow, and as the Soul
is guided by Reason, so must Reason be by Revelation: neither can Reason and
outward Revelation do the Work without inward Revelation, whereby Reason is
supernaturally endowed, and this is Faith a Gift of God: this is the ground of
our Blessed Savior's giving his Father thanks for revealing the Mysteries of
Faith and Salvation unto Babes, that is, those who as yet in his Sense were not
capable of Reason, and plainly tells Peter that if he knew and confessed him to
be the Son of the living God, Flesh and Blood, or his natural Reason, Matthew.
16. 17.
had not revealed it unto him, but his Father which is in Heaven; When the Lord
Jesus was upon leaving this World, he promised his Disciples a Guide, what
their own Reason? no such thing, but the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, who
should teach them all things, and bring to John 14. 16, 17.
remembrance whatsoever he had said unto them, and he was to abide with them
for ever: this Spirit of God is the right Guide whom true Protestants own to
lead and guide us in the way of Salvation; and this he does not according to
human Fancies or private Inspirations, but according to the Rule of the Word,
for says our Savior, he shall receive of mine, that is my Word, and shall
show it unto Chap. 16. 13, 14.
you, for he shall not speak of himself, he teaches and applies the Word, and
his working is by the Apostle called the Spirit of a sound Mind, which God has
given us; 2 Timothy 1. 7.
so that a sound Mind, an Orthodoxy in the Faith is an Effect of God's Gift,
not of our Reason or of any thing else in us, wherefore David says give me
Understanding Psalm. 119. 169.
according to thy Word. But these things Socinians have been told over and
over, and in the Preface and latter end of my Book I think I said enough to
satisfy unbyassed Persons, so have others too: this is the sure and infallible
Guide which God has given us, and not any human Authority different from or
contrary to it; the Pope we cannot own for he is a Party and sets up for
himself, nor the ancient Writers, if they deviate from the Rule, but it is a
good Argument for the things wherein they follow it: Men must not be so selfish
and wilful as to despise others who may have the Spirit of God as well as
themselves, and being Witnesses of those Times are able to inform us how things
stood in their time, and cannot be partial for this wherein we live.

The Author of the first Letter has a touch upon the page 8.
matter and that is all: it is about the interpretation of what S. John says,
the Word was made Flesh, I confess there is a great difference in the
interpretation, we say according to the natural Signification, the Word or Son
of God took upon him our human Nature; they say (...) which we translate the
Word, signifies Reason rather than Word, and they infer that the Reason or
Wisdom of God was communicated unto Jesus Christ; this is a very much forced
Interpretation and fetched afar off, for all along the Word is spoken of as a
Subject, and they would make a shift to turn it into the Predicate. Now what
shall we do, of these two Opinions to find out the true one? for if every
Person or Party be allowed such a Latitude as to interpret things after their
own Fancy, there will be no end of false Glosses and wrong Interpretations: how
does the Goldsmith do to know true Gold or Silver from that which is false? he
brings it to the Touchstone, so must we in this case; between them and us is a
Difference, the Party must not be the Judge, it is not just they should be
Judges in their own cause, nor we in ours: then we must agree about a Judge,
such as is impartial and infallible, and none but God is such: now God does not
immediately speak from Heaven, for he does it in his Word, that is his Will and
ought to be our Law and Rule: in matters of Faith I will believe no Man's
Assertion, except out of Scripture he proves it to me, the like he may justly
expect from me; but in case of that Text of Scripture he and I give different
Interpretations, what is to be done? we ought still to keep in the same Court,
and wait for a Decision from the same Judge; then I must prove my
Interpretation by some other place of Scripture or else he must not believe me,
nor I him except he does the like: and if Men will but lay aside Prejudices,
and be acted by a real and sincere desire to find out the Truth, God will not
leave them, but therein afford such Helps as shall answer their Good; for all
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is 2 Timothy 3. 16.
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect.

Now let us come to our Point, and reduce the Rule to a Practice; the Question
is, Whether by the Word is meant a Person as we say, or a Quality as they would
have it? there is a great Difference between Persons and Things; now to find
out the Truth, this Text must be compared with others, we need not to go far,
for in the first Verse of the Chapter we read thrice the same Name: in the
beginning was the Word (was, signifies existed, had a Being, which relates to
a Person, and not to a Thing) the same Word was with God and was God; what? a
Quality with God and a Thing God? does the Evangelist begin his Gospel in so
high a strain only to tell us how Reason was in the beginning, how Reason was
with God, and Reason was God, or in plain Words that God was Reasonable, which
is a Truth known to every one* so no need to tell it, but he would acquaint the
Readers with things before unknown to them; besides does this hold any
proportion with the Nature and Excellency of the Gospel and great Tidings of
Salvation? this indeed is to exalt Reason, and because they make a God of their
Reason, therefore for Name's sake Reason must be deified: then, according to
their Principle, this Reason must be an efficient Cause of all, for all things
were made 1 John 1, 2.
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; to create and
make things is the Property and Act of a Person, and not of a Thing, in him, as
in a Person and not as in a Thing, was Life; and the same Apostle calls him the
Word of Life, that Life which was manifested, and that Eternal Life which was
with the Father first, and then was manifested unto us; as if he had said, the
living God, according to an usual way of speaking in Scripture, when the
Abstract is put for the Concrete, thus God is called the Lord our
Righteousness; that same Word that was God, was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,
to dwell denotes a Person; and we Beheld his Glory, not the Glory of Reason or
Wisdom, but the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, here is a Relation
of a Son to a Father, and surely a Son is a Person not a Thing; and of this
same John bare witness of him, saying this was he of whom I spoke, he that
comes after me is preferred before me, read on till ver. 19. all along the
Word is spoken as of a Person, and in ver. 17. he declares who that Word is by
a Comparison between Persons, the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ. This Jesus Christ he has been speaking of all this
while, and his Design is to show that Jesus Christ is the Word so often by him
mentioned, and to that effect he speaks of John's Evidence about him, if the
Word be a Thing and not a Person, Christ was so, and so Moses who was a Person,
and Christ after he was made Flesh is compared to him: O the Perverseness of
some Men's Judgment! who read Scripture, not to find out Truth or be guided by
it, but out of it to wrest some things to support their Prejudices: Papists, to
set up the Pope's Supremacy, think after much seeking to have found a Text to
serve their turn, he that is spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
yet he himself is judged of no Man, with them the Pope is that Spiritual Man:
the Socinians, whose Design is not to set up one, as Papists do, but to pull
down and destroy the great Work of Incarnation, say, because it serves their
turn, no Word or Divine Person, but only the Reason of God was made Flesh. Out
of what I have said I think it plainly appears how the Scope of the Place, and
the Design of the Evangelist is to speak of a Person and not of a Thing.

But to prove our Interpretation, let us further search into Scriptures, Paul
speaks to our purpose, for as John says the Word that was God was made Flesh,
so he declares that God was manifest in the Flesh, which he calls 1 Timothy 3 16.
the great Mystery of Godliness, and the whole Verse, tho in different
Branches, as preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up
into Glory, do plainly demonstrate the Lord Jesus to be that God or Person of
the Godhead manifest in the Flesh: and in another Place he says, when the
Fullness of the time was come, God sent Gal. 4. 4.
forth his Son, made of a Woman: that Person which in another place is called
God, in this is called the Son of God, and in another God's own Son or proper
Son: in Romans 8. 32.
these several Texts mention is made of an Incarnation, or of being made Flesh,
manifest in the Flesh, made of a Woman, and God sent his own Son in the
Likeness of sinful Flesh, and the Subject is called the Word, God, Son of God,
God's own and proper Son: is there in all this any Metaphor, or any Ground to
say that the Word made Flesh signifies Reason communicated to Jesus? all this
proves that our Interpretation is according to the Analogy of Faith, and shows
a sweet Harmony of several Texts of Scripture, to demonstrate the adorable
Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son God.

Thus far we proved our Interpretation of that Text of Scripture, we do not
perceive they are in a Condition to do the like for theirs, for if they could
we should hear of it, they have not one Text to do it: Magister dixit is no
Reason with us, the Unitarian may say, but that is not enough, what he says he
must prove, upon true Grounds and to the purpose: well, for want of Scripture
the Author of the Letter gives a Reason of his own, which is this, And we all
know that Divine Wisdom may be communicated to Man without the Incarnation of
God: Did ever any one read such a pitiful coming off in so weighty a matter as
this is? how saucy with God are some Men in the World, in setting out their
foolish and wandering Fancies, and where is a due Respect for his Holy Word?
has not God made foolish the Wisdom of these Men, if ever they had any? does
this Interpretation hold any proportion with that high and noble Idea which the
Evangelist would give us of the Person whose History he writes? first of all we
defy them to show that this is the Sense of any Text concerning this Matter?
Secondly, suppose they could, yet it being against the usual Meaning, they
ought to show reason why in this place it should be taken otherwise, and then
must such a silly Reason weigh down the Authority of so many Texts of
Scripture? what will become of all the glorious Attributes and Prerogative of
the Lord Jesus over Angels and Men? what of that Name which is above every
Name, God's own, only begotten Son in whom he is well pleased, if all comes
only to this, God's Reason and Wisdom were communicated to him, which God in a
high degree did to Solomon, and to others of his eminent Servants, whereby he
must make them equal with his Son and he with them: we all know that God, if he
pleases, can create another World, must we conclude therefore he has not
created this; God, if he had pleased, could have delivered his People out of
Egypt otherwise than by the hand of Moses, must we say therefore he delivered
them not by his hand? Out of what God can do we must not infer that he has not
done what he has done; because God can communicate Reason to Man, therefore
the Word the Son of God was not made Flesh: Ye great Logicians, is this a good
Consequence, risum teneatis, I could almost say, if the thing in question was
not of the highest importance.

Before I leave this Point, I shall skip over to another p. 12, 13.
place of the Letter; for though he there speaks not to me, but to another, whose
Notions I am not concerned for, yet what he says relating to the Cause, I
ought to take notice of, the more because* it belongs to that Text of John,
which hitherto we were upon; it is said, Tke Incarnation of God is no where
expressed in Scripture, it can be no more than merely a deduction from thence.
It Is well you are so kind, as to grant it is in it in some way: As to the first
part, if you say in so many Letters, according to your cavilling way, we
know it; for the word Incarnation is Latin, and so none of the Books of
Scripture being originally written in that Language, we must not think to find
it in it, but we say a word altogether equivalent, and which signifies the same
thing is in it: Does not to be made Flesh and to be incarnate, being made Flesh
and Incarnation, signify the same? May be you will deny it, it is but what some
of yours do in a thing of the like nature, as that to make and to create the
World, signify not the same thing: If the Word, which as S. John says, was
God, was made Flesh, I think, that according to all Rules of Logic, out of
those Premises we may conclude, how God was incarnate or made Flesh, and that
Act we may well call Incarnation. As to the other part, that it is only by
Deduction, you cannot be ignorant how there are such Deductions as are
equivalent or next to the Expression; for when the chief Assertion contained in
Scripture is true, so must also be whatsoever is therein included, and in the
Explication of it drawn by a true and right Consequence. Thus, though in the
Sixth Commandment, to give one Poison be not expressed, yet by a true and
certain Consequence, it is deduce out of these Words, Thou shall not kill; so
starving one to death is adjudged Murder, and punished as such: Tho Incest be
not expressed in the Seventh, yet none will deny it to be forbidden under these
Words, Thou shall not commit Adultery; so is Fornication; and so of every other
Precept wherein when a Sin is forbidden, all of the same kind are so, and also
the Virtue contrary to the Sin is prescribed: And tho there were some
difference in the Nature of the thing, yet hence we infer this certain Truth,
that tho some things be not expressly set down in Scripture, yet are therein
contained, and thence deduced by a true and lawful Consequence: Of this sort
are the words Trinity and Incarnation; and if the Names, then also the Things;
for the Use of Words is to signify Things.

As to what is added in Answer to the Assertion, that the Son of God was made
Man, how the Unitarian will say, The Son of God does not always signify God,
it is thereby employed that sometimes it does, and that grants what we desire;
for thus we know, that when it is simply and absolutely attributed to Christ,
which is never so to any Angel or Man, we may conclude, that then it
necessarily signifies God. As to what is answered to the other Text, The Word
was made Flesh; that the Word does not plainly signify God, I only say this,
how John says the word was God, I leave them in his hands, and let them come
off as they can: As to the Third Text, the Unitarian will say, what he said
before; That God may be manifest in the Flesh without being incarnate; he may
say what he pleases if he proves nothing, nay, not so much as go about it;
surely they claim a Privilege to be believed in what they say upon their bare
word; but seeing they give no reason for what they say, we may suppose those
great Masters of Reason have none to give, their Reason fails them, and is
succeeded by Passion; I see they found out a short way to answer all Arguments
against them; either with not taking notice of them, and thus they answer my
Book, or with denying every thing without giving any Reason for it: This puts
me in mind of a common Saying when I was in the Philosophy School, Plus negabit
asinus quam probabit Philosophus. The dullest Fellow in the World can deny
more, than the greatest Philosopher is able to prove; do but always deny, and
at last the Philosopher will have nothing to say: There is no arguing against
those who deny Principles; now this is a great one for Men to give Reason as
for what they affirm, so for what they deny; this is the part of Rational Men:
We attack them out of Scripture, and they ought in our way to answer us out of
the same, as their School-Arguments we answer in their way.

But to return to what the Unitarian says, that The Son of God does not always
signify God, I say it is not always necessary to our purpose it should: And to
state the Question well, these two things ought to be observed: First, The
Question is not at all about Angels or Men, but about the Person of the Lord
Jesus: The Second, The Name God is not improperly taken. This being premised, I
say, how the words Son of God when spoken of Christ, do signify God; which to
prove out of many Texts, I shall bring only two in S. John's Gospel, and if in
the whole Bible there was but one, yet it would be sufficient, for every word
therein is Truth; and if once the Holy Ghost therein declares the Son of God to
signify God, it is not in the power of Men or Devils to make it otherwise:
Besides that, the two Texts are so plain, that there is no ground left to
Cavil: The first place is about the Interpretation given some words spoken by
our blessed Lord, whereby, said the Jews, thou make thy self God, which John
10. 33, 36.
our Savior rendered by these, I said I am the Son of God. So that the words
God, Son of God, signify just the same: The Question between our Lord and the
Jews, was not about the meaning of what he had said, they were agreed about it;
but the Dispute was, whether those words were Blasphemy? which they affirmed,
and he denied. Those words in question spoken by our Savior are in ver. 30. I
and my Father are One, which because they are most material to the Question, I
shall thereupon observe this, How therein Christ expresses Two Persons, Himself
and the Father; the word I he explains by the name Son, I said I am the Son of
God; and as by the first words of the Verse, he makes a distinction of Persons,
so by the last he affirms a Oneness between Him and the Father, when he says
they are One. This Oneness cannot be of a Personality, which already he has
distinguished; what else then can it be but in Nature, and consequently in the
Attributes thereunto belonging. With this Text is to be compared the other, I
am in the Father, and the Father in me. It is very idle and frivolous John 14.
10.
for them to think they are One only in Will and Consent; for if our Savior's
meaning had been only so and no farther, the Jews would never have branded it
with Blasphemy, nor offered to have stoned him for it; they well knew, how by
their Law no Man could be guilty of Blasphemy for saying his Will and Consent
was one with God's, for they were commanded to conform their Will and Mind to
the Will of God, that thereby might be a perfect agreement between their God
and them, between his Law and their Obedience: Therefore to make this in their
opinion to be Blasphemy, there must be something of another nature, which they
declare plainly enough, because that thou being a Man, make thy self God. So
the Question came to this, Whether the Lord Jesus was God? Which the Jews
denied, as now Socinians do; but our Lord affirmed, as after him we do; whence
we conclude he is, because he said so; which if he were not, he had asserted a
Lie, spoken Blasphemy, and the Jews had been in the Right; but seeing he said
he was the Son of God, he spoke the Truth, which Socinians denying, they bring
the Lie and Blasphemy upon themselves, and as good as say, as the Jews did to
Pilate, He ought to die because he made himself the Son of God, John 19 7. The
other Text to prove how the Name Son of God when spoken of Christ, signifies
God, is this; Lazarus's Sickness was for the glory of Chap. 11. 4.
God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby: We may see how the word
God is explained by that of Son of God: So that whether the name God be taken
Essentially or Personally, still the Person of the Son is God, for therein is
but One Glory of God and of the Son of God, the Father is glorified in the Son;
if they have one equal and common Glory, then they have a common and equal
Nature; for we know the true and eternal Almighty God has said, My Glory will
I not Isa. 42. 8.
give to another.

In my Book I at large have asserted this Divine Filiation of the Lord Jesus,
with the manner of it, and thereunto expected an Answer, if they had been
willing and able to give it. That Divine and Proper Sonship and his Godhead,
John in several places of his Gospel and Epistles, both as his own belief and
in the very words of our blessed Lord, in those Comparisons which he so often
makes between himself and the Father, lays it so clear, that for an
unprejudiced mind there is no ground left to doubt of it; the Pronoun
possessive My in the Singular number, joined with Father, which so frequently
he makes use of, does denote the Singular Nature of his Sonship, and
distinguish it from every other Kind: I shall mention only what, when he was
but Twelve Years old, upon the occasion of his being found in the Temple asking
the Doctors of the Law Questions, and Mary having said, Son, why have thou thus
Luke 2. 49. 50.
dealt with us? He answered, Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's
business? The meaning of which they understood not, as the Evangelist observes,
he thereby signified another kind of Filiation that what had any relation to
Mary: As according to the Flesh he was her true and proper Son, because
begotten of her own Substance, so in relation to the Spirit and Deity, he is
God's own and proper Son, because begotten of the Substance of the Father: If
there be any such, (as certainly there is, and in the Chapter about his Eternal
Generation I sufficiently proved it) then ye Socinians cannot deny the Lord
Jesus to be He; and if he be not the proper Son of the Father, as the Apostle
affirms he is, then God the Father is not properly a Father; for the works of
Grace do not properly make one a Father, but it must be the work of Nature, of
Humane in Men of Divine in God; Humane Nature may receive some Divine Gifts,
but only thus much as it is capable of, within certain bounds and degrees, or
else it were to make Humanity to be Deity: But Christ has not the Spirit by
Measure, or by Grace, but by Nature and Infinitely in him, which no Finite
being, such is every Creature, is capable of; the reason is, because in Christ
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Coloss. 2. 9.
bodily. Thus he must necessarily be God primarily, and not derivatively, or in
part only; for Divine Nature is indivisible, either wholly God, with all
Attributes of the Godhead, or no God at all: No Creature, Man. Angel, or
Archangel, can have all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him, because
none of them is the Infinite God: But since all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in the Person of Christ, he must needs* be God Infinite; for all this
fullness of the Godhead is a fullness of Nature, of the Essential Attributes of
that same Nature, of Immensity, Power, Eternity, and of any thing else proper
to that Nature: If in the whole Word of God there was no other Text but this to
prove the Godhead of our Savior, it were sufficient to do it, it being so
positive, so full, and so plain: All is an Absolute word, to be taken without
any restriction or limitation whatsoever: All Fullness, What more can be said?
Of the Godhead, What more Divine and Expressive?

But what upon the matter remains in the same place is this, Whether a God, and
a God, and a God, do not amount to more than One God? To take the thing as I
ought, and not as some others do, I say that your Arithmetic in this does fail
and deceive you; wherefore believe Revelation before your Reason, which indeed
may tell you how in humane and finite things One, One and One make Three; but
Revelation, which contradicts not it self, calls the Father God, the Son God,
and the Holy Ghost God; the same also says there is but One God: A Divine
Nature common to Three Persons, does imply Three Persons, but no more than One
God, which is One Divine Nature subsisting in Three Persons and Three Persons
existing in One Nature: Must I with Scripture conclude, that Father, Son and
Holy Ghost are but One God, or with your Arithmetic and Reason, that they are
Three Gods; make but your Reason first agree with Revelation, and then you and
I shall agree; so that the Dispute is more between your Reason and Scripture
than between you and me: But surely with me Gods Word is of greater Authority
than your Reason; ye must not suffer your Reason, that Ignis fatuus, to wander
from the Rule: Do you know what Solomon Prove. 28. 26.
says, He that trusts in his own heart is a Fool; if you know it not, I tell
you and your Partner, he speaks to you when he says, Cease from thine own
Wisdom, or Chap. 23. 4.
Reason.

Now having done with this, I must go back where I left, and there shall find
things of another nature, you call Enemies to the common Rights and Liberties
of p. 9, 10.
Humane Nature. Those who permit not every one a free liberty to make
Interpretations and Inferences for themselves from Scriptures, and this you
ground on a false Supposition, that Both the Word of God and the best means of
understanding it, are Originally and Vncontroulably given to every Man: For
Scripture and Experience convince us, that every Man has not the Word not
Means to understand it, and therefore it is neither Originally nor
Uncontroulably given to every Man; this is a truth which elsewhere I made good,
and shall, by Gods grace, be ready again to do upon occasion: But besides that
it would require some time, this is no place to do it, and I ever avoid going
from the Question: However, this I say, that ye go upon a Principle destructive
to Order, if every one must be allowed to believe and profess what he pleases,
though never so Heretical, and to the disturbance of a Settlement made by a
Lawful Authority, and to promote it in Discourse, Conversation, Printing,
Publishing, and such other ways as ye Gentlemen Socinians are forward to do,
what security for the Articles of our Religion as by Law established: We must
be governed by an uncertain Tide; this Year of one Mind and Religion, the next,
as occasion is offered, of another; and those who now are the undermost in
Power, and so much plead for a freedom of Opinions and Religion in the greatest
latitude, if once they had the upper-hand, they would alter their Tune, and
turn Blasphemy and Idolatry upon the Orthodox for setting up a mere Man for a
God, and worshipping him: As long as they want Power they are for Moderation,
but ye are ruled by a Spirit which might soon happen to make you turn
Moderation into Persecution, as all Enemies to Christ are apt to do. Socinians
were not twice banished out of Poland, where they were grown In 1565. and 1660.
strong, and turned out of other places for nothing; it is but prudence to tie
your Hands and bind you to your good Behavior; if ye are so busy when not
supported by the Magistrates, what would ye be if once you had gotten the Power
in your own hand; unruly Horses must have Curbs put upon them: Will not a
general Toleration, and for every Man in the Land about Religion, introduce
Confusion? That must not be, if it were only for Order sake; for as the
greatest part of the World is the worst of it, so Idolatry, Blasphemy, and all
manner of Heresy, must be looked for at one time or other; and are ye not of
opinion, that Confusion in Church might pass into the State, for ye would not
be bound with any thing: No doubt ye would be very angry if the Parliament
would either revive old or enact new Penal Laws against you: How far you would
give the Magistrate leave to meddle in Matters of Religion we cannot well tell,
though by thet Title of the Book you commend to our reading about the Power page
39.
of the Magistrate and the Rights of Mankind in Matters of Religion, which I
being in the Country cannot see for the present, yet we must suppose it to
favor your Principles, or else you would not commend it as you do.

And as you would not have the Magistrates to meddle far in Matters of
Religion, nor to punish Heretics, which was one of Donatus his Errors; so by
what you say, you have no very good opinion of a Convocation, p. 6. 13.
which yet we look upon to be the most competent Judge we have about those
Matters: We agree with you how the Convocation which made the Articles,
Service Book and Homilies, was an Assembly of Doctors and Clergymen that were
Fallible; but for all that Fallibility, many of them were Men of great Piety
and Parts; and as no Infallibility is to be found in this World, next to that,
I think the Nation was happy at that time to have Persons so well qualified for
the Work: And ye are much mistaken, to say they enacted their Opinions into
Articles, for the Articles of our Faith are not Man's Opinions, they extracted
them out of the Word of God, which supplied them with the Materials, only they
disposed it into the best Order they thought fit, as God enabled them: After
this rate you attempt to give our Religion a fatal blow; you would have us to
pin our Faith on Men's Sleeves and Opinions, so they might lawfully be repealed
this Year, the next, or at any time: Thus if Popery under King James had
prevailed, we had quite been at a loss, our Articles had been declared
Heretical, (though if we measure them according to the Rule of God's Word, they
are as sound as any can be) and our Religion in some sense had been lost, and
we put to seek for and set up another: But, I say, that though the whole Popish,
false Christian and Mohammedan World, should condemn them, yet still they would
be True and Orthodox, not because they were formed by a Convocation, but
because they are collected out of God's Word the Rule of Truth: Suppose
Socinians here had the upper hand, which I hope I shall never live to see, then
they would get a Convocation of their own to wrest and turn our Articles into
their Channel, and for all their plea for a private Interpretation, they would
set up a public one of their own, and like another Council of Arimini, which
revoked what that of Nice had done before against Arians, have an Assembly to
Condemn, or at least to give our said Articles their Socinian Interpretation.
As to what you say, that a future Clergy may repeal and declare against the
present Articles; I answer, God forbid that ever he should be so angry against
the Nation as to suffer such a thing to be brought upon the Stage, but in case
it was, I say, it might happen that such a Convocation could repeal, that is,
have a Power, but it might not, that is, should have no right to do it; I can,
but may not kill a Man.

I shall not trouble my self with discovering the Page 14,
Rottenness of your Principles about these things, for that you do your selves,
when you say that People may alter their minds, and so their Religion; so one
to day a Socinian, may, if he thinks fit, to morrow be a true Christian, and
you give this for a reason, A Man cannot foresee what will come to pass, and so
a Doctrine which at one time may be convenient, may be otherwise when
Circumstances of Time shall alter: So now, when Socinians are undisturbed, it
is convenient for them to be what they are; but if the Circumstances of Time
should alter, then for Convenience sake they might alter too, to avoid Fire and
Faggot, if they were in danger of it: This Policy never entered into the Heart
of Martyrs; but after this Principle, yours is a time-serving and unstable
Religion, one may alter from the worse to the better; it is well and good, and
happy ye, If God peradventure will give you repentance 2 Timothy 2. 25.
to the acknowledging of the Truth of Christ, and not holding it in
Unrighteousness. This Principle of yours for Fickleness and Changeableness in
Religion, you would demonstrate, and may be justify, out of what you say, All
the Subscription of the Clergy to the Predestinarian-Doctrine contained in the
Articles and Homilies, has not preserved them from contrary Sentiments, such
as, when Van Harman first broached them, were universally judged to be contrary
to the Doctrine of the Church of England. I like, in a thing that cannot be
denied, to see you own the Truth, how Arminianism is contrary to the Articles,
Homilies, and Doctrine of the Church of England. Thus, Habemus fatentem reum;
why then, ye, who pretend to be Members of the Church, do you profess Doctrines
contrary to hers, and all along declare for them? I see you will not stop
there, but infer, that as the Clergy of the Church, contrary to their
Subscriptions, are departed from the Doctrine. I call it the true, about
Predestination to fall into Arminianism, so they may embrace Socinianism, as
you say, the majority now does, and so successively and by degrees pass into
any other Heresy; for which you give this reason, Men cannot help the altering
of their Minds: This truly and properly is the Religion of Libertinism, and
Atheism is the next step: So Men may plainly see what a kind of Religion you
are striving for, and would bring us into. To what has been said about
Convocations, this I shall add, that though ye seem to slight a Convocation,
yet let me tell you, page 30.
either in Quality or Number it is no despicable Body, it being the
Representative of a considerable part of the Nation; and it is hoped from the
Piety and Wisdom of the Parliament, that in Matters of Religion, upon occasion
they will not despise their Advice and Address.

In the Disputes about Socinians and us, we are agreed to be judged by the Word
of God; yet they dislike our making use of it against them, too much as they
think; but this Gentleman, who in the beginning of his Letter complains of my
numerous Quotations of Scripture Phrases, as he calls it, has taken effectual
care to avoid giving me cause to complain of the like against him; for in the
whole Letter there is but one Quotation, just at the latter end of it, and it is
ushered in with this Christian Preamble, 'The ill-natured turn of your
Title Page, and the malicious and persecuting design of your Preface, convinced
me, that (if we may believe our Savior Christ) you know neither the Father nor
the Son; this is what we call To beat a Man with his own Weapons, his own he
hitherto used to little purpose, at last he resolved to try whether the same I
made use of against him, would do his Work; but he is so unskilful in handling
of it, that 'twill not serve his end, but is against rather than for him: He
says to me, If we may believe our Savior Christ, the if may well be turned
against you; out of another Man's Pen it were not questionable, as it is out of
yours; I wish you would believe him as we do, when he absolutely, and without
any limitation, does call himself the Son of God; as some times they wrest his
Words, so here they would make him say, that I know neither the Father nor his
Son, whereupon he quoteth this Text, They shall put you out of the Synagogues,
yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, shall think that he does John
16 2, 3.
God service: and these things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the father nor me. But how well applied let us see, not at all to his
purpose; for there the Lord Jesus foretold his Disciples, that for his sake,
and upon his account, Persecutions should befall them; I ask whether in earnest
he looks upon himself and other Socinians to be Disciples of Christ? May be
such as Judas was, who betrayed his Person as they do his Truth; but true
Disciples, that cannot be; for suppose that Sect were brought under the Rod, it
would not be for his Cause: His Apostles, as we read in several places of the
Book of the Acts, suffered Persecution for owning Christ to be the true Son of
God, the holy one, the Prince of Life, and not for affirming him to be a mere
Man, who had no Being before he was born of the Virgin Mary, and denying him to
be true Eternal God of the same Nature with the Father; certainly if God should
bring you to Punishment, ye could not have the face to say it is for the same
Cause as his Disciples suffered, they suffered for giving him his due, and ye
for robbing him of it.

Therefore to retort your own Argument upon you, I say, ye know neither the
Father nor the Son; for, the Father ye cannot know but in and by the Son: The
Son ye do not know, for ye will not own him to be what he is, namely, true
eternal God, blessed for ever; thus out of our Savior's own Words I conclude
against you, as in this same Cause and upon the same account he did against the
Jews, who looked on him as a mere Man, and would by no means own him truly to
be God, Son of God, Ye neither know Joh. 8. 19.
me nor my Father, if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also:
Wherefore since ye know me not, ye know not my Father neither. This weight I
farther lay upon you, how as ye know not, so ye have not the Father; for ye
deny the Son to be what he is indeed, of the same Nature with the Father; and
the Apostle says, Whosoever denies the Son, the 1 John 2. 23.
same has not the Father; to deny the Son is not only to deny him to be, but
also to deny him to be what he is. And now, since I am upon this, your Words,
If we may believe our Savior Christ, are a Motive for me to go on, and to call
things by their Name, Matt. 3. 17. and 17. 5. Joh. 12. 28
to say, ye are a sort of Infidels; for ye will not believe God, though he speaks
from Heaven, not only once but twice and thrice, in our Lord's Baptism, in his
Transfiguration, and at another time, when the Voice came from Heaven, God the
Father from Heaven proclaimed him to be his beloved Son, in whom he is well
pleased, with a Command to hear him, Hear ye him; yet ye will not believe the
Father, nor hear the Son, who appeals to that Testimony of the Father, nor Joh.
5. 37.
when he calls himself God's Son, only begotten, who is One with the Father,
in Power equal with him, For what things soever the Father does, these also
does the Son likewise; that the Father sent him out of his Bosom, that he came
down from Heaven, he proceeded and came down from God, and so many more things
to that purpose: But now he speaks to you as once he did to the Jews, Why do ye
not understand Joh. 8. 43.
my speech, even because ye cannot hear my word: yet him ye will not hear; but
mark what will become of it; And it shall come to pass, that every soul Acts 3.
22, 23.
which will not hear that Prophet in all things whatsoever he shall say unto
you, shall be destroyed among the People: Ye would rob him of that Glory and
Honor which he received from God the Father, which not only is recorded by the
Evangelist, but confirmed by an Apostle with all the necessary Circumstances,
what, where, and when; We were eyewitnesses 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18.
of his majesty; for he received from God the Father honor and glory, when
there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory; This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; which he affirms not by hearsay, but as
ear-witness; for he adds, And this voice which came from heaven, we heard,
when we were with him in the holy mount: But ye will hear neither Christ nor
his Apostles, tho they speak loud and plainly enough; whence we may well
conclude you to be none of his Sheep, whereof the great Shepherd himself gives
this to be the proper Character, that they hear and know his voice only, and
not the John 10. 3, 4, 5.
voice of strangers, and they follow him when he leads them out; but ye follow
him not, only the Devices and Inventions of your own Heart.

Thus to return to you, who falsely would bring in your selves as Disciples of
the Lord Jesus; we know, that as there is a Church of Christ, so there is a
Synagogue of Satan, and that the Devil has his Martyrs as well as the Lord
Jesus; some have been so far hardened, as to dye for denying there is a God;
therefore it is neither the Manner, nor the Place, but the Cause of Death which
makes the Martyr; it is neither Smithfield in London, nor Campo di Fiori in
Rome; for as the most honest Men, so the greatest Villains may happen to be
executed in both; neither must we believe those who falsely would call
themselves Disciples of Christ, and insinuate as if they suffered for his
Cause, when it is for their Heresies and Blasphemies: I remember the Apostles
words, how false Apostles, deceitful Workers would transform themselves 2 Cor.
11. 13, 14.
into the Apostles of Christ: and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of Light. Do not pretend to say, ye are for Christ, when ye are
against him. As to your mis-applying of the Text to me, let me advise you to be
more conversant with Scripture, and therein you may learn how, at another time,
more fitly to adapt your Comparisons, and better to apply Texts, and not as you
would so ingeniously screw out of that, how you think me an unfit Writer in
behalf of the Trinity (which you believe not) and therefore did not so much as
read over my Book; and I to answer ad hominem by a rational and natural
Consequence, out of your own Words, that you have not so much as read over my
Book of the Trinity, do conclude you to be a rash, giddy, and unfit Judge,
whether or not I am an unfit Writer in behalf of the Trinity. Thus go you off
the Stage like a Snuff. I answer you in your way, because you answer me not in
mine.

AN ANSWER TO THE Second Letter.
HAVING done with one Antagonist, I must now turn to the other: Between them
both they shared the Task, to try which of the two could most wrest and
mis-represent things, and give a Man ill Language. wherein it must be owned,
this last yields it not to the first (for they writ after the same manner) and
whose steps about my Epistle he follows in his first Page, and part of the
next, wherein he would seem to soar high in his politic Enthusiasms, and then
falls down right into a Nonsense, which he would page 17.
father upon me; certainly a Man has little to say or do, that stumbles at the
Threshold, and falls a gathering Straws, when there are solid and good things
to mind; and instead of examining high Matters of Divinity offered, he to put
off the Blow, and for Diversion sake, turns to be a Grammarian, and pitifully
falls upon cavilling at Words: This, like the Dog in the Fable, is to snap at
the Shadow and leave the Body: My words are these, To time things well, is one
of the best parts of Prudence: To say it is the part of a prudent Man to act in
due time and Season, is there any thing contrary to Sense and Reason? By the
word Part is not meant any such thing as we call Essential part, as the Soul is
to Man, or what we call Integrant part, such are an Arm or a Leg to the Body,
but it is an usual way of speaking to say, It Is the part of a Wise Man not to be
Hasty, it is the part of a Christian to Forgive, to signify how it is proper
for, and belongs to a Wise Man not to be Rash, and to a Christian to Forgive: I
add, and one of the most Essential Circumstances of our Actions, the meaning is
plain, how Timing things well, is one of the chief and most necessary
Circumstances of our Actions. This is no just cause for any Man thereupon to
entertain such idle and extravagant Fancies as we see him to do: Without being
a great Philosopher, one may know there are several Circumstances belonging to
every Action: An ordinary Rhetorician can tell the Rule -- quis, quid, ubi*
quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando. I take Agent, Time and Place, to be
three Concomitants of any Action, and without the three no Action, so then the
prudential part of an Agent in the Act, and to make it succeed, is to choose a
fit and proper Time; to apply a Remedy, take Physic or be let Blood; if done
in due time, is to observe one of the chief and necessary Circumstances If the
word Essential joined to Circumstance does disquiet you, then by the word most
Essential is improperly understood the Circumstance most necessary to be
observed; we use to say a thing most Essential, or most Necessary, most to the
purpose, most Important and most Material, to signify the same thing or near
upon it; I take the Essence, whether Physically or Metaphysically, to be the
same with the Nature of the thing: And do you not think that Circumstances have
their Nature, and that there is the Nature of an Accident as of a Substance?
and that to the end one may Act well, there is that which is Necessary and most
Necessary. God forbid, when we speak of Gods Nature, or even of matters of
Philosophy, we should make no difference between Essence and Circumstance; but
in Discourse it is usual, as you know too well, to make use of such improper and
figurative Expressions. Does not our Grammar tell us, that Nouns Adjectives are
compared, and that there are three degrees of Comparison, have ye so far
forgotten it? Thus the word Essential is an Adjective, whereof the Superlative
we call most Essential, and we may say Essential, more and most Essential:
Surely ye judicious and acute Sophisters, if ever you learned Logic, were
taught, that there is a Predicament called Proprium, and that there is a
Proprium not only primo, but also quarto modo; Quod convenit soli, semper, and
omni, which in Grammar words we may call most proper in the Superlative degree:
And ye Gentlemen, for so I must call you, (though I would have called you by your
Names if ye had subscribed your Letters) ye Gentlemen Socinians, who are so
much for Tropes and Figures, might know how it is usual by an Hyperbole to
represent things with exaggeration as whiter than Snow, blacker than Pitch; and
if such manners of speaking with exaggeration be admitted in a common
Discourse, much more may this improper one now in question: So sometimes a
thing which we like well, we call best of all; thus if instead of saying
Essential I said most Essential, I did use the Superlative degree instead of
the Positive: But these are but Quibbles of your own, which argues, that seeing
you stick at such things, you have little else to say for your selves; ye leave
things for Words, and like drowning Men, lay hold upon any thing that lies in
your way to save a sinking Cause, when no serious Man but would think it below
himself to stay upon such things; all your Observations and Inferences are an
effect of a distempered Imagination, and not of a sound Reason, whereby you
deserve the name of the Ridiculer ridiculed: As well as you, we know Essence to
be one thing and Circumstance another; but that were tolerable, if ye did not
as ye do, jest with Holy things. But I think to know where the Sore lies; ye
do not like the words Essential nor Essence, derivative nor primitive; and though
in the Schools of Divinity and Philosophy they be used, yet ye dislike them,
because in so many Letters not to be found in Scripture; but here you might see
I use it not in a Religious but Civil account. I own I am at a loss to find a
way how to please such nice Spirits as ye are; for of one side ye would not
have us to use the words Essence, Trinity, Person, because you say they are not
in the word of God, yet ye both find fault with me for making use of Scripture
so much as I do against you in my Book: So ye Gentlemen, prodigies of Learning,
may now see, (which if you do not others do) how ye sin against very common
Rules; what then will become of the four things you learned, after you put your
Wits to the rack to make others pass for Nonsensical Scriblers, who hardly can
write three words of good Sense? Thus if your witty Premises do fall, how can
your learned Inferences stand? These miserable Shifts, which every solid Man
would scorn to trouble his head with, do tend only to show how in you is an
earnest desire, but want of power to make others who differ from you, to pass
for Silly and Ridiculous: so take to your selves what you had prepared for
others: But what is all this to the Cause, but a putting it off and running away
from it?

Having showed how, when I penned my Epistle, I thank God, I was in my right
Senses, the next thing I must do, is to prove my Charge against Socinianism,
which he calls false and disagreeing, yet I make no doubt but it will stick.
First, I call it Blasphemous, and I shall prove it out of better Authority than
that of the Polonian Knight or Bidle's, or what the Reasons page 19.
to the contrary of the Authors of both Letters, can come to. In order to it, I
say, there is a twofold Blasphemy, page 18.
one Positive, when Men call or otherwise make God a Liar, and to deny himself,
or the like; and the other Negative, when Men deny him to be Infinite,
Almighty, or Eternal; the first when God is made to be what he is not, the
second when he is denied to be what he is: That Blasphemy is an abominable
Injury, directly against God's Nature, Attributes or Works, is so plainly and
frequently set down in Scripture, that I think unnecessary for me to prove it;
and if the same offense committed against God's Nature, Attributes and Works,
be called Blasphemy, and that committed against the Lord Jesus's Person be
called Blasphemy; it follows first, that Jesus Christ is true God; then
secondly, that whosoever denies Christ to be God in his Nature, Attributes and
Works, he is a Blasphemer: Now Socinianism denies our Savior, Divine Nature,
and Essential Attributes of that Nature; therefore Socinianism is a Blasphemous
Opinion and Doctrine, as much for denying Christ to be true God by Nature, as
by denying Divine Nature, Almightiness and Eternity. Now that the Sin called
Blasphemy is sometimes committed against the Lord Jesus, we learn it out of his
own mouth upon the occasion of the Pharisees saying he Matt. 1^. 31.
did cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, this he called
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost the chiefest of all: And when he was in the
hands of the Jews, the things by them done and spoken against him, Luke 22. 65.
Acts 13. 33, 45.
were by the Evangelist called Blasphemy, and many other things spoke they
blasphemously against him. Thus when the Jews spoke against the things that
were spoken by Paul, and what were those things? That Christ was the Son of
God; which to prove, he made use of the words of Psalm 2. Thou art my Son, etc.
in the proper Sense; their speaking against this is called Contradicting and
Blaspheming; upon the same account in another place it is said, they opposed and
blasphemed. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Acts 26. 11.
Thus Paul says of himself, he was before his Conversion a Blasphemer, and
compelled others to blaspheme, that is to deny and speak ill of Christ; so to
say that Christ is not God of the same Nature and Power equal with the Father,
is as great a Blaspemy, as to say he was or is a Sinner, which any one that
has a religious Honor and Love for him, and hops for Mercy at his hands
when at the last day he shall appear in his Glory, cannot, and as much as in
him lies, must not endure.

The next Charge against Socinianism is Atheism and Deism; he does couple them
thinking to show a Contradiction, but there is none: I say to worship the true
God not in a true manner is Idolatry, as well as to worship a false God:
Jeroboam for worshipping the true God in an undue manner, is branded with
Idolatry, and provoked God as much as Ahab for worshipping Baal, or a false
God, or else with Papists we must take away the Second Commandment: In like
manner, I say, not to know the true God in a true manner is Atheism, as well as
not to know him at all; and the true way to know God, is to know him in Christ,
without whom no true knowledge of God; to that purpose the Apostle says unto
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2. 12.
that at that time when they were without Christ, they also were without God in
the world: That is, they were Atheists; and is it truly to know God in Christ,
only to know him there in a Creature? (seeing the very Heathens can tell us,
Praesentemque refert quae libet herba Deum) and not rather as in him in whom
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. These Coloss. 2. 9.
fragments of Scripture please not Socinians, for they not knowing God in
Christ, as his Eternal and Natural Father, are thereby branded with Atheism. As
for Deism, I take it in the Sense wherein it is taken now adays, for a Deist is
he who prefers Humane Reason before Faith and Revelation; so you own my Charge
is not a perfect Nonsense, though in some degree you would have it still to be a
Nonsense; for you are pleased thus magisterially to decide, Now I confess this
page 19.
sort of Charge is not so perfect a Nonsense as the other; however I still lay
under the Lash, for it is a silly Calumny, as you say, yet it is no Calumny but
a Truth, and that no silly one: (I shall anon take notice of your Style.) Deism
is not only an absolute denial of all Revelation, but also it is a giving the
preference to Humane Reason before Revelation; which is done when you set up
your own Reason to be a Judge of Revelation; and here I hold you fast, for else
you would give the Slip. Though you have not the face to deny Christian Religion
to be of Divine Institution, yet your own Reason, which your Brother calls the
only Guide which God has given us to Judge and Interpret that Revelation, you
exalt above it; Is not this to set up a Tribunal over and above the Word of an
Infallible God, and to make your poor silly Humane Reason the Oracle or
Revealer of the true Sense of that Revelation? So I leave you to refute this
Charge of Deism as well as you can, the Racovian Catechism shall afford you no
help, except you mince it as you use to do other things, which by and by I
shall, by the Grace of God, take notice of. A Deist we call him who makes a God
of his own reason, as you do, that is, sets up a false God; now between such a
one and an Atheist there is not the direct opposition which you imagine, for in
these Times Deist is taken in an ill Sense, and in a way of Reproach; but to
believe a God is no Reproach, and ought to be taken in a favorable Sense; so
it is the use of the words that shows their signification: Besides, as there are
two sorts of Atheists, the one in Theory the other in Practice; for as there
Psalm. 53. 1.
is a Fool, whom David speaks of, who says in his heart there is no God, so
there is a Fool that says so in his Actions, and lives as if there was no God:
The like we say of Deists, some are Speculative, such as believe as you do,
their own Reason to be the only guide in Matters of Religion; others are
Practical Deists, who accordingly own no other Sense of Scripture, but what is
their own Interpretation. And others through-paced, I may add, who are both
Practical and Theorical Deists, and I make no doubt but page 22.
that ye know well where they live, though you question much whether we have any
of these Socinians in England.

Profaneness and Immorality follow next: Profaneness I call a handling of Holy
things without a due Respect, which in a high degree is the guilt of Socinians,
as in several places of my Book I made it plainly appear; how bold and saucy
are they with God's Word? How contrary to the analogy of Faith, the design of
the Spirit of God, and the natural, usual and proper signification of the
Words, do they wrest Scripture to make it serve their own turn? They
irreverently use it as a Stalking-Horse to answer their ends, and by forcing
unusual and far-off-fetch'd Interpretations, as much as in them lies, would
make it contradict it self: This, and prefering Humane before Spiritual and
Heavenly things, like Esau, whom Scripture calls a profane person, for
selling his birthright for a morsel Heb. 12. 16.
of meat, I brand with the name of Profaneness; and shall not I call so the
Preference which you give your Humane Reason above Divine Revelation, when you
make it to be the Judge of it? In some places of your Letters, your own Example
is a proof of Profaneness attending on Socinianism, let the particular of your
Jesting at the Name of Christ's mystical Body page 25.
to signify the Church, serve for all; you cannot be, but wilfully ignorant,
how in several places of Scripture Romans 12. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 15. Coloss. 1. 24.
an express mention is made of the Body of Christ, whereof we are said to be
the Members, and Christ is called the Head of the Church, and the Savior of
the Body. This cannot be spoken of his Natural Body which now is in Heaven, so
it must be of another Body of his, and that is our being in him by Faith, and he
in us by his Spirit, which Scripture calls a Mystery, so Ephesians. 5. 23, 32.
in Scripture Phrase we may call that a Mystical Body without giving profane
Men cause to Jest at it as you do. God's Name, says David, is Holy and
Reverend, Psalm. 111. 9.
but ye make bold to profane it. As for Immorality it consists both in Words
and Actions, Carriage and Conversation; so that though one was not an Immoralist
either in every Kind or in every Degree, if it be but in one, it is enough to
denounce him an Immoralist: As for Me, who neither have nor desire to have any
Society with the professed Enemies or false Friends of Christ, I do not meddle
with their Actions, for it is not my business, but leave every one to God;
besides that, I ever avoid, as much as I can making or meddling with Persons,
only with Things: But, I say, that Profaneness is usually attended with
Immorality, for commonly Sins go by couples, and he who is so profane as to
Jest with God and his Word, is soon drawn to that jesting, foolish talking and
filthiness, Ephesians. 5. 4.
which the Apostle joineth together: And you may know how Paulus Samosatenus
Bishop of Antioch, one of your first and great Ringleaders, kept young Wenches,
and allowed his Clergy to do the like.

Though the Persecuting Accuser, as I am called, have page 20.
not the Wit of Machiavel nor of his Villains, yet he has Truth on his side,
which is better: And the Negative Argument, how neither the Racovian Catechism
nor Socinian Author has written so, cannot put off the Blow; indeed Men must
wholly have forfeited common Sense and Reason, who in their Writings and in the
face of the Sun, will set up for Champions of Profaneness, Immorality, Atheism,
Impiety, Blasphemy, or Idolatry. But what they do not plainly express, is often
drawn by good and lawful Consequence; in any of your Books you do not say ye
are Profane, but out of what you say in your Two Letters, how that, as to your
selves, you are the Judges of Scripture, and that your Reason is your only
Guide in giving such Interpretation as ye think fit, is not this to make bold
with Holy things? Though I had no other Evidence (which yet I am full of) I say,
that only is a sufficient ground for me to conclude your Principles to be
Profane, which make you prefer your own Reason before the Teaching of the Holy
Ghost out of that same Scripture, and those who embraced your Principles, are
thereby led into Profaneness.

What you say about the Means used by some Men to promote Heresies by high
pretenses to Piety and Virtue, may be true, and what I say too, every Bait is
not proper for every sort of Fish, so Men have several ways to get Proselytes,
according to the several Tempers of those whom they would draw to themselves;
do but find the predominant Passion of a Man, and, except God be pleased to
strengthen him, ye are like soon to draw him into your Snare, according as they
are acted by Worldly Considerations. There is but one true God, and one true
Principle of Religion and Piety, but there are many Gods of this World; give
but Riches to the Covetous, Honors to the Ambitious, and Pleasures to the
Voluptuous, without God's restraining Grace they will soon be for you; but you
will say, what is this to us? we know all that: Then I come to you, and say, how
I take you to be zealous for Socinianism as you take me to be against it, and
by your carriage we find to be in you a great desire to propagate it: To
increase the number of Proselytes, you must draw them out of several Parts, and
ye know how in this Corrupt Age, there is abroad a Spirit of Profaneness,
Immorality, and of Sin in all kinds; now for you to make Converts out of all
these kinds, ye would think it would tend much to the Honor of your Cause; and
as in the Nation there is also a sort of Witty People, though sometimes Profane,
to please those too, you study with fine Words, smooth Language, and with such
plausible Reasons as you are Masters of, to support it, and it is known ye are
unwearied in your endeavors to promote the Interest of the Cause: I see no
reason to hinder me from believing, but that any who will join with you in the
main, shall be welcome among you, and this Intriguing Spirit in you, makes you
the more dangerous to our Religion, and shows the necessity of a great care
required to prevent the ill Effects of it; thus ye follow the Maxims of
Papists, though in some things you would seem to be much against them; for among
them do but come to Mass and own the Church, then do what you will, and believe
what you please as to your self, you are a good Catholic still; and the
Jesuits, who among them are reckoned to screw up things to the highest, do say,
Commit what Sin ye will, and under an easy Penance ye shall from us have a
full Absolution; all this to draw a Throng and get their Churches to be
crowded; so ye will do or say, be but Unitarian, as to the rest give Scripture
what Sense and Interpretation your Reason suggests unto you, and all shall be
well; as to Life and Manners, we shall leave you to that same only guide your
own Reason: They which are unsound in the true Faith, without which it is
impossible to please God, it is very possible for them to be so in their
Practice; though Men teach not Atheism, Profaneness and Immorality, yet it being
too much the Religion of the Times, some may happen to practice it, and to
strengthen themselves, will indifferently receive among them those who do: So
this is no new way to promote Heresy, I wish it be not successful, though you
say it is not like to be so.

Ye may know the true God, yet not as he ought to be known, in and through
Christ; ye know not Christ, Matt. 11. 27.
and will not own him to be such as he is, true God, Son of God by eternal
Generation, and as the Father is glorified in the Son, if ye glorify not the
Son as he ought to be, ye glorify not the Father? but what follows for not
glorifying God as he should be? St. Paul can tell you, how because men when
they knew God, glorified him not as God, or as he ought to have Romans 1. 21, etc.
been, therefore he gave them over to those dreadful Judgments and abominable
Courses, which may be read in the place quoted in the Margin, whereby ye may
see Errors in Judgment followed with those in Practice: Hereunto I shall add
that which can serve to strengthen what I said about Atheism, and it is this;
Our Savior told the Jews, Ye have not known God, John 8. 55.
the reason is, because they had not known him: To know one is to know him for
what he is; this Reason the Lord Jesus gave his Disciples, If ye had known
Chap. 14. 7.
me, ye should have known my Father also; and henceforth ye know him and have
seen him; the reason must be this, because ye have known and seen me. For the 2
Cor. 4. 6.
knowledge of the glory of God is only in the face of Jesus Christ.

As to the Charge of Idolatry, he seems willing to save me the trouble to make
it good, for he says, page 21.
As to what concerns Idolatry, it must be confessed, that Socinus' s System of
Divinity is not absolutely free from it; and he gives his reason thus, for he
maintains that Divine Worship is to be given to Jesus Christ, though he be not
the true Almighty, and the eternal God, but only something I know not what,
more than a mere Man; which is but what themselves make of him and no more. To
render the Creature a Religious Worship only due to the Creator, is certainly
Idolatry; But, says he, I question much whether we have any of these Socinians
in England; he is best able to tell, being no doubt, well acquainted with most
Socinians in England: He thereby declares that there is more than one kind of
Socinians, and what a kind of them he himself is of, namely a Davidian: Among
the promoters of this Heresy, I in my Book took notice of one Francis David,
who though in every thing else he agreed with Socinus, yet herein he differed
from him, that he denied any Religious Worship should be rendered unto Christ;
and that the Author of the Letter is of that Sect of Socinians, I am confirmed
in my opinion by what he said before, how Socinus lies under the suspicion of
having page 18.
contributed to the Persecution of Francis David: Here appears his Partiality
for this last against the first; so Socinus was a Persecutor, so may Socinians
be upon occasion: His System was not absolutely free from Idolatry, but David's
was; however that distinction cannot clear him, for though according to the
Socinian Hypothesis the Davidian Opinion be free from Idolatry, yet according
to ours, it is the worst of the two, for they altogether deprive our Savior of
the Worship which the others yield him in some way: in the mean time he would
give us the slip thus, It is not unlikely but that Socinianism may get clear of
the Charge of Idolatry, either by the help of her own Logic, or by virtue of
the Authority of the Church: as if the Church was bound to defend their Errors.
But anon I, by the Grace of God, shall examine it, but before, we must make an
end of the Charge.

After the Word Idolatry, is in abbreviation an etc. which at large he writes
Et caetera: upon such enumerations it is usual for brevity's sake to conclude
with that Letter, thereby including other things of the same or like Nature,
but he like a weak silly Gnat (no more than I a Conjurer, as in the place he
says I am not) sticks at the Cobweb and would make an insipid Jest of it, tho
the foregoing things are serious and of moment, and the better to set out that
Buffoon's Trick of his, he goes backward to the Dissenters of the last Age,
who, says he, baited the Word unmercifully. I see, as to Time, we must help
his M^mory, for that which was about between 40 and 50 years ago, within this
same Century, he calls the last age; then he omits the chief ground of
Exception against it which was an Oath in the case, Men were made to swear to
an etc.: but here his righteous Conscience, as he calls my Soul, is not put to
the Rack; but seeing he presses me to declare what I meant by etc. after
Atheism, Deism, Profaneness, Immorality, Idolatry, whereby I also pointed at
Popery, I now fill it up with Davidism, whereunto I might add Ebionism,
Cerinthism, Arianism, Photinianism, Sabellianism, Samosatenianism,
Macedonianism, Pelagianism, Donatism: ye see how big-bellied was my etc. to
contain so many things, and more too; for Socinianism I look upon as a Sink
into which fall all virulent Humors against the Person and Grace of our
blessed Lord and Savior; as in the Body a diseased and infected Place draws
most if not all corrupted Humors to it self: and as your Religion is a kind of
Confusion, and ye are great Latitudinarians, so to strengthen your selves you
reject none but receive all Comers into your Communion, which you would set up
for the only School of Wit, Parts, and Learning, and this in part was my
Meaning when I said how to promote your Cause you would be ready to admit among
you not only all Excrements of Christian Religion, but even Jews and
Mahometans, for you think the way to Heaven broad and easy, there being, as ye
say, but very few things necessary to Salvation to be done and believed,
contrary to what our Savior said, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way
which leads unto Life, and his Apostle says the Righteous is scarcely saved.
By 1 Pet. 4. 18.
what I said it may appear whether my Charge was disagreeing, false and
incredible, or whether the Attendance I gave Socinianism does not belong to it.

Now I come to the two ways whereby you think Socinianism may get clear of the
Charge of Idolatry, the first you say is by the help of her own Logic, the
second by virtue of the Authority of the Church; its Logic is refined enough
according to this World, as far as Mode and Figure can stretch, you will; if
Barbara cannot do, may be Celarent, Cesare, Festino, or some Bocardo will, all
these are at the command of your Logicians, then Sophism, as Sorites or the
like, will come in apace and in course, and when an Argument in its own Mode
and Figure cannot do, then you will be mincing, for out of your own Letters I
find ye are excellent in that Art; now your Logic is this, if nothing else can
serve, you will say ye are no Socinians, ye take it an Injury to be so called,
for ye say ye are very injuriously termed Socinians, yea twice in p. 22, and 33.
the same Page; so ye positively deny your selves to be Socinians, do ye say so
out of shame or out of fear? one would think there is cause for both: Men who
call themselves and pretend to be Christians should indeed be ashamed to go
about robbing Christ of his due, and afraid of Punishment, if not from Men, yet
at last from God, the Avenger of his Honor: not only (if we may believe him)
he is no Socinian, but says he, if there be any in England it is more than I
know; sometimes some Men in the World know not themselves, however they will
not confirm their Denial with an Oath. They will not be Socinians, yet when
they are charged with a Denial of Revealed Religion, they appeal to the
Racovian Catechism, which is the Summary of Socinianism: this playing fast and
loose in matters of Religion is not to be endured: however they are brought to
deny themselves and so they may be allowed to deny their Master Socinus: but
why do ye engage in a Cause, if you are ashamed to own it? hereupon to them we
may put the Question, which upon the account of the most holy Trinity they put
to us; a thing is or is not? ye are Socinians or ye are not? if ye be, why are
ye such Hypocrites as to deny it? if not, why do you concern your selves for
them? let them maintain their own Quarrel and defend their own Cause, and why
do ye take up the Cudgels for them? why in their Defense, contrary to good
Nature, Breeding and Moderation, do ye write so passionatly and angrily, that
one would think your Letters to be dated from Billingsgate? if ye be Davidians
ye are Socinians still, and the worst of them too: Sirs, it is not the Change of
Name that can alter the thing, if ye hold Socinus his damnable Opinions, ye are
Socinians, call your selves never so much by the Name of Unitarians, or what
other ye please; so this Sophistical Logic of denying your selves to be
Socinians, cannot do the Work.

Let us see whether the other which you brag of, the Authority of the Church,
will do it: these Men make use of a great Name with a Design to shelter
themselves under it: one of them falsely charge me with making, as he calls
it, an impudent Reflection; but here upon good p. 33.
grounds, in his own coin, I might turn it upon him and say, it is a piece of
transcendent Impudence for such Cattle to call themselves Members of the
Church, which this does in as plain Words as can be, For I am no Socinian,. ^9.
but a Member of the Church of England by Law established. So formerly some
called themselves the Church which were the Synagogue of Satan, and as our
glorified Savior knew them, so he knows these, I know, says he, Rev. 2. 9.
and 3. 9.
the blasphemy of them, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, and
are the Synagogue of Satan, he knows them to be Blasphemers: Socinians Members
of the Church of England! then Satan is an Angel of Light, for sometimes
transforming himself into one: those who are a scandal to the Christian Name,
and would prove a shame to any Church but their own, to be Members of our
Church! then such Members as are rotten and gangreened, ought to be cut off and
spued out of the Church, in case they be in, as they pretend they are: Members
of the Church are her Sons, but these can be no natural lawfully begotten, but
Bastards, who are in only to watch an opportunity and time to bring in Thieves
and Enemies, unnatural Sons who rend their Mother, and care not if she were
torn in pieces, such Sons to the Mother as the Harlot was Mother to the Child,
whom she pretended to be Mother to, tho she was not, content she was that the
Child should be divided and cut to pieces. I hear indeed how some of them are
in Orders, and actually in the Service of the Church; and this I meant when I
said the Enemy and Plague of Socinianism was gotten into the Bowels of the
Church, the more the Pity; and therefore seeing they will not hide themselves
for shame, here I do humbly desire the Heads and Governors of it, to take
notice of Socinians boasting to be Members of the Church, and care to weed them
out. Good Lord! Men who overthrow the first Article of our Religion of one God
in three Persons, and the second of two Natures in one Person, besides others,
the Athanasian Creed, the the first part of the Litany, with several others of
the Service Book, yet they have the face to call themselves Members of the
Church.

However it is worth the inquiring into, what they ground upon their calling
themselves Members of the Church? we already have taken notice of one place,
wherein, speaking of themselves in the third Person, they say, For Peace sake
they submit to the Phrase of the Church, p. 7.
and own three Persons: so they seem not to be much concerned for the Truth, to
know whether what they or we say be true, but they take care of their Safety,
being, as they pretend, alarmed with fear of Fire and Faggot, and to save their
Bacon; therefore I am apt to believe that what they say, in relation to this,
is more out of fear of Punishment than of love for Truth: however for Peace
sake they are Members of the Church: but to dive into the bottom of this Title
of theirs of being Members of the Church, two Places I am to look into, the
first is this, p. 22.
As for those late English Writers sometimes called Unitarians, and very
injuriosly termed Socinians, they seem desirous to wash their hand of it: and
their disputing some of the Articles of our Church, has proceeded chiefly from
their Apprehension that it would be Idolatry to admit them. Thus still under
disguise, and of a third Person, they are those late English Writers who call
themselves Unitarians, who seem desirous to wash their hand of Socinianism, so
it is only seemingly and in appearance, for else what could make them tooth and
nail concern themselves so much for Socinians; let it be taken notice of how
these pretended Members of the Church confess that they disputed some of the
Articles of it, and these are none of the less fundamental, which they
suspected as leading into Idolatry, and therefore they would not admit them:
See what Members of the Church these are, who publicly and in Print own that
some of the Articles of the Church do tend to Idolatry; does not this very
thing deserve Punishment according to Law? and to justify their disputing of
some of the Articles, they would infinuate as if the Church, or some part of
it, had owned they were in the right, Therefore upon the prudent Explication
which has been given (he does not name by whom) of some obnoxious Terms, they
wave the Dispute and come in as Brethren: This is as good as to say, that in
our Articles those that are the most Fundamental, are in terms justly
obnoxious, that is to their Cavils: And to show they had cause to take
Exceptions, an Interpretation has, according to their Sense, been given those
Articles, and so, upon their own Terms, they are come in as Brethren; if they
are come in, then they were out before, and so no Members: Thus it seems they
had Correspondency in the Church with some who, as they term it, prudently made
way for them to come in: Now does not this Confession justify what in my
Epistle I said, Socinianism is gotten into the Church; and consequently show a
necessity to turn it out: Thus having, as he thinks, twisted Socinians with the
Church, he most judiciously draws this Inference, and Ironically bids me
defiance; I hope Mr. Gailhard, will not in anger against them, impute Idolatry
to our Church, as by Law established. Can any thing in relation to the Church,
be spoken more insolently in the face of the whole Nation? A strange thing,
indeed, though nothing may seem strange from Men whose Principles allow them to
say and make themselves any thing: Like the grievous Wolves, which in Sheeps
Clothing enter in among the Flock, not to feed but to tare it; to deceive the
blind, they come in with Esau's Hands, but the Voice is Jacob's, yet being
known should bring a Curse upon themselves: But 'twill be strange indeed, if
such ones be once found out, having under the cloak of taking Care of Souls
Poisoned them, be not cast out by Suspension or Deprivation, according to the
severity of the Penal or at least of the Ecclesiastical Laws. Upon this
occasion, the Eyes of the whole Nation are fixed upon my Lords the Bishops.

The other Place which I must take into consideration is this; He tells us,
speaking of me, that to deny page 33.
the Trinity and our Saviors Divinity, is as much as in a Man lies, to pull
our Religion up by the very roots, and quite to overthrow it; which, says he,
that the Socinians do, he takes it for granted: That they deny the Trinity and
Christ's Deity, it is done in the face of the Sun, and that these Points are the
Foundation of Christian Religion, no true Christian will deny; and my Inference
is good, that pulling down the Foundation, the Building does necessarily fall:
Yet, according to the usual way, he would mince the matter thus; Yet those who
are injuriously called Socinians declare, that they only dispute some
unscriptural Terms with us, but are well satisfied with the Sense put upon
those Terms and Explications, which a considerable majority seem to be agreed
in. They cannot leave off the ridiculous juggling in their change of Persons;
for they are those called Socinians, who dispute with us, that is with
themselves; so they act both parts, put the Question and answer it, be the
Socinian and Churchmen too; but the worst is, they want Sincerity, that whilst
they indeed are the Socinian, yet would pass for the Churchmen. Besides, they
would have the Dispute to be only about Words, and so of no Importance; thus
whether there be Three Persons in the most adorable Trinity, and whether the
Lord Jesus and the Holy Ghost be truly God, they make it to be a Dispute only
about a Word and a Trifle: What a Confidence is it for such Men so publicly to
vent their Impieties? Thereupon they declare to be satisfied upon this ground,
that a considerable Majority of the Church seem to be agreed with them in their
Sense; so according to this, a considerable Majority of the Church is become
Socinian: Let him that can, believe this, for my own part I am not so
Credulous; however, I humbly desire of the Church, especially of that lesser
part which this Man owneth not to be Socinian, to mind what he says so openly,
and to take it into their serious Consideration, I bring it to their Door and
there leave it: They are highly concerned to take in hand their own Cause as
it is now become; I have done and said what might be expected from a Member, my
work being to Vindicate the Honor and Right of my most blessed Lord and
Savior, as far as he will be pleased to enable me, and to pull off the Vizard
from these falsely pretended Members of the Church.

In the Pamphlet are several Trifles under the Head, how wide Socinianism is
spread, which yet in my way I shall take a short notice of, not minding what he
says of my ill-natured and malicious Paper, for by this time he has pretty
well used me to ill Language as to an idle foolish talking, and (which is the
worst) ridiculing and profaning Holy things. In several Parts of Europe where I
happened to meet with the dispersed Jews, I sometimes took an occasion to
discourse with some of them about our blessed Savior, but in them all from the
highest to the lowest, I found a gall and prejudice against him, and have cause
to think those whom we have here in England to be acted by the same Spirit: and
by some words heard to drop out of Manasseh Ben Israel's Mouth, when in
Cromwell's time he came over, I perceived that if ever they were suffered to
stay here, they in Matters of Religion would be as ready to do us harm as
themselves good in another way; and I thought that I being about naming the
Enemies of Christ, the Jews we have here might not be omitted: and I am of
opinion, that in case among them there be any Man of Parts, Socinians would not
be backward to gather out of them what Arguments they could against the Person
of our blessed Lord, no not from Mahometans, if any were near and able to
afford them: and this I said in relation to Servetus, one of their Ringleaders,
who in his Youth being in Africa among Jews and Mahometans, sucked their
Blasphemies and brought them into Europe; and to show how, in relation to the
Principles of Religion about our Savior's Person, it is possible for a Socinian
to become a Turk, I prove it by the Example of Alciati, one of their Gang, and
Socinus's Companion, who out of Poland fled into Turkey and became Mohammedan.
Do not think I do you any wrong, when speaking of Socinianism I mention
Mahometanism; for though as well as you they deny our blessed Savior to be God,
yet they own him to be a great Prophet sent by God: It Is observable how Mahomet
himself in that part of his Alcoran wherein he relates that notorious Imposture
of his having been carried up into the highest Heaven, there to see great and
strange Mysteries, (whence may be you borrowed your Dream of an imaginary
Ascension of our Lord and Savior after his Baptism before he began to Teach)
when at his coming to the first Heaven he met with Adam, in the second Noah,
Abraham in the third, etc. he says, they all one after another, commended
themselves to his Prayers; but when he came into the seventh, where he met
Jesus, himself he commended to Jesus's Prayers. And if ye will know how in many
things about the Trinity and Christ's Divinity Socinians agree with Mahometans,
I refer you to Hottingerus in his Histor. Orient. l. 2. c. 3. Yet though what I
speak upon the Matter be words of Truth and Soberness, he has as good as called
me Mad, and fell into such a long raving Fig, as I think it would require a
strong dose of Hellebore to purge away the Matter which caused it; and that
makes him so often talk of Fire and Faggot, and such other things as he brings
in over head and shoulders, and so looks upon me as one who would see all
Socinians put to death: Socinianism indeed I would gladly see rooted out, but
to have Men put to death, is neither my inclination nor my work; yet as there
is a Sin of Lev. 5. 1.
concealing what one has seen or known, so I cannot but take notice of, that,
as in the case of a false Swearer, Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Lev. 24. 16, 23.
God said thine Eye shall not pity, so the Blasphemer was by his immediate
command put to death.

He would take advantage of something I said about Arminians, and upon that
occasion would act the Statesman's part, and show I have taken wrong measures
to gain my Point, and so would ironically give Counsel: By what they say in
several places, I see they are free enough to Advise, though undesired and unfit;
but they should know we are not used to take the Counsel of our Enemies: Men
who stand for the Truth are not biased by Worldy Considerations and Designs,
though never so plausible and specious: I thank God, in Matters of Religion I
have no squint Eye, I am neither ashamed nor afraid openly to own a Truth, if I
was not satisfied it is so, I would not own it, but it being, I will do it, by
the grace of God, as long as I live, till I see cause to the contrary:
Therefore it is but time and labor lost for such Advisers; their wise Counsels
let them keep for themselves, for some things which they call Sense and Reason,
others upon better grounds call Sensual Reason. And here, Sirs, I must tell
you, how you talk so much of want of Learning in others, as if ye were the only
great Doctors of the World; if, as ye say, I am a Mystery to you, so is your
Learning a Mystery to me; by your Letters I cannot find where it lies, nor no
Man else I think: But to speak confidently, to lodge all Brains in the World
within your own Skull, to outface Men, to wrest and misrepresent what others
say, and to set up for Judges of all good Sense, Wit and Learning, that indeed
ye sufficiently learned, and every one may well be satisfied how great
proficients ye are in that kind of Learning: But to take my turn to Advise you,
do not always trust your own Looking-glass, for it does but flatter you, and
represents not after Nature; ye would appear unto the World as if all Wit,
Parts and Learning were monopolised to your selves, and all besides you lying
in Blindness and Ignorance: That Original Sin derived from, and inherent in
Socinus's Family, that old Leaven in you ought to be purged, but God knows when
it will be, if at all, for ye look very big upon all others, like the proud
Pharisees, This people who not knows the Law are Cursed, but we sit in Moses
his Seat.

Matters of Grace and Providence I believe to be of the highest Importance, and
such as our Salvation depends upon, and in my judgment I am fully satisfied
Arminians to be much in the wrong; but however if a Comparison be made between
the Socinian and Arminian Principles, no Man that is acquainted with both can
but make a difference; for though in many things they agree, yet in others of the
most Essential, as about the Trinity and the Person of our blessed Savior they
differ from them, and therein join with us against that common Enemy, Socinians
lay under open Blasphemy and condemned Heresy by the first Oecumenick Council
and others following; the Arminians not so, I mean not Worstius and the like,
but such as in comparison of others are Moderate: But still I say, that the
Cause against Socinians cannot so effectually be handled upon Arminian
Principles, for in some things their Bounds are so near and undiscernable, that
sometimes a Man cannot fall upon one but he must tread upon the other, and one
blow sometimes hits them both; so sometimes the Arminian does not strike home
upon the Socinian, for fear of hurting himself.

However, to show you what a difference we ought to make between Adversaries
and Adversaries; we have some Disputes both against Lutherans and Papists, yet
much more and greater against the last than against the first; certainly we
will not carry our selves equally toward both, for there is cause to make a
great distinction between them, which to show, upon occasion we keep Communion
with Lutherans when we may not with Papists; yet the former are in a gross
error to think the Substance of the glorified Body of Christ which is now in
Heaven, and shall be until he comes to Judge the Quick and the Dead, to be
included in, with, and under the Bread and Wine; yet because they declare they
adore not the Bread nor the Wine, we do not look upon them as Idolaters, as we
take Papists to be, for they adore a Wafer under the notion that it is turned
into the Substance of the Body of Christ, and we are forbidden to have
Communion with Idolaters: Thus we ought to make a difference between Lutherans
and Papists; so we must between those who would destroy the Grace of God in
Christ (which is very ill) and those who impiously fly against his Person, as
ye do; nay I say Socinians in some things are worse than Papists, who own the
Article of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Divine Nature, and the
Divinity of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, which ye deny: Ye are the worst of
all Christian Societies, which Name ye are unworthy of, because ye reject,
despise and undervalue the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, from whom we are
called Christians, and will not take his Word nor God the Father's when he is
by him and by himself called Son of God.

This Man, as well as his Partner, will make use of p. 25.
his Arithmetic; and because I complained of the increase and number of
Socinians, he makes a pother about almost all the Church, a moiety of the
Presbyterians, Nine parts in Ten of the Quakers; like a Squirrel in a Cage,
which turns again and again, but never the farther on in his way, always within
the Circle; so he, which way soever he turns himself, is ever upon his Dunghill.
As to the Number of Socinians; though it was never so inconsiderable
comparatively, yet it is ever too great, though never so few yet still too many:
One Wolf in a Sheepfold can do Havoc enough; only one that has the Plague can
infect a whole Town; always Vermin multiplieth too fast; wherefore to prevent
the Growth and Increase of it, it is necessary a sufficient care be taken by
those who are concerned, (especially those whose Diocese is much infected with,
and made the center of that Vermin) whom David, a great King and Judge of
Israel, and a Prophet too, gives this Charge unto, Be Wise now therefore O ye
Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Psalm. 2. Dignity calls for and
commands Duty, and to whom much is given, of them much shall be required. Not
only a Disposition but also a Resolution in Magistrates, is necessary, for it is
that which helps to put Life into those Laws, which otherwise languish for want
of due and discreet Execution, wherein one is to go to the root of the Evil, if
he will extirpate it: In some Distempers the Dose must not be weak, else it
will but stir the Humors, and not remove them. But what is it that David would
have Kings and Judges of the Earth to learn and be instructed in? in the next
Verse he says it, to serve the Lord with fear; in their station to defend his
Cause and maintain his Concerns, is part of the Service required here: But whom
is this Service due to? to Christ the Messiah, to whom the Lord has said, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, to whom the Heathen are given for
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession, whom
he shall break with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters
Vessel. Certainly such a Potent Lord, Son of God, deserves to be served with
fear by all Kings and Judges of the Earth; and it is his Cause, not Man's, which
now is under debate, his Right and Title being questioned, which if Men in
Places and Power do not, as they are bound, Assert and Vindicate, to speak in
Mordecai's words to Esther, Deliverance shall arise from another place, some
others will do God's Work, but thou and thy Father's House shall be destroyed.
For the Lord Jesus himself will in his due time not only do it, but also require
it at the hands of those who neglected it, which is a most abominable Crime, no
less than, as much as in them lies, to set their hands to his Condemnation,
and suffer him again to be Crucified for pretended Blasphemy, for affirming
himself to be the Son of God, which the Jews did well call making himself God.
For the Names God, Son of God, simply, properly and absolutely taken, imply
Divine Nature, as Man, Son of Man do Humane; therefore said the Jews to Pilate,
By our Law, that is of Blasphemy, he ought to die, for he made himself the Son
of God, which if he was not, then, (without Blasphemy let it be spoken, and the
thoughts make my Hair stand on end) he had been a Blasphemer, a Liar, and an
Impostor, and such the Socinian Principles impiously make him to be.

And because I said, it had been well if at first that necessary care had been
taken, especially by those that are most concerned, to prevent it; thence he
does infer, that though not indeed in plain words, but intelligibly p. 27.
enough, I said it had not been done, which after his usual, calm, and
Christian-spirited way, he calls a mere Story, my own pure Invention, and a
notorious Slander; and to prove it so, in his Head he frames an Idea of an
Hurly burly and Confusion in opposing of Socinianism, and this he would make a
Play of, and without any distinction ridicule all that appeared against it: The
Opposers, says he, did but scuffle tumultuously with they knew not whom nor
what, and in the event it appeared they were more afraid than hurt; and to
ridicule it the more, he says, This zealous Leader would p. 18.
scower through the dark Vales of Ancient Fathers and General Councils; that
learned Author would bustle in the thorny Thickets of the Schoolmen; here
indeed is to be found the flourish of wild Rhetoric sallying into sundry
Metaphors, as he speaks of, and he adds, One or two now and then with wondrous
Confidence and manly Resolution, would bolt out upon the open Plains of Natural
Reason, but they were quickly forced to shelter, not being able to bear the
brightness and warmth of the Meridian Sun, which illuminates and gives light to
those Plains; these are high Fancies and true Bombast, if any thing be so,
surely the Man has read Don Quixot: This People, who condemn in others
something of Metaphors, allow it to the full themselves, as being privileged
Persons who may say and do what they please, and all is well: But, alas, all
these opposers of Socinianism were but Fools for their pains, especially those
who would talk of Reason with them who are the great Masters of it, and could
not stand before them, but-were sent to School with a Rod upon their Back, and
all this depth of Learning, height of Fancy, closeness p. 4.
of Reasoning, brightness of Eloquence, and clearness of Style, are set in form
of a Triumphal Cant; yet for all this, for greater security, he still runs
under the shelter, for after he has talked of some of our old School p. 27.
Terms, of which we had no great opinion our selves, (whether we will or not
this Man is always among us) and kept them only because we could get no better,
but then the wisest of our Doctors explained them to a very honest Sense.
Speak, said one formerly, that I may know thee; so this People are known by
their talk; but still I say our Man runs to the shelter when he says, Oxthodox
with us who are the majority of the Church, p. 28.
which if it was true, as it is not, would be but to follow the Multitude to
believe and do Evil.

Something he would be picking out against my Citation out of the Book of The
Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws, wherein without passing Sentence, as he
pretends I do, I humbly offer a Precedent of what was formerly done in like
cases: And suppose the Book had been written before Socinus was born, yet it
may reach him and his Opinions; as for instance, when a p. 29.
Law is enacted, it does reach those who break it, though born never so long
after; and we know a Law can be broken in several ways, nay sometimes Laws are
made not only to restrain present Crimes, but also to prevent others to come;
for it is the prudence of the Lawgiver not only to punish Evils in being, but
also to prepare a remedy against those which may happen: therefore if Socinians
in the Land do any thing forbidden by some Law, though never so old, if
unrepealed, they are liable to the Penalty of it: The Law does more directly
regard Things than Persons: When the Law makes a thing to be Treason which was
not so before, yet whosoever hereafter, though unborn when the Law was enacted,
commits it, is no doubt by that Law guilty of Treason; this truth one may know
without Prophetic Inspiration.

As to what I add out of King Edward's Letter to Archbishop Cranmer, etc. how
according to the Power, Form and Effect of a certain Act of Parliament in the
Third Year of his Reign, he had appointed them to compile his Ecclesiastical
Laws; his wresting and unfaithfully representing the thing is clear and
palpable, for he would make my Observation thereupon, how in those Laws there
is something of a Parliamentary Authority, because he says, he has chosen
them by virtue of an Act of Parliament in the Third Year of his Reign, to be
gainsaid by my next words by him misquoted thus, That something wants a
Parliamentary Stamp, when they are thus, and if there be any thing wanting, it
lies in your power to set a Parliamentary Stamp upon it; he relates them
Absolutely, and I Conditionally with an if; I take it to be good Sense to say,
There is already something of a Parliaments Authority, and in case there be any
thing wanting, this present Parliament may supply it if they please: It is
great pity that this spoils his Witty Jest in that place of a Something p. 30.
that is just as good as Nothing: I shall have a farther trial of their
misrepresenting things. I find they are not so much concerned as to what the
Gospel says about Matters in dispute, as they are about what the Law says
when it reaches their Persons; threaten them with a Parliament, and they are
more concerned, than if you would set the whole Bible in order against them.

Therefore they are nettled with the Fourth Canon directly pointed at them by
name, of the Ecclesiastical Constitutions by both Convocations in 1640, and by
King Charles the First, straightly enjoined and commanded to be diligently
observed and executed. The King is Supreme Head of the Church within his
Dominions; by virtue of that Supremacy King Charles of his own voluntary Act,
and without any violence or compulsion, set upon them his Royal Authority; and
his Memory is not become so odious and contemptible, and in that particular so
slighted, that no regard at all should be had for it: and though Socinians
despise the Authority of those who went before, I dare say in the Nation there
be some who are not of their mind; and as we know the Legislative Power to be
lodged in Kings, Lords and Commons, so we hope they will agree in things which
tend to the Glory of God, the good of the Nation, and that upon occasion none
of the three, through God's influence, will, as I said before, give the
Convocation any Repulse about things within their Sphere when represented in
Parliament: But I find you are as Angry, Hot and Fiery (I make use of your own
words) against Convocations as against Calvinism, for you speak of the
Ceremonial or Sanguinary p. 30.
Rules and Orders, Canons and Constitutions of the Convocational Clergy; and
let me say, how in the same Page you give the Clergy some other Lashes, which
is not Brotherly done, but I hope you will give me leave to think, if not to
say, that you or your Partner may be of the Tribe, if so, then in Moses's Words
let Number. 16. 7.
me tell you, Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi.

The Man seeing he is unable to defend his own Cause, would be suing for help;
in order to it, he maliciously and fasly would suggest, that I have slurred the
Honor of my Lords the Bishops, when I no where p. 31.
have named or so much as pointed at them, only in a place of my Epistle where
it was unavoidable, it is upon the occasion of a Quotation out a Book called The
Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws, my words are these, According to this,
Bishops are to take cognizance, inquire into and declare whether or not the
Person or Persons be guilty of Blasphemy, which being clear, he or they
(according to that Law) are to be delivered into the Civil Magistrate's hand;
but if through neglect or otherwise any of the Bishops happen not to act their
part, and thereby stop the Course of Justice, certainly the Magistrate is to
look into it: This Man, who in several places abuses Convocations, would, to
serve his turn, in this seem to be much concerned for the Lords Bishops: Of
this false Accusation he gives two Reasons, the first is this, For though several
of them have written learnedly and angrily against Socinianism, some in the
Real, some in the Nominal Trinitarian way, yet Mr. G. takes no notice at all of
this; and for this reason he affirms, he most audaciously and slyly slurs the
Honor of my Lords the Bishops. His second Reason is, He often declares his
aversion from the Arminians, of which Persuasion most of the Bishops have shown
themselves. Is this good Logic; I am against Arminianism, therefore against
Episcopacy, because, it may be, some of the Bishops are Arminians, it will not
stick; I disprove Arminianism, and honor the Bishops, as, some of their
Lordships can witness; but to aggravate, he falsely and foolishly says, I have
thereby slyly and desperately wounded the Honor of the chief Defenders of the
Orthodox Faith. Out of this he would prove me to be a rank Socinian, or else I
would not, says he, have done so; wherein he confesses Socinians to be
desperate Enemies to the Lords Bishops. And to retort it, he being a Socinian,
must be an Enemy to the Bishops: But I see the Devil is Devil still, a
Slanderer, a false Accuser, though hypocritically he pretends much Meekness and
Charity: This very same Man who but one Leaf before blames one much better than
himself for not taking p. 28.
care of his Language, for his liberal Railing and throwing his Wit and his
Foam about he in many places of his Letter does so against me, slanderously
charging me with impudent Reflections; and again, Is it not the p. 33.
highest Impudence in him? and in other places they throw such like words upon
me: Therefore thou art p. 40.
unexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge
another thou condemnest thy Romans 2. 1.
self, for thou that judge do the same things. Nay, not only so, but the
Man has from first to last broken not one, but most Rules of Humanity; it
would be a happy thing if every Man could but know the Plague of his own Heart.

And were it not that a good Advise, which he does much want, bestowed upon
him, would be so much time and labor lost, I would put him in mind, how by
God's command, there was no Sacrifice offered without Salt, an Emblem of
Prudence, to show how God would not have Men rashly to meddle with Holy things,
and except, with a serious and humble frame of Spirit, and with an awful
Reverence, (which was the true Preparation of the Sanctuary) they were
qualified for it, otherwise he would not relish or accept, but only (to speak
in Solomon's words) account it to be the Sacrifice of Fools: This under the
Gospel in Matters of Religion, ought to be a Rule for us, as in relation to
God, so between Man and Man, for the Apostle says, Let your speech be always
with grace, Coloss. 4. 6.
seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man: which
being joined with another Apostles Exhortation, Be ready always to give an
answer 1 Pet. 3. 15.
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with
meekness and fear, or Reverence, as the Greek word does also signify, does
teach us how we ought to speak with Grace, Fear and Reverence of Matters of
Religion, and with Meekness toward those whom we speak to: But these Men do
quite the contrary, for of one side they jest with Holy things, and on the
other they injuriously use those whom they deal with; that is, are profane with
God and rude with Men: They cry up Moderation and Mildness, yet with their
Railing, ironical and brutish Style and Language, are ever the first to break
the Rules thereof; to call one Impudent, and at several times too, and to give
the Lie, it argues in them neither Breeding nor good Nature, therefore they
must expect that Men thus unhandsomly provoked, will take some notice of it,
though it be contrary to their natural inclination and practice.

Here upon this account I must desire the Reader to take special notice of the
Spirit which this sort of Men, whom we now deal against, are acted by, and in
particular of the want of Sincerity, Moderation, Modesty and Judgment, and this
shall be within a narrow compass, out of what is said by one of the Men (as I
take it) whom I have to deal with; in the Apology for M. Toland, are with great
approbation quoted some Lines page 42, 43.
of one of their own, whom he calls that Celebrated Unitarian in the Agreement,
he has written, of the Unitarians with the Catholic Church, p. 54, 55. He
highly commends that Man with the name Celebrated, in hopes upon occasion of
the same return of Flattery from him, for Asinus asinum fricat. The very Man
whose Letter I now am about examining, would charge me with slurring the Honor
of the Lords Bishops, and desperately wounding the Honor of the chief
Defenders of the Orthodox Faith: Would not one think that this Man is highly
concerned for, and has a great Honor for the Bishops, whom he well calls the
Chief Defenders of the Catholic Faith; but this must needs be either out of
Hypocrisy to serve, as he thinks, his present turn against me, or by an Irony,
for Socinians love neither Bishops nor Convocations; for will they sincerely
call Defenders of the Orthodox Faith, those who writ against them? And for
proof of this, let us observe how in the fore-quoted place of the Apology, they
use one of our most Eminent and Learned Bishops; when I speak thus, the Reader
will presently know I mean my Lord Bishop of Worcester, who by them is named in
the place: I know not, says he, what it was to his Lordship's purpose to fall
upon Mr. Toland' s Book; but if he knows it not, his Lordship did, and we may
suppose it was to some purpose, or else he might as well say, the Lord Bishop
knew not what he did: One would think they cannot have the face to teach him
what he must do: but here follows that which is worse, but if he would needs
attack the Book, he should have dealt fairly. Which plainly enough implies the
Bishop has not dealt fairly; and to show herein that I am not mistaken, he
adds, and not carp'd only at a few Passages, and those too so mangled and
deformed by his representation of them, that I dare to affirm, Mr. Toland does
not know his own Book in the Bishop's representation of it. Is not this a plain
demonstration of the great respect which such Men have for the Lords Bishops,
and of the Reason this Man has to accuse me for slurring and desperately
wounding the Honor of the Bishops?

But let us turn leave, and see in how different a Style that Socinian speaks
of Mr. Toland and his Book, him he calls the Learned and Ingenious Author, and
of the Book he says, I do not perceive, to speak truly, but that Book still
stands in its full strength: and not only so, but, if we believe him, it has
also acquired a farther reputation, by what has been written against it, which
that great Master of Learning does despisingly call an unsuccessful nibling at
it. But this kind of comparison between two so highly different Persons, is
odious, for it carries along with it a great disparagement to one of them
against whom is given the preference, and is an invincible proof of want of
judgment in such Men as pretend to make it: but the commendation or
discommendation of that sort of People, being so misapplied, are insignificant;
and it would be no Credit, rather the contrary, for an Orthodox Person to be
commended by them: But to carry on their Confidence to the utmost they
challenge the Lord Bishop to answer the Reasons in their own Books against the
Trinity. Yet for all this, and after their great Commendation of Mr. T's Book,
those wise and cautious Men being afraid of any thing that smells of the Fire,
as that Book does, they declare about it, in which, and for which, we are not
in the least concerned: But I think they were for one which somewhile ago was
burnt, whilst many more of theirs which now are abroad deserve the same Fate.
But as we must not expect they will follow the Example of those who brought in
their Books (among which we may well think were no worse than some of the
Socinians are) and burnt them, which these will not themselves do of theirs,
for Acts 19. 19.
indeed it is the proper work of the common Executioner, far from it they set
them out and commend as much as they can, nay they are so bold as to let the
World know there were such Books of theirs abroad, and we find it many times,
witness Mr. T's Apology among the Advertisements in the Post-Boy, and such
printed Papers, and this in defiance of Laws and Parliaments, whose Authority
in Matters of Religion, as observed before, they deny: So that it were but fit
that on this occasion that Illustrious Body would be pleased to assert and
vindicate their Right. For that sort of Men if they had Power, would in the
denial of this Authority soon pass from Religious to Civil Matters, wherefore
it is the Interest of Church and State to support one another, for they are like
the Twain Children, born and bred together, between which was such a sympathy,
that when one was Well, Sick, or Strong, the other was so too, and as they were
born, so they died together.

He who but a little before said that the Socinians will agree to the disputed
Article if they may explain it, meant after their own way, is such a stranger
to Scripture, that if it be not the Printer's fault, I am apt p. 31.
to believe, because in the Margin I quoted not the place, he knew not whom I
meant when to Socinians I applied the Character which Scripture gives of
Ishmael, Genesis 16. 12.
whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him; for
instead of Ishmaels the word Infidels is in. Though I do not mind the nauseous
stuff wherewith he has filled up the rest of that Page and the following, yet
I well know and take notice how he is not satisfied to misrepresent me to the
Lords Bishops, but most maliciously would traduce me as one who makes impudent
Reflections on the King and Parliament, thereby to make me obnoxious: To be
Impudent were an invasion upon his Property, which I never was nor shall be
guilty of. Here I might claim the Law of Retaliation; he cannot defend his
Cause, therefore he would throw his Venom upon me, Si non mart tamen art; Now
this Calumny of his, he does ground upon these words of mine; That to the
Toleration of those two transcendent Wickednesses, Blasphemy and Idolatry, we
may chiefly attribute the cause of the Chastisements which make the Nation
uneasy. I hope none will deny that Sins bring God's Judgments upon Nations,
and when we feel them it is our duty to speak the Truth, our Sins are the cause
of this; Afflictions do not arise out of the Dust, but if we must believe
Scripture, Chastisements or Punishments of Nations, Families and Persons, come
from the hand of God; for as he is most Just, so leaves nothing unrewarded; if
in the World there was any Person free from Sin, that very same should also be
free from all manner of Pains; but Punishment is tied to the tail of Sin, and
when we feel God's Chastisements, and we know they are inflicted for Sin, then
the most notorious, the greatest and most frequent Sins are obvious to our
Eyes, as the two in question must needs be, and thereupon we should say, Lord
we have sinned against Heaven and against thee. About this Point, I shall out
of Scripture, bring a Precedent of what must be done in such Cases: The
Israelites are smitten at Ai, whereupon Josh. 7.
Joshua rent his Cloths and fell upon his Face, and God said unto him, Israel
has sinned, I will be no more with you, except ye destroy the accursed from
among you; the Accursed, both Person and Thing, at that time were destroyed;
and now if not the Persons, at least the Thing should be, if we will have God
among us; and what things in the World more accursed than Blasphemy and
Idolatry? wherefore I then did, and now do conclude, that all Christian and
prudent care ought to be used to remove Blasphemy and Idolatry out of the
Kingdom, but how to effect it, it is to be left to those whom it belongs to, but
still the thing ought to be done; Now I ask, Is this to make an impudent
Reflection against King and Parliament? But they make a real one, for under the
notion that he is no Persecutor, they would proclaim his Majesty and the
Parliament to favor and protect Blasphemy and Heresy, that is Socinianism.

But this Gentleman, according to the Spirit which they all are originally
acted by, would profanely ridicule the dispensations of God's special
Providence and divest that infinite Majesty of his being the just Judge of the
World, who does execute Justice and Judgment: After this rate the Old World was
Drowned by Chance, though the Flood had been foretold 120 Years before: Thus
Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed by Accident, and without God's special
Appointment, though he out of Heaven rained Fire and Brimstone: So by Hazard
Nadah and Abihu were consumed, though Scripture says, There went out Fire from
the Lord and devoured them. Likewise, without a special Providence, the Earth
opened her mouth and swallowed up Korah, Dathan and Abiram, though it was a
special Judgment of God; as was that of the 14700 Men, who for their murmuring
against Moses and Aaron, as we read in the same Chapter, died of the Plague. In
the like manner, after their Principles, the Famine in David's days of three
Years, Year after Year, came merely according to a general course of Nature,
without a particular Cause, and special Providence; certainly when David
inquired about it, the Lord assigned the particul Cause, and answered, It is
for Saul and his 2 Samuel 21. 1.
bloody House, because he slew the Gibeonites. The Sin, with the Punishment,
and by whom inflicted, were all named and expressed, yet against all Right and
Reason, they would not have this Case to be a special Providence, for they say
there is no such thing in the World. But why should I bring a Candle to light
the Sun, and in a thing which God's Word does so plainly and fully demonstrate,
how to punish National, Family and Personal Sins, God sends the Plague, Famine,
the Sword, venomous Beasts, the Locust, the Canker-Worm, Joel 2. 25.
the Catterpillar, and the Palmer-Worm, which the Lord calls his great Army
which I sent among you: Did the Plagues of Egypt come at a venture, or were
they inflicted by God to punish that Nation for their Sins? God threatened the
Children of Israel for their Disobedience, to send upon them Cursing, Vexation
and Rebuke; the Pestilence, a Consumption, a Fever, an Inflammation, an extreme
Burning, the Sword, Blasting, Mildew, the both of Egypt, the Emerods, with
Scabs and Itch, Madness, Blindness, Astonishment of heart, etc. as expressed in
Deuteronomy. 28. Are not all these Judgments of God upon Men for their Sins? Have I
then spoken any harm, that you should Cavil at what I say, that to the
Toleration of Blasphemy and Idolatry, we may chiefly attribute the cause of the
Chastisments which make the Nation uneasy through losses by Sea, by Land, by
Fire, or any other way you named or can name? Blasphemy and Idolatry ('it is a
sad truth) do abound in the Land, and a flood of all Evil in Doctrine and
Practice has overflowed it; and though it be against Gospel and Law, yet no
visible effectual care is taken to suppress it: Can we be unconcerned when we
hear God by his Prophet speaking thus, Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord? shall not I be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 29.
With such a Warrant in my hand, I am neither ashamed nor afraid openly to
declare, that winking at Blasphemy and Idolatry, we may well reckon among the
chief Causes which have drawn God's Rod upon the back of the Nation, and the
more, because the Sins which there move God to speak by his Prophet, are
against Men, but these we now complain against are directly against God: And if
God be angry for their not judging for Men, will he not be so if Men neglect to
Judge for him? Do but read the last Verse of the same Chapter, where mention is
made of Distempers, if not exactly the same in relation to Persons, yet in
Nature much like ours, and take notice of God's Expostulation there, What will
ye do in the end thereof?

Now the Misdemeanour they would wrongfully charge me with, I may justly retort
upon them: With all due Respect I addressed to both Houses, and humbly
represented things as it is usual in points of Grievances, whereof some are of a
Spiritual as others of a Temporal nature: I then said, and now say it again,
that according to Divine and Humane Laws, Blasphemy should be rooted out and
Blasphemers punished: To ask for Justice is not to prescribe the Judges any
thing what they ought to do, and there is nothing like this in my whole
Epistle, as these words of mine which the Author of the Letter has taken
notice of, do evidence. Thus having laid open the Disease, I leave it for your
Piety and Christian Wisdom to find out, and apply the true and proper Remedy:
We know it is for the Supreme Judges to do Justice in what manner and degree
they please: no Man of sense will deny it to be in the power of, and to belong
to the Magistrates Office to punish Delinquents against God as well as those
against Men, of the first as well as of the second Table, Blasphemers,
Idolaters, Profaners of God's Holy Name, as well as Murderers, Adulterers and
Thieves: S. Paul was no sanguinary Man, yet in one place, after an enumeration
of several things, whereof some are less grievous than Blasphemy, concludes,
That they which Romans 1. 32.
commit such things are worthy of death. For my part, I neither in my Epistle
nor in the Preface have said, or designed to say so; yet if I had, without
being a Sanguinary Man, I here have a Warrant for it.

But having spoken of my self, I now must come to you and say, Ye both have
been much wanting in your due respect for that Illustrious Assembly of
Parliament: For one humbly to Address or Petition the Supreme Judges to redress
things which are amiss, is no disrespect; but to pretend to be their Apologist
and make use of their Name in an Ironical way, as ye, I may say, saucily have
done in the Title of your Pamphlet, is certainly to want a due respect and to
deserve Punishment: To call a Libel against the Doctrine of the Religion by Law
established by the name of An Apology for the Parliament, most humbly
representing, etc. is a great Abuse, and a piece of high Impudence in you,
which hangs together with your whole Carriage; for contrary to the known Laws
of the Land, and in defiance of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, you
do print, publish, and most insolently go about to Vindicate your Heretical and
Blasphemous Opinions in opposition to and the disturbance of the Church by Law
established. And when ye are not able to defend your bad Cause, to give the
thing a wrong side, the Superior Power to be your drudges, must by you be
brought in, but it is in you a high presumption to think you can impose upon
them: Now for my part I must tell you, that when I am engaged in any
Controversy I stick to the Point, beg for no Foreign help, and Answer not with
Injuries but with good Arguments, ye do the contrary. But over and above what I
have said, to show how with humbly Addressing my self to the Parliament to ask
Justice against you, and toward preventing the growth of Socinianism, I did
nothing but what is according to Law, I here lay down an undeniable proof of
it, with a Copy of the Presentment of the Grand Jury of Middlesex on the last
day of the last Easter Term 1697, and this according to directions Monday May
17.
given by the Judges, who must know the Law. The Names of the worthy Persons
that were of it, do for their Piety and Zeal deserve to be recorded in Letters
of Gold, and it is hoped this may be a Precedent for others to do the like in
other parts of the Kingdom. A Copy of the Presentment of the Grand Jury of
Middlesex, the last day of the Term at Westminster, viz.
WE the Jurors sworn to enquire on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King,
of all Offenses committed in the County of Middlesex, in consideration of our
Duty and in obedience to the Directions given us by Mr. Justice Rookeby in his
Charge, do humbly present that, We find by daily experience, that several great
and fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, as they are professed by
the Church of England and contained in the 39 Articles, and established as the
Avowed Doctrine of the Church of England by several Acts of Parliament, are not
only disputed and questioned, but absolutely denied, and particularly the
Doctrine of the Trinity, of the Divinity of Christ, and of the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost, and Books are daily writ, printed and published, either directly
contrary to the said Doctrine, or by consequence in opposition to them, denying
all the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, and resolving all into such
Notions as are to be made good by Humane Reason, and thereby making void the
whole revealed Religion, and destroying the Necessity of Faith in order to
Eternal Salvation, by means whereof Arianism, Socinianism, Atheism and Deism do
greatly abound: and there are Proselytes to the same daily made, to the great
Scandal of the Church of England and the Orthodox Members thereof: For
preventing of which for the future, We do present that all care possible ought
to be taken for the speedy discovering of all such Books as are so writ,
printed or published, contrary to the known Doctrine of the Church of England,
and the Authors, Printers and Publishers of the same; and for punishing the
Authors, Printers and Publishers thereof according to the utmost severity of
the Laws, and for the suppressing all such Books of that kind as are already
printed, and for preventing the printing any more for the time to come: And we
do farther present, that a Book Entitled, Christianity not Mysterious: or a
Treatise showing, That there is nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason or
above it, and that no Christian Doctrine can be properly called a Mystery;
supposed to be written by one Mr. Toland: And also another Book Entitled, The
Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures: And also one
other Book Entitled, The Lady's Religion, in a Letter the Honorable the Lady
Howard, are Books fit to be suppressed, and the Authors, Printers and
Publishers of the same ought to have such Punishment inflicted on them, as by
the Laws of the Land they may. Item, We present a Pamphlet lately published,
Entitled, A Letter to a Convocation-Man concerning the Rights, Powers and
Privileges of that Body, to be Scandalous and against the Constitution of the
Government, and ought to be suppressed and the Author punished.



Now ye may see by the Agreement of this Presentment, with the things contained
in my Epistle and Preface, to which it is posteriour, how in what I said or did,
I was not in the wrong nor out of the way: I faithfully give it as it is,
without changing Words or altering the Sense, as some of you have done of some
of your Citations out of my Papers; ye are always sure to give the worst
Construction of Words and Things, like Spiders ye turn all things into Poison;
about which, besides what I already observed, I shall on the way take notice of
one thing more, when I say no Soldier in an Enemy's Country ought to struggle
out of the way, etc. for he that does so, ventures to be knocked on the head;
you put in ought instead of ventures, p. 36.
is this fairly done? Certainly it is a great difference between saying a Man
runs the hazard of being knocked, and he ought to be knocked on the head; so if
I should but write or speak Reason, you with adding one Letter, would soon make
it Treason; and if you write or speak Treason with taking off one Letter, you
can soon make it Reason; this is said to show your Partiality: As to what
follows in the same Page and the next after about Dr. Sh -- against his
Antagonist as against me, I shall not trouble my head about it, only God
forgive and give you Grace to mend: I see all that have any thing to do with
this Man or lie in his way and are not of his mind, must prepare for the like
usage: but, I say, I do not concern my self about Persons so much as about the
Cause; and therefore whosover would in the Godhead set up three Spirits and
Substances, is in my opinion fallen into a fundamental Heresy; and whosoever
is against such, in that same thing. I join with, because I always love to be
for the Truth.

In what follows I desire the Reader to take notice of the Man's want of
Sincerity: As well as I, he knows we are not and cannot be agreed upon the very
Terms he sets down, for they contain the quintessence of their Error about the
Holy Trinity; for, Sirs, ye would have Jesus Christ to be not a Person, but
only an Attribute as the Wisdom of God, so the Holy Ghost to be only the Virtue
and Power of God, and not an Hypostasis a Person of the Godhead; for though one
of you says, that for Peace-sake ye submit to the Phrase of the Church, that
is to the name Person, yet ye interpret it not as the Church does. Therefore,
though you say, the Unitarians, the Catholic Church, the Translator and I, are
at perfect Agreement, and though we agree in p. 37.
the Oneness of the Godhead or of one Divine Nature, and, to make use of your
words, that there is One Infinite Spiritual Substance, yet we are far from
agreeing with you in what follows, with three Properties, unbegotten, begotten
and proceeding, etc. except ye explain your meaning otherwise than ye use to
do: Arius under a word which if well taken, might be harmless enough, sheltered
his Error, so it is usual with you, ye are merely for Words, but we do besides
Words look for Things, and would have such Words as are proper as much as may
be, to signify the Things; Now your threefold distinction of Original Mind,
reflex Wisdom, and Divine Love, may be sufficient to represent what you mean
thereby, but not what we believe: We make a distinction between the Property
and the Person of the Godhead, but you do confound them, and would have it to
be but one and the same: Now if with us you will say, that in one and most
simple Nature of God are three distinct Persons to whom the infinite and
singular Nature of one only God is common, and that these three distinct
Persons, the Attributes of that one God do belong to, then you say something to
the purpose, or else, like the Gibeonites, you come in to us only to deceive
us: We assert three Persons and not barely three Properties in the Godhead; we
say the Father is a Person, the Son a Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person, and
so three Persons; but we don't say, the Father is an Attribute, the Son an
Attribute, and the Holy Ghost an Attribute, thereby of three Persons to make
three Attributes: We cannot say the Son of God to be a Property or Attribute;
we cannot say an Attribute of Divine Nature was made Flesh; we cannot say three
Properties appeared in our Saviors Baptism, or that we are baptized in the
Name of three Properties: Therefore ye may see we are not so far agreed as you
said; if you will have us to be agreed, you must come to us, for we declare we
cannot go to you, that is the easiest and surest way of the two, for we are tied
by a Revelation, and may go no farther than it does allow us; but your Human
Reason is a Latitudinarian which can stretch a great way; we may not, we cannot
go beyond the bounds which God in his Word has prescribed us, but ye are
Free-willers and at liberty; to day your Reason may teach you one thing, to
morrow another; for as you say your selves, a Doctrine which at one time may be
convenient, may be otherwise when Circumstances p. 14.
of Times shall alter, but with us, no Circumstances can alter our Heavenly
Doctrine. Out of this you may see, how all this while, I have not been fighting
against the Man in the Moon, or as you very civilly express it, making a Rod
for a foolish Back of p. 37.
my own, or to speak home, a Faggot to roast my own Ribs.

But upon a surer ground I may say, he has been in a Dream or in a hot violent
Fit, for he has been striking on all sides and spared none that lay in his
way; as for me, I am the Man, and therefore in the Fit, having forgotten the
Cause he has at me almost in every Page; and in one place he admires at my
extravagant p. 38.
Zeal, who would have the Socinians burnt for their compliance with the Church
of England: If so, then indeed there were cause to admire, but there is true
ground of admiration that he thinks it so; but really nothing is to be admired
at, either in or from him, for he calls me a Papist, a Calvinist, and a Zealous
one, a Socinian, nay a Real one: He says he is no Socinian, but p. 26, and 29.
I am, when he writes for and I against them; this is a Hocus Pocus, it is and
it is not; surely there is cause to suspect something is out of order within
that brains of his, or an extraordinary brazen-fac'dness, however let him as he
can secure all this from Contradiction, Et erit mihi magnus Apollo: When I
think upon such Men as pretend to alter the Nature of things, I am put in mind
of what a famous Popish Author says, That the Pope can make that to be Sin
which is no Sin, and that not to be Sin which is Sin; so do these Men who would
seem to be much against Popery, yet follow several of their Maxims, and would
make that to be a Nonsense which is good Sense, and that to be no Contradiction
which is, and so on the contrary: If these Men themselves be not Mysteries, as
one calls me, their dark Sentences are; all this while the Cause is safe enough.

But Calvin not so, how roughly does he handle him on all occasions, if he were
alive he would not be good to give to Dogs, though neither he nor a dosen more
such ones would be worthy to carry his Books: I confess it is to me, and ought
to be a wonder to others, to find how mad some Men in the World are against
that faithful Servant of God, once in his Life and Conversation, and now in his
Works and Labors an Eminent Instrument in his Hand as for Instruction, so at
first in the Work of Reformation: This is a Fit of Rage which several Years
since, out of Envy, some in Parts much inferior to him, began to be possessed
of, and by Men of the same Kidney, has been propagated to this very day,
whereof the Authors of the Two Letters are real Instances; for to speak in
Paul's Acts 26. 11.
words, they are exceeding mad against him, and as they are against his Memory
and Person now far out of their reach, so they are broken loose and so hot and
fiery against the Doctrines he taught, that all the Water of the Leman Lake
could hardly cool them; what they call p. 28.
Calvinism they adorn with these Epithets, Proud, sour, and fiery
Qualifications, Calvinistical Impatience, and p. 35.
many such more, whereof this Orthodox is one, The Heresy of the Tritheists is
not worse than uncharitable p. 33. p. 41.
and ill natured Calvinism: Therein I shall conclude with this, In truth I
think Heylin was over modest to esteem a Presbyterian that is a Calvinist worse
than a Papist: Here is your Protestants; and as if this had not been enough,
his own venom he throws out in the same place, for my part I esteem a Christian
from whatsoever Sect denominated, not excepting the Socinians, more honorable
than a Persecuting Calvinist: Though the word Persecuting had been left out, it
had been all one to that Christian Righteous Soul of his. But as for Socinus he
was a most excellent Man, very sound in the Faith, and who, if we will believe
this Man, has by his Works laid a great Obligation upon the World, and he
subscribes to what one of the Gang said of him, That none since the Apostles
has deserved p. 18.
better of the Christian Religion; so that a Man may more avail himself by
reading his Works, than by perusing all the Fathers together, with the Writings
of more modern Authors. This People either never read, or care not for what
Paul says, Let your Moderation be known Phil. 4. 5.
unto all men, for they observe it neither for Socinus nor against Calvin; but
having elsewhere had an occasion in few few words to do this faithful Servant
of Christ some Justice, I shall leave off speaking of his Person to take some
brief notice of his Works.

That which most nettles his Enemies are the Doctrines about Grace and
Providence mentioned in the Two Letters, which they call Calvinism: But if they
would not so proudly despise all Antiquity, but peruse some of Augustin's
Works, who lived 1200 Years before Calvin, they might find he was a Calvinist,
so were Hilarious, Prosper, Fulgentius, and others, who so long before he was
born, could, as well as he did afterward, find those same Doctrines in the
Word of God; and accordingly, the beginning, progress and end of our Salvation,
and from first to last, we attribute to God's free Grace, which in that matter
we can never yield too much nor too little to any thing of our own; we do not,
like the Pharisee, boast in our Prayers, that we Fast twice a Week, give
Tithes, and are not Luke 18. 11, 12, 13.
Extortioners, Unjust, and make no Comparison with our Neighbors as being
better Men than they, but we say, God be merciful to us miserable Sinners; for
we are commanded to trust in the Lord with all our hearts, Prove. 3. 5.
and forbidden to lean unto our own understanding, which is as good as to say,
depend not upon your own Reason; therefore in any thing we go about, we are to
call upon God for his help, and the gracious influence of his Holy Spirit,
being sure that without it we can do no good; and we be sufficiently taught in
Scripture to trust to no strength or abilities of our own; and when in the
World we meet with Men of Principles contrary to these, we find it not strange,
for we know that there must be also Heresies among us, or those called
Christians, that they which are approved may be made manifest among us:
Wherefore as long as we have about these Matters such a Foundation as Paul the
great Preacher of Free Grace has laid, we need not to care for all Exceptions
or Cavils of Men or Devils: These are such Truths, as we hope through Grace,
never to be ashamed or afraid to own unto the end, even to lay down our Lives,
as he did his, for so Glorious a Cause.

The Person of the Lord Jesus Christ and his Grace are so linked together, that
no Man strikes at one, but the other feels it; though may be in a different
degree, they have a common Enemy, so he who is against one is against both,
which I positively affirm of Socinians; Grace and Truth, says the Evangelist,
came by John 1. 17.
Jesus Christ, who coming into the World brought Grace along with him, for he
is the Spring of it, which he manifested in framing and redeeming of his
Church, the Foundation whereof and of our Christian Religion lies in this great
and fundamental Truth whereof Peter made a Confession, how Jesus Christ is the
Son of the living God; upon the verity Matt. 16. 18.
whereof, there our Savior declared that his Church should be built, and at
the same time signified that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it:
For this is the House built upon a Rock which, though the Rain Chap. 7. 24, 25.
descends, and the Floods come, and the Wind blows, yet it falls not, for it
is founded upon a Rock. In that Promise of his the Lord Jesus declares two
things; First, The Gates, that is the Power of Devils in Hell, would afterward
make some attempt against that fundamental Truth of his being the Son of the
living God. As indeed, it has from time to time raised its strongest Batteries
against it, as not long after his Ascension, even in the life time of his
beloved Disciple, and after his death, the Assaults began by Simon the
Sorcerer, Ebion, Cerinthus, Menander, and afterward by other Hellish
Instruments: But in Arius's time great strugglings happened with so prodigious
a success, that all the World was said to be Arian; hence came the Saying, All
the World against Athanasius, and Athanasius against all the World; so
afterward for the same Cause against our Savior's Divinity, several fought
under the Banners of Hell, as now, though more cunningly, Socinians do, having
taken up the Cudgels; and as those Blasphemous Opinions were exploded out of
the World, so shall be, in God's due time, those which are raging for the
present, notwithstanding all the Craftiness, Malice and Power of Hell, and all
Antichrists, of Devils and Men: This my so positively speaking, is grounded
upon Christ's Promise, how the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
truth of his being the Son of the living God, which his Church is built upon;
and this is the Second thing, not only deduced from, but plainly contained in
those words of the Lord Jesus, whose Person is a fit Object of Adoration, as
his Grace is of Admiration. These Truths one may abundantly be satisfied with
out of Scripture, which I much have made use of, because some places prove a
Truth directly, others collaterally, and others are brought in to illustrate
and give a light to the thing, so that Scripture is of several uses, nothing
therein without some use; it is of it as of the Rivers in the Garden of Eden,
they all did not run one and the same way.

But now to conclude, I in the first place put you in mind to Answer my Book,
and then take this Occasion which you give me, in case ye knew it not before,
to acquaint you, how upon those Matters I have written a A Plea for Free Grace
against Free Will.
Book hitherto Unanswered; if you have such an aversion for them as you p. 9,
20, 33.
express, do but give us in Print your Thoughts about it, it is a fair Field I
offer you, but be not afraid, for it is not Smithfield: but if ye can defend
that Cause no better than the Socinian about the Holy Trinity and Person of the
Lord Jesus, then it will be in you but Time and Labor lost in vain. And if you
go about it, be more Serious in a Business of so high a nature, and less
Virulent and Malicious; For shame leave off Jesting with Holy things, and let
it be without giving ill Language, for therein I yield you know to do it more
than my self, and write like Scholars and Gentlemen, without breaking the Bonds
of Humanity, with Arguments as hard as ye please but softer Words, and make no
more haste than good speed; if ye come in that way, then by the Grace of God I
will fairly Answer you in the like manner; and though already there is Work
enough cut for you, I doubt more than ye are well able to compass, yet several
new Arguments I have to bring in: but if in the usual Scolding Reviling way, I
will leave you to chew your Cud: May be your Bantering way of Writing has
succeeded against some, but be not mistaken, with others it will never do, come
with good Arguments and then I am for you; however come which way you will, I
declare I shall not in the least care whether you come asunder or both together.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for J. Hartley.
THE Blasphemous Socinian Heresy Disproved and Confuted, etc. With
Animadversions on Mr. Toland's Christianity not Mysterious. Dedicated to both
Houses of Parliament, By J. Gailhard, Gent.

Verdicts of the Learned concerning Virgil and Homer's Heroic Poems.

Regular and Irregular Thoughts in Poets and Orators.


